AN ANSWER OF A TRVE CHRISTIAN TO THE PROVDE CHALLENGE OF A counterfeit
Catholic.

By William Fulke Doctor in divinity.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Vautrollier dwelling in the Black Friars. 1577.

To the Christian Reader.
THIS short treatise (gentle Reader) has lain by me near hand or altogether
ten years space, written at the request of a godly and learned friend of
mine, in answer to a proud challenge of a Papist against the Protestant.
Which though at the first and many years after I determined not to publish,
supposing the same challe^ge to have been private, or in fevve men's hands: yet
now of late that I have seen it in diverse godly gentlemen's hands, to whom
it has been delivered by Papists, belike to pervert them, and of whom also I
have been desired to au^svver it, and am further credibly informed, that the
same is in print, and esteemed of many ignorant Papists, to be so
vnansvverable, that although it has bin protested, by gentlemen of great
worship, and credit, that they have seen the au^svvere thereof in vvriting,
yet they vvil not believe, that any man dare set his pen to the paper, once to
attempt the matter: I have now thought good to put it in print, as it was
vvritte^ at the first. Nothing douting, by Gods help, but I shall be able to
stand to the defense, if the Challenger will proceed to mainteyne his
challenge any longer. And whereas the same of late has been joined with my
confutation of the doctrine of purgatory, and yet is desired of many to be set
forth in several, because the argument is more general, it is thought good to
satisfy their desire, and to spare their exspenses, that being resolved in the
matter of purgatory, do yet stagger in the challenge of the Church. The
breuity that I have used (as I understand) is misliked of some men, which
vvoulde have wished a larger discourse, but seeing the Challenger requires
shortness, if this that is used be sufficient to satisfy his demands or any of
them, a longer treatise were but superfluous. If he think him self not
thoroughly answered, (and declare the same) in all or in part, that which is
now omitted shall then God vvilling be supplied. In the mean time use this
(gentle Reader) and fare well in the Lord.

The faults of this impression are thus to be amended: The first figure
signifies the page, the second the line.
Page 3. line 35. Lithuania read Lithuanda. 5.3. vvriting r. writings.
10.10. the scripture, read the book of scripture. 13.17. then, read thou and
line 19. you, read thou. 15. line the last. T^^erius. read Liberius. 19.4.
you, read the, and line 10. Ca. line. 58. read Carolines. 8. and line 19.
Mercamas, r. Marranias. 22.9. favor, read honor. ^3.26. the prince, read the
printers. 24.1. put out and. 25.9 not for his, r. for his. 29.10. unity of
mind, r. unity of faith and mind. 30.3. in the places above rehearsed. in
diverse places of his epistles, a. lib. 3. epist. 14. and 15.16. etc. 41.30.
Rhenes, r. Rhemes. 49.5. the the, r. that the. and the 12. r. and the Catho.
etc. 52.13. in Brytish, read in the Brytish. 63.14. about the articles, r.
about the chiefest articles. 64.20. put out (that hilde.) and the 24. here,
rea. sore. 67.21. which can not, rea. which you can not. 68.4. in a name,
read in a manner. 69.4. prorsus opinemur, r. prorsus non opinemur. and 34.
universally, r. universality and 36 which you do, r. which you do not.
70.17. propone^da, r. praepone^da. and 22. in a r. in the. and 24. when. r.
when the. 71.20. where, ra. were, and the 22. to, read in. 78.26. that you
savv a bastard church, r. that you being a bastard church have. 87.34
Commentualls, rea. Conuentualles. 91.32. that he rea. then he. 92.30. cultiued,
r. continued. 97.^. your, read youres. 99.13. there, rea. therefore. and 14.
vinci, read v^ice.
AN ANSWER OF A TRVE CHRISTIAN TO A COVNTERFAIT CATHOLIC.
The proposition of the Adversary.
CHrist did commit at his departure hence, the testimony of that truth, for
which he died, and the conversion of the Nations to the belief in him, to the
true church of God, which then stood principally, and almost only in the
persons of the Apostles and a few more, that by their preachings, and those
afterward of their calling, the Christian religion might be planted in all
Nations, beginning at Jerusalem, and so proceeding to the coasts and corners
of the earth.

AN ANSWER TO THE PROPOSITION.
I Grant that our Savior Christ, at his departure hence, commanded his
Apostles as principal members of his Church, though not the greatest part of
it, to preach the doctrine which he confirmed by his death unto all nations,
beginning at Jerusalem, and so forth according to his saying: Go therefore and
teach all Nations baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the holy Ghost: Teaching them to observe all things what so ever I have
commanded you. Matthew. 28. Whereupon I challenge the Papist, that if he be able
to prove that the doctrine of popery is all that truth, and nothing but that
truth, for which Christ dyed, and which he commanded the Apostles to teach, I
will acknowledge the popish church to be the Church of Christ.

The first article conteyneth 3. demandes.
1 First I ask of the protestant what Church that was, which converted all
these cuntries that be now Christian, to the faith of Christ?
IF you mean by Christians, true Christians, and by the faith of Christ, the
true faith of Christ, I answer: only the true Church of Christ, has had the
word of God and sacraments, as means which God uses, to subdue al nations
unto the obedience of the faith, as was the primitive Church of the Apostles,
which has continued unto this day by succession, not of persons, and
places, but of faith and truth, wherefore if the Papist can prove, that we
hold not the same faith and truth, unto which the Apostles converted the
nations, we refuse to be called the Church or Congregation of Christ.

But if by Christians and Christian faith, you mean all them that profess the
name of Christ, in the whole world, I answer, that the true Church of
Christ, did not convert them all, for in Aethiopia, there are yet people,
converted by the false apostles, which taught circumcision, and observation of
the law, in which heresy they continue unto this day, and it is manifest by
all histories, that the nations of the Alanes, Goths, and Vandales, were first
converted by the Arrians.

2 And let him show unto me, that ever his Church converted any people, or
land in the earth, from Idolatry, or Gentility, or Iudaisme, to the true
Religion of Christ, or that this his faith was taught to any Nation in steed
of true Christianity.
WE are members of that Church, which converted all lands in the earth that
are converted, from Idolatry, Gentility, Iudaisme, or heresy, to the true
Religion of Christ, and we affirm that the Apostles taught none other faith in
steed of true Christiantie, but that which we hold, as we are ready to prove
by the word of God: And at this day the most part of Europe, is converted
from Idolatry, heresy, and Antichristianitie, unto the same true faith, that
we maintain, as in England, Scotland, Ireland, France, Germany, Denmark,
Suetia, Bohemia, Polonia, by public authority, in Spaigne, and Italy, a
great number under persecution and tyranny. Also of the Jews, no small number
are converted to our religion, since the rising up of the Gospel in our days.

3 Or any Church, but the common Catholic Church to have don that, and I
recant.
BEcause you mean by the common Catholic, not the true Catholic, but the
popish church: First I deny that ever the popish church converted any people,
to the true faith. Secondly, I deny that the popish church has converted all
nations, to the profession of Christ: For, it is showed before, that the false
Apostles, and Arians, converted some nations to the profession of Christ's
name, but yet to false religion, And it is also manifest by histories, that the
Grecians, whom the papists count no part of their church, but schismatikes,
converted the Moscouites first of all, unto the profession of the name of
Christ, which yet continue in their religion, being neither the true faith, nor
yet popish religion. As for the popish church, as it is certain, that it has
perverted and corrupted all parts of the Latin, or Western Church, with
Idolatry and false religion, so it shall be hard for the papists to prove, that
it has converted any Nation from Gentility to the popish religion, except some
parts of Germany, and them by force of arms, rather than by preaching, and
teaching, as appears by the conversion of Liuonia, Anno Domini 1200. of
Prussia, Anno Domini 1254. and of Lithuania, Anno Domini 1386. wherefore I
conclude that seeing I have showed that our Church, holding the true doctrine
of the Apostles, is that which converted all nations to true religion, and that
the popish church, has not converted any people to true religion, nor all
people to the profession of the name of Christ, this chalenger, whosoever he
be, do the recant.

The second article conteyneth 4. demandes.
1 I ask of him what Church it was, which has induced the Christian people
through the whole world, to give most humble credit in all points, to the holy
books of the Bible?
I Answer, it was the Church of Christ, and not the Popish church, which has
commended the books of holy Scripture, to be believed of all true Christians
where soever they be, although it be the office of the holy Ghost, to open the
hearts of men, and to form them that they may believe the scripture to be true,
like as it is the office of the scripture or word of God, to try and examine,
whether it be the spirit of God that persuades us to believe any thing, so the
spirit bears witness to the word and the word to the spirit. As for the
popish church it could not induce the Christian people to give credit to the
scripture in all points, because she is contrary to the scripture in many
points: and even in the cheifest points of Christian Religion, namely in
points concerning the glory of God, and the salvation of mankind, giving the
glory of God to dead men, and dumb Images, and denying the mercy of God,
pourchased by the only sacrifice of Christ's death, to be the only cause of
man's salvation. Finally seeing it is manifest by the answer to the first
article, that the popish church did not convert all nations, to the profession
of the Christian faith, it is evident thereby, that the popish church did not
induce all them, that are called Christians, to give credit to the books of
the holy Bible, as this chalenger would have it to be thought.

2 What Church has had the discerning and seuering of them from other
writings of all sorts?
THe Church of Christ, has not an absolute authority to allow or refuse books
of the scripture, but a judgment to discern true writing from counterfaicts,
and the word of God, of infallible verity, from ye writing of men, which might
err, and this judgment she has, not of her self, but of the holy Ghost: as
for the popish Church, it can not be said to have this judgment of discerning
the scripture of God from other writings, not only because she is so blind that
she can not discern between ye Canonical books of the scripture, from the
Apocrypha writings, as appears by receiving the books of the Machabees,
Ecclesiasticus, etc. to be of equal authority with ye books of the Law,
Psalms, etc. but also because she is so presumptuous, as to compel men to
believe, that Customs, and traditions, writings of doctors, decrees of Popes,
and Counsels, are equal with the authority of God his word, yea are of
force, to alter and change the law of God, and the institution of Christ, set
forth unto us in ye scripture. And although she boast that she receaueth all
the books of scripture, yet this proves no more that she is the Church of
Christ, than was the churches of the Arrians, Donatistes, Nouatians,
Euthychans, and other heretics, which received the Bible, as well as the
Popish church.

3 What Church has had the custody of them, and most safely has preserved
them, for the necessary use of God his people, and from the corruption of
adversaries, as well of Jews, as heretics of all sorts?
THe providence of God, has always preserved the Scripture, both from the
violence of tyrants, and from the falshoode of heretics, and has never
suffered the true Church, to be destitute of the necessary use thereof. But the
popish church, has not kept the scripture for the necessary use of the people,
which has so kept it in an unknown tongue, that the people could have no
use, much less the necessary use thereof: wherefore if this be a note of the
Catholic Church, to keep the word of God for the necessary use of God his
people, it is plain that the popish church is not the Catholic Church, which
has kept the scripture so, that God his people could have no use thereof.

And if the only custody of the scripture from corruption of heretics, be a
sure note of the Church, why is not the Greek Church, the Catholic Church,
which unto this day has kept the scripture as safely as the popish church? why
are not other Estern Churches of Asia, which never acknowledged the Pope, or
popish religion, true Churches, which likewise have preserved the scripture, as
we have seen of late, that the new Testament is printed in the Syrian tongue,
at themperours charges, for the increase of Christian faith among them. And
finally, why are not the Jews, the Catholic Church, which have kept the old
Testament in Hebrew, more faithfully than ever the Papists. And because they
boast of safe preserving of the scriptures, all men, that are learned in the
tongues can testify, in how corrupt a Latin translation they have kept the
scriptures, both of the old and of the new Testament.

4 And let the Protestant declare to me, that their Congregation has had from
time to time, or ever had right herein, or any other Church, saving the
Catholic Church, and I recant.
Our Congregation, which is the body of Christ, has ever had, both right and
possession of the inestimable treasure of the word of Christ her head: as
appears by this, that our Church and Congregation believes nothing but that
she learneth in it, acknowledges that all things profitable to salvation, are
sufficiently contained in it, and finally in all things submits her self
to the judgment of it. But the popish church, which believes many things
contrary to the scripture, teaches many things beside the scripture,
necessary to salvation, and refuses to have her faith, doctrine, and
ceremonies, to be judged by the scripture, neither has, neither ever had, any
right to the scripture, though she have never so many books of them in
possession. Wherefore these things considered, this chalenger does recant.

The third article conteyneth 5. demandes.
1 Show me why our common known Church, did not as well corrupt the text of
the Testament, as the true religion contained in the same?
THere may be diverse good reasons showed, why your Church, commonly known to
be the church of Antichrist, did not as well corrupt the text of the Testament,
as the true religion contained therein. First, because she could not, the
copies thereof being so many, by the providence of God dispersed throughout the
world. Secondly, because she thought it not so needful, having other means
to work her deuilish devise: For, although she could not corrupt the
scripture, yet it made the less matter, because she found means to diminish,
and control the authority thereof by advancing decrees of men, Popes, and
Counsels, to be equal or of greater authority than the scripture. Thirdly,
because she would be less in fear, to be reproved by the scripture, she
provided that the knowledge thereof, should be hidden from the unlearned
people by a strange tongue, and from the learned, by the tedious mazes of
questions, devised by her Canonistes, and Sententiaries. Fourthly, because she
submitted all interpretation of the scripture, to her own judgment, and
therefore would not be controlled by the judgment thereof, but would always
expound it, as it liked her best. As appears by Ockam, and Duns, who though
they confess, that transubstantiation, seems to them, contrary to the
scripture, and reason, yet they believed it, because of the authority of the
church, and for none other cause. These are the reasons, why the Romish church
did not, as well corrupt the text of the Testament, as the true Religion. And
yet how corrupt that Latin translation is, which they would needs thrust
upon us, is sufficiently known to all learned men, even in such texts, as are
the most coulerable places for the defense of Popish doctrine. I will give one
example for all: They allege the text 1. Cor. 10. Qui stat, videat ne cadat.
He that stands, let him take heed he fall not, against the certainetie of
faith, whereas the Greek has, not he that stands, but, he that thinks he
stands, let him take heed he fall not: Thus the popish church cannot
altogether excuse her self, from corrupting of the text of the Testament,
whether it was of fraud, or of ignorance, or of negligence, the Lord knows.

2 Show me why, she kept not so safely, and faithfully, the true sense of God
his word, as she preserved the word it self?
BEcause it was against her own estimation, and profit, which are the chief
ends for which popish Prelates mainteyne popish religion. Take away the Popes
prerogative, which is contrary to the sense of God his word, down go
Cardinals, Legates, Prothonotaries: down goes all the Court of Rome, take
away works of supererogation, which are contrary to the Scripture, down go
Abbeys, Priories and Chantries. Take away the sacrifice of the Mass, and
Purgatory, which are contrary to the word of God, down goes the estimation,
and gaynes of all the popish clergy: And this is the cause, why the popish
church kept not so safely, and faithfully, the true sense of God his word, as
she preserved the word it self, although she preserved not the word it self,
in such safety as becommed the Church of Christ.

3 Show me why, we should believe the Papists, as you term them, for the word
it self, and rather you Protestants tha^ them, for the meaning of the word.
WE do not challenge credit to our selves, in any point, so presumptuously as
the Papists, that men must believe it because we affirm it. But because we
prove it to be true, by the word of God. And therefore for the meaning of the
word, you should believe us rather than them, because our grounds and proves
are better then theirs, or else we require not to be believed better than they.

4 Show me why, you believed our Church, telling you this to be God his book,
and will not credit her, auouching this to be the true and undoubted sense of
the same book?
IF we had no better ground to persuade us, of the authority of God his book,
than ye testimony of your Church, you may be sure we would not believe it. But
because we have most steadfast assurance of God his spirit, for the authority
of that book, with the testimony of the true Church in all ages. If you say it
is God his book, we believe you not, because you say so, but because we know it
to be true. But if you bring out a false sense, we believe you not, because we
know it to be false, and are able to prove by the word of God, that it is
contrary to the meaning of the holy Ghost. To be plain with you, we give as
much credit to your Church, as to the devil. When the devil says: it is
written: He shall give his angels charge over thee, and with their hands they
shall hold thee up that thou dash not thy foot against a stone. We believe that
this is the word of God. But when he avouches this to be ye meaning of it,
that we may cast down our selves from a Church steeple, without danger, we
do not believe him, because we know this sense is contrary to an other
Scripture, which says: Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. So when you say
these words are the Scripture of God: This is my body: We believe it, because
we know it to be true. But when you say this is the meaning of these words.
This bread is turned into my natural body, we believe you not, because it is
contrary to all places of Scripture, which prove the truth of Christ his
humanity or natural body. Thus I show you why we believe you, if you say the
Scripture is God his word, namely because we know it to be true, and why we
believe you not, saying this is the meaning of it, that is, because we know by
the word of God that it is false.

5 Last of all, Show me why, you believed the old known church, affirming this
to be the word of God, and will not believe her, affirming Luther to be an
heretic, show me good reason or Scripture for these things, and I recant.
IF you mean by the old Church the primitive Church, whose testimony of the
word of God we allow and believe, I deny that the primitive Church did affirm
Luther to be an heretic, or the doctrine that he taught, which we hold, to be
heresy, but I am able to prove, that the primitive Church, from which you have
received the Scripture, affirms your doctrine to be heresy, and your Church
ye Church of Antichrist.

But if by ye old known Church, you mean the Church of old, known to be the
Church of Antichrist, which is the popish church, we believe the devil if he
speak the truth, and we believe not an Angel coming from heaven, if he bring
any other Gospel, than S. Paul delivered to the Galathians. Therefore when
your church affirms Luther to be an heretic, seeing we know that Luther did
not obstinately, and maliciously err, in any article of faith, concerning the
substance of religion, we do not believe her: and specially because she is a
partial witness against him, whom God used to discover, so much of her
wickedness, to her great hindrance, there is no credit to be given unto her,
when she goes about to deface him, by sclaunderous names, and false
accusations. Thus I have showed these things that you require, both by good
reason, and also by scripture: Therefore if I may believe you, you recant.

The fourth article conteyneth 3. demandes.
1 I demand, what Church has mightily gonne through, borne down, and fully
vanquished, all heresies in times past, as well against the blessed Trinity, as
other Articles of our religion?
I Answer, the true Catholic Church, has always resisted all false
opinions, contrary to the word of God, as her duty was, and fought against
them with the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God, and by the aid
of God obtained the victory, and triumphed over them. So did Paul overcome
the Jews Act. 18. So did the fathers of the primitive Church, from time to
time, confute heresies, by the scriptures, and declare in their writings, that
by them they are to be confuted, for examples sake of a great number, I will
allege a few. Hylarius, writing of the blessed Trinity against heretics Lib.
4. says: Cessent itaque propriae hominum opiniones, neque se vltra Diuinam
constitutionem, humana iudicia extendant: Sequamur ergo aduersus irreligiosas,
and impias de Deo institutiones, ipsas illas diuinorum dictorum authoritates,
and vnumquodque eorum ipso de quo quaeritur auctore tractabimus. Wherefore let
opinions propre to men give place, and let not men's judgments stretche them
selves further than God his constitution. Therefore against these vnreligious
and ungodly opinions of God, let us follow the very authority of God his
sayings, and handle every one of them, by the aid of him, about whom the
question is: Thus Hylarius, would have heresies against the Trinity, to be
confuted, not by men's judgment, but by God his word. Basilius magnus, very
often testifies, that he would have all good things, proved by the
scripture, and all evil things confuted by the same, In his moralles Did.
26. Every word or deed, must be confirmed by the testimony of holy
Scripture, for the persuasion of good men, and the confusion of wicked men: And
in his treatise of Faith: we know, that we must now, and always, avoid every
voice or opinion, that is differing from the doctrine of our Lord. And in his
short definitions to the first interrogation: whether it be lawefull or
profitable for a man to permit unto him self, to do or say any thing, which
he thinks to be good, without the testimony of the holy Scripture? he
answers: forasmuch as our Savior Christ says: that the holy Ghost shall
not speak of him self, what madness is it, that any man should presume to
believe any thing, without the authority of God his word. By these, and many
other places, it is manifest, that Basilius, would have heresies and false
opinions, confuted by the holy Scriptures.

Chrysostom, upon Luke cap. 16. says, that the ignorance of the scriptures,
has bred heresies, and brought in corrupt life, yea it has turned all things
vpsidown, by which it appears, by what means he would have heresies kept
away, namely by knowledge of the scriptures. It were to long to rehearse all the
places of S. Augustine, by which his mind appears, that he would have the
Church, sought only in the scriptures, and heretics confuted, only by the
scriptures, to whose only authority in many places, he professes that he him
self will be bound, as Epist. 19. ad Hieronymum. Epist. 48. Vincentio. Epist.
111. Fortunatiano. Epist. 112. to Paulina, contra Faustum. lib. 11. cap. 5.
Contra Cresconium Grammaticum, lib. 2. cap. 31. and 32. de Baptismo contra
Donatistas lib. 2. cap. 2. De meritis and remissione peccatorum, contra
Pelagianos lib. 3. cap. 7. De naturae and gratia cap. 61. De gratia Christi
contra Pelagium cap. 43. De nuptijs and concupiscentia lib. 2. c. 29. In these
places, S. Augustine prefers the authority of the Canonical scripture,
before all writings of Catholic Doctors, of Bishops, of Counsels, before all
customs, and traditions. But that he would have the true Church sought only
in the scriptures, it is manifest, by these places, first in his 48. Epistle to
Vincentius. Nos autem ideo certisumus, neminem se a communione omnium gentium
just separare potuisse, quia non quisquam nostrum in iustitiae sua, sed in
scripturis Diuinis quaerit Ecclesiam. speaking of the Donatistes, he says. We
are suer, that no man could justly separate him self from the communion of all
Nations, because none of us seeks the Church in his own righteousness, but
in the holy Scriptures. So if the Papists would not presume of their own
righteousness, but seek the Church of Christ in the scriptures, they would
not separate them selves from the communion of Christ's Church, now by God his
grace enlarged farther than the Popish church. Also in his book De vnitate
Ecclesiae. cap. 2. he has these words. Inter nos autem and Donatistas
quaestio est, vbi sit Ecclesia. Quid ergo facturi sumus? in verbis nostris eam
quaesituri, an in verbis capitis sui Domini nostri Jesus Christis puto quod in
illius potius verbis eam quaerere debemus, qui veritas est, and optime nouit
corpus suum. The question is between us, and the Donatistes, where the Church
should be, what shall we do then? shall we seek her in our own words, or
in the words of her head our Lord Jesus Christ? I think we ought rather to
seek her in his words which is ye Truth, and best knows his own body. So
the question is at this day, between the Papists and us, where the church is,
let us seek in God his word, there we shall easily find her. To the same
intent, he speaks in the third, fiueth, and sixtenth Chapters of the same
treatise. Furthermore, that he would have heretics confuted only by the
scriptures, he shows likewise in many places of his works: for writing
against Maximinus the Arian, lib. 3. cap. 14. a place commonly and often cited,
he says: but now, neither must I preiudicially bring forth the Council of
Nice, nor then the Council of Arimine, for neither am I bounden to the
authority of the one, nor you of ye other, but let matter with matter, cause
with cause, reason with reason, contend by authority of the scriptures, not
proper to any, but indifferent witnesses to both parts. If Augustine would not
oppress the Arrians, by the authority of the Nicene Council, which was the
first, and the best general Council, that ever was, but only by the
scriptures, how much less would he charge them with other authorities, that
the Papists allege, beside the authority of holy scriptures. And in his
book De Vnitate Ecclesiae against the Donatistes the 16 chapter: Sed vtru^
ipsi Ecclesiam teneant, non nisi diuinarum scripturarum Canonicis libris
ostendant, quia nec nos etc. But whether they hold the church or no: let them
show none other wise, but by the canonical books of holy Scripture, for we
our selves do not say, that men ought to believe us, that we are in the Church,
because we hold that Church which Optatus of Mileuitum, or Ambrose of Millayn,
or innumerable other Bishops of our communion, have commended to us, or because
it is set forth by the Councels of our fellow bishops, or because so many
miracles of hearing requests, or healinges, are don in the holy places, which
our fellowship does frequent in the whole world, so that the bodies of
Martyrs, which were hidden so many years (which thing if they will ask they
may hear of many) were revealed unto Ambrose, and that at the same bodies, one
that had been many years blind, very well known in the city of Millayn,
received his eyes, and eye sight, either because this man dreamed, or that man
was ravished in the spirit, and heard a voice, that he should not join
himself to Donatus, or that he should depart from the faction of Donatus:
for when soever such things are don in the Catholic Church, they are to be
allowed, because they are don in the Catholic church. but the church it self
is not therefore proved to be Catholic, because these things are done in it.
By this Augustine declares first that heretics must be confuted, only by the
scriptures, and secondly that neither Counsels, succession of bishops,
universality, miracles, visions, dreams, nor revelations, are the notes to
try the Catholic church, but only the scriptures. Moreover in his book De
Pastoribus cap. 14. Quaerit infirmus Ecclesiam etc. A weak person seeks the
Church, he wandreth and seeks the church, what say you? The church is of
Donatus side. Enquire for the shepherds voice, Read me this out of some
Prophet, read me this out of some Psalm, rehearse me it out of the law,
rehearse it out of the Gospel, rehearse it out of the Apostle, out of them do
I rehearse the Church dispersed over all the world. And a little after: Tu
accusas non Euangelium etc. Thou accusest, not the Gospel, thou accusest not
the Prophet, not the Apostle of whom this voice speaks to me I believe him
other I believe not. But thou will bring forth decrees, I will also bring forth
decrees, should I believe thine? believe thou mine likewise. I believe not thine,
neither do thou believe mine, then let men's writings be laid away and let Gods
word sound between us: bring me one place of scripture for Donatus side etc.
These places may sufficiently declare by what means this doctor thought the
Church should overthrow heresies, namely by the word of God only, which
thing also Leo, the first bishop of Rome, in his Epist. 10. ad Fabianum contra
Eutychen plainly confesses saying: Sed in hanc insipientiam cadunt, qui cum
ad cognoscendam veritatem etc. But those men fall into this folly, which when
they are hindered by any doubt to know the truth, have not recourse to the
voices of the Prophets, not to the writings of the Apostles, not to the
authority of the Gospel, but to them selves. And therefore they become,
masters of error, because they have not been scholars of truth. Of the same
judgment was the whole Council of Constantinople the sixth, as appear Action
18. Si igitur omnes simpliciter etc. Therefore if all men from the beginning
would have simply and without subtlety taken upon them the preaching of the
Gospel, and have been content with the constitutions of the Apostles, suerly
matters should have been well, and in good case, neither should painful
contention, have been exercised against the authors of heresies, nor against
the favorers of priests. Here the Council confesses, that the heretics and
schismatikes grow so fast, because they were not beaten down, by preaching of
the Gospel and authority of the scriptures. Thus I have declared by example,
and authority of these Fathers, that the true Church of Christ, has convicted
all heretics, only by the scripture.

2 And what Church it was, that has always stand still, and steadfast,
whilst all other Congregations, as well of Arrians, as Anabaptists, Aerians,
Nouatians, Vigilantians, Iouinians, and the rest have decayed.
THe true Church of Christ, has always stood steadfast, and inseperable, from
Christ her head, when all heretics have been, and shall be confounded. But the
true Church has not always flourished in wordly peace and tranquillity: for
until the time of Constantine the great, which was Anno Dom. 339. the Church
had small rest from cruel persecution in most places: and soon after again
under the Emperors Constantius, Constans, and Valons, it was greatly infected
with the heresy of Arius, what time also Tiberius Bishop of Rome, was infected
with the same heresy. After that when Iulianus the Apostata, was Emperor, the
temples of Idols were opened, and gentilitie again restored, so that the
Church suffered great detriment. To be short, when the barbarous Goathes,
Vandales, Alanes, and other Idolatrous or heretical nations destroyed the
Empire, the Church of God suffered a great Eclipse. But when Mahomet, in the
East, and Antichrist the Pope, in the West, seduced the world with most
detestable heresy, then was fulfilled that which was revealed to S. John in
the 12. of the Apocalypse, the woman clothed with the Son, which you your self
confess to be the Church, was so persecuted by the Dragon, that she fled into
the wilderness, there to remain a long season. Where she has not decayed, but
ben always preserved, until God should reveal Antichrist, and bring her again
into open light, which (his holy name be praised) is now brought to pass in
our days, to our inestimable comfort, and his everlasting glory.

3 And if it can be proved that either the Protestants Church or any other
Church but ours, has mightily overthrown these foresaid sects, and other of
all sorts, I recant.
IT has been already proved sufficiently, that the true Catholic Church which
is led only, by the word of God, as a most infallible rule, has
overthrown heresies of all sorts. But the popish church which refuses the
only weapon, by which heresies are cut down, to be sufficient for that
purpose, never was nor shall be strong enough to encounter with heretics,
therefore she practices to vanquish those whom she counts for heretics, not
by authority of the Scriptures, but by fire and sword, and cruel war, as
appears by her dealing with the Waldenses, Albigenses, Bohemians, and in our
days with the true Christians. But where her power of fire and sword could not
prevail, there has she not overthrown such as she condemns for heretics,
namely the Grecians church, and all other churches of Asia, and Aphrica, which
unto this day will not acknowledge her doctrine to be Catholic, nor her
authority to be lawefull. Wherefore seeing the Popish church neither has
confuted those that are heretics in deed, nor subdued those whom she counts
to be heretics, if you be as good as your word, you recant.

The fiueth article conteyneth 3. demandes.
1 Again, what Church is that, which has exercised by Christ's appointement,
Discipline, upon offenders in all degrees?
Only the Church of Christ, by Christ's appointement, has exercised true
discipline upon offenders, Although by means of persecution, she could not
always practice the same as she would.

2 And for that purpose, has continually executed laws and Canons
Ecclesiastical, with Excommunication, Degradation, suspension, and such like.
THe Church of Christ only, has had lawful authority to exercise discipline:
but as it is said before, she has not continually practiced the same, because
she could not, being hindered by persecution, and dispersion. Concerning
excommunication, she has practiced it according to the word of God, and
against such offenders, as the scripture judges worthy of that severe
punishment: As for degradation, and suspension, it may be doubted what you
mean by them: if you understand by degradation, that such persons as the
Church has tried unmeet, either for doctrine or manners, to execute the office
of preaching, and ministering the sacraments, she has displaced and rejected
from that charge: she has also practiced drgradation: And if you mean by
suspension, that when the accusation of a man's doctrine or life was uncertain,
that she has willed him to cease from executing his office, until his cause
were tried either good or evil, she has also used suspension: but if by
degradation and suspension, you mean those foolish and wicked ceremonies,
which the popish church now uses and so terms, I deny that ever the true
Church of Christ had to do with such degradations and suspensions.

3 Prove me this geere to proceed from Protestants, or from any other Church
than the Catholic, and I recant.
IT is proved before, that true discipline belongs to the true Church, whereof
we are a part, which Church is sufficiently proved to be the spouse of Christ,
because she is ruled in all things by his only voice: And therefore all
congregations of heretics, which depart from the true word of God, though
they take upon them, to exercise discipline, by excommunication or otherwise,
it is not to be regarded, and lest of all the Popish church, where remains
nothing of discipline and excommunication, but the very names: for what call
you popish discipline? is not that it which they use in Lent, whisking men on
the heads, and women on the hands, with white rods which they them selves
call discipline? Or is it the severe punishment that they use against offenders
by excommunication, suspension, interdighting etc. First, it is manifest they
have no excommunication by Christ's appointment, for neither it is executed by
the persons appointed by Gods word, nor against such offenders only as God his
word appoints: for whereas our Savior Christ appoints the order of that
discipline, to the Congregation of such as are wise, godly, and careful of
men's health, which first shall labor by fatherly admonition and wholesome
exhortation, to bring the offenders to repentance, whom if they refuse to
hear, they are to be reputed for hethens and publicanes, the Pope contrariwise
refers the same to profane and vnreligious officers, which are more desirous
to gain the fees of absolution, than by bringing the party to repentance, to
save him from excommunication. Moreover whereas by Gods word, excommunication
is the last and most grievous punishment, that the Church can enjoin against
any, of whom there is any hope of salvation, and therefore ought not to be
practiced but for heinous offenses, the Popish church makes it serve for every
trifling matter, yea for petty debts and all, then comes in interdightings
and suspensions of places, as churches and towns, yea whole realms, for one
man's fault: what likelinesse has this unto the discipline of Christ's church
set forth in the scriptures, and practiced by the fathers? with what face can
you Papists affirm, they have discipline, in their Church, when all penaunces
for most horrible offenses, may be bought out for money, and an open market
thereof set up at Rome, with the prices rated, what men must pay for every
thing that they buy: as absolution for him that has killed his father, or
mother, brother, sister, or wife Turones 4. Ducat. 1. Ca. line. 5.8. For an
heretic before he have abiured 36. Turones. and 9. ducates. For a witch 6.
Turones. 2. ducates. For a priest that is a Sodomite, or has lain with brute
beasts 36. Turones. 9. ducates. For a nonne that has been a common whore both
within and without her Abbey, with dispensation that she may be able to receive
any dignity, in her order, yea to be Abbess, 36. Turones. 9. ducates. And so
for all other offenses, with dispensations, inhibitions, rehabilities,
licenses, relaxations, commutations, confirmation, perinde Valeres Marcamas and
the devil and all for money: wherefore except you be to impudent, to
acknowledge this to be Christian discipline, be as good as your promise, and
recant.

The sixth article conteyneth 3. demandes.
1 Again from what Church, did all the solemn ceremonies, and observations,
all festival days, all fastes, all distinctions, and varieties of service, by
diversities of seasons, and times of the year, (proceed.)
FIrst you must understand, that we detest and abhor all your beggarly
ceremonies, which you count holy and solemn observations: for we know, that
God is not to be worshipped with such things but that the true worshippers
must worship him in spirit and verity John 4. And seeing we know God, or
rather are known of him, we will not regard the weak and beggarly elements,
because they are destitute of God his word, which only is able to give them
strength and estimation? as for your festiuities, in the honor of creatures,
we do likewise abhor them. we honor the Saints as S. Augustine says for
imitation, but we do not worship them for Religion. De vera Religione cap. 55.
Where he also says. Quare honoramus eos charitate, non seruitute. We honor
them with love, and not with service. And as he does often affirm, that it is
Idolatry to build churches in the honor of Saints, so is it as great
Idolatry, to institute festival days, in the favor of the same Saints. As
for the festival days that were used in the primitive Church, although they
might have been omitted, without any hurt of Christian Religion, yet were they
not kept in the honor of creatures, as they are of the Papists, but only for
the memory of the Martyrs, and other Saints, that their good life might be
followed. Your fastes are also abominable: for they are nothing else but
abstinence from meats, created of God to be received with thankesgeuing, which
S. Paul affirms to be the doctrine of Devils 1. Tim. 4. Also your
distinctions and varieties of service, because they consiste most of
blasphemous prayers to dead Saints, and sometimes to damned spirits, with
foolish lessons, responses, versicles, etc. Lewd lies and uncertain tales,
which you read and sing, as God his service, they are all abominable. In
vain do they worship me, says our Savior Christ, teaching for doctrine the
precepts of men. Math. 15. Also it was decreed in the Council of Laodicea,
the 59. chapter, that nothing should be song or read in the Church, but the
Canonical books of holy Scripture: wherefore if you demand whence your
ceremonies, festival days, fastes, and varieties of service did proceed? I
answer plainly, out of the bottomless pit of hell.

2 From whence did all things, yet indifferently for most part, observed, and
allowed, on both sides, from whence did they proceed?
IF you had uttered what things you mean, that are so indifferently allowed
on both sides, we might better have answered: but seeing you have not, we must
conjecture what you mean: if you mean any thing that is allowed without
controversy on both sides, it did either proceed from the scripture of God,
or from the primitive Church or else it a thing merely indifferent, but if it
have no ground in holy Scripture, nor example of the primitive Church, nor
judged merely indifferent, it not indifferently observed for the most part,
nor yet allowed on both sides.

2 And if it can be proved, that the Protestants Congregation, or any other
Church, but ours, has instituted and ordered all these, or any of these, for
the comeliness and honor of God his house, I recant.
I Have answered before, that the Protestants Congregation, gives you leave
to brag, that you are the inuentors of all these Idolatrous superstitions,
and false worshipping of God, and yet because you offer so liberally to recant,
if it can be proved that any Church but yours, has instituted and ordered all
these things, you shall he are what can be said. First, your great doctor
Durande, plainly affirms that many of your ceremonies, and solemnities, had
not their first institution of your church, but were taken of the Jews or
Gentiles: And it may easily be proved, that many of your ceremonies, were
instituted of heretics, as your holy water which you say you use to put men in
mind of their baptism, was derived of ye heretics called Hemerobaptistae,
which were, baptized every day. Epiphan. lib. 1. Tom. 1. cap. 17. Of the
Ossenes, you took the great estimation of water, salt, oil, bread, etc. and
use to swear by them, as they did. Epiph. contra Ossenes 19. Of the same
heretics, you received the superstition of relics, for they used to take the
spittle, and other filth from the bodies of Marthys, and Marthana, which were
of the seed of Elxai, that is, great Saints with them, and used them to cure
diseases, as Erasmus witnesses, at Canterbury were kept the clowtes, In
peregrinatione Religionis ergo.
that Thomas Becket did occupy to wipe of his sweat, and to blow his nose on,
which were kissed as holy relics, and thought also to be holsom for sick
folks: of the same heretics you learned to command the people to pray, in an
vnknowene tongue, as Elxai, the great Pope of those heretics said: Nemo
quaerat interpretationem, sed solum in oratione haec dicat. Let no man seek
the interpretation, but only say these words in his prayer. Which words
were in a strange tongue, either the Hebrew, or the Arabike. Epiphan. lib. 1.
Tom. 1. haeres. 19. Likewise the Marcosians when they baptized, used to speak
certain Hebrew words, that the ignorant people might marvel the more at
them, as you do in Baptism Ephata, etc. Epiph. lib. 1. Tom. 3. haer. 34. To
make the Images of Christ, and of the Apostles, and to sense them, you learned
of the heretics called Gnostici, and Carpocratir, Epip. lib. 1. Tom. 2. in the
preface Epiph. lib. 1. Tom. 2. haer. 27. and Irenaeus lib. 1. cap. 23. Of the
Valentinians, you learned to have in price the sign of the cross, and to
abuse the places of scripture for the same superstitious use: as, God forbid
that I should rejoice but in the cross of Christ, etc. Irenaeus lib. 1. cap.
1. Epiphan. lib. 1. Tom. 2. haeres. 31. Of the Heracleonites, you learned to
annoynte men at the point of death, with oil, and balm, and to cast water
upon dead men, with inuocations. Epiph. lib. 1. Tom. 3. haeres. 36. Of the
Cayanes, you learned to call upon Angels. Epiph. lib. 1. Tom. 3. haeres. 38.

Of the Marcionistes, you learned to give women leave to baptize. Ep. lib. 1.
Tom. Haer. 42. George, Bishop of Alexandria, invented bears to carry dead
corpses, charging all men to use them for his own advantage, as do you
Papists your bearing clothes and other toys for funeral pompes. Ep. lib. 3.
Tom. 1. Haer. 76. Of the Colliridianes, you learned to make images of the
virgin Marie, and worship them and her, with offering of candells, etc. as
they did of cakes, etc. Ep. lib. 3. Haer. 79. Of the Messalians or Martirians,
you learned to shave your beardes and to let your locks grow long. Ep. lib. 3.
Haer. 80. Of the Pharizees, you received your superstitious masking garments,
which you call amictus dalmaticus, and pallia, as witnesses Epiphanius, in his
epistle to Acacius, and Paulus. Last of all what say you to the ceremonies,
festiuities, fastes, and solemnities, used in the Greek Church, and in the
other Oriental Churches, if they be sufficient to make their church Catholic,
why do you count them heretics, and Schismatikes? if they be not sufficient,
why do you reason of the institution of the like, to prove your Church
Catholic? You see that proved which you desired, play the honest man therefore,
and recant.

The 7. article contains 3. demaundes.
1 Further I ask them, what Church that is, which has brought forth out of
her womb, so many noble personages, of Martyrs, Confessors, Doctors, Virgins,
and holy Saints, of all sorts, all which both they and we do outwardly
profess, by the continuance of the Callendare, which yet is used every where,
to be Saints in heaven.
FVrther I answer you, that all true Saints, whether they were Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, Eua^gelistes, Martyrs, Confessors, Doctors, Scholars,
Virgins, wives, widows, married, or unmarried, are all children of that
Church, in whose fellowship we rejoice to be, and are our dear brethren and
sistern begotten in Jesus Christ by the gospel, and we all hold of one head
Jesus Christ, as members of his mystical body. We all believe to be received
into that glory that they are, by the only mean that they were, that is by
the mercy of God in Christ Jesus. But as for the continuance of the Callendar,
we have little respect unto it, yea no regard at all, to use it either as a
record, or as a register of those whom we acknowledge to be Saints in
heaven. Let the Prince make you answer, for the continuance of such
calle^ders, for we have not to do with them. Nevertheless because you speak
of a Callendar, that is used every where, you declare that you have small
experience in Callendars, for every cuntry has them diverse in most days,
except holy days, and in some cuntry Callendars, such days are festival to
those Saints, that have not their names in Callendars of other cuntries, yea
it may be doubted whether they have their names in the book of life. If you
saw a Bohemians Callendar, perhaps if you should see John Hus, and Ierom of
Prage, which your church condemned for heretics, and have as solemn feasts,
in the Callender as Peter and Paul, wherefore we acknowledge those to be
Saints in deed, not whose names are continued in the Callendars of men, but
are written in the book of life of the Lamb, that was slain from the
beginning of the world. Apoc. 13.

2 And if it can be proved by any man of the Protestancy, that these were
either, of the Protestants Congregation, or belief when they were alive.
IT is sufficiently proved against you, of the Papistrie, that all they, whom
we acknowledge to be Saints in heaven, are members of the same mystical
body of Christ, that we are, and hold the only foundation that we hold, which
is Jesus Christ, and although some of them, builded straw and stubble upon the
same foundation, yet the Lord has not imputed it unto them. But whereas the
Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles were chief lights and pillars of the
church of Christ, the day is yet to come, and ever shall be, that all you of the
Papistrie, shall be able to charge us with one point of our faith, contrary to
the doctrine of the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles.

3 Or canonized and allowed for Saints by the Protestants Church, when they
were dead, or by any other Church, then I recant.
Our Church does take all them that show the fruicts of a lively faith, to be
Saints, while they be alive, as well as after their death, and we say with
David: All my delight is in the Saints, that are in the earth Psalm. 16. and
with S. Paul: We labor to comprehend with all Saints, what is the length,
breadth, depth, and height, and to know the love of Christ. Ephesians. 3. Finally
the scripture teaches us, to call all them that are sanctified in the blood
of Christ, and called to the fellowship of the Gospel, holy and Saints of
God. 1. Cor. 1. Ephesians. 1. etc. Wherefore, your Popish church does great injury
to the Saints of God, first, because she does not so account them while they
live, and secondly, because she refers the canonization of them only to ye
Pope, who not for their holy life, makes them Saints, but for the holy
honger of gold, as appear by Pope July 2. who would not canonize king Henry
the sixth, at the request of king Henry the seventh, under an unreasonable sum
of money. If that sum of money had been paid, he should have been a saint,
though he had not deserved, not for his virtue. And because that sum of money
was not paid, he might not be canonized, although his godliness never so much
deserved. Again of what force your Canonization is to be esteemed, we may
learn by a fact of Pope Boniface the 8. who condemned, dug up, and burned
the body of Hermannus in Ferraria, 30. years after his burial, who had been
worshipped for a saint above 20. years before, as witnesses Platina and
other. Gregory the seventh canonized Pope Liberius, which was an Arrian, as S.
Hieronym testifies, Moreover if I should likewise demand of you, what Pope
canonized Peter, Paul, and the rest of the Apostles, yea most of the Martyrs
of the primitive Church, you shall never be able to show me either what Pope
did it, or that any Pope did it: For seeing none may canonize but the Pope in
your church, and you can not prove that the Pope has canonized the Apostles
and chief Martyrs, you can not prove that your church has canonized the
Apostles and principal Martyrs. But it is manifest that your canonization is
taken from the heathen Senate of Rome, which challenged authority to make Gods,
whom they them selves thought best. And if I should rippe up the most part
of those Saints, which have been canonically canonized by the Pope, it were
an easy matter to find them heretics, traitors, Necromancers, Whoremongers,
and whores, as you may read in Bales Votaries abundantly, believing his
report no farther than he alleges his Author, where you may find it.
Wherefore it were wisdom for you, not to depend upon the Pope his
Canonization, but upon God his approbation, and to recante.

The 8. article conteyneth 3. demandes.
1 And because Christ as S. Paul says, has established in his Church some
Apostles, some Prechers, some Teachers, and Doctors even until his coming
again, I ask the Protestant, what Church that is, which is able to show and
prove, the continuance and use of the said functions ever sense Christ's time
by plain account of orderly Succession.
I Answer the Papist, that Christ has given to his Church some Apostles,
some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors, and Teachers. Ephesians. 4. and 1.
Cor. 12. And we are able to show and prove, that we continue in that unity of
faith and knowledge of the Son of God, for which end such offices were
ordained. But whereas you require, that we should show you the continuance of
those functions by orderly succession from Christ's his time until our days,
you declare how small skill you have in understanding the scriptures, for the
offices of Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets, were not appoincted to
continue always in the Church, but for a time, until the Gospel had taken
root in the world. Moreover, whereas you requier an orderly succession,
according to persons, or places, you are never able to prove, that any such
thing was promised to the Church, that we should show you the performance there
of in our Church. Otherwise we doubt not, but God has always stirred up some
faithful teachers, that have instructed his Church in the necessary poinctes
of Christian Religion. Although the world and the church of Antichrist did not
always see them.

2 And is able to name you by the histories of all ages, the notable persons
of all the forsaide states, in their government and ministry.
A Gain I answer you, that you are not able to name, me any text of
scripture, by which you can prove, that al these offices must have perpetual
continuance in ye church of Christ, nor yet that any of them should keep an
ordinary succession of place or persons: But contrariwise, seeing it was
prophesied that the church should fly into the wilderness, that is, be driven
out of the sight and knowledge of the wicked, and be so narrowly persecuted of
the Romish Antichrist for a long season, it were a token our church were not
the true church, if we could name such notable persons as you speak of, in all
ages flourishing in their government and ministry. And it is a good argument,
that the Popish church is not the church of Christ, because it was never
hidden sense it first sprang up, in so much that you can name all the notable
persons in all ages in their government, and ministry, and especially the
succession of Popes, you can rehearse in order upon your fingers, in which
beadroole, nevertheless you must name many tyrants, many traitors, one whore,
many whoremongers, many Sodomites, many murderers, many poysenors, many
sorcerers, and Necromancers, and from Boniface the third, all blasphemous
heretics, and Antichrists. But our church, which has not had so many
registers, chroniclers, and remembrancers has perhaps fewer, but yet honester
men to name: we can name Peter, Paul, Matthew, John, etc. Mark, Luke, Timothe,
Agabus, Epaphras, etc. Instinus, Irenaeus, Cyprianus, Athanasius, Hylarius,
Ambrosius, Augustinus, etc. Gyldas, Bertramus, Marsilius de Padua. Joan. de
Ganduno, Bruno Andagauensis VVickleue, John Hus, Hierome of Prage, etc. With
the first, namely Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets, we consent wholly in
all points of doctrine, with the rest, in the chief and most substantial
articles of faith, always agreeing with any man, so far as he agrees with
the word of God.

3 And if he can prove unto me, that their Church has never lacked the same
appointed officers, or that any Church or Congregation but ours has kept that
charge, the^ I recant.
FOr some of those officers I have twice answered before, that they were not
ordained, to continue always, with the church, wherefore they are not to be
exacted of us, but such officers as are necessary for the conservation of God
his people in the unity of faith and the knowledge of Christ, our Church has
never lacked, although in time of the great defection and Apostasy whereof S.
Paul does prophecy 2 Thessalonians. 2. there were but few, as there were but few
members of Christ his Church notwithstanding that through injury of the time,
the remembrance of all their names is not come unto us. And although we could
rehearse in order as many successions in our Church as the papists boast of in
theirs, yet were that nothing to prove it to be the Church of Christ, which
must be tried only by the Scriptures, as S. Augustine says in his book de
vnitate Ecclesiae, against the Donatistes cap. 16. Sed vtrum ipsi Ecclesiam
teneant, non nisi diuinarum Scripturarum canonicis libris ostendant, quia nec
nos propterea dicimus nobis credere oportere quod Ecclesiae sumus, quia ipsam
quam tenemus commendauit Mileuitanus Optatus, vel Mediolanensis Ambrosius, vel
alij innumerabiles nostrae communionis Episcopi, etc. But whether they hold
the Church or no, let them show none otherwise, but by the canonical books of
holy Scripture, for we our selves do not therefore say that men must believe
us that we are in the Church because we hold the same Church, which Optatus of
Mileuitum has commended, or Ambrose of Millayn, or innumerable Bishops of our
communion. Even so we require at the Papists hands that show them selves to
hold the Church not by succession of Bishops, or rehearsing of their names,
but only by the Scriptures: for although we did rehearse innumerable names of
Bishops in orderly succession on our side we would not require men to believe
us, but only because we prove the doctrine of our Church by the authority of
the Scriptures. But as for the popish church, neither has nor ever had any of
those officers which S. Paul speaks of, for Apostles, Evangelists, and
Prophets, she can challenge by no reason, seeing she refuses to be tried by
their doctrine uttered in their writings, in steed of pastors and reachers she
has wolves, du^me dogs, or false prophets, which either teach not at all, or
else teach the doctrine of devils and the dreams of men. And further I would
desire none other place in all the Scripture, to overthrow the popish
Hierarchy (which is the greatest glory of their Church) then this place of
Paul, Ephesians. 4. he speaks of Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors and
teachers. But where are Popes, Cardinals, popish archbishops, Bishops,
Priests, Deaco^s, Subdeacons, Exorcistes, Cantors, Acolyts, Ostiares, Monks,
Friars, Chano^s, Nuns, etc. Wherefore I conclude that all these popish orders
are no offices in the Church of Christ. And especially, seeing the Apostle both
in this place Ephesians. 4. and 1. Cor. 12. by these offices proves the unity of
mind, he acknowledges no Pope as one supreme head in earth, which might be
very profitable (as the Papists say) to maintain this unity: for if there had
been any such office appointed of God, S. Paul in no wise would have omitted
it, especially when it made so notably for the confirmation of his purpose,
which was unity. To conclude if it be sufficient, or any thing worth, to
rehearse the names of them that have orderly succeeded in all ages in the
bishops sees, in an outward face of the Church, the Greek Church is able to
name as many as the Latin Church, and in as orderly succession. Wherefore if
you be as ready to perform as to promise, you recant.

The nynth article may be divided into nine demaundes.
1 And for the necessary use and execution of the foresaid offices, they must
further be asked, what Sacraments the Protestants ministered for the space of a
thousand years together, in which they confess their congregations to have
been near or else wholly hidden.
THey ministered those Sacraments which Christ did institute, namely the
Sacrament of baptism, and the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, at
such times as the cruel tyranny of you Papists did not hinder them, to come
together for such purposes.

2 What correction they kept and discipline for offenders.
THey did use such discipline as was used in S. Cyprians time, when persecution
hindered not the free course of it. As he does often complain in the places
above rehearsed. They did admonish secretly, before witnesses, and when
persecution stayed them not, they did also excommunicate.

3 To whom they did preach their Faith.
TO such as would give them hearing, as VVickleue to the Englishmen: John Hus
to the Bohemians: VValdo to the Frenchmen, and so of the rest.

4 How did they reprove heresies?
THey reproved heresies, by the word of God, and patient sufferinge of your
tyranny: the one you may read in their works, that are yet extant of
VVickleue, Bertrame, Hus, etc. The other in histories of your own writers.

5 Where did their principal Pastors sit in Judgment?
I Might ask you where the Apostles did sit in judgment and you are never
able to show me, for I read as one says: that they stood often to be Judged,
but I never read that they sat in judgment upon others: And so I answer of
the principal Pastors of our Church, especially in time of persecution.

6 Where did they gather as in Counsels to try the truth of doubtful
matters?
AS God gave them respight, from your tyranny, they had conference one with an
other: and as for doubts, they tried them by the word of God, and not by
number of voices, as you do in your counsels, as for the places where they
met, is nothing at all material, at Prage, at Lions, at Merindol, etc.

7 How might Christian men, justly offended with some of their brethern, have
sought out your officers or Congregation, to make complainct of him?
YOu are void of all reason that in a persecuted church, will require all
things to be so formal and orderly, as in time of peace and quietness, I could
choke you with putting like cases of your Church. If a number of Papists be
carried prisoners into Barbary, or Turkey, what Sacraments, what discipline,
what Judgment have they among them, if one be offended with his brother how
shall he come to your officers, or to your Church to complain. In such cases
where the ordinary authority of the Church is hindered by persecution, or
otherwise, the rule of S. Paul. 1. Cor. 5. may serve and ought to be observed:
If any that is called a brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an Idolater,
or a rayler, or a drunkard, or an extorcioner with such one eat not. So that
if a Christian be justly offended with his brother, he ought to abstain from
his company. And if he may have ordinary authority, he may complain further.

8 Or how if it had liked any man to have been baptized of them, or to have
received the communion of them, or to have been married of them, or to have
joined them selves in Faith and Religion to them, how might I say that secret,
contemptible, and unknown company, be found in this case?
HE must have sought them out as well as he could, and if he had been
persuaded, that they only ministered the Sacraments, and Ecclesiastical rites,
sincerely, according to the word of God, it were no great matter for him to
find them, seeing he knew by whom he was so persuaded, and of them might also be
informed where he should have them. I marvel you are not ashamed to demand
these questions, as though it were material to discuss, whether of us has
the Church, to have the Church so manifest, that every man may see it. Do you
not remember how many schisms have been even in the popish church, more the^
twenty, and sometime two Popes at once, sometime three, and sometime four,
which of them should a simple Papist take for head of the Church, especially in
the 22. schism, which lasted 39. years: one Pope sitting at Rome, an other at
Auinion, either having his court, either having and making Cardinals, either
cursing other. Or in the 23. schism, when the question was of one of the
highest points in all popery, and is not yet thoroughly decided among them:
Whether the Pope be above the Council, or the Council above the Pope. In the
time of these schisms how might a man have found out, which was the true
Church, which was Christ's vicare in earth, which had the right Sacraments and
Sacramentalls, to which Popes court should he appeal, where did the principal
Pastors sit in judgment, etc. How should counsels be gathered, which Pope
should confirm their acts, etc, When you are able to answer these
questions, for your own church, then you may better require them of ours. As
for that secret, contemptible, and unknown company of our Church, in the
sight of the world, was nevertheless manifest, glorious, and known to our
Savior Christ, and the lively members of his body.

9 If therefore you can show me, that any man ever sought Justice or knowledge
of truth, sacrament, or faith, or any help of Salvation at the Protestants
secret and close congregation, or any other where, but of Gods known Catholic
Church, I recant.
ALthough it be to little purpose to answer this demand, because it is no
reason to say, these things has not been, because chronicles make no mention
of them: yet that all men may see, how far you ouershoot your self, I will
partly satisfy your request. Charles the great sought knowledge of the truth
of the sacrament of Bertramus. John, Duke of Lancaster, and diverse other noble
men were instructed in our Religion by VVickleue. The land of Bohemia, was
converted by John Hus, and Hieronym of Prage, and sought the sacraments of
them. Finally, you always forget the Greek church, which you do not account
part of the Catholic church, and yet you can not deny but men have sought
Justice, sacraments, faith, etc. of it. Therefore if a man might trust you
upon your word, you recant.

The 10. article conteyneth in effect but 2. demandes.
1 Moreover I ask whether for all these many hundredth of years or ever else
before there was any temporal Prince or Potentate, that offered to be under
God a minister of Justice and an executor of Christian laws in the right of
your Congregation, that ever maintained by laws Civil or other, your Faith
and Congregation, and I recant.
BEfore ye general defection, it is an easy matter, to name you the Emperors
and Princes which both offered, to be ministers of Justice in the right of our
church, and also mainteyned our faith and Congregation, by Civil laws, as
Constantine the great, Iouinianus, Valentinianus, Theodosius, Archadius,
Honorius, Marcianus, Iustinianus, Mauricius, and diverse other. But when the
kings of the earth had committed fornication with the great whore of Babylon
(as the holy Ghost foresheweth Apoc. 17. and 18.) it is no prejudice to our
cause if we can not show, any of them that have maintained our Religion. Yet
because you make so gentle an offer upon the trial of such a matter, which is
of small force either to the hurt of our cause or the maintenance of yours, I
will let you understand what I have read for this purpose. Not doubting but
other which have read much more, and seen more ancient histories than I, can
show you a great deal more. I pass over as to well known, how many of the
Grecian Emperors resisted the setting up of Images, in so much that in the
Greek church to this day they can abide none in their temples, likewise I
pass over Charles the great, who wrote a book against Images, which is in
printe, who also declared, that he liked not the heresy of the real presence
and transubstantiation, which in his time was in forging, in that he called
Bertrame, to declare his mind of that matter, as appears by his book, which
is also in printe. I will not rehearse those princes, that contrary to the
Popes laws, defended their priests, that were married: For although these and
such like defended some part of the truth, which we hold against you, yet
lest you should object, it was but in some one or two points, I pass them
over with silence. But VVickleue, I wene, you will not deny, but he was of our
Church and Religion. And I read that king Edward the third, both in his
Parliament holden Anno Domini, 1371. and at other times with diverse other noble
men defended his cause: in so much that so long as he lived, all the popish
bishops, could do him no harm, yet did he openly inueigh against the Pope,
calling him Antichrist, and all popish doctrine without any couller or
dissimulatio^ both in the university of Oxeford, where he was reader, and also
in his sermons abroad, as appears by his books and English homilies, which
yet are common to be seen, we unless he had been supported, and maintained by
the king and other potentates, could never have continued so long as he did.
Further, have you not heard of Zisca, and Procopius, two mighty Capitaines,
which defended the Bohemians from the tyranny both of the Emperor, the Pope,
and almost all the Princes of Germany? For what cause did Paul the second
Anno Domini, 1466. condemn George, a noble and a worthy Prince, king of
Bohemia for an heretic? and deprived him of his kingdom? was it not for
defending the Protestants in his dominion? Thus you see that some Princes and
Potentates have not only offered but have in deed, taken in hand to defend our
church, which you thought unable to be showed, wherefore I challenge your
promise, you must recante.

The 11. article is so confuse that it is hard to bring it into any certain
number of demandes.
1 Again I requier of the Protestants to declare by good histories, or by
reasonable likelihoode when the true church, as they count theirs, decayed?
I Answer, even in the Apostles time, there arose many heresies which did not a
little trouble the Church, but immediately after the Apostles time, while the
fathers of the church were earnestly occupied, in resisting of horrible
heresies, by the craft of Satan, some errors and abuses crept into the true
Church of Christ, which at the first because they were small, and men occupied
in greater matters, were either not espied, or not regarded: as may be known
by the writings of Justinius Martyr, and Irenaeus, two of the most ancient
writers, sense the Apostles time. Justinius, was in this error, that he thought
that the Angels lusted after women and therefore were turned into Devils. It
seems also, that the Church in his time, was in some error, about second
marriages and diuorcements. Irenaeus, affirms, that our Savior Christ lived
here 50. years, which he says was received of them that heard it, even of
the Apostles mouths. Also both he and Papias, which was before him and was the
disciple of S. John: are charged by S. Ieronym, in Catalogo Script. Eccl to
have held this error, that Christ should reign a thousand years after the
Resurrection here in the flesh, whereby it is manifest, seeing these ancient
fathers, and pillars of the Church were thus stained with errors, that the
Church in their time, could not be free from the same. And so it is evident,
that the true Church decayed immediately after the Apostles times.

2 What year the Religion of the Papists came in and prevailed?
ALthough many abuses and corruptions were entered into the church of Christ
immediately after the Apostles time, which the devil planted as a preparatiue
for his eldest son Antichrist. Yet we may well say, that the religion of the
Papists came in, and prevailed, that year in which the Pope first obtained
his Antichristian exaltation, which was in the year of our Lord 607. when
Boniface the third, for a great sum of money, obtained of Phocas, the
traiterous murderer, and adulterous Emperor, that the Bishop of Rome should
be called and counted, the head of all the Church. Since that time, that
deuilish heresy has always increased in error, until the year of our Lord
1414. in which the Council of Constance decreed, to rob the people of the
Sacrament of Christ his blood. From this time it has again decayed, being
mightily subdued by the bright beams of the Gospel, shining in the world, and
at the length shall be utterly destroyed.

3 Whether all their true Church was so soundly sleeping, that none could
preach against it as it first entered.
WHen the coming of Antichrist was in all power of lying signs, 1 Thessalonians. 2.
Math. 24.
and wonders, in so much (that if it were possible) the very elect should be
deceived, and a general departing from the faith was foreshewed, and the Church
to be driven into the wilderness, what marvel were it? if none of our Church
could preach against it, as it first entered: yet because you speak of the
first entering of popish religion, which depends chiefly upon the Popes
authority, you shall hear, that when it first began to advance it self,
there wanted not some, either to preach or write against it. When Victor,
bishop of Rome about the year of our Lord 200. passed the bonds of his
authority, in excommunicating of all the Churches of Asia, many bishops
withstoode him, and especially Irenaeus, bishop of Lions, and Policrates of
Ephesus, as witnesses Eusebius, libro 5. cap. 25. Eccle. S. Cyprian, also
reproves Cornelius, bishop of Rome, for that he was moved by threatening of
heretics to receive their letters, and did not send them back into Africa, to
their own bishop lib. 1. Ep. 3. Also when Stephanus, bishop of Rome, was bold
to communicate with Basilides, and Martialis, two Spamards, that were justly
excommunicated and deposed by ye bishops of their own province, and sought to
restore them: Cyprian and his fellow bishops of Aphrica, being required to give
their advise, gave counsel, that in no wise they should be received, not a
little blaming Stephanus, that being far of, and ignorant of their cause, he
would take upon him, to defend such wicked men. lib. 1. Ep. 4. Likewise when
the same Stephanus, threatened excommunication to Helenus and Firmilianus, and
almost all the Churches of Asia, because they thought that such as were
baptized by heretics, should be baptized again: he was misliked by Dionysius
of Alexandria, and diverse other godly bishops, as appears by his Epistle
written to Xystus. Eusebius. lib. 7. ^ap. 5. Cyprian also reproves him very
sharply, for the same opinion, accusing him of presumption and contumacy Epi.
ad Po^npeium, and in his epistle to Quintinus, he says plainly, that Peter
himself was not so arrogant, nor so presumptuous that he would say he held the
primacy, and that other men should obey him as his inferiors. When Anastasius,
Innocentius, Zozimus, Caelestinus, bishops of Rome all on a row, challenged
prerogative over the bishops in Aphrica, by forginge a faise Canon of the
Nicene Council, they were withstoode by all the bishops of Aphrica, who
decreed, that none under pain of excommunication, should appeal to any
bishop, beyond the sea, Council. Aphrican. cap. 92. and that the bishop of the
chief see, should not be called prince of priests, or highest priest, but
only bishop of the chief see. Conc. Aph. cap. 6. When Celestinus by shop of
Rome dealt hardly with the Nouatians, Socrates testifies, he could do not
good with them, because they envied his ambition, saying that the bishoprike of
Rome, like as of Alexandria, was long before grown beyond the bonds of
priestbood, into foreine lordship. Lib. 7. cap. 11. By these examples it is
plain, that although the mystery of iniquity, began to work in Victor,
Cornelius, Stephanus, Anastasius, Innocentius, Zozimus, Bonifacius, and
Caelestinus, yet it was reproved, by some godly men: as Irenaeus, Polycrates,
Dionysius Alexandrinus, Cyprianus, the Council of Aphrica, and Socrates the
Historiographer.

4 Whether all nations suddenly and in one year were moved to the doctrine of
the Papists, no one man of all their true Church neither preaching, teaching,
writing, nor attempting any thing against it, or making mention of it.
WHen the scripture tells us, that the mystery of iniquity, preparing for
the general defection, and revelation of Antichrist, wrought even in S. Paul's
time 2 Thessalonians. 2. it is folly to ask, whether suddenly and in one year all
Religion was corrupted. And yet all nations never consented to the doctrine of
the Papists, for as it has been often said, the Greek church, and other
Oriental churches, has never received the Popish religion, in many chief
points, and especially, in acknowledging the Popes authority: what preaching,
teaching, and writing has been against it, is showed before, and shall be more
declared hereafter.

5 Whether suddenly all books of service were altered?
NO forsoothe, but by little and little, in the Latin Church: as for the Greek
and Oriental Churches, never received nor used your Latin service books.

6 Whether in a moment, the Mass was said in steed of other Apostolic
Communion?
When Durande, your own doctor, shows what Pope sewed on every patche, that
belongs to your Mass, it were folly for us to say: it came in suddenly, and
impudency in you, to affirm that it came whole from the Apostles, which was
so long a framing in so many pieces.

7 Whether men began suddenly to pray for the souls departed?
FIrst it is manifest, that men had no warrant out of God his word to pray for
the dead: and it can not be proved for 200, years after Christ, by any
credible author, that it was used in the Church: wherefore it is certain, that
it was first planted by the devil, as were other abuses: And because it has a
pretense of Charity, deceived simple men the sooner. Yet did it not so
prevail, in the primitive Church, that they durst define, what profit the
souls received thereby: for Chrysostom in his 3. Homely, upon the first
Chapter of the Epist. to the Philippians, says: Procuremus eis aliquid
auxilij, modici quidem, attamen iuuemus eos. Let us procure them some help,
small help truly, but yet let us help them. Likewise, Augustine in the 9.
book and 13. Chapter of his confessions, where he prays for his father and
mother, declares how uncertain he was of that matter, one while he fears
the danger of every soul that dies in Adam: An other while he believes, that
they need not his prayer, yet he desires God to accept the same, and move
other men to remember them in their prayers: Thus it is necessary that they
wander, which lean unto men's traditions without the word of God.

8 Suddenly required the help of Saints in heaven?
Whether suddenly or by little and little, men were brought to such superstition,
that they required help of Saints, it makes little matter, seeing it is
contrary to the word of God, and the example of the primitive Church, for 200.
years after Christ. Yet it is to be thought, that it grew up, as other errors,
by little and little. And S. Augustine in his book, De cura pro mortuis agenda,
wearieth him self, and in the end can define nothing, in certain, how ye
Saints in heaven should hear the prayers of men, on earth. Such
doubtfulnesse they fall into, that leave the word of God, and lean to
traditions.

9 Suddenly the tongue of common prayers altered?
FIrst ye Greek church, and other churches both in Asia, and Aethiopia, never
received the Latin tongue: but to this day continue in their vulgar tongue.
The Western Church, for the most part all spoke and understood Latin, as
the sea coast of Aphrica, Italye, France, Spain, Britayne: as for Germany,
was lately converted to the faith. Then seeing they spoke Latin, and had their
common prayer in Latin: The tongue of their common prayer was not altered, but
their speech was altered from the tongue of their common prayer: and this was
not suddenly, for it was more than twelve hundred years after Christ before
it was taken for a Catholic doctrine, that common prayer should be used in
latin. S. Augustine preached in latin and all the people understood him, and
that they might the better understand him, he does use such phrases and terms
which were not pure latin, but commonly used of the people as Ossum, and
Faenerare, etc. But soon after his time, when the Goths, and Vandalles,
oueranne the Empire, the latin tongue which before was not pure among the
people, began daily to be more corrupted, and yet remained after a sort latin,
until the year of our Lord 768. when Charles the great began to reign in
France, and long after: for within the time of his reign, which was 47.
years, a Council was holden at Turon, in France, what year it is not
certain, but it is probable, that in the latter end of his empire, in which
it was decreed, that every bishop, should have certain homilies Et easdem
quisque aperte studeat transfer in rusticam Romanam linguam aut Theotiscam,
quo facilius cuncti possint intelligere quae dicuntur. Turon. 3. cap. 17. And
that every one study to translate them plainly, into the rusticall Roman
tongue or into the Theotisce tongue, that all men may more easily understand
what is said. By this Canon, it is evident, that at this time, the people
understood the Latin tongue, though it were very rude and rustical. And where
the Canon prescribes the same homilies to be translated either into the rude
latin tongue, or into the Theotisce tongue. Although this word Theotisca,
seem to be corrupted, yet it is most certain that they meant Dutch tongue,
for as much as Carolus magnus, had a great part of Germany under his dominion,
and the Germans, as never thoroughly subdued by the Romans, never thoroughly
received the latin tongue. Yet it is manifest, that they understood their
common prayer in the latin tongue, though not perfectly, because the Canon
says: Quo facilius etc. That all men may more easily understand, signifying
that they understood the pure latin tongue though hardely and not perfectly.
About the year of our Lord 813. the knowledge of the latin tongue, began
more and more to wear away, from amongst the common people, which when the
bishops perceived, they decreed in the Council of Magunce, cap. 25. that every
Sunday, and holy day, there should be a sermon in such sort, that the
common people might understand it: and in the 45. Canon. they decreed, that
every Christian, should learn the Creed, and the Lord his prayer, Et qui
aliter non potuerit, vel in sua lingua hoc discat, that is, And he that can
not, yet let him learn it in his own tongue. Whereby they declare, that they
desire to retain the latin tongue still, but rather than the people should
be ignorant, they command them to learn their prayers and belief in their
mother tongue. Also by the 43. Canon, wherein they judge that no preeste can
say Mass alone, it appears that the people commonly understood the latin
service: for they ask how he should say: Dominus vobiscum, and admonish the
people to lift up their hearts, and diverse like sayings, where there is none
by him but him self. Now if the people understood not these sayings, it
were all one, whether they were present or absent. Also in the Council of
Rhenes, holden in France about the same time, the like decree was made cap.
15. that bishops study to preach sermons, and homelies of the holy fathers so
that all men may understand, according to the property of their tongue.
Finally in the Council of Laterane holden under Pope Innocent the third, Anno
Dom. 1215. in which Council transubstantiation was first established, the 9.
chapter, it was plainly decreed that forasmuch as within one city and
diocese people of diverse languages be mingled together, having under one
Faith, diverse rites, and manners, we straightly command, that the bishops of
such cities and diocesses, provide able men, which according to the diversity
of their rites, and languages, celebrate unto them, the divine service, and
minister the sacraments, instructing them both by word and example. Hereby it
appears, that when the latin tongue, was either almost, or altogether grown
out of the common peoples understandings, order was taken that common prayers
should be said and sacraments ministered in the mother tongue of every nation.
But the bishops which should have seen it put in execution, either
negligently omitted it, or willingly refused to do it, because it was more for
their profit to keep the people in blind ignorance. So thus I have showed,
that suddenly the tongue of common prayer, was not altered.

10 Tell me what year of our Lord, under what Emperor, under what Pope, by
whom these things were wrought, upon what occasion, this marueillous mutation
was made?
WHo can tell the original of every blind custom and peuish tradition, of
every old error and foolish fashion it is sufficient to show, that these
things have no ground in the scripture of God, they were not taught by Christ
and his Apostles, nor received in the church that followed immediately after
them, and then we are bold to say, with Tertullian: This prejudice there is
against all heresies, how soever they came up or when soever they sprange up,
That is true that was first, and that is false, that is latter, therefore from
the beginning it was not used to pray for the dead nor to the dead, from the
beginning common prayer was not in an unknown tongue. Wherefore prayer for the
dead and to the dead, with prayer in a strange tongue are false, when soever
they began, or how long soever they continued.

11 Who preached against it, what history makes mention of it, who of all
your Pastors preached against it, was God his Church so void of the spirit of
Truth, and strength, that even then when it most flourished, it had none that
durst open against such corruption of religion, as it entered in, and when it
might soon have been repressed?
BEfore you demand what year the religion of the Papists came, in and
whether it came in suddenly: and as though we should answer that it came in
suddenly, you demand, who preached against it etc. This is to fight with your
own shadow: for we say not that it came in suddenly, but that it entered by
small degrees at the first and therefore was less espied by the true Pastors,
especially being earnestly occupied against great heresies, and open
adversaries, that sought to beat down the chief foundations of Christian
faith, as the Valentinians, Marcionistes, Manichees, Arrians, Sabellians, and
such like monsters. So when Satan had gotten in one foot, by such crafty
pollitie, he never rested, until he had thrust in his whole body, with the
power of Antichrist.

12 If it could not, show me then what year of the Lord this mutation was
made, and who of all the true preachers did with stand this doctrine?
SO often as you demand one thing, so often must I answer after one sort,
this mutation was not all in one year, nor in one hundredth years, nor in one
thousand of years, for transubstantiation no small article of your religion,
was not decreed until the year of God 1215. what preachers have withstoode
your doctrine at diverse times are declared before in the answer to the 8.
Article 2. demand.

13 Or note the name of him that ever first preached any article of our
doctrine: and if we note you not by their names, every one of your Capitaines,
and the several errors that they tought and the time, and the year when they
arose against the former received truth and the Counsels in which they were
orderly condemned if I, say this can be done of your side toward us, or if we
do it not for improofe of your Church and religion, I recant.
I Have noted in the answer to the 6. article 3. demand, the names of diverse
heretics, that first preached diverse articles of your religion, and further I
note unto you Pelagius, and Coelestius, which tought that free will without
grace could do somewhat toward eternal salvation, and that grace was given
according to merit, which article you teach also with culler of a distinction
De congruo and condigno, which is a mere cavil: for God is as much bound
unto congruitie, as to dignity or worthiness, and as he can do nothing
against worthiness, no more can he do any thing against congruitie, which is
a kind of Equity. And whereas you brag, to note unto us every one of our
Capitaines etc. except you note unto us the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
Evangelists, and Christ himself, you shall never be able to perform that you
promise, for we teach nothing but the eternal truth of God, wherefore we
refuse not to be counted heretics, if you can prove, that we hold any one
article of faith, contrary to the scripture: you may perchance note the names
of them, that preaching the truth of our doctrine, against your received
errors, were accounted of the world for heretics, but you must prove that
their opinions are contrary to the word of God, or else all your labor is in
vain: we confess also, that some articles of our doctrine, were taught by
heretics, as there was never no heresy, which had not many things common
with true Religion, but yet in those poinctes they were no heretics, neither
did they err. Yea but you will say, they were condemned for those opinions,
as erroneous. I will not dissemble, that which you think the greatest matter.
Aerius tought, that prayer for the dead was unprofitable, as witnesses both
Epiphanius, and Augustinus, which they compte for an error, but neither of them
both, reproves it by the scripture. Wherefore, if Aerius had not been an
Arrian, this opinion could not have made him an heretic. Also he tought that
fasting days are not to be observed, if he espied the superstition of fasting
days and reproved it, that was no error at all. But if Aerius was an heretic,
for denying prayer for the dead to be profitable, why were the Heracleonites,
accused of heresy, because they buried their dead with inuocations Epiph.
lib. 1. Tom. 3. Haeres. 36. Augustine, also by authority of Philaster charge
the same Aerius, with abstinence from flesh, if this be an heresy, then be all
Papists heretics, which compte abstinence from flesh an holy fast. Again you
will bring in Iouiniane, which affirmed that virginity was no better than
marriage, which if it be well understood, is no error at all: for although
virginity in some cases and respects, and for some persons is better than
marriage: yet is it not simply, that is in all respects and cases, and for all
persons better than matrimony. And if he tought further that such as could
not contain, though they had vowed Virginity, should nevertheless be
married, this was the doctrine of S. Paul: It is better to marry than to burn.
And Epiphanius was of the same judgment, although he compte it an offense to
marry after their vow, yet he says: It is better to marry then to burn.
Melius est itaque vnum peccatum habere, and non plura, etc. It is better to
have one offense, rather then many. It is better for him that is fallen from
his course, openly to take a wife according to the law, and to repent long
time that vow of his virginity, and so again be brought into the Church, as
one that has done amiss, as one that is fallen and broken, and having need
to be bound: rather then to be wounded daily, with privy darts of that
wickedness, which ye devil puts into him. So knows the Church to preach,
these are the medicines of healing. Ep. lib. 2. Haer. 61. this medicine the
popish church will not acknowledge, but will separate them from their wives, as
they did in Queen Mary's times. S. Ieronym also, who was a most bitter enemy
unto Iouinian, plainly affirms, that rather then they which have professed
virginity, should live incontinently, they ought to marry. Sanctum Virginum
propofitum and coelestis angelorumque familiae gloriam, quarundam non been se
agentium nomen infamat. Quibus aperte dicendum est, vt aut nubant, si se non
possunt continere, aut contineant, si nolunt nubere. Epi. ad Demetriadem. That
is: The name of certain virgins, which behave them selves not well, does
blemish the holy purpose of virginity, and glory of the heavenly and angelike
family. To whom must be plainly said that either they should marry, if they can
not conteyne, or else conteyne if they will not marry. Note well this saying of
S. Ieronym, the great aduancer of virginity, and dispraiser of marriage.
Moreover if Iouinian taught that fasting, abstinence from certain meats, and
other bodily exercise of them selves profit little, his doctrine agrees with S.
Paul. 1. Tim. 4. but if he taught (as he is charged) that such things profited
nothing at all, we agree not with him in that opinion. Last of all Vigilantius,
shall be brought in, who wrote against invocation of Saints, superstition of
relics, and other ceremonies, him Ieronym reproves or rather rayleth on him:
for his reasons are nothing worth that he has against him, therefore howsoever
Ieronym esteemed him in his rage, if he had none other opinions contrary to the
truth: we doubt not to acknowledge Vigilantius (as many godly and learned
Bishops of his time did) for a true preacher and reprehender of that
superstition whereunto Ieronym was to much addict, although he do somewhat
qualify the matter. If any man think his reasons to be effectual, let him
mark this one, that he uses, and thereby judge the rest, he says of the
Martyrs: Sequuntur agnum, etc. They follow the lamb whether soever he goes.
If the lamb be every where, therefore they which are with the lamb, are to be
thought to be every where. Beside this evil consequence, consider what
perilous assertions these be: that the lamb is every where, and that ye
martyrs are every where, this is to destroy the humanity of Christ, and to
give divinity unto the Martyrs: for Christ concerning his humanity, according
to which, he is called a Lamb, is not every where, but in one place alone, as
S. Augustine says Ep. ad Dardanum 57. Secundum hanc formam non est putandus
vbique diffusus, that is: According to this form it is not to be thought, that
he is diffused every where. Again no creature is every where, in more places
than one, at one time. Wherefore to say that the souls of Martyrs, be every
where, is to deny them to be creatures and so make them gods. I doubt not but
S. Ieronym if he had quietly considered these absurdities, would have revoked
them as erroneous and heretical: but while he rather followed affection, then
judgment, you may see how he was deceived. Thus seeing we have noted to you
the names of diverse heretics, which first preached certain articles of your
doctrine, and you are not able to name any, which preached any article of our
doctrine, but the same was consonant to the Scripture. If you were as ready to
perform, as you are to promise, you should recant.

14 And for that purpose because the government of the Bishop of Rome is most
misliked of them, and yet most notoriously known by every history, let them
name the Pope that first brake of the course of his forefathers belief, and
regiment in any article of faith or necessary Christian usage, and I recant.
I Have named before Victor, which was the first that went about to usurp
authority over other Churches. Also I have named Boniface, the third, which
was the first that challenged to be universal bishop: For Gregory the great
says: Nemo meorum decessorum hoc prophano vocabulo vti voluit, That is: None
of my predecessors would use this profane word. The same Gregory, as
Hulderichus, bishop of Auspourge does testify, was ye first that compelled
priests to live unmarried, which afterward when he saw the inconvenience, he
revoked. Thus having named diverse Popes that first brake the course of their
fathers faith, and regiment etc. and more could rehearse but for avoiding
prolixitie, I challenge your promise that you must recant.

The 12. article has 3. demandes.
1 Item I ask what kind and order of service, or common prayer, what way of
ministering of the sacraments your Church had: before Papistry (as you call it)
did prevail in the world?
IVstinus Martyr, in his second Apollogie to the Emperor, declares plainly
what order of service and ministration of sacraments our Church had before
Papistry prevailed. On the day called Sunday (says he) there is a meeting
together of all them that dwell in the City or in the country, and the
monumentes of the Apostles, or the writings of the Prophets are read until
it be thought sufficient, when the reader has made an end, he that is our
ouerseer (or chief minister) makes a sermon of admonition and exhortation to
follow those good things that are read. After this we all stand up together
and make our prayers, and as we have said before, when our prayers are ended,
there is brought forth bread and wine and water, and the chief minister, does
likewise with all his might yield prayers and thankesgeuing, and the people
answers Amen. Then is made distribution to every one and receiving of those
things for which thanks was given, and to them that be absent, it is sent by
the deacons. Such as are rich and willing do give alms what they will, etc.
By this one authority, it may be seen though other might be brought, what
order of service and ministration of sacraments our Church used before Papistry
gat the upper hand.

2 Show one book of Communion or what else you list that was in English, or
lacked prayer for the departed, or invocation of Saints in heaven, or that
wanted oblation, or sacrifice, or that charged a number to receive, or else that
the priest could not consecrate nor say Mass, himself, or show any note in a
Communion book, that the people should take the sacrament for plain bread,
or that they should give no honor to it, show this book or any leaf or line
of this book.
IT may trouble a wise man to answer all the questions that a fool can
propounde: you requier to see a book of Communion in English, or that lacked
etc. When it is confessed, that the English nation received their religion
first from Rome, at such time as Religion there was very corrupt, what
marueill is it, if we can not show you such a Communion book as you require,
but we can easily show you out of the scripture, the the Communion ought to be
ministered in the vulgar tongue, that prayer for the dead and to the dead
ought not to be used, that the sacrament ought not to be turned into a
sacrifice, that there ought to be a communion of many receauers and not a
private mass, that the substance of the bread is not changed, that the
elements of the sacrament are not to be honored: these I say we can prove out
of the word of God, the Catholic writers of the old Church. And though
perchance, it will be hard to find a communion book in English, yet have I
found you a canon of the Laterane Council, that it ought to have been
translated into English; yet are there found diverse monumentes of Antiquity,
as Prayers, Psalms, and Homilies, etc. in the old English or Saxons tongue,
in which the real presence, transubstantiation, and other poinctes of Popish
doctrine are plainly confuted. There may be showed you also Bybles both the
old Testament and New in the English tongue of diverse translations, in old
written hand. Also great books of English homilies inueighing directly
against the Pope and all Popish doctrine in old English written hand, with
diverse other small treatises and pamphlets of like matters, if these would do
you any good, you might have the sight of them, when you please.

3 Or any Church or Congregation that ever had any Authentical service but
ours, and I recant.
THe Church of the Brytannes before Augustine came in, with Romish service, had
they not trow you Authentical service? which continued in the faith of Christ
even from the Apostles time. The Grecians also and Oriental churches, have
they not unto this day, their Authentical service? which is not yours? If you
can not deny this, you should recant.

The 13. article has 2. demaundes.
1 Furthermore I requier to know what should be the cause that the Protestants
themselves, do receive all Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and other officers
spiritual of all sorts of our Catholic church, and do admit them as men
lawfully and sufficiently ordered, both to preach, minister sacraments, and to
exercise spiritual jurisdiction no less, but rather more, than if they were
of their own ordering, where we of the Catholic church, do not acknowledge
any man of their calling to be any whit more fit for any spiritual function
than other lay men.
ALthough all godly men wish more severity of discipline to be used, in
receiving them that come out of heresies to serve in the Church, than is
commonly practiced in England: yet you are highly deceived, if you think we
esteem your offices of Bishops, priests, deaco^s, any better than the state of
lay men, but far worse: for we judge them to be nothing else but
Antichristianitie, heresy, and blasphemy. And therefore we receive none of
them to minister in our church, except they forswear your religion: And so
their admission is not an allowing of your ordering, but a new calling unto the
ministry.

2 Therefore upon this presumption that they do not only admit our ministering
of sacraments, but also the lawful ordering of the ministers for the same, if
they can show me why our church having by their own consent and approving
lawful priests and bishops should not be the true church, I recant.
YOu presume to much as I said before to think that we receive your orderinge
to be lawful or your ministering of sacraments to be pure. And if you gather,
that we admit your ministration of sacraments because we do not rebaptize
them that were baptized by you, we may likewise gather that you admit our
ministration of sacraments, because you do not rebaptize them that are
baptized of us, nor marry again those that are married in our Church: whereas
you count marriage to be a sacrament, so that our accepting of your doings does
no more allow your church, than your accepting of our doings, does allow our
Church. And as touching the sacrament of Baptism, because you reteyne the
Institution, in baptizing in the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost: and in as much as the sacraments take not their effect of the minister,
but of God, we receive it: as of other heretics which likewise retain the
Institution. Wherefore there is no cause why you should think we allow yours
to be the true Church thereby: So that there is good cause why you should
recant.

The 14. article has 5. demandes.
1 Also I demand what furniture or commodity in serving God the Christianity
of any age, or any part of Christendom had ever by your Congregations?
THe service of God has small need of furniture in outward things: for God
being a spirit, is not worshipped with outward pomp but with spiritual and
inward reverence. And as for other furniture that is necessary, was decreed to
the Church by the Emperor Constantine and his successors, that were of our
Church, before the revelation of Antichrist. Notwithstanding the Church was in
better case, before such furniture was granted, than it was since. Therefore
it is a small reason to challenge the Church of Christ by outward furniture.

2 What Churches did you build for your assemblies and service?
Our assemblies were kept in secret places, long time after Christ's Ascension,
in most cuntries, that were subject to the Roman empire. Wherefore the
building of material churches proves nothing at all the builders to be
members of the mystical Church, that is the body of Christ. Howbeit in such
realms and cuntries where the faith of Christ, was received by public
authority, as in this land of Brytaine, there were churches builded as our
Chronicles declare. And when Constantinus had given peace to the Church: he
also builded Oratories and great Synagoges called Basilicas, for our assemblies
and service.

3 What Bishoprics for the government of the Church did you find?
AS the church continued long without material churches, so also without
large possessions, for the living of bishops, yet in Brytish Church our
histories make mention that the possessions and places of the Pagane Flamines,
and Archiflamines were converted to the use of Ecclesiastical bishops and
archbishops, so soon as Lucius, the king received the faith. Also the same
histories do testify, that when Augustine came into Britayn, there were still
7. bishops and one archbishop among the Britains. And in the Roman Empier
Constantinus, and other Christian Emperors appointed great possessions for the
mainteyning of the ministers of the Church.

4 What Universities, Schools, or Colleges, did you ever erect?
THe Church of God has always had schools, or Universities for the
mainteinance of godly learning. For the first Colleges of monks in solitary
places, were nothing else, but Colleges of students, that were after, as
occasion served, taken to serve in the Church, as appears by Chrysostom in
his book De Sacerdotio, where he shows yt Basilius, who was a Monk with
him, was taken by violence and made a minister of the church, as he him self
was afterward. Also in the bishops house was a college of students: and our
histories testify, that at Bangor, in Wales was a great University of learned
men. Also of late days, you may hear that diverse Universities, Schools, and
Colleges are erected by Protestants, in Germany, and other contries that have
received the gospel: As at Wittemberge, Geneua, Zuriche, Conigsperge in
Prussia, etc.

5 Name one Church, not builded in all fashions, as well for the making of the
chancells, the form of the aultars, the use of the chalices, the signification
of the vestiments, as also for the special intent of the builders thereof.
Name one of them in the whole Church of Christ, either erected for your Faith,
Church, and service, or not prepared, in all sorts for catholic practices:
Prove unto me that any of all those things were ever provided for any other
service and Religion then ours, or that they be monuments of any other Faith
and Church then the common Catholic, and I recant.
HEre are many words to little purpose. What if it were granted that all
churches that now remain were builded by Papists, and for popish uses, what
had you won thereby. The same challenge might the Idolaters have made to the
Apostles: Show us a temple in all the world that was not builded by Idolaters,
and to mainteyne Idolatry? Certainly they could show none when the Temple of
Jerusalem was destroyed. But for all your bragges, we are able to show that
such Churches as were builded by true Christians were not builded to such end
as yours are: for they were all builded in the honor of God, and the most of
yours in the honor of creatures: for whereas you have one Church in the honor
of Christ, you have near a thousand in the honor of Saints: For Basilius
magnus in his 141. epistle proves ye holy Ghost to be God because he has a
Temple. For Omne Templum Dei Templum est. Every temple is the temple of God.
Also Didymus, in his book De spiritu sancto, which S. Ieronym translateth,
uses the same reason and to the same purpose. S. Augustine in the same matter
is very plentiful: as in his book De vera Religione cap. 55, speaking of the
Saints he says: Quare honoramus eos charitate non seruitute, nec eis templa
construimus, etc. Wherefore we honor them with love and not with service,
neither do we build temples unto them: for they will not be so honored of us
because they know that we our selves when we are good, are the temples of the
highest. In this saying beside his judgment for building of temples, note that
he will not have Saints to be honored with service, which he calls
seruitus, and is the same that dulia is, contrary to the Papists which will
worship them with service called dulia, or seruitus. Also in his 174 epistle to
Pascentius, he says, the holy Ghost could not have our bodies to be temples
except he were God, And in his Enchiridion ad Laurentium, cap. 56. he says:
how should he not be God which has a temple? Also in the 8. book cap. 27. De
ciuitate Dei. Nec tamen nos ijsdem martyribus templa, etc. he says:
Christians build no temples unto Martyrs which were to make them gods. And in
the 22, book cap. 10. De ciuitate Dei. Nos autem Martyribus nostris non templa
sicut dijs, sed memorias sicut hominibus mortuis, quorum apud Deum viuunt
spiritus fabricamus. Nec ibi erigimus altaria in quibus sacrificemus
martyribus, sed vni Deo and martyrum and nostro sacrificium immolamus: ad quod
sacrificium sicut homines Dei, qui mundum in eius confessione vicerunt, suo
loco and ordine nominantur, non tamen a sacerdote qui sacrificat inuocantur,
Deo quippe non ipsis sacrificat quamuis in memoria sacrificet eorum, quia Dei
sacerdos est non illorum. Ipsum vero sacrificium corpus est Christi quod non
offertur ipsis quia hoc sunt and ipsi. that is: We truly do not build temples
to our martyrs as unto gods, but memories as unto dead men whose souls live
with God. Neither do we there set up aultars in which we should sacrifice unto
the martyrs, but to God only which is God both of the martyrs and of us, do
we offer sacrifice: at which sacrifice they are named in their place and order,
as men of God which have overcome the world in his confession: yet are they not
called upon by the Priest that does sacrifice, for he offers sacrifice to God
and not to them although he do sacrifice in their memory, because he is the
Priest of God and not of them, and the sacrifice is the body of Christ which is
not offered unto them because they them selves are the same. Here also beside
building of churches, note that no sacrifice ought to be offered to Martyrs,
but prayer is a sacrifice, therefore it ought to be offered only to God.
Secondly, that Martyrs were not called upon in time of the sacrifice but only
named for remembrance. Thirdly, that Altares were not builded in the honor of
Martyrs or other Saints as they be in Popish churches: as our Ladies altar.
S. Peter's altar. S. Laurences altar etc. Fourthly, that the body of Christ,
which he says was the sacrifice that was offered, was not the natural body
of Christ but his mystical body, because he says the Martyrs and it are all
one, whereby it is manifest, that he means the sacrifice of thanks giving
offered to God for the redemption of his church by the death of Christ.
Wherefore if this one place were well wayed, it will interpret and answer all
places of the ancient doctors, where mention is made of sacrificing the body
of Christ at the time of the communion. But to return to building of churches
the same Augustine, contra Maximinum Arrianum. Lib. Titul. 11. has these
words: Nunc si templum alicui sancto angelo excellentissimo de lignis and
lapidibus faceremus, anathematizaremur a veritate Christi, and ab Ecclesia Dei,
quoniam creaturae exhiberemus eam seruitutem quae vni tantum debetur Deo? Si
ergo sacrilegi essemus faciendo templum cuicunque creaturae, quomodo non est
Deus verus cui non templum facimus, sed nos ipsi templum sumus? that is: If we
should build a temple of wodde and stones to any holy and most excellent
Angel, should we not be accursed from the Truth of Christ and from the Church
of God, because we should show that service unto a creature which is due only
unto God? Therefore if we should be sacrileges by making a temple to any
creature, how is he not true God to whom we do not make a temple, but we our
selves are a temple. If this be true, how be not the Papists accursed from the
Truth of Christ, and from the Church of God which build and uphold churches
to Angels, as S. Michaels, S. Gabriels, etc? So that to build churches as
Papists do, is church robbing or sacrilege. Furthermore whereas you will us
to name one church whose chancell is not builded in all fashions to serve
popery. First it is manifest that the first Churches which were builded for
Christians had not the same fashion of chancels and other parts that most
churches have in England, for that purpose read the Panegyricall oration made
before Paulinus bishop of Tyrus. Eusebius. lib. 10. cap. 4. In which is described
the fashion of that church builded in that city far unlike the most part
of churches at this day in all parts, and specially in the cha^cel which was
in the midst of that church, a place compassed in with grates or wodden
latesses called Cancelli, whereof this word chancel is derived, and the altar
stood in the midst of it whereof some similitude remains yet in old
Cathedral churches. Contrariwise your chancells in most churches be at the
Eastende and the altar hard at the wall, there was also but one alter in that
church, but you in every church must have many, it is certain also in their
church the Ministers and Deacons stood round about the table or altar, but
so they can not about your aultars except some of them stand on the top of
the wall or in the window. Moreover if you mark the most part of old
churches in England you shall plainly see, that the chancells are but
additions builded sense the churches, of likelihoode by the parsons that
disdained to have their place in the midst of the people as the old manner
was. Also you may see some churches builded round: as at London the Temple,
and an other is at Cambridge of ye same fashion. And some churches have the
steple at the Est end, very unhandsomely for placing of the roode lofte.
Again many churches have cross Isles in which the people can not see the
chancell, nor the high altar, which argues that there was no use of such
chancells when they were builded: For such churches as are lately erected have
the chancell and church all of one building, and are made of such fashion that
men may see the high altar in every part of them: Beside this, in the
Oriental church, as their ceremonies are diverse from yours, so no doubt the
fashion of their temples differs from yours. As for chalices, the church in
the beginning was content with wodden cups, and then came Zepherinus and
brought in the use of glasses. Acacius Amidenus is commended for selling the
golden and silver vessels of the church, to redeem captives. Socrat. lib. 7.
cap. 21. S. Ambrose also Offic. lib. 2. cap. 8. says the church has gold,
not to keep it but to be bestowed for necessary uses, for which it is lawful
to break, melt, and sell, even the holiest vessels of all. But of your church
it is true that one said of old time: ye had wodden chalices, and golden
priests but now you have golden chalices, and wodden priests: your
vestimentes are of as good stuff as your chalices. The old church knew none
such, but as your own Authors write: when they went to celebrate they changed
the affection of their mind rather than the garments of their body: as
Antoninus witnesses of Fulgentius. Howbeit we are content that your church by
her gorgeous garments as well as by other things should declare it self to
be that woman which is described to be clothed in purple, gold, perles, and
such like ornaments Apoc. 17. Finally whereas you will us to name one church
that for the special intent of the builders, was not prepared in all sorts
for Popish practices: Although I could name many, yet for examples sake, I name
Pantheon, a church in Rome, prepared by the special and only intent of the
builders for Cybelle, the great mother of the gods and for all false gods of
the heathen, which now is called the church of Mary and Alhalowes. Then this
church with many other in Rome, and other places, being monuments of the faith
and religion of the Paganes and not of yours, except yours and theirs be all
one, as they are very like, you are bound by your promise to recant.

The 15. article conteyneth in effect 3. demandes.
1 Again name any one company of men in the Christen world that in all
articles of Faith, be in one meaning and belefe.
IT is an easy matter to name diverse companies agreeing in one meaning and
belief: as the church of the Grecians, the church of the Aethiopians, the
church of the Chaldeans, Moscouites, etc. But especially the whole company of
Protestants in Europe do agree in all necessary articles of true faith, by
which we are justified.

2 Or in things where they doubt, be contented to submit their several
meaning to the judgment of their Superiors.
THe Greek church in doubts will be ruled by the Patriarch of Constantinople,
and so will the rest of the Oriental churches by their chief Patriarchs and
bishops. And the Protestants in Europe will also be ruled by their Superiors,
so far as their superiors are ruled by Gods his word.

3 And to that communion and company whereof they be, name any company of men
agreeing and thus humbly affected in Christ's Religion, saving the blessed
fellowship and members of the Catholic communion, and I recant.
TO the communion and company of the Grecians, I name the Moscouites and
Russians agreeing in Religion, and so humbly affected, and these are not of the
fellowship, that you call the Catholic communion: Among the Protestants, to
the church of Saxony, I name the church of Dennemarcke, or to the church of
Heluetia, the church of France, or to the church of England the church of
Scotland, but so, that none of these allow any consent or submission, but to
the Truth, which must be tried only by God his word. And seeing none of these
are of the Popish communion, if your promise be any thing worth, you must
recant.

The 16. article conteyneth one demand, and one challenge.
Furthermore name any one man that is confessed on both sides by the judgment
of the world, to be holy and learned, and a member of the true Church, in what
age soever you list sense Christ's time, and prove him to have been in all
articles of Faith of the Protestants meaning.
SEeing you give so large scope, I will name S. Paul, who I think is
confessed on both sides to be holy and learned, and a member of the true
Church, whom I can prove by his writings, that in all articles of faith, he
taught the same, which we believe. And for trial of this, because it would
requier a whole volume, if I should prove every particular article, wherein we
dissent from you Papists: If you will name an article, wherein we agree not
with S. Paul, If I be not able to prove that we agree with him in the meaning
thereof, I will revoke that article and agree with you therein.

Yea if I bring not the adversaries them selves to acknowledge in the end him
to be wholly against their doctrine in diverse of articles of great importance,
and therefore that he could not be of their church, I recant.
YOu shall never bring us, neither in the beginning, nor in the end to
acknowledged that S. Paul is against us in any article of our Faith, but we
agree wholly with him. Nevertheless I know what you mean, and will not be
afraid to utter. Forasmuch as immediately after the Apostles time, corruption
entered into the Church, which was hardly kept out, while they lived: as we may
learn by the Epistle to the Corinthians, you think that we dare not depend
upon any one man's judgment: and therein you are not deceived: for we must
depend only upon Gods word. But where you say there is none but he
dissenteth from us in diverse articles of great importance, you say untruly:
for you are not able to prove that Justinius Martyr, or Irenaeus, two of the
most ancient authentical writers, that the Church next unto the Apostles had,
are against us, in any point of doctrine wherein we differ from you? Yet are
there certain errors in them, which neither you, nor we allow, as is touched
before in the answer to the 11. article 1. deman. But they are both wholly
against you in diverse articles of your doctrine, and namely in
transubstantiation, which is one of the greatest articles of Popery: as
Irenaeus, in the 34. cap. of his 4. book Contrahaereses: Quemadmodum enim qui
est a terra panis etc. Even as the bread which is of the earth after it has
received the invocation of God, is not now common bread, but the Eucharistie,
or (bread of thanks giving) consisting of two things earthly and heavenly,
so our bodies receiving the Eucharistie, are not now corruptible, having hope
of resurrection. Here you see plainly, that Irenaeus affirms the sacrament,
after consecration to consist of the earthly substance of bread: which may
better be understood, when we know that he reasons against such heretics as
denied the world to be made by God, saying that he would never have made so
great a mystery of bread, which is a creature of the world, if the world had
not been made by him. Justinius, in his second Apology to the Emperor. (...)
etc. We do not receive these things as common bread and a common cup but
even as Jesus Christ our Savior was incarnate by the word of God and took
upon him flesh and blood for our salvation: So we are taught that this meat
for which thanks is given by the word of prayer from him of which our flesh
and blood are nourished by transmutation, is the flesh and blood of Jesus
that was incarnate. Here, he plainly affirms that the substance of the
Sacrament is turned into the nourishment of our bodies. Therefore it remains
still after the consecration. The other writers of later years, as they have
some errors which neither you nor we do allow in them, so we are not afraid to
confess that they have some corruption, whereby you may seem to have color of
defense for invocation of Saints, prayer for the dead, and diverse
superstitious and superfluous ceremonies, yet not so addict to these, nor
joined with such absurdities as yours are. But for the chief points of
Christian Religion, and the foundation of our faith, that is, for the honor of
God, the offices of Christ, Redemption, Justification, Satisfaction, the
fruits of Christ his passion, Grace, faith, works, authority of God his
word, authority of the Pope, real presence, transubstantiation, Communion in
both kinds, Images, etc. the most approved writers Tertullian, Cyprian,
Origin, Epiphanius, Hilarious, Chrysostomus, Ieronymus, Ambrosius, Augustinus,
etc. are utterly against you, and therefore can not be of your church. But for
as much as they hold the foundation, that is Christ, though they have diverse
errors and superstitions, they were doubtless, the members of the true Church of
Christ, which because you are not able to disprove, reason would you should
recant.

The 17. Article conteyneth 5. demandes.
1 I ask of them whether the Lutherans, Zuinglians, Illirians, Caluenistes,
Confessionistes, Swenkefeldians, Anabaptists and such like, be all of one
Church?
BEcause you would make simple men believe, that there be so many diverse sects
of Protestants, as you have given them names, I will first discuss these
sects, and afterward answer your question. Lutherans, you mean them that
follow Luthers opinion of the Sacrament. Zuinglians, follow Caluines judgment
of the same. Confessionistes, them that exhibited their confession at Auspurge,
which were both the Lutherans and Zuinglians, so these 3. names may be
contracted into two: Lutherans and Zuinglians. As for Illyrians, if you call
them of Flaccius Illyricus, they be Lutherans, in opinion of the Sacrament, and
differ only in ceremonies, which can not divide them from the faith. Calvin,
and they that be of his judgment, agree plainly with Zuinglius, so that of
five names, there remain but two sorts differing in opinion, whereunto you
join the Swenkefeldians and Anabaptists. Now to your question, these be not
all of one Church, for ye Swenkefeldians and Anabaptists be detestable
heretics, but ye Lutherans and Zuinglia^s (as it pleases you to call the^) are
of one true church, although they differ in one opinion, concerning ye
Sacrament, for although the one affirm a real presence, ye other deny it, yet
they both consent in this, that ye body of Christ, is received spiritually, not
corporally, with the heart, and not with the mouth. Wherefore, this dissension is
not so great (though there be error on the one side) but that they may be both
of the Church of Christ, as well as S. Cyprian, the Martyr, and all the Bishops
of Africa, and a great many of Asia, differing with Stephanus, bishop of Rome,
and the rest of his opinion in rebaptizing such as were baptized by heretics.

2 And if either they can prove unto me, that these, being of such diversity
in faith and religion make one Church.
WE have always abhorred the heresies of the Anabaptists, Libertines,
Swenkefeldians, Dauidians, Seruitians, and all such. But that Luther and
Zuinglius, may be both of one Church, differing only in one opinion of the
Sacrament, is declared before.

3 Or that each of their sects may give salvation to their folowers, being so
disagreable, one with an other in high points of our Religion.
Salvation is the gift of God, and not in the power of any company, or sect of
men: but this we affirm, that out of that Church, whereof we count Luther, and
Zuinglius, notwithstanding their diverse opinions (which is but in one matter
of the Sacrament) to be members, there is no salvation.

4 Or that I should believe all these rather then the Catholic Church, or one
of these more then another, all making such a bold challenge of the truth and
Gospel.
NO man requires you to believe all these, but the true Catholic Church only.
Neither do we require you to believe any one company of men, more then an
other: but to believe the truth before falsehood. Now, which of them has the
truth, that they all brag of, you must search in the word of truth, desiring
the spirit of truth that you may understand and believe the truth, and so
without doubt, you shall come to the knowledge of the truth, and of the Church
of God, which is the pillar and stay of truth.

5 Let the Protestants of all these kinds put their heads together, and show
me a reason of these things, and with all, let them among them selves agree,
to what sort of these sects they would have me, and I will recant.
SVch is your impudency in this matter, as in all other, that you would make
men believe that the Anabaptists, Swenkefeldians, Libertins, and other
abominable heretics, be Protestants: But it is well that you can make none
but fools think so: as for the Protestants, they need take no great
deliberation to answer your demandes but you had more need to lay your
heads together to reconcile the Thomistes, Albertistes, Ockamistes, Scotistes,
Reales, and Nominalls, which be all sects of Papists, and especially your
Canonistes, and divines, about the articles of your religion, that is: whether
the Pope be above the Council, or the Council above the Pope. Whether the Pope
may err and not the Council, or whether the Council may err and not the
Pope. These two: the Popes determination and the Counsels determination, being
the rules of truth in your religion and not agreed upon: how can any truth be
certain in your Church? At for Luther, and Zuinglius, they agree upon one rule
of truth, that is the word of God, and differ only for the applying or
laying of this rule, and yet but in one matter and that not the greatest. But
you Papists, some holding of the Pope, and some of the Council, as rules of
truth, can have no ground nor certainty thereof. Therefore if you would have
me, or any man, to be of your belefe. First determine how I shall know when I am
in a right belief: one says, if the council allows it, an other says if
the Pope allows, what shall I do, when one of these is against an other? yea
when one Pope is against an other, and one council against an other, shall I
think that truth changes so often as they change. Moreover when one Pope
grants, that the council is above the Pope and that the Pope may err.
Likewise one council grants, that the Pope is above the council and that
the council may err, as it has been within the 200. years, the counsels of
Constance and Basil, determined that the council was above the Pope and that
the Pope may err. Contrariwise, the council of Ferraria, and Florence,
determined that the Pope was above the council and that the council might
err. Martinus 5. the Pope chosen by the council of Constance, was of the same
judgment that the council: But Eugenius 4. that gathered the council of
Ferraria, and Florence against the council of Basil, was of the contrary
judgment. Now I would say he were a witty fellow, that could reconcile
this gear together. For, if he be a Canonist that holds this opinion: that
the Pope can not err, when the Pope him self grants that he may err, which
way shall he turn him self? For, if this proposition be true: the Pope can
not err, then this is true also, that the Pope may err: for if he can not
err he can not err in saying so: And if the Pope erred in saying, he could
err where he can not err, then this proposition is false, the Pope can not
err, so one proposition shall be both true and false, which is impossible.
Likewise if he hold that hilde that the council can not err, and the
council it self confesses it that it may err. Gentle master N. reconcile
me these together, which concern a case that has been in practice and still
is, in the Papistrie, and may here trouble a man's conscience that would
believe your church, and if he have any wit, restrain him for ever coming into
your church: If you can not untie this knot nor wind your self out of this
maze, unless you will be still obstinate, it were wisdom for you to recant.

The 18. article has but one demand.
I demand whether they were ever of the true Catholic church, which either
took to them selves new names of religion according to the calling of any
sect master, or liked not so well the name of Catholic or Christian as of
their several teachers, as to be called of Arius, Arians, or of Calvin,
Caluinistes, or of Luther, Lutheranes, or Protestants etc. if any man therefore
can prove unto me that men which have chosen to themselves to declare their
diversity of faith, from the common known Catholic church such new names,
should be of the Catholic church, I recant.
I Answer that they which can not be content with the name of Christians, but
chose unto them selves new names after the calling of their sect masters: as
Arrians, Pelagians; Franciscanes, Dominicanes, Benedictines, Gilbertines,
Augustinians, Scotistes, Thomistes, Albertistes, etc. are none of the Catholic
church: But the true Christians which desire most of all to be so called, and
compting it a most honorable name without chosing any other name, be of the
Catholic church, although in reproach, they be called of you Caluinistes, and
Lutherans. As for the name of Protestants, came first of them that made
protestation against the decree of Spires in Germany, and from that time has
been attributed to the professors of the Gospel: which name they do not so
much delight in, as you do in the name of Papists. Therefore, if nothing else
do let you but the name, there is no cause why you should not recant.

The 19. article has but one demand.
Again, if these, which by the common calling and judgment of Christian
people, be named and commonly taken for heretics, have not in all ages proved
them selves in the end to be heretics in deed, notwithstanding their craking
of Gods word, and therefore that the Protestants being so taken and called,
prove not so in deed, I recant.
THose that by true Christians, have been called and counted for heretics,
have proved so in deed, and therefore the Papists, being called and counted
heretics of true Christians, without doubt, are heretics in deed. But it
has not been always true, that they, which of the people commonly called
Christians, were called and taken for heretics, proved so in deed. For the
true Christians of the Arrian people, that were called Christian people, were
called and taken for heretics, and in reproach, were called Homousians, and
Athanasians, yet they proved and were in deed, true Christians and no
heretics. So the true Christians at this day, being of the Papists, which
after a sort, are named Christians: called heretics, and in reproach
Protestants, and Caluinistes, in that their faith agrees with the word of
God, prove them selves in deed, to be true Christians, and no heretics.
Therefore you have bound your self to recant.

The 20. article has 3. demandes.
1 Likewise, if any man can prove unto me, that either those be not true
Christians, which by the consent of nations, and by old prescription of so
many years as be since their conversion, be and ever has been called
Catholics.
YOu your selves, will not account the Grecians for true Christians, and yet by
consent of nations, and prescription of as many years as you can prescribe,
they be, and ever have been called Catholics, if you say: they are not called
by you, I answer: no more are you so called by the^. And sense the time that
you departed from them, as great a portion of the world, and as many nations,
have called them Catholics, as you are able to show on your side. Therefore
either you must compte them true Christians, or else you must grant that they,
which have been long called Catholics, are not always true Christians.

2 Or that those can be any true members, or children of the Catholic church,
which do mislike and mistrust so farre-forth these holy names, as well of
Church, as Catholic that they have turned the^ into Congregations, and
Gospellers, and Protestants, and such like.
HE is a foolish sophister, that reasons from names to things, as you do
most vainly and childishly: we mislike the names of Church, and Catholic,
because we do sometimes use these names: Congregation, and Gospellers or
Protestants, and therefore be no true members of the Catholic church: we
neither mislike nor mistrust those names as you sclaunder us, neither do we
boast and trust only in these names, without the things them selves, as you
do, and as your forefathers the wicked Jews, crying: the Temple of the Lord,
the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord: when they had nothing less
than the Temple of the Lord, but rather a den of thieves: So, you cry, the
Catholic church, the Catholic church, the Catholic church, when you have
nothing in deed but the synagoge of Satan. But because you make so much of
these two names, Church, and Catholic, let us see what great mysteries are
contained in them. This word, Church, comes of the Greek word Kyriaka, in
Latin Dominica, in English, the Lord his house: for so were they wont, in
old time to call their temples, or oratories, so that this word, church,
proprely signifies a material temple, and can not signify the fellowship and
communion of Christian people, but by a figure. Therefore if we other whiles
use this word, Congregation, which can not deny, but it is the English word
of this Greek name Ecclesia, that the Scripture uses, and signifies without
figure ye same thing that this word, Church, does by a figure, you may be
ashamed, if you were not impudent, to find any fault with us for so doing.
Likewise this word, Catholic, comes of the Greek word, and signifies
Universal, or over all, which word the common people does not understand.
Therefore we expound it plainly and say: that the Catholic Church, is the
Congregation of Christ, dispersed over all the world. What reasonable man can
reprehende this doing, and not rather your folly, which think it inoughe, if
the people can prate like parates: Catholic, Catholic, and understand not
what Catholic means. Thus, as we do not refuse these words: Catholic, and
Church, because they are commonly received, so do we interpret them, by
Universal, and Congregation, because they are not else, commonly understood.

3 If therefore any thing can prove our true Church better than the honorable
name of Catholic, or more condemn them to be out of Christ's church tha^ that
not only the Christian world gives it not to them, but they in a name, do
refuse the same them selves, then do I recant.
HEre you bewraye your self evidently, and acknowledge, that we do not
sclaunder you, when we say: you boast only of the Catholic church: For you
declare plainly, that you have no better argument then the very name of the
Catholic Church, to prove, that you be the Catholic Church: if this be the
best argument, all the rest is little worth. For if the only name of an honest
man, is enough to prove an honest man, many a knave may prove him self an
honest man, and if the very name of learning, make a learned man, many an ass
may prove him self to be a learned man, or if ye name of a good Christian,
prove a man to be a good Christian, every hypocrite may prove him self a good
Christian. Likewise if you have no greater argument, that can more condemn us,
then that we are not called the Catholic Church, then can you no more condemn
us, then Christ and his Apostles, that were not only, not called the true
Church, but also were called heretics and deceivers by the people of the
Jews, which were as rightly called God his people, as they that give you the
name of Catholic Church, are called the Christian world. It is well you have
nothing better to prove your Church, then the honorable name of Catholic, nor
any thing more to condemn our Church, then that we are not called Catholic,
and yet we have as many nations, and more then you have, that by public
authority, call us Catholics, and you heretics, although you most shamefully
sclaunder us, that we do refuse the name being offered unto us. Seeing you
boast so much of the name, Catholic; you shall hear what some of the old
writers judged thereof. Chrysostom, in an homely, that he writes of Adam,
and Eve, in the later end has these words, after he has told them that he
has no need to repeat such deep questions, as those men have handled which
have fought against heretics: Satis sufficere credimus quicquid secu^dum
praedictas regulas Apostolica scripta nos docuerunt, vt prorsus opinemur
Catholicum, quod apparuerit praefixis sententijs esse contrarium, that is, we
believe that what so ever the Apostles have taught us according to the foresaid
rules is sufficient, in so much that in no wise, we think that to be Catholic
which shall appear to be contrary to the sentences before determined. By this
you may see that Chrysostom thought it not sufficient to have the name of
Catholic, for he judged nothing to be Catholic in deed, that was contrary to
the rule grounded in the writings of the Apostles. Wherefore how so ever you
boast of the honorable name of Catholic, except you can prove that your
opinions agree with the Scripture, they are not Catholic in deed, by
Chrysostomes judgment. S. Augustine also, in his book de Genese ad literam
imperfecto cap. 1. speaking of the Catholic faith, says: This is an article
thereof, that we should believe. Constitutam ab eo matrem Ecclesiam quae
Catholica dicitur, ex eo quia vniuersaliter perfecta est, and in nullo
claudicat and per totum orbem diffusa est. That he has appointed a mother
Church, which is called Catholic, of this, because it is universally perfect,
and halteth in nothing, and is dispersed over all the world. S. Augustine
here, is not content that the Church be only called Catholic, but shows
when it is that, which it is called, and therefore the popish Church, not being
universally perfect, as most Papists will confess, that many things in their
church have need of reformation, and halting in many things from the truth of
God his word, neither yet being dispersed over all the world but contained in
a corner of Europa, is not by S. Augustines rule the Catholic Church.
Furthermore S. Augustine, co^tra Epistolam Fundame^ti cap. 4. against the
Manichees plainly declares, how far forth, not only the name of Catholic,
but also how far universally, consent, succession, antiquity, are to be
allowed: Vt ergo hanc omittam sapientiam, etc. Therefore to omit this wisdom
which you do believe to be in the Catholic Church, there be many other things
which may hold me most righteously in her bosom. The consent of people and
nations holds me, the authority begun with miracles, nourished with hope,
increased with charity, confirmed by antiquity, does hold me. The succession
of Priests from the very seat of Peter the Apostle, unto whom our Lord after
his resurrection, committed his sheep to be fed even unto this present
bishopric, does hold me. Last of all that very name of Catholic does hold
me, which name, not without a cause, this Church alone has so obtained, among
so many heresies, that whereas all heretics would be called Catholics, yet when
a stranger shall ask: where men meet at the Catholic Church, none of the
heretics dare show him, either their principal temple or house. All this, you
will say makes exceeding much for us: yea, but hear that which follows:
Apud vos autem, vbi nihil horum est quod me inuitet ac teneat, sola personat
veritatis pollicitatio: quae quidem si tam manifesta monstratur, vt in dubium
venire non possit: proponenda est omnibus illis rebus, quibus in Catholica
teneor, that is: But among you where there is none of these things, that may
provoke or hold me, there sounds the only promise of truth, which if it be
showed so manifest that it can not come in doubt, is to be preferred before all
those things, by which I am holden in a Catholic Church. By this you may
plainly see, that though consent, antiquity, succession, and the name of
Catholic, be good confirmation, when they are joined with the truth, yet when
a truth is severed from them, it is more to be regarded then they all: and it
is truth that makes Catholic, to be esteemed, and not Catholic, that gives
authority to truth: Wherefore, seeing it were better to prove your Church, to
be Catholic, then to boast, that it is so called, and to disprove our Church
so to be, then to say: it is not so called: The best way for you, is to recant.

The 21. article conteyneth but one demand.
1 Moreover, I ask of the Protestants: whether in that time, in which they
hold the true church to have been hidden or lost: the people that learned this
article of their Creed (I believe the Catholic church) was bound to go from
that church which they saw, and taught them both the article, and all other
things touching their faith and by which they were Christened, and receyned
all other sacraments, and commodities of salvation, whether they were bound, I
say, to believe this unknown and close Congregation, which they could never
come unto, nor by which they ever received, or could receive any benefit, and
so forsake that church by whom and in whom, they received both their faith and
sacraments: Show me therefore that the Christian men of these days, were
charged to believe any other church than that, which taught them the article of
the church, and baptized them, and I recant.
THis demand, is like a drunken man's dream, having neither head nor foot:
whether they should believe the church was lost: whether they should believe
the church that was unknown to them, etc. But if your demand have any sense
in it: This is my answer. The church was never lost, but hidden from the eyes
of the world: Therefore, if the people that where taught that article: To
believe the Catholic church, and were baptized to your church, understood that
this church, was not the Catholic church, which was so commonly called, but
that God had a secret Congregation, which was in deed, the true Catholic
church, they were bound to forsake your church, and to believe the secret
Congregation: for if a man had been baptized of the Arrians and being brought up
by them, had learned that article, to believe the Catholic church, which the
Arrians would expound to be them selves, if afterward, by God his help, this
man understood, that the church of the Arrians, was not the catholic church,
as he was taught it was, but that Athanasius, and a few other, that were
banished and persecuted, were the true Catholic church: he was bound to leave
the Arrians, commonly called the church, and to join him self with the
secret, banished, hid, and persecuted church of Christ. But as for your
Popish church, in that time of blindness and error taught not the people that
article, nor any other but kept them back from the knowledge, as well of that
article, as of all other things that were necessary to their salvation: for
you taught them nothing else, but to pronounce, and that full ilfauoredly, like
popingeys, certain latin words, which they understood no more than stocks
or stones. So that the people had no instruction of you, no not of the name of
God, in many places but that they received by uncertain talk of their
parents, as it were from hand to hand: for how many thousand parishes are
there in England, that within these 60. years would declare, that they never
heard sermon in their life. As for that they heard of their service, they
learned as much of it, as of the ringing of their belles, which was a sound
without understanding. Therefore you may be ashamed to speak of teaching the
people, their belefe and all things necessary for salvation, when you have
counted it heresy to learn their creed in English, or to read the scripture
in English, in which is contained all thing necessary to be known for
everlasting salvation. Finally because you requier me to show you that the
Christian people of those days, were bound to believe any other: church than
that, which taught them the article of the church and baptized them, I trow I
will so show it you, that for both your ears, you dare not deny it: how say
you? The Christian people of the Greek church, which were taught by the Greek
church, that article of the church, and by the same Greek church were
baptized, whether ought they to believe any other church but the Greek church?
If you say no: then you acknowledge the Greek church to be the true church
which denies the Popes authority, if you say yea: Then you are welcome home,
you recant.

The 22. article, although it be very confuse, yet it conteyneth in effect 3.
demandes.
1 I ask also whether any man for the space of that 1000. years of blindenes
could be saved, out of that secret and small Church, which they say was the
true Church, if they answer me, there might be some saved, with our
Sacraments, and in the Communion or fellowship of the Papists out of the
Protestants Church, then there was a way to heaven, out of Gods Church: if they
say that none could be saved by our Sacraments out of their close Church, then
all men young and old perished for those years without any hope of mercy,
because they could not unite them selves, and be incorporate to that company
and Congregation, whereof they never neither heard, nor could by any means
surmise. Therefore let any man alive prove unto me that either any man could
out of the true Church be saved.
NO man alive that knows what the true Church means, will say, that any man
can be saved out of the true Church, for he that is not a member of the body of
Christ, ca^ by no means receive any benefit of Christ to his salvation.
Therefore how long so ever the true Church were hidden, whether it were a
thousand years (as you bear men in hand that we should say) or two thousand
years it is not material, this is certain, that out of this Church, none
could be saved, and though you count it small, as in deed in respect of the
world, it is but a small flock, and few are elected, and few find the
streit gate of life. Luke 12. Matthew. 7. and 20. yet is the number of it
greater, then man's eye commonly can discern. As when Elias thought that he
only had been left alone of the true Church: God answered, that he had yet
reserved 7000. that never bowed their knee to Baal. 1. Reg. 19. And as Esaias
declares when the people should be almost all destroyed, yet a remnant should
be saved, which though it seemed to be small, yet it should ouerflow and fill
all the world with righteousness, Esa. 10. and though it shall be like a
gathering of grapes when vintage is ended, or the shaking of an olive tree when
men think they have left nothing upon it, yet there be two or three in the
top among the boughs, and four or five under the leaves in the highest
branches. Esaias. 17. and 24.

2 Or that any other company could be known for the true and only Church but
our common Catholic society.
THe true Catholic Church was never so secret or hidden but it might be
known of all those that had eyes to see it, whose hearts were lightened with
the spirit of God and were enstructed by the word of God, that they might
understand the truth, and know the spouse of Christ from the common strompet
of Antichrist.

3 Or that all men were damned for a thousand years together because they
could not find, nor surmise of any other Church, then that which practices
all holy functions, which Christ left for our salvation in the world, and I
recant.
WE take not upon us to meddle with God his judgments, whom he condemns, and
for what causes, further then the word of God teaches us, namely that as many
as have not believed in the only son of God, are condemned for their
unbelief, other secret causes we remit to his secret counsel and knowledge.
And whereas you say that the popish church practices all holy functions that
Christ left for the salvation of his Church, it is most false: for first you
do not preach remission of sins in the blood of Christ only, for either
you preach not all, or else you preach remission of sins in any thing, rather
then the only merits of Christ, as in men's own merits, works of
supererogation, pardons, masses, beggarly ceremonies, as holy water, auriculer
confession etc. Secondly, you minister not the Sacraments purely according to
Christ his institution, but either corrupt and defile them with man's
traditions, as you do Baptism, or else clean change the use of them, as in
the Lords Supper, which you make a Sacrifice, an idol, a Priests breakfast,
and defraude the people of the one half of the sacrament, as though you were
wiser then he, that instituted it in both kinds. Thirdly, discipline you have
converted into tyranny and covetousness, reteyning nothing but the name of it
alone: Wherefore seeing you exercise no holy function after Christ his
institution, but clean contrary to the same, and do obstinately defend the
filthy whore of babylon against the clear light of the Gospel, and the true
spouse of Christ, ye shall be damned except you recant.

The 23. article conteyneth 2. demandes.
1 Again show me any Church, or imagine if you can by good reason, a church of
Christ in which there is no gathering together for preaching, no spirit of
prophesying, no rod of correction, no order of ministering nor any spiritual
function that can be named, prove me that there should be a true Church for a
thousand years together, and lacked all these things.
YOu would feign have a great nombre of Articles and therefore you bring in one
matter often times in diverse phrase of words, that it might seem a new matter
when it has been uttered twice or thrice before: as this Article is contained
before in the 5.8. and 9. Articles, where you shall find it more largely
answered. But let us see, what this strange demand requires, we must show
him a church, or else imagine by good reason a church of Christ without
preaching, ministering, and discipline for a thousand years together. Although
we will not grant that it has so long continued without these exercises, yet
because you give us leave to imagine, we can imagine that it may as well
continue without public preaching, ministering, and discipline for a thousand
years, as it did for three hundred years before Constantine. But you will say
there was preaching ministering, and correcting, though it were not known to
the tyrants and persecutors, so say I unto you, for that thousand veres there
was gathering together for preaching, ministering, and correcting, though the
Pope and his persecuting Prelates could not always see it, nor come to the
knowledge of it: for if they had once intelligence of it they smarted for it,
as is known by the stories of the Waldenses, Bohemians, etc. Furthermore
continual exercise of preaching, ministering of sacraments, and executing of
discipline, are notes of a quiet and peaceable Congregation, not of a
dispersed, persecuted, and disquieted Church. How often does S. Cyprian
complain, that the brethren could not be gathered together for executing of
discipline, whereby it is certain, that likewise they could not be gathered
together for other exercises. Therefore the intermission of these exercises in
a persecuted Church, does not prove the same to be no true Church: But where so
ever there be two or three gathered together in the name of Christ, there is he
in the midst of them. But whereas you require the spirit of prophecy
(except you mean the gift of interpreting the Scriptures) the Church in the
most quiet and flourishing state, may want the spirit of showing things to
come, as well as the gifts of tongues, healing, etc.

2 And withal, that there was an other untrue Church which for those many
days only practiced to the salvation of many, all these offices: and give me
a good reason why this Church, that always has had these things should be a
false Church, and the other that wanted them, to be a true Church, and I recant.
WE utterly deny, that beside the true Church, there was an untrue church,
that practiced those offices to the salvation of any man: for once again I
tell you, you have neither the preaching of the word, nor ministering of
Sacraments, nor execution of discipline, according to the truth of God his
institution, but either altogether changed, or else greatly corrupted. And
whereas you say, that the popish church only has practiced these offices: I
ask you again whether the Greek Church be a part of your Church, and
whether the Papists in England be a part of your Church. The Grecians you will
say, are not: but the English Papists are. Then have I found out by your own
judgment, the Church of the Grecians, practicing these offices being an untrue
church, and the church of ye English Papists not practicing the same, yet
granted of you to be a true Church. Therefore you are bound to recant.

The 24. article conteyneth 10. demandes.
1 Moreover let any man show how that Church can be the pillar of truth, which
durst not for a thousand years claim either preaching of Gods word or
ministering of Sacraments or show her self against falsehood or superstition.
AS the number of your articles does draw to an end, so your matter is far
spent, and therefore to make up your number, you must repete one thing twice.
This demand is contained before in the 11. and 12. articles, where also it is
fully answered. Notwithstanding, seeing it comes again it shall be briefly
answered in this place. The Church is not called the pillar of truth, because
it should stand always in the sight of the world: for then the defection,
which S. Paul speaks of, could not have come, neither should the Church fly
into the wilderness, as was declared to S. John: But it is called the pillar of
truth, because that where so ever the Church is, either visible or invisible,
there is the truth. So though the Church were hid a certain time in the
wilderness, yet there was truth with the Church. You seem to be a good
Arithmetrician: for no number sounds in your mouth but a thousand.
Nevertheless how long so ever it was, the pillar of truth decayed not, And as
God gave his spirit, diverse times was bold to challenge preaching and
ministering of the Sacraments, yea, and so boldly, that it cost many of the
chalengers their lives. As Berengarius, Bruno, Marsilus de Pandua, Ioannes de
Gaudano, Ioannes VVickleffe, VValdo, Ioannes Hus, Ieronymus de Praga, etc. Thus
it is manifest that the Church has diverse times challenged her right, and
withstood falsehood.

2 Let any man show that all gifts of the spirit, and functions of the holy
Ghost have been taken from her, a thousand years together, and only practiced
to the peoples use by an aduouterous Church.
THere is no man can show this: for it is a false lie, that all gifts of the
spirit, and function of the holy Ghost were either taken from the true Church,
or given to the adulterous church. And this has been showed more then once or
twice before.

3 Let it be declared, how the gates of hell have not prevailed, or Christ's
promise and warrant for her, not been void and frustrate, if a bastard Church
exercising idolatry, as they say, has spoiled the true Church of all holy
actions, and the whole government, and the whole name of Christianity, almost
ever since Christ's time.
THe Devil has bent all his force and ordinance, he has armed all the power
of darkness, he stirred up ryrantes, heretics, Popes, Saracenes, and Turks
to destroy the Church, the dragon, that old serpent Satanas, the Devil,
stood before the woman to devour her child, he persecuted her into the
wilderness, he cast out of his mouth, a great river to carry her away, he
made war with the rest of her seed that keep the commandments of God.
Apoc. 12. but yet in despite of the devil, the Pope, and all her enemies, she
is to this day preserved, and shall be to the worlds end: Therefore the gates of
Hell, have not prevailed against her, nor the promise of Christ has failed.
And whereas you say, that your bastard church has spoiled her of all holy
actions, government, and Christian name, it is a most impudent lie, as it is
true, that you saw a bastard church usurped her holy name, counterfaicted her
holy actions, and turned her government into tyranny.

4 Let me see therefore how the only dearling and spouse of Christ should be
neglected of him so long.
SHe has not been neglected of him, but felt his continual aid, he has
given her safe deliverance of her child, and taken it up from the cruelty of
the Dragon, he has provided her a place in the wilderness, he has made war
with the Dragon for her sake, and driven him out of heaven, he has given her
Eagles wings to fly into the wilderness, he has caused the earth, to swallow
up the water that should have carried her away, he has given the remnant of
her seed, Victory over the Dragon. Finally, his merciful protection and
loving care over her, has never more notably appeared than that against so
many dangers and enemies all this while he has preserved her, until such
time as he has thought good, now to bring her out of her secret place in the
wilderness, into the open sight of the world again.

5 Let the adversary show that the Church should ever by superstition and
falsehood commit adultery or be deuorced from him.
THe true church, consisting of God his elect, and the lively members of the
body of Christ, shall never commit such adultery that she shall be divorced from
him. But the visible church, by Idolatry and superstition may separate her
self from Christ, and be refused of him, as God speaks by Esaias to the church
of Jerusalem cap. 1. How is the faithful City become an harlot? It was full
of judgment, and justice lodged therein, but now they are murderers. Thy
silver is become dross, and thy wine is mixed with water. Thy Princes are
rebellious and companions of thieves etc. even so may he say to the church of
Rome: how is that faithful church become an harlot, true Faith and Religion
have dwelled in her, but now Idolatry and superstition: thy silver is turned
into dross, and thy wine is mixed with water, thou have nothing pure and
uncorrupted, thy Princes be rebellious Antichrists etc. Thus I have showed
that the visible church, may become an adulteress, and be deuorced from Christ.

6 Or that Christ should ever want his spouse in earth.
THis has been often answered before, Christ has never wanted his spouse in
earth, though the blind world can not always see her, or when they see her,
will not acknowledge her to be his spouse, but persecute her, as if she were an
adulteress.

7 Or that he should be a head either without a body.
THese are but one thing in diverse phrases, as he has never wanted his spouse
in earth, so has he never been an head without a body, and seeing these
words in this sense are relatiues (for Christ is called a head in respect of
the Church which is his body, and the Church is called a body, in respect of
Christ that is her head) I answer you by a rule of the Logicians: No man
knows a relative, except he know the correlatiue thereof, Therefore, though
Christ had a body in earth, yet could it be known of none, but such as knew
Christ the head of that body. Of whom, when the Papists were ignorant,
specially when they appointed an other head in earth, it is no marueill, if
they could not see the body of Christ, though he have never been without it.

8 Or such an unknown and small body.
THis has been answered immediately before, it suffices that it be known to
Christ the head. As he says: My sheep hear my voice and I know them. John
10. And to them that be of the members of the same body. As for the rest, it is
not necessary that they should always see it, which will never acknowledge it.
Neither is it so small, as it is thought of, it is dispersed in many places over
all the world, and yet few in comparison of the malignant church, whose
number is as the sand of the sea, etc. Apoc. 20.

9 Or that Christ's only kingdom should become so co^temptible.
NOthing else is to be looked for of the world, but hatred and contempt, as
Christ him self says: You shall be hated of all men for my names sake. Matthew.
10. and S. Paul bids us look on our calling, not many wise men, according
to the flesh, not many mighty men, and not many noble men: but God has chosen
the foolish things of this world to confound the wise, and the weak of this
world to consounde the strong. 1. Cor. 1. And what has the true church to
boast in but in the Cross of Christ. Gal. 6. than the which, nothing is more
shameful, contemptible or reprochefull to the wisdom of this world: what
knowledge or preaching has the true church but Jesus Christ crucified, which
to the Jews is an offense and to the Greckes foolishness, but to them that be
called, both Jews and Greeks it is the power and wisdom of God to
everlasting salvation 1. Cor. 1. Romans 1. So that as the church in the sight of
God and his Saints is most glorious and honorable, so in the sight of the
world it has always been most base and contemptible.

10 Or that his spouse in earth should ever lack the singular prerogatines of
Gods spirit, show me these things, and I recant.
THis also has been declared before in the second demand of this Article.
There be certain singular prerogatives, which are not continually with God his
Church: as the gift of tongues, the gift of prophecy, the gift of healinges
etc. but there be other prerogatives of God his spirit, that are necessary for
the salvation of God his elect, as the gift of understanding, the gift of
Faith, the spirit of adoption, etc. and these the spouse of Christ has never
wanted. Wherefore if you will be partaker of those benefits which are received in
the church of Christ, you must forsake your Romish religion, and recant.

The 25. article has 2. demandes.
1 Show me that the Church, which ought to be a Christian man's stay, in all
troubles and tempests of doctrine might become so hid or so close that no
man could find her.
THe reader must not be offended with me for any tedious repetition of mine
aunsweres, seeing you give the occasion, by propounding your demandes so often.
This demand has a false principle: that the church ought to be a Christian
man's only stay in all troubles and tempests of doctrine: for when soever any
such tempests do arise, there is as great question and doubt of the Church,
as there is controversy of the doctrine: for as every heretic chalengeth unto
him self the truth of opinions, so also does he challenge the possession of
the church, so that the church is always in as great question as the doctrine.
And then is it to be sought out and tried only by the scriptures, as we have
declared at large in the answer to the 4. Article, 2. demand. Secondly
whereas you demand: whether she could be so hid or close that no man could
find her, because I have answered to this demand sower or five times
already, I will now answer in one word: Although she was hidden and close
from the world, yet was she known to them that were her children.

2 Or so harteles that she could succor no man nor instruct any man in his
doubt of conscience or distress of Faith, prove me that there may be such a
decay of Gods spirit, truth, and Church, and I recant.
THe Church has never been afraid to do her office toward her children and
true members, in teaching, exhorting, comforting, confirming, etc. neither has
the spirit of God failed to lead her into all truth, and Christ has been
with her ever more, and shall be to the worlds end. But that the spirit of God,
truth, and the Church of Christ, should depart from the greatest number of
the world, is proved by S. Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2. and by the Revelation of S.
John. Apoc. 12. Therefore if the spirit of truth did lead you, you should
recant.

The 26. article conteyneth in effect but 3. demandes.
1 Show me again whether any man of years may be saved, except he believe the
Catholic Church?
THere is no man of what age or years soever he be that can be saved, except
he be a member of the Catholic church. But how necessary it is to believe the
Catholic church, it is very doubtful, as you demand, and as the conclusion
of this article seems to require. If you mean that it is necessary to believe
the Catholic church, that is to say, that God has an holy universal
Congregation, I grant it is necessary to believe. But I utterly deny that ye
Romish church is that holy Catholic church. But if you mean (as it seems)
and as the rest of the Papists do interpret that article, I believe the
Catholic church, that is: I believe, what soever the church does allow, to be
true: I deny that it is necessary to salvation, that a Christian man should so
believe the Catholic church, both because the church may err, and also because
something may be commonly received of the church, which is not material to
salvation. And that this is a false interpretation of this article of our
Creed, I believe the Catholic church, that is: I believe what so ever she does
set forth or maintain, to be true, appears manifestly by the words them
selves: For who ever was so ignorant in the Latin tongue, to think that
Credere Ecclesiam, and Credere Ecclesiae, were all one in signification. In
deed if the words were: Credo Ecclesiae Catholicae, in the dative case, this
interpretation might take place, but when it is in the accusative case, Credo
Ecclesiam Catholicam, A boy that would conster it otherwise than thus: I
believe that there is a Catholic church, were worthy to have a doosen stripes
for his labor. Moreover this common distinction of Credere in Deum, that is:
to put our trust in God. Credere Deum, that is: to believe that there is a God,
and Credere Deo, that is: to give credit to God, that he speaks the truth,
plainly overthrows this foolish and false interpretation: For we say not:
Credo in Ecclesiam, that is: I put my whole trust in the Church, for that were
blasphemy, against God, in whom only we must believe, neither do we say: Credo
Ecclesiae, that is: I give credit to the Church, as though she should always
speak the truth: But we say and confess against all heretics and
scismatikes: Credo Ecclesiam etc. that is: I believe, that there is one Holy,
Catholic, and Apostolic church, whereof I am a member etc. Finally, when the
articles following, are spoken in one context and phrase, it can not be chosen,
but that they must have one kind of interpretation Communionem Sanctorum,
Remissionem peccatorum, Carnis resurrectionem, that is: I believe the Communion
of Saints, the forgiveness of sins, the Resurrection of the body, etc.
whereof the interpretation must needs be this: I believe that there is a
Communion of Saints, that there is forgiveness of sins, etc. Even so I
believe, that there is a Catholic Church, which is an article of our creed,
necessary to be believed of every Christian man, but to believe all and every
thing that the Catholic church, by common consent does maintain, is no
article of our Faith, and therefore not necessary to salvation.

2 And that is it which has in the face of all the world practiced preaching:
the conversion of nations to the obedience of the Gospel: that has always
had the ministering of sacraments, the hearing of matters in controversy, power
Iudiciarie in Ecclesiastical causes, the orderly succession of Bishops,
uniformity in solemn ceremonies, unity in faith, that has in her self all
holy functions of the spirit, as working of miracles, remission of sins, the
true sense and interpretation of Gods word that is bewtified by the diversity
of states, commended by Christ in the Gospel, as with Virgins, with Martyrs,
with Confessors, and the rest.
BEcause these colewortes have been sodden twice or thryse already, they are
not worthy to be showed in several disher, but even as they are here mingled
all together in an hochpotte. Of these notes that you make proper to the
Catholic Church (as it has been declared before) some are not always
necessary in ye catholic church: As open preaching in the face of the world,
open ministering of Sacraments and execution of discipline, these are not to be
required in a persecuted Church. Some were proper for a time, and then ceased,
as working of miracles, and diverse other functions of the spirit. Some are
never necessary in the Church, as succession of Bishops, uniformity in
ceremonies, etc. But of all these notes, there is not one that is proper to the
Church of Rome: for she has not always practiced open preaching, and never
preached the word of truth, she has converted but few nations to her
Religion, from Gentilitie, and them rather by war, than by preaching: she
never had sense she first arose, the ministering of sacraments according to
Christ his institution, she has hard matters in controversy, not for
furtherance of Justice, but for love of money. Her iudiciarie power, may be
dispensed withal for money. She has had no orderly succession of Bishops,
except an hoar be an orderly Bishop of the Church of Rome: And except so many
schisms as they write of, be orderly successions: she has not uniformity in
all ceremonies, for diverse nations, and diverse Churches in these nations have
diverse ceremonies, as Sarum, York, Bangor, etc. in England: she has not
unity in faith: for it is not yet determined, of one of the greatest articles
of Popish faith, whether the Pope be above the church: she has no holy
functions of God his spirit, but profane vsages of men's inventions: she has
no true miracles, but the power of Antichrist in lying signs and wonders. She
has nothing less then the true sense of God his word, which submits the
same to her own corrupt and changeable judgment. She is not bewtified with
estates commended in Scripture, as Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors and
Teachers, but with Popes, Cardinals, Monks, Chanons, Friars, etc. In steed
of virgins, she has filthy strumpets, her Nuns, or else such foolish
virgins as bring no oil in their lamps: she has no Martyrs, but obstinate
traitors, as Becket, Fisher, More, etc. she has no confessors of truth,
though she have ten thousand mainteyners of salshood and lies: Wherefore if
these be the notes of ye Catholic Church, ye Church of Rome can in no wise be
that same.

3 Prove unto me that this is not the true Church, or that we be not bound to
obey this Church and no other in all controversies, and doubts raised either
by the difficulty of the Scripture, or by the vain contention and pride of
heresy, and I recant.
I Have proved, even immediately before that not one of those notes, which you
count to be marks of the true Church, is proper to your Church. And therefore
it is not the truth, neither ought it to be obeyed in any thing. And as for
doubts that arise by difficulty of Scripture, or contention of heresy, must
be resolved and determined, as it is abundantly declared before, only by the
Scriptures: for the hard places of the Scripture must be opened by easy
places, and heretics must be confuted, by the Scriptures: for there is never
heresy, but there is as great doubt of the Church, as of the matter in
question, only the Scripture is the stay of a Christian man's conscience, which
I would wish that you would truly embrace and recant.

The 27. article conteyneth 5. demandes.
1 Moreover let any man prove unto me, that the true and only Church of God,
may at any time be void of God his spirit.
THe true and only Church of Christ, can never be void of God his spirit, and
yet she may err from the truth, and be deceived, in some things, even as
there is no true Christian man that is void of God his spirit, for he that
has not the spirit of Christ, is none of his. Romans 8. yet may every true
Christian err, and be deceived in some things, according to the saying of the
Scripture, every man is a liar. Wherefore the whole Church militant consisting
of men, which are all liars, may err all together, as every part thereof,
although neither the whole Church nor any true member thereof be void of God
his spirit.

2 Or falsely interpret any sentence of holy Scripture.
THis gentle offer must needs be taken, I will prove unto you, that the church
of Rome, has falsely interpreted diverse sentences of scripture, and therefore
by that which she has done, it cannot be doubted but that she may do it. S.
Augustine was in this error, that he thought Infantes must receive the
sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, under pain of damnation, and was
deceived by false interpretation of this scripture: Except ye eat the flesh
of the Son of man and drink his blood etc. Joan. 6. This error and false
interpretation, he affirms to be common to all the Western church, and to
Pope Innocent him self. Contra duas epist. Pelag. ad Bonifacium lib. 2. cap.
4. and co^tra Iulianum lib. 1. cap. 2. Furthermore the second Council of Nice,
how many textes of scripture does it falsely interpret, which it were to
tedious to repete, yet for examples sake I will rehearse some of them. God made
man to his own image Genesis 1. therefore we must have images in the church. No
man lights a candle and sets it under a bushel Math. 5. therefore images
must be set upon the altars. As we have heard, so we have seen in the City of
our God, Psalm. 48. that is: God must not be known by only hearing of his
word, but also by sight of images. If these be not true interpretations I
report me to you. Beside these, I will bring you a sentence of holy Scripture,
not only falsely interpreted in sense, but also falsified in words, and
concerning not a small matter, but even one of the chief articles of our
Faith. It is written in the 10. chapter of the Gospel after S. John the 29.
verse (...). My Father which gave the^ unto me (speaking of his sheep) is
greater than all. This sentence, has the Council of Laterane, holden under
Pope Innocent the 3. where were present 70. Metropolitanes, 400. Bishops, 12.
Abbates, and 800. Priors commentualles in all 1300. Prelates, falsified in
words, after this manner, Pater quod dedit mihi, maius est omnibus, that is:
That which the Father has given me, is greater than all. This sentence they
allege, to prove that God the Father begetting his Son from everlasting,
gave his own substance unto him, the words be in the 2. Canon. Pater enim ab
aeterno filium generando, suam substantiam ei dedit, iuxta quod ipse testatur:
Pater quod dedit mihi, maius est omnibus. At dici non potest, quod partem suae
substantiae illi dederit, and partem retinuerit ipse sibi, cum substantia
Patris indiuisibilis sit etc. that is to say: For the Father, begetting his
son, from everlasting, gave him his own substance, according as he himself
witnesses: that which the Father gave me, is greater than all. But it can not
be said, that he gave him part of his substance, and kept part unto him self,
when as the substance of the Father is indivisible etc. Go your ways now and
persuade us, that your church can not interpret any sentence of the scripture,
falsely, when the Laterane Council, which is your represented church has thus
both falsefied, and falsely interpreted, this scripture. Persuade men, that
they may safely lean to the interpretation of your church, when among a
thousand and three hundred Prelates, gathered canonically in a Council, not
one was found that could epsy such gross abusing of the word of God, but
let it pass in a Canon, under the name of the whole Council. Persuade men,
that in all controversies, and condemning of errors, they must be ruled by the
determination of your Church, When the Fathers of the Laterane Council, can
not confute the error of Ioachim Abbot, concerning the Divinity of Christ, but
by falsefying and false interpreting of scripture. These few examples of an
infinite number, I have set forth, because they are sufficient, both to
satisfy your challenge, and to persuade the simple, that the church of Rome may
falsely interpret the scripture, which you would bear them in hand were
impossible.

3 Or induce any error among the people.
THe true and only church of God, is so guided by God his spirit and directed
by his word that she can not induce any damnable error to continue. Yet, as it
is declared before, she has no such privilege granted, but that she may be
deceived, in some things: for her knowledge is imperfect, and her prophesying
is imperfect. 1. Cor. 13. And it is true that S. Augustine says: even the
whole church is taught to say: Forgive us our trespasses. And if general
Counsels be the church represented (as you Papists do teach) S. Augustine
plainly affirms that they may err: De Baptismo contra Donatistas, lib. 2.
cap. 2. Quis autem nesciat sanctam scripturam Canonicam tam veteris quam noui
Testamenti etc. And who knows not, that the holy Canonical scripture, as
well of the old, as of the new Testament, is contained within her certain
bounds: and that it is so preferred, before all later writings of bishops,
that of it, no man may in any wise doubt, or dispute, whether it be true, or
whether it be right, what so ever is known to be written therein: and that the
writings of bishops, which have been written, or are now in writing, may be
reprehended, if they have gonne astraie, any thing from the truth, both by the
saying that is perhaps more wise, of any man, that is more skillful in that
matter, and by the more grave authority and wisdom of other better learned
bishops, and also by Counsels: and that even those Counsels which are
gathered in every region or province, ought to give: place without all doubt,
to the authority of the general Counsels, which are gathered out of all the
Christian world: and that even the very general Counsels, may often be
amended, the former by the later, when as by any trial of things, that is
opened, which before was shut, and that is known which before was hidden,
without any swelling of wicked pride, without any stubbernesse of arrogance,
without any contention of peuishe envy: with holy Humility, with Catholic
peace, with Christian charity. Thus far, S. Augustine, which clearly
affirms, that general Counsels may often err, which may often be amended,
but that the authority of God his word, is to be preferred before the writings
of all Doctors, and Decrees of all Counsels, and that it only can not err.
The Council of Carthage the 3. ca. 23. determined, that all prayers at the
altar, should be directed only to the Father, and not to the Son, or the
holy Ghost, whether this be an error to define that it is unlawful to pray to
God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, let every man judge. But you will
except, that this was a provincial Synod, and not a general Council. But I
answer you, it has the authority of a general Council, because it was
confirmed in the sixth general Council holden at Constantinople in Trullo. And
as for the Popish church, that it may err, what need we better proof than
the prayer, which it makes, after the ending of every general Council,
Precamur scilicet vt ignorantiae parcas and errori indulgeas, that is we pray
truly that thou would spare our ignorance and pardon our error. And again,
Et quia conscientia remordente tabescimus, ne aut ignorantia nos traxerit in
errorem, aut praeceps forsitan voluntas impulerit a Iustitia declinare, ob hoc
te poscimus, te rogamus, vt si quid offensionis in hac Concilij celebritate
attraximus, condonare, and remissibile facere digneris. that is: And because we
are grieved with remorce of conscience, lest either ignorance have drawn us
into error, or perhaps rash will has driven us to decline from Justice,
therefore we pray thee, we beseech thee, that if we have drawn unto us any
offense in the celebration of this Council, thou would vouche safe to
pardon, and to make it remissible etc. If it be impossible for the general
Council to err, what need they pray to God to pardon their error, and when
their own conscience condemns them and compels them to confess, and that
before God, that they may err, what impudence is it in any man, to contend
that they can not err? Furthermore the second Council of Nice, determined
that Angels, and souls of men had bodies, were visible, and circumscriptible,
and therefore might be painted, and this it affirms to be the judgment of
the Catholic church, Con. Nice. 2. Action 5. If this be not to induce an
error, to make men believe that Angels and spirits have bodies visible and
circumscriptible, there was never any error sense the world began. Finally,
when they say the Pope can not err, they acknowledge that such general
Counsels as condemned Popes, for heretics, did err, as the sixth general
Council of Constantinople in Trullo, which condemned and accursed Pope
Honorius for an heretic, Action 13. Even as Pope Leo, the 2. did also, as
appears in his epistle, to the Emperor Constantine. Also the Council of
Constance did err, which condemned Pope John the 23. for denying the
immortality of the soul, and the resurrection of the body. Session. 11. which
Council, Pope John him self affirmed to be most holy, and that it could not
err. Session. 12. And the Council of Basile did err, which deposed Pope
Eugenius, the 4. Session. 34. the same Council being confirmed by Pope Nicolas
the 5. Session. 43. If you say: these two last Counsels did not err, in
condemning and deposing these Popes: Then the great general, and OEcumenicall
Council of Ferraria, and Florence, did err, in disallowing the determination
of these Counsels. Thus it is manifest that the Romish church, which they them
selves confess, to be represented in a general Council, may err, which has
so often erred. And if it may err, and be deceived it self, what man is he,
that need to doubt: Whether it may iuduce any error among the people.

4 Or approve any unprofitable or hurtefull usage among Christians.
IF the church had not approved many unprofitable and hurtefull vsages, among
the people in S. Augustines time, what need had he to complain, that many of
God his co^maundeme^ts, were little regarded, and man's presumptions so highely
esteemed, Sed hoc nimis doleo etc. But herewithall I am to much grieved, that
many things which in God his book are most holsomly commanded are less
regarded, and all things are so full of so many presumptions, that he is more
greuousely reproved, which in his vtas has touched the earth, with his bare
foot, that he that has buried his mind in drunkenness. Therefore if it be
an unprofitable and hurtefull usage, to prefer man's traditions before God his
commandments, the Church in S. Augustines time approved an unprofitable and
hurtefull usage. Furthermore, if the Church can not approve an unprofitable or
hurtefall usage, wherefore are so many ceremonies, as were approved in S.
Augustines and S. Ambroses times, abrogated and disanulled, either because they
were unprofitable, or else hurtful. Last of all, what superstitious vsages,
does the church of Rome still approve? even such as the wiser sort of Papists
are ashamed of.

5 Or that she suffers any man, damnably abusing her religion, without open
reprehension thereof, prove any of these things, and I recant.
THe true Church of Christ, in such places as she is, suffers no man damnably
abusing her Religion, with out open reprehension, as in the days of VValdo,
VVickleffe, Husse, etc. whereof sufficient mention is made before, but because
she is not in all places at all times, many men, yea whole nations, may
damnably err, and not be reprehended of her, As all the Mahometistes, which
occupy the greatest part of the world, who does, or has always openly
reprehended them. And the Romish Church, can well enough abide, ye true
Religion of Christ, to be damnably abused, not only without reprehension, but
also with allowing: For when the Friars, Dominicanes, and Franciscans, had
forged a new Gospel, out of the doctrine of Ioa^himus, and the visions of
Cyril, which they called the Gospel of the holy Ghost, the Gospel that should
endure hereafter, the everlasting Gospel: which diuilish gospel they affirmed
to be so much more perfect, then the Gospel of Christ: as the Sun is more
perfect then the Moon, and a kernel of a nut, before the shell: yet did not
the Church of Rome, once reprehend it. So that it was cultiued 55, years, and
at length set forth to be openly expounded in the University of Paris, Anno
Dom. 1255. without open reprehension of any, but such as were counted heretics
for their labor, As Gulielmus de S. Amore, Gerardus Sagurellus, etc. And
finally, when the matter was brought before the Pope, Anno Dom. 1256. by
Gulielmus de S. Amore, and other sent from the University of Paris, the Pope
and the Cardinals, took order that it should be privily burned, and not
openly reprehended, for shaming their orders. Mathaeus Paris. Whereby it is
clearly proved, that the Romish Church has suffered wicked men, damnably to
abuse Religion, without open or privy reprehension for the space of 55.
years, and at length without open reprehension, when there was no remedy but
it must needs be reprehended, wherefore if there be any grace in you, you will
recant.

The 28. article conteyneth 3. demandes.
1 If unity in Faith, austeritie of life, sharp discipline, great penance,
much fasting, large alms, godly devotion, obedience to higher powers, gravity
and constancy in all cases, be not the signs of the true Church.
IF you ask of true Faith, repentance, discipline, etc. these might be signs
of the true Church, but if you mean unity in any faith, etc, as it seems by
your words, the Mahometistes and Turks, are the true Church, for they have
unity in their faith, austeritie of life, sharp discipline, fasting, alms,
devotion, obedience, gravity, Constance, etc. as much, or rather more then the
popish church.

2 Or be not more in our Church then in their Congregation, I recant.
YOu have not unity in true faith: for you know not what it means, but are
utter enemies unto it, and in your own principles, there is no unity, whether
the Pope or the Council be superior, etc. you may, as all hypocrites, pretend
austeritie of life, when you are most luxurious riotors, as the world knows:
your discipline is not so sharp, but money will make it blunt: you have great
penance but no true repentance, you have much abstinence from meats, which is
the doctrine of diuills, but you fast as little as other men: your alms are
large but without faith, and therefore sin: your devotion is blind, and not
godly, but like her mother Ignorance: you are disobedient to Christian
Magistrates, submitting your selves to Antichrist: your gravity and constancy
in all cases, is better commended of yourself, then known of other men:
Wherefore being void even of these, which you make the signs of the true
Church, you are none of the true Church, except you recant.

3 But if discord in religion, licentiousnes in living, contempt of
Discipline, rejecting of penance, lothesomnesse of fasting, lack of zeal and
devotion, disobedience to Magistrates, sacrilege, apostacy, breach of vows,
unlawful lusts, wantonness in all life and manners, if these things, I say,
agree not better to the Protestants, than the Catholics, or if these be not
the plain signs and fructes of a false church, and doctrine, I recant.
WE acknowledge that in the outward face of our church, be many hypocrites,
chargeable with these crimes that you speak of, and we yield our selves
guilty before God of grievous offenses, that our life is not aunswerable unto
our doctrine: Nevertheless we doubt not, but God for Christ his sake, will
have mercy upon us. But if in life and conversation we be compared with you
Papists, even the cheifest of your church, as Popes, Cardinals, Bishops,
Monks, etc. We dare approve our life to be honester both before God and men.
You shall never be able to charge us with such riot, whoredom, adultery,
incest, sodomitry, bestiality, murder, poisoning, necromancie, apostasy,
blasphemy, etc. as both the world sees to ouerflowe in your Prelates at this
day, and we are able to bring forth of your own Cronicles and Hystories, to
have been committed in times past: wherefore, for very shame, leave of this
comparison. We meinteine no stews, neither of males nor females, we set forth
no books in commendation of Sodomitry, we exact no tribute of Courtisans, to
keep open bawdrie, we privilege no writings that teach men to commit
vylanie, worthy of a thousand deaths. Therefore be not so impudent, to charge
us with these crimes above the Papists, but rather forsake that filthy whore,
the mother of all fornication, and recant.

The 29. article conteyneth 8. demandes.
1 Let any Protestant in the world, prove unto me, that their church could
rightly be called Catholic, which was so particular, that no man alive could
name a place where any such church was.
WHy might not our Church, when it was most hidden, be as rightly called
Catholic, as the Church of the Apostles, when it was so particular, that it
was contained in the narrow bonds of Jury: for it is not called Catholic,
because it should be every where, for that it never was nor shall be: But
because that where so ever it be, in parts, it is one body of Christ. The
Popish church is not in every part of the world: For Mahomets sect is in the
greatest part. Many cuntries are Idolaters and the most part of them that
profess the name of Christ, are not in the fellowship of the Popish church: And
whereas you say: that no man alive could name the place where it was, you
make an impudent lie: For although it were unknown, to the Papists, and
enemies thereof, yet was it known to the true members thereof. It was in
Italy, when Marsilius of Padua, preached: in France, when VValdo preached at
Lions, and there about. In England, when Wickliffe taught: in Bohemia, when
John Hus, and Ieronyme of Prage did florishe.

2 Or that it might be called holy, which never had Baptism, or other
sacraments, to sanctify any of her followers withal.
IT had the spirit of God to sanctify the true members of it, and it had
sacraments to testify the same: Also did not the Bohemians baptize: Were not
pauperes de Lugduno baptized? etc. But if you count their Baptism no Baptism,
why did you not rebaptize in Queen Mary's time, all those that were baptized
by our Church in King Edwards time?

3 Or that it should be one, which as soon as it grew up in the world, was
divided into so many sundry sects.
NOne of us will grant you, that our Church began first to grow, when it was
last brought to light, and knowledge of the world: for it has continued even
since Christ. But if there arose, or were renewed many heresies, with it, that
is no new matter, but an old practice of the devil. For as soon as the
Church of Christ began to grow up after his ascension, even in the Apostles
time, there were many sects and heresies, As the Jews that mainteyned the
law, they that denied the Resurrection among the Corinthians Hymenaeus and
Philetus, Simon Magus, Cerinthus, Ebion, Marcion, Basilides, Valentinus,
Carpocrates, etc. So that there were many more heresies, at the first preaching
of the Gospel, in, and immediately after, the Apostles time, then at the last
restoring of the public preaching thereof unto the world in our days: And yet
the Apostolic Church was one Church, and so is ours at this day one and the
same.

4 Or that it might be called Apostolic, which could never count by orderly
sucession from any Apostle, or Apostolic man.
YOu are never able to answer the arguments that are brought to prove that
Peter was never Bishop at Rome. And then where is all your braggs of
Apostolic sea, and succession, etc. But be it that Peter was there, except you
prove succession of doctrine and faith as well as succession of men, your
succession is not worth a straw. And our Church, which holds all the doctrine
of the Apostles, and none other but the doctrine of the Apostles, shall be
truly called, and found, the Apostolic Church, when your with all her
succession of Antichrists whore, whoremongers, heretics, Sodomites,
blasphemers, coniurers, etc. shabe Apostaticall, rather than Apostolical.

5 Or the secret, base, contemptible, defaced, and disordered Congregation, was
ever of that majesty, that it might require the obedience of all Nations.
HOw base, and contemptible soever it be, in the eyes of the wicked despisers
of it: yet did it not only require, but also subdue all nations to the
obedience of the Faith, so many as were ever subdued, in the days of the first
Christian Emperors, and before. And sense, when it was most defaced by the
tyranny of Antichrist, it was of such majesty, that it both required and
obtained the obedience of the realm of Bohemia, and in process of time, has
obtained the obedience of almost all the nations of Europe. If the church of
Rome retain the like majesty, why does it not now, requier the like obedience
of all nations, both Christians and Turks. you will say: It requires, but it
can not obtain. Even so, I answer of our Church, it has always been worthy
to requier: but it has not pleased God, that it should always obtain.

6 Or that it was ever able to gather general Councels.
THe four best general Counsels were gathered by our Church, and the
Emperors, that were defenders of the same, and not by the bishops of Rome.
Neither were they Presidentes in them, as it is manifest, that other men were
Authors of the Canons, or distinctions: As of the Nicene, Alexander Bishop of
Constantinople of the Constantinopolitane. Nectarius bishop of the Ephesine.
Cyrillus bishop of Alexandria of the Chalcedonense. Anatolius of Constantinople
etc. and in other general Counsels where the bishop of Rome was president, I
answer as John Patriarche of Antioche did, in the Council of Basile, his
presidence was: Honoraria ad beneplacitum Concilij eis data: non authoritatiua,
nisi ex concessione aut permissione habente vim concessionis aut ex tolerantia,
that is: For honor sake granted to them so long as it should please the
Council, and not of authority but either by grant or permission being of the
force of a grant or else of sufferance. And I conclude as he does, the Pope was
never President either of honor, or of authority, but by the grant or
permission of the Council. And how is the Popish church able to gather general
Counsels at this day? who will come at her calling? Except a few Spaniardes,
and a ioly company of buckram bishops of Italy? general Counsels of all the
world, can never be gathered, but either when there is a Monarchy, or else
(which is not to be looked for) that all the Princes of the world, will
consent together.

7 Or exercise Discipline.
BEcause this demand has been answered so often before, I will say the
less now. The free course of discipline, in time of persecution may be
hindered: As it was in S. Cyprians time, when the members of the Church be
dispersed: but the power of discipline, has always remained, and when
occasion served, been executed: As the Bohemians, excommunicated the Adamites,
and the civil Magistrates punished them by the sword.

8 Or that these names, proper by scripture and Doctors of the true Church,
could be ever challenged, by any right to their said Congregation.
AS many of these names as are proper to the Church by scripture, or Doctors
agreeing, with scripture, have been always justly challenged of right to
perteine to our Church and Congregation.

I mean these:

1 Corpus Christi.
Our Church does rightly challenge, to be the body of Christ, which
acknowledges Christ to be her only head, Savior, Redeemer, Priest, King,
Intercessor. etc. The Popish church can not challenge this name, because she
does not acknowledge Christ to be these only and wholly.

2 Sponsa Christi.
THe spouse of Christ, hears the voice of Christ, and is ruled thereby, so
does our Church, therefore she is spouse of Christ. But the Romish church goes
a whoringe after her own inventions, commits gross idolatry, and will in
no wise be ruled only by the voice of Christ, there she is not the spouse of
Christ.

3 Vinci dilecta Christo.
How tenderly Christ loves his Church, the true members thereof, which have
received the first fruits of his spirit, do better understand in heart tha^ can
be expressed with words, and how he abhors the whore of Babylon the Romish
Synagoge, the Scripture does plentifully declare.

4 Columba speciosa.
Our Church, expressing the simplicity of a fayer dove, may justly challenge
this name: But the Babylonicall Strompet your church, in craft and subtilitie,
is more like a fox than a dove.

5 Domus Dei.
THe true Church, in which we are, is the house or family of God, which he
governs by his stewardes, the sincere preachers of his word. The popish
church is the Synagoge of Satan, where the preaching of God his word is
despised, and the word it self, made subject to men's determinations and
authorities.

6 Columna veritatis.
Saint Paul by this title does admonish Pastors, and Preachers, how great a
burden and charge they sustain, that the truth of the Gospel can not be
continued in the world, but by their ministry in ye church of God, which is
the pillar and stay of truth, this their duty true preachers considering, are
diligent in their calling to set forth the Gospel and to preach the truth. But
the popish church, which is not the vpholder, and mainteyner, but the
ouerthrower and oppressor of the truth, compelling it to give place to falsehood
and error, can by no equity challenge this name, to be called the pillar and
stay of truth, but rather of falsehood and lies.

7 Ciuitas Dei.
Our Church is the city of God, builded upon the foundations of the
Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, Jesus Christ being the head corner stone:
ruled by the laws of God only, reteyning that form of regiment and common
wealth, that Christ him self has prescribed. The Church of Antichrist, is
founded upon seven hills, Apoc. 17. upon the traditions, dreams, fantasies,
and devises of men, refuses to be ruled only by the laws of God, has clean
altered and changed the form of regiment prescribed by God, and set up an
other, full of Antichristian pride, cruelty, and tyranny. Therefore in no
wise may be called the city of God, But Babylon the mother of fornication,
Sodoma and Egypt, where our Lord is daily crucified in his members.

8 Ciuitas supra montem posita.
THis saying of our Savior Christ in the 5. of Matthew, is not properly meant
of the Church, but of the Apostles and their successors the ministers of ye
Church, even as these sayings: You are the salt of the earth, you are the
light of the world, A city builded upon an hill can not be hidden, neither
is a candle lighted to be set under a bushel. By which words, he teaches
them above all other men, to look diligently to their life and conversation:
for as they excel in place and dignity, so the eyes of all men are set upon
them. As a city builded upon an hill, must needs be seen of all them that
come near it, so they being placed in so high an office and dignity shall be
noted and marked above all other men. As a candle is not lighted but to be set
on a candlestick and to give light unto all them that come into the house,
even so a Minister and P^^^cher of God his word is not ordained for any other
end but that he should shine before men in true doctrine and good manners.
Hereby it appears how fondly some Papists would seem to prove out of this
place that the Church must always be visible, when the words are not applied
to the Church, but to the ministers thereof, I know some of the doctors expound
this place otherwise, but the context of the words does plainly confute their
error.

9 Hortus conclusus.
AS a garden or orchard walled in or enclosed with hedges, is more esteemed of
the owner, the^ great broad fields, and the trees and flowers that grow
therein are preserved and kept more safely, then such as are wild and grow
abroad, right so the Church of Christ severed from the rest of ye world, though
it be small in compass, yet is it more esteemed of him then all the world
beside. But the Church of Rome, which will not be enclosed with the walls or
hedges of God his word, but wandreth at large after her own inventions, can
not be called the enclosed garden of Christ.

10 Fons signatus,
THe true Church of Christ is also compared to a spring or founteine, which is
shut in or sealed up from the profane waters of worldly vanities,
ministering the water of life to all the children of God. But as for the popish
church, which ishueth out of the bottomless lake, is a stinking puddle of all
false doctrine and heresy, whereof the whore bears a cupp full. Apoc. 17.
out of which all nations have dronk, Apoc. 18. So far is it, that she should
be a well, sealed up by Christ.

11 Sponsa Agni.
THe description of the Spouse of the Lamb, set forth in S. John's Revelation,
does in all points most aptly agree unto our holy Church and congregation. But
the popish church, which is not content to be clothed in that white shining
silk, which is the Justification of Saints made white in the blood of the
Lamb, but with the filthy rags of man's righteousness, Esaias 64. is no Spouse
of Christ, but the darling of the devil.

12 Mulier amicta Sole.
NO place in all the scripture does more plainly set forth the estate of our
Church than this 12. of the Apocalypse. She is clothed with the sun of
righteousness Jesus Christ, which is her beauty. She treads under her feet,
the Moon of mutabilitie, changeableness, and inconstancy, she is crowned
with 12. stars, which is the doctrine of the 12. Apostles, the word of God.
She is always fruitful, and persecuted by the devil and his members, but
yet by Christ defended, protected, and provided for in all dangers and
adversities. But the church of Rome, is that whore of Babylon clothed in purple
and scarlet, gold, precious stones, and perles, described Apoc. 17. sitting
upon the beast with seven heads, which are the seven hills, and is the great
city that had dominion over the kings of the earth.

13 Habitatio fratrum in vnum.
ALthough this saying be not proper nor peculiar unto the Church only, but
common to every society and fellowship of men that continue in godly unity,
yet does it most aptly agree unto our Church, which holds one unity of
doctrine, faith, and religion of Christ. But the Popish church how so ever it
brag of unity, because their agreement is not in verity, can not be that
cohabitation of brethren, which the Psalmist does so highely commend.

14 Mons Dei mons pinguis.
THe hill which David so extolleth Psalm. 68. is the mount Zyon, which though it
be small, yet it excels the high and fruitful hill of Basan, because God
had chosen it to place his tabernacle thereupon: even so the church of Christ,
though it surmount not over kingdoms in worldly dignities and commodities, yet
to such as David was, the little hill of Zyon is more worth, than all the seven
hills of Rome.

15 Sacra anchora.
IN all the Scripture the Church is not compared to an holy Anchore, but in the
sixth to the Hebrews Faith in God his promises, is compared unto a sure and
steadfast Anchore of our souls, upon which Faith seeing our Church is builded
we may truly say that in our Church only is this sure anchore, which the
popish church does so much despise that she counted it heresy for us to fly
unto Faith, tanquans ad sacram anchoram, that is: As to our only sure refuge.

16 Vinea Domini.
THe Vineyard of the Lord is of his own plantinge, dressed and tilled by such
husbandmen, as he has placed in it, which will yield him fruit in time
convenient. This agrees aptly unto our Church, which allows no plant, but
such as is planted by our heavenly Father. This Vineyarde ca^ not the popish
church be compted, which plucketh up the vines planted by God, and in the
steed of them sets thorns and thistles after the devises of men.

17 Terra viuentium.
THe land of the living in scripture signifies this present life, as: I
trusted to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living. that is:
Although I was near death, yet I believed that God would preserve me in this
life Psalm. 27. And unto Doeg, he says: Psalm. 52. God shall destroy thy root
out of the land of the living. that is: Out of this life. Also Ezechias, in
his psalm. Esaias. 38. I shall not see the Lord, even the Lord in the land of
the living. that is: I shall no more praise God in his temple here in this
life. And when you shall bring forth a place of scripture where it is proprely
applied unto the church, it shall be an easy matter to prove that we only are
the lively members of Christ, which abide in his body receuing all benefits of
life from him which is our head: And easy it will be to prove that you are the
land of the dead men, which are strangers from the life of God Ephesians. 4.
which are alive in this world and not dead unto Christ.

18 Regina in vestitu deaurato circundata varietatibus.
ALthough this saying alleged out of the 45. Psalm, be figuratively meant of
the church, as it is literaly spoken of Pharaos daughter whom Solomon married:
yet being alleged not after the truth of the Hebrew but after the error of
the old translation, I will not interpret it contrary to my conscience (as
S. Ieronym fayeth) according to that corrupt version but according to the
truth of the text, which is: The Queen in a garment of gold of Ophir, As for
compassing with varieties, it is not in the text. By this figure the spiritual
magnificence of the church of Christ gathered of the Gentiles is set forth unto
us, and therefore let not the Papists dream that material gold is the
ornament of Christ his spouse, but as it is before said, of the whore of
Babylon.

19 Ecclesia magna.
20 Populus grauis.
David in the 35. Psalm promises that he will give thanks unto God after his
deliverance, in a great company and solemn assembly of people, such as was
wont to come together at the holy meetings in the Sanctuary. This is the true
and the simple meaning of this text. And it were to violent an interpretation
to enforce it to be a prophecy of the church of Christ, although it be true
that the church is a great congregation and a mighty people, yet remembering
therewith that in comparizon of all the world it is as Christ him self
calls it: A little Flock.

21 Archa Noe.
IN the Arch of Noe, as S. Peter testifies 1. Pet. 3. but a few, namely 8.
souls were saved in the water, even as many as were obedient unto the voice of
God, the whole world beside were drowned. Wherefore how few soever we be: As
the Papists say we are not many, so long as we obey the voice of God, we doubt
not but we shall be saved in the Arch. And the Papists with all their
universality and multitude, despising the law of God, shall perish with the
wicked world.

22 Tabernaculum altissimi.
THe old Tabernacle was a figure of the true Church, and we know that none
shall dwell therein but such as be described in the Psalm. 15. Therefore let the
Papists brag as long as they list of the Tabernacle of the highest, yet
shall they not dwell there, neither shall they rest in his holy hill, because
they be not endued with such virtues, springing of true, and a lively faith: As
in that Psalm be set forth.

23 Ager and area Dei.
THe church is the feelde and flower of God, in his feelde he sows none but
good seed, and the chafe shall be purged from his flower. The Papists are some
of these tares, whom the envious man has sowed while men were a sleep, and
the chafe, which after it be purged from the corn together with the tares
shall be burned in the unquenchable fire.

24 Matter fidelium.
Jerusalem that is from above is free, which is the mother of us all, which
embrace Jesus Christ as our only Redemer from the bondage and curse of the
law. As for that step mother of Rome which brings men into captivity
through ceremonies and traditions of men: Begets unto bondage as Agar did,
and is become the mother, not of the faithful, but of abominable fornication
Apocalip. 17.

25 Nutrix Christianorum.
THe church of Christ is the Nurse of Christians, which brings them up and
feeds them first with milk, and afterward with stronger meats according as
they are able to receue it 1. Cor. 3. Heb. 6. But Rome, which feeds her babes
with poison of man's traditions in steed of the milk of God his word, and will
rather see them famish than they should taste of God his word, may well be a
nurse of Antichristians, but never did good unto Christians.

26 Ecclesia orthodoxa.
TRue opinions are confirmed out of the word of truth, wherefore our church
which holds no doctrine, but such as is tried by the word of truth most
truly may be called the true believing church. Contrariwise, the Popish church
which so manifestly dissenteth from the word of truth that she dare not be
judged thereby, but most blasphemously submits the same to her corrupt and
false judgment, may justly be called a false believing church.

27 Vna, Sancta, Catholica.
28 Apostolica.
THis has been often proved before: And namely in the first, second, third,
and fourth demandes of this last Article.

29 Vxor de latere Christi sicut Eua de latere Adam.
AS S. Augustine says: The church of Christ is taken out of his side: as Eve
was out of Adams side, which so long as she obeys the voice of her busbande,
is not deceived by the serpent: But if she be absent from him, that she be not
instructed by him, she is deceived by heretics Augusti. De Genes. contra
Manichaeos libro. 2. cap. 24. and 26. by which place of Augustine it is proved
that the Church may err, if she be not ruled by the word of God.

30 Domus Pacis.
THe church may be called the house of Peace, because there is in it Peace and
agreement in the cheifest Articles of the Faith, or because in it is taught us
the Peace and reconciliation wrought by Christ, whereby we knowing that we are
justified by faith, have peace with God. Romans 5. But neither of these Peaces
are in the church of Rome: for there is dissension in doctrine and their
doctrine dissenteth from the truth: as for the peace of conscience is
altogether unknown unto Papists, even as the justification of Faith, by which
only it is obtained.

31 Domus Refugij.
THe house of Refuge or defense may also be applied to the Church, out of which
is no salvation: And in whose bosom it becomes every man to rest, which
shall look for the refuge and defense of God. But God forbid that any man
should seek for refuge or help at your church, which must be overthrown with
such violence as a great mylstone that is cast into the Sea, and shall be found
no more Apoc. 18.

32 Domus Veritatis.
AS our church is the pillar and stay of truth, so is she also the house of
Truth, which knows nothing but him that is the Truth it self Jesus Christ
and his most holy Scripture: In which this truth is signed and testified. But
your Synagoge is the house of lies, where beside men's doctrines and traditions
which are nothing but lies, there be also leaden legendes of lies, Promptuaries
of lies, Festiuals of lies, and other infinite books of lies.

33 Societas Sanctorum.
HOw should not our Church be the society and fellowship of Saints, which
is sanctified and purged by the blood of Christ, which has received the
spirit of sanctification, by which we cry: Abba, Father, which is guided and
governed by the most sacred and holy word of God. And how can the Popish
church be the fellowship of Saints, when she refuses the sanctification of
Christ his one oblation and sacrifice, as sufficient to make them perfect,
which scorneth at the spirit of sanctification, which can abide any thing,
rather than to be directed only by God his holy word: Finally which
acknowledges no saints, but such as the most unholy Pope, for money does
canonize and make saints.

Prove unto me therefore that these excellent and propre callinges, can agree
to any disordered company or Congregation, or to any unknown society of men:
but only to the true Church of Christ spread throughout the whole world by
Christ's his promise, and by virtue of his spirit, continued in truth and grace
from falsehood sense Christ's time, and I recant.

AS many of these excellent names, as in the word of God, or the doctors
agreeing with the word of God, are propre or perteyning to the true Church of
Christ, so many have I proved to be propre and perteyning to our most holy and
well ordered Congregation. And moreover that they can in no wise be rightly
applied to that most abominable, Idolatrous, and disordered Synagoge of Rome,
which is utterly departed from the faith, giving heed to spirits of error,
and doctrines of devils, being so lively painted forth and even pointed fotth
by the scripture to be that Antichristian church, whereof the holy Ghost
prophesies, that no man, except he will wilfully be blind, can be ignorant
thereof, so that if you be not stark blind, and given up into a reprobate
sense, when you consider these things you will recant.

Let any man therefore alive answer directly and plainly without color or
fraud of words and unprofitable digressions to the foresaid or any of the
foresaid demandes, and I shall willingly leave the known Church and plain way
of Salvation, and wander in the woods to seek after them, and their
congregation.

IF you had not added this conclusion, we might have conceived some hope, that
upon further instruction in such matters as troubled your conscience you would
have been contented to be reformed after God his word, and good counsel. But
now you declare that you are so obstinatly bent that what so ever be proved
against you, you will not receive it as truth but yield unto it perforce. As for
me, Although I know there are very many which with more learning and eloquence
could have answered your demandes, yet being such as they are, I submit my
self to the judgment of all them, that be learned and godly minded, whether I
have not directly and plainly, without color or fraud of words, and without
all digression answered the same, so that I doubt not, but as many as are
tractable, and stayed upon these doubts only, may be fully persuaded by these
not very long and yet sufficient Answers.

THE END.

