Praelections upon the Sacred and holy Revelation of S. John, written in latin
by William Fulke Doctor of Divinity, and translated into English by George
Gyffard:

JOAN. 21. verse. 24. This is the Disciple which bears witness of these
things, and which wrote these things, and we know that his testimony is
true.

Revel. 22. us. 8. I am John which saw and heard these things.

Imprinted at London, by Thomas Purfoote, at the sign of the Lucrece.

Anno. 1573.

TO THE RIGHT HOnorable and noble Lord Ambrose Dudley, Earl of VVarwike,
Baron Lisle, general of the Q. Majesty's Ordinance, and Knight of the most
noble order of the Garter.
THE life of man (right Honorable) is said of the holy man Job to be a
continual warfare on earth: whereby it is evident, that so long as we remain
in the tabernacle of this flesh, we are even in the midst of this difficulte
and daungerouse fight, compassed in on every side with huge Armies of feyrce
and cruel enemies, and also subject at every moment to the furiouse assaults
and invasions of strong and subtle adversaries. As the holy Aposte S. Paul
witnesses Ephesians. 6. That we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but
against principalities, against powers, and against the worldly governors,
the Princes of the darckenesse of this world, against spiritual wickednesses
which are in the high places. Being therefore so weak and feeble of our
selves, that we are altogether unable to resist or to stand in battaill, and
encounter with so mighty stout Champions as these, namely that old serpent
with all the whole rablement of the hellishe Army, which by long practice are
so expert, that there subtlety is more to be feared then there power: the
holy ghost warns all those that will be the true soldiers of Christ, to put
on all the armor of God* as to have there loins gyrded about with verity,
having on the breast plate of righteousness, and to have there feet shood with
the preparation to the Gospel of peace, to take the shield of faith, and the
sword of the Spirit, the helmet of Salvation. All which spiritual weapons,
the Lord does minister unto us by his holy word. And our savior Christ as a
most mighty Captain, by his example has taught all his soldiers how they
shall use the same to the vanquishinge of Satan. But the malice of the devil
wrought so effectuously in the corrupt nature of man: that by the means of his
general Vicar Antichrist, for a long space of time, he had almost quite
banished these spiritual weapons and Christian armor, and brought in a great
number of his own framing, which are so far vnfite or unable to repel the
violence of his fyerie darts, that of themselves they give deadly wounds unto
all those that put or repose any confidence in them. For of them selves
(whatsoever they seem to be) they are nothing else to the souls of men, but
deadly poison. And yet notwithstanding, the blindness of the world through
the just judgment of God: For the contempt of his holy word, was such, that
being made druncke^ with the abominatio^s of Antichrist, it ra^ne a whoring
after strange Gods, and in such filthy manner, that fully it has been
verified in the^ which the Lord does grievously complain of by his Prophet
saying, my people have committed two evils: they have forsaken me the fou^tayn
of living waters to dig to the^ selves pits eue^ broken pits, that can hold
no waters, yea this madness proc^aded so far and the corruptions of Antichrist
were so depely roted in the hearts of men, that even unto this day, although
the LORD in great mercy by placinge a noble and virtuous Prince to reign
over us, which has set up and maintained his holy word, has outwardlye
banished them, they remain still in the minds of the people: but whereto may
this be imputed, that in all places almost of this Realm, the greater part
bear more favor to the monstruouse proceadinges of the man of sin, then to
the pure Gospel of Jesus Christ but that they are kept in such ignorance and
blindness, that they have not tasted of the power of Gods word. For this has
always been and is the crafty pollecie of the Devil, when as he can not
whollye stop the course of the Gospel, yet that he may make it the less
fruitful, to endeavor by all means possible even to entangle the ministers
thereof in the vain pleasures of this world, with covetousness and ambition,
that thereby they may become more studiouse, to set forth there own glory,
then to advance the glory of Christ, more careful to erect and garnishe there
own bowers, then to build up the house of the Lord. The miserable experience
of our time is an evident proof hereof. For out of what other founteyne have
all the mischeifes of latter time flowed, in this our Realm of England? But
that the carelesnes in feedinge the Lords flock has been so great, that in
most places eather raueninge wolves, or else such lewd unskillful blind
guides as are not able to govern them selves, instead of true pastors are made
governors in the church, and have the rule over the flock of Christ, so that
it is no great marvel, that the people in some places of this realm, for
want of good instruction not knowinge there duty to God set themselves in
armor to rebel against the minister of God, there Sovereign Prince. Thus
Antichrist by means of ignorance the mother of deuilishe devotion, seducinge
the people into sundry errors does mayntaine his bloudye kingedome. For if
his subtle practices were disclosed, and his abominations made manifest, there
is no doubt but that the greatest part of those that have there minds still
bewiched with the enchauntementes of that whore, would even looth and detest
her filthiness and hate here with a deadly hatred. Now seeinge that the Lord
has always had such a provident and fatherly care oue^ his Church, that he
would have nothing hid from his elect which should tend to there eternal
health and salvation, but even long before by sendinge his Angel, revealed
to his servant John what subtiltye and cruel tirannye, the devil by the
ministry of Antichriste would practice against the saints the true
servants of Christ. I think the Church should suffer great iniurye, if it
should want or be deprived of the use of those treasu^es which are contained
in this prophecye, which are so manifold and so great (as the godly and
diligent reader shall find) that I am far unable to speak any thing, which
may set forth the excellency and worthiness of the same. Which all men must
needs confess, seeing the holy ghost pronounces them to be blessed, which
here and keep the sayings of the prophecy of this book: especially living in
these daungerouse and troublesome times, wherein the Romish monster, inspired
with a deuilishe spirit, fearinge the utter subversion and overthrow of his
kingdom rages so vehemently, that he uses all kind of falsehood and subtle
dealinge, yea Barbarouse, and monstrouse tyranny, and all to establishe and
maintain his own pride and usurped authority, he has oftentimes such
success in warring against the true professors of the Gospel, that he has
victory and sleaeth there bodies, and that in such terrible manner, that it
might seem to be a Just quarill which he mainteyneth, except the Lord had
here revealed to his servant John, that he should thus for a time prevail:
and that in the end he will revenge the blood of his Saints. Again here is
fully answered that deuilish and blind objection of the Papists, which so
sore troubles the consciences of the ignorante: namelye that the Church of
Rome having continued so many hundred years, and been so general, and has
had from time to time a succession of Bysshoppes, and always remained visible
in the eyes of the world, can not be but the true Church. On the other side,
they say that this Church of ours was not any where to be found within an
hundred or two hundred years paste, and therefore can not be the true
Catholic Church of Christ. But let the diligent reader Judge, of these
things when he has perused this book: for herein he shall find even painted
out before his eyes, the form and shape both of the true Church, and also of
the false, which is the Synagoge of Satan. I might stand to reckon up a great
number of the like commodities, wherewith this prophecy is full, but then I
^houlde be over tediouse: and I wish rather that the diligente Reader should
gather them him self, which shall not be heard for him to do: seeinge the
aucthour thereof, as it does evidently appear applied him self to write
briefelye and plainly, not troubling the Reader with any long circumstances,
nor yet wading curiously in searching out darcke mysteries, but with modesty,
comparing and alludinge to other places of the scriptures. Whereby those
things that seemed most darcke and difficulte to be understood, are made plain
and easy. Thus when I had finissed my labor in translating this book, I was
bold to dedicate the same unto your honor, with diverse and sundry causes and
respects being moved thereto. As considering the great benevolence and good
will, which ye have toward the Aucthour hereof, and to all other that are
godly learned: adjoining thereto especially the fervent zeal and love toward
the Gospel, which God has wrought and planted in your heart: with the hatred
of Papistrie and all other deuilissh doctrine and errors, which by any ways
or means anoy the Church of Christ. These are not the gifts of nature, or of
flesh and blood, but of the spirit of God, given for the mainteyning of his
glory here in earth, and for the succouring of his pore afflicted Church,
especially in those which for the same end and purpose, he has placed in high
calling and authority: whose greateste honor and chiefest dignity does
consiste in this, that they are made the nourcing fathers and nourcing mothers
of Gods people. The Lord which has begun and wroughte these his graciouse
gifts in you, continue and increase the same daily more and more, bless ye
with all spiritual blessings, give unto ye long life with increase of Godly
honor, to the advancement of his glory, the commodity of his Church, and
your everlasting comfort and salvation in Christ our savior and redeamer.
Amen.

FINIS.
1573. Your Lordshippes humble Orator George Gyffard.

COMMENTARIES OF William Fulke upon the holy and sacred Revelation of Saint
John.
BEfore that saint John does enter into the full and just narration of the
prophetical visions, he thought good, to place some things before as in yt
way of a preface, which should make to the commendation of his doctrine, and
get authority to his writing.

Verse. 1. The revelation of Jesus Christ.

THis first verse conteyneth the title of the book, that it is ye revelation
of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, to this end that he might show his
servants those things which should shortly after come to pass. It is
usual among all the Prophets, least they should be thought to spread abroad
among the commun people the devises of there own brain, to ascite God as the
aucthor of there doctrine, of which sort are these, The word of the Lord, The
burden of the word of the lord. etc. The self same does saint John, in
saying the revelation of Jesus Christ: saving this that they do simply allege
god as their only aucthor, but this Apostle shows Jesus Christ to have
delivered those things unto him, which he himself received of the father. And
truly Saint John nourished up in the clear light of the Gospel, does speak
much more plainly and sensibly unto us, the^ the Prophets which were brought
up under the shadows of Moses law. For although Christ, which is the eternal
wisdom of his father, had always this prerogative, to deliver forth the
heavenly oracles, by whose benefit we ought to knowledge our selves to have
received, whatsoever good gifts God has at any time bestowed upon his Church:
yet notwithstanding it was not so manifest to the fathers in time past under
the law, as after yt the sone of God took our flesh, and manifested him self
to be beholden of us under ye clear light of ye Gospel, ye vail being taken
away. Rightly therefore says John, the revelation of Jesus Christ, whereby he
does not only sever, and distinguish this heavenly doctrine from all devises
of men, but also extolleth the great and most excellent dignity of our
savior Jesus Christ, to whom he does attribute this divine revelation: which
is all one, as if he should say our flesh to be lifted up and exalted to so
great honor that it should eue^ be made partaker of gods mysteries, which
ought not to seem straung, when as Christ placed at the right hand of god, in
his fathers steed does govern the Church and moreover the whole world.

WHich God gave unto him that he might show to his servants. etc. The
wonderful goodness of God does here shine forth unto us, that he does
vouchsafe to revels to his Church such great mysteries and secrets of things
to come, neither does he suffer his servants to be ignorant of any thing,
which is any way profitable for them to know.

Here therefore God is appointed and declared to be the aucthor of this
doctrine, Jesus Christ by whose means so great a treasure is come unto us, to
be the mediator, for truly in him which is our head, God does also embrace us
which are his body, so that we refuse not to be his servant, most ready to
receive and obey all his commandments. Moreover S. John means not by these
words, those secrets only, to be known of our savior Christ, which are
declared in this book (for seeing that he is the wisdom of God no part of the
divine counsel can be hid from him) but he understands that Christ in the
person of the mediator, has received this revelation of the father, that he
might communicate the same to his Church. For it is not to be doubted, but that
God revealed also many things by visions to other Apostles and holy men,
which should make either to their confirmation and strengthninge, or else to the
admonicion of the Church then present. But he would have this revelation only
committed to writing for ye use of the whole Church. For like as before the
coming of Christ, when doctrine and teaching was more dark and obscure, the
Church stood in need of many revelations, so after ye light of the gospel is
sprung up, and has dispersed and driven away all clouds and darkness, we
ought to hold our selves content with very few extraordinary visions. This
one therefore, but yet a most excellent revelation the holy ghost thought
sufficient for the Church, that he might admonish it of the perils and dangers
which it should pass through. And this is it that John says, that God gave
this revelation to Christ that he might declare it to his servant ( Those
things that should shortly come to pass.) Although the execution and
fulfilling of many things which are fore told of in this book, should be
differred unto a long time after, yet he means that even then the utility
and profit of this prophecy was to take place, when as by and by after,
horrible persecutions should be stirred up against the Church by the Roman
Emperors, and even a little before were begun to be stirred up by Nero and
Domitian ( And sending his angel) He teaches by whose ministry this
revelation was brought unto him, that is by an Angel being sent of Christ who
partly by word and partly by signs showed all these things unto him. And
this is no small commendation of this doctrine that Christ sent it from heaven
by an angel. That he calls him self the servant of Christ, it is the same
that the other Apostles do, as Paul, Peter, James and Jude, he means that
he is a servant of Christ, peculierly ordained to the ministry of the Gospel.

Verse. 2. Who bare record of the word of God and of the testimony of Jesus
Christ, and of all things that he saw.

HE procures authority to this prophecy, by the person of him self,
because that like as God has ordained and appointed him to be a preacher of
his gospel, so he has faithfully discharged the duty and office committed
unto him: for these two things are required in a teacher, first to be lawfully
called, least any other should rashly intrude, and thrust in him self, besides
him which is called of the lord, and secondlye to be faithful, that he may
sincerely, diligently and truly execute those matters which are committed unto
him. The Apostle therefore does signify that his faithfulness is already
sufficiently known and approved to the Churches, because it is he which
always here to fore With great faithfulness and constancy, has testified
and professed the word of God and the gospel of Jesus Christ, whereby they
may less doubt but that he will now also deliver and bring a perfect, sound,
and uncorrupted prophetical vision, sent down to him from heaven. So he
says in the end of the gospel which he writ. The same disciple is he which
testifies of these things, and wrote these things, and we know that his
testimonye is true.

Verse. 3. Happy is he that reads, and happy are they that hear the words of
this prophecy and keep those things which are written therein for the time is
at hand.

HE commends this doctrine by the great profit and commodity that it
brings, that it does not for a short time delight those that are studiouse in
the same, with a vain, colored and painted eloquence of words, according to
the manner of profane writings, but it makes the^ altogether happy and
blessed for evermore. Which thing although it may well and truly be spoken of
all the whole sacred scripture and of every book of the same, yet it is
evident that S. John speaks here only of his own prophecy. For that he
says the time is at hand, he admonishes the faithful, if they will take
any fruit thereof, that they ought to give them selves diligently to the
meditation and study of this prophecy, least the perils and dangers now
presently hanging over there heads, they living securely and carelessly, should
oppress the^ unawares. But rather being instructed in the doctrine of this
prophecy, they may be able to stand strongly against all the violent, force,
fraud, and deceit of the adversary. And here is the singular love of God and
of our savior Christ toward his Church commended unto us, over which he has
so provident a care, that the faithful may not only be admonished of the
dangers and evils hanging over there heads, but also yt way and means may be
showed, by which they may not only eschew the evils, but also put them selves
in possession of true and perfect blessedness. If they will diligently
exercise themselves in meditating upon this prophecy, and in keeping and
observing those things that are written and contained in the same, whereby it
shall come to pass, that they may be prepared to receive and resist all the
assaults of Satan, and may quietly triumph and have the victory, even in the
midst of the daungerous^ waves and flouddes of mischief and iniquite.

Verse. 4. John to the seven Churches which are in Asia.

Saint John warned by the holy ghost writes to seven of the most famous
Churches of Asia the lesser, to whose keeping he was commanded to commit the
great treasure of this prophecy, that by there faithful ministry it might be
preserved and kept, and spread over the whole world.

Grace and peace. etc.

ACcording to the custom and manner of the other Apostles, he wishes unto
them grace and peace: Grace that is the free favor of god, that he would
vouchsafe to embrace them with his so tender love and compassion, from whence
flows and springs this peace, that is the happy and prosperouse success of
all things, which god is accustomed to grant to those, whom he does
acknowledge for his children.

From him which is, and which was, and which is to come.

HE craves and desires this grace and peace of him which only can give the
same, that is of the eternal god, which in all ages does remain the self
same and like him self, with who^ (as says saint James) there is no mutatio^ or
change, neither any shadow of alteration, which as he is now, and always
has been, so shall he for ever and ever continue a patron and mighty defender
of his Church.

And from the seven spirits which are before his throne.

IT is the office and work of the holy ghost to seal and confirm grace and
peace in the hearts of the faithful, no marvel it is therefore, though he
desire the same from the holy spirit to be given unto the Churches. But this
does trouble some men, that for one spirit, he says seven spirits, for
howsoever the gifts be diverse, yet one spirit works all in all. 1. Corin.
12. But we must understand yt the Apostle speaks here according to the vision
showed unto him, which he expresses in the fourth chapter and first verse,
where there do appear seven lamps of fire burning before the throne which are
the seven spirits of God, which does no more take away the unity of the holy
ghost, then those fiery tounges, which sat upon every one of the Apostles, in
the second of the Acts. That he places seven spirits before the throne, he
signifies that those heavenly gifts, which are the effects and workinges of
the holy ghost, do descend unto us from no other then from the most high
father of light which is the aucthor and giver of all good things.

Verse. 5. And from Jesus Christ, which is a faithful witness and first
begotten of the dead and prince of the kings of the earth.

Seeing there is but one only mediator between God and man, even Jesus Christ
which alone has pacified his fathers wrath toward us: not without great
cause S. John desires and craves grace and peace at his hands, which has
brought us again into the favor of God, and by his death has established
true and perfect peace, betwixt God and mankind. In that the Apostle in this
place does so beautify and adorn our savior Christ, with diverse excellent
comme^dations of dignity and praise, he does it to this end that the greater
reverence, and aucthorite might be given to this revelation which he received
of Christ. First therefore he calls him a faithful witness, that is one
that testifies the truth, which has been accoustomed to deliver nothing to
his church but that which he has drawn out from the sacred and holy bosom of
his Father: whereupon he him self says, my doctrine is not mine but his that
sent me. He therefore which does deminish the faithfulness and truth of this
his testimony, does accuse the truth it self of untruth and lying, nether
shall his so great blasphemy against the sone of God escape unpunished. To
this end also he is called ye first begotten of the dead, and prince of the
kings of the earth: whereby his most high and souerayngne authority and
power, which he has both over the quick and the dead is approved, as he which
ouercomming death and triumphing over all his enemies, has obtained the chief
Empire and government both in heaven and earth. To whom now being risen and
returned from death, and exalted into the height of glory and majesty, if we
do not give due credit and reverence, we are altogether unworthy to enjoy
any benefit of his death and passion, or upon whom he should bestow and
impart any spark of his glory. Unto him which. etc. when he falls into
mention of the benefits of Christ he cannot withould himself, from celebrating
his grace with worthy praise and commendations, which we know Saint Paul
does almost always, as often as he was drawn into the consideration of the
same grace. And truly we are more then blockish, if at the remembrance of so
great benefits, we be not wholly turned in to thanckes giving and celebrating
of his divine glory. He does also admonish us, that even the only remembrance
of the benefits of Christ ought to suffice among all godly men, that the
authority of this doctrine should be sacred and holy.

Verse. 6. Which loved us and washed us from our sins in his blood, and made
us Kings and priests to god, even his father to him be glory and dominion for
evermore. Amen.

HE appoints the love of Christ to be the beginning of one redemption, which
for this cause is after a meruailouse sort commended unto us, that when we were
his enemies he refused not to wash away all the filthy spots of our sins
even with his own precious blood, and to bring us again into the favor of
God his father, and not this only, but also of wretched miserable, and abject,
bondslaues of Satan, of profane and vnpure contemners of God, by his benefit
he has exalted and lifted us up to a kingly honor and dignity, and preistly
holiness. Seeing he has made us partakers and heyers of his kingdom, and has
consecrated us preistes to offer spiritual sacrifices to god, to him worthelye
be all praise glory and dominion for evermore. Amen. But here the papists
have to consider, which study by all means to deminishe and make light the
benefit of the death of Christ, whereas the Apostell does attribute all yt
may be thereto, as remission of sins, kingly and preistly honor wherewith
Christians are exalted, he acknowlegeth to be received only by Christ.

Verse. 7. Behold he comes with clouds and every eye shall se him yea even they
which have pierced him through, and all kindreds of the earth shall wail
before him. Even so. Amen.

HE proceeds forward in the same argument, that he might get credit to his
prophecy, shewinge that none can falsely and without danger, despise this
doctrine, seeing yt came from him which shall come to judge the quick and the
dead, and shall take vengeance upon the wicked despisers of god. In that he
says he shall come in the clouds, he sets forth the glory of his cominge,
as well to terrefy and beat down the hautye stomachs of the wicked, as to
the lyftinge up of the minds of the godly into the hope of blessed
redemption, as in the. 24. of Math. And every eye shall se him. etc. No man can
fly from his presence, for even the wicked will they nill they shall be brought
into the presence of there judge, and those that would most of all withdraw
and hide themselves, yea they which pierced him, and handled him most
despitefully, shall even against there wills be drawn forth into his
presence. Furthermore all the kindreds of the earth which do so scornfully and
proudly reject and despise all his government, shall then but all to late, with
great sorrow acknowledge, how unhappily they conspired together to reject and
cast of his yoke, whose judgment they are compelled to receive and enter into
vnwillinglye.

Even so Amen. He confirms the former sentence with a double affirmation in
Greake and Hebrew, that he may commend the certeinte of the same. For there is
nothing more easy to profane persons then to deride our hope that we have of
the second coming of Christ and to delight and sport the^ selves, the mean
whiles in their delicate pleasures. But at length they shall prove by
experience to there great hurt, that this promise is not in vain. When as all
the tribes of the earth in desperate manner shall bewail them selves over him.
S. John does also express with how fervent prayers, all the godly ought to
desire the coming of that day, when as all the wicked being thrown down,
Christ shall have his perfect glory.

Verse. 8. I am alpha and Omega, that is the beginning and the ending says the
Lord, which is, and which was and which is to come, the almighty I say.

LAstelye he beautifieth and sets forth the excellency and worthiness of
this prophecy, in this, that it is his which is the beginning, and the end,
eternal and almighty, whom also (that the authority may be the greater)
he brings in speaking in his own person I am the Alpha and Omega, alpha in
the Grecians proverb, which is also in use among latin writers, signifies the
first* and by the same reason Omega signifies the last. The beginning and the
end, of whom all creatures took there beginning, which unless they should be
kept from destruction by his secreat virtue and power, they would every moment
vanish away and consume to nothing, which thing although it should come to
pass, yet no part of his divine majesty should be thereby deminished. For
howsoever all creatures be subject to alteration and change, God alone is free
from all unstableness. It remains therefore if we will be happy and blessed,
yt we cleave wholly to him, because yt about him we shall find nothing but
corruption and destruction. Which is. That is eternal, unchangeable, and the
self same throughout all ages, ( And which is to come) he shows yt he does
not speak of the incomprehensible essence of God, of which the sophisters do
folishly and childishly babble many things, otherwise he should say, And he
which shall be. But when he affirms that he will come, he signifies unto us,
that hereafter he will make manifest his glory even unto men, as well for the
comfort and consolation of his Church, as for the destruction and overthrow of
the wicked. For the lord is said to come, either to defend the faithful, or
else to revenge him self upon the wicked. Almighty we ought not here to dreme of
any idle power which does nothing, but to understand it of such a might as
governs all things with his only will, disposes all things by providence,
and by force and strength brings all things to pas. The meaning is, that
Christ (which is alpha and omega, the beginning and the end, eternal and
unchangeable) is the aucthor of this prophecy, that the faithful may receive
it with reverence, the wicked and ungodly can not despise the same without
there deserved punishment.

Verse. 9. I. John which am also your brother, and companion in tribulation and
in the kingdom and patience which is in Jesus Christ.

NOw he enterith into the narration of the first vision, describing the time,
and place and manner of the same. But it is offensive to some, that he so often
mentions his own name, as though it were not needful for him that declares
so wonderful visions, often to put the faithful in mind, who he is which
writes them, least that they should suspect those things to be but devises of
man's brain, when as they were testified of him whose calling and faith were
sufficiently known to the Church. Which self same thing we know, to be done
often time of the other Prophets, but especially of Daniell which does more
oftener repete his own name then this S. John. Howbeit the great modesty of
ye apostle here apeareth, that when as in many degrees he excelled other, yet
he makes himself equal with the rest, calling himself a brother, and a
partaker of the commune grace of the saints. Far otherwise is it with the
Roman Bishop which even in every trifling question but does nothing else but
ratle out ye popely dignity of the sea Apostolic, and the excellency of his
own holiness. But these three things are to be noted, in which Saint John
says he is a companion, that is in the kingdom, in affliction, and in the
patience of Jesus Christ. He chalingeth therefore unto himself a portion in
afflictions, because it is almost impossible, that any should profess Christ
syncerely, but that Satan will seek to lay manifold troubles upon them: how
much more then if he preach the Gospel: but it is a gloriouse thing to
suffer for Christ. S. John does therefore comfort the godly, that they are not
chastised with any other of Gods scorges, then he him self, whom they knew
to be most tenderly beloved of God. But this is more, that he adds, in the
kingdom, for if we be made like unto Christ in sufferinges, we shall also be
made partakers of his glory: according to that which Paul says, if we
suffer together with him we shall also raygne together with him.

And moreover he sets forth the qualite of Christ's kingedome in this life
to be such, yt although we seem daily to be overwhelmed with adversities and
troubles, yet the majesty of this his kingdom getting the victory, triumphs
over all afflictions. And thirdly that he adioyneth, in patience, he teacech
that troubles and afflicttons do no otherwise profit us to the attayning of
this kingdom, then if we bear them patiently for christ's glory and the
spreading abroad of his gospel In the mean while let us not pas over this,
that he calls it the patience of Christ, which none can have but by his
benefit, that they may be able with a quiet and pacified, yea a merry and
ioyefull mind to bear the cross laid upon there shoulders.

I was in an I Will called Patmos. etc. Now he shows the place, that is a little,
desert, barrain and unpleasant island of the sea Aegium, which is called
Patmos, into which he was banished by the tyrant Domitian, as all histories
agree with one consent.

For the word of God and for the testimony of Jesus. etc. He shows that
the preachinge of the word of God and the Gospel of Jesus, was the cause of
this his banishment, not that he would willingly seek any solitary place their
to dwell in, as now of later time the Monks, the Heremites Anachorts and other
solicarie persons have used to do, for who^ it had been more meter, if they had
been able, or if it had been lawful for them, to have given there diligent
attendance in declaring Gods word and preaching Christ's Gospel, in the
greatest and most famous cities, if they would truly have immitated S. John.

Verse. 10. I was ravished in the spirit on the Lords day. etc.

Now he declares the time when this vision was showed unto him, yt is upon ye
day of the Lord or sunday, which day was kept holy in the assembleies of the
Christians, and S. Paul calls it the first day after the Sabbath. At which
time, I doubt not but that Saint John, even in that great deserte, although he
were absent in body, yet was present in spirit, with the Churches: and with
his godly prayers and meditations, did commend them to the custody and
defense of Christ. That he says he was in the spirit, I understand that he
was ravished from himself, and that his bodily senses in the mean time
rested, that his mind might be more free in beholding those things which the
Lord showed unto him. Here we are taught that the baseness or deformity of
any place, can not let but that the godly mind, may be drawn up into the
secrets of the heavenly glory. John receives visions in the I Will of Patmos,
Peter in the roufe of a tanners house, and afterward also in prison: and Paul
in a torn ship, for to such things, neither does the excellency of the
place any thing availl, nether the unworthiness thereof any thing hinder.

And I heard behind me a great voice as it were of a trumpet saying. etc.
That suddenly he heard a great voice, even as it were of a loud sounding
trumpet, the lord would have him first stricken down and amassed with the
strangeness and greatness of the thing it self, that he might be the more
attentively prepared, to receive those things which by and by after, were
revealed unto him. To the same end also. I refer this, that he heard the
voice behind his back. For those things are more sudden and more unawares,
which come upon us behind our backs, then those which come before our faces.

Verse. 11 I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last.

LEast that S. John should stand in doubt whether this vision were delivered
unto him by divine inspiration or no, Christ testifies with plain and clear
voice, that he is eternal God, the first and the last, according to with
sense, the lord in the 41. and 44. Chap. of Esaias calls him self the first
and the last.

That which thou see, write in a book, and send it unto the seven Churches
which are in Asia, etc. That he might not think that he was made partaker of
this divine revelation only for his own sake, (as saint Paul which was taken
up even into the third heaven and heard things which it was not lawful to
utter) but that he might make it commen to ye whole Church, he is commanded
to gather together in a book those things which he saw, and to send it to the
seven Churches of Asia, both that they might be keepers of this prophetical
book, and also that they might witness to the whole world, that it was
written by the ministry of that same Apostle, of whose faith and plain dealing
they had sufficient proof.

Verse. 12. And I turned back to see the voice that spoke with me, and when I
was turned I saw seven golden candelstickes.

WHen as he saw nothing before him, and yet was commanded to write those
things which he saw, he turned back that he might see him which uttered this
voice, which seemed also to talk with him even as familierly as with one whom
he knew. And when he was turned, he saw seven golden candelstickes, which
because Christ himself afterward expounds to be seven Churches, we need
not any longer rest in them. The like is showed to Zachary in the 4. Chapt. of
his prophecy, excepting this, that Zachary saw but one for the whole Church,
and John did see seven for many particular churches, which were as parts and
members of the whole. But how the sign does represent the thing signified, we
will afterward declare.

Verse. 13. And in the midst of the candelstickes one like unto the son of
man.

IT is not greatly material whether we understand, that S. John did know the
outward form and shape of our savior Christ in the Angel which he had seen,
or whether yt speaking simply according to ye manner of the old Prophets, he
means that he appeared having taken upon him yt form and shape of a man, so
that we hold this for certentie, that he represented the person and figure of
Christ, which manifested him self to be seen. For he is always co^uersant in
the midst of his church and does govern it with his spirit, and has a
continual care over the same. In vain therefore we seek Christ any other
where, then in the church, in vain also do we seek a Church founded upon any
other then Christ. What can the Roman bishops here answer, which boast them
selves to be Christ's vicares as though he were absent, whom nevertheless
John saw in the midst of the ca^delsticks, because he is always present
with his Church, and chalengeth the whole government thereof to him self
alone.

Clothed with a garment down to the feet. etc. Because this kind of garment
was such as pertayned to the priests, I do not mislike that some do
interpret it to signify in this place, the pureness and innocence of the
priesthode of Christ: although in my judgment it is more simple to say, that
it declares a certain rare dignity, and reverend majesty of the person
that wears it.

And gyrded about the papps with a golden gyrdle. The priests were also girded
about with a gyrdle yt they might ye more spedely execute there office, for a
large garment hanging louse about one, is a let or hinderaunce to those which
should spedely finishe any work they go about. Christ therefore is gyrded
about with a goulde^ gyrdel that we should not think he s^andeth in the
midst of the candelstickes like a dead Image, or as an idle loker on, but as
one that is girded up, and so most redely prepared to execute those necessary
business, which do apperteyne unto him in the government of the Church. Which
readiness truly is more preciouse then any gold, and is such an ornament to
his office and function, that not unworthily, it might well be signified unto
us by a golden gyrdle. But in that he has his breast gyrded about and not his
loins, some think it to be done for this cause, that he has no need, as
mortal wreches have, to repress with gyrding about, praue and wicked
affections from which he was free, but his breast only replenishede with
wisdom, and love toward his servant is gyrded about with a golden
gyrdell, to signify his great diligence.

Verse. 14. His head and his hear were white as wolle, and as snow.

BY this shining brightness of his head and his hear, it is necessary that we
understand his wonderful glory and dignitye, which far surmounteth the
condition of men, which nevertheless shines in the manhood of Christ. A show
whereof he gave, when he was tra^sfigured in the mount, when his garments
shined whiter then any snow.

And his eyes were as a flame of fiere, etc. Some do refer this to
wrathfulnesse and anger, wherewith he is incensed and styrred up against his
enemies. But I think rather yt they signify the exceeding quickenes and
sharpenes of his sight, wherewith even as fiere he perceth through all things,
so yt nothing can be hid from his presence, no not the secrets and hid
corners of y^ heart. In vain therefore do hypocrites hope that they can keep
them sel^es close from his sight, whose fierye eyes do pearce through eue^
unto all the depest secrets. And such an head yt behooves ye church dispersed
over the face of the whole world to have, which being furnished with fiery eyes,
may look round about into all parts of the same, and find out the subtle and
pryuie practices and deceiptes of Satan, and when they are found out can
auoyed them.

Verse. 15. And his feet were like unto fine brass as though they burned in a
furnace.

THis similitude does express the constancy and vnweryed study and diligence
of Christ in cherishing and helping his Church, when with these feet he
walks continually in the midst of the candelstickes. There is also noted
unto us, the beauty and perfection of his ways, because he has feet of
metal tried and polished with fire.

And his voice was as the sound of many waters. First he compared his voice
to a trompet, now to the noise of many waters, and afterward also he will
compare it to thonder, and not without Just cause, which sounded through the
whole world in spreading abroad of the Gospel. Which that we may pass over
other things, is of such virtue and force, that the dead shall hear it out of
there graves. Whereby the shamful insensible blockishnesse of those me^ is the
more to be abhorred, whose ears being daily stricken with the sound thereof,
do either scarcelye at the length hear but a little, or else are altogether
deaf.

Verse. 16. And he had in his right hand seven stars.

THE stars he himself does interpret to be Aungells, yt is pastors of the
Churches, which otherwise are subject to innumerable perils and dangers, but
that the Lord holds them in his right hand, least that they should fall, and
with great care he defends those, to whom he has committed the charge over
his Church. Here the true pastors are admonished, that they ought not to leave
of from doing there duty, for any labors, crosses, or afflictions, for
howsoever Satan and his ministers shall raise up false accusations against
them, and threaten imprisonments, torments and death also it self, yet they
ought manfully to contemn all these, because he himself has a care over there
health and safegarde, out of whose hand, no force or power is able to draw
them.

And out of his mouth went a sharp two edged sword. It is very usual in
the scriptures to compare the word of God unto a two edged sword which s.
Paul calls the sword of the spirit. With this sword the faithful are armed
against all the violence, crafts and subtiltye of the devil, the mighty
force whereof the Apostell does notably describe in the 4. Chapter to ye
Hebrews. With the same Christ fyghteth against his enemies. And we may not
take this sword any where else, then proceeding out of his mouth, for what soever
came not forth of the holy mouth of Christ, is not in any wise to be taken for
ye word of God.

And his face shone even as the sun in his strength. etc. The same that the
Su^ne is to ye whole world, even the same is Christ to his church, which being
but only one, and placed in heaven, yet nevertheless, with his shining
brightness he lighteneth ye whole church being a stranger upon earth, for truly
he is ye sun of righteousness, which so soon as he shines in the consciences
of the godly, straighte way drives away all the darkness of the devil, and
fills the mind with most joyful light, whose brightness to cover with the
clouds of darkness the devil laboreth all in vain, which is so far of,
that they should be to able obscure and darken his clear countenance, that
they being dispersed and driven away, his glory does appear out of them far
more clear and bright.

Verse. 17. And when I saw him I fell at his feet even as dead.

Man's infirmity can not bear the beholdinge of Gods glory, but straight
way it falls down. No marvel it is therefore though S. John beholding
Christ in such brightenes, fell down as it were dead before his feet. For
which cause his word is more to be reverenced, where with he allureth us so
gently and familierly to come unto him, which if he should show forth but even
the least shadow of his heavenly glory, we should not be able to abide it, but
should fall down upon the earth as dead.

Then he laid his right hand upon me saying. etc. The Lord lifts up his
servant that lay prostrate upon the earth wc his touching and with his voice.
For after that God has humbled us to his obedience he comfort us again by
his mercy. We are here taught that we shall lie dead at the beholdinge of the
heuenlye glory, except Christ reach forth his hand unto us, and with his
comfortable voice take from us our fear.

Fear not I am the first and the last. etc. He shows that they need not to
fear, to whom Christ which is the first and the last does vouchsafe to be
merciful.

I live and was dead. etc. And which lives for this end yt he may for ever
save those that come unto god by him. From whom it is so far of that death
should take away his life, that contrariewise being conqueror of death he has
attained eternal life. This particle Ame^ is added for the greater
confirmation.

I have the keys of hell and of death. etc. He says that he has obtained the
high government and empire over eternal death, that he might declare unto us,
that they need not to be afraid of death or hell: whom Christ has taken into
his custody and keeping: on the contrary part, that they shall be adjudged to
eternal punnishments which become enemies to him, which has the keys of hell
and death.

Verse. 19. Write therefore the things which thou have seen and the things
which are, and the things which shall be fulfilled hereafter.

HE commands that he should diligently commit to writing the visions showed
unto him: of which he declares some of them to be descriptions of things
even then present, as those which did peculierly pertayne to those seven
Churches: and some of them to express the state and condition of the church
even unto the worlds end.

Verse. 20. And the mystery of the seven stars which thou saw in my right
hand and the seven golden candelsticks. The seven stars are the angels of the
Churches and the seven candelstickes which thou saw are seven Churches. etc.

CHrist is the best interpreter of all mysteries, he expounds therefore the
mystery of the seven stars and of the seven canstelstickes teachinge that by
the stars is signified the Ministers of the Churches, which ought to shine
before the Churches in ye light of heavenly doctrine, and as stars to take
all their light from the sun which is Christ. By the golden candelstickes is
meant the churches which God has chosen, to sustain the light of his gospel
in the midst of ye darkness of this world, as in an other place the Church is
called the pillar of truth. The candelsticks are of gold, that we may know
in what price they are with God. Moreover here, we learn that without the
Churches which are the candelstickes to bear the light, we shall find
nothing in this world but horrible darkness. Let us beseech Christ therefore,
that he will for ever keep this light among us, and that he will draw us out
of the darkness of this world and bring us to the light of his heavenly
glory, to whom be all praise and honor for ever and ever. Amen.

The second Chapter.
Verse. 1. Unto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus write. etc.

THat the Churches might understand how proffitable this prophecy should be to
the ages following, and therefore they might receive it more reverently, and
keep it more religiouslye, and spread it abroad more diligently: the lord
would instruct them by some experience in them selves. The Church of Ephesus was
as it were the mother city of all Asia. Not that it had any authority over
the rest (for there was no difference perceived to be among the golden
Candelstickes) but yt it was gathered together in the most famous city and
therefore ought chiefly to give forth her light by example of doctrine and
manners. And he writes to the Angels of the Churches that is to the Ministers
and Pastors, not that those admonitions were necessary to them only but
because that, from them whether it be good or evil that proceaded, it flowed
into the whole body of the Church whereof they had the government, like as
also in the Church whatsoever things were well or evil, they ought to be
imputed either to there diligence or negligence.

These things says he that holds the seven stars in his right hand, and
walks in the midst of the seven golden Candelstickes.

THat the pastors of the Church might know how greatly they ought to esteem
these admonitions, Christ foretells yt they all proceeded from him, which a
little before was perfectly described in the vision. As touching the pastor of
Ephesus, he writes, that it is the commandment of him that holds the seven
stars. etc. That is, which by his ayed and succor does defend as well the
Churches them selves, as there pastors, and by his provident care, does keep
them in safetye, that he may acknowledge it to be his benefit, that being free
from so many evils, and adorned and decked with so many virtues, he should be
praised of Christ.

Verse. 2. I know thy works, and thy labor, and patience.

BEcause nothing is more easy to hipocrites then to boast of faith which
outwardly does not appear by any works, or else does glory in works that are
only colored and deceyrable, he forwarneth all me^, that whatsoever faith
they boast themselves, in outward profession to have, that he thoroughly sees
and knows what there works are (. And thy labor) It seems that the
diligent care of this pastor in governing the Church was very great, that the
Lord does count it worthy of such praise. And truly this diligence is most
necessary for the minister which has the care of the Lords flock committed
unto him, to which also he ought to join patience, because it can not be, that
any can be able to execute diligently the office committed unto him, but that
Satan will devise, and stere up diverse persecutions and troubles against him,
which that he may bear with a strong and stable mind, he has need to be
armed with patience.

And thou can not forbear them which are evil, and have examined them which
say they are Apostels and are not, and have found them liers. etc. He does also
commend the zeal of this pastore, in driuinge Wicked men out of the church,
and such as would not be brought to a better mind, and not only those which
showed them selves openly to be such, but even those also, which showed them
selves under the honorable name of Apostels, when as in the mean time they
were grievous plagues to the churches, of which sort are said to be, Nicholas,
Ebion, Cherinthus, Marcion, Manicheus, which striued and labored with there
new opinions, to defyle the puretie of the gospel, whose subtilties and
deceiptes by his diligence, and wisdom being found out, he perceived, and when
they were perceived he strongly resisted them.

Verse. 3. And thou have suffered and have patience and for my names sake have
labored and have not faynted.

Although he could not bear there wickedness, yet he was constrained to suffer
the troubles and persecutions which they stirred up against him. Which because
he bare pacie^tly, he declared that he did not boast of patience, but that he
had patience in deed. Lastly that he would willingly sustain so great labor
for Christ's names sake, and yt he never fainted as over come with any griefs,
it is sufficient proof, that he was the servant of Christ, and not of his
own belly, a pastor of the church, and not an heyering.

Verse. 4. Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee because thou have left thy
first charity.

THere is nothing thoroughly perfect in this corrupt nature of man. For he which
a little before seemed to want nothing that should make to the praise and
commendation of a good pastor, is now accused, that he has left his former
love. For when as we ought to profit and go forward daily in the study of
godliness, and charity toward our neighbors, he went not forward, but into yt
which was worse. For he had cast of much of his former burninge zeal,
which nevertheless, he ought daily more and more to have increased. But it
may be demanded how his zeal should first be commended, and his vnweried
exercise of labouringe. It may be answered, that his zeal was eue^ then also
worthy commendation, although it were much more fervent before, and it may come
to pass, yt one may he endued with a heroical spirit against the ungodly, and
yet not love his brethren as he ought to do, for these two I join together,
piety toward God and love toward our brethren, because nether of them is
without the other.

Verse. 5. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen and repent and do the
first works, or else I will come against thee shortly and will remove thy
candelsticke out of his place except thou Amend.

THE disease being found out and showed, although never so secreat, he
counsels and persuades to lay to it ye medicine of repentance, which that
it may be healthful, he commands him two things. First to way and consider
from how exelle^t godliness he is cast down, out of what blessed state and
condition he is fallen, and whether at length (except he take heed in time) of
necessity he must fall, which suffers love by little and little to die in him
self. The other is that he slatter not him self, like as hipocrites do in
this dangerous estate, nether seek colors or clokes to hide and excuse his
fault, but without delay recover his former love, and do his former works,
which things if he neglect, he shall shortly prove, how dangerous a thing
it is, to despise the frendely admonitions of Christ, when as his candelsticke
being removed out of his place, he may look for nothing but horrible
darkness yea more then the darkness of Egypt, to come upon him. This place
does admonish us how sharply God will punish the neglecte of profiting and
goinge forward in godliness. But it seems contrary to all reason, that for one
man's offense, ye whole church should be punished with so extreme and deadly a
punnishment, but we ought to remember that this evil flowing out of the
pastor him self, did run over the whole Church. For such as the ministers
of the Church are such also we see the people for the most part to be.

Verse. 6. But this thou have that thou hate the works of the Nycholaites
which I also have. ^c.

HE means him to have deserved, that even out of hand he should execute
sharp punishment upon him, but that he might not think his former virtues to
be defrauded of there just reward, he shows that there is a time of
repentance granted, specially for this cause, that he fully hated the
doctrine and works of the Nicholaites which the Lord also pronou^ceth to be
worthy of his hatred. Whith works if we may believe ancient writings, were
wicked and foul pollutions and defilinges of Matrimony, and prostitutiones of
there wives, which they would have in common among them and afte^warde Christ
callethe it fornication, and eatinge of things offered to Idols. But the
papists shall here unfitly move any question as concerning the deserts of
works.

When as also the Lord does seem often to give some reward to the works of the
wicked, which have but an outward show of goodness as the feigned repentance of
Achabe, which he does for this cause that he may show how greatly those which
are good works in deed do please him, much more the virtues of the godly ought
to be accepted of him which is ye aucthor of all goodness, not that they
deserve any such thing, seeing they be imperfect, but because through his
fatherly favor, they are taken in good part.

Verse. 7. He that has ears to hear, let him hear what the spirit says to
the Churches. etc.

LEast any should think these things to be spoken only to the pastors of the
Churches, the holy ghost speaks generaly to all, as many as have there ears
opened to hear what the spirit says, not only to the Aungells, but also to
the Churches them selves. Whereby we do well understand, that these
admonitio^s are not private to some particular persons, but common to all. For
those that shall sin after the the same manner, shall be rewarded with the like
punishment, like as also the same rewards are appointed to those that covet to
follow the same virtues which are here commended.

To him that over comes I will give to eat of the tree of life which is in
the midst of the paradise of God. etc. He teaches that the godly have a
great strife, with this world and with the devil, but all labors are to be
set light by, in consideration of the inestimable greatness of the reward. To
the conquerers therefore in this battaill, the Lord which is our governor in
the same, will grant them to eat of the fruit of the tree of eternal life,
which is in the midst of the heavenly paradise, from the use whereof we know
that our first parents for there sin were justly excluded. Here we are
taught that it is Christ, that opens the paradise unto us which was shute,
which freely gives unto us eternal life, whereof the tree of life was a
sacrament, and yet, not unto such as are slothful and idle, but to those that
fight valiantly against the enemies, and in the end by his virtue and power
overcome the^. We are here also put in mind, what a prouocatio^ to stir us up
to contend, the greatness of the reward set forth to those that overcome, ought
to be, when as we daily see the greatest labors to be borne for the obteyning
of the smallest benefits of this corruptible life.

Verse. 6. And unto the Angel of the Church of the Smyrnians write, these
things says he which is the first and the last which was dead and is alive.
etc.

SMyrna was ye chefest city of Ionia, therefore he was comanded to send the
second epistle to the Bishop of the same, this bishop as it seems was a right
faithful Christian, when as the Lord counted nothing in him worthy
reprehension, not that he was without sin, but that as much as man's
weakness could, he was free from heynouse offenses, and a faithful
administratour of the office and charge committed unto him. Which was down so
much the more, because the Lord had exercised him with continual temptations.
For we se that idleness bredeth carelesnes and securite. He had need therefore
of great consolation, because he was oppressed with many adversities. Christ
therefore uses such a kind of preface, which should be most fit to confirm
and strengthen him, that he is the first and the last, that is eternal God,
therefore though he should suffer the most grieuouse affliction of all, which
is death it self, yet Christ which has overcome death, and hell, lives for
ever, not for him self but for us.

Verse. 9. I know thy works and tribulation and poverty, but thou art rich.
etc.

THat his works are allowed of Christ, it ought to be as much as all
rewards, and a most notable comfort, for God can never forsake, those whose
works he testifies do please him. But he proceadeth foreward, and first he
says that he does know his affliction and poverty. The Devil can lay nothing
upon the godly, rashly or without the determinat counsel of God the lord
knows both. The weight of afflictions and the strength of his servants,
wherefore he will not suffer them to be tempted above that they are able to
bear, but he will show a way out, even of the midst of the maze of
temptations. He is not ignorant how heavy a burden poverty is, but yet he
says that this pastor is rich because he had an incorruptible treasure laid
up in heaven. The riches of this world are thorns, by which the immortal
seed is choked, therefore we ought not to be grieved for the want of them.
And it is very like that by these two things, that is by affliction and
poverty, he was holden in his office, least he should wax wanton, or be taken
in the deceitfulnes of the world.

And I know the blasphemy of those that call them selves Jews and are not
but are the synagoge of Satan. etc. Thirdly he adds the sclaunder wherewith
the wicked did assail him, which falselye called them selves Jews, that is the
Church of God when as there wickedness did bewray them, not to be the holy sede
of Abraham, but ye profane synagog of satan, and as it is said in the history
of Sufanna, ye seed of Chanaan and not of Judah. Truly a noble mind and a clear
conscience of all evils bears this cauilinge slaunderings most greuouslye,
but this ought to suffice the godly that Christ pronounces them blessed, which
for his cause have all poisoned tounges armed against the^. And here he
admonishes that this blasphemy is not spronge up from good men, but it was
raised by wicked hypocrites, whose abominations were detested and abhorred of
all the godly. This place does teach, that it is profitable to the godly
pastors of the church, to be tried by afflictions, by pouertye, and sometime
also by infamy and sclaunderinge, raised up by the subtiltye of Satan and his
ministers, by which there faith, constancy, patience, and innocencye, is
better proved and tried, then if they should live in happy estate all there
life long not oppressed with any adversities.

Verse. 10. Fear none of those things that thou shall suffer, be hold it
shall come to pas that the devil shall cast some of you into prison that ye
may be tried.

AFter that he has testified that he knows his labors, least that he might
think any thing to come upon him by chance or at the will and pleasure of the
adversaries, that he might perceive he was strengthened by the aied of god,
that hitherto he did not faint in the troublesome waves of afflictions: he does
instruct and arm him against the storms following against the most bitter
hatred of Satan, which he should shortly tai^ of by experience. For the mad
rage of the devil should proceed so far, that he would cast certain of his
flock into prison, for the testimony of the gospel, but he shows that the
divine providence of god would so moderate this his furious rage, that this
tribulation should not bring destruction to the children of god which Satan
sought to bring to pas, but a trial which is profitable for them. Here we se
by whose leadinge the enemies of the Church rage in cruelty against the
faithful, that is by the inspiration of the Devil, which has the
governance of all there works, and also works in them. We are put in mind
with what kind of weapons and armoure we ought to be furnished against this
spiritual adversary, that is with spiritual armor.

And ye shall have tribulation ten days. etc. The number of ten in the
scriptures, according to the phrase of the Hebrew tongue, is the number of
fullness or perfection. As in Genes. 31. Number. 14. Job. 29 He declares
therefore unto them, that so long as they remain in this world, they must not
hope to have an end of there afflictions. Nevertheless he mitigateth the
grief of the continaunce thereof, in that he notes that time, by days and
not by years, as if he should say, for a few days, whiles ye live in this
world ye shallbe subject to troubles and afflictions, which being finished ye
shall inioye eternal blessedness in heaven.

Be faithful unto death and I will give the a crown of life. etc. We see now
what shield he counsels us to hold out against all these weapons, that is
faith, which he commands us to keep constant, and stable even unto death
that it may be adorned with the crown of immortality, He teaches that
afflictions are not to be suffered heauiely or sorowfully, throughout the short
course of this life, when as they are to be rewarded with perpetual felicite,
and that death is manfully to be suffered for Christ, which eternal life shall
recompense, reproach and ignominye is not to be feared, which does bring us to
the crown of glory.

Verse. 11. Let him that has an ear hear what the spirit says to the
Churches he that ouercometh shall not be hurt of the second death. etc.

Again the holy ghost does witness that this is a voice which all the godly
should diligently way and consider: He that overcomes shall not be hurt of
the second death, that is he shall be delivered from everlasting damnation.
The first death is of the body only, the second both of body and soul. A
wonderful comfort that they which be tormented with sundry kinds of
afflictions in this world, after death has finished this wretched life, shall
live for ever in most blessed estate, and voyed of all fear of death. For this
mortal life is eue^ for this cause miserable, yt it is in fear of death
always hanging over it, not only of the body but much more of the soul,
except in those in which by ye death of Christ, the stinge of death being
broken, they are called to the hope of blessed, and immortal life.

Verse. 12. And to the Angel of the Church which is at Pergamus write, this
says he which has the sharp sword with two edges.

PErgamus was the chief city of Phrygia, to whose bishop the third epistle
is sent, with this preface, yt it was sent from him, which has the two edged
sword, whose doctrine can suffer no mingling of profane opinions, but cutteth
of all perverse doctrines from the Church, as perniciouse plagues to the same.

Verse. 13. I know thy works. etc.

FIrst Christ does knowledge, and confess that he does allow, whatsoever
things are well done of him, and yet this does not hinder, that he should
less freely show, what soever he notes in him worthy reprehension.

And where thou dwell, even where Satan's throne is and thou kepest my name.
etc. How much more grieuouse the perils were which compassed him in on every
side, so much more commendable was his faith and the invincible constancy of
his mind. He dwelled wheare the throne of Satan was, that is, where all
godliness was trodden down, and ungodliness bare all the swaye. Where as Satan
sitting as it were in the stately seat of his kingdom ruled all things
according to his own pleasure. In that place, as it was necessary that all
wickedness should abou^d, so likewise the greatest cruelty and tyranny. It was
an argument of a couragiouse and heroical spirit, and a plain proof of
divine constancy, in so great dangers, to hold a free and sound confession
of the faieth.

And have not denied my faith even in those days when Antipas my faithful
martyr was slain among you where Satan dwells. etc. He testifies that the
constancy of this confession of his faith, was not broken by any denial, no
not even then when persecution did most of all rage against the church, that
is, even at that time when as the faithful martyr of Christ Antypas was
cruelly murdered, with those which being led and governed by Satan like
ravening wolves do cruelly rage against the flock of Christ. This place does
teach that whersoeuer c^uelty and tyranny does rage against the children of
God, there is neither the seat of Christ nor of the Apostels, but of Satan, as
it is in the Church of Rome. Moreover that denial of faith, although it be in
extreme dangers, is not permitted to christians, as the false Nychodemits
mainteyne. And lastly what honorable mention Christ makes of his martyr
which was slain, that we should not doubt how precious the death of them is
to the Lord, to whom it is granted, by there death to glorify God.

Verse. 15. But I have a few things against thee.

CHrist does not keep close that which was wanting in him that is to say the
zeal which he had commended in the pastor of Ephesus, that he could not suffer
the wicked, and specially the Nicholaites whose doctrine also the lord
testifies that he hates, this pastor of Pergamus did not so manfully and
stoutlye resist such kind of persons.

Because thou have there, them that maintain the doctrine of Balaa^, which
taught Balac to put a stumbling block before the children of Israel, that they
should eat of things sacrifised to Idols and commit fornication. etc. That
he might make those men more to to be abhorred he compares there doctrine,
with the doctrine of the old false Prophet Balaam which for rewards sake,
taught and instructed Balac, with what engines the health and safeguard of the
Israelites might he overthrown, that is, that by the whorishe women of the
Madianites they might be enticed to fornication and idolatrye, which came so
to pas, as we read in Numery 14 and 25. and the Nicholaites did teach ye same
things, that is to have wives in common and without any difference to eat
those things that were offered to Idols, whereby it is gathered, that as they
were given to foul pleasures of the flesh, so also couetously minded, which
for filthy ^ukers sake taught those things yt were not mete. The pastors are
here admonished that they ought not to wincke at the aucthors and teachers of
errors, and false doctrine no not even then, when as persecution is most
cruel and bitter, for it is great danger, tha^ the poison should spread
further abroad, and devour the whole and sincere sheep of Christ.

Verse. 16. But be converted, or else I will come unto the shortly and will fight
against them with the swoorde of my mouth. etc.

WE must needs confess that he had heynousely sinned, that he should be called
to repentance, and that under this condition, that except he should spedely
return in to the right way, the Lord himself will fight against them, and
^lea them with the sword of his mouth. For this is the force and strength of
his word, that those which it does not bring to a better mind it makes
subject to eternal curse. But here the question may be asked, what this did
pertayne to the pastor of Pergamus which was of a right judgment in the faith,
if the Lord justly punish the Nicholaites being heretics. I answer that the
Lord comprehends him in the number of the same persons, so long as he shall
not leave of to communicate with them in there sins, by favoring, and
wickinge at the same. For he will require there blood at his hands, if he
shall be negligent in doing his office, either in correcting, or driving them out
of the Church.

Verse. 17. He that has an ear to hear let him hear what the spirit says
to the Churches. etc.

HE does always repeat this, that we may know, that it is the purpose of the
holy ghost to set forth this doctrine not for one man or one Church only
but generallye for all men.

To him that overcomes I will give to eat manna that is hid and will give
him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no man knows
saving he that receives it. etc. Like as he threteneth punishment to the
dispisers of his word, so also he promises reward to the faithful that shall
overcome all temptations: that being made partakers of the heavenly table,
they shall be satisfied with angels bread. Not with that manna which there
fathers did eat forty years in the wilderness and yet are dead, but with
that living bread which came down from heaven, and gives eternal life to as
many as shall eat it. Of which the former manna was but a figure and shadow.
And he seems to allude to that manna which was hid in the arc, which being
kept by the commandment of God, remained many hundred years uncorrupted, when
as that notwithstanding which the Israelites did eat, being kept but unto the
next day would putt^^ye and slincke. A white stone, in election of officers
did assign him, which should be made a magistrate. By this white stone thefore
the Lord does signifye, what great honor he will be stowe upon him, which
shall overcome the vain enticementes of this world. By the name written in
it, which none does understand, but he which receaueth the stone, I understand
that by the earnest of the spirit shall be sealed in his heart, the full
assurance of eternal life, of which every one is privy to him self alone.
He does promise therefore, not only of the hiden manna plenty and fullness,
but also everlasting tranquillity of mind, through the feling of Gods mercy.
The new name signifies the grace of regeneration, that a new name may agree to
a new man. Woe be to our cowardlye sluggishnes, if pleasing our selves in the
vain pleasurs of this world we either despise or little esteem so ample
rewards, and like to the Israelites, desire flesh to be given us insteede of
manna, and being called to the dignity of the children of God, we had rather
serve in Egipte, in most miserable bondage.

Verse. 18. And unto the Angel of the Church of the Thyatirian^, write this
says the son of God, which has his eyes like unto a flame of fire, and his
feet are like fine brass. etc.

HE is commanded to write the fourth epistle to ye pastor of the Church which
is at Thyatira a city of Lydia. He makes this preface that the son of God
is the aucthor of this Epistle, from whose fiery eyes no spotte or blemish of
the Church can be hid, whose feet being like fine brass, do signify the
perfection of his ways, neither do they admit any forged myxtures.

Verse. 19. I know thy works and thy charity, and service, and faith, and thy
patience. etc.

THere are many virtues commended in him, but yet not without some spotte of
negligence. Very properly and fitly he joins service to charity, and
patience to faith. For if we love our brethren with unfeigned love, we shall not
be grieved to do the duetyes of charity toward them. And if we have a lively
faith in God, we will for his glories sake, suffer patiently all the calamities
which he shall lay upon us.

And thy works. etc. which sprung and flowed out of these virtues, faith in
God and love toward our neighbors. It was not a bare and empty name of
faith and charity, but he was endued with true faith which works by charity.

And the last are more then the first. etc. This does almost excede the other
praises, and commendations, that he had not left his former love, as the
pastor of Ephesus had, but the study of godliness did increase in him daily
more and more. Which thing although it be straightly required of all men, yet we
find but few which do not the contrary, that is that either they profit not
in godliness at all, or else are changed into worse. We must therefore have great
care to imitate and follow this Church and the pastor of the same, that we may
do our endeavor, that the procedinges may not only be agreeable to the
beginninges, but also excel the same.

Verse. 20. Notwithstanding I have a few things against the, that thou
sufferrest that woman Iezabell which calls her self a prophetuse to teach
and to deceive my servants, to make them commit fornication and to eat
meat offered to Idols. etc.

THis pastor is reproved, for his neclect of ecclesiastical displine, that
he did not put to silence, those prattling women which taught wicked things.
Whereby we gather, that it is the office of the minister, to repress the
insolent pride of those which arrogantly take upon them the office of teachinge
not being called thereto by the Church, much more it perteyneth to them, to
repress false Prophets, which set forth there perverse opinions. Like as this
minister is here first reprehended, that he suffered a woman, whether she were
but one, or whether they were more, to teach, which is not agreeable to the
comlines of ecclesiastical discipline: and after, that he did bear with her
teaching so wicked things. And he calls her Iezabell because that according
to the example of the wicked wife of Achab, she deceived the people and seduced
them into errors. Which although she pretended to have a spirit of prophecy
in here impieties, yet she is known by this, that she feigned new revelations,
to establish the damned doctrine of the Nicholaites. For she taught with these
Nicholaites, these things, to commit fornication and to eat meat offered
to Idols. This was no small necligence of the pastor, that he suffered the
servants of God, the sheep of Christ, by his carelesnes to fall hedlonge into
so deape a dongeon of errors. We may note here the craftiues of satan, which
that he may make his false stuff sailable among men, invented new
revelations contrary to the word of God. So Simon shows of on Selen,
Apelles of Philemena, Montanus of Prisca and Maximilla, the Papists have there
Brigites, and in our age also they suborne certain prophesing wenches, as now
of late in Kent a certain nun named Elizabeth Barton, all of them that they
may defile the pure doctrine of the Gospel, set forth in the holy writings of
the Apostles with new and vnpure opinions, under the show of heavenly
revelations. Such pestilent sores as these are diligently to be eschewed.

Verse. 21. And I gave her space to repent of her fornication and she repented
not. etc.

IT is meruail that the most mighty God would not straitway strike down with
thunder these great blasphemies and the Aucthores of the same, so sone as they
were brought forth, but his gentleness is wonderful, by which he grants a
time of repentance even to such persons, which when they shall despise, as it
is said this arrogante woman did. He reco^penseth his slackenes, with
increasing the punnishement.

Verse. 22. Behold I will cast her into a bed, and them that commit
fornication with her into great affliction except they repent them of there
works. etc.

HE threteneth not her only, but those also which willingly apply there
corrupt ears to hear her adulterate doctrine, that except they repent in
time they shall be taught by most sharp punishments, that it is no light
matter or such as shall escape unpunished, to defile the heavenly doctrine with
these deuilish devises. By the bed he himself expounds to be mente great
affliction, and the Metaphor does fitly agree, for as adulterers have beds
serving for there filthy plesures, which they esteem as the greatest delights,
so the Lord will cast the^ into a bed of the greatest miseries, out of which
they can not rise without extreme and final destruction.

Verse. 23. And I will kill her children with death, and all the Churches shall
know that I am he which search the remes and heart and I will give to every
one of you according to his works. etc.

THe disciples of the prophets are called there sons. This woman therefore
which chalinged to her self the name of prophetisse had her disciples which
are here called her children. These the Lord does adiudge to death, and
pronou^ceth that he will punish them most sharply and extremely. That it may
be made manifest to all Churches, that no hipocrisy can deceive Christ, which
perceth even unto the deep and secret thoughts of the reins and heart. All men
peradventure will acknowledge this in voice and words, but yet many do so
favor and flatter them selves in gross disimulation that they hope that they
can auoyed Gods judgment, and therefore to themselves, they let lose the
bridle to all ungodliness. But when god shall perform, yt which he has
promised, that he will render to every man according to his works, then they
shall perceive how horrible a thing it is to reject the grace offered unto
the^ and to continue in there accustomed crooked path of wickedness obstinatly
unto the end. But of the deserts of good works here can nothing be gathered,
for this far differs, that God will give to every man according to his
works, from this that the papists defend, that God does respect the merits
of works in justifying a man.

Verse. 24. And unto you I say the rest of them of Thyatyra as many as have no
this learning neither have known the depenes of Satan as they term it I will
put upon you none other burden.

IT appears that there were many in this Church which did not only not
favor this wicked and deuilishe doctrine but also by all means did oppugn
and resist the same. Those Christ does not charg in the same fault with the
rest, but does only exhort them, that they suffer not the simplicite of there
faith to be corrupted with any fained inventions of new revelations, howsoever
the aucthors of the same boast nothing else but the deep mysteries of God,
which nevertheless rather deserve to be called the secrets of Satan. Except
peradventure they them selves called the secreates of there knowledge the
depthes of satan, as the words pretend, which comes all to one end. Truly
Paul had respect to an other thing, when he said that the deep cogitations
of Satan were not unknown to him.

Verse. 25. But that which ye have already, hold fas^ till I come. ^^.

HE warns them to be content with the doctrine delivered unto them from the
Apostles, and to admit no new opinions, but that they keep the same even unto
his coming again, and to reverence it as sacred and holy. Whatsoever
therefore the Roman Antichrist and other Heretics strive to bring into the
Church, which is manifest not to have been delivered to the Churches from the
Apostles, we may strongly reject it, as an other burden wherewith the Lord will
not have us to be laden.

Verse. 26.27. For whosoever overcomes and keeps my works to the end, to him
will I give power over nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of iron and
as the vessels of a potter shall they be broken to shyuers.

HE shows who they be which in the end shall get the victory, not those that
for a time shall stand stoutly in the fore front, and afterward be subdued, but
they which shall fight even to the end of the battle. And Christ does set his
woorks as contrary to the works of the Nicholaites, as also his doctrine is
contrary to there doctrine. For as of true and sound doctrine good works do
spring and flow, so of necessity evil works follow vnpure opinions. The
reward which he sets forth by so diverse figurative speeches, is
notwithstanding but one, and the same common to all the godly: which is the
partaking of him self, so when Christ calls us to take part of his kingdom,
whereof he is the right heir, he gives all things unto us which are his,
foreasmuch as we are made one body with him, he promises therefore a
gouernemente over the gentiles, and that of such power, that we shall rule the
rebelliouse and stubborn with an iron scepter, and shall bruise them in pieces,
like erthen vessels. That is, all our enemies being trodden down, and all the
thretninges of our adversaries, brought to naught, we shall quietly inioye the
possession of the heavenly kingdom under Christ which is our head.

Verse. 18. Even as I received of my father so will I give him the morning
star. etc.

Whatsoever things, Christ by reason of his manhood is said to have received
of his father, he received them for us, and not for him self, he is that
morning star which rising in our hearts, drives away all darckes of
blindness.

And we also as morning stars, ye as the sun it (self by his benifit) shall
shine in his heavenly kingdom, howsoever the devil and his ministers, with
infinite sclaunders and lies oppressing our innocence, do labor to obscure
and darcken our name.

Verse. 19. Let him that has an ear hear what the spirit says to the
Churches.

AT every several admonition he repeteth this, least we should let them pas
without due consideration.

The third Chapter.
Verse. 1. And write unto the angel of the church of Sardi these things says
he.

THE first epistle is sent to the Angel of the church which was at ^ar^y,
whereas first it is profitable to note, that although the estate of that church
was most corrupt, shall it wholye almost deserved to be called dead, yet
Christ does adorn it with the name of a Church, flat against the frentique
errors of certain men, which now here acknowledge a church to be where their is
any thing, which does not in all points please them. On the other side the
papists do not require any thing more earnestly, and with greater contention,
then that we would grant the name of the church to the^e company for certain
hundred years, in which the truth was almost buried. If that for a few,
which it is certain were saved, of that huge mass and multitude, we should
attribute this name unto them, yet never the latter we may say with Christ,
thou have a name that thou live and yet in very deed thou art dead. For
althinges are not by and by right: where we may aknowledge a Church to be.

That has the seven spirits of god, and the seven stares I know thy works.

THis preface also even as the rest, does very well agree to the matter: which
is entreated of in the epistell. For he had to do with a pastor and Church,
which he complains to be dead, and life is given only by the spirit of God.
They therefore which had almost quenched the spirit of God as much as in
them lay ought to have sought to him, which alone does give the same
spirit to those that ask of him. For Christ, from his father sends the
holy ghost upon the Church, as he himself often witnesses. John. 14.15.16.
chapter. Of the (...) of the spirits we have spoken before in the (...) Cha.
us. 4. That he also holds ye seven stars in his han^^ he admonish the
pastor that he could not hitherto have remained in any part of life, but that
he should utterly have died, except the Lord had sustained and kept him by
his virtue and power, from extreme destruction.

Thou have a name that thou live, but thou art dead. etc. Thou art counted
among the number of those which live unto God and have renounced the world,
when as yet thou live to the world and to thy self, and art counted as dead
before God. For if a widow which lives in pleasures, be dead eue^ living as
Paul says, how much more the pastor of the church, (which by preaching of
the word of God, ought after a sort, to breath into others the spiritual
life) may be counted as dead, except he renounce the devil, the flesh, and
all the vain inticementes of the world, and frame his whole life to the
obedience of Christ. And we nevertheless in the mean while so long as we have
a name yt we live, do give our selves over to pleasures, we live to the world,
we are dead to Christ. For except the Image of God be renewed in us, in vain
we boast of the grace of Christ, which is not idle in those, whom it has
truly embraced. Neither ought we to sever Christ from his spirit. The spirit
truly can not but work effectuousely in those, which Christ by the grace of
regeneration shall call to newness of life. This place does teach, what great
danger hangs over the Churches, through pastors that are half dead, when
as the infection proceeding out of one, does spread over almost the whole flock.

Verse. 2. Be awake and strengthen the things which remain that are ready to
dye. etc.

THis admonition does show, that this pastor was not utterly dead and
without all recovery, but oppressed even as with a deadly sleep, and except he
should spedely be helped, he would straitway, yield up the ghost. He cou^selleth
him therefore that he without delay awake out of this slepely sickness, and
that he be careful to call back again into life those, things that were
even then ready to die, as if he should say, that he was so nygh destruction,
that death has eue^ now atached some of his members, and his whole body was
even at deathen door, except he spedely shake of this drousines. That he
commands him to awake, he signifies that nothing is more unmeet for a
pastor of the church, then yt he give him self to slepines, whom it behooves to
watch continually over his flock

For I have not sound thy works perfect before God. etc.

He which before said that he knew his works, now shows of what sort they
were, that is, not sound, but imperfect, and which bewrayed his inward
hypocrisy. For how beautiful soever they apeared in the eyes of men, yet
before God they are found imperfect. But are not the works of the best and
godliest, (so long as they are compassed about with the infirmity of the
flesh) also imperfect? I confess they be. But here I say, that soundnes is
opposed to hypocrisy, and not to perfection, which perfectly fulfilleth the
whole law of God.

Remember therefore what things thou have received and heard and hold fast
therefore and repent etc. He ministers a fit medecin to the disease.
Continual sleep had brought forgetfulness. He commands him therefore to call
to remembrance the doctrine which he had received and heard, and hold the same
and to repent for those things which were committed against it. We are taught
here that forgetfulness of the heavenly doctrine brought forth this death of ye
soul, into which he had fallen, so that it is no meruaill, if where it be
altogether silent, (as it is in the papacy) although there all godliness do
utterly die.

If thou shall not watch I will come on the as a these and thou shall not know
what hour I will come upon thee. They that are oppressed with a deep sleep,
are not awaked without great cries and often repeted. Again therefore he
commands him to awake, for if he go on in giving him self to sleep, it will
come to pas, that the lord will strike him with sore vengeance he not thinking
it. And no otherwise then thieves are wont to break up there houses which are
drowned in a dead s^epe and to slay them, suspecting no such matter, and to
spoil them being slain of all there goods: so Christ threteneth that his
coming shall be uncertain to him, which except he shall prevent with wailing
and repentance, his eternal salvation is utterly lost.

Notwithstanding thou have a few names in Sardy. etc. By these words he
shows, that this rebuke did not pertayne to all the parts and members of the
church, but to the most part. For he confesses that there are a few, whom
he also knows by name, which have kept them selves clean and unspotted
from those heynouse vices. Christ does not contemn the small number of these,
ye he does more esteem two or three which worship him syncerely, then the
infinite multitude of worldlinges, which despise his commandments. It is
better therefore to be one of these few, whose innocencye Christ testifies
that he does approve and allow, them to be of the huge multitude of those, which
delighting them selves in there filthy pleasures, the Lord counts as dead.

Which have not defiled there garments. etc. The reason of this Metaphor seems
to be, that those which have given there names to Christ in baptism, have
put on Christ as a garment, that is, have professed righteousness, which garment
they do filthely defile, with wicked concupiscences and works of darkness as
many, as like the dog to his vomit, and the sow to the mire, do return
to there old fleshelye conversation.

And therefore they shall walk with me in white. etc. He promises to the
godly, that they shall not want the reward of there sound and upright
living, for as they have not been partakers with the wicked in there sins,
so likewise they shall be free from there punishments.

For they are worthy. Because it is equity and right that they which have
lived godly and incorruptly, should receive the reward of righteousness
promised them in Christ. For he does not here reason concerning ye deserts of
works, which eue^ the very papists them selves do not maintain, that they
do justify for there worthiness, neither concerning the merits of congruite,
because all this dignity does depend upon the promises of God, and they are
grounded in his free favor he being pacified in Christ. For good works are
neither ours, for they are the gifts of God, neither perfectly good, in so
much as they be ours, theirfore we cannot deserve any thing by them. Moreover
this is a notable conselation to the faithful, which live in that company
where they see the wrath of God by many men's sins daily provoked, that they
may be of good comfort, that God will not punnishe them together with the
wicked, with whom they have not consented in sin and iniquity.

Verse. 5. He that overcomes shall be clothed in white array. etc.

AS well they which shall become conquerers in rising out of the pernicious
sleep of security, as they which are never overcome of the same drousye
disease, shall receive white garments the reward of innocency and victory,
and the token and badge of true blessedness.

And I will not put out his name out of the book of life. etc. That is they
shall receive the crown of eternal life. But for those, which here do labor
to overthrow the holy predestination of God, we must understand, that two
books of life are mentioned in the holy scriptures, the one of election, the
other of calling of the former Paul speaks in the 4. chapter to the
philippians: the 3 verse. and S. John in this reuelat: chap. 13. verse. 8. and
20. verse. 12. and 22. verse. 27. Of the later, ye psalmist speaks, when he
says, let them be blotted out of the book of life, and let them not be
written with the just. And God says to Moises, I will wipe those out of the
book which have sinned against me. Exo. 32. of which this place may not
unfitly be understood: as if he should say, by there wickedness they have
deserved, that I should wipe them out of the book of life, yet if they shall
repent, I will not make void there first calling. For as perteyning to
election, we are taught by infinite testimonies of scripture, that it shall
remain always unchangeable. But many are called and few are chosen.

But I will confess his name before my father and before his Aungells. If any
man be not ashamed of Christ in earth Christ will not be ashamed of him in
heaven. For he comfort the faithful whom the world has always despised,
ye he promises that he will acknowledge them for his own, before the
Aungells, so that they keep the confession of there faith pure and constant
even to the end.

Verse. 6. He that has an ear let him hear what the spirit says to the
Churches. etc.

WHen as this sentence comes so often, it teaches that these admonitions
which the Lord gives to the churches, are not carelessly and lightly to be
passed over.

Verse. 7. And write unto the church which is at philadelphia, these things
says he that is holy and true. etc.

IN the sixth epistle the pastor of the church of Philadelphia is praised, and
receives comfort against the dangers that were at hand, and hanging over him.
First therefore Christ begins his preface with those things which are most
fytte to confime and strenthen this pastor, that he him self is holy and
true. Holy because that being fully consecrated to God his Father, he does
sanctify the whole church, which is his body: whereupon he is said to be
made to us of God, holiness, righteousness, and redemption, (True) not only
because that he is most free from all liynge and dissimulation, to which all
mankind is subject, whereby also he deserves to be called the truth it
self, but also because he alone has set forth true doctrine, yt this pastor
may acknowledge by whose benefit he has embraced true doctrine, and is numbered
among the saints of God, that is by the benefit of Christ, which is holy
and true. What ca^ the Roman prelates here answer, that they chaleng to
them selves the office of sanctifiynge, that they boast and brag that they
cannot err, that the pope does suffer himself to be called not only holy, but
most holy, and holiness it self? are they not blasphemouse against Christ
which alone is holy and true?

Which has the key of david, which opens and no man shuteth, shuts and no
man opens. etc. Which has full power over the house of David, that is his
Church, which so has granted the keys of the kingdom of heaven to his
ministers, that yet he keeps them to him self. Which has so committed the
government of his Church to Pastors, that he may not in the mean time
abrogate his own aucthorite. For least that under the pretense of the keys,
the Prelates should chaleng authority and rule over the Church to appoint
every thing at there own pleasure, he makes this preface, that he only has
the keye of David and opens and shuts at his own pleasure, as Lord and
ruler, whom no mortal creature can withstand whether he open or shut. For
although he promise that he will subscribe and agree in heaven to the sentence
given by the Pastors, if they shall lose or bind any thing in earth, yet
this is so to be understood, when men bring forth for decree, the Judgment of
God, and not there own fantasies. As concerning the Pastor of the Church of
Philadelphia, he ought to be admonished even by this preface only, that he
by the authority of Christ whom nothing can resist either in heaven or earth,
is called to that function and office in the Church, and by his virtue shall be
helped in discharging his duty, and shall be kept free from violence of all
enemies.

Verse. 8. I know thy works. etc.

CHrist does acknowledge that the works of this pastor did please him, which
might be insteede of a spur, that he might cherefully go forward in the
course he had once begun, for what greater reward ought we to wish? Then
that we may do somewhat that is thanckfull and accepted of God.

Behold I have set before the an open door. etc. Saint Paul used this
Metaphore, when as he would show the great hope propounded unto him of
spreadinge abroad the Gospel in the. 1. Corin. 16. And it does fitly agree,
that Christ does open unto us the gate of the heavenly kingdom, when he
preparethe a way to faith, by the Preachinge of the Gospel.

And no man can shut it. etc. He means that there will be enemies which will
labor hard, to hinder and let the course of the Gospel, but they shall
trouble them selves in vain. For in spite of the devil and his Aungells, a
door is opened which no force of the enemy shall be able to shut.

For thou have a little strength and have kept my sayings and have not denied
my name. etc. An argument of a sincere affection, that almost above his
strength which Christ confesses to be but small: he stood constant and stable
in the true and most free confession of the faith. For not always he who^ God
has endued with greater gifts and fit to the same, has the greatest care to
set forth the Gospel. For you may see many which excel in doctrine and
knowledge of tongues, and yet be very cold, and almost dumb in spreading
abroad the Gospel: when as in the mean time, those that are endued but with
mean knowledge, do labor abundantly in the harvest of the Lord, whose
labors, as here we may see, Christ him self will vouchsafe to bless more
plentifully. This place does also beat down yt false Nicodemites, when as it
teaches ye none other can rightely keep the doctrine of Christ, but those
which never deny his name.

Verse. 9. Behold I will make them of the synagog of Satan to wit them which
called them selves Jews, and are not, but do lie. Behold I say I will make
them that they shall come and worship before thy feet and shall know that I
have loved thee.

HE shows that the diligent labor and constancy of this Pastor had
proceaded so far, that he should by his study and diligence draw some even
out of the Jaws of satan. For he says that even of the number of those,
(which falsely would be named Jews when as nevertheless they were the synagog
of Satan, because by all means they persecuted the Church of God) certain
should come, which should humbly desire and crave pardon for there heynouse
offenses, and should confess and acknowledge earnestly, that he was dear to god
whom they vexed hitherto with so great hatred. For in my judgment, it can
hardly be understood of stubberne persons, which are compelled against there
wills to make this confession. For that ought not to be restrained to few but
pertains to all the wicked which are the synagog of Satan, except
peradventure he would note those, especially of that whole rout which above al
others were most troublesome to this pastor whom he said should at length be
driven to repentance, (...) confession of their sins, when it should be to
late.

Verse. 10. Because thou have kept. etc.

CHrist will not suffer there hope to be in vain, which shall patiently wait
for his aid and succor. For he promises deliverance to this pastor from
most great dangers, which did hang over the world for sin: because his
faith and constancy were proved by many experiments and sufficiently witnessed
to him and to the world.

The words of my patience, therefore I will deliver thee from the time of
temptation which will come upon all the world, to try them that dwell in the
earth. As this pastoure suffered not the doctrine of patience to slide from
him, which Christ requires of his servant, but held it even in the most sore
temptations, and in very deed expressed it in his acts and doings, so Christ
promises insteedee of a most ample reward, that he would keep him likewise by
his mercy out of much more bitter calamities which shortly after should light
upon the whole world. He names it the hour of temptation, to teach, that the
times of afflictions be appointed of God, how long men should be chasticed,
that they should labor in vain to deliver them selves out of the same,
which do not patiently wait, for the end determined and appointed of god.
Moreover he calls afflictions temptations or triales because they bewray men
what they are. For the reprobate fret, and rage, or else despair and always
seek out unlawful means to escape contrariwise the godly do acknowledge the
mighty hand of God, to which they do patiently submit them selves, or if at
the most being overcome with impaciency of sorrows they desire to escape, by
dishonest means, yet they never sum or rise up against God.

Verse. 11. Behold I come shortly.

THis is added insteedee of an exceading great consolation, that he might not
fear that the time of his deliverance should long be deferred, and that
whatsoever battle remains, he might sustain it with more quiet mind. For
it has great force to persuade us to patience, when we know that our labor
shall shortly come to an end. Therefore the holy ghost so often in the
Scriptures sets before our eyes the shortness of our battle, that we may
contend more strongly, and bear patiently our labor and trauaill.

Hold that which thou have, that no man take thy crown. etc. Only (says he)
hold the simplicity of doctrine, and go forward in the conversation of a
sound life: do not so behave thy self, that thou which have hitherto fought
manfully in defense of the Gospel, should now at length even in the last
brunt wax weary, and in being vanquished, should lose the crown of
victory, which Christ our Captain would shortly after have set upon thy head.

Verse. 12. Him that overcomes will I make a pillar in the temple of my God,
and he shall go no more out: and I will write upon him the name of my God, and
the name of the city of my God, which is the new Jerusalem which comes down
from God out of heaven, and I will write upon him my new name. etc.

THey were wont to set up trophies and pillars with inscriptions upon them, for
those which had behaved them selves manfully, and became conquerers in battaill
against there enemies, as well to show them selves thankful to them which
had sustained so great labors for the safeguard of there country, as also that
they might sterre up others to imitate and follow there virtues. But Christ will
make his cha^pions pillars, not in the market place, or in the field of Mars,
at Rome, but in the holy temple of his God, that is in the Church tryumpha^t,
in which they shall be made partakers of all the good gifts which God shall
vouchsafe to bestow upon his Church. And where as the trophies and monumentes
of Princes, either through envy of there successores, or by madness of the
people are often thrown down: Christ promises that this conqueror shall be
fixed in so sound a foundation in him self. which is the very foundation of
the temple, that he can never be pulled out or cast down from thence. Moreover
he does assign three kinds of inscriptions for this pillar. The first of the
name of god, by which it is declared to be consecrated to God. The second of
new Jerusalem which shall descend from heaven, by which he is taught that ye
fredome of that heavenly city perteyneth unto him. The third inscription is
the new name of Christ which is given him for his excellent obedience and
humility even unto death, which is above all names, that in the name of Jesus
every knee should bow of things in heaven and things in earth, and of
things under the earth. By the inscription of this name, Christ will take this
pillar into ye partaking of his glory. Whereby we are admonished yt it is
Christ alone which may consecrate us to God the father, into holy pillars of
his temple, that it is Christ alone that may bestow upon us the city of the
heavenly Jerusalem, and to conclude, that it is Christ alone that may call us
to the fellowship of his heavenly kingdom, we ought therefore valiantlye to
fight under him, yt we may attain so great ornaments of victory.

Verse. 13. He that has an ear let him hear what ye spirit says to. etc.

A worthy voice truly which should always sound in our hearts and ears yt
the flattering voices of this world being conte^ned, we may strongly gird up
our Ioynes to ye battle.

Verse. 14. And to the Angel of the Church which is at Laodicia write, these
things says Amen, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the
creatures of God. etc.

THe last epistle is written to the luke warm pastor of the Church of
Laodicia, to whom also a fit and convenient preface is made, as unto all the
rest, that is, that these things are spoken of him, which is Amen, that is
constant, and not a colored truth, as S. Paul says, that all the promises
of God in Christ are yea and Amen 2. Cor. 1. which is a faithful witness and
true, and therefore can not suffer halting between both parts. For as he has
truly and faithfully declared the embassage committed to him of his father, so
he requires also such ministers as should imploye all there whole strength in
this, that the dignite and authority of the Gospel, may be extolled above all
things.

The beginning of the creatures of God. etc. That word by which all things
are made, to which all the creatures are bound to yeald there full and perfect
obedience, neither ovgh they by any means to give part to the world, and
part to the^ selves of that obeysaunce which is due unto him. For cursed is he
yt does the work of the Lord negligently, whom we ought to worship and
reverence, with all our heart with all our soul, and with all our strength,
neither to make any excuse, by which we may be with drawn by any means from
his obedience. For he does renounce the obedience of Christ, that does not
wholly submit him self unto him, which does never allow any halting obedience.

Verse. 15.16. I know thy works that thou art nether cold nor hot I would
thou werest cold or hot. Therefore because thou art between both* neither
cold nor hot it will come to pas that I shall spew the out of my mouth. etc.

WE ought to be as S. Paul says fervent in spirit, that is, bent with all
feruentnes of mind, to set forth the glory of Christ. The lukewarmnes
therefore of this pastor and his Church is worthily reprehe^ded, that nether
they burned with yt zeal, that they ought, to have defended ye glory of god,
neither were they altogether cold in mayntayning the same. But Christ
pronounces that he does hate this lukewarmnes, so that his stomach can not
bear meat that has so evil Juice and nurishment in it, but that he would
vomit it up. For that they flattered them selves as though they should be
notable Christians, if they were not professed enemies of his name, but should
profess and acknowledge his doctrine so far peradventure as should be for
there profit and commodity: Christ shows that this is but in vain,
because, except they would wholly frame the^ selves to ye obedience of his
word, they should not remain as his members in his body which is the Church,
but should be cast out with his very great lothing and detestation. In that he
wishes they were either hot or cold, he means not that they do any ways
please him which are cold, but that he is so far from alowing the lukewarm,
that he had rather they were cold, that is his professed enemies. For they do
more hurt to the overthrowing of the faith of the simple which craftily thrust
in them selves under some color and show of religion, then they which with
open blasphemies tear the name of the Christ, of whom every one can easily
beware. It is merueill but Christ here by the spirit of prophecye, has
expressed the state and condition of our Churches under the figure of the
bishop of Laodicia, and nothing is more to be feared, then yt we shall perceive
at length to our great hurt, that these terrible threteninges do also belong to
us. The like metaphor Joshua and Helias used, when they forbade the people to
halt on both parts, and commanded them either to follow God only, or Baale
only.

Verse. 17. For thou say I am rich and increased with goods and have need
of nothing and know not how thou are wretched and miserable, and pore and
blind and naked. etc.

ALL burning zeal was not only quenched in him, which is evil, but moreover
he was infected with a foul hypocrisye, which is much worse. And it almost
always comes to pas, that they which are scarcely any thing at all hot in
promoting the worship of god, and the confession of faith, yet nevertheless,
do boast them selves to be very great prelates of the truth, and most sharp
defendores of the says. As this pastor boasts him self to be rich, and not
contented with this, he^ braggethe that his riches are increased into a great
heap, so that he wanted nothing, but had the abu^daunce of all things, even
to satietie: when as by the judgment of Christ he was the most miserable and
most poor, yea beggarly, blind, and naked. We see how that Christ spoilethe
them of all there goods, which arrogantly challenge to them selves riches, and
the abundance of all things.

Verse. 18. I council the to buy of me gold tried in the fire that thou may
be made rich. etc.

Now least the state and condition of this pastor should seem altogether
desperate and incurable, her exhortethe him to repentance, and first of all to
the acknowledging of this his poverty, that he might find true riches in
Christ, who confesses him that he buy gold of him tried in ye fire, that is,
most precious gould, which is, that he should seek the flowing abundance of
all good things at his hands, which sells it freely without taking any
money, but yet to those, to whom nothing is more precious and dear then ye
grace of Christ. For he that will bye that field in which the treasure lies
hid, and that pearl which of all others is most precious, must not cheapen
like the hucksters, but sell all that he has yt he may enjoy so great
treasures, that is to esteem as nothing all other things, so that be may
possess the riches of the grace of Christ.

And white raiment that thou may be clothed, and that thy fylthy nakedness do
not appear. etc. For he was naked so that his filthynes was open and manifest
to God and his Aungells, until he put upon him the righteousness and innocence
of Christ, whereby his filthynes being covered, he may approach into the presence
of God decently araied.

And anoynct thine eyes with eye salve that thou may see etc. Unto all these
miseries was added so great blindenes, that whereas he was void of all good
things, a beggar, filthy, and naked, yet he could epsy none of all th^se
things, but thought him self to be in most blessed estate. For hypocrisy is
always blind, and by the just judgment of God this blindness is cast before
the eyes of hypocrites, that when they think they may without danger mock
both God and men, they deceive them selves so much, that other whiles they are
dead before they feel them selves sick. And when they walk naked and in the
sight of all men, they think the^ selves to be gayly clothed. Such me^ have
need of this eye salve to anoint there eyes wtall, that they may be delivered
out of so great darkness. This metaphor does signifye that when we are
lightened with the spirit of Christ, we do clearly see all things, or else
we see no more in those things that pertain to eternal life, then stocks or
stones.

Verse. 19. Those whom I love I chastise, be zealous therefore and amend.

THat he may know that there is mercy in store for him, if with earnest
affection of mind he return to God, he shows that this reprehension
proceaded of fatherlye love and not of spightfull hate. For whom God loves
most, he does not only rebuke them with words, but also chastise them with
strypes sometimes. For so does he bridle our wantonness, which if it were not
refrayned with such brydelles, we would run hedlong to our own destruction.
Therefore we are much bound to the mercy of God, that he had rather chastise
us with rods, then kill us with swoordes, which proceadeth of nothing else,
but of his fatherly love toward us. But as touching this pastor of Laodicea,
he requires these two things of him, first that he repent him of his
former sloughtfulnesse and necligens, and secondely that heareafter he be
kindled with a greater zeal to set forth ye glory of Christ, and so follow
David, whom ye zeal of Gods house had eaten up altogether, and all other the
saints of God, which cannot otherwise show that they love God entierly, then
if they be wholly set on fire with zeal of aduauncing the glory of his name.
For as we herd a little before he can in no wise abide them that are neither
hot nor cold.

Versus. 20. Behold I stand before the doze and knock and if any man hear my
voice and open the door. etc.

THe love of Christ toward the Church is wonderful great which is so zelus
and careful for there health, which burn with no zeal to set forth his
glory. The verb in greek is of the preterperfecte^s. Whereby he signifies yt
he has long ago looked yt they should repent from the bottom of their heart,
and receive his grace into there heart. Moreover this place does plainly teach
us, that we cannot rightly receive Christ, before he first offer him self to
be received of us.

I will enter in unto him and will suppe with him. etc. The gentleness and
mercy of ye Lord is marvelous, which so willingly pardons so great injuries
done unto him by his servant, that forgetting all injuries he does of his own
accord offer pardon and in sign of perfect reco^ciliatione, he will gently
come and suppe with him. For men are wont by such tokens to renew friendship yt
is broken between the^. But those who^ Christ voutsalueth to be partakers of
his table (as he voutsalueth all the faithful) he feeds there minds with
spiritual daynties, whereby they shall be nourished unto eternal life, namelye
with righteousness freely given, quietness of conscience, and unspeakable joy,
where with the godly are fed by the holy ghost, whereof also he has given
a most excellent pledge, the holy communion of his body and blood, which when
we receive by faith, we have him everlastingly dwelling with us.

Verse. 21. To him that shall overcome I will grant to sit with me in my throne,
even as I overcome and sit with my father in his throne. etc.

HE that shall continue faithful unto the end and with feruente zeal shall
promote the glory of Christ, him does Christ admit unto the partakinge of
his heavenly glory. And as he him self is set in the throne of majesty of
his father for a reward of his victory: so will he advance them unto the
height of his throne, which through faith shall obtain victory against the
devil and the world. For by faith we are made heirs of God and fellow
heirs with Christ.

Verse. 22. He that has an ear let him hear what the spirit

HE concludes this first visione with this his usual acclamation that this
doctrine of the holy ghost is worthy, which should be imprinted in the
minds of all the servant of Christ, and always be remembered of them, that
it may obtain dew effect in us through Christ our Lord to whom be honor
and glory. etc.

The fourth Chapter.
THE second vision is contained in the eight Chapters following, in which the
state and condition of the Church is lively described and painted out, of what
sort it shall be, from that time forth, even to the end of the world. The First
part of this vision which is comprehended in this. 4. Chapter, conteyneth a
description of the divine majesty and glory of God, in which the faithful
are taught that they ought not to faint or quail, no not in ye grettest
dangers, which are governed by his wounderfull council who above all things
has tender care, once the health and safety, of his Church. And when as all
things both in heaven and earth do celebrate, and set forth the praises of
God, it is not convenient by any means, that the same praises should not sound
forth, in the Church militant.

Verse, 1. After this I looked. etc.

AFter that first vision which principally was set forth to describe the state
of the seven Churches, he says there was an other vision showed unto him,
which did express the state and condition of the whole Church, of what sort
it should be in the world, from that time, even unto the end and consumation
of all things.

And behold a door was open. etc. By these words he shows, that a passage
was made open unto him, to the knowing of these mysteries, which except this
door be opened are so included and shut up in heaven, that they far exceade
the capacity of earthly men. The philosophers have diligently searched and
discussed all things whatsoever are comprehended within the circutie and
compass of the heavens, and with meruailouse sharpness of sight, have perced
even unto the secrets of nature: but as for those things, which are above
the highest sphere of ye firmament, either they were altogether ignorant of
the^, or else if they boasted the^ selves to know ye same they waxed vain in
there own cogitations, and I know not what monsterouse things they have set
forth insteede of divine mysteries. As it is to be seen in Plato, Trissmegistus
and others, which men, while they would measure the secrets of Gods majesty
by the co^pas of there own brain, they wholly despised that one only way,
by which access is given to so great secreates, that is the revelation of
God, which is chiefly set forth and declared in his word. Let us therefore
always retain and hold this principle, that we can not, although with never
so sharp speculations, see those things which are in heaven, except God open
the door unto us. How much more is the boldness, or rather ^ may say, the
Impudency of the scoole men, which although neither by visions, neither by the
word of God, so much as a rifte is opened unto them, yet as though they had
thoroughly seen and known all the secrets in heaven, they dispute and reason
of the incom^rehensible essence of God, and of other mysteries, which I believe
the aun* them selves dare scarcely meddle withal.

And the first voice which I herd, as it were of a trumpet talking with me
said come up hither. etc. Although the door were opened to him in heaven, yet
he durst not enter in, but being called by ye heavenly voice, for such modesty
becomes the servants of God, that they wait for his voice in all things
which they attempt: But in that he says it was like a trumpet, he signifies
that he was called with a loud and a shrill voice, that he might be more
attentive in considering those things which the holy ghost would reveal unto
him. Come up (says he) hither and I will show unto the, those things that
must come to pass hereafter. John was taken up in spirit even into heaven,
that he might behold this vision, therefore with the greater study and
reverence, it behooves us to be occupied in searching out these mysteries, and
to have regard both unto the heavenly wisdom, and to the love of Christ,
which would reveal this vision, to the edifying of his Church.

Verse. 2. And immediately I was ravished in the spirit and behold a throne was
set in heaven and one sat on it. etc.

AFter this voice says he, I was drawn into a trau^ce and my spirit being
taken up into heaven, I beheld those things which were set as it were before
mine eyes. In the highest place of heaven an high throne was set, magnifically
adorned, in which one did sit of unspeakable glory to behold, whom by evident
notes, I knew to be the majesty of God. But here two doubts arise, first that
he says a throne was set in heaven, whereas the Lord does glory in the
Prophet Esaye that the whole heaven is his seat: and also he shows that he
saw the Majesty of God, when we read so often in the scriptures, that God is
invisible. We answer to both, that God is not here described as he is, which
fills the heaven and the earth neither can be seen with the eyes of men, but
for the capacite of our wit, that we may acknowledge him as king and
Emperor sitting upon his seat, to whom all things are subject. God is
discribed here bearing the person a king, whose government and laws, it is
necessary the whole world should obey.

Verse. 3. And he that sat was to look upon like unto a Jasper stone and a
Sardine stone, and there was a rainebow about the throne in sight like to an
enteralde etc.

TO the imbecilitie and weeknes of man, nothing semethe more beautiful, then
precious stones. His countenance therefore was like to the two precious
stones, Jasper and Sardine, of which Pliny says, the one has a certain
waterishe shining, the other a fiery. The raynebowe compassing ye throne and
shining, like the green emeralde, does extol the glory of his throne, above
all the benches of men. And it is very like that by these two figures, the
power and mercy of God are lively expressed. For by that watrie and fiery
beauty of his countenance shininge like yt Jasper and Sardine, it is probable
yt his power and justice are signified, which as it was once showed in time
past, in drowning ye whole world so it shall be made manifest at the length, in
the consumatio^ of the world with fire. The rainebow which was a sacrament of
the covenant which God made with men, does without doubt show forth his
inco^prehensible mercy, which co^passing his whole throne about, in a
meruailouse great orname^t to the same. The feeling whereof although it be
figured by ye cherefull color of the emerald, yet it does exceade infinitely,
the bewty of all precious stones.

Verse. 4* And about the seat were 24. seats and upon the seats I saw 24.
elders sitting clothed in white raiement and had on there heads crowns of
gold. etc.

THat the Majesty of Gods glory might more clearly he set forth, there is
joined unto him the reverend company of 24. elders. For kings are wont, when
they consulte of weyghtie matters, or when they will show forth there glory to
the people, for the greater majesty, to join there counsel unto them. So the
holy ghost, when as he would according to the capacity of man's wit, describe
the glory of God in governing the whole world and principally his Church,
expressed it under such a like figure. And this number of senators, does
signify the whole company of Gods elect. But especially of those, which
having fynished there labors in earth, are taken up unto the fellowship of the
heavenly glory. And in my judgment he alludeth, to that promise of Christ,
by which he promised to his Apostles, which tarried with him in all his
temptations, that they should sit upon 12. seats, and should judge the 12.
tribes of Israel Mat. 19. and Luke the 22. where as the number of twelve is
not restrained to the Apostles only, like as it does not extend to them all.
For at that time Judas had the office of an Apostle, but it pertayneth to all
the elect. And although I will not to carefullye search for mysteries in
numbers, yet the number of twelve here doubled, seems to me to comprehend the
Church gathered together into one body of the Jews and gentiles. The elders
therefore are placed in thrones, that they may allow by there consent, the just
judgment of God, which he will execute upon the world, and also may for ever
celebrate and set forth his magnificence. The aparell and deckinge of these 24.
elders is described, that they were clothed in white garments, and had crowns
of gold upon there heads. White raiment in time past, was the sign and token
of noble men, first therefore it commends the dignity of those whom God by
his mercy has called to the adoption of his children: and afterward the
righteousness and innoce^cie, which they have, not of them selves, but borow,
it of the blood of Christ. The golden Diademes, are signs of victory and
kingly dignity, for they that through the virtue and power of Christ, have
overcome the world by faith, shall receive a crown of him, and moreover
shallbe admitted in to the fellowship of his kingdom. No marvel therefore
though these elders can never satisfy them selves in celebrating the praises
of God and of Christ, when as by his benefit, they are drawn out of so great
calamities, and exalted to so great honor.

Verse. 5. And out of the throne proceaded lighteninges, and thunderinges and
voices and seven lamps of fire burninge before the throne which are the seven
spirits of God. etc.

IT is not to be doubted but yt the holy ghost according to his divine essence
does sit even in the throne of majesty with the father and the son, yet by
his virtue which is spread over all through which he sets forth the power,
wisdom and goodness of God toward his creatures, he is said to proceade
out of the throne where the majesty of God does sit, and his force and
strength is expressed by two figures: of which the one does nothing but strike
a fear and terror, the other is sweet and pleasant. Out of the throne, (says
he) proceed lightenings, thunderinges, and voices, and seven lamps burning with
fire, which are the seven spirits of God, An ensample of either of them is
set forth in the law, and the gospel. For ye law as it conteyneth nothing but
yt which is fearful and terrible, so in time past when it was delivered
forth in mount Sinai, it was painted out by such signs and tokens. But the
light of the gospel is acceptable to the hertes of the faithful, which he
promised should come upon those which sat in darkness and in the shadow of
death, and at length it was set forth to the world, by Christ and his
Apostles, and is daily set forth by the sincere preaching of his word. I
confess that there is also some light of the law, but yet such as has fear
and terror mingled with it, as lightening has: but the pleasant and
harmless light of the gospel is fitly expressed by ye seven la^pes. The
number of seven is ye number of perfection and fulness. It signifies therefore
all the gifts and graces of the holy ghost, wherewith god does beutify and
adorn his Church, and the preachinge of the gospel. And it is no new thing,
that the signs and effects have the name of that thing which they represent
or follow. But wherefore they are called many, when there is but one spirit it
is de^lared before in the first chapter.

Verse. 6. And before the throne there was a sea of glass like unto crystal.
etc.

THe state of this world is in the sight of God, which is expressed by a sea
of glass, for although it seem to us diverse, inconstant mouable and frail
(which is signified by the glassye sea) yet to God which governs it by his
will and pleasure it appears sure, stable, and disposed in the best order,
and more clearer then any crystal, because nothing which comes to pas in
the world, is hid from his providence, and although it be such that the
Church may seem every moment to be overwhelmed and drowned with the waves of
ye same, yet all danger of drowning thereof is far of. So yt although we
think that this sea does rage with surges and terrible tempests, yet by the
providence of God, the welfare of the church is as safe, as though the byldinge
thereof were founded upon a dry and hard rock of crystal, and not as a
ship should be tossed to and fro in a swellinge and tempestuous sea. For
this world and all things therein are governed by the will and pleasure of
God, that nothing can hurt or hinder the salvation of those whom he has taken
into his defense and kepinge.

And in the midst of the throne and round about the throne. etc. He sees
the throne of God to be borne up of four beasts like the seat of kings, or
the triumphall chariot of emperors not that his glory needs any such aids,
but because he does meruailously shine in the blessed spirits which he has
created, in which sense also Paul calls the Aungells thrones in the Col. 1.
chap. Moreover when as here is almost the same description of the beasts,
which Ezechiell has in his first and ^enth chap. It is no doubt but that ye
holy ghost had respect thereunto, that he might show forth the self same thing

Were 4. beasts full of eyes before and behind. etc. Ezechiell understood
those 4. beasts which were showed to him in the vision to be cherubins, that
is Aungelicale spirits, whose ministry God uses in the gouerme^t, of the world
and all creatures, they are showed under the form of living beasts, yt we
may understand that the mouinge and workinge of all creatures does depend
upon the will of God, which works by the virtue of angels that we be not
seduced by the gross error of the epicures, that we should think God to be
so shut up in heaven that he does nothing in earth, when as nevertheless
his providence is extended to the smalest things which he has created, which
this figure of the beasts has fitlye expressed, when as they were full of
eyes before and behind, which notablye paint forth the clear sight of his
providence most sharp of all others. For as these beasts full of eyes, can
see all things for the multitude of these eyes, whether they be before or
behind, or on either side, above or beneath, neither can any thing be hid
from there sight, so the eye of Gods providence, fills al places, for as God
is every where by his inestimable power, so also he sees every where by his
inscrutable providence.

Verse, 7. And the first beast was like a Lion, the second beast like a calfe,
the third beast had a face as a man and the fourth beast was like a flyinge
Eagle. etc.

THe forms and shapes of the four beasts are set forth, that they might
represent the Image of all creaturs which are contained in the four parts of
the world. And although in plants, stones, metalles and in other such like
creatures, the power of God also works, yet it is less perceived of the
ignorant (to whose capacity these things are framed) then in those things
in which there is sense and motion, in which it is manifest that God does
move them. According to that saing of S. Ihon the first Chap. In him was
life. etc. But in that which does pertayne to the particular form of every
one of these beasts, because the Lion holds the chief place among wild
beasts, the ox is most proffitable among the came beasts, the man is ruler
over all living creatures, the Eagle is called the chief of fowls, under
these four shapes this vision does comprehend all other living creatures.

Verse. 8. And the four beasts had each one of them six wings about him.
etc.

THe wings do signifye the swiftenesse, wherewith these Aungelicall spirits,
do carry with meruailouse quicknes, the power and will of GOD to all parts of
the world. The number of the wings does show that Christ had respect to those
things which Esaias speaks of the Seraphines, in the sixte chapter of his
prophecy, which had two wings to cover there faces, two to cover there
feet, and two wherewith they did fly. For when as the Cherubins and Seraphins
also them selves, shall approach into the presence of Gods Majesty, they cover
there faces, as though they were not able to behold so incomprehensible
glory, and they hide there fete as it were, acknowledginge there own
imperfection: finally, being wholly prepared to his obedience, they fly with
two wings. How much therefore is the arrogancy of hypocrites to be abhorred,
which when they be altogether defiled and profane, neither by any means
^ramed to the obedience of God: yet they dare boldly step forth into his
presence, neither do they fear least this impudency of theirs should be
corrected with thunder thrown down from heaven upon them.

And they were full of eyes within. etc. He said before that they were full of
eyes on every side, before and behind, and now he repeteth that not only
without, but also within they were full of eyes, that he may stretchforth the
providence of God, not only to these things which are wrought openly and as
it were in outward face, but that the force thereof does reach even unto those
things also which are within, although never so secreate and removed from the
eyes of man, which thing we shall well understand, if we shall diligently
consider the generation, conservation, form, beauty, order, virtue and
disposition, of all creatures.

And they ceased not day and night. The Angelical spirits have never any
lesure to cease from singing the praises of God, but they celebrate ye same
with perpetual melody. And truly the glory of god which is in all creatures,
ye very du^be stones do proclaim. And what other thing speak all things in
general? then yt the power and wisdom of god which made the^, is equale with
his goodness. Which when it is done of the^ without intermission or ceasinge. I
greatly marvel how it comes to pas, that men for whose sake all other
things were created, should think, that they may always leave of from
celebrating and publishinge the praises of God. But this truly does excede all
monsters, that they which excelled al other living creatures upon earth not
only in exellencye of creation, but also exalted to the dignity of Aungelles,
by the benefit of redemption, should be so far from immitatinge the Angels
and other creatures in settinge forth the praises of God, that they may seem
almost to have conspired with the devils, that they may pull him out of ye
throne of his majesty. Hear but that I do reverence the secreat judgment of
God, which I do not understand, I have nothing else wherewith to rid my self
out.

Saying Holy, Holy, Holy. etc. This is the celebration of the divine praises,
that they attribute holiness only to God, which except all creatures borow of
him, they are profane and polluted. But as I suppose that this thresold
repetition does avow the mystery of the trinite, so I think it is scarce mete
to stifely to urge the same against heretics, as the old fathers did. For the
chief points of our religion ought to be proved with more manifest
testimonies, especially when we have to do with those which are ye enemies of
our faith, to whom we be com laughing stocks, if sticking so fast in weak
proofs, we may seem to have less force to resist them. For it is like that
the continual and unwearied study of the Aungells is noted in this place,
rather then the divinity of the three persons.

Lord God almighty. etc. They extol the holiness, the omnipotence and eternity
of God, not only that he is such in him self, but because he is the
unsearchable fountain of al goodness out which every good thing does slow
into the Church of even holiness, and the perfect fruition of eternal
blessedness. We ought not to imagine a bare and idle almightye power of God
about which yt Sorbonistes do vainly contend, but which may suffice to execute
in all things his most holy will. For as often as god is named almighty, it
is for this cause, that our faleth may be strengthened against temptations,
that we may not doubt at all, of the performinge of his promises, which is
induced with strength and power to bring to pas whatsoever he has decreed.
But his eternal divinity and godhed is therefore set forth, that we may learn
to cleave and stick only to him, when as all other things are inconstant and
uncertain, except they be sustained and kept from destruction, by his secret
virtue and power.

Verse. 9.10. And when these beasts gave glory, and honor, and thanks to him
that sat on the throne which lives for ever and ever, the 24. elders fell
down before him that sat on the throne and worshipped him that lives for
evermore. and cast there crowns before the throne saying. etc.

IF the Angels with all other creatures are inflamed with so great feruentnes
to singe forth the praises of God, that they never leave of the study and care
they have to celebrate ye same, what should the Church do, upon which
greater benefits of God are bestowed, then upon any other creatures? ought it
not to be wholly turned into thanks geuinge? when the Church therefore does
acknowledge, especially the fellowship of those which triumph in heaven: by
comparinge them selves with the other creaturs, how much she owe^h unto god:
She is ashamed that she should be most slackest of all things in celebratinge
the praise of God. Therefore she does prepare her self to holy emulation, and
whith how many more benefits god has adorned her, so much more cherefully she
proceeds forward, to the continual celebrating of his glory. For seeing John
says, when the beasts gave glory to God, the elders do the same, (and he had
said before that these beasts had no rest day nor night from this holy
off^ce), he shew^th that the glory of God is sounded forth of the elders with
continual and vnweried study. But it is worthy to be noted with what
circumstances: the Apostell commends this there diligence. First he shows
that they fell upon there faces before the throne of God, where by there humble
submission is noted: that when they should set forth the praises of God, they
seem to ask pardon, because they can not think or speak any thing worthy
his glorious majesty. For so we ought to come to declare his praise, that we
may acknowledge our selves far unmeet to such an office. Away therefore with
every such proud opinion of desert, whereby men be puffed up as though they
should deserve God, when they come forth to glorify his name, which if they
understood how unworthy they are to take so excellent a thing upon them,
even for this cause they would give immortal praises to God, that he should
vouchsafe them so great honor, as to suffer the^ to be publishers abroad of
his glory. Secondly they worship him which lives for ever and ever. whereby
they profess there obedience to be due unto God, and there duty binds that
they show them selves, thankful for so great benefits bestowed upon them.
Lastly they cast there crowns before the throne, by which sign they declare, yt
they wholly renounce all there own dignity, or which by any means pertayneth
unto them, yt they may render to God his due obedience. For we can not any
other way come into the presence of God to sing forth his praise, then if we
spoil our selves of all our ornaments, that God may have his perfect glory
alone. For all heyght must fall down when we shall come into his presence, and
it behooves all things to appear humble before his face. Moreover we must
note that not to Angels, or Archaungels, or to the blessed virgin, but to him
alone which sits upon the throne all glory is to be ascribed.

Verse. 11. Thou art worthy o Lord to receive glory honor and power.

THey do not sound the praise of God with their lips only or with there
tongue as the manner of hipocrites is, but from the bottom of there hearts they
confess as they have tried, that all honor, glory and power is to be
ascribed only to God* when they say thou art worthy o Lord. We are hear
also admonished that no honor is dew to creatures which deserve none, but to
God only which is worthy thereof.

Because thou haste created all things, and for thy wills sake they are and
have been created. etc. They show that all glory is dew unto god for two
causes, first because he has created all things, by which right aloe wall
creatures owe obediens to there maker. Secondly for the end of there creation,
for all things were created for his will, and therefore ought to obey his
will. This place teaches, that the praises of God ought to be celebrated, not
only with the tongue but with all actiones of our life, which ought to be
framed unto his obediens. Where be then the merits of works either of
congruitie or condignitie (as they call the^) when as even by the very right of
creation, all our service and obedience is hear affirmed to be dew unto God

The fyfte Chapter.
AFter that vision was showed unto S. John whereby was showed the glory of
Gods majesty, that we might know from what foundation this prophecy was
drawn, in the next place is taught, by means of what mediator, the
knowledge of so secreate things could come unto the Church. For the vision
which is set forth in this Chapter does teach, that it is only Christ which
can open unto men the secreate will of his father. For he is the only doctor
of his Church, which has brought the truth unto us from heaven that is of
so great distans from earth, whose voice also his heavenly father has
commanded us to hear.

Verse. 1. And I saw a book in the right hand of him that satte upon the
throne written within and without sealed with seven seals. etc.

THis book conteyneth the whole will of God which is set forth to be known
of men, especially those decrees of his purpose which concern, the
disposition of his Church in this last age of the world, as it is manifest by
the next chapter. Whereby we understand that there be some secreats of Gods
will which because they are not contained in this book of his revealed will,
it is wickedness for men to seake to know the^. I will say moreover they
labor all in vain to know those things which God of purpose would have to
be hidd, wherefore hear must needs fall down a great portion of the scoole
divinity, which is occupied in searchinge out those things only, which God
by no means has vouchsafed to make known unto me^. Moreover we are
admonished, that the decrees of God, concerning the governing of his Church,
are so certain, that they are registered in a book, that we should not think
that any thing falls upon the Church by fortune or chance, or beside the
will of God. And whereas this book us written within and without, it
signifies, that it conteyneth the narration of many and diverse things, which
could not be expressed in two or three leaves, but scarsely be contained in a
whole book written all over. This book is sealed with seven seals, that is
to say it is closed up on every side so that although it be written both with
in and without. Yet nothing can be red thereof before the seals be opened. For
the number of seven as we have showed before, signifies fulness and
perfection. Finally in that this book is seen to be in the hand of him that
sits upon the throne, we are taught that the disclosing of Gods secreates,
cannot be attained unto by man's wit except God him self teach the same to
us by his hand. When God therefore holds the book in his right hand, which
afterward the lamb does open, he signifies, that the knowledge of all
mysteries, does flow from him alone through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Verse. 2. And I saw a mighty Angel, which preached with a loud voice, who
is worthy to open the book and lose the seals thereof. etc.

THat all the world might more certeynly and manifestlye know, that Christ
only is the interpretour of the heavenly will of God his father, a mighty
angel is sent forth, which with a loud voice should proclayme to all
creatures in heaven and earth, if any have any opinion of there own excellency
and dignity, whether they be worthy to open yt book and to loose the seals
thereof.

Verse. 3. And none could neither in heaven, nor in earth nor under the earth
open the book neither look thereon. etc.

THere was not found such worthiness in any creature, that they could either
open the book or see any thing therein. And if the merits of no creature are
so much worthy, as that they may attain to yt knowledge of Gods will: how
much less shall they be able to perform his commandment, and to purchase
everlasting life? That he reherseth the creatures that are in heaven, in
earth, and under the earth, he does it to amplify the matter. For if heavenly
creatures are unworthy, much more vnworthtie are earthly creatures, or such as
are under the earth.

Verse. 4. And I wept very much because none was found worthy to open the
book or to read the book neither to look thereon. etc.

WHen as Saint Ihon knew by inspiration of yt holy ghost, that the
knowledge of those things which were contained in that book, was very
proffitable and necessary for the Church, and yet there was none, found
among Aungells or men which could make him pertaker thereof, he burst out
into weeping, and grievously complained that none was found, which was
worthy to open this book or at the lest to look upon it. The godly affection
of the Apostle toward the Church is here commended unto us, in that he
testifies by his weeping, what desire he had to promote the same unto all
necessary knowledge, so that he wept so abou^dautly because he thought for the
time, that the knowledge of this book had been denied him. What shall we then
say unto those men, unto whom when as the care of instructinge the Church is
committed, yet thy follow there own pleasure, and are so far of from being
grieved at the ignorance of there flock, yt they the^ selves through there
idleness and sloughtfullnesse do nurish among them dame ignorance the mother
of all mischief. And with what spirit shall we say that the popish prelates
are ledd, when they are grieved at nothing more, then if the Church of God
obtain knowledge of those things, which the goodness of God has appointed for
her use. This truly is the spirit of Antichrist, that he should forbid
those things to be known which the holy ghost has delivered to that entente
they should be known. where as S. Ihon testifies that he wept exceadingly,
because those things were kept from the knowledge of the Church for a time
that she might better understand by whose benefit she obtained the knowledge
of them at the length.

Verse. 5. And one of the elders said unto me weep not. etc.

THe Lord suffered not his servant to be long vexed for the want of that thing
which by any means should be proffitable unto him, but when he had first
showed yt all other means did fail, he brings forth our only mediator by
whose means, that whereof S. Ihon did almost despeyre should be be performed.
For they that thrist after ye knowledge of good things (as he has promised)
shall at length be satisfied. Wherefore one of the 24. elders is sent unto him,
to comfort him, declaring that one was now sound, that should open the seals
of the book, read it, and also make the Church partaker of it.

Weep not. etc. As if he should say, this vision was not therefore showed
thee, that thou should vex thy mind thereby with immoderate sorrow but this
rather was the meaning of the holy ghost, to admonish the that this treasure is
opened unto the proffite of the Church by the benefit of Christ alone. Here
let the Church learn worthily to esteem the knowledge of these mysteries,
seeing it is purchased unto her by no other means, but by the mediation of
Christ alone.

Behold the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the root of David has obtained to
open the book, and to lose the seven seals thereof. etc. He reportethe a
matter worthy both to be maruailed and also diligently considered, that
only Christ took in hand and accomplished a work of such difficulty which
could be brought to pass by none other means. Wherefore he calls it his
victory not unworthily, because none durst take ye enterprise in hand but he.
But let us here see with what co^mendations he sets forth the virtue and
power of Christ. First he calls him a lion of the tribe of Judah, secondlye
the root of David and last of all the conqueror of so hard an enterprise.
That he calls him the lion of the tribe of Judah, he alludeth doubtless, to
the old prophecy of the patriarch Iacobe concerning his son Judah: that he
should be as a lion terrible to his enemies, so that even when he was a sleep
no man durst awake him. Now what dignity or prerogative so ever God gave unto
that tribe, it is certain it was for this only end, to set forth the glory
of Messiah which should arise out of that tribe. Wherefore the whole tribe was
as a lions whelpe terrible to their enemies, but especially Christ which was
borne of that tribe, may chaleng this honor unto him, that as a conqueror and
triumpher over all his enemies, he sits in heaven on high. He calls him
the root of David to show that it is he whom the scriptures pronounces to be
the son of David. Esaye truly magnifieth a rodd that should spring out of
the dry stock of Isay the Father of David, upon which the spirit of
understanding, wisdom, counsel, prudence, and fear of the Lord, shall rest
that worthily we may acknowledge that it is he, whom it behooves only to
open these heavenly mysteries unto us. When he therefore with these
commendations, sets forth his fearful power, and wonderful wisdom, he
declares that he only is worthy, which should obtain the victory of so
hard a conquest.

Verse. 6. Then I beheld and ^o in the midst of the throne, and of the 4.
beasts and in the midst of the elders, stood a lamb as though he had been
killed which had 7. horns and 7. eyes which are the spirits of God sent into
all the world etc.

ANd when as one of the elders had spoken these things, by and by (says he)
I saw a lamb in the midst of the throne as though he had been slain which
took upon him to open this book, which lamb he shows by many circumstances
to have signified Christ. First that he did apeare under y^ shape of a lamb,
whom Ihon Baptist magnifieth to be appointed of god the la^be which should take
away the sin of the world, by the sacrifice of his death. But it is meruail
that he was showed in the form and shape of a lamb, whom one of the elders a
little before had said to be a Lion. But thus we must answer: that Christ is
a lion against his enemies, and a lamb that he might yield that obedience
to his father, by which he should deserve to be the redeamer of the world.
Moreover, that this invincible force and strength painted forth under the
figure and shape of a lion, never showed it self forth more happily, then in
the sacrifice of his death, by which he most strongly subdued the deadly
enemies of mankind, the devil, death, sin, and hell: Furthmore the lamb
apeareth in the midst of the throne, that the equalle of the divine glory he
has with the father might be showed. Away therefore with the cursed impiety of
the heretics, which pratleth yt Christ is not equal with the father, when as
S. Ihon saw him in the midst of the throne, and of the 4. beasts and 24.
elders, by which figures the greatest majesty and glory of the mighty God is
described. He seems as though he had been slain, because by the price of
his death, he obtained this in comparable dignity to his manhod, that he might
be worthy which should open the secreate mysteries of Gods counsel to men.
Besides this he has seven horns and seven eyes, by ye horns no doubt is
signified his full strength and power, for although he show him self meke and
gentle, under the shape of a lamb, yet he has might enough whereby he is able
to break and overcome, the force and strength of all his adversaries. The
mystery of the seven eyes, S. Ihon him self expounds, to signify seven
spirits, which are sent into the whole earth, that is the perfect wisdom of
the holy ghost, by which Christ does govern his Church which is spread over the
face of the whole world. Let us not fear therefore to become subject to Christ
which is endued with so great power, that nothing is able to resist him and
moreover furnished with so wounderfull providence, that he guides and
disposes al things, in all places to the safeguard of his Church.

Verse. 7. And he came and took the book out of the right hand of him that sat
upon the throne. etc.

CHrist which is the lamb of God, slain from the beginning of the world, is
found worthy alone, which should open and read this book. Which when it was
testified sufficiently by the voice of an Angel, he could have rested and
been content with that praise which was granted to him of all things, if he
were no rather desirouse of our health and salvation, then of his own glory.
Christ therefore came out of the bosom of his father and out of the middes^e
of the throne, an interpretor of Gods divine will and pleasure, and for our
instruction has opened the book which he took out of the right hand of him
that sat upon the throne, which being opened he expounds it unto us.

Verse. 8. And when he had taken the book, the 4. beasts and 24. elders fell
down before the lamb having every one harpes and golden vials full of
odoures, which are the prayers of ye saints. etc.

WIth what thankefullnesse of mind we ought to receive this benefit of
Christ, we are taught by ye example of the beasts, of the elders, of the Angels
and of all ye creature of god. So much more our vnthankefullnesse is to be
lothe^, which when we are those to whose commodity and health this whole
benefit is referred, yet as though this thing did very little or nothing at
all touch us, we neither show our selves thankful to the aucthor of this
benefit, neither do greatly esteem ye benefit it self. But it behooves us
to consider, by what means they prepare themselves to sing forth the praises
of God. They fall down upon their faces before yt lamb, as well the 24. elders
as the 4. beasts, and do offer unto him divine honor. For it is he who^ all
the angels of God, are commanded to worship. For no creature which is not
God can take this honor, without great sacrilege, this la^be of God therefore
is God whom all the Angels do worship. Moreover by this gesture they
testifye there modesty and submission, that they are no otherwise fit to set
forth the praises of Christ, then if they acknowledge the^ selves altogether
unworthy of so great honor. They have every one harpes, whereby the consent
and harmony might be the greater, by which they show that all there strength,
and the inward affections of there mind, do agree with there tongue in
celebrating and magnifying the praises of God. Moreover they have golden vials
full of odoures, which are the prayers of the saints, as he him self
expounds it. For the Church which is the congregation of the saints,
offers to God a sweet smelling sacrifice, when she pours out unto Christ,
prayers, and supplications for the health of the whole body and every member
of the same. For so yt prophet of old time did sing in ye 141. Psalm. let my
prayer be as an incense in thy sight, and the lifting up of my hands as the
evening sacrifice. And they have these sweet odoures in golden no^els, that we
may be admonished, that those prayers must proce^de out of a pure and sincere
heart, which shall be acceptable in the sight of Christ. Let us offer up
therefore the incense ^f our prayers, out of golden viales, corrupted and
defiled with no hypocrisy or wicked affection, so they shall be for a savor of
sweetness to the Lord and his Christ. But that, certain do here contend yt
the prayers of the saints living in earth are offered up to God, either by
the Angels, or by other saints departed out of this life, it is more weak,
then that it should need any long confutatio^. For here the. 24. elders which
are interpreted, the saints, are said to offer to God not the prayers of
others, but there own, whereby is signified, that the intercessions of the
whole Church are offered to God through our only mediator Christ Jesus, for
we saye^ before that this fellowship of the elders did signifye and represente
the Church, partly warring in earth, and partly triumphing in heaven with
Christ their Emperor.

Verse. 9. And they sing a new song saying. etc.

BY singing they express there joy and sincerity of mind. Confessing that
nothing can be more pleasant unto them, then for ever to magnify and set
forth the praises of Christ. And they sing a new song, the recording whereof
continuallye, is never tediouse or ircksome unto them. Although they shall
sing it a thousand times, yet the newnes thereof does always please the^,
because they do celebrate ye praises of Christ for ever without wearines. For as
the benefit of Christ, is eternal, it so behooves that his glory should also
be eternal. And like as by no age or continaunce of time the excellency of
his goodness is deminished, so the remembrance of his love ought never to wax
old in the minds of the godly. But always they may think they have new
matter offered unto them, to magnify Christ, as often as they shall consider,
that the profit and commodity of his benefits shall never die. Which if it
were taken of all men with that affection it ought: There should not so many
be found, which with full mouths do boast them selves to be the disciples of
Christ, to whom nothing is more tediouse, and fuller of weariness, then to
leave of from there trifels and vain pleasures a very small time, to the
settinge forth of the glory of Christ.

Thou art worthy to take the book and to open the seals thereof because thou
wast killed. etc. This truly is the song, which with heart, mind and tongue
they sing to the praise and commendation of Christ. That the lamb of God is
worthy alone among all creaturs, which should take ye book and open the
seals thereof, which has deserved to open unto men the will of his heavenly
father, which was seven fold shut up and hid from the knowledge of mankind.
They show why he is worthy, when they say he was slain, for the obedience of
Christ deserved so much, that it brought to us (god being reconciled) health
and salvation, to him self the dignity of incomparable glory.

And thou have redeamed us to God by thy blood out of every kindered, and
tongue, and nation, and people. etc. The effect of his death is described,
that we which were the servants of sin, guilty of death, and bound slaves
of the devil, by his inestimable grace are delivered from so great evils our
price and ransom being paid, not gould or silver or any corruptible thing,
as Peter saiethe, but his own precious blood, which has washed us from al
uncleanness, and brings us forth into the presence of God clothed with new
righteousness, not only chosen out of the tribe of Judah, or out of the tribes of
Israel, but taken out of every kindred, tongue, people ^ nation, whereby the
calling of the gentles is plainly declared.

Verse. 10. And have made us king and priest to our God. etc.

WE are made of servants kings, that is partakers of the heavenly kingdom
by says, of profane and unclean despisers of God preistes, to offer up
spiritual sacrifices to God.

And we shall reign upon the earth. etc. He signifies that we shall not have
a bare and empty name of a king, as we know many to challenge to them selves
the kingelye name, when as they have no government or kingedome at all, he
says it shall come to pas that the faithful shall in very deed reign over
the earth. Yet this seems to be against reason, that they seem to say that the
kingedome of CHRIST shall be earthly which he flatlye denies to be of this
world, but we must understand that under the figure of an earthlye kingedome
the heavenly kingedome is described. And the faithful are admonished, in the
mean time to bear all greifes patiently which they sustain for the
professinge of the gospel, whereas shortly after kinglye dignity shall follow
there miseries and calamities, which ought to be unto them insteede of great
consolation and comfort. Let us learn here when it comes to pas that we be
oppressed wc the cruel tyranny of satan or his ministers, not to despair,
but to lift up our minds to the most blessed hope of the heavenly
kingedome. He is faiethfull which has promised, I even now this in heritage is
purchased, if that we patiently wait for the time apoincted of God, when we
shall enter into the same.

Verse. 11. And I saw and heard the voice of many angels about the throne and
about the beasts and the elders. and there were thousane thousands. etc.

Saint John does diligently set forth this vision, that of all creatures as
many as are in heaven or in earth, Christ is acknowledged to be worthy alone,
which should be the interpreter of his fathers will, and declare and open to
his Church, the mysteries of things to come. But it is obscure and darcke
which he says, that he saw and heard the voice, when a voice is only heard
and not seen, but we must remember, that sight is not to be referred to the
voice, but the infinite multitude of Aungelles which compassed about the throne
of God. Like as the glory of a king stands in the multitude of people, so
the majesty of God is here described compassed about with an innumerable
army of blessed spirits, which are all most redely prepared to obey him, these
also do rejoice with the Church for the grace of Christ, whom they extol with
worthy praise.

Verse. 12. Saying with a loud voice the lamb is worthy which was killed to
receive power and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory,
and praise etc.

THousand thousands of blessed spirits do witness with a loud voice, that
Christ which by his death redeamed mankind from destruction, is most worthy
all the praise of power, riches, wisdom, strength, honor, glory, and
blessing. Would God all those which profess yt they seek the glory of
Christ, would retain this Aungelicall confession, to ascribe all laud,
honor, dignity and thanks giving, to him alone, which by his death has
bewtified the power, riches, and wisdom of God above all the capacity of men
and Angels. The Angels therefore could satisfy them selves with no
multitude or deaping together of words, that they might worthily extol his
glory.

Verse. 13. And all the creatures which are in heaven, and on the earth, under
the earth and in the sea, and all that are in them heard I saying, praise and
honor and glory and power be unto him that sits upon the throne and unto
the lamb for euermor. etc.

THis may worthiely be called a catholic confession, which all the creatures
which are within the compass of heaven do make, that to God only and to
Christ all blessing, honor, power, is dew for ever and ever. Moreover when the
same things are attributed to Christ together with him that sits on the
throne, who sees not yt they acknowledge Christ to be eternal god? that he
names creatures under the earth, he means not souls in Purgatory, neither
the deuill^ of hell, but it is added for amplification and enlarging the
matter, like as he numbreth all the creatures as it were by there kinds, as
before in the third verse, likewise in these words (and all things which are
in them) when as he had rehearsed before all things in heaven and earth and in
the sea. But in that the dumb creatures do also sound forth the praises of
God, with what ardent zeal ought men endued with reason apply them selves to
set forth the glory of God.

Verse. 14. And the 4. beast said Amen, and the 24. elders fell down and
worshipped him that lives for evermore. etc.

TO this godly and holy song, the 4. beasts which are Cherubine and Seraphin
appointed of God for the preservation of his creatures, do sing Amen. The 24.
elders which are the company of the faithful, falling prostrate, do worship
him which lives for ever and ever, with all submission of mind giving to God
only by Christ all glory, honor and thankesgeuing, for the health and
salvation purchased unto them.

The syxte Chapter.
THe six first seals of the book being opened by the la^be, so many secret
mysteries of Gods will a^e revealed to the Church, the victory of the Gospel,
murder, famine, pestilence, ye complaints and consolation of the martyrs, and
lastly an earthquake, which should shake the whole world.

Verse. 1. And I saw when the lamb had opened one of the seals and I heard one
of the beasts say as it were thunder come and see.

Whatsoever God has decreed with him self, concerning the ordering and
disposing of things in the world and principally in the Church, the same is
far removed from the knowledge of men, except the lamb which is the son of
God, vouchsafe to open the same unto us, which does not only reveal the
secreates of things to come, but also he shows unto us the invisible God
himself, John the 1. chap. After therefore that ye lamb, to whom this office
does only belong as we have learned in the former chap had opened one of the
seals s. John heard a voice uttered by one of the 4. beasts, as the voice of
thunder which gives him leave to behold, this voice although it were uttered
up one of the 4. beasts, yet it is known to be the voice of God him self,
whose servant only ye Angel was for it is not lawful to any creature to
give leave of him self either to approach near or to behold any thing in
the divine mysteries of God: it was like thunder that it might wake and sterre
up al his senses to attentatio^ and diligent consideration, for we ought to
shake of the drowsenes fyxed in man's nature if we will come (...) to the
beholdinge of Gods mysteries.

Verse. 2. Therefore I behold and lot there was a white horse and he that sat
on him had a bow, and a crown was given unto him, and he went forth
conqueringe that he might overcome. etc.

THe openinge of this first seal, to the comfort of the godly describes
under the figure of a white horse, and of him that sat upon him, the victory
of the Gospel spread over the whole world. For the white horse signifies
the ministry of the gospel, over which Christ has the ruling even as one
that sits upon an horse, by whose ayed, the heavenly doctrine is carried
with wonderful swiftnes over the face of the whole earth, so that wtin few
years after ye ascension of Christ, ye base and contible co^pan^ of the
Aposteles, spread abroad ye doctrine of ye gospel into all regions of the
world. The whitenes of the horse describes the ministry of the gospel to be
most beautiful, such as it is in it self not such as it seems unto the
world, for beutifull are the feet of them yt bring the glad tidinges of peace
of them that declare good things. Joyful and happy therefore is ye coming of
this horse chiefly when he bears such a one upon his back. For by him that
sits upon the horse, we must understand Christ him self, or else the
doctrine of the gospel, which should be spread into al parts of ye world, by
the ministry of the word. He is armed with a bow, which showteth far, and
perceth deep. that he might signify that his force should with swift course
he sent forth into the uttermost borders of the earth, and enter eve unto the
depest secreates of the heart. Lastly he has a crown given unto him, which
is a sign and token of the kingdom and victory which he shall get in the
world, in spite of Satan ^ all his ministers. Because the full time was come
in which he that sat upon the horse should show forth his strength, in
delivering the Church out of the ^awes of satan, he sets forward and
whether soever he goes, he gets the victory, neither is he sent forth of
God to any other end, then that he might get a noble victory over Gods
ennemies. This truly ought to be a comfort, and as a spur to the ministers
of the gospel, that they should not fainct under there burden, neither by
cowardlynes leave there camp, if they were persuaded, that the doctrine which
they preach, shall suerly get the victory, in spite of the devil and all other
ennemies. For in vain does all the wickedness of the world labor to hinder
his course, or to overcome him, whom God him self has purposely sent forth
already crowned, not to a doubtful battle, but to a certain victory. And
this figure does represent the primitive Church, a that first age, in which
the white horse clear from all spots of perverse and wicked opinions, carried
ye doctrine of y^ Gospel through the whole world.

Verse. 3. And when he had opened the second seal I heard the second beast
saying come and see. etc.

LEast we might suppose that all things should joyfully go forward
according to these happy beginninges, the opening of the second seal does
show, that the doctrine of the gospel should be received with the wicked
hatred and malice of satan and the world. Touching that he is called to behold
by the voice of the second beast, we may learn to use our selves soberlye
and modestly in searchinge out the mysteries of God, that we covet not to know
more, then the Lord does vouchsafe to reuele unto us. Moreover that he might
more diligently consider all ye several of this vision, it behooves that to
every one he should be styrred up with a new call, for such is the weakness
of our nature that except we be very often provoked to meditate and consider
those things which God has reveled unto us, nothing is more ready then that
the same should fall ^ slip out of our minds.

Verse. 4. And there went out another horse that was red, and power was given
him that sat there on, to take peace from the earth, and that they should kill
on another, and there was given him a great sword.

IT is certainly sure that the gospel of it self is the doctrine of peace,
not only between God and men, but also to men among them selves. For what
other thing does the gospel teach then that we should rest by true faieth in
God our father, which is reveled unto us by the death of Christ, and that we
should embrace righteousness and peace with men which are our brethren. But it
comes to pas by ye wickedness of men and ye craft of satan, that when this
holsom and peaceable doctrine is rejected, men do cruelly rage among them
selves, with murdering and slaughters, and god him self sends tumults and
vprores of war, that he may take vengeance upon the wicked despicers of his
word, which is here plainly expressed under the figure of the red horse, and
satan sittinge upon him. For the red horse does signify the cruel and
bloody purpose of Satan, by which he strives even at once utterly to root
out all the professors of the gospel, except his cruelty should be bridled
by the unchangeable decree and purpose of God. Hereof it comes to pas, that
the gospel being once preached, there arise horrible commotions, slaughters,
and tumults. But Gods divine providence does so moderate all these things,
that by these temptations he truth his children, he suffers his adversaries
to flea and murder one another. And this is it which John says that power
was given to this rider, to take peace from the earth, that me^ might rage and
war cruel among them selves with killing and murdering and for a token of the
same power, he received a great sword. This is that sword, which Christ
affirms he came into the world to send. This worthy to be noted yt the devil
him self although he burn with cruel hatred against the godly, yet he can
work nothing against them, but so much as there merciful father does grant.
Also for the revenge of the death of the godly, yt the lord does turn the
sword of the enemies through there own bowels. For we scarce read at any
time, yt cruelty was used against the godly, but yt there blood was revenged,
is greater bloodshed of the persecutours. And this seems to be the figure of
the Church, which Satan assalted with open violence under the Roman
emperors, even to the time of Constantine the great, for in that space Satan
wrought innumerable slaughters of ye holy martyrs under Domitiane, ^ra^ane
Antoninus, Decius, Dioclesian, Maxentius, Licin^^s, and other cruel tyrants.
But god thoroughly revenged there death, when infinity thousands of them which
became ministers of Satan's madness in persecuting the Church were daily
consumed, either by foreign wars, or civil seditio^s, and the Emperors also
themselves, proconsuls, and governors of provinces, by poisoning, by treasons,
by tumults, and often times murdering them selves, did bear the due punishment
of there cruelty. And yet his course was not hindered, nor his victory
disgraced, which sitting upon the white horse went forth that he might co^quer
and overcome. But rather among these bloody swords, and sore wou^des, his
victory appeared much more gloriouse.

Verse. 5 And when he opened the third se^le I heard the third beast saying come
and see, then I beheld and ^o a black horse and he that sat on him had
balaunces in his hand.

HE had need of a new admonisher that he might diligently print in his mind
the mystery of the third seal. And it was on this sort, when men waxed werie
of heavenly food, God sends hunger and famine among them, that they may
suffer there deserved punishments for despicing his gospel. There appears
therefore a black horse, carrying the sorrow and grie^e of famine into the
world, yt they which will not acknowledge ye happy victory of him yt sat upon
the white horse going before, should he miserably afflicted of the sturdy and
cruel sitter upon the black horse. This horsema^ carries a paier of bala^ce yt
he may beliuer to me^ for there sustena^ce bred and water by weight, by which
we read that the scarcite of things, and famine is signified, as in Leuit. 26.
Ezekiel 4. and ^. When the Lord threateneth that ten women shall bake together
in one oven, and shall deliver forth bread by weight, and the Lord does
denounce by ye Prophet, that the Israelites shall take for there sustenaunce
bread and water, by weight and measure. But here he foretells not so much
the scarcity of corn and victualles, as that woeful scarcity and hunger of
the word of God, which Amos says shall come upon the world for the contempt
of the same.

Verse. 6. And I heard a voice in the midst of the 4. beasts say: A measure
of wheat for a penie, and three measures of barley for a penny, and oyel and wine
hurt thou not. etc.

LEast he should think this famine to be the most bitterest of all the
plagues, he hears an oracle out of the midst of the 4. beasts, that this
punishment shallbe tolerable, as that which should not bring utter
destruction. For he proclaymeth one measure called Chenix of wheat for a
penye, and three of the same measures of barley for a penny, and that there shall
be no scarcity of wine and oyel. Chenix was a measure of wheat and barley, so
much as should suffice a servant, for one days sustenaunce. The old
interpretor does translate it two pownde, Budeus four pound, Pollux writes
that it weieth but three pound. Ezechiel in Chap. 4. does allow for the
sustenaunce of one man for a day twenty sycles, that is one pound of bread,
and the sixth part of a hin of water. And the Roman penny comed under Domitia^
was almost as much as 7. of our pence. And at that time they did work for a
penie a day. When as therefore every days labor should be spent for there
breadcorne of wheat* he signifies that the scarcity should be great, but yet
such as might be borne, seeing there should be greater plenty of barley, and no
scarcetie of wine and oil. And this figure seems to represent the state of
the Church, after it had taken root in the world, but chiefly after the
peace granted thereto by constantine when as besides the horrible herisyes
which did openly defyle and corrupt the doctrine of Christ, many other
traditions of men and unprofitable ceremonies crepte in, by which a great
famine of sincere and pure doctrine which is the spiritual meat of the soul,
was brought into the Church, and yet not so great, but that there was
sufficient of necessary food, to the keeping of eternal life. For although
they suffered the penury of pure wheate^ bread, yet there was barley bread,
which they might use although not for so pure nurishment, yet for necessary
food. Notwithstanding in the mean time, there wanted not matter of spiritual
joy and gladness, (which is figured by the wine and oyel) to the godly,
which holding the only foundation of there faith, which is Christ, have
obtained remission of sins, peace and quietness of conscience, through the
benefit of the same Christ.

Verse. 7. And when he had opened the fourth seal I heard the voice of the
fourth beast say come and see. etc.

THe fourth seal being opened, he is admonished by the voice of the fourth
beast to come nerer and to behold the thing more certenlie and throughlye.

Verse. 8. And I looked and behold a pale horse and his name that sat on him was
death, and hell followed after him, and power was given unto him over the
fourth part of the earth, to kill with sword, and with hunger and with death,
and with the beasts of the earth. etc.

THis pale horse which carries death upon his back. signifies the plague and
other pestilent dyseases, which by the just judgment of God do slay men for
the contempt of the Gospel. And after death follows hell, that it should
not be thought to be a pestilence of the bodies only, but that with eternal
death of the soul and torments of hell do follow after. And truly hell
always follows the death of the body, except in those only, to whom the
stinge of death is broken, and the victory of hell spoiled and taken away, by
the death of Christ. And least it might be thought, that pestilence only
should devour the reprobate, he hereth that there was power given unto him, to
destroy the third part of men with sword, famine, pestilence, and teeth of
wild beasts. with these 4. kinds of punishments God being angry, does
strike, as Moses witnesses in the 26. chap. of Leuit. Whereby we gather that
the condition and state of those times shall be very miserable, this terrible
thretening shall be fulfilled. Such as those times were when the empire of Rome
was spoiled and wasted fair and wide by the Goths, Hunnes, Vandalles, and
other barbarouse nations. For histories do testify, that there were never
more manifest examples of Gods vengeance, then in those miserable times, when
all places were filled with murderings, burninges, famishment, pestilence, and
beasilye cruelties of barbarouse people. What meruail, if then the pure
doctrine of Christ almost driven out, and condemned in many places were sylent,
whereas before it flourished wonderfully, if heresies, perverse, and wicked
opinions, and traditions of men did then receive so great strength? when by the
just judgment of God the minds of men must be bewitched with lies and
falsehood, for neclecting the truth: if the Church smitten and shaven with the
persecutions of pagans and heretics was greatly deminished and brought into
a straight and narow Rome? But against all these calamities and miseries the
minds of the faithful ought to have been armed, that they should not faint
in such sturdie storms of temptations, but hold and keep an undefiled and
constante profession of there faith even to the end.

Verse. 9. And when he had opened the fyft seal, I saw under the altar the
souls of them that were killed for the word of god and for the testimony
which they maynteyned. etc.

THe opening of the fifte seal declares the state of the faithful after they
are departed this life. For when as they being oppressed with infinite
calamities, were all the day long as sheep appointed to the slaughter, this
doubt might rise in the minds of the godly, what good or evil may come to
them after death? when all there life they are entreated after a wretched
manner, and afterward by the Barbarouse cruelty of there enemies they are
diliuered up and put to most bitter death. Christ takes away this scruple or
doubt, when as he shows, that those which were slain for the word of God,
and the testimony of the Gospel, which they always boldly and frelye
professed, do after this wretched life, inioye blessed tranquillity in heaven
and do look and wait for just revenge upon there wicked enemies. And the
souls of those that were departed out of this life are placed under the altar,
that is, they rest under ye defense of Christ, which is made to god, for them,
the priest, altar and sacrifice, and they them selves also are offered up in
earth by martyrdom for a sacrifice of acceptable and sweet smell. Ve^e fitly
therefore rest is assigned unto them in heaven under ^he altar. But as
concerning the place in which the spirits and souls of the saints are
placed, none other thing is here sign^^^ed by the altar then that which in the
16. Chap. of ^. Luke, is men^ by the bosom of Abraham, and in the 23. Chapter
by paradise.

Verse. 10. And they cried with a loud voice saying how long tariest thou Lord
holy and true to judge and avenge our blood on them that devil on the earth.
etc.

THe blessed spirits wish and desire that the glory of God may be extolled
above all things, they are here therefore brought in by a figure called
prosopopeia taking it grievously that the judgment of God was so long
deferred: that vengeance was not yet taken upon the bloody enemies of Christ
and his Church. But it is not so much here expressed in what kind of affection
they are endued, as it is described, what there persecutoures have deserves.
That we should not either imagine those to be lost which give there lives for
the glory of Christ, or think that the wicked shall always preuail in there
wickedness. They cry with a loud voice, that they seem to be touched with an
earnest desire of revenge. How long o Lord. etc. They do not expostulate or
quarrel with God, as though he were unjust unto them, in that he deferred
there revenge in long, but according to the manner of the godly they pour
forth there complaints into his bosom. For when they call him holy and true,
they signifye that he neither can nor will suffer any thing, which is not in
all points agreeable to his righteousness and truth. For it is not agreeable
to the justice of God, that he should always suffer the injuries done to the
godly to be unrevenged and it is contrary to the truth of his word, that
wicked men should escape unpunished, of whom he has promised so often that he
will take due punishemente upon them for there wicked and heynouse offenses.

Verse. 11. And long white garments were given to every one of them.

WHite garments are signs of dignity, wherewithe Christ extolleth the souls
of them, which have not refused valiantly to suffer death for the testimony
of his Gospel. For although they do not as yet inioye the full and perfect
joy of happiness (such as shall be given them after the restoring of both body
and soul) yet they live and reign with there head Christ in heaven, inioying
happy and blessed tranquillity, but yet so that they carefully under hope, do
wait for the restoring of the bodies, and the time of the last judgment. And
this dignity comes unto them only by Christ, as we shall hear in ye next
chapter following, of those that have washed there garments in the blood of
the lamb.

And it was said unto them that they should rest for a little season until
the number of there fellows and brethren and of them that should be killed as
they were, were fulfilled. etc. They are commanded to rest in this quietness,
and to bear patiently for a little time the deferring of the last judgment,
that the whole number of them whom God has likewise ordained to the glory of
martyredome, should obtain with them the same palm and praise of victory.
Whereby it is euidente, that although almost infinite thousand martyrs
which suffered under those ten famous persecutions, that yet there
remainethe a great number of the godly, which are reserved and kept and shall
suffer the like things, in the openinge of the sixth and seventh seals.
Moreover the time is called short, although it last many hundred years after,
because the Lord has appointed the end and terms of the same, which if we
have respect to the everlasting comfort and consolation, ought to seem very
short. For what equallity or proportion is there of that which has an end,
with that which is infinite? Neither are our sufferinges to be esteemed if they
be compared to the glory that shall follow. Moreover we understand by this
place yt can none promote or prefer them selves to the glory of martyredome,
but he which is appointed and ordained of God for the same work. Lastly we are
sufficiently instructed by this vision, yt the souls of those that are
departed do not sleep without any sense or felinge of happiness, when with a
loud voice they desire revenge they praise and magnifye God, are clothed in
white garments are commanded to wait and abide for the victory of there
fellows and brethren.

Verse. 12. And I beheld when he opened the sixth zeal and lo there was a
great earth quake, and the sun was black as sackecloth made of hear, and
the moon waxed even as blood. etc.

THe openinge of the sixte zeal sets forth a terrible earth quake and also
diverse wonderouse things of heaven. Christ prophesied in the 24. chap. of
Matthew, that there shall be famine, and pestilence and great earthquakes in many
places al which things, as also they are foretold to come by this vision, so
if they be understood without figure, as Christ himself testifies, they are
only the beginniges and as it were the foretellinges of sorrows, and truly
there cronicles are full of many great earthquakes in diverse and sundry nations
and cuntries, which as Il grant that they were signs of euilles should
follow, so I doubt not but that by the earthquake here are forshewed great
alterations and chaunges of empire and religion, which should follow almost
through the whole world. such as were when the wicked pestilence of mahomet
prevailed in the world through the sarasines, and suddenly spread over the whole
empire of the cast and at length the turks succedinge oppressed ye greatest
part of the west also. Then truly Christ the son of righteousness suffered
a great eclipse, when the pure doctrine of the gospel was darkened almost to
all which seemed to be like sackeclothe of hear to them, whose eyes the
brightness of this world had so tied and bound that they were blind even in
the clear and broad daily light. For Christ himself suffered not any part of
his own glory to be deminished: which was even then also the light of the
world and the son of righteousness, to the faithful although they were very
few, but that he seemed to be so to the wicked multitude, when as most sharp and
cruel persecution raging, very few durst truly and boldly profess him. The
moon that is the church which boroweth here light of the sun, that is of
Christ, is not only (the sun being darkened) deprived of her light, but
also through the horrible slaughters and calamities is all over covered with
bloudye colloure.

Verse. 13. And the stars of heaven fell unto the earth even as a fygge tree
casts of her untimely fygges when she is shaken of a mighty wind. etc.

THe doctors and teachers, which in the sincere doctrine of ye Gospel seemed to
shine as the stars in heaven, and other professors also, now overcome with
calamities, and oppressed with miseries, do fall down to earthly things:
they forsake Christ and his Church and embrace this present world. And least
they may seem to be few which shall do this, he shows that there shall be
innumerable, which no otherwise the^ untimely fygges do fall from the fygge
tree when it is shaken of a vehement and mighty wind, even so together and as
it were with one violent motion, many, and at length almost all, shall fall from
the confession of the heavenly doctrine to the dross and corruption of this
world.

Verse. 14. And heaven departed a way as a scrole when it is rolled together and
all mountains and Islles were moved out of there places. etc.

THe doctrine of ye gospel being taken from among the^ which was wont to open
heaven, the very sight also of the heaven it self is taken from the eyes of
men. The similitude of the scrole rolled together does express the sudden
taking away of the same. The mountains also and the Isles which were wont to
be refuges and places of safeguard in such calamities, are not free them selves
from the same terrible motions, so that there apeareth no comfort at all to
wretched and miserable men either in heaven or in earth.

Verse. 15. And the kings of the earth and the great men and the rich men, and
the chief Captains, and the mighty men, and every bond men and every free
man, hid them selves in dens and in rocks of the hills. etc.

THese proud despisers of the wholesome doctrine, which giving them selves to
riote, and vain pleasures, have neclected the true worship of God, whether
they be kings, or wether they be great men, rich men, or chief captains,
potentates or mighty men, with all there train, both free and bound, shall
now bear the punishmente of there impiety, when as for fear of the evils
hanginge over them, they shall fearfully hide them selves in the dens and
holes of the mountains.

Verse. 16. And they said to the hills and rocks fall on us and hide us from
the presence of him that sits on the throne and from the wrath of the lamb.
etc.

NOw they which hitherto have carelessly despised God, being pricked with the
furies of there own conscience, do at length acknowledge these calamities to
be sent upon them from God being angry. They do not so much fly death, which
they desire to be upon them for ever, but the sight of him that sits upon
the throne, and the wrath of the lamb, which is judge both of the living and
dead: what the^ are the torments of hell when the horror and fear of
judgment is so great? and we may note that the wrath of the lamb which is so
gentle to his friends, is terrible to his enemies, although in time past he
offered up him self to the Jews to be slain.

Verse. 17. For the great day of his wrath is come and who can endure it. etc.

NOw they confess that the time is come in which they shall be punished for
there wickedness, and that it cannot be avoided, but that they must needs
feel the severity and sharpness of the la^be which no mortal creature is
able to bear. Let us therefore kiss the son while he offreth himself unto
us easy to be pleased, that being free from these evils, we may live
blessedly with him for ever.

The seventh Chapter.
THe blessed rest of the souls departed out of the body, is described before
in the openinge of the fyfte seal, that is the state of the triumphante
Church in heaven, now is seemed convenient, that it should be declared in this
Chapter, which does perteyne to the opening of the sixte se^le, what should
be, the state and condition of the Church militante in earth. For the same
being preserved and kept out of the greatest affliction of all which heretofore
has happened and signed with the seal of the living God delivered out of the
calamities and miseries of this life, at length is taken up with those that
went before into the same degree and state of blessedness.

Verse. 1. And after that. etc.

AFter this terrible earthquake, which altogether draw away slothfulness and
dilicacie from the wicked Princes of the world and all the champeons of Satan's
guard which being greatly amazed with terror of wind, they rather wished any
kind of death then that they would be drawn to the tribunal seat of the
angry Judge: Ihon might meruail what should become of the Church of Christ.
He is admonished therefore by this vision, that not one of the whole number of
the faithful whom God has predestinate to eternal life can be brought from
the constant confession of the true faith either by the cruel torments of the
persecutours or by the subtle and privy deceites of heritiques, and false
deceyuers, although never so great storms of persecutions fall upon them.

I saw four Aungells stand on the four corners of the earth holding the
four winds of the earth, that the voices should not blow on the earth never
on the sea neither on any tree. etc. It pertayneth not greatly to us to know
wether they were good or evil Augels, for God as it seems god unto him self
executes his judgments both by good and evil Angels. For a^ evil Angel
brought in the plague in the time of king David. A good Angel also
ouerthrewe the army Sennacheri^ with a mighty great slaughter. Although I do
incline to the Judgment of those which contend that evil Angels are
understood in this place. Howesoeuer it be, it is thought good to the just
judgment of God, to take away almost altogether out of the world, the free
preachinge of the gospel, which before sownded in the whole earth. And the
metaphore of the wind, does very fitly agree: for the word being taken away
the force of the holy ghost, which shows him self forth in the preachinge
of the gospel, is restrained and holden back, that he should not blow upon
the earth nor upon the sea, neither upon any tree. For that which wholesome and
seasonable winds are to the world, the same is the holy ghost, to the
Church. The mystery of the word therefore being taken out of the world, the
Church must needs suffer a sore decay and deminishinge. And here no doubt is
signified the greateste defection and departing almost of the whole world, from
the pure doctrine of the gospel, such as happened in those miserable times,
when the pestilente doctrine of Mahomete invaded all Asia and Africa, the
popish dross daily received great increase in Europe. And it is very like,
that here is noted that general Apostasy, which Saint Paul foresaw
should go before the reuealinge of Antichrist 2. Thessal. 2. chap. which is
plainly described in the openinge of the seventh seal.

Verse. 2. And I saw an other angel ascend from the rising of the sun
which had y^ seal of the living God, and he cried with a loud voice to y^ 4
angels, to whom power was given to hurt the earth and the sea. etc.

I agree with them which understand Christ to be signified by this angel, to
whom those things, which are showed to John in y^ vision, concerning this
angel, do properly belong. And it is so usual in the scriptures, that the
angels do bear or represent the person of there lord and head Christ, that I
will not tarry in it. But as concerning this present place, y^ which is here
spoken, does truly agree to our savior Christ, that he ascended from the
rising of the sun, who Zachary in his song almost with the same words
magnifieth rising and springing from an high. For he is the sun of
righteousness, before whose risinge as well in the greater world as in the less
which is man, nothing is found but most thick darckenes. He is said in this
place to have ascended from the rising of the sun, that by his brightines he
might bring some comfort and consolation, to the godly, for we herd before yt
the sun was darkened in the world, as though it had put on a sack clothe of
hear. But that is applied to the sight of the wicked and of hipocrites, for
Christ ascending from the rising of the sun to the Church his spouse, does
illuminate the same with the most pleasant and brighte beams of his gloriouse
light. Furthermore Christ has yt holy seal of the living God, that is the
everliving, and from whom all life does flow, which seals with the holy
spirit all those whom the heavenly father the founteyne of life, has elected
and chosen to eternal salvation, and who^ he has redeamed by his death, and
restored, by his resurrection into newnes of life. Lastly with great
authority he restrains the force of the 4. Angels, to whom it was
granted that they might hurt the earth and the sea, that they should not touch
any thing at all until he had placed the servant of God in safety. This
place does most clearly show, that God does never so grieuouslye show forth his
wrath against the world; that he should cast away the ear he has over his
Children.

Verse. 3. Hurt ye not the earth, neither the sea, neither the trees, until we
have sealed the servants of our God in there forehedes. etc.

HE commands them that they hurt not the earth, nor the sea, nor the trees,
before that he shall by the setting on of his seal destinguish and sever the
servants of God, from the wicked and hypocritical. Here the punishments of
the ungodly are deferred. while there is provision made for the elect. The
flood came not before Noah with his family had entered into the arcke. And the
Angels witness that they can do nothing to y^ city of the Sodomits, except
Lot were first brought forth into safety. The angel spared the first borne of
ye Egyptians so long, until the posts of the Israelites were sprinkled with
the blood of the paschal lamb, a little before night. And there is the like
thing in the 9. Chapter of Ezekiell whereas the six armed men were sent forth
to destroy the city of Jerusalem, they are commanded to follow the man
clothed with the linen garment, having the inckehorne of a scribe at his
gyrdle, who^e God sent before to set a mark in ye forehead of those, which did
morn for all the abominatio^s which were committed in the city. Those whom
this first did not mark, he committethe to the other to be slain. But they
are signed in this place, not that they should be kept free from pestilence or
murder, but that being delivered from eternal death, they might be knit and
joined to God and Christ there deliverer. And there are none signed besides the
servants of God. And this is also moreover to be noted, that they receive the
print of the seal in there foreheads, to this end, yt as they are the
servants of God, so they may also be known of all men to be such, neither
that they should be ashamed, wheresoever need shall require, to confess whose
doctrine and religion they profess. And although they are signed in there
hearts by the holy ghost, yet the print and figure of the same seal apearethe
in there foreheades, when as with the heart we believe to righteousness, and with
the mouth we confess unto salvation.

Verse. 4. And I herd the number of them that were sealed, and there were sealed
and hundred and four and forty thousand of all the tribes of the Children of
Israel. etc.

THe number of the elect is certain to God, so that one of them can not
perish whom Christ has taken under his protection, for this foundation of
God shall always stand immovable, having this seal: the Lord knows who
be his: and let him depart away from unrighteousness, whosoever names the
name of the Lord. The number truly of the elect is great, and greater then men
would think. The elect in deed are not many if we compare them with the
infinite mylions of the reprobate, but when a man would think that there
remain very few and almost no true worshippers of GOD at all, yet Christ
has his Church. There were seven Thousand that is many thousands of the
Israelites, (when as Elias believed he was alone) which had never departed
from God to the wicked worshipping of Baale. And when we might think the
nation of the Jews almost taken out of the world, by the horrible persecutions
and calamities, which chanced after the opening of the four seals: S. John
hears an hundred and four and forty thousand of those that were signed of
all the tribes of Israel. This number is composed of twelve thousand, twelve
times repeated, the number of twelve signifies yt gathering together out of
yt miseable dispersio^, into one body of Christ and his Church which was
founded in 12. patriarchs, and afterward being foully dispersed, was gathered
together by ye 12. Apostels, which were the preachers of Christ. And Christ
would signify the same thing by the seue^ty and two Disciples sent forth
throughoute the whole region, when this number of so many elders instituted by
Moses, was counted famous among them, and it might plainlye enoughe admonish
the Jews, that the Messiah was come, which would gather together again into one
body, the wa^dering and straying Jews and the Israelits dispersed over the
whole world. We are caught here, that there remains a body of ye Church, to
God, although the members be separated one from another with never so long
distance of place, so that they hold the holy bond of unity in Christ there
head. For wheresoever the dead carcas is, thither will the Eagles be gathered.
Matthew 24.

Verse. 5.6.7.8. Of the tribe of Judah were sealed twelve thousand, of the tribe
of Ruben were sealed twelve thousand. etc.

HE counts it not enough to rehearse the whole number of those that were
sealed, except he should also number out of every particular tribe, twelve
thousand of those that were signed. Which thing he does for this cause,
least any thing of the promises of God, which yet remained most famous and
clear, concerning the restoring of the commune wealth of Israel, might
seem to fail. Not that it is necessary that an equal number should to be
taken out of every tribe, but because the number of twelve, notes perfection,
and it shewethe that the number of the elect is determinate with GOD,
likewise as the multitude of Soldiers is known to there Captain, which that
he may know the certain number of them the better and that order may be kept,
deuideth and distributeth his whole army into ensigns or standerdes, which
Christ does here. Otherwise there is no difference or prerogative of tribes in
the first election. For the order of the ensigns is otherwise distributed
here, then of Moses in the 2. Chapter of the book of Numbers although the
privilege of Judah kept, for the mystery of our redeamer and head, for Christ
came of the Jews. But it causes some to marvel, why the tribe of Dan should
be altogether omitted and left out of this rehersall. The ancient writers
supposed by the Prophecy of Iacobe that Antichrist should he borne of that
tribe, and therefore it was not to be reckoned among the elect tribes, which is
to weak and vain, and it brought forth mo^strouse fables concerning
Antichrist, when as the words of Iacobe sound no such matter Gene. 49. But
only, that like as serpents do set upon men unawares, so the nature of this
tribe should be such that by subtilties and deceytes it should overcome the
enemies. The simplest and plainest cause, why one tribe was omitted, is this,
that there might be place for the tribe of Leuy, which was not to be left out
of that rehersall, for the notable Mystery therein contained, For when as it
had no inheritance in Canaan the land of promise (because the lord was there
portion) now the priesthood being translated to Christ, the holy ghost would
plainly express, that the tribe of Leui also is admitted to the partaking of
the heavenly inheritance, although that among the rest it had no part in the
earthly omision, but of so great a number of Jews which are here rehearsed we
may gather that mystery which Paul touches in the 11. Chap. to the Romans That
blindness is partly happened unto the Jews until the fullness of the
gentiles become in and then all Israel shall be saved.

Verse. 9. And after this I beheld, and so a great multitude which no man could
number, of all nations, kindered, people, and tongues. etc.

IN the first place are numbered those that were signed of Israel which is the
first begotten of God, and after follow the gentiles in there order, which as
the Jews are above them in dignity of time, so likewise they are above them
in multitude and number. A great multitude, (says he) which no man could
number, but yet not of an uncertain number but which is known to God, and
can not be comprehended of men, out of all nations, kindredes, people and
tongues, God is no acceptor of persons but of every nation those that love
him, and work righteousenes, are accepted of him. For in Christ Jesus there is
neither Jew, nor gentile, Scithian or Barbarian, but those whom God has
chosen he has called, who^e he has called he has sanctified, whom he has
sanctified, he has glorified. We se here what a wounderfull great company
of the faithful, by the meruailouse counsel and providence of God besides all
hope of man, is escaped out of so great waves of persecutions. And where as we
thought the Church to be almost destroyed, yet great remnantes of the same to
be preserved by the help of God. We may learn hear that the Church is not
to be sought with the bodily eyes, neither the multitude thereof to be
measured by the Judgment of the senses. For if the Church should always
flourish in the eyes of men, there had been no need that the minds of the
godly should be confirmed by this vision, against that temptation by which
the whole Church should seem to be utterly overthrown, when all things
apeared full of slaughters, herisies falshoodes, defectio^s, that sound rock,
which is promised shall stand against hell gates* which was no where seen with
man's eyes.

Standing before the throne and before the lamb. etc. They which before were
aliants and strangers from y^ Church to whom there was no access open to
God, now are citisius thereof, and the sons of God through the lamb, which
takethe away not the sins of the Jews only, but of the whole world, so
that they may bouldly stand in the presence of God and of Christ, when as the
wicked desired nothing more then to be hid from the presence of him that sat
upon the throne, and from the wrath of the lamb, as we heard in the Chapter
going before.

Clothed with long white robes and palms in there hands. etc. There aparell
and decking eis here described, yt they are clothed in long white garments,
which are tokens of dignity and innocence that they bear palms in there
hands they testify and declare that they are conquerers of the world the
^leshe, and the devil, but because he speaks more at large hereafter of
there happiness, less shall here suffice.

Verse. 10. And they cried with a loud voice saying salvation comes of our
God that sits upon the throne and of the lamb. etc.

THere thanke^ullnesse is declared by the loudnes of there voice, that they
cried out with loud voice, giving worthy honor to God. But this is chiefly
to be observed, that there is one voice of all those that be saved, that they
refer all there salvation that they have received, wholly to God and Christ.
Salvation (say they) to him that sits upon the throne of our God and to the
lamb. These do attribute no part of there salvation to there own deserts,
no part to works of superarogation, no part to creatures although never so
holy, but they ascribe all the glory of the same being restored in God and
Christ, this is the Catholic doctrine of y^ Church, howsoever the Roman
Antichrist condemns it of heresye y^ cause not heard, and persecuteth the
professores of the same with fire and sword, and exquisite torments both by
sea and land.

Verse. 11. And all the Angels stood round about the throne and about the
elders and the 4. beasts, and they fell before the throne on there faces, and
worshipped God saying, Amen. etc

ALthough the whole root of the papists abhor and detest this doctrine as
heretical and Scismaticall, yet it has for defenders even infinite
thousands of Angels, which about the throne of the elders and the four
beasts, do diligently wait upon the will and pleasure of God, as we have
learned in the 5. chap. these do allow with there consent, the triumpha^t song
of the blessed spirits. For after they have yielded reverence to God, with due
submission, which they are wont before they dare bring forth any thing into
his presence, first they testify there godliness in the approving and alowinge
the former song, saying Amen. Afterward that they may satisfye there own
zeal, they expound the same sentence with many mo words.

Verse. 12. Praise and glory and wisdom and thanks, and honor and power and
might, be unto our God for ever more. Amen.

TO this end belongs this heaping together of words that they may testify
ye by all means they ascribe all glory to God alone. Therefore they express
the same thing with mo words all those are, praise and thanks giving, honor
and glory, power and strength. For we can never attribute to much to God in
praises. And by this note or marcke we may descerne the true doctrine of God
from that which is counterfere and forged, for that doctrine which fears to
give to much to god, as the popish doctrine does, is altogether false and
knows not the infinite Majesty of God. For the papists do fly and eschew
this confession, that they should ascribe all laud, glory, and praise, to God,
least nothing should be left which they might attribute to S. Images, to there
works and other there profane toys and trifles.

Verse. 13. And one of the elders spoke saying unto me, what are these that are
arased in long white robes? and whence came they?

Saint Ihon does meruail secretly with him self at the usiber and gloriouse
beauty of those, which after the sealeo^ Israelites ^ame forth before y^
throne. Yet he durst not ask who they were modestly waiting whether that
should be revealed unto him or not, by the permission of God. One of the elders
therefore makes answer not to the question but to ye doubt of Ihon
familierly talking with him, and asking him, whether he knew well what they
were, which were araied in long white garments and from whence they came.

Verse. 14. And I said unto him Lord thou know according to. etc.

IHon makes answer according to his simplicity, honorably (as the manner is
of speaking to a noble personage) calling the elder Lord that he is ignorant,
but yet hops that he shall be instructed of him concerning the condition of
them, who^ he believes to know the same.

And he said unto me these are they which came out of great tribulation. etc.
This elder declares first what they are and afterward whence they came. These
are (says he) those which by the benefit of God are delivered out of that
horrible affliction which before was described should come* and now being free
from all there labors, they are received unto blessed rest until the day of
resurrection, truly this seems wonderful and strange, that out of so great an
earthquake which did shake all parts of the world, such a number could be
saved, but that we may confess the meruailouse counsel of God to be far
above the capacity of our wit.

And have enla^ged there long robes and have made there long robes white in the
blood of the lamb. etc. He sets forth two notes of dignity to be
considered in there garments, the breath and the color, they ought to
acknowledge, to have received both of them by the benefit of Christ. Large
garments are the appareill of noble personages and mighty men. This largenes
they go in the blood of Christ, which hanged naked upon the Cross that he
might bewtifully cloth us. And they borrowed there white color, (which is as we
said before a token of dignity and innocence) of the red blood of the lamb
which though it always continue red, and as it were even new (...) has this
meruailouse quality, that in washing (...), it tourneth the purple color of
garments, in^o the whitenes of snow or wolle, according to that in the 1.
Chapter of Iesay if your sins shall be as red as scarlet they shall be made as
white as wolle, lastly we must note that all this whitenes is placed in there
garments and not in there bodies, that we may acknowledge that they do not
shine in there own righteousness, but that there uncleanness is covered with the
innocence of Christ, even as with a large garment.

Verse. 15. And therefore they are before the throne of God. etc.

NOt because they trust to there own merits, but because being covered with
the righteousness of Christ they are beautiful to behold, they dare come forth
in to the presence of the throne of the immortal and everliving God. Truly
the dignity of this garment is meruailouse, because they do were it although
they be privy of there own infirmity, yet they are not afraid to come into
the presence of ye most just judge.

And they serve him day and night in his temple. etc. God does accept free
service which are clothed with the innocence of Christ, without which ornament
the service of none can please him, but he will expel them out of his
familye as vagabondes, and runnagates, which do thrust any service upon him
which they would have to be accepted at his hands without Christ. But now
there obedience is acceptable unto him, so that they serve him in his temple as
holy preistes day and night, that is for ever, that they apply them selves to
his holy worship as though they had never been profane. We may learn here
by what means we may offer up in the Church reasonable service accepted of
God, yt is if unclothed of filthy garments of our flesh and having put on the
righteousness of Christ, we come forth into his presence.

And he that sits on the throne will dwell among them. etc. It is not only
accepted of God which his faithful servant do, but he takes upon him the
office of a merciful and liberal lord, when he on the other side becomes
there patron and defendoure, and as the hen covers her chickens, so God will
keep his servant free from the invasions of all evils.

Verse. 16. And they shall hunger no more neither thirst any more neither shall
the sun light on them neither any heat. etc.

ALthough so long as they followed the warfare of Christ in earth, often times
they suffered hunger, often thirst, and parthinge heat of the sun and other
such kind of adversities, now being made free and losed from the bond of
warfare, they feel no more such calamities neither any discommoditye at all
and of ye place some do not amiss that the fire of purgatory is here utterly
quenched, when as this Angel pronounces, that ye godly shall feel no kind of
burninge heat after this life.

Verse. 17. For the lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall feed them
and shall lead the^ unto the lively fountains of waters and god shall wipe
away all tears from there eyes. etc.

THis is a reueng of the cause, because the lamb which has redeemed them
sittinge in the midst of the throne equal to God his Father, has taken the
care and charge of them, and and shall lead them to the perpetual fountains
of living waters which being satisfied, they shall not thirst for ever, and
God himself also will wipe away all tears from there eyes, when from
hencforth there shall be no cause of sorrow and mourning offered unto them, but
they shall have the fruition of perpetual joy world without end. Amen.

The eight Chapter.
THere remains behind as yet the openinge of the seventh seal which being
opened there, are more greiuous calamities, then as yet have been hard of to be
sent forth into the world. When as the kings most terrible or rather the
tyranny of antichriste is described.

Afterward his ruin is fore told and lastly the signs of Christ coming to
judgment do appear.

Verse. 1. And when he had opened the seventh seal, there was silence in
heaven about the space of half an hour, and I saw the seven Aungells standing
before God, and to them were given seven trumpets. etc.

BEcause the greatest matter that ever hapened, and most worthy due
consideration, were made manifest in the openinge of y^ seventh seal, his mind
was to be prepared to ye diligent making of ye same, with a rare and
unaccustomed manner. There is silence therefore made in heaven as it were for ye
space of half an ower in with space whilst all things were silent, the
Apostell should sterre up his mind to the diligent consideringe, what
misterye should be revealed to the Church in the opening of the seventh seal,
which he now saw opened. Moreover when as his mind was holden in suspense half
an hour in ye waiting for of those things which should follow, he could not
but diligently print in his mind the things which so desirousely he had
waited for to know. But this silence may be also referred to the deliberation
of God, for Princes and wise men are accustomed when as they will decree or
pronounce any thing, concerning great matters and weighty affairs, to have
some silence in the mean time that they may not seem to have done it, but
with great deliberation not that the counsels of God are prolonged with
doubtful consultatio^s according to the manner of the counsels of men, but
because he would prepare our minds to the diligent consideration of his works
an^ words, by such signs as it were by aides: if therefore we will
understand those things which are revealed in the opening of this seal, let
us bring minds altogether, void of worldly troubles, and casting of the cares
of all other things for a time, let us give our attendance only to this, that
we may diligently receive those things which the holy ghost has spoken. I know
that this silence is diversely and far otherwise expounded of others, and some
do fly to vain and unprofitable speculations: But this interpretation which
I have brought, as it is the playnest, so it seemed most convenient and fit to
the purpose.

Verse. 2. And I saw seven Aungells which stood before God and to them were
given seven trumpets. etc.

ALl this preparation is set forth to express the greatness of the thing,
first there came forth seven Angels into the presence of god, they stand a
certain while as it were waiting what service god would command the^,
afterward there are delivered into there hands seven trumpetes, yet they do
not straitway sound the same, but they wait for the will of God in all
things. All these do after a sort prouosticate and foretell the heuinesse of
Gods judgments which should shortly after be made manifest. But the number
seven, of the Angels, as otherwhere so also hear, does represent the whole
fellowship of them, which are all continually most redely prepared, to the
obedience of god, although as it seems good to his infinite wisdom, he
apointeth now these, now those to the executing of diverse businesses. But here
the Angels are appointed to be tru^petters, which is because they are ordained
to publish ye judgments of god in the world. For as it is the manner of
kings and Emperors and always has been, to publish to the people there
decrees, especially perteyninge to wars, with the sound of a trompet: so God
has described under a like figure the judgments which he has prepared
against his enemies and despisers of his Gospel, when they are to be made
manifest in there times. And the seven trumpetes, do signifye all the
reuelatio^s of Gods judgments, like as the number of seven is universal, and
signifies fullness in the writings of the prophets. When as therefore seven
Angels go forth with so many trumpets, there is meant, that all the kinds of
punishments, which were included in the seven seals, are to be repeated in
this last seal. No meruail therefore, if our minds with so great preparation,
be stirred up to diligent marking. Moreover if we shall gather the duty of
the doctors and teachers of the Church, by the Angels that sound the trumpets,
we shall not do contrary to reason. And the analogy leads us to the same,
when as there office also is to be declarer of gods judgments. For god has not
been accustomed to send famous plagues into the world, but first me^ were
admonished of the same by prophets and teachers, that all pretense and cloak
of ignorance might be taken from the wicked and if any be curable, they might
repent from there errors, by which being seduced they wandered out of the way,
and so escape the evils hanging over them.

Verse. 3. And an other Angel came and stood before the altar having a
Golden censer. etc.

THis Angel does represent Christ, which is not an Angel by nature, but by
office, and Malachie the prophet calls him the Angel of the covenant. For
when as ye most dangerouse persecution of all, was at hand, under the tyranny
of Antichrist, which is revealed in the opening of the seventh seal^ Christ
comes forth into the presence of God, being the head and preserver of his
Church, as one that would defend the same, against the dangers which were at
hand. Whereby both the greatness of the perilles is expressed, as though now
necessity required that the present help of Christ should be with them, and
as it were to provide them in doubtefull matters: and also the singular love of
Christ toward his, and the especial care he has over them, which when
troubles aproche near, is ready prepared and present to defend the^ before
god, and by continual intercessions to commend the cause of the Church to his
fatherly mercy. And Christ is here brought in exercising the office of an
high priest, (which he has without succession) when as he is placed at the
altar. Whereby he can save for ever those that come unto God through him,
living always for this end, that he may make intercession for them. Hebrews
chap. 7. Which is notablye described under this figure. For he stands at the
altar, not that he may again offer up sacrifice propitiatory, because there is
no oblation for the forgiveness of sin without the shedding of blood. For
this sacrifice being once finished, by which eternal redemption is obtained,
we need not to have it repeated. But when as he is entered into the holy of
holiest that is into heaven, he offerethe up incense in the presence of God,
which are the prayers of the saints upon the golden altar of the incense.
For this figure does allude to the custom of the priests of the old law,
which daily entering into the sanctuary, did offer up incense upon the golden
altar of incense. Exodus 30. Which now the vailes and separations being taken
away and the priesthood translated to Christ only, is removed into the holy
of holiest into which Christ him self has once ascended.

And much odoures was given unto him. etc. The continual prayers of the godly
which they offer up to god through Christ, are odoures or incense, as in the 5.
chap. Verse. 8. And he says much, because when affliction does provoke, the
study of praying is more fervent in the faithful, which when matters are
quiet and pacified, is relented. And this is that pure incense which Malachie
in the 1. Chap. of his prophecy, foretold should be offered up through the
whole earth even from the sun rising to the setting thereof.

That he should offer with the prayers of all saints upon the golden altar
which is before the throne. etc. To this end much incense, (which are the
prayers of the saints) is offered to Christ, yt he might give an incense of
the^ upon ye golden altar which is before the throne. That is, yt by his
intercession which is the mediator and advocate of the Church, the prayers of
the saints might deserve to be herd of the majesty of God. This place
teaches very plainly, that we need none other mediatoures of intercession
with God, then this one Angel, which is Christ, for he alone offers up to God
ye prayers of all saints, and promises that his father shall perform unto
us, whatsoever we shall ask in his name. Moreover when as none either Angel or
Saint, can chaleng this priestly office of Christ without great sacrilege: it
follows y^ no Angel or Saint (this one Aungel of ye covenant being
excepted) can offer up incense upon the golden altar which is before the
throne of God.

Verse. 4. And the smoke of the odours with the prayers of the Saints, went up
before God out of the Angels hand. etc.

THe effect of this oblation is declared, that the prayers of the Saints
being offered as incense by Christ, are a sacrifice of sweet smell in the
presence of God. When as therefore prayers are directed to God with lively and
fervent faith in Christ, they can not but be heard for Christ's sake, which
makes them acceptable to God.

Verse. 5. And the Angel took the censer and filled it with fire of the Altar
and cast it into the earth. etc.

CHrist promises that his father will give the holy spirit to those yt ask
it importunatly, which when he also proceeds from the son, after great
perfume stirred up with prayers of the saints, is sent down into the earth, in
the shape and likeness of fire taken from the heavenly altar, whose fiery force,
or if any thing be more pearsinge then fire, is perceived in the Preachinge
of the word, in constancy of faith, in invincible patience, and other
Heavenly gifts of his. And the great abundance of the same spirit is
signified by the fillinge of the censer for in Isay chap. 6. one of the
Seraphins taking a burning cole with the tongues touched therewith the lips
of ye prophet, that the unworthiness of his sins being taken away, he
might be meet to declare the message of God. But here the great golden
censer, in which the prayers of the saints are offered, is filled with fire,
and is cast into the Church, wandering as a stranger in earth, according to
that saying of Christ I came to send fire into the earth. Luke 12.

And there were voices and thunderinges, and lightnings and earthquake. etc.
The holy ghost can not be in the world but that he will rebuke the same of
sin, of righteousness, and of Judgment, and then do those tumults arise,
that heaven and earth seem to be mingled together, but in the mean time it is
well provided for the Church, that against the most grieuouse persecutions of
Antichrist hanging over her, she being strengthened with Gods ayed, shall not
be overwhelmed with any raging tempests of adversity.

Verse. 6. And the seven Angels having the seven trumpetes prepared them selves
to blow the trumpetes. etc.

AFter that provision was made for the safegarde of the Church, least it
should faint under so great a burden of evils, the seven Angels do
straitway prepare themselves to sound there trumpets, whereby we may easelye
gather, that they were stayed before, so long as Christ made intercession for
the safety of the Church, and with his gifts might arm the faithful to
bear all adversities whatsoever. Which thing although he do continually, yet
it was enough that it should be showed once in a vision.

Verse. 7. So the first Angel blew the trumpet, and there was hayle and fire
mingled with blood, and they were cast into the earth, and the third part of
trees was burnt, and all green grass was burnte. etc.

WHen as every one of Gods Judgments is revealed, an Angel blowing a
trumpete goes before, and after follows the visione which opens the whole
matter. The sounding therefore of the trumpete is a sign that God will open
some thing which ought to be received of men with due reverence and
attention. And he notes by these figures the procedinges and increase of the
tyranny of Antichrist, which by the just judgment of God he shall obtain
through^ the whole world. As S. Paul writes in the 2. to the Thessal. 2. Chap.
That they which received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved,
should be deceived with lies that they might be damned. The like Allegories he
uses in the opening of the seals and will use in the powringe out of the
vials Chap. 16. When he understands that the sentence of God does perteyn to
the whole body of Antichrist and every part thereof: he reckeneth up
therefore the earth, the plants, the sea, the fluds, the heaven, the air, and
all things that are therein, that nothing may seem to remain whole or
untouched. These things therefore I have forewarned, that we should not to
curiously seek subtle and curiouse expositio^s in every word, when we
understand that it is the manner of the prophet, and also often used in this
vision, when as he will describe any general calamity, to rehearse all the
parts of the world after this manner. There followed (says he) after the
sounding of the trumpet of the first Angel, hail, which when it uses to
beat down the fruits of the trees, and the corn of ye earth, is wont to
bring in great famine and scarcity of corn and victuals. But here fails not
only hail, but also flames of fire together therewith, and the blood mingled
with the some makes the plague more horrible. For if the hail leave any thing
not ^ast down, the fire consumes it, or else the blood corrupts and rotteth
it, whereupon he says, yt the third part of the trees and every green
herb was burned. It is declared in the sixte Chap. In the opening of the sixte
seal, yt there was given power to death to sley the fourth part of men, with
sword, with, famine, with pestilence, and with wild Beasts: But here at the
sowndinge of the Trumpettes, it is foreshewed that the third part shall be
afflicted. And there is signified only the dearthe of victuals, as that
Chenix of wheat should be sold for a penny, but here is described a
meruailouse great scarcity, when as every green herb is burnt up. Whereby it
is gathered that these calamities should be greater then those, for the third
part is greater then the fourth part, and the scarcity of victuals is more
grieuouse the^ the dearnes of ye same. Except perhaps he alludeth to the third
part of the world, because in Europe which is esteemed to be the third part of
the world, the tyranny of Antichrist chiefly rages, the want of true and
sincere doctrine, which through the traditions of me^, and unprofitable
ceremonies, although not altogether wicked in the first institution, by long
continaunce of time was brought into the Church, whiles that the greater part
of men was bent to defend the ordinances of the elders, rather then to keep the
commaundeme^ts of Christ him self. Here upon it was necessary that a most
greuouse famine should be brought into the Church. For ye souls of men except
they be daily fedd and nourished with the iewce of Gods word, wax dry and
wither even like unto those herbs upon which blasting wind has blown, or
whith to much parching heat has burned up. We may also in this place not
vnfitlye understand, diverse other plagues coming all together, as by the hail
famine, by the fire pestilence, by the blood war, as histories do testifye,
that all these evils did vehemently rage in the world, in the beginning of the
Roman tyranny. But when as the two latter do immediately follow again, the
former interpretation likes me best: in the mean time I deny not but that the
godly ought to be admonished by those bodily calamities, of what sort that
kingdom of Antichrist should be, which with such unlucky signs and tokens
begone to be spread abroad.

Verse. 8. And the second Angel blew: and as it were a great mountain burning
with fire was cast into the sea and the third part of the sea turned to
blood. etc.

AT the sounding of the second trumpet which admonished that the second
judgment of God should be made manifest, there seemed to fall into the sea as
it were a meruailouse great mountain burning with fire. A horrible sight no
doubt and full of terror, and truly there neded such a wonderful sign to
the describing of the kingdom of Antichrist, which follows immediately after
the want of spiritual food. For this great mounteyne does signifye the
kingdom of Antichrist, as it is usual in the prophets that kingdoms, and
commune wealths are signified by mountains, as in Isay and Daniele. By the
sea which is a gathering together of many waters, the holy ghost understands
in this book, the infinite multitude of people divided into diverse nations,
kindreds and tongues. This whole mountain burns with devouring fire, what
soever shall come next to hand, for like as fire corrupts and consumes into
ashes the matter which is put unto it, even so the pestilent moren of
Antichrist does eat up, raven, and devour all things. And although it be
cast into the sea, yet it is not quenched, but turns the third part of the
sea into boiling blood. And this plague is sent into the world of God in his
wrath, because it would not esteem the most fruitful mount Sion that is the
kingdom of Christ. Therefore the world is compelled to bear the most sharp
and bitter tyranny of Antichrist, which had refused to bear the most sweet
and pleasant yoke of Christ.

Verse. 9. And the third part of the creatures which were in the sea died the
living things I mean, and the third part of ships were destroyed.

WHen as the world stobornly refused eternal life offered by Christ, it can
not fly the most bitter death which by ye kingdom of Antichrist is brought
upon very many. And here may be observed the quantity, quality, and effect,
of the Antichristian kingdom. The quantity is noted, in that it is compared
to a very great mountain, which is so much the worse, as it is spread the
brother, as when the papists do brag and boast that the borders of there
dominion are stretched forth unto the ends of the world, and of the firmament.
The quality is described that like deuouringe fire it burns, destroys, and
wastes all things, although those brawling hyerelings cry out never so loud,
that without this mountain there is no salvation. The effect is declared, in
that it turns the third part of the sea into blood. And how much blood he
has shed by diverse kinds of torments, and especially by fire (yt we may
omit the times that are past) our age that we now live in does see, and our
own eyes do daily testify the same unto us. Moreover we will not declare
what wars, and how cruel he has stirred up in the ages past. But in our
age, what tumults he has raised up in France, in Germany, in Spain, and in
Flanders, who is there through out all Europe which knows not? and in England,
what he has practiced and wroughte even this present year that we write these
things, I would to God it were as ready to be avoided, as it is easy to
remember it. That rightly he may be said to have destroyed the third part
of them that dwell in the sea, and the third part of ships by which we may
understand towns or cities. But at length this fiery mountain shall be cast
into the fiery lake. Which all godly hearts do wish to be done most spedely.

Verse. 10. Then the third Angel blew, and there fell a great star from
heaven burning as it were a tortch and it fell into the third part of Rivers
and into fountaynes of waters. etc.

THe third Angel sownding his trumpet, the Prince and head of this fiery
mountain fell from heaven in the likeness of a great star burning as a
torch. In time past the bishop of Rome shined in the heaven, bewtifull to
behold with the beams of heavenly doctrine, but after that he had by little
and little degenerate into a strange and usurped government (of which defection
the ancient writers co^playned more then a thousand years ago) he begun to
fall from heaven toward the earth, till at the length, for the establishing of
his pride and tirannie, he poisoned and infected all the puere doctrine with
his own inventions, and so in the end he fell into the third part of the
rivers and fountaynes.

Verse. 11. And the name of the star is called wormwood therefore the third
part of the water was turned into wormwood and many men died of the waters
because they were made bitter. etc.

THis Star takes his name of the effect, because with so great bitterness of
his poiso^, he infecteth the pleasant springes of pure doctrine, that he
makethe the waters into which he shall fall deadlye poison, so that as many
as shall drink thereof except a spedy remedy against poison be taken should
perish with everlasting death. And the waters are called bitter which this
star does poison. Not according to the sense and judgment of the flesh, to
which they seem to have the taste rather of honey then of wormwood. But to the
spirit of god, which searches all things by his sharp judgment, this
bitterness is found out. Which all the godly do easily acknowledge, which are
drawn from the pestilente drinkinge of this doctrine, that there is no taste of
heavenly and spiritual swetenes in popery, but a mere bucherie of conscience,
and all things most bitter, when any of them is but a little stirred up and
wakened out of the sleep of security (in which the most part of them are
drowned) and pricked with the sense and feling of there sins. We may learn
hear, that no drop of this bitter water, that is of the papisticall doctrine,
is to be mingled with the pure Gospel of Christ, least that it should taste of
this pestiserouse and poisonfull bitterness.

Verse. 12. And the fourth Angel blew the trumpet, and the third part of the
sun was smitten, and the third part of the moon, and the third part of the
stars, so that the third part of them was darckened, and the day was
smitten that the third part of it could not shine, and the night likewise. etc.

WHen as sound doctrine was corrupted with the pestilence devises and
inventions of men, what could remayn sound in the Church? The third part of
the sun, the moon, and the stars was smitten with thick mist and
darckenes, to those especially which dwell in this third part, in which ye
kingdom of Antichrist bare all the swaye. Hereof by the just iudgmente of God,
ye foul ignorance, even as it were a darcke cloud was sent into ye eyes of
those, which were willingly blind in ye light of knowledge and understanding.
Hereof the third part of the day loses the light* the sun being darckened,
the night also is darckened likewise in the third part, the moon and the
stars losing there light, so yt there appears no sparcke of the light to
expel and drive away the darckenes. And to be short, a most thick cloud of
ignorance which took away a great part of the heavenly light, covered the
world. And one we m^ruaill if the papists glory and boast that ignorance is
the mother of there religion? seeing that this darckenesse went before that
great and horrible defection which is afterward declared.

Verse. 13. And I beheld and herd an Angel flying through the midst of
heaven, saying with a loud voice, woe, woe, woe, to the inhabiters of the earth
because of the sounds to come of ye trumpets of the three Angels which were yet
to blow. etc.

ALthough assuredly the judgments of God are horrible, which were hitherto
revealed with the sound of the four trumpetes, yet there remain much more
greater and greuouser behind. Which undoubtedly are so terrible, that is
behooves us to be stirred up with a new admonition to the diligent
consideration of the same, Saint John therefore saw a certain Angel flying
in the midst of heaven, that he might as well be herd of the heaven, as of the
earth, whom he herd with a loud voice cryinge woe three times, to the
inhabitants of the earth, for the severe sharpenes of those judgments
which were yet to be revealed at ye sou^ding of the other three tru^pets. Here
except we weere as dull as stones, the weight of Gods judgments would drive
away all drowsinesse from us, and stir us up to the reverent receyuinge of
the same, that being delivered out of so miserable calamities, we may serve
him for ever.

The nyenth Chapter.
THere is described in this Chapter, the horrible confusion of the kingdom of
Antichrist, which was established partly by fraud and de^cite, and partly by
violence, until it came to the highest, and then should be discovered by the
restoring of the Gospel, and at length utterly abolished by the coming of
Christ.

Verse. 1. And the first Angel blew and I saw the star which fell from
heaven unto the earth. etc.

WHen as the participle is of the time past, (...) and not (...) I understand
that it was the same star which had fallen before into the rivers and
founteynes. which had the name of wormwood given it, which we said before
does signify the head of this Church, which is the bishop of Rome. And if
any man contend that it were not the same in number, yet I hold that it was the
same in office, for although there have been many popes in number, yet they all
make but one head of Antichrist, which has rule over the mo^strouse body of
the Roman Church. Therefore albeit the Roman prelate shined in time paste in
the heaven even as a star in the hand of the Lord, yet now being cast down
to the earth he has lost all his shininge beauty. It is ridiculouse
therefore that the pope does brag of the dignity of his seat, to be such as
it was acknowledged to have been of the old fathers in there time: and that he
makes mention of the virtues of his predecessors, which were martyrs of ye
primitive Church, all which do pertayne no more to him which is cast out of
the heavenly seat unto the earth, then if the devil should boast of his
principality which in time past he had among the Angels, out of which he has
long time been expelled.

And to him was given the key of the botto^lesse pit. etc. The pope which is
Antichrist boasts of the keys of ye kingdom of heaven in time past committed
to Peter, and with great sacrilege he snacheth and chalengeth them to him
self only, when as they pertayne and are common to all the ministers of Gods
word. But in very deed saint Ihon plainly declares what kind of key is
given unto him, that is the keye of the bottomless pit of hell. That as power to
open the heaven is given to the godly teachers of the Church, so to Antichrist
and his ministers, there is granted powers to open the pit of hell, We may
note here, that the power of the adversary, obteyneth rule in the world, not by
chance or against the will of Christ, but by his will and pleasure, to take
horrible and dreadful vengeance upon the profane contemners of his word.

Verse. 2. And he opened the botomles pit, and there arose the smoke of the pit
as the smoke of a great furnace. etc.

ANtichrist does not slackly and slowly use the key committed unto him, but the
same being received, he straytwaye opens the bottomless pit, which before
was shut up and locked. This place does teach, yt so long as the pure doctrine
of the gospel does flourish and take force, hell is shut, but after the same
has been silent, or infected and darckened with the profane inventions of men
(as we have showed in the chapter goinge before) the most deep pit of hell is
opened, out of which all kind of evil does breath forth. We see therefore,
that not with out just cause the Angel thundered out woes to the inhabitants
of the earth, when as the pit of hell should be opened to there utter
destruction.

And the sun and the air were darckened by reason of the smoke of the pit.
etc. The pit of hell being opened, two most cursed and abominable evils ascend
out of it, ignorance and error. For by the smoke which darckeneth the air and
the sun, I understand ignorance: by the army of the locusts, the teachers
and defenders of errors. For that ignorance which before was spread only
over the third part of heaven, now the smoke ascends out of the pit of hell,
the miste does darken the whole Sun and the air. And truly how gross and
shameful the ignorance of the former ages has been no man can be ignorant,
which has tasted and known the barbarousenes of those times, by there
writings.

Verse. 3. And there came out of the smoke locustes upon the earth. etc.

THey say that locustes are bred of corrupt smoke, which if we receive for
truth, it is found out, that ignorance is the mother of errors. Howsoever it
be, that the locusts go forth of the smoke, it is manifest that the masters
and teachers of errors took occasion by the ignorance of the people, to
spread a broad there deuilish doctrine and wicked opinions. And like as the
swarms of locustes very often infeste and punish whole regions, even so the
whole routes of these, do infecte, corrupt, and devour all things. It is
very like that by the locustes is signified all the rableme^t of Romish mass
priests, Monckes, and especially of begging friars.

And unto them was given power as the scorpions of the earth have power. etc.
Heretics and mainteyners of wicked opinions can not sow and spread abroad
there poison, but so far as power is granted unto them, which is upon those
that perish. And this power of theirs, which they have to hurt is compared to
the venimouse poison of Scorpions, which though it be of it self but a very
little vermin, yet it has power enough to kill a man. They prick and sling
also secretly like scorpions, for they wind in them selves by privy deceits,
until they shall give a deadlye stroke. To these the Popish clergy is like
in all things, but specially the begging friars, which through a colored show
and visore of humility, do seem little, yet secretly they thrust in the
poisoned stings of there abominable errors, and so they sley men.

Verse. 4. And it was commanded them that they should not hurt the grass of
the earth: neither any green thing, neither any tree; but only those men
which had not the scale in there foreheades.

WE herd before, that the four Aungells were forbidden and stayed that they
should, neither hurt the earth, the sea, nor the treese, before the servants
of God were sealed in there foreheades, so likewise these locustes are
forbidden to hurt the grass, nor the green herbs, nor the trees, but only
those men which were not signed with the seal of god in there foreheades.
Whereby we are admonished, that neither the illusions of Satan nor the subtle
sleyghtes of Antichrist have any force to seduce the elect, which like green
plants being watered with the dew of the heavenly doctrine, are preserved from
the locustes which burn up all things, Psalm. 1. There are rehearsed diverse
kinds of plants, as grass, herbs, and trees that we may know, that all and
every one of the elect are drawn out and delivered from this plague: in which
although God work diversely, as in diverse kinds of plants, yet there is one
only foundation, that God knows who are his.

Verse. 5. And to them was commanded, that they should not kill them but that
they should be vexed five mounthes, and that their poison should be as the pain
that comes of a scorpion when he has strong a man.

Pliny in the 28. Chapter of the eleventh book of the natural history
writes, that the pestilence of the venim of scorpions is importunate, but that
with greater punishment, they sley with slow and lingering death, in three days
space. Not without great cause therefore, the perverse doctrine of the Popes
guard, is compared to the stinging of scorpions, which does not by and by sley
men by violent death, but tormenteth them a certain space with cruel torments,
and at length takes away eternal life. Of such sort are the persuasions of
the merits of works, of satisfactions and the peynes of Purgatory, and of
other such like trumporie, wherewith these locusts torment the miserable
consciences, and which alone were heed in pulpits, in lectures, and in there
shifts. When as in the mean while there was no mention, concerning the merits
of Christ free justification by faith, eternal election, and other points of
wholesome doctrine which are taught in so many places of yt holy scripture. There
is limited unto them a certain space of time in which there is, power to hurt,
granted the^, for five mounths, which is added for the comfort of the godly.
that they may not fear that this plague shall always increase, but the force
thereof shall be broken, before half a years space be finished. But if we will
more narowly interpret this place, this infection shall abound in five hundred
years, but in the sixth age, which goes before ye latter end of ye world, it
shall decay, which we see has come to pas in our age yt almost every where ye
popish clergy is conte^ned, yea even with ye very papists, and at length
without doubt it shall be utterly confounded and brought to nothing.

Verse. 6. Therefore in those days shall men seek death, and shall not find
it, and shall desire to die, and death shall fly from them. etc.

WHen as we heard before that those scorpions do sley with slow death, it is
no meruaill if those yt be stricken of them and tormented with cruel
torments, desire to dye sooner then it is granted to them by the strength of
the poison. By which sentence is expressed the greatness of the torments, by
which the papists do sley the miserable consciences of me^, with there
poisoned opinions, as it were with the singes of scorpions: which when as they
altogether lead from Christ in whom alone all consolation of the godly mind
does consiste: there remains nothing unto them besides the fear of hell
fire, and desperation full of horror.

Verse. 7. And the form of the locustes was like unto horses prep^red to
battle, and on there heads were as it were crowns, like unto gold. etc.

Hitherto he has spoken of there poisoned strength and ^orce, now yt we may
know them the better, he notably painteth the^ forth in their colors. The
form (says he) of there bodies is like to horses prepared to battle, whereby
ye manners of the popish clergy are clearly described, y^ like horses they tune
with swifte course through all things, and are always most ready to
battailles and strifes, if any man say against them by any manner of means.
They have crowns upon there heads, as it were of gold, because all of them,
although they be most obiecte verletes, do challenge unto them selves a certain
kinglye dignity, and they would be had in price and estimation, neither would
they be subject to the civil magistrate, when as notwithstanding they are but
vile locusts, which are noble neither by any virtue, learning or godliness,
and proffitable for nothing but to hurt. Yet at the will and pleasure of these
men all things were governed in time p^st, when as the world honored them as
kings, and kings them selves feared them, as those whith by shrifte and
confession knew all there secreates.

And there faces were as it had been the faces of men etc. They are not
terrible to behold, but lock inside and smoth with the countenaunces of men,
and allure men into there own destruction, for they are meruailouse great
flatterers, which for there lucre and bellies sake, and that they may win
the favor of mighty men, are not ashamed most filthily to flatter.

Verse. 8. And they had hear as the hear of women. etc.

THe delicate wantonness and unbridled lust of monckes and other of ye popish
clergy is noted, which can be contained to no bounds of shamefastnes or laws
of nature, but that it will break them all. Afterward there more then womanly
attire is reproved, and other whorish tricks, by which they would draw men to
there dishonest love. For the world was never so blind that it would greatly
esteem them, but that they bewitched the minds of men with there whorish
inticementes as it were with charmed drinckes of love.

And there teeth were as the teeth of Lions. etc. Although they look smothly
with gentle and womanly contenaunce, yet they have teethe like mermaydes. Which
for there hardness and ravening are compared to the teeth of lions. For
witnesses hereof let be the towns, howses, fields and Lordships, and moreover
whatsoever the world has which is gainful, and serving to pleasure, all which
these locustes have ground with there teeth, to serve for their meat. And to
co^clud there is nothing more rauenouse then they, which although they be very
small in body, yet with the hardness of there teeth, they devour whatsoever
comes next to their hand. In our country of England, they did posses the
half almost, of all lands, and when it was ordained by the law, that there
should no more lands of inheritance be delivered into there hands, without
the licens of y^ Prince, the popish clergy cast there lionish teeth upon there
own possessions. And the Monckes as the greatest Cormarantes drew all the
fattest benefices unto them selves, the hurt of woose devouring griedinesse,
the Church feels unto this day, being deprived of good pastores for lack of
living.

Verse. 9. And they had habbergions like to habbergions of Iron. etc.

THey are defended with so great favor and succor, as well of Princes, both
ecclesiastical, and civil, that they seem to have breasts so hard that no
weapon can pearce through them, and they dare boldly provoke all men to
battle.

And the sound of there wings was like the sound of charets when many horses
run unto battle. etc. Although they have the face of a man, yet they utter
not a man's voice, but like locustes who^e they chiefly resemble, they make a
horrible noise with there wings, even like the sound of chariots, which with
many horses are drawn into ye battle. For they bellowe in there temples, with
a terrible sound, crying out but without understanding. Sometime they utter
great soundes in pulpets, but with out all reason, that worthily they may be
said not to speak with the mouths of men, but to make a terrible noise with
there wings.

Verse. 10. And they had tails like unto scorpions, and there were stings in
there tails, and there power was to hurt men five months. etc.

BEfore he compared there pestilent power of hurtinge to scorpions, but now
when he does diligently recite all the parts of them, he shows that the
locustes are armed also to the tails of scorpions, whereby they closely send
forth there secreat poison, and suddenly when thou art not aware they thrust in
there venomed stinges. Afterward he repeateth that power is granted them to
hurt for shorter time then they them selves would wish, for they shall not
infest or hurt the world about five months.

Verse. 11. And they have a king over them which is the angel of the
bottomless pit, whose name in hebrew is Abaddo and in greek he is named
Apollyon. etc.

THat we may understand under what king this huge army of locustes does
war, he says that the Angel of the bottomless pit is there king, which
is satan him self, and the pope is his vicare, whose name is given him in
hebrewe and in greek of the great desire and study he has to destroy, for he
is called in hebrew Abaddon, and in greek Apollyon, which word in english
signifies a destroyer:

Verse. 12. Our woe is past, and behold two woes com after this etc.

S. John shows that this pestilence of the locustes is ye first of those three
horrible judgments of god, which ye angel said to remain, and it is in deed
a terrible judgment of God that he suffers so vile vermin by there venemouse
and poisoned subtilties, to rule me^ as they list, even to there eternal
destruction and yet there follow two heuier judgments of God the^ this.

Verse. 13. Then the sixth angel blew the trumpet, and I heard a voice from ye
four horns of the golden altar with is before God, etc.

HOw much more grievous dangers were at hand, so much more greater attention,
it was convenient should be moved, that ye faithful being admonished, might
arm and prepare the^ selves against most bitter temptations, when ye sixte
angel therefore sou^ded ye trumpet which did foretell ye most bitter and sharp
persecution of al which should come before ye end and co^sumatio^ of the
world, John herd a voice from the four horns of ye golden altar which is
before God. We spoke before of the golden altar which signifies Christ, which
is offered up to God for a sweet smelling sacrifice, the force and effect of
which sacrifice, because it remains for ever, an altar is always placed in
the presence of God. And the voice is uttered from the four horns of the
altar, that is from the highest part of the altar, that it might be known to
be the voice of Christ which governs the altar.

Verse. 14. Saying to the sixte Angel which had the trumpet, loose the four
Angels, which are bound in the great river Euphrates. etc.

THat voice sounds to the sixte Angel which had sounded the trumpet, that
like as he had been a messenger to declare so great a plague, so he should be a
minister of the furtheraunce of the same. Loose says he the four Angels
which are bound in the great river Euphrates. The four Angels signify yt
whole power of the devil, which he utters in Antichrist and his tyranny,
which should be spread into the four quarters of the world. Which nevertheless
has hither to been restrained, that it should not brust forth into extreme
cruelty, but now the bridle is losed to the same for a certain time. A place
no doubt, full of exceeding great consolation, by which we are taught, that
Christ which is our patron and defendour, holds the devils bound both
hand and foot, that they can not hurt the Church or move persecution, but upon
his sufferrance. But it seems obscure and dark, that he says yt these
wicked Angels are bound at the fludde Euphrates, of which there are sundry
interpretations. But I whileste I wey all things, think that the place is
assigned somewhat darckely, which shall be afterward described more pleynlye,
out of which this pestilence is powered in to the whole world. For Euphrates
being taken without figure, is a river flowing round about Babylon, by which is
meant Rome by a metapher in this book as shall be showed more plainly afterward.
This sense therefore I gather, that there was at Rome, which is the seat of
Antichriste a great desire of wastinge and destroyinge the Church with fire
and sword, neither were subtilties wanting, by which they might attempt there
cursed work: and more over that there were prepared all instruments of war.
But that this made rage was restrained and bridled from heaven, by Christ, that
it should not show forth it self to the world, before the time appointed of
God.

Verse. 15. And the four Angels were losed which were prepared at an hour, at
a day, and at a mounth, and at a year. etc.

CHrist commands when they are losed, whatsoever therefore the Angels that
were losed do, so far forth as they execute the just judgment of God, is to
be ascribed to Christ. They are said to be prepared, at an hour, at a day.
etc. Whereby is expressed not only the promptnes of there mind, by which they
are inclined to hurt, but much rather ye certain time and even the very
momentes thereof determined of God, in which they may rage after this manner.
And he notes a very short space to be granted unto them, that he calls
it an hour, a day, a month and a year at the most.

To sley the third part of men. etc. Before, at the sounding the trumpet of
the fyfte Angel, the locustes with there king Abaddon, by privy practices
and subtle deceites, slew a great part of men with the venim of there
poisoned doctrine, by torments that endured long: but now with open violence
and cruelty, to the wasting and destroying of mankind, these wicked and
malignante spirits are sent forth with fire and sword to slay the third part
of men. But how far they were from necligence in exercising this power
committed unto the^ and what slaughters they have made, all Europe oppressed
with the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, has felt to much in these latter
times, and as yet is compelled to feel. And we know this tragedy was taken in
hand and begone by the ayed and help of these wicked Angels, and as yet is
continued by the same, although we now hope that the matter draws near to an
end.

Verse. 16. And the number of horsemen of war were twenty thousand times ten
thousand. For I herd the number of them. etc.

NOw he teaches with what means and instruments these destroyinge Angels
are furnished, and also with what preparation to battaill, that they may make
such a slaughter of men in the world. Verily that the whole army is all of
horsemen, whereby the strength and ^orce of the preparation is signified to be
the greater: That is to say, by so much as an host of horsemen is more
terrible, and more violent in war, then an host of fotemen. Lastly comes
the number of there army, which is almost infinite, twenty thousand times ten
thousand which number S. Ihon plainly expresses that he herd because it
seems incredible, that such an army could be gathered out of the whole world,
but by this huge army are signifiede, not the host of one age, but of many.
And this is ye multitude of the Church of Rome, which is so often boasted of,
which multitude is manifest to be mustred into battle against Christ and
his church. But this great army shall easily be driven back and discomfited by
him, which losed out of prison and sent forth. these Angels, which are the
leaders of it, which he can call back again into prison, when it pleasethe
him, and that we trust he will do now shortly after Antichrist has been so
long revealed.

Verse. 17. Thus I saw the horses in a vision and them that sat on them, having
fyery habergions, and of hyacinth and of brymstone. etc.

Saint Ihon proceadeth in describinge the furniture of the horsemen such as
they were showed to him in ye vision. And the whole description of them is full
of horror and fear. For lest they might be thought to be natural horses, or
the horsemen after the common sort, he declarethe, that there was a far
other form and shape both of the horses and also of the^ that sat upon them
showed unto him in a vision. For the horsemen had fiery habbergions, and of
hyacinth and of brymestone, by which is meant that there breasts were so armed
and fortifyed, against all violent force of weapons, yt they need not to fear
any thing at all, yea whether soever they ^ourned the^ selves, they might show
forth before them nothing else, but fire smooke and brimstone, for so I
interpret the hyacinth or yelow color, for that which follows in the next
clause. For as the horsemen which ride on barded horses, are wont to were
colors or signs in there breasts or there shield which might make the^
terrible to there enemies, so these soldiers of Antichrist showing forth in
there breast flammie, smoky, and brimstone like colors they plainly make
manifest to all me^, what they thretten to the world in every deed fire and
flame, that is extreme destruction.

And the heads of the horses were as the heads of lions and out of there
mouths went forth fire and smoke and brimstone. etc. The form of the horses
was monstrouse and horrible, as which besides the swiftnes of horses, had also
y^ heads and strength of lions, and yt which is above yt fearcenes of lions,
which tear only with there teeth and claws, out of there mouth says S.
John, went fire and smoke and brimstone, and under these figures is described,
yt mo^strouse and barbarous tyranny of Antichrist, which with open violence
defends the cursed seat of his pride, and cruelty warreth against all those,
which shall but move a finger against his presumtuouse arrogance.

Verse. 18. Of these three was the third part of men killed, that is of the fire
of the smoke and of the brimstone, which came out of there mouths. etc.

HE signifies that they shall be destroyed with most certain and present death,
which by any means oppose themselves to his tyranny. For the fire spedely
deuoureth, the smoke strangleth, and choketh, ye brimston both miserably
torment those yt it burns neither can it be quenched if it shall once burn.
Such shall be the rage and cruelty of antichrist, yt he is not wont to wou^d with
ye sword but utterly to consume with fire, to blind y^ eyes with smooke, to take
away ye spirit, and to burn cruelly with fiery flaming brimstone, and with these
three evils he slew ye third part of men, by his warriors, horsemen of
brimston, and lions like horses, that is by y^ princes which are subject unto
him, and the furious common people which like horses carry upon them ye bondage
and slavery of Antichrist and at the will and pleasure of there Lords, do fill
all things with smoke brimston and fyery flames.

Verse. 19. For there power is in there mouths and in there tails: for there
tails were like unto serpents, and had heads wherewith they hurt. etc.

ALthough certain copies have not these words (and in there tails (yet they
seem to me by other examplars in which they are found, yt they should be added,
or at the least understood: For ye sense is this, that this army does hurt
there adversaries with manifest violence, and as it were with open war, and yet
not inexpert or wanting fraud and deceipte, which was not perceived in ye
locusts, which seduced only by subtilty and craft. But these out of their
bloody and cruel mouths breath out, smoke, fire, and brimstone. But yet they
want not their enginnes and snares, because they have tails also like
serpe^ts, which tails also have heads, which after ye manner of serpe^ts,
privily byte, those which are uncircumspect, yet they hurt more with there heads
then with there tails, with violence the^ with deceit, because many do know
there subtilties, but they cannot bear there cruelty, therefore either they are
like wretches slain, or else revolt as cowards.

Verse. 20. And the remnant of the men which were not killed by these plagues
repented not of the works of there hands, that they should not worship devils
and Idols of gold and of silver, and of brass, and of stone and of wood with
neither ca^ see, neither hear nor go. etc.

HE teaches that ye world being corrected with these plagues yet would not be
brought to a better mind, for those yt remained vnkilled by these calamities,
were stricken with no repentance, for there heynouse offenses that they might
depart from there wicked works. They fained some sorrow peradventure so long
as evil oppressed them on every side, but it was mere hypocrisy which they
boasted. For so soon as the affliction ceased, they returned to there kind,
and gave them selves wholly to there accustomed impieties. They honored devils,
they worshipped idols, made of all kind of matter and substance, and although
they were blind, deaf and could not move themselves, yet they sought and
hoped for health of them. And it is worthy to be noted, that the Apostle
rehearses all kind of matter or substance whereof idols were made: both that
he might show the vanity of men that they would seek divine nature in
every creature, rather then in God, and also that he might declare that no
kind of Idols are to be esteemed.

Verse. 21. Also they repented not of there murder, and of there ^orcerye
neither of there fornication, nor of there theft, etc.

THey can not keep the commandments of the second table, which dishonor
God after such a sort, as S. Paul says to the Romans 1. Chapter, therefore
he reprehendeth not only there Idolatry, but also there murderers,
sorceries, theftes, and other such like abominable wickedness. And we see by
this prophecy that men took never the more heed for the plagues wherewith God
afflicted the world chiefelye for the tyranny of Antichrist, which although
many of the Papists them selves detest and abhor, yet they forsake not his
Idolatrouse religion, neither depart from there wicked ways.

The tenth Chapter.
THere is described in this chap. What comfort the Church shall have in so
great afflictions, when as Christ is brought in as patron and defendoure of
the same, which with the word of salvation, and his secreat virtue and power
will preserve the same safe and sound against all the violent assaults of
satan.

Verse. 1. And I saw another mighty Angel come down from heaven. etc.

IT behooved that the minds of the faithful, should be armed with some notable
consolation against so sharp and bitter temptations least they should be
altogether discoraged. For how could the feeble and weak multitude of the elect
be able to suffer and endure so sturdy force as hard as the Adamant, of these
horsemen, except they were furnished from heaven with such rare and singular
virtue, of the holy ghost? Christ therefore comes forth even in due time, in
the shape and form of an Angel as he does often in this prophecy, because
he does faithfully execute the will of his heavenly father in protecting and
defending the Church, and he is described to be a far other person from those
former seven Aungells, which sounded the trumpetes, as to be such an one as is
armed not so much for the taking vengeance upon the wicked as appointed for the
health and safegarde of the Church. For his wonderful and mighty power is set
forth, that the faithful might not doubt to rest quietly and safely under the
protection of him which is endued with invincible strength to break and
overthrow all the violent force of the adversaries. He descended from heaven,
that he might succoure the Church warringe in earth, and eue^ now presently
beginning to fainte under yt burden. For as often as we be oppressed with
evils, heaven seems to be shut unto us, and through the weakness of man's
nature we fear least the great distance of place should separate us from the
defense of Christ. Now therefore Christ descended from heaven, yt he might
bring present ayed to the afflicted and almost desperate estate of the Church.
For he has promised yt he will be with us even to the end of the world. And
although he ascended into heaven, yt he might fill all things with his majesty,
yet nothing lets, but that he may be said to descend unto the earth to ayed
and succor the godly in there afflictions. So Isay 64. desires that the Lord
would break the heavens and come down into ye earth, the same does David often
in y^ psalms: whereby we plainly gather, that the desce^ding of Christ into
the earth does minister matter of true and sound comfort to the faithful. For
God never forsakethe, nor leaves destitute his Children whom he has once
taken under his tuition.

Clothed with a cloud. etc. He descended unto the Earth clothed with a cloud,
that is full of majesty, for a cloud does often times in the scripture
represent to men a manifest sign and token of Gods divine majesty, so that
sometime it is called the garments, sometime the chariote or horse of God. And
at length our savior will come in the clouds with wonderful beauty and
glory, to judge both ye quick and the dead, that the faithful may learn
boldly to contemn all the glitteringe show of gorgiouse apparel, as of
purple robes scepters, and other princily ornaments, so often as it is bosted
of to obscure and darken the glory of Christ. For there is no such glory in
the robes of any prince, as there is in Christ clothed with a bright cloud.

And the rainebow upon his head. etc. He wears a notable ornament upon his
head, not a crown of goulde, not a miter garnished and set with the finest
preciouse stones, but ye rainbow, which is the old sacrament of the mercy of
God toward mankind, whereby not only the meruailouse greatness of him is
declared, whose head is seen compassed with ye rainbow, but also his infinite
clemency and gentleness, which being begun to be made manifest toward men
from ye creation of the world continues throughout al ages like it self. And
hereupon he bears that ancient token and sign of the covenant yt was made
with the whole world, that we should not think that the whole church which is
upon earth, shall be overwhelmed together with the storms and waves of cares,
griefs, and calamities, as often as we se the heaven wax dark and black with
thick mistye clouds of miseries.

And his face was as the sun. That which the sun is to the world, the same
is Christ to his church, which restores to the same the acceptable and
glorious bewty of his light, when the storms and tempests of adversities are
driven away. Therefore in so great darkness of the tyranny of Antichrist,
verily Christ the son of ryghteousnes arises in dew time to the faith full,
which being refreshed with the most pleasant bewty of his countenance, may
well hope yt the end of miseries which they wished is come. For by his virtue
and power that brymston-lyke smoke which is cast out of the mouth of the
monstrouse beasts is scattered and vanishes away, that it can not chooke the
remnants of the Church, as it does the other worldly men.

And his feet were like pillars of fire. etc. From the head even to the feet,
Christ is described to be endued with invincible power and strength. For he
has feet as it were pillars of fire, by which he will tread down and bring to
nothing all the violence of yt adversaries. For he must sit so long at ye
right hand of God until all his enemies be made his footestole. Therefore
there remains a terrible end for the wicked, because they shall be sla^ped to
poulder with the fiery and pillerlike feet of Christ. What can Abaddon the
king of locusts do against this Angel, what can the twenty thousand times
ten thousand horsemen do? what can those terrible horses do, which having heads
like lions do breath out of there mouths fire, smoke, and brymstone? what can
the fiery, smokie and brymston like habbergions of ye horsemen do? only the
feet of the Angel which are like pillars of fire, shall easily tread down
and overthrow all these preparatio^s and furniture.

Verse. 1. And he had, in his hand a little book open. etc.

THis book is an other (as I judge) from that we had before sealed with seven
seals which contained the secreat judgments of God, y^ were to be revealed by
Christ. But this book seems to conteyne, those great consolations which are
rehearsed every where in the scriptures as often as mention is made of God
reconciled to us by Christ, or yt I may speak more briefly, the promises of
the Gospel, with which it behooves the minds of the godly to be sustained and
holden up, yt they may not faint, when they are oppressed with evils, but may
lift up themselves to the hope, of eternal blessedness. And they are said to
be comprehended in a small book, because they do not lead us about by long and
doubtful circumstances, but brings us directly to the throne of grace by one
only mediator Christ. They are written in a book, yt they may remain
throughoute all ages, otherwise it should suffice to have preached and uttered
the^ only to ye men of one age. This little book is opened, because the
doctrine of the gospel is offered to all, though it be received, but of a few:
Therefore all excuse of ignorance is taken away, seeing that the book is showed
open unto us. Moreover the faithful have in a readiness wherewt they may
comfort one another, when no man forbids to draw out of this open book, yt
which may serve for there purpose. And Christ only reaches forth unto us
these co^solations, so that worthily the Angel is said to hold the book in
his hand, which afterward he delivered to Ihon which required it, to be eaten.

And he put his right foot upon the sea and his left ^oote upon the earth.
etc. His meruailouse greatness is noted in that with the one foot he trod upon
the sea and with the other upon the land. And also the largeness of his
kingdom is signified, that he possesses all things both by sea, and by land.
And treads upon both the same elements even as lord and ruler both of sea and
land. And I think this is not to be passed by, that he put his right foot
(upon which we stand more strongly) upon the sea, and his left foot he set on
the earth, for the waters are even as stable and firm rocks to his feet,
that the raging waves of the sea can not ouerwhelme and ^rowne them. There is
no cause therefore that we should fear, least any force of this deuilish army
should prevail against him.

Verse. 3. And he cried with a loud voice, as when a lion roreth. etc.

HE which seemed a long time to be dumb, and as a Lion to sleap in his den,
whiles the tyranny of Antichrist raged against the Church: Now having spied a
co^uenien^ time to revenge the cause of the faithful, suddenly this Lion of
the tribe of Judah, as it were raised from sleap, roreth with a terrible voice
against his enemies, and threatens that he will pluck the pray even out of
there Jaws. And the similitude of a lion roaring is fitly placed, whose voice
does strike a fear and terror into all the wild beasts. So when Christ
shall once thunder after a terrible manner with his mighty word, all the pride
of Antichrist must needs tremble and quake. Although I do not think that he
used an inarticulate voice, or y^ he filled the apee with a rude cry without
understanding, but that he thretned horrible vengeance to the wicked, with an
imperiouse and angry voice.

And when he had cried seven thunders uttered there voices. etc. It appears
that Christ with his loud cry called forth the seven thunders, that they
might make known to Ihon the severity and sharpenes of his judgment against
the wicked, for as soon as he had cried with a loud voice the seven thunders
uttered there voices. By the seven thunders I understand, all kind of most
greuouse judgments, which God shall thunder against the wicked contemners of
his divine Majesty, which are foretold that they are prepared, by seven
thunderinge, rather then speakinge Angels, least when we measure the
invincible power of the army of Antichrist with fleshly eyes, we should think
that God were scarce able, to cast them down out of so high dignity and
power and that he wants ways and means whereby he may succor the most
miserable state and condition of his Church.

Verse. 4. And when the seven thunders had spoken there voices I was about to
write, but I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, scale up those things
which the seven thunders have spoken, and write them not. etc.

BEcause Ihon believed that those things which the seven thunders had uttered,
should be profitable to the Church, he would have committed the same to
writing, and set it forth with the rest as a part of this prophecy. But he
herd a voice from heaven forbidding that he should write the same, but that he
should shut up and seal them, as sacred and holy mysteries which it was not
lawful for men to know. For God would not have all things which he has
decreed to be known before they come to pas. So he commanded Daniele to seal
up certain things that they might not be spread among the people. Chap. 12.
And Paul was taken up into the third heaven and herd things which it was not
lawful to utter. But some will say, wherefore then spoke the seven thunders
the things which no man is granted to hear? I Answer, that they spoke when
Ihon herd them, that both his faith by the knowledge of the same, and also our
faith by his testimony might be confirmed, when as we know that God has
prepared all his judgments, wherewith he will strike and punish the wicked,
although it pertayne not to us to know, what time, by what means, and by what
minister he will e^ecute the same.

Verse. 5. And tho Angel which I saw stand upon the sea, and upon the earth.
etc.

AFter that the voices of the seven thunders were sealed, which the holy
ghost forbade to be uttered abroad: that most mighty Angel which stood
upon the earth and the sea (least any thing should be wanting to the godly
which might make to there full and perfect consolation) confirmed with a
solemn oath that there calamity should shortly be finished. For it has great
force to persuade to patience, if the faithful know, that the hope of there
deliverance shall not long be differred. Howsoever therefore God would have
very many of his counsels kept close from men, yet he suffered this to be made
manifest: and that the rewards prepared for his soldiers should not long be
kept back. But it is profitable more diligently to consider the form of the
words.

Lift up his hand to heaven. etc. It is certain, that in as much as
pertayneth to the form of the vision, he alludeth to those things which are
written in the 12. Chapter of Daniel: although for an other end, for there the
Angel lifting up hoth his hands to heaven swear, that after a time, two
times, and half a time, the persecution of the Church should be ended, but
here the Angel affirms that there shall be no delay or tarying at al, after
the soundinge of the trumpet of the seuenthe Angel. And in that he swereth
with his hand stretched forth to heaven, he observes the solemn cerimonie,
which the old fathers used in swering, whereby they signified that they called
the God of heaven to witness, and also to revenge if they had failed and broken
there oath. So Abraham in the 14. Genes. made answer to the king of Sodoma,
when he was earnestly requested to retain the pray and spoil of the slaughter
of the kings, I have lift up my hand (says he) to God the possessour of
heaven and earth. etc.

Verse. 6. And swear by him which lives for ever more. etc.

THis is a circumlocutio^ of the mighty god, which lives for evermore, by
which kind of speech he is separated, not only from dead idols, but also from
tyrants which are mortal, which would be worshipped them selves as gods, of
which sort were Caligula, Nero, and Domitian. To whom also this does
properly perteyne, because that by himself he lives eternallye, and is the
aucthor of that life, which is in all other things according as S. Paul
says in the 17. of the Acts in him we live, move and have our being. And it
ought not to trouble us, that this Angel which bears the person of
Christ, flies to the aucthority of God in swearing, when as he is God
himself, seeing Christ himself does the same thing very often in ye person of
the mediator. But rather the holy ghost would admonished S. John that this
decree concerning the consumation of the world and the last judgment,
proceeded not from any creature, but even from God himself. For we see how
carelessly the world does deride those things which are spoken in ye holy
scripturs concerning ye dissolutio^ of this frame of ye world, and the
faithful are sometime a sleep, when they give the^ selves to much to pleasurs,
so that they forget ye last judgment whom it behooves to be wakned with this
sacred oath of as Christ it were with a loud cryinge voice, that they may more
diligently meditate of those things which perteine to ye receiuinge of our
redemer from heaven.

Which created heaven and the things that are therein, and the earth and the
things that are therein and the sea and the things that are therein. etc. The
next thing yt is ascribed to God, is that he is ye creator of al things, and
that he lives not blessed to himself alone as yt Epicures do dream, but
governs all things which he has, created either in heaven or earth by his
divine will and providence. For it is against all reason when we shall ascribe
ye creation of all things to God, yt we would take from him all rule and
government over ye same. For it is necessary yt every work serve to y^ will
and pleasure of the workman. Moreover he does here solemnlye, and as it were
with expressed words, as the custom is in matters of great weight, number up
all kinds of creatures, taking the division of places wherein they be. Which
is done to amplify the matter, for though it be the very same as if he should
say (he that has created all things) yet we are more drawn into admiration
of so great power, wisdom, and goodness, when we here recited the heaven and
all creatures which are therein, whether we understand the Angelical powers,
or the stars, when we consider the earth and the infinite kinds of living
creatures pla^ts, stones, and metals, which are in the same, when we behold
more diligently the great huge sea, and the innumerable forms and shapes of
living things which are ingendered in the same. And that he mentions these
three places only, he does it according to the usual manner of the holy
scriptures, because these three commonly are most in sight to the common sort,
and the holy ghost by his infinite mercy does abase him self to the capacity
of the rude and ignorant people. Although to say the truth, all creatures are
contained in these three places. For nothing is engendered in the element of
fire, and the scripture co^prehendeth the higher regions of the air in which
the meteores are made, under the name of heaven, so that they are also called
the fowls of heaven which fly in the lowest part of this air which
compasses us about.

That time should be no more. etc. The greek word (...) signifies the long
delay of time. Whereupon it is said that (...) does signify to delay, or be
slack. For he does not understand, as certain do to subtlety gather. yt the
moving of the higheste sphere of the heaven called Primum mobile, by which we
measure time, shall then cease, but that from thence forth there shall be no
stop, nor stay to defer out redemption, nor no delay to take vengeance upon
ye ungodly and reprobate: for they shall not then mock the judgment of God,
as they now carelessly deride that, which is foreshewed concerning his
severity and sharpenes.

Verse. 7. But in ye days of y^ voice of ye 7. Angel when he shall begin to blow

HE shows how long the day of the last judgment shall be proroged, even until
the time in which the seventh aungel by the sound of his trumpete shall give
manifest signs of the resurrection, and judgment. Those things therefore
which remain to be made manifest in the soundinge of the trumpet of the sixte
Angel, are without all doubt to be referred to the last age of the world,
which if we diligently consider, do clearly express and point out the state
and condition of this our age, as we shall declare more at large in the
Chapter following.

Even the mystery of God shall be finished. etc. The secreate counsel of God
which is furthest removed from the wisdom of the world, against which Satan
with all ye wickedness of the world opposes and sets him self, shall at
lentgh obtain an end. The gloriouse and perpetual redemption of the whole
Church through Christ. And the everlasting destruction of Antichrist, with his
whole body: In either part ye unspeakable glory, and wonderful magnificence
of God shall be seen. Which things if they be not now seen of the wise men of
this world, we are admonished that it is, the mystery of god, which is
reuerentlye received of the simple and sincere faith of the godly, but is
proudly rejected of the swollen and puffed up knowledge of the ungodly, but in
his due time it shall be revealed to the whole world, to the wicked for there
reproach and condemnation, to the godly for there glory and endless
consolation.

As he declared to his servant the prophets. etc. The holy ghost did not
here first begin to admonish men of the judgment of God to come, but in
time past in all ages he did the same by his servant the prophets. For we
cannot rightlye understand God, except we acknowledge him to be a rewarder of
the good, and a taker of vengeance upon the wicked, as the Apostell witnesses
in the 11. chapter to the Hebrews, And this is also to be noted, that he uses
the word (of declaring the gospel) when he speaks of yt terrible judgment of
god, for that day is even the perfect finishing and fulfillinge of the gospel,
in which the Lord shall perform what soever he has promised. So Christ
preaches to his Apostels saying when ye see all these things come to pas,
lift up your heads for your redemption draws nere. And truly in that this
second coming of Christ seems terrible unto us, it is for this cause that
either we abound in sins and iniquities, in which alas, we do to securelye
sauoure and flatter our selves, or else that we are weak in faith which we
ought to pray continually that God will increase in us.

Verse. 8. And the voice which I, herd from heaven spoke unto me again, and
said, go and take the little book whith is open in the hand of the Angel,
which stands upon the sea and upon the earth. etc.

NOw the heavenly voice does teach to what end Christ held open the book of
the promises of the Gospel. Verily that when it was delivered by him to the
ministers of the Church in the person of Ihon, and received of them, yea
thoroughly digested in there breasts, it might afterward he spread abroad to
the consolation and comfort of the whole Church. (And the voice which I herd
etc.) the same heavenly voice which commands to keep close the secreate
mysteries of the seven thunders, commands him to take the little book of the
Evangelical truth, which is open in the hand of the Angel. Let us
diligently therefore look upon this book, which is committed unto us by the
commandment of the holy ghost, but let us not curiously search after those
things which the same spirit would have to be kept secreat. Moreover we may
note, that the doctors, and teachers of the Church are commanded (under the
person of Ihon) to require the doctrine of the Gospel at ye hands of Christ,
which they are bound to deliver forth pure unto the Church, even as they have
received it. Therefore the heavenly voice expresses by name, from the hand of
which Angel he ought to receive the same, not of eneey one, but of his verily
which stands upon the sea, and upon the land, whom S. John knew well
enough to represent our Lord Christ. For if an angel from heaven shall bring
any other Gospel, let that Angel be accursed. Galath. 1. Chap.

Verse. 9. And I went unto the Angel, and said to him give me the little
book, and he said unto me take it and eat it, and it shall make thy belly
bitter, but it shall be in thy mouth as sweet as honye. etc.

Saint Ihon does obey the holy ghost (and as this thing was done in a vision)
he goes to the Angel assigned him by the heavenly voice, and as he was
commanded he required the book of him. And the Angel does not only
deliver to him the little book, but also commands Ihon to eat up the same.
Afterward he shows the force and working of the same, saying that in taste it
would be as sweet as honye, but it would fill his belly with bitter juice and
such as could not be kept in.

Verse. 10. Then I took the little book out of the Angels hand and eat it up,
and it was in my mouth as sweet as honey, but as soon as I had eaten it, my
bellye was bitter. etc.

IHon shows that he gredely devoured the book, which he received according
to the commandment of the Angel, and that he found it to be so in very
deed, which he had heard before concerning the force and working of the same.
For as long as it was showed in his mouth, he seemed to be replenished with
the most pleasant sweetness of honye, but after it had descended into his
stomach and intrailes, he felt more then the bitterness of galle. And this
place alludeth to those things which are written in the third chap. of
Ezechiell, for there the prophet being commanded to eat up the book which
contained even the severity and sharpenes of Gods vengeance. yet felt the
sweet taste of honey in eating the same, how much more did S. Ihon eating a
book full of consolations, perceive an heavenly taste? but yt so sweet meat
does make the belly bitter, it is for this cause, that he should not think
that he had ^ate it up for him self alone, which was to be belched up again
for the medicine of many. For both ye Angel does plainly show this thing in
the next verse folowinge, and also the holy ghost does other where, use this
same figure of the bellye being made bitter. As in the 4. Chapter of Ierem. the
Prophet complayneth that he felt the greuouse torments of his bellye that was
made bitter because he had herd the sound of the trumpet, and the voice of
him that cried alarm. And in the 32. Chapter of Job. Elihu bosteth that his
belly is full of the holy ghost like to the vessele of the vintuer which would
burst except it be opened.

Verse. 11. And he said unto me thou must prophecy again among the people
and nations, and tongues and to many kings. etc.

HE teaches that so great treasure of the heavenly doctrine was not committed
to Ihon for him self alone, but that it was for this cause laid up in his
custody, that as often as need should require, it might be brought forth for
the use of the whole Church. And after he declares how largely yt fruit and
commodity of the same does extend, when as the utility and proffite thereof
must be spread abroad, among nations and people, and tongues, and also many
kings. And there is described in this vision by a notable figure, a true
pastor of ye Church and faithful minister, whom first of all it is meet to
be raised up by the holy Ghost to so high an office, and calling, and the
same spirit leadinge him, to receive and take desirousely the book of the
heavenly doctrine offered and reached forth to him of Christ, and when it is
received, to lodge it in the inward bowelse of his breast, and last of all when
it is well degested, to bring it forth to the proffite and commodity of many,
and to stir up Princes together with the people to the obedience of the same.

The eleventh Chapter
Saint John goes forward in this chapter in describinge those things which
remain to be uttered in the sowndinge of the trumpet of the sixth Angel, and
in the end of this chap. verse. 15. he describes the trumpet of the seventh
Angel which is a messenger of the resurrection and last judgment.

Verse. 1. There was given me a reed like to a rod. etc.

NOw it is declared under this figure, to what end the Apostle is commanded
to utter forth the little book of the heavenly word, (which he had eaten) in
prophesiyng diligently. Verily because ye Christ will yet always byld up his
Church yt it should not utterly be destroyed, although it be greiuously
oppressed with the tyranny of Antichrist, threatninge present destruction and
utter cuine. But chiefly he signifies that ye ruin of the same shall be
repaired toward the end of the world, eue^ as this figure perteyneth to the
trumpet of the sixth Angel. For the measuringe is referred to ye byldinge, like
as in other places of the holy scriptures, Ezechiell 40. Zachar. 1^ there is
the like metaphor.

And the Angel stood by, saying arise and meat the temple of God and the
alter and the^ that worship therein. etc. Although in certain copies these
words (and the Angel stood by) are not found yet I doubt not but John
understands that this was the speech of that noble Angel Christ which he
had described in the chapter going before. For Christ is the master bylter of
his Church. Under whom all the ministers of the word labor in preaching
and spreadinge abroad of the gospel to the bylding up of the same holy
temple. Therefore Christ commands to measure the temple of God, the alter
and those that worship in the temple: By which sign he teaches that he will
have a care, that the whole church, which is signified by the temple, that the
true worship of God which is figured by the alter, and that all the parts and
members of the Church, which are shadowed by those which worship in the
temple, shall for ever be builded up and preserved in safety the which would
all suddenly vanishe away, except by his ayed and defense, and by the ministry
of the word, they should be propped up, even as it were with pillars.

Verse. 2. But the court which is with out the temple cast out and meat it no^
for it is given unto the gentiles. etc.

Saying the readinge of this place is doubtefull in the greek books, for when
some have (without) and some (with in) we can a poynct nothing for certeynty,
but that having respect to the form of the old temple of the Jews, which
was divided into three parts, I rather incline to that readinge, which has
(without) for there was no inner court that I know, but the holy and the holy
of holiest. Although I leave it indifferente whether way it is to be red. Yet
this is certain yt by this court, whether we read the (inner) or the (utter) is
signified the fellowship and congregation of hypocrites, which though they
proudly boast them selves in the glorious title of the Church, yet they are not
comprehended in the bosom of the true Church. But rather as bastardes and
degenerate children, they are refused, cast out and banished, and no other wise
then the temple of the Jews, by the Roman gentiles is destroyed in such sort
yt not on stone is left upon an other: So these when they are banished and cut
of from ye people of God, shall be gathered and joined to the profane gentiles,
of whose number they are. Therefore least that S. John might think that Christ
comprehended under the name of the temple and those that worship there in, all,
as many as beast in an outward s^ew and vision of Christ and the Church, he
slatlye forbids him to account that utter court, that is, heritiques and
schismatiques, and all the other rablement of the sect of Antichrist, among
those whom the Lord will receive to be builded up into an holy temple, whereof
he himself is ye corner stone, he pulls away yt visor therefore from ye faces
of the papists and other heritiques which have nothing else in there mouths but
the Church, the Church, when he commands the^ to be cast forth, as those
that are neclected and despised.

And the holy city they shall tread under foot two and fortye months. etc.
The wicked and profane gentiles shall tread under foot, that is shall
greiuously oppress, persecute, and afflict the Church of God, for the full
space of two and forty months, that is for that time which Christ does
grant unto Antichrist to rage in cruelty against the godly. Some do count the
number of months, from the first persecutions of ye christians by the Roman
emperoures, even till the time of the emperor Constantine which granted
peace, unto the churches. But let them which maintain that opinion see how
certain it is. But to me it seems more plain that under numbers the certain
fixed, and determinate time of the persecution of antichrist is assigned,
which he cannot pas, although he fret sum and rage never so much. For the
Lord has counted the same time by months days, and hours. The reason of
the numbers seems to be of this sort, this time which sometime is called two
and forty months, sometime a thousand two hundredth and sixty days, sometime
a time two times and half a time, makes in all, three years and an half,
that is ye one half of a prophetical week, which time also is called three
days and an half. And this place alludeth to the weeks of years in the 9.
Chapter of Daniell. Whereupon we gather to the great consolation of the Church,
that a short time is appointed to Antichrist to wast the same, which is also
showed twice afterward in the 12. chap. and in the 20. y^ a short space of
time is permitted to the devil that he may s^riue with all his force to beat
down the Church, this interpretation as most simple and plain pleases me
best, those that seek more subtiler may follow there own judgment.

Verse. 3. But I will give power unto my two witnesses and they shall prophesy a
thousand two hundredth and threscore days. etc.

AFter that the Lord, in the figure going before of measuring the temple, has
promised that he will build up his church now he shows by whose industry
and labor he will perform the same verelye with the ministry of his word
and by those ministers, which he will always raise up to him self for this
work, yea even in the midst of the storms of persecutions. He promises
therefore that he will raise up to him self two witnesses at the least, which
the law requires for the confirmation of every cause, even then when as the
greatest multitude made droncke with the doting vaniti^s of Antichrist, would
refuse sound doctrine. They commonly interpret the two witnesses to be
Heuoch, and Helias, when as we may rather by those things which follow in the
sixte Verse gather that it is Moses and Helias. But it is absurd and against
all reason to restrain to certain persons those things, which are spoken of
all the Ministers of the word, which Christ has promised that he will appoint
even in that perilouse, and daungerouse time, which are called two, not for the
certain number, but for the fewness sake. And yet he promises that he will
furnish these with meet and agreeable virtues, and gifts of grace, so that by
the space of a thousand two hundred and sixty days, they shall valiantlye.
and boldlye execute the office and duty of prophets, in teaching, reproving
and comforting. That is for the space of 24. mo^ethes, whiles the holy city is
trodden down of the gentiles. He count^^h the same time also by days, that we
might not think that the Church should be deprived and want her teachers,
even the smalest space of time. For although to Antichrist and his blind
proctors, and adherentes the doctrine of the Gos^^ll seemed to be buried, yet
the Church had always a^ the (...) witnesses of Christ. Of which although ye
names of every one* by reason of the injury of ye time, have not come unto us,
yet hystories do sufficien^ly witness that there have alw^ies (...) some, as
in England, Wickli^^e, in Italy, Marcellius of (...), in France the pore people
of ^ionse, in Bo^mia Ihon Huss^, and Hierom of Phrage and in other places
diverse others.

Clothed in s^ckcloth etc. Persuading men by all means to repentance from
Idolatry and other works of darkness: moreover Christ does take to this so
honorable an office of being his witnesses, not golden popes, not purple
Carbinals nor yet mytred bishops, but base men of the abject people, clothed in
sackclothe whose dignity is to be esteemed not by there apparail, which is very
course, but by the office which is committed unto them.

Verse. 4. These are 2. olyue trees and 2. candelsticks before the god of ye
earth.

Because the world does scornefully receive those, which are sent of the Lord
except being adorned with outward pomp and glory, they may draw men's eyes upon
them, therefore Christ shows in how great price and estimation they are with
him. They are says he 2. olyue trees always fresh flourishing and green,
such as David glories yt he will be after he has eschewed ye false accusation
of Doeg, and always dropping down^ the oil of wholesome doctrine upon the
Church, they are says he, two candelstickes susteyning and holding up the
light of the Gospel in this darcke world, of what sort soever they seem to be
earthly men, they are of this sort to God and the Lord of the earth and the
whole world. The ministers of the Church may here be admonished of what sort
they ought to be if they will be allowed of Christ as his witnesses.

Verse. 5. And if any man will hurt them, fire proceaded out of their mouths
and deuoureth there enemies: for if any man would hurt them thus must he be
killed. etc.

THat the world might not escape unpunished in despisinge there simplicity, the
lord pronounces that there word against the reprobate shall be like fire, which
may burn them to ashes, and deliver them to be burned with infernal flames.
For it is the savor of death unto death to those yt perish. In vain therefore
does the pope commit the bodies of the Saints to be burned with corporal
flames, seeing that he himself shall be much more grievously tormented for ever,
with there fiery spirit. This place does teach with what earnest zeal the
godly preachers ought to burn with all against the wicked enemies of the
Church of Christ, and not to fear there cruelty, seying they have in a
readiness the vengeance that is to be taken against all ungodliness.

Verse. 6. These have power to shut the heaven, yt it rain not in the days of
there prophesiynge, and have power over waters to turn them into blood, and to
smite the earth with all manner of plagues, as often as they will. etc.

IT is no doubt but that he alludeth to ye history of Elias which fore told of
the three years brought in the days of Achab. 1 kings. 17. chap. like as
also in the other part of ye verse. to Moses which stroke the land of Egipte with
diverse and sundry plagues, as we may read in ye. 7.8.9.10. chap. of Exodus By
which (...) he signifies, yt his witnesses shall be endewed with the zeal of
Moses and Elias, whose contempt the lord will revenge with most grievous
punishments, as Egypt felt, as Israel felt, which escaped not unpunished for
despising Moses and Elias: and the popish Church daily feleth, the wrath and
vengeance of God denounced by these witnesses, to fall upon them armed with many
and sondrye plagues, and at length shall feel utter destruction. Furthermore,
to the great consolation of his Church and establishinge the authority of his
witnesses, Christ compares the^ to the most clear lights of the old Church,
that ye congregation of ye faithful may believe, yt Moses and Elias, are as it
were returned from death and come unto them, for the singular gifts of mind
and spiritual graces of ye holy ghost which God has bestowed upon ye same his
witnesses. Hereof it is yt we so highly honor ye wonderful virtues of Luther
and Calvin and others, that we think them to be inferior to none which have
lived since ye Apostels time, God grant that we may be thankful for so good
gifts and that we may use them well.

Verse. 7 And when they have finished there testimony. etc,

THe devil can do nothing, Antichrist can do nothing against the witnesses of
God, so long as they have not finished there testimony, that is not before
they shall have run the course prefi^ed them of God and shall fulfill the
office and duty committed unto them. They need not therefore fear the madness
of ye persecutors, but boldly to give testimony to christ and his gospel, so
long as it seems good to ye Lord, and at length when they have discharged
there duty to permit themselves to his will and pleasure.

The beasts that comes out of the bottomeles pit shall make war against
them, and shall overcome them and kill them. etc. The cruel and unreasonable
beast Antichrist, which shall come forth of hell to establishe the kingedome of
the devil which is inferiore to them in spiritual battle, yet their
superiore in carnal war, shall oppress, overcome, and slay the holy
Martyrs of God.

Verse. 8. And there* corpses shall lie in the streates of the great city. etc.

ANtichrist puffed up with so great a victory, shall triumph over their dead
bodies with barbarous cruelty, the streates of the great city shall be
scattered with there slain members. Every where through out the whole
dominion of Antichrist, how wide and large so ever it be, shall be seen, the
dead bodies of the saints, which thing how true it is, the history of the
former times and experience of our own age, does sufficiently, teach.

Which spiritually is called Sodom and Egipte where our Lord also was
crucified. etc. He shows which is that great city, the sea of Antichrist,
which falsely bosteth her self to be the holy city Jerusalem, that is the
Church of god, when as yet for there cursed wickedness and filthy abomination it
rather deserves to be called Sodom, and for the persecution and bondage which
it lays upon ye saints, to be named Egypt, neither does it resemble
Jerusalem in any thing, except in cruelty against the godly which as it killed
all ye prophets, so likewise it slew christ himself the head of ye Church with a
shameful death. And here he does plainly even as it were poynct at the sea
of Rome with the singer, when as he calls it the great city in which our
Lord was crucified. For Jerusalem of the Jews, deserved not by any reason to
be called the great city, much less when John received this vision, when as
it was utterly raised of the Romans and made even with the ground. But
saying that the holy ghost does after ward manifestlye by the great city
interpret Rome, it is certain yt the same city is also understood in this
place. And it fitly agrees, that the Roman tyranny is called the great
city, not only because the city of Rome is the head of the whole Romayne
Empire, but because the city it self is increased unto such meruailouse
greatness, that it became a Monarchia, which was not in the other three
Monarchies, the beginning whereof were taken of kings, and not of any city.
And it is not amiss to say, that Christ was crucified at Rome, seeing he was
condemned to death of the Romayne presidente as the enemy of Caesar, the
Emperor of Rome, he was delivered up and slain by that kind of death, which
was established by the laws of the Romans Ihon Chapter. 19.

Verse. 9. And they of the people and kindereds and tongues and gentiles shall
see there corpses three days and an half, and shall not suffer there
carcaseis to be put in graves. etc.

THere shall be no nation subject to the tyranny of Rome, which shall not see
the slaughter of the holy witnesses of Christ, the space of three days and an
half, that is for half a week. For they shall not long feed there ferce
eyes with this cruel sight, but God even in the midst of ye heat will break
the persecution, but yet in tho mean time so long as they have power, they
will persecute the godly with such hatred, that they will also show there
cruelty over the very dead bodies, and shall not suffer them to be buried,
but will show them open to all men, as it were signs, and tokens of there
victory.

Verse. 10. And they that dwell upon the earth, shall rejoice over them, and be
glad and shall send gifts, one to an other, for these two Prophets vexed them
that dwelt upon the earth. etc.

THe wicked inhabitants of the earth reioysed with themselves and were
joyful for the destruction of the prophets. For those two prophets although
they were but few in number, yet they grievously tormented all the wicked
inhabitants of the earth, whiles they thundered ye thretning of gods word
against their ungodliness. The wicked therefore do testify by this joy, with how
great pricks of conscience they were tormented, when as there sins and
offenses were reproved, and corrected of the godly pastors and teachers. For
such is the force of gods word, that it tormenteth even the contemners of the
same, with due deserved punishments.

Verse. 11. But after three days and an half. etc.

THE wicked shall not always triumph over the martirs of Christ which they
have cruelly slain, but they shall perish themselves, sooner the^ they
suppose. For all power shall be taken from Antichrist, which he has over ye
Saints, which although his flatterers and peuish adherentes do boast, shall be
eternal, yet Christ measures it here by the space of three days and an
half. Which verelye pertayneth both to the beatinge down the pride of the
wicked, when as they hear that there kingdom shall endure, but a few days,
and also to the comforting of the afflicted servants of Christ, and to teach
and instruct them to patience, when as they understand that in short space of
time the tyranny of Antichrist shall be taken from among them.

The spirit of life which came from God entered into the^ and they stood up
upon there feet. etc. According to the manner of the prophets he uses the
time paste for the time to come, and the meaning is, that we should not think
that they are utterly lost and destroyed, which Antichrist by a diuilishe
cruelty has slain and taken away, they which seemed to lie as dead, for the
space of three days and an half, at length when the power of there
adversaries is taken away, and God giving them a new life, and standing
vprighte upon there feet, shall prove and show that they were not dead, but
that they slept only for a certain time. Which thing shall clearlye be
seen in the resurrection of the just, although this place may well and fitly
be understood of a new raising up of ministers, which ye Lord will place in yt
rooms of those which are crowned with martyrdom, but chiefly in the end of
the world after that the man of sin is revealed, which we see is come to pas
in this our age.

And great fear came upon them which saw them. etc. The wicked must needs
be stryken with an horrible tear and terror, when as they shall see them
restored again to life whom they slew, where upon they certeynly understand
that they warred against God. For when as preciouse and dear in the sight of
the Lord is the death of his saints. Psalm 116. They can not but be
grieuousely tormented with fear of gods vengeance, which they perceive that
they have provoked against them selves with blind madness and rage.

Verse. 12. And they herd a great voice from heaven saying unto them come up
hither. etc.

WHiles fear and terror of eternal damnation, with the greatest horror of
wicked conscience does occupy and posses there adversaries, they are called up
to heavenly joys, with a sweet voice and full of consolation. This reward is
laid up for the faithful martyrs of Christ, that out of prison, torments,
and death it self, being raised up to a blessed life, they shall receive a
crown of glory in the kingdom of heaven, with him, whom they have witnessed
in earth. This hope nourishes there minds in the greatest torments, least
they should fainte for any pains or punishments of the body, which fight
against the wicked and have eternal happiness for there reward.

And they ascended up to heaven in a cloud. etc. Like as Christ our head
ascended in a cloud, and we also shall be taken up in the clouds to meet
Christ as the Apostle witnesses, so those two prophets the witnesses of God
are says to ascend up into heaven.

And there enemies saw the^ etc. Like as they shall see Christ which perced him
thorough, even so shall they see his members the holy martyrs lifted up to
heavenly joy, which despised, afflicted, and slew them in earth, when as
they them selves being thrust into the dongeon of hell, shall be tormented for
ever not only with there own evils, but also with the blessed estate of there
adversaries. So the rich Glutton saw Lazarus in the bosom of Abraham, whom
he despised as a most vile creature whiles he was living, neither cared he to
feed him at the least with the cromes yt fell from his table. Luke. 16.

Verse. 13. And in that hour there was a great earthquake. etc.

WHen as the ripe and full time shall come in which God will take vengeance
upon Antichrist and his folowers, men's matters shall be shaken with a mighty
great motion, all things shall be moved, with wars, with treasons, and with
seditions, neither shall Antichrist any longer inioye his kingdom peacibly
which being sore troubled with this horrible commotion as it were shaken with
an earthquake, shall shortly after fall to utter ruin. We may suppose that
this earthquake has happened in our age, for we have partly before our eyes,
and partly we bear in fresh memory, with what motions through the cause of
religion, all christendom is shaken. And the other things which follow in
this verse, are plainly seen in this our time. And the tenth part of the city
fell. etc. There is no man which knows not, how great a deminishing and decay
of it self the Church of Rome has suffered, from which very many nations
have utterly departed, and forsaken it. And also superstition it self has
failed in the tenth part among the papists, and they them selves are
constrained to leave and forsake many of there toys and trifles, and to
confess certain errors with which in time past they bound very straightly
the faith of the people.

And in the earthquake there were slain the names of 7. thousand men. etc. To
a great multitude of men, this earthquake shall not only be troublesome, but
also mortal, by the violent force whereof seven thousand men shall be destroyed:
concerning the numbers, of ten, and seven, we have often said before that they
are referred to fulness and perfection. As this number of 7. thousand
comprehends all those, who^ God has appointed and ordained to punishment in
this grieuouse co^motio^ of the world. For as many as are not humbled with the
scorges of God and called to repentance, those being hardened in there
ungodliness shall at length bear the deserved punishments of there heynouse
offenses.

And the remnants were afraied and gave glory to the god of heaven. etc. God
has always his remnantes, which according to election being drawn out of the
greatest flames, are preserved and kept to the glory of his name. The rest
thereof being tamed with the rods of God, and taught by the fall and ruin of
the other, are instructed to repentance, and being stricken with an earnest
fear of god forsaking the filthy worshipping of Idols, will apply them selves
to yield up due glory to the God of heaven. We see very many such in our age,
which being werie of the errors of Antichrist, do acknowledge the true
religion of Christ, and magnifye the God of heaven with ye other godly
worshippers. Here we ought to reverence the counsels of god, which are far
above ye capacity of our reason, when as the third part of me^ was slain by
the army of ye horsemen as we read, in the 9. chap. none repented, but here
when the 7. thousand are destroyed, ye rest return to a better mind.

Verse. 14. The second woe is past and behold the third woe will come anon.

THe second woe of those three, which were foretold to pertayne to the trumpet
of the three last Angels, when as the 6. trumpet has received an end, the
holy ghost shows that the last woe shall shortly come, which is eternal woe,
to all the reprobate, which shall be published by ye trumpet of yt 7. Angel.
Therefore if we se all things fulfilled which pertayne to the 6. trumpet, ye
next thing is that we shortly after wait for to hear the sound of the last
trumpet in the coming of Christ.

Verse. 15. And the seventh Angel blew the trumpet and there were great voices
in heaven. etc.

CHrist affirmed with an oath in the tenth chapter. That the trumpet of the 7.
Angel should be last, under which ye mystery of God should be finished, as he
has declared to his servant ye prophets. Therefore when the sound of this
trumpet was herd, Thou shows yt the praises of God, and of his Christ were
song with meruailouse joy of the heavenly spirits.

Saying the kingdoms of this world are our Lords and his Christ's. etc. The
heavenly spirits be joyful with God, now when Antichrist and his patron the
devil, which exerciced tyranny in the world, be vanquished, all the kingdoms
of the world are become gods and his Christ's to whom they properly pertayne*

And he shall reign for evermore. etc. They do not acknowledge an earthly and
transitory kingdom of God, but an eternal Dominion, which indureth
throughout all ages. But it may be demanded whether God does not now also
reign and always has reigned in the whole world? verily the chief
government has always been Gods, and all things are ruled at his will and
pleasure. But now Satan, and Antichrist by his permission and sufferance
obtain principality over the darckenes of this world, whose power in the
day of the last judgment shall be utterly abolished. Therefore God shall then
reign with his Christ, when no adversaries shall molest or trouble the
happiness of his Church. And in this song we may behold the right holy and
godly nature of the heavenly spirits, that they do not so much rejoice for
there own eternal blessedness, as that they triumph for the magnifyinge of
gods glory, of which (if we will be like unto them) it becomes us to be more
careful then of our own salvation. More over this place is of force to
overthrow the error of the Chi^iastes, which shut up the kingdom of Christ in
the space of a thousand years, when as that voice does clearly confess that
he shall reign for ever and ever.

Verse. 16. Then the 24. elders which sat before God on there seats fell upon
there faces and worshipped God. etc.

THe reverend company of the 24. elders, which being placed in seats
before the throne of god do represente the whole fellowship of gods elect, do
not omit there duty, but falling prostrate before the throne, they humbly
worship god with all earnest affection of mind.

Verse. 17. Saying we give the thanks o Lord. etc.

THose also do meruailously rejoice, that all the enemies of god being
overthrown, he has his sound and perfect glory: And thry sing a long of
thankesgeuing saying. We give thee thanks o Lord. Because he has now showed
himself to be a revenger of his own glory, as though they had received some
notable and singular benefit, they agree that praise and thanks are to be
ascribed to god. And not without just cause, for nothing ought to be so dear
to the sons of God, which love him with there whole heart, as the glory of
there heavenly father, if neclecting all other things they would diligently
seek, they should both show them selves to be indeed begotten of God, and
also they should the best provide for there own health yea eternal
blessednesses.

Lord God almighty, which art and which was, and which are to come. etc. We
have spoken at large before in the first and fourth Chap. of these speeches, by
which they attribute all Dominion power and eternity to God.

For thou have received thy great might and have obtained thy kingdom. etc.
The heavenly spirits do praise God, that now at length when all his enemies
are vanquished he has received the sovereign rule and government which was
always due unto him, and also has happily begun that most peaceable
kingdom against which none of all the adversaries dare oppose and set them
selves. For so long as the devil and Antichrist exercised tyranny in the
world, they seemed to reign alone in ye earth, and they chiefly labored in
this one thing, that the kingdom of Christ might not stand, but after yt god
has now openly exercised and declared his great power which before lay hid,
when satan is subdued and yt kingdom of Antichrist abolished, ye glory of god
shall alone excel, and shine over all his creatures.

Verse. 18. And the gentiles were angry. etc.

IN my judgment they allude to the beginning of y^ 99. psalm. The lord shall
reign although ye people be angry. That is in spite of all the profane
enemies, thou only do obtain the empire and Dominion. For the wicked
gentiles following ye camp of Satan have set the^ selves against the kingdom
of Christ as much as they could, but David himself foresaw as we read in the 2.
Psalm, that all there enterprises should he in vain.

And thy wrath is come and the time of the dead, that they should be judged,
and that thou should give reward to thy servants the prophets and to the
saints, and to them that fear thy name, to small and to great. etc. Nether
to the wrath of the wicked gentiles, heretics, Turks, hypocrites has raged
against thee, and the members of thy body, and now on the other side the time
of thy wrath is come, that thou may destroy all thine enemies: For now is
that day come which is terrible to the wicked, in which the dead being raised
to life, may feel the severity and sharpness of thy judgment: in which
also a reward not due or deserved, but promised freely may be given to thy
servants. Not only to those which thou have raised up to the government of
thy Church, whom thou have endued with the spirit of prophecy, but also to
all the rest of the saints, which worship the in true faith, and reverence
thy name, as well to the small as to the great.

And should destroy them, that destroy the earth. etc.

THey pronounce with one word that the horrible and manifold wickedness of
the reprobate shall be punished with grieuouse torments and pains: and
together therewith they show, how equal and just it is, that God should for
ever destroy those, which studied nothing else, but to destroy ye whole world
with there wickedness.

Verse. 19. And the temple of God was open in heaven, and there was scene in his
temple the arcke of his couenannt, and there followed lightninges and voices,
and thunderinges, and earthquake, and much hayle. etc.

SOme do join this verse with the Chapter following, that it might be the
beginning of the next vision, but it seems to me to be the conclusion and
shutting up of this vision. So that Ihon does teach that after the praises of
God were song of the heavenly company, the execution of his judgment, which
they so often published abroad, should follow. Verily when as the temple was
open in heaven into which the true worshippers of God were received, and the
arcke of covenant openly showed, that is Christ, by whose mediation they
should be received, for the rest, it should straitwaye lighten. thunder, and
hayle from heaven upon: the reprobate and all the army of Satan, by which
terrors the wicked being driven to madness, should be thrust down to the
everlasting pains of hell. And he does briefly comprehend in this place the
form and manner of the last judgment, which he would afterward in the end
of this Prophecy, prosecute more at large.

The twelfte Chapter.
THis third vision conteyneth the ix. Chapters following, in which the madness
of the Devil and Antichrist against the Church is described, in other figures
then before, yet the same Church by the defense of Christ does stand and endure
safe against all the inuasio^s of the enemies. And the malignant Church which
seduceth the greatest part of the world into error is painted out in her
lively colors, then follow the punishments, which go before her fall, at
length follows here extreme ruin, which shall never be restored or repaired
again, after this follows the condemnation of the devil and Antichrist, and
the eternal felicity of the Church after the resurrection, all these things
are described more clearly, and more at large then in the former vision, and
the self same thing is expounded by sundry visions, that the truth thereof
might be more certain and that it might be printed more depelye in our minds,
which the prophets also do use often times. And in this 12. Chapter the
Church is brought in, suffering persecution of the Prince of darkness, which is
the head of all her enemies: and her state and condition is described of what
sort it should be from the first preaching of the Gospel even to the end of
the world.

Verse. 1. And there appeared a great wonder in heaven. etc.

GReat and meruailouse things were to be showed by a great and wonderful
sign, for it is above the capacity of our wit, how the Church, which is
described under the figure of a woman weak, unapt to war, and unarmed,
could any while stand in safety, against so sturdy and armed enemies. But
she appears in heaven that her birth and country might be signified, for
here in earth she is but a pilgrim and stranger.

A woman clothed with the sun. etc. The spouse of Christ is showed under the
form and shape of a woman, which of her self is weak and without force and
strength, but yet sufficiently furnished against all enemies, with the virtue
and strength of her spouse Christ. She is seen clothed with the sun, all
whose gloriouse apparaill is Christ the sun of righteousness, which
spreads the beams of his light upon the whole Church.

And the moon under her feet, etc. She treads under her feet all temporal
and transitory things, which although they seem to show forth there
brightness as the light of the moon, yet they are in no price or estimation
with the Curche, in which the gloriouse light of the sun being always
present, does darken all the beams of those things.

And upon her head a crown of twelve stars. etc. She has her head crowned
with twelve most bright shinning stars eue^ as it were with a beautiful
crown, not made of gold or earthly preciouse stones, but of stars, that is
of heavenly matter, which is the doctrine of the twelve Apostles which they
being lightened of the only son the fountain of Gods wisdom, have
preached, and after committed the same to writing. But if any object, that not
all the writings of the Apostles are extant, neither that they were all
Apostles, which writ Gospels, the answer is in a redines, because that
doctrine, which was delivered by a few writers, was nevertheless the doctrine
of all the twelve Apostles, verily even ye same which being received from
Christ they preached in the whole world. we showed before, yt in the number of
twelve is signified, ye unity of the Church gathered out of a miserable
dispersion, to which end Christ chose twelve Apostels, according to the
number of so many tribes of Israel, and afterward he sent ye same to ye
gentiles which he would have to be gathered into one body of Israel.

Verse. 2. And she was with child and cried travailing in birth and pained,
ready to be delivered. etc.

ALthough she was barren of her self, yet fruitful by he spouse, and now
even nighe to her travail, she is payned with great pensiuenes and carefulnes
that she might bring forth that which she has conceived by the seed of
Gods word. And this is a true and lively description of the true Church.

Verse. 3. And there appeared another wonder in heaven. etc.

AFter the Church described by a notable and clear figure, follows a full
description of a foul and cruel monster which is enemy of the same. And so
like as ye figure of the woman before painted out, was a wonderful sign, so
likewise the form and shape of her enemy seemed to John a thing worthy great
admiration, which was showed by and by after the most pleasant vision of the
woman. And it is so much more meruailouse that so horrible a monster appears
no where else but in Heaven. But we se in th^s figure, how far of it is from
the condition of the Church, to want an enemy, whose assaults and invasions
she is compelled to suffer, even in heaven. And we may chiefly here
acknowledge the malice of ye devil, which persecuteth ye Church even unto the
heavens, not countinge it not enough to vex the same with grievous torments in
earth, unless he may strive if he could so pluck down her eternal
salvation, which is in heaven. Let us not therefore make any covenant of since
with this enemy, for he seeks by all means nothing else but our utter
destruction.

Behold a great red Dragon. etc. He uses an aduerbe of shewinge for to sheere
up greater attention. For the thing is worthy to be diligently noted and
considered, this terrible Dragon is that old serpent which seduced ye first
woman to the destruction of the whole world, now laboreth diligently, not only
by subtilty as in time past, but also by force and cruelty to bring into
destruction, this woman restored to her old and also a far better s^ate and
condition by Christ. And seeing all kind of serpe^ts are both terrible and
hateful to us, ye great dragon cannot but raise up great terrore of himself,
and also no less hatred to all those which have a care to eschew his poisoned
and venim b^ringes Add moreover unto these, that shining in his fyery colloure
he thretnith nothing else to all those, which he shall enticelinglye draw into
his net, but mad fury and rage of destroyinge, and the studiouse care and
desire of sheading blood.

Having seven heads and ten horns, and upon his heads seven crowns. etc. He
is not simple in subtilty or a poisonful spirit of one mouth, but a deformed
monster with seven heads he testifies by the number of ye same heads that he
inuenteth and deuiseth all kinds of crafts and subtilties, like as being
armed with seven horns he boasts yt he wears crowns upon every one of
his heads, it shows his innumerable victories by which he has subdued to
his obedienc all the whole world.

Verse. 4. And his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven and cast
them to the earth. etc.

IT may also be here gathered what strength he had in his horns, and his
heads, seeing that by casting his tail only, yt is the lust of earthly
things yt he drew the third part of the stars to the earth that is many of
the teachers which for a time seemed to shine as stars in heaven, which being
addict to the study of earthly pleasures, have utterly lost all there heavenly
brightness, by which wicked act he takes greater courage, and hope yt he can
more easily overthrow also the whole church. Moreover it is hear showed how
great the unmeasurable hugenes of that monstrouse body is, whose meruailouse
long tail would suffice to cast down the third part of the stars. Such
and so great is the enemy of the Church.

And the Dragon stood before the woman, which was ready to be delivered to
devour her children, when she had brought it forth. etc. It is shadowed under
this figure with how great madness the devil would rage against the Church. The
Dragon waits upon the woman, which is in trauaill that he might devour the
infant so soon as it should be horn. How diligently Satan labored even in
the first beginning of the Church to destroy her tender babe, and first issue
that there might no posterity of the same remain in the world, we know by
histories. What left he undone by his ministers the Jews, the pries^es, and
the Pharisees, that the doctrine of Christ might not be spread abroad in the
world, but might be utterly extinguished with the Apostles them selves. With
what violent rage did he stir up Nero and other bloody Emperors that they
might utterly subvert the whole Church, by murdering infinite numbers of her
children, the faithful confessors and martires of Christ. The devil therefore
would have destroyed the infant of the Church, even in the very birth
thereof, if the success had been agreeable to his will and careful trauaill.

Verse. 5. And she brought forth a male Child. etc.

THe Dragons hope deceyueth him, for although he had assayed every way, yt he
might destroy the fruit and offspring of the Church even in the very birth,
yet the Church brought forth a male child strong and lively, which in s^ite of
Satan should receive the inheritance of rule, and Dominion appointed and
ordained for him of God the father.

Which should rule all nations with a rod of Iron. etc This prophecy is of
Christ in the 2. psalm. Therefore Christ is formed in the hearts o^ yt
faithful by the ministry of the Gospel as Paul witnesses to the Galath. 4.
chap. And Christ does compel all nations to his obedience although they
obstinately resist, breaking them with a rod of Iron. And the members of Christ
which are the faithful through him are made partakers of the same kingdom.
The devil lies craftilye in waise for these that he might devour them, so
soon as they he brought forth into the light of yt Gospel. But he does not
obtain his desire, for howsoever he shall conspire with the whole army of hell
to bring them to destruction, yet the lord will not give the^ for a pray unto
his teeth. It follows therefore.

And her son was taken up to God and to his throne. etc. Under the protection
and defense of God, he is in safety, so that he whom the Dragon desired to be
drowned in the bottomeles pit of hell, is taken up to god, and to the throne of
his majesty, and drawn out of the Jaws of the devil. For Christ whom the
devil wished so much to be destroyed, fitteth at the right hand of the divine
glory, to the which dignity also of heavenly glory, by his benefit are
exalted, as many as are made the Children of God and of the Church by faith.
In vain therefore Satan seeks there destruction, whom God has drawn up to
him self, and has so received them to the throne of his glory. How greedely
the devil assayed to blotte out the name of Christianity in the first
spreading abroad of the same, we have before touched, but what proffited he in
the end in bestowing so great labor? For how much more his ministers raged in
there madness with sword and fire, and all kind of torments against, the child
of the Church, that they might destroy him yet being but an infant and not
able to make battle, so much the more godliness increased exceadingly, and the
Church daily received such increasings, as were not to be ashamed of. And
Christ whose glory the Devil so greatly envied, sitting in the throne of gods
majesty defends yt godly from heaven, takes vengeance upon his enemies,
and bestows all kind of good gifts upon his Church. We need not fear
therefore, least that the whole Church should ever be subject to the tirannie
of the Dragon.

Verse. 6. And yt woman fled into wilderness where she has a place prepared of
god, yt they should feed her there, a 1000.200. and threscore days.

AFter that he had declared how yt the son of the woman was taken up into a
place of safety, now he teaches how provision is made also for ye woman her
self. God could at his will bind and restrain the devil that he should not
hurt the Church at all. But this is the most wise dispensation of his holy
will, that when she has been proved, and tried by sundry afflictions in the
world, he will at length, take her to himself into heaven: yet in the mean
time he does not fail her even in the most desperate matters, but sends
ayed from heaven in due season. Therefore he opens a way for the woman to
fly, that the might for a time eschew the violence of ye Dragon. Christ him
self also permitted this manner of auoydinge haunger to his apostels Matthew the
10. But when and who ought to sly when persecution approchethe it is not so
easy to express in words, as that the holy^ ghost shall inwardly instruct
every one when time shall be. But that we should not think, that the woman
should perish in the desert, where there is the scarsity of all things. S.
John does express, that there was also in the desert a seat prepared for her
of God, whereas she might safely for a time appoincted by God, breath and
refreshe her self from ye persecution of the Dragon. And least we might
suppose that she should in the mean time want any thing, he shows that she
shall be nourished and fed there for a thousand two hundredth and sixty days,
that is, by the space of two and forty months, which make three years and an
half, which short time, when as it is the half of a prophetical week, is
said to be granted to satan and Antichrist, that they cannot any longer
oppress or afflict the Church. Moreover this place does plainly show, that
the church shall not always be visible to the world, which thing the papists
do urge most of all, for if it should be always in the fight of all men, how
may she be said to fly into ye wilderness? Yea it is certain by this place,
that the Church of Rome is not signified by this woman, which was never
banished and driven into the wilderness, from ye eyes of men. And lastly we are
here also taught that we must answer to our adversaries which ask us where
our Church was before these two or three hundred years. Verily if we know yt
the true worship of God, was to be found in no region of Europe or Asia, it is
enough that it was in ye desert, that is in places not commonly known, that it
lay hid by the decree of god, even unto the time by him appointed. For ye
number of ye elect, which is ye church shall never fail but God does preserve
and keep to himself 7. thousand men, which have neither bowed the knee to
Baal nor kissed his Image with the mouth, and that, when as Elias believed that
he remained alone in the people of Israel. How much more is it like that
there remained many elect of God, throughoute the large regions of Asia, and
Europe, and also some parts of Africa, in which the name of Christ is spoken
of, which although they were unknown to Antichrist and his adherentes, yet
they offered and yielded to god his due honor? The papists therefore to there
own hurt do boast of there visible Church, and rashly do condemn ours,
because it was some time invisible to the Romanistes. For in this it is more
like to this true Church, that it sometime lay hid: and there synagoge
always visible, does sufficiently bewray it self not to be this woman, which
fled into the desert.

Verse. 7.8. And there was a battle in heaven, Michaell and his Angels fought
against the Dragon, and the Dragon and his Angels fought, but they prevailed
not, neither was there place any more found in heaven. etc.

THe first attempt or enterprise of Satan was most daungerouse, namely that he
might steal away, and devour the infant of the Church, so soon as it were
borne, and that he might deprive the Church for ever, of her eternal happenes.
But Christ the defendour of his spouse sets himself against the wicked
enterprises and practices of the Devil, and so the scarce battle arose in
heaven, whilst Satan studieth utterly to destroy the Church, and Christ to
save, and defend the same for ever. Therefore I expound this battelle, which
was toughte in heaven, of the study and enterprise of the Devil, whereby he
chiefly labors with all diligence to assalte ye eternal salvation of the
Church, which is founded in Christ, and his madness and impude^cie is noted,
that he dare fight with God him self. (Michaell and his Angels) Michaell that
great prince of the army of God does signify Christ, which is the general
c^ntayne of our oste, which thing is also taught in the 9.10, and 12. chap. of
Daniell, That he joins to him self the Aungells, it does not argue that
there is weakness or want of stre^ght in him, but he does it to increase our
confidence and trust. For the Dragon mustreth his army on every side of the
Angels of darkness, and puts forth all his strength to oppress Christ. But
what was the end of the battle? They prevailed not neither was there place
found any more in heaven. The terrible Dragon guarded with the infinite
thousands of his soldiers can do nothing against Christ, which defends the
health of his Church. Satan therefore being overcome with all his whole
army, is compelled to leave of the battle, and not that only, but also
being deprived of all hope of renuinge the war, he with all his soldiers is
cast down unto ye earth. Now therefore is the salvation of the elect certain,
when as the devil himself having assaied and proved all his strength to
break and overthrow the same, being put to shameful slighte, is overthrown
by the virtue and power of the most mighty Michaell.

Verse. 9. And the great Dragon that old serpent called the devil and Satan
was cast out, which deceives all the world, and he was cast into the earth
and his Angels were cast out with him. etc.

AFter that he had said that he was driven out of Heaven that his place
could there no longer be found, neither could he frustrate, or make void the
everlasting salvation of the Church, he shows whither he was thruste out
into Banishement with his whole army, that is to say into tho earth, that he
might exercise his mad rage only upon the reprobate, and that he might
afflicte the Church with temporal evils only, and yet that he might not
obtain that he would: that is, that through the terror, and fearce of
torments, he might drive her out of the earth. Moreover we must observe
with what sundry names and titles the holy ghost sets him out, that all his
malice and subtle deceytes might be perceived. First he is called, that
great Dragon, which is described before in the third Verse of this Chapter.
Secondly, that old serpent which seduced our first parents to disobedience,
now so much more subtle, as he is more ancient by long use and experience.
Thirdly he is called in greek even as it were by his propre name, Diabolos,
which in english is devil, yt is a false accuser, which with false crimes, and
secreat accusations never ceased to accuse the godly before the Lord God, that
if he could by any means, he might bring them into Gods hatred. Fourthly he
is called in Hebrew Satan, that is an adversary, the sworn enemy of Christ
and all godly men, at whose hands we ought to look for nothing, but enmity,
whom, it behooves us chiefly both to hate and take heed of. Fyftlye he is
called the deceyuer of the whole world, of whom how great the deceites are,
and with what diligent care of us to be eschewed, we may know sufficiently
even by this place, yt he has seduced the whole world, that is the greatest
part of the world, into errors, and false worshipping of God, whereby we
understand, that, that is not the very catholic Church in deed, which
boasts in the greatest multitude of men, neither therefore to be called
catholic or universal, because all give there consent into the same, seeing
the Devil here deceyueth the whole world: but that which all ye godly do
acknowledge for there mother, although the reprobate in respect of number, by
infinite parts do excede them.

Verse. 10. And I herd a loud voice saying etc.

AFter so gloriouse a victory over Satan and his army, the heavenly spirits
do sing a triumphant song to God and his Christ. By which we are taught that
the glory of god is always to be celebrated of us in the Church for so
unspeakable a benefit. That he says a loud voice, he shows both the
multitude and also the fervent zeal of the singers, for we ought all earnestly
to brust forth to the singing and celebrating of gods praises.

In heaven now is salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and
the power of his Christ. etc. There is uttered in this song, what fruit and
commodity there is of so notable a victory. For in saying that there is
salvation in heaven, they understand that the everlasting health of ye Church
does now remain unshaken after yt the devil which assayed to oppress the
same with war, is vanquisshed and cast down prostrate unto the earth. The
virtue and power of god has showed forth it self, to beat down the
violence of Satan. And now the kingdom of God over the saints, which the
proud Dragon desired, remains inviolate, when the Dragon is thrust out. And
especially the dignity of Christ does excel over all the power of the
adversary, by whose government the battaill is fought, and likewise by his
invincible virtue and power all the whole army with there captain are
overthrown.

Because the accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accused them before
our God day and night. etc. He which weried continually the ears of god with
daily false accusations laid to the charge of the godly, that he might spoil
the^ of eternal bliss, and as if they were guilty of eternal death might
make them bond slaves to the torments of hell. But god will now no longer
abide to hear any accusatio^s against his saints, which are washed with the
blood of his son. Who shall say any thing to the charge of gods chosen: it
is god which justifies, who is he that shall condemn? Romans 8.

Verse. 11. And they overcame him by the blood of the lamb and by the word of
his testimony: and they loved not there lives unto the death. etc.

Wonderful is the clemency of Christ that he takes his saints into the
praise of this victory, but yet in such sort as redou^deth to his own
glory. The heavenly spiritess therefore rejoice with the faithful for there
victory, but yet obtained not by there own blood, but by the blood of Christ,
although they them selves also powered forth there lives in battaill. And this
Aungelicall song does clearly reach with what armor and weapons the
faithful may overcome the devil, that is with the shield of faith, which is
in the blood of the la^be, which offered up him self a sacrifice for there
sins, and with the sword of Gods word and the confession of the name of
Christ, which they were never ashamed of before me^, although for witnessing
the same they should suffer most bitter death. After the same manner ought all
the godly to be prepared to whom the glory of God and his Gospel is
preciouse, that they may not love there lives unto death, as often as necessity
of confessing his name does require ye same. And although the danger of death
be absent, yet the same affection ought always to be with us, that we may not
love our lives even to the death, in comparison of holding the incomparable
treasure of the truth of Gods gospel.

Verse. 12. Therefore rejoice ye heavens and ye that dwell in them. etc.

A benefit is bestowed upon those in vain, whereof they that are partakers,
have no fruition in the same. And often times it comes to pas through our
perverse crokednesse, that being adorned with great benefits of God, we feel
no fruit of the same. Therefore they exhorted the heaven, and all the heavenly
spirits that they would be touched with the most joyful sense and fealinge
of so great a good, and for the same would rejoice with joy unspeakable, that
to Christ, glory, and to the Church, eternal salvation, is obtained by this
so gloriouse a victory.

Woe be to the Inhabitants of the earth and the sea, for the Devil is come
down unto you, which has great wrath knowing that he has but a short time.
etc. They do not so much curse the wicked, as that they express there most
grieuouse dangers, to the seducing of whom, the devil descended into the earth
full of fury and wrath. (Of the earth and ye sea) according to the literal
sense is understood the inhabitants of the main land, and Islandes, but
figu^atiuely he understands all the reprobate, which are so much addicted to
earthly and fraill pleasures, that they never look up into heaven, to make
whom blind and that worthily, the Devil descended, not more moved by his
own fury, then sent down by the judgment of god. Whose madness, they show,
should be so much the more fearce and cruel, because he knew for certentie
that a very short time was granted him to stir up his tragedies in. He will
therefore pretermite nothing in the mean time, whereby he may draw a large
and fat pray into his nets. What does he therefore.

Verse. 13. And when the Dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth, he
persecuted the woman which had brought forth the man child. etc.

WHen he saw that he was driven out of heaven, that he could not by charging
and false accusing hinder the eternal salvation of the church, perceyuinge
the same to be yet warring in earth, he raises up horrible persecutions
against her by his ministers the tyrants. And when as he could not devour the
child which the woman brought forth, for which he had long time lien
subtillye in wait, he persecuteth the woman which brought forth, with beastly
cruelty. Being overcome of the head, he sets upon the body. We may note
here the deuilishe cruelty of some men, which if they can not bring the
greatest hurtes upon the godly, as death it self, that they do not leave of to
hurt by such means as they be able, they violently spoil them of there
goods, they d^fame them with reproaches and sclaunders, and hate also even
there friends, for there sakes.

Verse. 14. But to the woman were given two wings of a great Eagle.

BEfore he said that the woman being delivered of her child fled into ye
wilderness: now he shows by what means she could eschew or fly the
marvelous swiftnes of the dragon in pursuinge. Two wings, says he were
given unto her, with which she be came swifter then the devil, and he adds
moreover (of a great Egle that we should understand, that the woman might
safely trust unto them. By the wings we may acknowledge the sundry and
vnaccustomable ways and means of flying which the Lord opens to the Church
as often as he has decreed to deliver the same by slight from the hands of
tyrants.

That she might fly into the wilderness, into her place where she is nourished
for a time, times, and half a time, from the presence of the serpent. etc. We
have spoken before in the 6. verse, of the flight into the desert, and of the
wonderful providence of God, which even in the scarcity and want of all
things provides not only lodging but also meat for nourishment. And the
space which is here darckly called, a time, times, and half a time, I
enterprete to be ye same, which he said a thousand two hundredth and sixty
days, that is, three years and an half, so that one time may agree to a
year, two times, to two years, and half a time, to half a year, for in
Daniell to whom he alludeth, times are read in the duall number, that they
might signify two times. And these appellatio^s of time, seem to be applied to
the sense and affection of ye Church which was banished. For she thinks the
time of her calamity long, and afterward follow two times, which increase the
weariness, but at length the half time, when as the matters seem almost
desperate, does manifestly show that according to the promise of our savior,
the days of affliction are shortened.

Verse. 15. And the serpent cast out of his mouth water after the woman as it
had been a river, because she should have been caught of the sloude. etc.

THe devil being vanquished an hundredth times yet repareth the battaill
again, and though violence have small success, yet he absteyneth not from
crafts and subtilties. He follows the woman therefore flying into the
wilderness, who^ he cannot catch and tear with his teeth, with reproaches,
lies, and sclaunders framed by heritiques, and hypocrites, whereby if he could
he coueteth to bring her into an evil report. And we see what a great s^oude
of lies and reproaches he has cast after her by the Arrians, Pelagians,
Papists, and other such like hypocrites, by which he studied, and also now
studieth to draw her in to the hatred of Princes, mighty men, and moreover of
all those which gave any credit unto them. But Satan shall never have
success or prevail by his subtilties, for it follows.

Verse. 16. But ye earth help the woman, and the earth opened her mouth and
swalowed up ye river which the dragon cast out of his mouth. etc.

HE which delivered his Church from the greatest violence. and cruelty of the
enemies, will not suffer her to be taken with the subtle sleyghtes of Satan,
but the earth shall rather open her mouth as it did in time past to swalow up
the whole faction of Cho^e, Dathan, and Abyrame, then that at the will and
pleasure of the Devil a hear should fall from her head. And we see that all
the devises of heretics against the Catholic Church, by which the dragon
hoped that the woman should be destroyed, have vanished away, as though they
were droncke up of the earth, and yet the Church her self, now at length
drawn out of secreat places, stands immouable, and shall stand for ever,
even unto the end of the world, We may here note that the heaven the earth,
and all things, which are in them, do help the godly, as often as the Lord
will deliver them out of the hands of the enemies. And also that we be not to
much moved and troubled, for the reproaches and sclau^ders of the enemies of the
Church, heritiques and hypocrites, (which are the instruments of the devil) by
which they endeavor, even like a most swift flood to draw her, and her members
into hatred and envy. For all there lies shall shortly be swalowed up by ye
earth, and there deuilish enterprises shall be brought to naught.

Verse. 17. Then the Dragon was wroth with the woman: and went and made wary
with the remnant of her seed, which keep the commaundeme^ts of god, and have
the testimony of Jesus Christ.

THe devil having set upon her so often with so great violence, and being so
often so shamefully repelled, it is no marvel though he be driven into
wrath and fury, yet notwithstanding he leauethe not of from his purpose,
which he took in hand. But although he can not oppress the whole Church
with the sundry sleyghtes which he has invented, yet he persecuteth every one
of her members with a meruailouse study and care of destroyinge. He make the
war therefore with the remnante of her seed, wheresoever they be dispersed
through the whole Earth, and he never leauethe of, to assault them partly by
force, and partly by deceites, whom we ought to resist strong in faith,
putting on the whole armor of God which the Apostle describes in the 6. Chap.
to the Ephe. And in that he calls the sons of ye Church the seed of the
woman, he alludeth to that, which the Lord pronounced of the seed of the
woman, which should break the serpents head, that we should not fear the
invasion of him, whose head being broken by Christ, is delivered also unto us,
which are the seed of the woman, to be trodden upon. Furthermore he briefly
expresses, whom he nu^breth among the lawful sons of the Church, that is
they which kept the commandments of God, and also do openly confess the
faith of Christ, which they embrace.

Verse. 18. And I stood on the sea sand. etc.

THis verse pertayneth to the vision of the Chapter following, Ihon therefore
thought in a vision that he stood upon the shoore, that he might behold the
beast ascendinge out of the sea.

The thirtenth Chapter.
WHen as he had showed that the devil the chief enemy of the Church
attempteth all things for the destruction of the same, now he shows in this
chapter, what principal instruments he would use, in oppugning the salvation
of the same, verily even the Romayne Empire that is Antichrist and his most
cruel ministers.

Verse. 1. And I saw a beast rise out of the sea etc.

ANtichrist is compared to a most cruel beast, because he persecuteth the
Church without all reason, or any sense or felinge of humanity. Moreover he is
not called (...), but (...) that is a certain wild and cruel beast. For of
the brute beasts, some although they want reason, yet they are gentle and
hurtlesse, but Antichrist is a beast of untamed wildenes, void of all show of
gentleness. For no otherwise then a wild beast through hunger rampeth upon the
pray offered him, does Antichrist rage upon the Church. But he is also said
to ascend out of the sea, that in the very birth or first springing up he
might show of what sort his rule and Dominion should be, that is troublesome,
and tempestuouse, diverse and inconstant. And histories do testify out of how
great waves of battaill, and tumultes the Romayne Empire has risen.

Having seven heads and ten horns, and upon his horns were ten crowns and
upon his head, the name of blasphemy. etc. By the number of heads, and
horns this monster bewrays him self of what father he was begotten, verelye
of the great Dragon, whose natural properties he thoroughly resembles. For
although the Monarchy of the Romans was ordained by God, even as all power
is of God, yet in as much as it abounded in trandes, tyranny cruelty and
lust, and that it persecuted the Church of Christ, it was of the devil, but
chiefly when all the power thereof was translated to the Pope, which is
chiefly figured under this beast, without all doubt it is to be acknowledged
to be the very natural son of Satan, but when as other notes also of him,
by the number of his heads and horns are propounded of the Angel in the 17.
Chapter, we will not touch them before we come to that place. That he wears
then crowns in his horns, when as the Dragon had but seven on his heads, it
seems to be referred to that, that the ten horns do signifye kings, which in
the beginning were consuls only and presidentes of provinces, but when as this
beast shall the second time rise up they shall together with the beast in one
hour receive kingly power, of which there follows more in the 17. Chap. And
he bears in his heads the name of blasphemy, when he calls himself the
head of the universal Church For although in his decrees, and other writings
approved of him, horrible blasphemies may be found, in which he is called some
time neither God, nor man, but as it were a neuter between both, sometime he is
called Christ, sometime our Lord God, and sometime God above all gods, yet he
bears that name openly in his head to be seen of all men, whereby he
boasts himself to be Christ's vicare as though he were absent, and plucketh
to him self alone, the knowledge of all causes, and he boasts that he can
not err in any thing. The like blasphemies uttered his predecessors,
Caligula, Nero, Domitian, Diocletian, which commanded that they them selves
should be worshipped as Gods, and that temples should be buylte and altars
consecrated to there godhead. But none more impudently then the Romayne
Bishops, for all men did mark and deride the folly and madness of the emperors,
although they flattered them most filthily,, but almost all have in good
earnest acknowledged the divinity of the pope, and have asked that of him,
which is the property of God alone to grant, as remission of sins and other
such like.

Verse. 1. And this beast which I saw was like a cat of the mountain, and his
feet were as the feet of a bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a Lion. etc.

BY this description it is more clearer then the light it self, that the
Romayne Empire is assigned, which did conteyne in it the power of the other
throe kingdoms, which are described by the sumulitudes of a Lion, a Bear and
a Catte of the mountain, Daniell chapter 7. But the fourth monarchy that is
of the Romans, composed of the pride, raueninge, and cruelty of all the rest,
was unlike to all the other. He has therefore a body like to a catte of the
mountain, which signified Ale^ander the great, which was most swifte to
follow after the pray, he has the feet of a Bear, by which he is equal in
ravening with the Meades, and Persians, but he had ye mouth of a Lion, by
which he exceadeth in hautinesse and pride the Assirians and Chaldeans and he
exceadeth in cruelty the fearcenesse of all beasts.

And the Dragon gave him his power and his throne, and great authority. etc.
He receives not only the power to hurt, and persecute of the Devil, but
also he occupies his seat in earth, that the power of Satan is manifest to
be seen in nothing more then in his Vicare Antichrist, and this is that sea
of Antichrist, and authority of the Pope, of which they boast so much of,
that is to say, the throne of the Devil and power received at his hand. But
it may be demanded how the Devil could give power, or empire, seeinge all
powers are of him, which also bestows them upon the wicked and Tyrants. But
in the tyrannical power two things are to be considered, the one is the
ordinance of GOD, which disposes all Kingdoms at his will, and to whom he
will. And the other is, there frauds, there treasons, and cruelties, by which
they aspire to the government, which things are of the Devil. The devil
therefore granted power and authority to Antichrist, in as much as by his
provocation, by all wickedness and impiety they atteyne that tyranny, which
occupy that seat.

Verse. 3. And I saw one of his heads as it were wounded to death but his
deadlye wound was healed, and all the world wondered and followed the beast. etc.

ALmost all interpretours do grant that a great deminishing of the power of
Antichrist is signified by this head that was wounded, but when it was wounded
they agreed not. For some do suppose that it wounded at the time when as that
Ihon Husse, and Hierome of Phrage in disclosinge the subtilties of ANTICHRIST,
separated a great part of the Kingedome of Bohemia, from the authority of
that sea. Other do expound it of Julius Caesar, others of Nero being slain.
Others do refer it to the City of Rome taken, burned and spoiled by the
Goths. But to me, which by the Beast, do understand not the lawful
administration of the Empire, but the tyrannical power in persecutinge the
Church, that he seems then to have been wounded unto death when as
constantine the great after that Marentius, and Lic^nius the last persecutinge
tyrants of the heathenishe emperors were slain, in granting peace to the
Church, smote that most cruel and monstrouse head of Antichrist with a deadely
wound. But shortly after that wound was healed by the wicked emperors
Constantius and Iulianus, valence, and others of whom some being heritiques
and Iulianus a forsaker of the faith, persecuted the right Church until at
length the bloudye tyrante Phocas, and murderer of his Lord and Master
Mauritius, resigned the Antichristians Kingdom to Boniface the Pope, in whom
and his successors plainly revived ye head of deuilishe tyranny which was
almost cut of by Constantine. Yet in the mean I acknowledge ye the horrible
destruction, and calamities of men by battle, which were brought to the
lawful Empire of the Romans by the barbarouse people, the Goths, Vandales,
and Saracenes, opened and prepared a way to the rule of the Roman, bishop.
And this also is manifest by the writing and monumentes of the learned, yt the
byshoppricke of Rome, from syluester unto sabinianus being increased in
riches, and that through the favor of the Emperors, it did little and little
degenerate into foreign rule and government, until at length it ascended to
the very poynct and top of Antichristian Aucthority. Where upon to the great
wonder of the world his Kingdom was established, lyfted, and exaulted so high
out of so obscure and dark beginnings.

Verse. 4. And they worshipped the Dragon which gave power to the beast, and
they worshipped the beast saying, who is like unto the beast; who is able to
war with him. etc.

IT is marvelous that he says men worshipped the devil, whom every where
all do abhor and detest. But he understands that the worship and
obedience, which was yielded to Antichrist of the men that were seduced,
perteyned to the spreading abroad of the devils kingdom, seeing they hoonoure
Satan in his vicar or legate. Like as they do honor the king which reverence
those magistrates, which he has appointed under him. And that he expresses
when as immediately he adds (and they worshipped the beast, saying, who is
like to the beast? whose power is so great yt he can forgive sins, and open
the kingedome of heaven to whom he will. Who is able to war against him?
which draws down Emperors, and Kings as often as he lust, on^e of there
statelye seat, which thundreth out the sentences of cursing^, against his
enemies, and through the fullness of his power he can thrust down his
adversaries even into hell.

Verse. 5. And there was given him a mouth that spoke great things and
blasphemies. etc.

IF any shall marvel how the majesty of God can suffer so great
blasphemies, which the devil and Antichrist show out against the same: Saint
Ihon makes answer showing that this is by divine permission, that Antichrist
should exault him self above all heygh, whereby he might seduce the
reprobate, upon whom by the just judgment of God the efficacy, and strength
of error is sent, that they may believe lies which despised the truethe. 2.
Thessalo. 2. By this place we gather that the wicked can not brust forth into
blasphemies against God, at there pleasure, except God suffer, that they may
abuse there tongues, to there own destruction Moreover we may here note that
Antichrist ratleth one nothing, but great things, and blasphemies. For what
soever they boast as magnificall, concerning the dignity of the Pope, his
authority, keys, swords, and other prerogatives of his, is mere
blasphemy, by which he chalengeth to him self the place, and rowme of Christ
over the Church yea all the whole Popish doctrine, of the Sacrifice of the
Mass, of Purgatory, of Satisfactions, works of superurogation, and other
such like monstres, conteyneth infinite blasphemies.

And power was given unto him to do, two and ^ortie months. etc. This clause
does show that Antichrist could not obtain rule in the world but by the
secreat, and just judgment of God. But this power is shut within her limits,
that he can not reign so long as he would, nor exercise his ungodliness, but
his tyranny is limited by 42. months. Concerning this number of months
what I think is to be understood, I have expounded in the 11. chap. Verse. 2.
Here it shall suffice to note that this short space of half a week is put to
the comfort of the godly, that they should not fear. That the tyranny of
Antichrist should be eternal.

Verse. 6. And he opened his mouth unto blasphemy against God to blaspheme his
name his tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven. etc.

WHen the power of blaspheminge was once granted, he opened his mouth to
manifold blasphemies, for he spoke coneumeliouslye of God him self of his
name, and of his tabernacle, and of those which dwell in heaven, so he
counts it not enough to reproach the majesty of God only, but also his name
that is the worshipe and religion which he has prescribed to sanctify his
name, he co^de^neth as false, and heretical, and koyneth a new out to his own
brain. And also he blasphemeth the tabernacle of god, that is his Church, in
which God dwells by his spirit, when he calls it nothing else, but a
conspiracy of heretics and Schismatiques, We may two ways take this of
those which dwell in heaven, either for ye true members of the Church, which
he with great reproach of them calls Lutherans, and Zwinglians. etc. Or else
for the saints now triumphing in heaven whom he diverse ways sclaundereth
either when he braggeth that they are the patrones of his wickedness, or else
condemns their doctrine of error, or else when he does erecte temples unto
the^, Images, holy days, and other divine honors, making Idols of the holy
worshippers of God: that I may not speak with what stinking lies he extolleth
there lives, in the giving of martiloge, and in such kind of writings,
which are all mere blasphemy against the Saints, which dwell in Heaven.
And what reproaches he casts forth against God him self we have touched
before in the first verse.

Verse. 7. And it was given unto him to make war with the saints and to
overcome them, and power was given him over every kindred and tongue and
nation. etc.

HE signifies that Antichrist could do nothing, but in as much as ability
was permitted to him by God. In that therefore that he shows his cruelty upon
the holy martyrs of Christ, he does it not at his own pleasure, or at the
will of the devil, for then would he utterly extinguishe and des^oye all the
true worshippers of God: but by the will of god, for a punnishment of the
reprobate, and a trial of his children, for whom it is very profitable to be
proved with sundry temptations. There is given power to Antichrist to make
war against the saints, and to affect them them with sundry torments
until he may have the do^eiull victory of many thousand of the^ being slaien.
And this t^^anny does not rage in one region only, but every where through the
whole earth, this is a catholic crueltye. And that which we know partly by
histories, how many milians of marti^es were cruel murdered by the Emperores
and Roman Byshopes, we are partly taught by daily experience.

Verse. 8. Therefore all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose names
are not written in the book of life of the lamb which was killed from the
beginning of the world. etc.

Like as he sore told in ye verse going before that Antichrist should show
his cruelty upon the bodies of the saints, so in this verse he shows
against the souls of whom his false illusions shall prevail. That is to say
against the reprobate only, which are not predestinate to eternal life in
Christ, whom he calls the lamb which was slaien from the beginning of y^
world, because the strength and effect of this sacrifice, can before he had
taken flesh profited the patriarchs from the beginning of the world, like
as it shall be profitable to the elect even to the end of the world. The
reprobate therefore being seduced partly by his sub^^lties, and partly
stricken with the cruelty used against those that resist, will acknowledge his
rule and au^thority, and will worship him instede of a most filthy Idol. For
his deceiptes and illusions shall not prevail in any, but in those which
perish.

Verse. 9. If any man have an ear let him hear. etc.

HE utters a matter worthy of great consideration as often as he moves
attentio^ with so earnest endeavor. We ought therefore with diligence to
imprint thoroughly in our minds the doctrine which follows to the hearing
whereof the holy ghost does as it were by name call every one of us.

Verse. 10. He that leads into captivity shall go into captivity, he that
kills with the sword must be killed with the sword, here is the patience and
the faith of the saints. etc.

THe law of repaying is decreed of the mighty God, for all tirantes, and to
those which oppress the Church of God with cruelty. Eternal captivity
abides for those which have led the the saints captives. They which have
slaien the martyrs with the sword, shall be killed with eternal death, which is
the sword of Gods furye and wrath. And also god will have certain signs of
his justice to remain apparent in the world, that all men may know that they
shall not escape vengeance, which according to the manner of beasts do
cruelly rage in madness against innocents. According to that of the poet: few
mighty cruel men descend to there grave without slaughter and blood few
tyrants by dry death. For if we should reckon up of the Emperors, those
which were the chief aucthors of persecutions, we shall find that they were
destroyed of God by diverse and sundry slaughters. Nero, Domitian, Decus,
Valerianus Licinius, Iulianus with many others, were slaien with bloody and
cruel death. Therefore the murtheringe of the saints is not so permitted to
Antichrist, that the Lord would leave the same always unrevenged. Here
therefore the saints have need of faith and patience, which follows next,
for except power were granted to Antichrist to e^ercise his tyranny, what
trial of faith should there be? what proof of patience? here therefore the
says and patience of the Saints is to be looked for.

Verse. 11. And I beheld an other beast coming out of the earth. etc.

NOw follows the description of the other beast which confirms the former
beast, yt we may know what instrument ^ Antichrist uses to the establisshing
of his kingdom. For as the Dragon with seven heads has for his vicare a
beast with seven heads: so the beast with seven heads has this beast with
two horns. He does not express of what form or shape this beast was,
although it be certain that he was a monster, because he was borne out of the
earth, that is of a most base and obscure beginning to the settinge forth of
the kingdom of Antichrist.

Which had two horns like a Lamb. etc. He has nothing like to a Lamb
besides his two horns, in the rest of his body deformed, uttering the nature
of a wild beast. But some do gather by these horns, that the pope is shadowed
by this beast, which chalingeth to him self the power of the kingdom, and of
the priesthood, which as it is probable, so I do not see how all things can
fitly agree to this exposition, which afterward are often repeated of both the
beasts. In my judgment therefore others do rightlyer interpret him to
signify the popish clergy, which endeavor with all there strength, to
maintain the dignity of there Pope, these will have somewhat like to Christ,
either when they boast them selves to be his servant or else when they
chalendge to them selves both the seculer and priestlye authority. I speak
of the chief Prelates, the Cardinales, the Archbishopes, and byshopes etc.
which usurp both a kingly and pontifical dignity.

But he spoke like the Dragon. etc. Howsoever by the number of his horns he
semethe to have some outward show, or likeness of Christ, yet he bewrays
himself by his voice that he is a preacher of the dragon and not of Christ.
For this beast, which afterward is called the false prophet, whose doctrine if
we shall examine according to the most certain rule of Gods word, it
shall be found to be Deuilishe, and quite contrary to Gods truethe. That I
may omit other profes, which are almost infinite, least I should be over
tedious, that one testimony of S. Paul in the first Epistle to Timothy and
fourth chapt. calling the forbidding of marriage and meats the doctrine of
devils, does sufficiently prove that this false prophet, which teaches ye
same things which the Pope prescribes, does speak the self same, which the
great Dragon inspireth into Antichrist.

Verse. 12. And he did all that the first beast could do before him. etc.

THe power of Antichrist is extended to his chief munsiers therefore he
exercises his power by them, this is yt which he says, that this beast with
the two horns did all that the first beast could do in his presence.

And he causes the earth and them that dwell therein to worship the first
beast whose deadly wound was healed. etc. The popish clergy labor with tothe
and nail, that all may every where acknowledge the authority of the Bishop
of Rome, and that all may require at his hands, Indulgences, dispensations,
Empires and kingdoms, and many yield to him homage, which thing whiles they
labor so sendiously to bring to pas, they call back again, the aunciente
tyranny of the Ethnikes, which being strike^ with a deadly wound, now at
length by there ayed has been perfectly healed.

Verse. 13. And does great wounders so that he makes fire come down from
heaven on the earth, in the sight of men. etc.

Saint Paul foretold that the coming of Antichrist should be in lying
signs. Because also Christ him self prophesied that there should come false
prophets, which with workinge monstrouse miracles should deceive many, in so
much that even the very elect if it were possible should also being seduced
be drawn into there destruction. And hear the false prophet, as it were an
apishe imitator of Elias, causethe fire to descend from heaven unto the earth,
in the sight of men, all which are either feigned to be done, or else by the
crafty conueyaunce and iugling castes of Satan, bewitching the eyes of men,
they are but boasted of, of which sort of Miracles the legens of the popish
saints are full. Yea those wonderful things, which they work by there
counsels and authority in the commune wealth, may worthelye be counted for
great signs and wonders, as when they translate kingdoms, from the lawful
heirs unto others, some Emperors they depose, others they place in there
roumes, and other such like, which are wonderful miracles to men. But we are
admonished so often in the scriptures of signs, miracles, and wonders, which
should be wrought by false prophets that we should not suffer our selves to be
led back from the truth of Gods word by any works, although they be never
so wonderful, against the truth of which word we ought not to give credit
to Angels coming down from heaven, to the Balath. Chapt. ^ Contrariwise it
has always been the manner of the false prophets, to call and provoke men
from the word of God to miracles, and here upon the papists instantlye
require of us to work miracles, as though the doctrine, which we profess,
were not sufficientlye confirmed with infinite miracles of Christ and his
Apostles.

Verse. 14. And deceives the^ that dwell on ye earth, by means of those
signs, which he has power to do in y^ sight of the beast. etc.

HE declares in this verse to what end he wrought great signs before men
verily that he might seduce the most of the^ into error. Such miracles
therefore with the workers of the same are to be accursed of the faithful by
which they are called away from the simplicity of Gods word to the devises
and inventions of men. But it is worthy to be noted, that he says power was
given him, that he might work signs in the sight of the former beast. For
god as S. Paul witnesses will give unto them the efficacy and strength of
error, yt they may credit lies, which would not believe the truth 2. These. ^.

Saying to them that dwell on the earth that they should make the image of the
beast, which had the wond of a sword and did line. And this is ye error into
which they seduced wretched men, that they should acknowledge the pope for God,
or rather for an Idolle, and that they should set up his Image for them selves
to worship as if it were some God, but some understand by the Image of the
beast, that in the papacy is restored, a certain Image of the Roman Empire
which was fallen to which opinion I would willingly subscribe, if the vision
did not express that both the beast, and his Image were extant at one time.
Add moreover that by the counsel and suggestion of this beast, an image of
the first beast ought to be made of the inhabitants of the earth. Lastly
that this two horned mo^ster, studieth by all means to aduau^ce the dignity
of the first beast, but the pope sets forth not the old Empire of the
Romans to be worshipped, but him self. I expound this Image therefore to be
the authority of the pope, which all are commanded to receive at the hands
of the popish clergy, being brought unto them by his legates a latere, and to
acknowledge it in the courts of Christianity as they call them, in which the
popes law is exercised, and the pope himself is chief judge which power
remaining in the court or in the Legate a Latere, may of good right be called
the Image of the pope. And that he repeateth so often that the deadly wou^d of
his head was healed, it is that we may know that it is notwithstanding the same
beast, although he somewhat differ in outward show, which made so many
slaughters of the martyrs whose cruelty although for a time being restrained
seemed as it were dead, at length revived to the exercising of the like or
rather greater tyranny.

Verse. 15. And he had power given him, to give a spirit unto the Image of the
beast, so that the Image of the beast should speak and should cause that as
many as would not worship the beast should be killed. etc.

HE always repeateth that it was given him, that we may understand that even
the very counsels and actions of ye wicked are ordered by the will of god, and
that the reprobate can do nothing at all, but that which god does permit.
Moreover least we should Imagen that this image here was dead, he adds that a
spirit was inspired into it of the beast being the priest thereof. So that the
Image should speak, that is the beast by his Legates, and other judges of the
papal court, which give sentence according to the popes law, so that now we
have an Image not dumb and dead, but which is living and speaks, we may
note, how the tyranny of the pope by little and little takes increase for in the
beginning, he only allureth and seduceth by miracles, then he persuades the
seduced to set up an Image of the beast in every city, into which being set
up he inspireth life and gives power to speak, and lastly he commands it
to be worshipped under pain of death. For we know that it was counted worthy
death, if any did contemn the power of the pope.

Verse. 16. And he made all both small and great, rich and pooer, fre and bound
to receive a marcke in there right hand or in there for cheades.

BEing not content to have set forth the pain of death to all that should
refuse to worship the Idol of the beast, that is to acknowledge the
authority of the pope, he also brings all of what state or condition soever
into bondage unto him compellinge every one, even as his boundslaues to
receive his marcke either in the right hand or in the forehead. By the right
hand by which the actions and deeds of this life are guided and wrought, he
signifies, that in all doings, whatsoever men of what state and condition so
ever princes or private persons do take in hand, always to the sea of Rome
her prerogative is to be reserved, that nothing may by any means be decreed
against that. And the marcke is imprinted in their forehead that always and
every where they may testify that they are slaves of that Apostolical or
rather Apostaticall sea.

Verse. 17. And that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the march or
the name of the beast, either the number of his name.

LEast any might escape by some subtlety he appoints this subjection that
none could buy, or sell that is exercise any action necessary, to the
sustentation of this life, but he which would confess him self to be
subject to this power. And to conclude, a man must be banished out of the
world, except he would take upon him this yoke of slavery and bondage. And he
puts three things, his mark, his name, and the number of his name which
perteyne all to one end, and they signify that by some outward sign or
ceremony, this servitude is to be professed to all men, that he may
acknowledge him self to be a member of the latin Church whosoever leads
his life within his Dominion.

Verse. 18. Here is wisdom: let him that has wit count the number of the
beast: for it is the number of a man, and his number is six hundredth,
threscore, and six. etc.

Because this mystery was very darcke, Saint Ihon forewarneth that here
lies wisdom hid, but yet because it is the number of man, that is, which
may be counted by the wisdom of man and is not infinite, he provoke wise
men which are endued with understanding to number the same: for the number is
six hundred, sixty and six. I will omit the most part of the expositions,
which are brought of this place, and I will bring forth that only, which
likes me best, which Ireneus affirms pleased many in his age, not long after
this revelation was received. Which is, that (...) is the name of the beast,
the number of which name, of ye computation of the numerall letters amounts
to six hundred sixty and six. Which if it seemed to be true in the time of
Ireneus, much more now unto us, seying the bishop of Rome in his common
prayers, in his laws, in his writings, in his faith is and will be counted a
latin. Moreover he ought to be a latin whosoever he be that will not be
called a Grecian, that is a Schismatike. So that rightlye in the verse going
before the number of his name is also to be taken for the marcke. Other do draw
ye same number out of ( Ecclesia Italica) the Church of Italy, which I do not
reiecte, when as whether thou sekest the Church, or the head of the same, thou
may find either of them in the mystery of this number.

The fourtenth Chapter.
YT is taught in this Chapter by what means the Church shall stand against the
tyranny of Antichrist, afterward the fall and ruin of ungodliness which
should be by the preachinge of the gospel, is sore told. The faithful are
admonished to take heed and keep them selves from the corruptions and defilings
of Antichrist, because the last judgment of God shall shortly after follow.

Verse. 1. And I looked and behold a lamb. etc.

WHen as he had foretold in the former Chapter that all tribes, tongues,
people, and nations should acknowledge the aucthority of ye most foul beast,
when as he had pronounced that the saints should be overcome of ye most
cruel monster, and also when he had fore showed yt all as many as would
exercise buying, and selling, and the traffic of this life, should profess
most filthy slavery and bondage, we might very well have doubted, whether the
whole Church of Christ, were utterly subdued or not, after yt the cruel beast
had apprehended and obtained dominion, except in this vision, as well the
preservation of the Church, as the destruction of that tyranny, had
consequently been declared. Like as therefore in the 12. chap. He saw Michaell
fighting with the dragon, so likewise now he sees a lamb placed against the
monstrouse beast. But it seems to be without reason, that he opposes and
sets a most meke lamb against a most cruel and wild beast. But we must
remember, that Christ is showed not such as he is to his enemies, but such as
he utters himself to his own. For to his enemies he is that Lion of the
tribe of Judah, but to the godly he is the lamb slaien from the beginning of
the world as louinge to his own, as he is terrible to his enemies.

stood upon Mount Sion. etc.

MOunt Sion is an ancient figure of the Church which should never perish,
of which there remain so excellent, and magnificall promises, that the Lord
will never forsake it. For out of that place, the doctrine of the Gospel
flows over the whole world, according to the prophecies of the old
Prophets, and according to the commandments of Christ him self which he
gave to his Apostles. Act. 1. Ye shall be witnesses unto me in Jerusalem, and in
all Judea, and Samaria, and unto the ends of the earth. That therefore, which
mount Syon was to the Jews, the same is the whole world, to us, if we have
respect to place, wheresoever the godly professors of the Gospel are found.
Which the prophet Isay witnesses Chapter 2. Saying: and the mountain of the
house of the Lord, shall be exalted above the top of all mountains and all
people shall be gathered unto it. Foundly therefore do they, which boast of some
particular city or place, to which ye Church of God may be bound and tied, as
the papists do of Rome, unless they would vaunte as they are very
impudente, that mount Sion is translated to that city, which is builded upon
seven hills. But it is manifest by the scriptures that the seat of God is
spread out of Sion over the whole earth. Therefore Christ is said to stand upon
the mount Syon, when he performs that which he promised other where: behold I
am with ye, even to the end of the world: and if we ask where he answers in
the 17. Chapter of saint Luke: Wheresoever the dead carkas shall be, thither
will the Eagles be gathered. This place does teach even by this one reason,
that the Church shall be perpetual, because it is the seats of the lamb,
whom the mount Sion shall never fail, in which he may stand with his chaste
worshippers.

And with him a hundredth and four and forty thousand. etc. The whole
fellowship of Gods faithful elect, gathered out of every one of the 12. tribes
of Israel, as we read in the seventh Chapter, is joined to Christ there head.
For wickedness never bears such sway in the world, but that God has his
sufficient number although much fewer then the reprobate, which he
preserves pure from Idolatry, filthiness, and defilinges, likewise as in the
time of Elias he kept to him self seven thousands which were clean and
unspotted from the filthiness of Baall.

Having his fathers name written in there foreheades. etc. That is, whose
election is not only sealed inwardly in there hearts by the holy ghost but
also, with outward and open profession testified before men. For they witness
by the whole conversation of there life whose servants they are, so that it
is ready and easy for every one, to read the name of god imprinted in there
foreheades.

Verse. 2. And I herd a voice from heaven. etc.

IT is not an idle nor dumb multitude which accompany Christ, but which is
always bent with most earnest study and endeavor in celebrating and
magnifying ye glory of god. S. Ihon therefore hears a loud voice from
heaven: but it may be meruailed wherefore it is said from heaven, seeing that
he had seen the lamb a little before standing on mount Sion. He signifies
therefore not an earthely hill, but that heavenly hill which is aunswereable,
to the heavenly Jerusalem, for the conversation of the Church being a
stranger in earth is in heaven.

As the sound of many waters and as the sound of a great thunder, and I herd
the voice of harpes harping with there harpes. etc. By a three fold similitude
he sets forth ye magnificence of the voice, which he herd. First that it
was like to that bellowing noise, which many waters tossed with contrary
winds, and russhing against rocks, and the sea banckes, do make. This is a
great confuse and troublesome sound, such at the first hearing, the voice of
them that sing forth the praises of God in the Church seems to be. Secondly
that voice was like to the crackes of the terrible thunder. For it strikes the
minds of sinners and specially of those, which are privy of there own
unthankfulness, when they hear the glory of god sounded forth, of his
faithful worshippers. Lastly when as the minds of men are subdued and brought
under to the obedience of god, and filled with the pleasant sweetenes of his
amiable grace, they hear with great delight a most pleasant harmony, as it
were of harpers singinge with there harpes. This is the true music, whose use
is in the Church rather then that chaunting, which creketh only in the voice,
and delights the outward ears, when as nevertheless the mind is void of
all sense or feling of godliness.

Verse. 3. And they song as it were a new song. etc.

SO great is the joyful willingness of the godly in setting forth Gods
glory, that when as nothing is more aunciente in the Church then the
celebration of divine praises, yet they seem always to them selves to sing a
new song. For the remembrance of Gods benefits toward them never waxes
old, neither does the praise of God ever fail in the Church, which always
indeuoureth with vnweried study to magnify his glory.

Before the throne, and before the four beasts, and the elders. etc. That is,
this exercise of singinge, does always florishe in the Church, before God,
the Angels, and the whole world, which is both approved to God and testified
to all his creatures.

And no man could learn that song, but the hundredth forty and four thousand,
which were bought from the earth. etc. None of the reprobate, nor yet of the
hypocrites, which feign even the most holiness, could learn this song, but
the elect only, to whom the holy ghost is wont to speak and teach the same
when as redemption is sealed in there hearts, yt they may with joyful and
sincere affection of heart, sing a psalm of thanks and praise unto him, whom
they acknowledge to be Abba and father. Where are therefore the songs and
prayers not understood, which please God eue^ for the work wrought as the
papists do mainteyn? For such songs every hypocrite can learn and sing, but
such are not allowed of God.

Verse. 4. These are they which are not defiled with women, for they are
virgins. etc.

THe conversation of life is agreeable to there profession. For they should not
be meet to celebrate ye praises of god, unless they could bring the^ forth of a
pure and undefiled heart. But under one kind, he co^prehendeth all other
defilings of a wicked life. They are free from whoredom, and other greater and
more veynouse vices. Although according to the manner of the scripture by
whoredom we may understand Idolatry, and other vices also which make a
diuorcemente between, Christ the only spouse of the Church, and men. For
this is most preciouse virginity before God, when the godly keep them selves
clean from adulterouse supersticions, and other defilinges of the world, like
as god commends his seven thousand, which were not defiled with any
filthiness of Baal. And Paul married the Corinthians, as a chaste virgin to
Christ which would not suffer her self to be drawn or led back from
Christ by wicked and counterfeyte devises of men, as it were with harlot like
enticementes. But in that the papists by this place would confirm the single
life of the popish clergy, it is without all reason. For ye holy ghost does
not speak of every conjunction with women, but of that only wherewith men
are polluted, but the Apostle witnesses in the. 13. chap. to the Hebrews that
ye marriage bed is undefiled. Neither does it make any thing for their purpose
yt they are called virgins. For this does perteyne to the whole company of the
elect, and not to the ministers of the word only, much less to the popish
priests, of which as there were many yt lived a single life, so there were
very few of the^ virgins, yea scarcely there is one among a 1000. of the^, but
yt he was defiled either with fornication, or preposterous lust, or at the least
wicked burning, so yt if when we give the^ single life, we may altogether deny
them virginity.

These follow the lamb whethersoeuer he goes. etc. The true members of the
Church are never separated from Christ there head, and the true worshippers of
God do not depart the breadthe of a nail from the side of Christ, he is the
sheperd, they are the sheep, therefore they follow the lamb wheresoever he
shall lead them, if we he careful therefore to find out the Church, let
us diligently seek Christ, not at Rome or Jerusalem, but in the Church
spread over the whole earth.

These are bought from men being the first fruits unto god and to the lamb.
etc. If thou demand wherefore these have so familier access to Christ, the
reason is reuered, because they are not of that lost lump of mankind, but
being redenied from men, and from the most miserable and filthy bondage of the
devil, they are restored into the liberty of the sons of God. And then he
shows the end of there redemption, when he says yt they are the first
fruits to God, and to the lamb, we know yt the first fruits were consecrated
to God, that it was not lawful for profane men to touch them, the faithful
therefore are redeemed from the earth and from men, that they may serve God in
holiness and innocence, to the praise of his glory. We are admonished by this
place how holily, and religiously innocence is to be embraced of all the godly,
when as they be certain, first fruits to God and Christ, not consecrate to
our own use, neither to the use of the world, or servitude of satan, but to
the glory of God. Moreover what horrible sacrilege it is to take from God and
Christ there first fruits, and to sacrifice them to the devil the flesh and
the world.

Verse. 5. And in there mouths was found no guile, for they are with out spot
before the throne of God. etc.

HE proceeds in declaringe the purity of those which are joined as companions
to the lamb. For nothing that is vnpure or corrupt can cleue to him. But it
may seem contrary to al reason, that he seems to make them free from all spot
of sin and iniquity, which is ye privilege of Christ alone, neither does it
agree to any other of the Sons of Adam. The comune sort refer it to the
infants that were cruelly slaien by Herod, which they call innocents. But that
is but a fond dream, saying this number comprehends all the elect, which
are not blameless before God in their own righteousness, but in as much as
that as lively members they stick to Christ there head.

Verse. 6. Then I saw an other Angel fly in the midst of heaven having an
everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every
nation, and kindred, toungue and people. etc.

Hitherto he has expounded the figure of the church preserved out of the
midst of the waves and stars of Antichristian persecution. Now he tourneth
him to set forth the ruin and destruction of Antichrist. He sees an Angel
therefore: flyinge through the midst of heaven openly and publicly bringing
an everlasting gospel, which is to be preached to the world. By which figure
is signified that the light of the truth of the gospel, which seemed long time
obscured through the persecutions and darckenes of Antichrist, by the singular
benefit of god, should be restored again to ye world, which except we see to
be fulfilled in this our age, we are very stones, and not men. For now, the
Angel which is the minister of god flies, not in secreat places and darcke
corners, but through the midst of heaven, and he spreads that everlasting
gospel (which nevertheless the enemies cry out to be new, and latelye
sprung up) over the whole world, in spite of Satan, Antichrist and his
adherentes, that it may now be truly said, which S. Paul taught to be
agreeable to his time, there sound is gone forth into all the earth, and there
words into the ends of the world.

Verse. 7. Saying with a loud voice, fear God and give glory to him. etc.

THe Angel sounds forth with a clear and loud voice. That not Antichrist
or his tyranny, but that god above is to be feared. And that honor is to be
given not to Idols see up by the subtlety of the devil, but to god only.
For many under the tyranny of Antichrist depart away from the true worship
of God, unto deuilishe superstitions, these the voice of the gospel does
admonish to yield and offer to god alone due fear and obedience.

For the hour of his Judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven
and earth, the sea and all the founteynes of waters. etc. Because the
darckenesse is driven away, and the light restored and all ungodliness is
condemned, and the time will shortelye come, in which God will as^ite all
mankind before the tribunal seat of Christ, that every one may receive
according to that they have done in there bodies. Therefore it is now no time,
or place to dissemble, but the very aproching nere of Gods judgment does
admonish us that all glory and honor is due to him alone, which created all
things by his will and has appointed, and ordained his creatures for our use,
not only the sea and the earth, in which his wonderful power is showed, but
also the founteynes of sweet waters in which his singular goodness does shine.
We are taught here, which is the voice of the true and everlasting Gospel,
that we may distinguishe the same from feyned, and counterfayt gospels, verily
even that which teaches that god alone is to be feared, to him all glory is
to be given, him I say is to be worshipped which is the only creator of
all things.

Verse. 8. And there followed an other Angel saying it is fallen it is fallen:
Babylon that great City. etc.

WHen the Gospel is preached through the whole world, and the Church of
Christ established in the faith of the same, then follows the fall and
overthrow of the kingdom of Babylon. For the Babilonicall empire can not
stand, when Christ once standethe up the defendour of his Church, which will
bring his Israelites out of most miserable bondage into fredome, and will call
them out of banishemente into there country the heavenly Jerusalem. By the
fall therefore of Babylon, we understand by the consent almost of all as well
the old as new writers, the ruin and decay of the Romayne tyranny. For
that which Babylon in the East was to the Jews, the same is Rome, which is,
Babylon, the West to the Christians. And as God compassed about and measured
the cruelty of that old Babylon within certain limits, so also the Lord
has before appointed the end of the Roman tyranny, although the papists
boast that it shall be eternal. And the holy ghost in these words alludeth to
those things which are found in Isay, and Jeremy concerning the destruction
of Babylon. The dubling of these words, it is fallen, it is fallen, shows ye
certeyntie of her fall, for although she boast never so much yt she is builded
upon a rock, yet without all doubt she shall fall, and although it be counted a
great and famous city, yet nevertheless it shall be brought into a deserte
wilderness.

For she gave to all Nations to drink the wine of the wrath of her
Fornication. etc. The cause is added, because her wicked abominations are come
to the full, because with her wicked and blasphemouse doctrine she has
seduced all nations to idolatrye, and he calls it the wine of wrath, either
because it provoke the wrath of God, or else because it drives into fury and
madness the wicked being made drunken there with, so that they dote in folly
upon idols that is most filthy strumpets, even as though they were stricken
with madness. For god by his just judgment has sent upon them the efficacy
and strength of errore. And we know how gredely the world has anassed up and
stuffed it self with the doctrine of Antichrist, which is nothing else but
ye furiouse wine of spiritual fornication, which is the worshippinge of idols.

Verse. 9. And the third Angel followed them saying with a loud voice. etc.

AT length when wickedness is made manifest, and Antichrist reveled, the
faithful are to be feared from his wicked opinions, that they may not suffer
them selves to be drawn into bondage of him whose horrible fall and ruin, the
holy ghost foretold should shortly after follow. Therefore the Angel cries
with a loud voice, because many men geuinge them selves to the delights and
pleasures of Babylon, are so deaf to hear the voice of the Gospel that they
are scarsely raised up in the end with loud cryinge to repent and turn
from the filthynes of Antichrist. The Angel therefore which betokens the
faithful preachers of ye Gospel, denounces horrible and eternal
punnishments to all those which by any manner of means would profess
servitude and bondage to Antichrist.

If any man worship the beast or his Image, and receive his mark on his fore
head or on his hand. etc. Least any by hypocrisy might fly and eschew the
judgment of God, as though he worshipped not Antichrist from the heart, but
from the teeth forward and in outward ceremony he numbereth all the kinds
of that deuilish worship which is bestowed upon the beast: Therefore whether any
man do acknowledge antichrist himself or his authority, or else profess him
self by some outward badge or sign to be subject unto him, he affirmethe
that the same person shall be cursed and condemned to the eternal torments of
hell.

Verse. 10. The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, yea the pure
wine which is powered into the cup of his wrath. etc.

IT is to be noted with what vehement figures he expresses the horrible
vengeance of God. For first he callethe it the wine of Gods wrath, which if
it, seem to little, he adds, that it is pure, because it is not mitigated with
any clemency or gentleness, lastly he saiethe that it is powered into the
cup of Gods wrath, so that by all means, he heapeth up and increases the
quality and quantity of Gods vengeance, against Idolaters and the boundslaues
of Antichrist.

And he shall be punished in fire and brymestone before the holy Angels and
before the lamb. etc. The effect of Gods wrath is expressed, that it
tormenteth them most grieuouselye whom it shall burn for ever with fire and
brimestone before the holy Angels and before the lamb, that they may be
punished in the presence or beholding of them whose fellowship, and whole some
admonitions they despised whiles they lived. Which part of torments is not
the lightest, that they are set as a gasing stock for whom they mocked and
derided whiles they flowed in there wanton pleasures and delights.

Verse. 11. And the smoke of their torments shall ascend up evermore. etc.

HE goes foreward in amplifying the unhappy estate of the reprobate for least
they should flatter them selves that their torments should come to an end by
any length of time, he shows that the smoke which rises up of there burning
souls, and bodies, shall ascend for ever, whereby all hope of deliverance is
taken quite away.

And they shall have no rest day and night which worship the beast and his
Image, and whosoever receives the printe of his name. etc. The calamities of
many, some little consolation being intermedled, do grant as it were a
breathing time, but the miseries of these shall neither by day, nor by night
feel any release or ease at all. So heavy is the wrath of god against those,
which either make them selves subject to Antichrist, or else profess his
servitude by some external and outward sign. It is marvel that the false
Nichodemites, and other which remain among the papists, are not altogether
stricken with horror and fear, if at the least they weygh and consider, but
even with indifferent minds ye grieuousenes of this judgment.

Verse. 12. Here is the patience of the saints here are they which ke^e the
commandments of God and the faith of Jesus. etc.

THis seems over hard to the flesh that they which for a time through
fear of cruelty yielded them selves to Antitichrist, are to be committed to
everlasting torments. But the Angel answers, that here is a place for the
patience of the saints, which ought to be proved by afflictions as goulde
is tried in the fire. That here the true worshippers of God are distinguished
from hypocrites, for then is the obedience of the godly seen and perceived,
when as they can not neither by threateninges or promises be moved or drawn
away from the obedience of God. Moreover that here is place for faith, when
as the faithful being bent and fixed upon one God, do not only fly and eschew
all the delights and pleasures of ye world as it were enticing meremaydes, but
also will suffer stronglye, the most exquisite and grieuouse torments which
tyrants lay upon them, rather then that they will slide from the true and
sincere worship of God, to the profane superstitions of Idolatry.

Verse. 13. And I herd a voice from heaven saying unto me, write blessed are
the dead, which dye in the Lord, even so says the spirit, that they rest
from there labors, and there works follow them. etc.

Like as the Angel threatened horrible punishment to Antichrist and to those
that worship him, so. It behooves the minds of the faithefull to be lifted
up by some consolation, that they may with the more indifferent minds be able
to sustain and endure the persecutions moved against them by Antichrist. S.
Ihon therefore herd the voice of the holy ghost from heaven sounding alowde,
and promising eternal blessedness to all as many as shall suffer death for
the Lords cause. And the circumstaunces of this place are worth consideration,
This voice is herd from heaven, that the testimony might be more notable and
manifest and that we ought to give more diligent heed to the same, because it
brings a rare and vnwo^ted matter of comfort and consolation. Moreover he is
commanded to write as it were some certain oracle far excelling the rest,
for he was commanded in the beginning to write whatsoever he should hear or
see, which commandment being here repeated, declares that this is an
excellent voice, which never ought to slip out of our minds. And he is not
content to promise happiness to the souls departed, except also he confirm
the same with an oath, and vehemente affirmation, and he shows who it is
which promises this happiness unto them verily even the spirit of truth
which deceyueth no man, and lastly he adds the reasons or causes wherefore he
pronounces them to be blessed. First because they are drawn out and delivered
from the labors and miseries, to which this life is subject. And secondlye
that they receive the most ample reward, which is ordained and appointed by
the free mercy of God, for there good works. There is no cause therefore that
we should sorrow for there death, which as it brings an end of present
evils, so likewise it is the beginning of eternal felicity. And though he
chiefly speaks here of martires, which are slain for the testimony of
Christ, yet it is not to be doubted, but that those things are to be referred
to the end of all the godly, which the holy ghost here preaceth of ye happiness
after their death. Therefore away with ye popes sire of purgatory, in which
the souls do not rest from the^e labors, but are tormented with the pains
of hell, if we may believe the papists: as those, whom not there own works
do accompany, but the merits of others do a long time after them. Which is
plainly a doctrine of devils, which was devised to set up and maintain a
very bucherlie torment of conscience, and is not a doctrine of the holy ghost
set forth to the comfort and consolation of the saints.

Verse. 14. And I looked and behold a white cloud, and upon the cloud one
sitting like unto the son of man, having on his head a golden crown, and in
his hand a sharp sickle. etc.

AFter that he had described the state of the Church, of what sort it should
be, even unto the end of the world, now he foresheweth that the utter
destruction of the wicked shall come at length, by the last judgment of God.
And that is showed by two figures, the one of harvest the other of gathering
grapes. Either of them is repeated in ye same sense among the prophets, but
chiefly of Isay, in the 17.63. Saint Ihon therefore sees a white cloud and
a certain Angel sittinge upon the cloud in the shape and likeness of a man.
The cloud is a foreteller of the judgment because the Lord will come in ye
clouds of heaven. This Angel clothed with the shape of man represents
Christ, or at the least wise is a minister of his judgment. He has a golden
crown upon his head that we may understand that kingly authority is
committed to him of god. The sharp sickle which he carries in his hand,
expresses the severity and sharpenes of his judgment, which none of the
wicked can eschew, which all the attemptes of the reprobate ca^ no more resist,
then the ripe corn can the sickle of the reaper.

Verse. 15. And an other Angel came out of the temple crying with a loud
voice to him that sat on the cloud, thrust in thy sickle and reap* for the
time is come to reap, for the corn of the earth is ripe. etc.

THe former figure of the Angel sittinge upon the white cloud showed that
the judgment of Christ is prepared, but this figure of the other Angel
coming out of the temple teachethe that the time is at hand, in which God
will take vengeance upon the reprobate. He goes ^orthe of the temple, that
is, from the presence of God himself, opening his secreate counsel: for as
kings do dwell in palaces, so God is said metaphorically, to dwell in a
temple, he admonishes the Angel therefore which bare the sickle, which
waited daily for the will and pleasure of God, that now at length that day is
come, in which all wickedness being overthrown, the glory of God may
perfectly shine, and they may be punnished, which hitherto have disdained to
magnify and set forth the same glory. If any think it an absurdetye, that
Christ is admonished by the angel, he must know that these hid mysteries are
showed and revealed by fygures, so far as our understanding could
comprehend them, when as Christ also him self, in as much as he was man,
confesses that the day of judgment was hid from him. Here also not Christ
himself, but an Angel representinge the judgment of Christ is brought in.

Verse. 16. And he that sat on the cloud thrust in his sicle on the earth, and
the earth was reaped. etc.

THere is no delay, so soon as he understands that the ripe and full time
to exercise the severity of god is come, his sharp sickle being thrust into
the earth, he reapeth all the harueste of the earth, sooner then one word can
be spoken.

Verse. 17. Then another angel came out of the temple which is in heaven
having a sharp sicle. etc.

IT may be demanded what need there should be to use two figures, seeinge
that former of the corn reaped might suffice. We may answer to this that in
the former figure is e^pressed that general change of all as well of the
godly, as of the reprobate, which shall be in the last day, and that in the
latter figure the destruction only of the reprobate is described: for Christ
him self compares the end of the world to an harvest, the angels to
reapers, but because in the harvest there are not only tares, but also wheat,
which when it is purged from the tares, is to be laid up in the barn, and in
this place, the purpose of the holy ghost is chiefly to comprehend the ruin
of ungodliness, therefore omitting the harvest, by the figure of gatheringe the
grapes he propounds and sets forth for us to behold the horrible
destruction or end of ye wicked. Therefore there goes forth of the heavenly
temple, an other angel then ye former, which sitting upon the cloud did
exercise the general judgment of all men, and he also bearing a sharp
sickle, in which he is ready to streache forth the vengeance of god against
the reprobate when it seems good to yt lord him self. And he goes out of ye
temple which is in heaven, as he which has received from ye mouth of god him
self the commandment which he was prepared to execute.

Verse. 18. And an other Angel came out from the altar, which had power over
fire and cried with a loud voice to him that had the sharp sickle and ^aied
thrust in thy sharp sickle and gather ye clusters of the vineyarde of ye
earth, for her grapes are ripe.

WHiles that former Angel armed with the vengeance of god going forth of the
temple, only waited for the will and pleasure of the lord, what time he ought
to execute ye office committed unto him, behold there goes forth an other
Angel from the heavenly altar, bringinge the commandment of God, that the
time to gather grapes was come for now the clusters of the vine of the
ungodliness are ripe, which the lord has commanded straitway to be cut
down. Hither to these things are clear and manifest enough. But wherefore is
he said to go forth from the altar? verily in my Judgment he alludeth to the
form of the old temple in whose innermost rowme was the golden altar above,
which was the arcke of the covenant, above the arcke were the Cherubines
between which the Lord dwelled sacramently and under a figure. He signifies
therefore, yt from the secreat counsel of god, which at length shall be made
manifest, this commau^deme^t came forth concerning the taking away of the
reprobate, they shall take away said Christ out of the kingdom of God all
things yt offend, and them that work iniquity Mat. 13. But it is much more
darcke yt he says, that this Angel has power over fire. Some do therefore
interpret him to be Christ, which came to send fire into the earth. Others do
expound it a fiery affection wherewith ye Angels burn, to destroy the
ungodly. But seeing s. Paul, to ye. Ephesians. 1. chap. And likewise Collos. 1.
calls certain angels powers, I do simply understand yt here is meant ye angel
which by the dispensatio^ of god has rule over ye element of fire. Like as
also we here afterward in the 16. chap. The Angel of ye waters. For god has
disposed to Angels the preservation of the creatures of the world, which we
find often times witnessed in the scriptures here therefore the Angel which
has power over fire is sent, that it might be signified with what kind of
destruction the Lord has decreed to change the form of the world, whereof
no man is ignorant. But we may learn by this place, that the due and as it
were ripe time to take vengeance upon the reprobate, is not to be discerued,
at our will but by the most secreat judgment of God: because it becomes not
us to prefixe the time but patiently to wayt for the same.

Verse. 19. And the Angel thrust in his sharp sickle on the earth, and cut
down the grapes of the vineyarde of the earth, and cast them into the great
wine fat of the wrath of god.

NOw there follows the execution of Gods decree upon the reprobate, in which
this is to be observed, that first the branches or clusters are cut down,
that is, the ungodly are spoiled and bereft of all there ornaments and
strength, in which they were proud, and after being naked, as it were rotten
grapes they are cast in to the great wine fat of Gods wrath to be trodden down.

Verse. 20. And the wine fat was trodden without the city, and blood came out of
the wine fat, even unto the horse bridles, by the space of a thousand and six
hundredth furlonges. etc.

HOw sharp so ever the wrath of God be upon the wicked reprobate, the
punishments shall not come nighe the elect for without the holy city, and
heavenly Jerusalem, is the wine fat trodden, in which the wicked are tormented,
whose blood issues and flows out of the fat, even unto the horse bridles.
and that by a very great space of ground, Shewinge what a horrible and
wonderful slaughter the lord will make of yt wicked, when the due time of
punishment shall come. Concerning the number of the forlonges, they make two
hundred miles, which was almost the greatest length of the land of Canaan,
which represented the whole world, beside Jerusalem that is the Church.

The fyftenth Chapter.
WHen as he had foretold in the Chap. going ^t the that extreme punnishments
should be taken upon the wicked in the last judgment of God, we might have
doubted whether they should quietly triumph or not until that time and
should not in the mean time be chastised with any scorges of God. The holy
ghost therefore teaches in this chapter, and also in the chapter followinge,
that like as the last destruction remains for them in the last judgment of
god so also in the mean time the Lord would be revenged upon there
wickedness, with diverse and most greuouse punishements.

Verse. 1. And I saw an other sign in heaven great and meruailouse, seven
Angels having the seven last plagues, for in them is fulfilled the wrath of
God. etc.

Saying that nothing is more usual to the world then to ascribe the plagu^s
sent of God, to fortune or to some other second causes: S. John shows that a
certain great and wonderful sign was showed to him, with which it behooves
the minds of men to be earnestly stricken with the fear of Gods judgments:
that is seven Angels bringinge the wrath and vengeance of God from heaven
unto the earth. Therefore the diverse kinds of punnishmentes are sent down
from heaven upon the reprobate, and chiefly upon the body of Antichrist, not by
any blind adventure of fortune, but by the sure and determinate counsel of
God, and he says seven plagues, because ye ungodly, shall be stricken of God
for there sundry and very many heynouse offenses, not with one kind of
calamities, but with diverse, not with few, but with very many plagues, even as
the number seven signifies universality and fulness. Moreover he calls them
the last plagues, because in them the wrath of God is finished, that is does
power out it self wholly to the destruction of those which being
admonished, by no chastisementes would be brought to a better mind. But rather
look how much more they were chastised of God with punnishments, so much the
more they were hardened against all calamities.

Verse. 2. And I saw as it were a glasie sea mingled with fire and them that had
gotten the victory of the beast, and of his Image and of the number of (...)
name, stand at the glassie sea etc.

GOd does never prepare punishments against the reprobate, but yt first he
provides for his own, least they should be drawn into destruction together
with the wicked. Which thing is clearly described by this figure, for before
the seven Angels power out the viales full of gods wrath upon the earth, to
terrify the wicked, and the inhabitants of the great city, S. Ihon sees the
holy worshippers of God had kept them selves free from the most filthy
bondage of Antichrist, first placed in safety, least any little part of the
seven plagues might touch them. He sees therefore a glassie sea mingled with
fire, that is the greatness of perils and troubles to which the godly are
subject in this world, which is so great that it may be compared to a sea,
for the unmeasurable hugeness, and it is bitter with so hard and sharp
persecutions that it seems all to burn with fire, and yet it is as hard as
glass, so that the faithful may be tossed to and fro, but they can not be
drowned in it, for Ihon beholds those, which by the benefit of God have
overcome, even in the most difficulte and hard battle incountred with yt
beast, that is with Antichrist and all his impiety, standing joyfully at that
glassie sea, as it were dedeliuered from shipwrake or free from drowning
singing a song of victory to God there deliverer, with all sincere affection
of heart. We may here note, that we must strive and fight with Antichrist, if
we desire to be garnished with the rewards of conquerers. Moreover in that the
beast, his Image, his mark and the number of his name are so often repeated,
we ought to have no fellowship or agreement with Antichrist, or with any little
portion of his deuilishe superstition. But we must fight not only against the
beast him self, which is the Pope, but also against his Image, that is his
laws and decrees, by which his wicked authority and pride has been founded
and established, and against his marcke, yt is the ceremonies which he has
invented and found out, to lead souls captive into his filthy slavery and
boundage. And lastly we must fight against the number of his name that we may
hate with like hatred as himself, whatsoever may be called by his name.

Having the harpes of god. etc. The holy ghost does signify by this metaphor,
that matter of joy and gladness is daily ministered of god to the godly, which
never leaves of to heap his benefits upon them, that although they seem to be
ye most wretched and miserable of all others in the eyes of the world, yet they
feel and perceive them selves to be happy, so that being joyful and glad
they sing hymns, and Psalms to god, with the harp. We are taught here that
we are unmeet, or unapt to celebrate the glory of god, except we receive
our harpes, of him by the most sweet harmony of which being helped we may
record the heavenly and divine songs.

Verse. 3. And they song the song of Moses the servant of God.

Because they acknowledge it to be no less benefit, that they are delivered
from the daungerouse waves of the fiery sea, that is the world, then that in
time past god led the Israelites safe through the red sea: they sing to god
there deliverer that noble song, which Moses the principale servant of god
taught the people of Israel, as we read in the fiftenth Chap. of Exodus: let
us sing to the Lord for he has triumphed gloriously, and so as follows. Let
us learn here, not to esteem ye power and mercy of god in protectinge and
defendinge his saints from the wicked defilinges and other infinite dangers
of this world, to be less, then in those ancient and wonderful works by
which he delivered the old patriarchs from the evils which hanged over there
heads. Whose examples are therefore set forth, that we may hope that god
will be such to us in our afflictions, as we believe, he was to the old fathers,
and that we may offer up our selves and become such in piety and
thankfulness as we read those holy men showed them selves for the benefits
which they received.

And the song of the lamb. etc. Seeing the faithful have Christ both the
only aucthor and mediator of there redemption, they do not only sing the
song of Moses, but also together therewith they singe a most sweet and
pleasant song taught by the lamb him self. For that which Moses was to the
Israelites, that same and much more gloriouse is Christ to his Church.

Great and meruailouse are thy works, Lord God almighty. etc. This is that
magnificall song taught to the Church by the Lamb, that is drawn out of the
Doctrine of Christ our savior, which song does ascribe all praise,
honor, and glory, to one God almighty. Of whom therefore shall we believe
that the most part of the papisticall or popish hymns and songs were taught,
which are framed to celebrate the glory not of God the creator, but of the
creatures, of which ^orte are these, hayle queen of heaven, hayle, star of
the sea, hayle triumphing cross, hayle mother Anna, and many other of the
same stuff, which are also fraught full of most horrible blasphemies: The
lamb never taught these songs, but that monstrouse beast, which has nothing
like to the lamb, but his two horns. Here also we have a most clear and
lively image of the true worship of God in the Church, verelye where all
things do sound to the praises of God only: on the contrary part, that it
is the sinagoge of Satan, Wheresoever the glory is magnified of any other,
besides the glory of the true and one only god. Moreover in that the
faithful do acknowledge the works of God to be great and meruailouse, they
teach us how his benefits are to be esteemed. For the devil studieth by all
means to deminishe the dignity of them, therefore he persuades us by his
suggestions, that they are small and common works, which god exercises
daily, either in protecting ye godly, or restraining the wicked when as in ye
mean while, but that we are altogether blind even in the midst of y^ clear
light, and deprived of all right judgment, they are great and wonderful.
They are great because no man, or any other creature can do the like. They are
meruailouse because besides all hope and opinion of men they take there
effect, yea though Satan and all his guard of soldiers resist and wrestle
against the same. (Lord god almighty) god alone because he can do all things,
has wroughte and brought to pass very great and wonderful works, as often
therefore as the end and finishing of our matters seems hard, let us turn
our eyes to the sovereign rule and power of God, for all things obey his
will. And let us lean and permit that to his counsel, which seems hard, or
impossible unto us.

Just and true are thy ways, king of Saints. etc. The works of God are not
only great and wonderful, but also just and true are all things whatsoever he
does. For if he chastise the offenses of any with plagues he does it by Justice
and right being the Judge of the whole world neither does he at any time
punish the innocent for those which are guilty. If verily he show him self
favorable and gentle to his servants, he does it for his infinite mercies
sake, which he has promised he will power forth upon those, which worship him
with sincere and ernest affection and love of godliness. Neither will he keep
back any part of those things, which he has promised to his Church until
at length he shall adorn the same with eternal felicity. That they call God
king of the Saints, they show that they acknowledge the government of him
alone, to whose kingdom so long as they he subject they need not to be
afraid of any tyra^nie of Satan, or wicked me^. Lastly we are taught who are
worthy the honorable name of Saints, verily even they which acknowledge God
to be there king, and as it becomes subjects, do obey his wholesome laws and
most holy decrees.

Verse. 4. Who shall not fear thee o Lord, and glorify thy name. etc.

THey Judge it a matter of all other most absurd and without reason that the
wicked being void of all fear of God, do contemn and despise the glory of
his name. For when as his works are so great and wonderful, and of such power
that no strength can resist him, seeing his Judgments are Just, so that none
of the wicked can eschew ye punishments due for his sins, who shall not fear
him, except he be as a block endued with no sense at all? and seeing he is of
so great benignity and gentleness toward those that fear him, so that he
adorneth them daily with all kind of benefits, who will not study and endeavor
to celebrate the Glory of his name except he be uoide of all shadow of virtue
and humanity.

For thou only art holy. Here of they conclude that all fear and honor is
due to God alone, because he only is Holy. All other things are wicked and
Profane except those to which he does communicate his holiness. Do we not
here acknowledge one of the blasphemouse names of Antichrist that he suffers
himself to be called most holy, when as God only is holy. Neither is that
enough, except also he should challenge to himself this dignitye, that the
holiness of the whole Church should depend upon him, and that he can pour
a new holiness into those creatures which it pleases him, and to be short,
that he claims the Canonizinge of dead Saints as they term it to pertain
only to him. Whereto do these things tend? but that he might rob God of
this prerogative of holiness, and with great Sacrilege transfer it to himself.

And all nations shall come and worshipe before thee. etc. He signifies that
the wicked do strive and resist in vain, because will they, ^ill they, at
length they shall acknowledge his rule and government.

For thy judgments are made manifest. etc. Whiles the judgments of god are
secreat, it seems somewhat to be borne withal, if they fear not his
judgments, whose severity they are ignorant of, but when as the Judgments of
God are made open, and most clear and manifest examples are daily set before
there eyes, it argues more then a stony hardness of the reprobate, that they
are mollified with no scourges of God, and taught by no experimentes, that they
may learn to fear God, and that they may yield due glory to his most holy
name.

Verse. 5. And after that I looked, and behold the temple of the tabernacle of
witness was open in heaven. etc.

AFter that he had set the Church of Christ free from those plagues, which
were prepared to punish the wicked he retourneth now to the former narration,
shewinge after what manner the Angels proceaded, which had the seven last
plagues. The temple of the tabernacle of witness (says he) was open in
heaven, by which figure we are taught that the horrible plagues should rise up
in the world not rashly, or by chance, for these Judgments come forth of,
the innermost secreate of Gods will. For he alludethe to the form of the old
tabernacle out of the innermost rowme whereof, answers were given to those that
asked.

Verse. 6. And the seven Angels came out of the temple, which had the seven
plagues clothed in pure and bright linen and having there breasts girded with
golden girdles. etc.

THey proceade from the will of God even all the ministers of his Justice and
severity, clothed in linen garments, pure and brighte, that they might
signify the sincerity and equity of his Judgment. For the wrath of God
does never rage against the innocente, but it is inflamed against the wicked
contemners of all ungodliness. Moreover they are girded with golden girdels,
that they may show how ready they are with all diligence to execute the
ministry committed unto them. Such diligence which is figured by the girdle
is in so great price and estimation with God, that it garnisheth and adorneth
those blessed Spirits more then gold, or preciouse stones. Princes and
Magistrates must imitate and follow this diligence, to whom god has delivered
the sword into there hands, that they may be ready to exercise vengeance
upon the wicked transgressors of gods law, not to let there sword gather
rust in the scaberd, and the godly in the mean time be oppressed by the
number and injuries of the wicked.

Verse. 7. And one of the four beasts gave unto the seven angels seven golden
vials, full of the wrath of God, which lives for evermore.

WE have expounded the beasts before by conferring them with the vision of
Ezekiel, to be Cherubicall Angels, which govern the creatures of the world.
The sense therefore is, that the creatures of God created to the use and
service of men, do minister scourges and punishments to be taken upon the
reprobate against whom all even the most contemptible creatures of the world
are armed. These vessels conteyne a cert^n measure of Gods Judgments, which
seem good to his counsel to be powered forth in there several tournes. And
they are golden, that is preciouse, because they set forth ye glory of God in
his Justice. Lastly they are said to be full of the wrath of god which lives
for ever, whose wrath against the reprobate is vnappeaceable and eternal, not
ye fury of some mortal creature, which though it be not apeased whiles he
lives, yet by his death it is finished and has an end. Far other is the
fatherly correction of god, by which he chastises his children for a time
against whom his wrath does not long time, or much wax hot, but by and by,
so that they repent, he retourneth in to favor with them, and becomes
merciful and graciouse unto them.

Verse. 8. And the temple was full of the smoke of the glory of God, and of his
power and no man was able to enter into the temple till the seven plagues of
the 7. Angels were fulfilled. etc.

HEre is described how great is the majesty, and power of God when he has
decreed to show forth the same, and that by no means access is open unto
him, so long as his fury waxes wrath against the wicked. Not that he rages
like an angry man, which being incensed against the evil, does without reason
or difference strike the good also coming next to hand, but because, when he
takes upon him the person of a Just Judge no sinful flesh can stand before
him, except with the voice of clemency and mercy he calls us unto him being
very fearful, and trembling.

The syxtenth Chapter.
HE shows in this Chap. with what plagues and scourges the Lord would strike
the kingdom of antichrist before the last overthrow and utter destruction of
the same, least they should always please the^ selves securely in their
delights and pleasures, and deride and scorn the calamities of the Godly.

Verse. 1. And I heard a great voice out of the temple, saying to the seven
Angels, go your ways, power out the seven vials of the wrath of God upon the
earth. etc.

THe seven Angels stood gyrded about holdinge the vials full of Gods wrath
which were committed unto them, yet they dare not power them out, until that
being admonished by the heavenly oracle, they knew that the ripe time for that
busynes was at hand. Therefore the voice of Almighty God is heard thu^dringe
out^ of the temple of his holiness, which commands the Angels with speed
to power forth the vialls full of Gods wrath into ye earth. Let us learn here
to wait for the voice of God in all things before we take any thing in
hand. We do pray continually, thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.
Behold here an example of aungelicall obedience, to the rule whereof we ought
to frame our obedience. The Angels are first called forth of ye temple, they
appear straightway, carefully waitinge what the Lord would command them:
there is given into every of their hands vials, that is power to exercise the
judgments of God against the Antichristian wickedness, which thing although
they desire spedely to dispatche, yet they tarry the time prefixed and
determined by God. Moreover we may here note the force of that voice, (pour
forth) that they are commanded to send them down not by drops as it were dew
or rain, but to power forth and emptye there whole vials at once, whereupon we
understand that rare and unwonted plagues were to be cast upon the reprobate.

Verse. 2. And the first angel went and powered out his vial upon the earth:
and there sell a noisome and grievous sore upon ye men which had y^ mark of ye
beast and upon the^ which worshipped his Image.

The seven plagues as we noted also before, signify in general all the
calamities, which God would send upon the kingedome of Antichrist, before
that Christ should flea the man of sin himself with the breath of his mouth.
And of those certain are usual scourges of God, with which he is accustomed
to afflict and punnish the world for sin, as pestilence, war famine,
contagiouse and sharp diseases, which are signified, by pouringe forth the
four first vials, And certain are ordained peculierly to beat down the
tyranny of Antichrist it self, which are described in the three other vials.
That which concerns the former, because the tyranny of Antichrist may
worthylye be compared to the bondage of Egipte, the holy ghost does denou^ce
the like punnishments by an allegory to the plagues of the Egiptia^s. For this
city is spiritually called Egypt, as we read before in the 11. chap. The first
Angel therefore powered forth his vial upon ye earth, and there followed a
noisome and grievous sore upon y^ men which professed y^ bon^age of ye beast,
and the^ which acknowledge his aucthority. And this plague represe^teth ye sixth
plague, wherwt god stroke y^ rebellious Egiptia^s by Moses as we read Exo. 9.
this plague signified, pestilence, sores, and specially ye french pockes with
which y^ popes cardinals, bishops and all y^ dregs of ye popish clergy are
chiefly afflicted, whose ungodliness god does daily reueng with sundry and
vnaccustomable kinds of diseases. And histories do testify how often ye
pestilence slew and devoured, at Rome in Italy, in spain, in france, and
sometime thorowout al Europe, as large as ye tira^ny of the pope exte^ded, so yt
we never read yt they were any where else so grievously afflicted with
pestile^ces, either before Christ, or after ye gospel revealed as in ye
midst of popery. But peradventure ye papists will object yt they are not only
plagued with pestilence, but ye the same does also take hold upon our countries
and cities: we confess ye same to come to pass through our sins and
iniquities: but here it is spoken of ye rare and unwonted greatness of ye
punishment which is plainly perceived to have been poured forth upon ye kingdom
of antichrist, when the lord does only afflict ours gently with fatherly
corrections.

Verse. 3. And the 2. Angel powered out his vial upon the sea and it b^came as
ye blood of a dead man, and every living thing died in the sea. etc.

THe Lord will beat down there pride not with and kind of punishment as we
said before, but with sundry plagues and often repeated. And this figure
resembles the first plague of yt Egiptians Exodus 7. When all the waters were
turned into blood. Here also the waters of ye sea are turned into corrupted
blood, he signifies (I think) yt with wars, seditions as well civil, as
foren, there should be made such a great slaughter of men, that the very sea
should draw into it a bloody color. And the amplification is hyperbolicall,
of which sort there are very many found in the scriptures, to express ye
grieuousnes of this punishment, wherewith god will afflicte ye reprobate. Whole
Europe almost is compassed about with sea, which when it is said to be turned
into blood, signifies yt all should redound, and as it were ouerflow with
wars, tumults, and bloody battles. Here also histories do witness, and
daily experience also does teach, what great slaughters the pride of the Roman
bysshopes has caused, whiles it set princes together by the ears with most
grieuouse battles to flea the^ selves on either part: whose force and
strengthes being weakened, he abuses to the confirmation of his tyranny. Who
can number, how many thousands of men he has slain? whiles he cast down
some Emperors from the Empire, and placed others in there rowmes, whiles he
absolved the common people from the faith given to there Princes, when he
against couenauntes invaded the Turckes, and Saracenes, whiles he makes
war for the cross, and the city of Jerusalem and whiles he sows discordes
and privy hatreds daily among Princes, and now before our eyes, what
tragedies has he raised up in Germany, France, Scotland, and Spain? and from
which our country of England is not altogether free. But howsoever he
applies his business, god in the mean time turns the calamity upon his own
head and makes the sea bloody with the slain carkases of the Papists. That
he says every living thing dyed in the Sea, it is a conueniente hyperbole
for the Allegory, and also together therewith he alludeth to the fishes of
the Egiptians that were slain, when the waters were turned into blood. But of
these things, which we have said it is not hard to understand what he
means.

Verse. 4. And the third Angel powered forth his vial upon the rivers and
fountaynes of waters and they turned to blood, etc.

THat nothing might remain pure and wholesome to the wicked, first the earth and
the sea, now the rivers and fountaynes, afterward the sun it self, are
stricken with sundry plagues. And this calamity does represente that first
plague of Egipte, by which the waters of the flood Nylus, and generally all
lakes and fountayns were turned into corrupt blood. But in that in the pouring
forth of two vials the waters are turned into blood, I think it is to be
referred to the more large settinge forth of the slaughter done upon the
wicked, which thing also the two Angels do afterward confess: that because
the thirste of blood is insatiable in the kingedome of Antichrist, therefore
by the law of equality, all things with them are turned into s^aughter, and
blood.

Verse. 5. And I herd the Angel of the waters say, etc.

I think the same concerning ye Angel of the waters which I saw before of
the Angel, which had power over fire. Verily that he is a certain power to
whom God has committed the government of the waters. For by this name,
(power) the Apostle Paul calls a certain order of the Angels, Ephesians. Chap.
1. Colloss. Chap. 1. And fitly is the Aungel of the waters brought in here,
acknowledging that this punishment has worthily happened unto them, that they
should drink blood insteade of water, which with so great heat of cruelty
thristed after blood. For although this Angel be set over the waters that he
might preserve and keep them from destruction, and corruption, notwithstanding
in that, being turned into blood they were corrupted, he confesses that it
came to pass, by the just judgment of God, for a punishment upon the wicked
for there monstrouse and horrible cruelty.

Lord thou art just, which art, and wast holy, because thou have judged these
things. etc. He magnifieth the most just Judgments of God, which fulfilleth
the office of a righteous and vncorrupt Judge. And such as he shows him self
in sending this plague, such has he been in all ages, even from the beginning
of the world. Which although according to the sense of the flesh may seem
sometime to be to little, yet notwithstanding at length when we shall be endued
with Aungelicall wisdom, we shall understand that all his Judgments do
consist in most beautiful equity.

Verse. 6. For they shed the blood of Saints and Prophets: and therefore have
thou given them blood to drink: for they are worthy. etc.

THe raging cruelty of Antichrist which he exercises daily upon the holy
martyrs of God, shall not escape unpunished, but he which is never satisfied
in drincking the blood of the righteouse, at length when the waters are
turned into blood shall drink his fill of blood. For the law of repaying is
most equal and right, that they which seek nothing, but the blood of the
Saints, and of the Prophets should them selves with bloody wars, and
cruel slaughters be satisfied even till they be weary.

Verse. 7. And I herd an other angel out of the alter saying. etc.

WHen as before he had placed the souls of those that were slain for Christ
under the altar Chapt. 6. Requiring vengeance upon there persecutours: I agree
with those which refer this voice, which came from the altar to the same
souls, now at length acknowledginge it to be true, which was said to them
before, that if they should rest a little while until the number of there
brethren which should likewise be slain for the testimony of the gospel,
were fulfilled, that by and by after god would grieuousely punish the wicked
reprobate.

Even so Lord God almighty, true and righteouse are thy Judgments, etc. First
this voice subscribeth to the Aungel^ of the waters, which had said that the
waters were worthily turned into blood, that they might be given for drink,
to blood thirsty men, afterward it does magnify the almighty power, truth
and righteousness of god. For God has declares his power, when as to beat down
ye proud, he has overthrown them with so great slaughters, he has co^me^ded
his truth seeing he has cast upon ye wicked ye punishments which he has
often threatened so sore. And he has showed his righteousness, when as he has
not only brought upon the^ the due pains for there heynouse offenses, but also
by the Just law of repaying like for like, has found out a convenient kind
of torment for there wickedness, that they which were so greatly delighted
with the deinties of cruel and bloody bankettes, should drink one of an
others blood, whiles to there own destruction, they rage daily with civil
wars, slaughters and tumultes. True therefore and just are his Judgments.

Verse. 8. And the fourth angel powered forth his vial on the sun, and it
was given unto him to torment men with heat of fire.

GOd will have nothing remain sound unto them, which by no benefits can be
drawn to worship him. We all know sufficiently how acceptable and amiable the
light of the sun is, how healthful the influe^ce of that star is, the
learned do acknowledge, how necessary the use of the same is to all men, the
learned together with the unlearned also do confess. But to the reprobate
ministers of Antichrist, which darckened the only sun of righteousness
with there own devises, and inuentio^s, and by there bloody decrees have
assayed to take him out of the world, God will make the natural, and
refreshing heat of the sun, pestiferouse and deadly, so that in burninge all
things, and also afflicting and tormenting men them selves with intolerable
heat, he brings in hunger and thirst, and most pestilent diseases which rise
and spring of the same. Moreover so large as the virtue of the sun does
extend, all things shall burn with immoderate heat, who can deny, but y^
they were afflicted with very great famine in the papisme? so that many also
perished for want of food. Moreover who knows not of the fevers, languishing
diseases, and pestilences springing of vnpure victuals, which sometime also
light upon the popes them selves, if he have read the history of the times
deduced from boniface the third, in whom the papacy begun, unto these our
times.

Verse. 9. And men boiled in great heat, and blasphemed the name of God.

HE signifies yt they parched not only with common heat of y^ sun, as they
be in hot countries, but scorched with far greuouser boiling heat of the
bright star: that they were almost turned into madness through ye torments.
But at length what proffitte took the wicked by these chasticeme^ts? they
blasphemed the name of god, ascribing these plagues not to there own
abominable wickedness, but to ye unrighteousness of the lord. To the Italians,
and also to the chief bysshopes, and popes the^ selves, how familier and
accustumable a thing it is to tear y^ sacred and holy name of god with
horrible blasphemies, yea even for ye lightest damages or hurtes, those know
which have seen and vewed there manners, and cities. With what fury and rage
think ye, would they bark against god as it were mad dogs? when these
grieuouse torments apprehended and took hold of the^. Moreover which is the
common blasphemy to all the papists, that they tear the holy gospel of
Christ, which god of his infinite clemency and mercy has vouchesafed to
open, and reveal unto us in these last days, with most filthy reproaches, and
attribute all the evils wherewith they are afficted, to the preaching and
spreading abroad of the same.

Which has power over these plagues. etc. He amplifieth there deuilish
wickedness, that directlye they touch him with there blasphemies, which has
power over these plagues either to increase or to deminish them, neither do
they fear, least being provoked to anger by there horrible blasphemies, he
should throw upon them more heavier and sorer torments. Here we may observe
and note the nature and property of the reprobate, which being subdued with
no chastismentes of god do yield or give place, but with how many more
scourges of God they are chasticed, so much ye more obstinatly and proudelye
they swell against God.

And they repented not to give him glory. etc. We are taught here what fruit
god looks for of our chastisement verily that we should repent for our sins,
and ascribe ye glory to god, which has worthily chastised us, confessinge
that we have deserved by our heynouse offenses, that he should punish us more
grieuousely, and may acknowledge that he tempereth this justice with cleme^cie
even then when he punishes. The wicked do not this, but they always complain
of the severity and sharpness of god, when as in very deed the thousand
part of there wickedness deserves not these temporal afflictions, but
eternal torments.

Verse. 10. And the fifte angel powered out his vial upon the throne of the
beast, and his kingdom waxed dark. etc.

ALthough god has hitherto with most grieuouse plagues taken vengeance upon
the ungodliness of the members of Antichrist, yet nevertheless the evils
scarce came near to the head him self. For in war famine and pestilence, ye
common people are rather afflicted thou the prelates and noble personages. Now
therefore the Lord does begin to punish the very head of the beast, and his
chief members, when as the first Angel powers forth the vial of gods
wrath, upon the throne of the beast, which I interpret to be done, when as
through the preachers of the gospel the controversy concerning the power of
Rome was first moved, which at length being discussed by the authority of
the scriptures, the Antichristian pride and arrogancy of the beast was made
manifest to the world. For then his kingedome waxed darcke. And that glory of
the popish kingdom, by which through mad pride he had exalted himself above
all Churches, yea above ye scriptures, is altogether darckened in the whole
world, so that every where, very many men do renounce the authority of
the Bishop of Rome, princes do expel and drive his authority out of there
Dominions, and to conclude the common people, yea even of the very papists,
do contemn his bulls, and pardons, and deride and mock his curses, violate
and break his laws and decrees without any conscience of them.

And they gnewe there tongues for sorrow. etc. The Romanistes take most heavily
this contempt of their dignity, but they find not how they may restore them
selves to their old glory and aucthority. They endeavor indeed with all
diligence and omit nothing, if by any means they might recover there lost
dignitye, but the matter is past recouerye, therefore being in despair for
the great anguishe of mind, like as it were mad men, they bite and gnaw there
own toungues. The holy ghost does signify by this metaphor, that nothing
could have happened unto them more greuouse, then that the throne and kingdom
of the beast should be darkened with the thick cloud of reproach and contempt.

Verse. 11. And blasphemed the god of heaven, for their pains and for there
sores, and repented not of their works. etc.

THey are says he oppressed on every side with so great sorrow, for the
disclosing of there frauds, errors, pride and shameful life, that being but
wicked inhabitants of the earth, they provoke the very God of heaven with
horrible blasphemies. For there sores. Rotten and festred sores cannot suffer
the least touching. But now when as they are not lightly touched only, but
lanched and seared with knives and hot irons, it is not to be meruailed at,
though the miserable men be driven into a furious madness. But yet in the mean
time they have no care of repentance, which is the only medicine and salve
for there pestred wounds. For although of what sort there works are they may be
of all men, yet never the latter they give themselves to there old accustomed
wicked and deuilishe vices, as covetousness cruelty and filthy lust. Moreover
this place does teach that true repentance is to abstain from wicked works.
For if we shall say a thousand times yt our wickedness does displease us,
except we bring forth fruits worthy of repentance, we are nothing else but
hipocrites. Here also we see and perceive the nature of the reprobate, which
look how much nearer they are to extreme and utter destruction, so much more
malipertly they despise the majesty of God.

Verse. 12. And the sixth Angel powered forth his vial upon the great river
Euphrates, and the waters thereof drie^ up that the way of the kings of the
east should be prepared. etc.

AFter that ye kingdom is obscured, so that there is nothing in the whole
world darkee then the papacy: the sixte Angel now powers forth the sixth
vial of Gods wrath upon the great river Euphrates. The city of Rome in this
prophecy is allegorically painted forth under the figure of Babylon, and the
river Euphrates was so great a defense to the old Babylon, that when Cyrus
would have taken that City, he could not by any other means, the^ by
deriuing the river Euphrates from his Channel, and tourning away the course and
stream of the waters, he made the floude it self passable: And by this means
he opened an entrance and passage to himself, into the most strong defenced
city, to the which History no doubt, the holy ghost here alludeth, when he
says that the waters of Euphrates were dried up, that a way should be
prepared to the kings of the East, to take and possese the city. He
signifies therefore that all the defenses and munitions of the Roman Empire
should by the Just judgment of God be destroyed, that the Romanistes being
spoiled and made naked of all there ayed, may be a pray to all there enemies
that shall invade them. Which thing whether it shall be by the Turcke, and other
tyrants of the East, or by the Princes of Europe, which have embraced the
Gospel, and shall occupy, and possess Babylon it self, I ca^ not for
certentie define any thing thereof, but the end shall once most plainly
show. Truly there is no man which sees not, that the West Babylon is
spoiled almost of all strength wherewith in time past she was furnished, (which
is that the waters of Euphrates are dried up) so that the assalte thereof is
now very easy and shall be to those to whom God shall sometime commit this
business.

Verse. 13. And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs, come out of the
mouth of the Dragon and out of the mouth of the beast. and out of the mouth of
the false Prophets. etc.

AFter that Satan perceived that great danger hanged over his kingdom, which
he governs by the hands of Antichrist the Roman bishop, that dilligent
watchful Dragon, stirs up the beast, that is the pope pricked with the
furies of his conscience, that by the consent and counsel of the false
prophet the two horned beast, that is, of the popish clergy of Cardinales,
and bysshopes, messingers, and Legates a Latere are sent forth to all Princes
o^ the earth, as many as acknowledge his authority, that they may stir
them up with there croking cries, like the furies of hell, and may arm them to
exercise cruelty against the godly professors of the Gospel, by the
inquisitours o^ heretical prauitie as they call them, and by other masters of
mischief. We are here admonished that there is one and the self same purpose
to the Dragon, the beast and the false prophet, that is, to the devil, the
pope, and the popish clergy, that when they fear that the ruin and
overthrow of his tyranny hangs over them, through the Gospel, they labor
and endeavor by all means to hinder and stop ye course thereof. For all
things are governed in the papacy, by the authority and inspiration of the
devil. Moreover he says that the Legates, or messingers of the pope, are
unclean spirits, like unto frogs or todes. Because that like as unclean
spirits drive those into madness in whom they dwell: so these inflame with
jury and mad rage, the princes and mighty men, to whom they are sent,
against all the godly, and against them selves, that to there own utter
destruction they may rage against Christ, and his sacred Gospel. And they are
said to be like frogs, either because they are delighted with mier and
mearish places, that is the filth puddles of errors, or else that without any
reason they always croke and cry out with making bubles like frogs, until
they shall compel kings to conspire against god, and against his sacred
truth.

Verse. 14. For they are the spirits of devils working miracles, to go out unto
the kings of the earth, and the whole world. etc.

WHen as before he had said that they were unclean spirits, now he repeateth
that they are the spirits of devils, that is even the very members and
Instruments of the devil, that all may know that the counsel wherewith they
inspire kings, is ungodly and diuilish. (Working miracles) bewitching the eyes
of men with illusions and feigned miracles, as though they were the ministers of
god, when as in very deed they are the slaves of Satan. For so they color
there lies to Princes, that they may turn there eyes from the light of the
gospel. For unless they were altogether blind, they would never apply there
ears to such brablers: that they should suffer them selves at the will and
beck of Antichrist to be mustred into that war which is taken in hand
against the almighty god him self.

To gather them to the battaill of that great day of God almighty. etc. In
which day a famous and such a slaughter as was never herd of before shall be
made upon all the proud contemners of god, which would suffer them selves to
be set in battle array against god, and against his Christ: in which day also
the perpetual praise of victory, and eternal triumph shall be obtained unto
Christ, When all the army of Antichrist being slain, overthrown, and
vanquished, the excellent glory of his virtue and power shall always have the
renown.

Verse. 15. Behold I come as a thief. etc.

I Confess that this verse is interlaced altogether without any hanging
together of the text, but not without reason. For seeing mention was made in
the end of the verse going next before, of that great and fearful day of
the Lord god almighty, which should catch and oppress the reprobate, like a
snare: this admon^tion is not out of season intermedled, that the godly may
learn always to watch, least the remembrance of that day should at any time
slip out of there minds. Behold I come as a thief, it is ye voice of Christ
Math. 24. Luke 12. Threatening that his second coming shall be sudden and
unlooked for to the world, as the flood of waters in the days of Noah, and the
fire in the days of Lot.

Blessed is he that watches, and keeps his garments lest he walk naked and
men see his filthiness. etc When as the coming of the lord is so uncertain,
it behooves us always to watch, neither at any time to sleep in the bed of
security. That therefore which they that watch do, for they do not put of
there garments, as they do which go to bed: that same is to be followed
of us in these Spiritual watches that we may always keep, and hold fast
the garment of faith and and innocence least if the light of that great day
springing up suddenly, should drive away all the darckenesse of dissimulation,
we be found to walk naked, and so the de^ormitie of our nakedness be
visible, or seen both to GOD and men. This garmente Christ does freely give
unto us, in that we will receive and gyrde the same diligently about us.

Verse. 16. And he gathered them into a place called in the Hebrewe tongue
Armagedd^n. etc.

THe order of his narration being a little interrupted, to bring in and place
between a most proffitable admonition, he returns again to his purpose
namelye that the Devil, and Antichrist by those Legates sent forth gathered
together Kings and there arms into a place appointed for there own killinge
and slaughter, to which the name Armageddon in the Hebrewe tongue is given, for
that which came to pass there which is worthy to be remembered. Concerning
the signification whereof, it is not agreed of among the learned, for some do
expound it Charmageddon, that is an army appointed to destruction, but others
do more rightly (in my Judgment) read this word in Hebrewe Guarmagedgnon,
that is the subtlety of destruction, so that the sense is, that by the deceypt
or fraud of the Devils, the Princes are brought into that place, where they
should perish by a slaughter in battaill, like as it is expounded more at
large in the last verse of the 19. chap. And we know that it was usual among
the Hebrews of the like things ye happened to give names to places: as
Kibroth, Hataauah, the graves of concupiscence, Numb. 11. And Hamongog, that is
the multitude Gog. Ezekiel. 39.

Verse. 17. And the seuenthe Angel powers ^orth his vial into the air. etc.

THis last plague seems the most grieuouse of all, because the other tauched
a part only, but this strikes the whole body of Antichrist with extreme
destruction. For now the lord God himself furnished with his own virtue and
power, will set upon the beast and his city Babylon, for now Antichrist shall
not have so much as the air, which he may breath, but being armed for his
destruction.

And there came a great voice out of the temple of heaven from the throne,
saying it is done. etc.

THis sentence proceeded or came forth from the majesty of God it self, and
from his certain determinate counsel, which is so suerly ratified and
confirmed, that it can by no meaanes be called back again. This voice
signifies that the last ruin of Antichrist does hang over his head which
he can by no means avoid or eschew.

Verse. 18. And there followed voices thundringes and lighteninges, and there
was a great earthquake, such as was not since men were upon the earth, so
mighty an earthquake I mean. etc.

THis is, that all things shall be tossed up and down with horrible terrors
that they whose iron breasts could not be pierced through with any strookes
of the plagues that went before, that they might repent: shall now be stricken
with so great horrore, that with fearefulnes of mind they shall down as
dead. Moreover those turmoles of the air, and chiefly the earthquake so
wonderful, do fore show the most greuouse and great chaunges in the world,
of which as we see the beginninges, so verily the end will be tragical and
horrible.

Verse. 19. And the great city was divided into three parts, and the cities
of the gentiles fell, etc.

NOW follows, the effect of this earthquake the greatest of all others, that
great city, which is the sea of Antichrist, the whole multitude of those which
were subjects to the pride of Rome, clone into three parts through the
violence of this earthquake, which many do thus interpret, and in my
judgment rightely. They which in time paste with one consent^ have worshipped
the beast, are now divided into three sects. For some of them do from there
very heart abhor and detest his tyranny, others do remain in the same
slauerye still, and the third kind of men do stick to neither part. But
has fallen either into Epicurisme, or Atheism. They expound the Cities of
the Gentiles, to be all the foreign and false religions, as of the Turckes, and
Jews and Barbarouse people, all which Religions it is certain shall be
destroyed at the coming of Christ or else a little before, but it becomes us
with sobriety to conjecture of those things which are not yet come to pass.

And great Babylon came in remembrance before God to give unto her the cup
of the wine of the fearcenesse of his wrath. etc. Not that God had at any
time forgot her, which has also sent upon her those former plagues. But he
signifies that his whole wrath was now to be powered forth at once upon her,
that he might utterly subuerte and overthrow her, as it shall be taught more
plainly in the Chapter 18. We have spoken before of the cup of the wine of
Gods wrath Chap. 14. But that here also is added an other word signifying
wrath to the greater Emphasis, for he says not only wrath, but also the
anger or fercenesse of his wrath.

Verse. 20. Every isle fled away and the mountains were not found. etc.

SO great shall the earthquake be that it does swalow up and devour the
Mountains and Isles. Some do refer this to the end of the world, but I
think it signifies that all place of refuge is taken away, for men are wont
in the greatest calamities, to fly for aid or safegarde to the mounteynes and
yles.

Verse. 21. And there fell a great haylle as it had been talentes* out of heaven
upon the men, and men blasphemed God, because of the plague of the hayle, for
the plague thereof was exceading great. etc.

LIke as God oppressed the men of Hierecho with hayle from heaven, so likewise
will he beat down and grind in pieces his adversaries the Antichristians,
with great stones as it were talentes, from heaven. All these are a Periphrasis
and as it were a description of the horrible end, which remains for the
reprobate, which we are taught can by no plagues be reformed, or brought to
repentance, but always they blaspheme God, so that they show them selves
worthy that God should make them perpetual monumentes of his wrath, and should
adiudge them to eternal torments.

The seuententh Chapter.
Hitherto he has with sundry colors painted out Antichrist him self now
also under the figure of the great whore, he describes his Church, or the
aldulterouse religion, afterward he expounds the mystery as well of the
whore as of the beast yt bears her: and lastly he foretells the
destruction of them both.

Verse. 1. Then there came one of the seven Angels which had the seven vials,
and talked with me, saying unto me.

THe self same Angels which are the Ministers of Gods wrath and severity
upon the wicked, do serve the godly to these comfort, and consolation, and to
the buyldinge up of the Church. Which thing truly is neither unprofitable
nor unpleasant to think yt we have those appointed of god to defend our
health and welfare, which as often as it seems good to god, can easily
overthrow and subvert, all the engines and subtilties of the adversaries. We
may note also how familiarly the Angels speak to the Apostle: whom for the
benefit of Christ they acknowledge to be there brother and fellow servant.

Come I will show thee the damnation of the great whore that sits upon many
waters. etc. When diverse times before he had made mention of the great city,
now the holy ghost that he might make manifest of what city he had understood
or meant, does describe it under the image or figure of the great whore. For the
great whore as the Angel afterward does expound it, signifies a great
city, like as many waters, whereupon she sits, do signify many people,
over which she rules and worthily is the Church or Romish religion, whose
whole aucthority depends upon that city of seven hills, compared to a
famous and noble harlot, which enticed the minds of me^ to her filthy love
with whorishe deceipts, and false colors as it were with harlotlyke
enticementes. For it is usual in the scriptures, to compare all false and
idolatrouse worshipping, to most filthy adultries. But the sinagoge of Rome,
which above all other herisies has invented false and idolatrouse
worshippinge of God, may as it were by her own proper right challenge to her
self the name of a great whore. Which although she does please and flatter
her self and her lovers, as though she were a bewtifull wife, yet
nevertheless by the just judgment of God, she is condemned to eternal
shame, and dishonor as a most filthy harlot.

Verse. 2. With whom have committed fornication the kings of ye earth.

THis was not the least part of the whorishe art, that she enticed and alured
kings and mighty men, with fained flatteringes, and practices of bawdry, into
fornication, for by this means she did hope that she should have the commune
people there subjects, even vowed to her love. Therefore she flattereth princes
and grants them license of all wickedness, in pardoninge all things as
murders, adultries, and incestes, so that they stand steadfast in the obedience
of the sea of Rome.

And the inhabitants of the earth are droncke with the wine of her
fornication etc. She has played the harlot not with kings only, but
generally with all the inhabitants of the earth, as a most impudente whore,
and with the furiouse wine of her fornication has made them droncken in such
abominable manner, that they are even like swine inflamed to fill and satisfy
there lust with her. And this is that zeal of the papists wherewith they are
in mad dotage upon masses, to Munckerie, Pilgrimages, Pardons, so that they
cared not to bestow all there substance upon the same baggage, because reason
being overcome with lust, they are made droncken with the wine of her
fornication.

Verse. 3. So he carried me away into the wilderness. in the spirit. etc.

SEeinge the time of manifestinge this whore in the world was not yet come,
although even then the mystery of iniquity did work, this harlotte is placed
in the deserte, which after certain hundred years should by the Just
Judgment of God be brought forth into the world, to bewitche the wicked
inhabitants of the earth: therefore Ihon is lead into the wilderness by the
Angel to behold this whore.

And I saw a woman sit upon a scarlat colored beast. etc.

WHen Ihon was come in to the wilderness, the Image of the woman sittinge
upon a scarlat colored beast, was showed and set before him, by the
description it appears that it is the very same beast which is lively
described in the thirtenth Chap. For the Church or religion of Rome is stayed
upon the authority of the pope and his clergy, which bear her up even as
beasts carry a burden, and with praises extol her beauty above the heavens
The color also of the beast is painted out to be like scarlet, which color we
know does please the court of Rome above all colors, for with this color
the pope him self, with this the Cardinales and there horses, with this the
prelates and Bysshopes being aparailed and decked, do walk in there
stateliness. Which thing, I suppose, is not done rashly or at adventure, but
that they might be aunswerable to this figure. And this red color does
signify there bloody desire in persecuting the true members of Christ and the
Church, even unto death.

Full of names of blasphemy. etc. If thou should weigh and examine the
names and callinges of all degrees, or orders in popery, thou should find
nothing but horrible blasphemies, as the holiness, the highness, and
fatherhoode of the pope, and prelates, and infinite blasphemies of the same
sort, with which base and unlearned verlets, are extolled above Christ, and
the Angels.

Which had seven heads and ten horns. etc. These are his badges or arms
whereby he is known, for they show that he is the self same beast, which he
saw before in the 13. Chapter: Whose mystical interpretacion also he
afterward received.

Verse. 4. And the woman which I saw was araide in purple and crimsin, and
girded with gold, preciouse stones, and pearls. etc.

THis verse conteyneth 2. things, the apparel and decking of this whore and
her wicked fornication. As concerning her apparaill she shines all over with
purple, crimsin, gold, pearls and preciouse stones that she may seem
beautiful to her lovers. Far other is the apparail of the true Church, of
which we read before in the twelfe Chapter, which is garnished altogether
with heavenly ornaments, but this stinckinge harlotte with the glitteringe
show of earthlye things hawkethe for the praise, and commendation of beauty,
for we see how that the Church of Rome, and popish religion, in altars copes,
vestume^ts, miters, crosses, chalisses, books, censers, patines, in gilding
and decking images does show nothing else, but a certain pomp of great riches,
of purple, crimsin, silk, silver, gold, preciouse stones and pearls, of which
things, Christian religion has no need of at all, but a popish religion
cannot stand without these things: for take from the pope, from the bysshopes,
temples, and priests, those player like apparials of purple, crimsin, gold, and
preciouse stones which are so beautiful to behold, with which ye eyes of the
blockish and rude multitud are daseled, and thou shalt find nothing in the
Church of Rome that any man will marvel a^ or esteem. For as common
harlates, when there preciouse apparaill is pulled of are, often times seen to
be deformed, so also the popish religion if thou take from it those tragical
attires, shall seem altogether naked and deformed, even to the very Papists
them selves. Which thing truly is an euidente proof, that there is no
spiritual beauty at all in her, when as she is wholly given to bodily
ornaments, sought out every where.

She had a golden cup in her hand full of abominations and filthiness of her
fornication. etc. I agree with those which by the golden cup do understand
the outward profession of Christian religion, and a certain show of the
truethe, whiles that she boasts that she does believe the word of God, and
use the sacraments, all which, notwithstanding, she has defiled with so
vnpure doctrines of devils, yt under an outward visor of truth she
comprehends nothing, but detestable abominations and the uncleanness of her
fornication. The cup therefore which she holds forth with her hand is of
gold, but the wine which is contained in it, is most deadly poison. But in
that she reaches forth with her hand, and offers the cup of these filthy
abominations to all men, her impudency is noted that she is not ashamed to
obtrude and thrust such stinking lies and filthy monstrouse errors: yea to be
credited even of wise men, he does also together there with show, that none
other are drawn into so great destruction of filthiness, and abominations,
but those whom she makes so mad with this bewitching cup, that they have lost
all spark of true judgment. The Emphasis also of these words is to be
noted, (...), that is abominatio^s, and the filthiness of her fornication,
because above all other nations, this sinagoge has abounded even wonderfully,
in unclean lusts, whoredoms and adulteries as well spiritual, as carnal.

Verse. 5. And in her forehead was a name written. etc.

THat her filthiness and impude^ce, might be hid from no man except he
burn in so great love toward her that he be altogether blind: she wereth a
name written openly in-that her whorish forehead, which fully and lively
expresses her qualities. For there is no man which has but even a spark, or
crome of true understanding, but that even in the very face, and so in the
forehead of this purple whore, he may read her name. For God has set this
mark of infamye upon her, that she might easily be known of the elect, least
they should be enticed and drawn into her filthy embracinges. Of which it
follows that the eyes of the papists are utterly blinded, which can not
behold this name princed and graven upon the forehead of the whore in such
sort that by no cunning she can hide the same, whereby at lenght they might
repent and turn from the dishonest company of her.

A mystery. etc. Although it be written in the forehead, yet it can not be
known of all without exception, but of those only to whom it is given to
understand mysteries. For this name is mystical, because that under a figure
it counteyneth* a true and natural description of her.

Great Babylon. etc. This is her name, which very fitly expresses her
manners. Not that this is the proper name of the city, as the papists are wont
now of late to expound it, with a feyned lie of a certain child borne at
Babylon, whom they would have men believe to be Antichrist, but as he said
before, this name is mystical and figurative, the interpretation whereof he
will afterward join, which should be altogether superfluouse, if Babylon
should signify literally that city of the Chaldeans. But because that city
in time past being most mighty and most proud, first was a rebel against
God, when as that tower was builded after which followed the confusion of
tongues, afterward it was the first city, which exercised tyranny upon
men, which being begun by Nymrod, continued even unto Nabuchadnezar, which
lead the people of the Jews capture, and held the^ in miserable bondage,
therefore the tyranny, Idolatry, pride and ungodliness of the city of Rome,
is signified under the figure of Babylon.

The mother of whoredoms, and abominations of the earth. etc. The east Babylon
was a sincke of all abomination and ungodliness, and not that alone, but also a
mistres of wickedness, yea a mother and nourse of all evil: all which are most
fitlye referred to the Sinagoge of Rome, which although she boaste her self
to be the Catholic and Apostolical Church the mother of all the faithful,
yet by her true and right name she is called great Babylon, the mother of all
Whoredoms and abominations of the earth: For what mischief, what ungodliness,
what uncleanness, and lewd lust, was not cherished by the support and defense of
that city? and where are there worse examples of all kind of deuilishe
wickedness, then at Rome? which are so great pestilences and corruptions, as
the very Popes, Cardinals and prelates themselves? of whom, besides there
blasphemouse errors, and profane contemptes of God there life also abounded
and ouerflowed with so great mischief that often times they exceded, Nero,
Domitian, Elagabulus, in pride, in murders, in poisoninges, treasons,
whoredoms, adultries, incestes, and preposterous lusts. Let their lives be
examined as they are set forth in histories, written even by the papists them
selves and let judgment be given by conferringe together.

Verse. 6. And I saw the woman droncken with the blood of saints and with the
blood of the martirs of Jesus. etc.

Hitherto her pride, excess and filthy abomination are described unto these
now comes so great cruelty, that Saint John affirms that he saw the whore
dronken with the blood of the saints, and martirs of Jesus Christ, which
she sucked and drunk, very gredilye, as most delicate wine, when it was shed
by the most cruel beast. This is a horrible and a barbarouse cruelty, that a
woman otherwise wanton and lasciuiouse should gorge in and devour blood
insteade of drink. And moreover that even unto drunckenes she should pour in
the blood of the godly into her belly the goulfe of all intemperaunce, what
should I here rehearse the murders, burnings, and torments, of the holy
martyrs of God, which the Roman beast like a butcher flewe, that the
continual thirsty harlot might not want drink even to make her droncken.
What a miserable slaughter of the servants of Christ has our country of
England seen in the five years persecution of Queen Mary? and what other
thing at all does the most cruel whore thirste for? whiles she raises up
civil tumultes, in France, Flaunders, Scotland, and Britanie, but the blood of
Gods saints? whiles the inquisitours in Spain, and Italy do draw great
companies of martires daily, even as sheep to the slaughter, they do there
diligence that the intemperaunce of there mistress the great whore, should not
fail.

And when I saw her I wondered with great meruaill. etc. When as S. Ihon had
seen before so great monsters armed against the Church of God, he less
wondered at them, because there terrible form and shape it self
sufficientelye bewrayed of what sort they were. But here when he had seen the
woman, shining in so bewtiefull and gorgiouse apparail, and with such whorishe
tricks enticinge the minds of men unto her, and the same also droncken with
the blood of the Saints, he wondereth vehementlye what she should be,
concerning whom as yet he had heard nothing.

Verse. 7. And the Angel said unto me wherefore meruailest thou* I will show
thee, the mystery of the woman and of the beast that bears her, which has
seven heads and ten horns. etc.

WHen as the Angel perceived yt Ihon meruailed so greatly at the beholding of
the whore, the mystery of whom he knew not, he speaks unto him familierly,
asking him why he wondered so much at her? for I said he will open, and
declare unto the all this whole mystery of what sort it is, as well of that
woman, which rides upon the scarlet colored beast, as of the Beast him
self, which bears her, which if thou have well remembered is the same,
which thou saw before furnished with seven heads and ten horns. We are
here much bound to the mercy of God, that he does vouchsafe to open this
mystery unto us, yt we should beware and take heed of the bewitchinges of this
most filthy harlot.

Verse. 8. The beast which thou have seen, was and is not, and shall ascend
out of the bottomless pit and shall go into destruction. etc.

THat beast by marks that are evident enough, does signifye the Empire of
Rome, which was most ample and large under Julius, Augustus, Tyberius, and
Claudius, but it had failed much of that ancient majesty, in Nero, Galba,
Otho, Vitellius, and Domitian, so that now it deserved not to be called a
monarchy, but was to be raised up again from hell by the popes and popish
clergy, which usurp and challenge to them selves the Empire over the whole
world, but his tyranny shall not endure for ever, because at length he shall be
apprehended by Christ and thrown headlong in to the lake that burns with
fire and brymstone, where he shall be tormented with perpetual flames, as we are
afterward taught in the 19. Chapter.

And they that dwell on the earth shall wonder, whose names are not written in
the book of life from the foundation of the world, when they behold the
beast that was, and is not, and yet is. etc. Although the falshoodes of
Antichrist shall be great, yet they shall not be able to seduce the elect into
destruction, but to deceive those only which were not predestinate to eternal
life, from the foundation of the world, but the reprobate when as they shall
see a new monarchy of the bishop of Rome raised by (which is the beast that
was under the first Emperors (but he is not) at that time when Ihon write
under Domitia^, (although he was after a certain manner) they will receive him
reverently, and as it were a new God they will worship the son of
perdition, which extolleth him self above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped. For God by his Just Judgment shall send upon them the efficacy
of error, that they may believe lies which refused to give credit to the
truth. But here for the better understanding we must note, that the beast,
that is the monarchy of Rome, is said to have been, when as it flourished most
of all which was Nero, it is said not to be, when as the strengthes and
might thereof were weakened, so that at length they were brought almost to
nothing, which was the state of the Empire when Domitian reigned, when John
wrote these things, from which time it was never restored to her ancient
dignity, but failed and decreased by little and little, until it was altogether
decayed which we know came to pas many hundred years ago, this clause (and
yet is) shows that the empire was not then utterly abolished, although even
then the power and dignitye thereof began to be deminished. Last of all, that
ascending of the beast out of the bottomeles pit, is the monarchye of the
Pope, which always increased by the decay of the Emperors until at length
when they were quite cast down, he drew unto him self the aucthority of both
the swords.

Verse. 9. Here is the mind that has wisdom. etc.

THe Angel makes his preface, to stir up attention, that this is the most
wise interpretation of this mystery, that the faithful might diligently weigh
the same, least they should be catched unawares, by the frauds and deceipts of
this beast.

The seven heads are seven mountains whereon the woman sits. etc.

WHen as afterward in the eyghtenth verse the Angel by the woman
interprets the City, it is manifest, that this which he says of the
woman sittinge upon seven hills is to be understood of a City builded upon
so many hills. Now what City is there in the whole world, that is builded
upon seven hills, besides Rome? which Poets Historians, and Describers of
places, do all with one consent affirm to be builded upon seven Mountains,
the names whereof be these, Capitolinus, Paletinus, Anentinus, Celius,
Exquilinus, Viminalis, and Nuirinalis. Moreover this is no darcke Description
of the City of Rome, when as the Poet Virgill, also did Describe it with the
same Periphrase in his Georgikes, where he says, the city which within one
wall does compass seven hills. And it is very euidente that by the city of
Rome he signifiethe, the Church or popish religion, for all the excellency
thereof, as they them selves witness depends on the authority of the city
of Rome, which is the sea of the pope.

They are also seven Kings. etc. By the number of the heads he shows, that
not one note or mark only to decerne her may be taken, but diverse, for the
seven heads do signifye seven kings. And verily the city of Rome, in the
beginning had kings in number seven, but the verse following shows that, that
which he says here is not to be understood of them, and others some do
expound it to be the seven electors of the Empire, which seems to me not to
agree to yt matter. Others also number the Emperors from Nero, which were
these, Balba, Otho, Vitellius, Vespasian, Titus, Domitian, and Nerua, which was
the last of the Roman Emperors, seeing Traianus was a spaniard borne. But
whiles I weigh and consider all things, nothing seems more probable to me,
then that the seven heads should signify so many degrees, or orders of the
monarchy of Rome succeding one an other, for there have been so many heads
of that Empire, the first of kings, the second of consuls, the third of
dece^uiri, the fourth of dictators, the fifte of triumuiri, the sixth of
Emperors, and the seventh of popes. (Five are fallen, one is and the other is
not yet come) of those heads, or kingly powers, five are fallen that is are
abolished. That is, kings, consuls, dece^uiri, triumuiri, and dictators. The
sixte, that is that Emperors, do now bear the rule, the seventh that is the
Pope, which has not as yet invaded the tyranny. And when he commethe he must
tarry a little while, this is added to the consolation of the godly that they
might know yt the Roman Antichrist, should not always exercise his cruel
tyranny in the Church, but for a short time only, as it is showed before,
in the 11.12. and 13. Chapter.

Verse. 10. And the beast that was, and is not, is even the eyghte and is one of
the seven. etc.

Verily that is the new monarchy of Rome, which shall ascend out of the
bottomless pit, that is the whole body of Antichrist which shall make up the
eight kingdoms, that is, shall exercise a spiritual tyranny unlike to the
rest, and yet nevertheless he is of the number of the seven heads, because he
will also arrogate to him self civil gouernemente, and after the manner of
kings, of dictatours, and Emperors, he will govern with the glory of
outward pomp. We see here that the beast usurps to him self two powers,
and both of them the beyghest, when the selfsame is numbered for both the
seventh and eyghte of the kings.

And shall go into destruction. etc. When as he so often makes mention of his
destruction, he admonishethe us, that he is the same son of perdition, of
whom S. Paul speaks in the second epistle to the Thessalonians Chapter 2.
Which although being puffed up with a deuilish pride, he boastethe, that his
kingdom shall be eternal, yet shortly he shall go into destruction.

Verse. 11. And the ten horns which thou saw are ten kings, which have
received no kingdom as per, but shall receive power as kings at one hour
with the beast. etc.

THe ten horns like as also in Daniell, do signifye ten kings, that is all
the proconsuls and presidentes of the provinces, which in the Empire of Rome
governs ye common wealth, yet they were not endued with kingly power, because
they served under the emperor, and at his pleasure, were either set up in
authority or deposed. This is it that he says, that they have not yet
received a kingedome, but so soon as the beast should ascend out of the
bottomless pit, together with him they should receive power as kings. For
the monarchy of the pope, increased by the damages of the rule of the
Emperors, and when as the provinces departed from the Empire, creating and
setting up to them selves new kings, the bysshoprike of the Pope sprung up,
which received them into his Dominion and made them tributaries unto him.
Moreover it is to be noted that he says not simply they shall obtain a
kingdom, but they shall receive power as kings. For as long as they were
subject to the aucthoritye of the byshope of Rome, they were not kings
indeed, but only exercised as it were kingly power under him, because they
always depended upon his pleasure, whom also as often as it pleased him he
would thruste out of the kingdom, and place other in there roumes, at his
own will.

Verse. 12. These have one mind and shall give there power and strength unto
the beast. etc.

THese kings with one consent and agreement of mind, even as servants rather
the^ kings, shall resign all there strength and power to the beast, that is
they shall war under the Pope pay tribute unto him, execute his
commandments, as vassals shall acknowledge him for there Lord in all things.
Who knows not that this was the state of the kings of all Europe not many
years agon?.

Verse. 13. These shall fight with the lamb and the lamb shall over come them,
for he is lord of lords, and king of kings. etc.

THese shall after so slavish a manner serve the Pope, that he shall bring them
forth into battaill against Christ, that they may study by all means to
restrain the light of the Gospel brusting forth, but yet being overcome of
the Lamb, they shall be brought under. Which although in the humble shape of a
servant he be despised of the world, yet in the end of the war he will
plainly show that he is Lord of Lords and king of kings, whom no strength
of man can resist.

And they that are on his side, are called, and chosen and faithful. etc.
Those whom they condemn for heritiques, Schismatiques, and wicked men, are
called of God, because they were elected of him and they stand constantlye in
his faith, these shall war under the banner of there captain, against
tyrants, and in spiritual battaill shall overcome them. But of this famous
battaill and victory of Christ, we shall hear shortly after in the 19.
Chapter. In which after that the beast has powered forth all his poison he
shall be at length apprehended and thrown headlonge into the lake which burns
with brymstone.

Verse. 14. And he said unto me, the waters which thou saw where the whore
sits, are people, and folk, and nations, and tongues. etc.

THe Angel said in the beginnge of this Chapter, that the whore sac upon
many waters, now he expounds them to signify diverse people, great
multitudes, sundry nations and tongues, for this whore shall have a large
dominion almost over all Europe. And this is that universal consent of
nations, people and tongues, of which the papists brag so much. I confess
that many nations conspire together into the love and delights of this whore.
But shall it therefore he thought to be a Catholic Church?

Verse. 15. And the ten horns which thou saw upon the beast are they which
shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate and naked. etc.

THose ten kings which were sometime subject to the beast at length being
instructed and taught by the gospel shall shake of her most filthy yoke. And
they which before committed fornication with the Church of Rome and her
abominable religion, after that the light of the gospel is spronge up, they
shall clearly see and perceive her deformity, they will hate her with deadly
hatred. So that the which before was environed and guarded with so great a
band of her lovers, shall be forsaken of all and shall remain desolate and
solitary, then which nothing can happen more grievous or sorrowful to a
harlot. For kings shall both withdraw themselves, and also the people of
there dominions, from her most abominable company. And also they shall spoil
her of her riches, substance, ornaments, farer buildinges, large possessions,
and all the rest of her goods, and shall drive her naked forth of the doors.

And shall eat her flesh and burn her with fire. etc. That is, they shall be
enflamed with so great hatred and lothinge of her filthynes, that they would
even rent and tear her with there teethe, and will curse her to extreme
destruction. And at the length they will wast and destroy with fire and sword,
the city of Rome it self which is the sincke of all mischiefs.

Verse. 17. For God has put it in there hearts to fulfill his will, and to do
with one consent for to give there kingedome unto the beast, until the words
of God be fulfilled. etc.

THat we may know that this whole matter is governed by God, he shows that
it was done by the counsel of God, that those kings for a time should
apply themselves to the beast. and should permit there kingedome to his will
and pleasure. For as by the just judgment of God, Antichrist came into the
world to seduce into destruction, the reprobate contemners of Christ and his
gospel, so all the increase of his tyranny shall depend upon Gods will.
Otherwise it seems incredible that kings should after so slauishe a manner
submit there necks to the Popes yoke, but that God had blinded there minds
for there heynouse offenses. But he teaches that this subjection shall not be
perpetual, but that it shall endure to that time only which is appointed by
the decree and purpose of God.

Verse. 18. And the woman which thou saw is the great city which reigns
over the kings of the earth. etc.

Saying that all writers of the ancient primitive Church as many as have
weighed this sentence could understand no other but the city of Rome, I greatly
merueile with what face the papists dare refuse this exposition. Yea verily
when as no man can bring any other interpretation which has at the least
any likely hode of truth what should we stick any longer in it. To whom I
pray ye, is this unknown, that the city of Rome even then when John writ,
had the dominion over the princes of the world? he could not therefore more
clearly even by name have said, Rome, then this periphrasis doethe signify.

The eyghtenth Chapt.
THE Angel promised to Ihon, that he would show not only the mystery, but
also the damnation of the great whore, which he does execute diligently in
this chapter, describinge the unrecoverable ruin of Babylon.

Verse. 1. And after these things I saw an other Angel come down from
Heaven* having great power. etc.

THis Angel does signify the preachinge of the Gospel, which God in these
last times has seat down from heaven, to reprehende the impudency of the
great whore, and to preach her most certain overthrow, which should never
be repaired again. This Angel is endued with great power, which brings the
unchangeable decree of GOD, concerning the subversion of Babylon. And we see
with what great zeal, freedom, and authority, all the abominations of the
Romish Church are reprehended by the faithful ministers of the gospel.

And the earth was lightened with his glory. etc. Whereas before was most
thick darckenesse, which covered ye whole kingdom of Antichrist, there the
gloriouse light of the gospel has shined, which has driven away all the mist
of errors and ignorance from the eyes of the elect.

Verse. 2. And he cried out mightelye with a loud voice saying, it is fallen:
it is fallen. Babylon the great city, and is become the habitation of Devils,
and the hold of all foul spirits, and a cage of every unclean and hateful
bird. etc.

THere is very great vehemency of every word, that he preached not but
cried out, and that strongely, with as great streyninge of voice as he could.
For it behooves the minds of men to be wakened, to the diligent considering of
gods Judgments. Such in time past seemed the stablenesse of Babylon to be,
when as it was on every side holden up with ye strength of kings and mighty
men, that men thought it should never be subject to any fall or ruin. The
angel therefore cries with a loud voice, that she is fallen, she is fallen,
even Babylon. although she were never so great and trustinge to her own
fortresses. The Church of Rome therefore may never look for any repayringe
of her ruins, for she is fallen, she is fallen even the West Babylon, and
shall never be restored again, for those things shall be performed upon the
Sinagoge of Rome, which were Prophesied of old Babylon, by Esaias the thirtenth
Chapter, and Jeremy 51. Because if there shall remain any broken pieces of the
buyldinges among the heaps of sherdes and rubbishe, they shall not be left
for any hope of restoring, but to the greater horror: for in those desert and
solitary houses, shall Zijm, and Ohijm dwell, that is spirits and Goblins:
Ostriches shall there make there nestes, and the Satyrs shall dance there,
Owls shall cry, the Serpents shall hiss, Dragons shall wallow and tumble
there, and horrible indeed shall be the face of all things in that place. Which
the Angel has expressed in the very same sense, and almost in the same
words, when as he sayethe that Babylon shall be an habitation of Devils, a hold
of all foul Spirits, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird. When
the Gospel therefore is preached concerning the overthrow of Babilo^,
whatsoever remains in it, after the servants of god are called out, we ought
not to count the^ for any other, which rejoice to dwell in such desolate places
then for devils, foul spirits and all unclean birds. Moreover we may
plainly see before our eyes an Image of Babylon destroyed, in temples,
monasteries overthrown. Who would ever have believed, yt so great buildinges,
so beautiful palaces, so great riches and treasures should be laid wast, and
brought into so great desert? but ye voice of the Angel foretold this, it is
no doubt therefore, but yt the same end remains for all ye relics and all
re^nants of babylon.

Verse. 3. For all nations have droncke of the wine of the wrath of her
fornication, and the Kings of the earth have committed fornication with her,
and the marchantes of the earth are waxed rich of the abundaunce of her
pleasures. etc.

IF any peradventure might think yt Babylon deserved not grieuouse
punishments, that she should be stricken with destruction which should never
be restored, he rendereth a reason of the most just judgment, because with her
poisoned art. and bewitchinge cup she has seduced the people of all nations to
idolatry, and also she has procured all the kings of the earth to fornication
and has enticed them into spiritual whoredom being smothely handled by her
worishe tricks, and to conclud she is so given to her prodigal pleasures and
intemperaunce, that all the merchantes of the earth are made rich by her
excessive pleasure. Who is so blind that he sees not all these vices to over
flow in the Church of Rome? where is there such excess, where is there such
insatiable covetousness* where are there so great deceiptes and iudglinge
castes? and to be short where is there more filthier and more abominable
defiling of divine religion, then in poperye? Worthelye therefore she falls
into that destruction, appointed her of God?

Verse. 4. And I herd an other voice from heaven saying, come away from her my
people, that ye be not partaker of her sins, and that ye receive not of her
plagues. etc.

IT may be demanded, what there should need any other voice, when as that
Angel that a little before descended from heaven might have pronounced the same
things. Yea verelye the exhortation followinge is of so great weeght, and
worthy so diligent attention, that it behooves to be published with a new
voice sent from heaven, and we must observe, as well in this book, as in other
prophecies as in Esaye the 40. Chapter that as often a voice is said to be
heard without any aucthore seen, a matter of great weighte, and which is
to be recoined with deep consideration, is signified such as this most
weightye admonitions, that the faithful should depart from the fellowship
of the malignant Church, least if they be made partakers of her sins, they
should also be wrapped in her torments, and verily this heavenly voice
requires three things of the true worshippers of God, of which the first
is, that they should depart sacre away from her fellowship, the second
that they should take due vengeance upon her, the third that they should
rejoice with the whole affection of heart, and magnifye the name of God for her
unrecoverable fall. But as concerning that which perteyneth to the first
admonition, the holy ghost alludeth to the exhortation of the Prophet Jeremy
in the Chapter. 51. Verse. 45. Which with the same words, speaks to the
people of God, that they would depart out of the midst of east Babylon, if
they would provide for there life and safety. But here the heavenly voice
commands not only to fly the place, but especially to take heed of her
sins: least if they should favor and flatter them selves in her wickedness,
it might come to pass, that they should be also punished with her torments.

Verse. 5. For her sins are come up to heaven, and God has remembered her
iniquities. etc.

HE shows that the time is not now to be differed, because without delay
God will take most grieuouse punishementes upon her. For her sins are gone up
even unto heaven, as the enormities of the Sodomites, and her unrighteousness,
has put God in remembrance of his righteousness, that he can no longer suffer
so great and cruel injuries unrevenged. We are here admonished, that grieuouse
tra^sgressio^s, and great sins, do require a swifte vengeance from heaven.
Moreover how dangerouse a thing it is to have fellowship with the wicked,
whose heynouse sins draw the vengeance of God upon there heads. Let us
therefore as the prophet Jeremy warns us, fly far without the circuit
of Gods wrath, which hangs over the whole region of Babylon.

Verse. 6, Reward her even as she has rewarded you, and give her duble
according to her works: and in the cup that she has filled to you, fille her
the duble. etc.

THe next thing which god requires of his servants, is, that after the
abomination of the whore is disclosed, that they would show themselves
ministers of the most Just vengeance of God, in tormenting her in miserable
manner, reward her, says he, even as she has rewarded you. And the Psalm.
137 pronounces them blessed, which shall render to Babylon the same things
which she cruelly committed against the people of God. We must not therefore
spare her, but rather her vengeance is to be dubled, according to y^ measure
of her sins, and the cruelty, which she exercised upon the holy martyrs of
God, she is to be punished with duble torments. Princes therefore and
Magistrates shall see, which through two much gentleness do not punish her
wickedness, what they will answer to god, when they shall be accused of the
neclecte of this commandment.

Verse. 7. In as much as she glorified her self, and lived in pleasure, so
much give ye to her torment and sorrow.

HE teachethe that it is most equal and right, that by how much greater
pride, and presumption she has extolled her self, with so much greater infamy
she should be reproched, and look how much more the abominable whore has
applied her self to riote and intemperaunce, by so much more grieuouse
torments and punishments, her wantonness should be restrained. Therefore here
is no place of mercy, but her sins are to be weighed in the equal balance of
Justice, with her torments, and look whatsoever she has deserved, she ought
to suffer, without any favor showed at all. For it becomes not us to be
liberal of that which is none of our own. God the eternal Judge, has given
this sentence upon her, whose sharpenes no mortal creature can mittigate or
aswage. Let us therefore hate Babylon as we ought, with the greatest hatred,
and with vehement and earnest prayers let us desire her extreme destruction,
which so long as she remains safe the Church of Christ whose felicity we
ought by all means to procure, can never flourish.

For she sayethe in her heart, I sit being a Queen, and am no widow and
shall see no mourninge. etc. He paynteth out her arrogauncie, pride, and
security, that she said with her self, I sit being a Queen, that is, I
rule over all men as the Lady of the world, and I am no wedowe, which am
guarded and compassed about with so great a multitude of lovers, I am touched
with no fear of desolatio^, which am the spouse of Christ, the Catholic and
Apostolic Church, against which the gates of hell shall not prevail and
therefore I shall never be partaker of mourning and sorrow. After this manner
glories the malipart whore, but all these things shall vanish into smoke,
when God shall require at her hands the blood of his holy martires.

Verse. 8. Therefore shall her plagues come at one day, death and sorrow, and
famine, and she shall be burnte with fire. etc.

HE alludeth to the prophecy of Esaias concerning the old babylon in the 47.
Chapt. signifying that God will suddenly beat down her pride, bridle her
riote, and shake of her security. Because she shall be oppressed with diverse
calamities, and those coming upon her at once as with death, famine, and
sorrow, and at length even as it were appointed to extreme and utter
destruction, she shall burn with fire.

For strong is the Lord God which will condemn her. etc. If any man at the
beholding of her present estate should think that it could not come to pass
that so great strength, riches and dignity, could vanish away to naught: he
sets the strength of God against them all which seeing he has condemned her
to such destruction, he will throw down all her loftiness, break all her
strength, and tread all riches under foot, that the sentence which he has
pronounced against her may take place.

Verse. 9. And the kings of the earth shall bewail her, and lament for her,
which have committed fornication and lived in pleasure with her, when they
shall see the smooke of her burning. etc.

THat the horrible fall of Babylon, might be set as it were before our eyes,
there are brought in kings, marchantes, and mariners bewayling her, and as
many as under her defen^e have lived a voluptuouse and careless life. In the
first place kings and noble men, which under her protection gave them selves
to wanton pleasures and delights, do take it grieuousely that they are called
by the voice of the Gospel, to embrace righteousness and temperance, when
they shall see the smoke of her burninge, they weep, and after a womanlye manner
b^wayle her fall.

Verse, 10. And shall stand a far of for fear of her torment, saying alas,
alas, the great city Babylon the mighty city, for in one hour is thy
Judgment come. etc.

ALthough they loved her, and wished that she might remain safe for ever yet
through the fear of her torments they shall stand a far of and shall
acknowledge the Just Judgment of God upon her, saying, alas that notable city
Babylon, that most mighty city, how soon have thou fallen from so highest
degree of happiness? this verily is even the Judgment of God because thou
wast sufficientlye furnished against all the force and strength of man. We are
taught here that very tyrants and hypocrites do acknowledge the hand of God
in subuerting Babylon, and yet are not converted to God, but being in despayer,
do bewail the ruin of that city which they confess to be overthrown by the
Just Judgment of God for her wickedness.

Verse. 11. And the merchauntes of the earth shall weep and wayle over her, for
no man byeth there ware any more. etc.

AFter the bitter complaints of the Kings, and Princes, now follow the
doleful songs of the marchantes, which bewail Babylon not so much for any
love they have toward her, as for the loss of there own gain. Because no
man here after will bye there most precious wares, after the destruction of
this rich City. And by these merchants are understood not only the petie
merchants which were wont to sell such kind of pedlinge marchaundize to the
Prelates, to maintain the riote and in temperaunce of the Church of Rome: but
also the great Bysshopes, Prelates, and priests the^ selves, which had all
the ceremonies of there Church set to sail, whereupon they heaven up to them
selves infinite riches. But after yt vnproffitablenesse of there wares was made
manifest by the preaching of the Gospel there fayres and markets wax cold
and at length they shall find no man, which wlli bestow upon such baggage
and triflinge toys, so much as a dodkine, or a rotten nut. Not without just
cause therefore they weep and lament, because the hope of such sweet gain is
now all taken from them.

Verse. 12. The ware of gold, and silver, and of precious stone, and of pearls,
and of fine linen, and of purple, and of silk, and of scarlet and of all
manner of thine wode, and of vessels of yuerye, and all vessels of most
precious wode, and of brass and of iron, and of marble. etc.

IT is marvel that they should complain that these wares should be no more
saleable, seeing they were never had in greater price, then after the fall of
Babylon. But the meaning is, that all these things are esteemed no more as they
were the merchandise of the church of Rome, that is in masses, in images, in
the theatricall or player like shows of there temples, and in other
papisticall ceremonies, for otherwise, gold, precious stones and purple are
esteemed in there old price. But chalices, crosses images, miters of goulde,
silver, and pearls, are not embraced with there wonted reverence. Copes,
vestiments, and other tragical garments wrought of fine linen, silk, purple,
and scarlet are despised, neither do they dasill the eyes of men as in time
past. The other ornaments, and instruments of temples monasteries, and idols
of yuerye, ceder, cypress, of brass, iron and marble, are trodden down,
despised and broke in pieces.

Verse. 13. And of sinauion, and odours, and ointments, and frankincense and
wine and oil, and fine flower, and wheat, and beasts, and sheep, and horses,
and chariots, and bodies and souls of men.

NO man does now desire the perfume, of Frankensence, cinomon, and other
spices, with which they did perfume the temples and idols. No man requires the
oynetments and oil to baptize, to confirm, to ordeyne, and to bury men. No
man requesteth of them wine to wash altares, to howsell lay people, and to
heal the chincough and other infirmities of the throat. All men despise there
God made of fine flower, no man prepares wheat, oxen, or sheep to feed there
slothful belies; yea verily to be breife they might sterue, except they
should provide for themselves. The horses the chariots, and the slaves,
serving either to the necessary use or intemperance of the prelates, they the^
selves seeing they are spoiled of all there goods will not buy, neither will
other men buy the^ to give unto the^ after the manner of flatterers. Lastly, no
man will buy of them, by indulgences, masses, merits, and works of
superarogatio^, the souls of men which are the best cheap marchaundize among
the^, which nevertheless Christ purchased with his blood. Here of are those
tears, hereof come mourninges and bewaylings of the papists, hereof springs
that fretting and fuming against the doctrine of the gospel, which if it would
bring the^ the like gain they would not be altogether so sorry to change it
for popish religion. More over that he numbreth the souls of men also among
the wares, we easily understand of what Church he speaks. For never any
other heresy has set the souls of men to sale, besides popery. And also all
other merchandise which have place in popish religion, do sufficiently show
the condition of the same.

Verse. 14. And the apples which thy soul lusted after, are departed from thee,
and all things which were fat and excellent, are departed from thee, and thou
shall find them no more. etc.

NOw he tourneth his tale to babylon her self, for more veheme^cie sake, as if
he should say, not only those preciouse wares shall cease to be in price among
men, but also the sweet apples which thou have lusted after with thy whole
heart are departed from thee, and all things which were fat, and excellent are
departed from thee, and thou shall never find them any more. Nothing could
happen more grieuouse or sorrowful to a harlotte that is drowned in riote and
excess, then that all her dilicate delights and pleasures, in which she so
greatly sported her self are shaken of from her. This is therefore the
greatest torment to the Babilonicall whore, that she which a little before
flowed in such abundance of all things which she abused to intemperance, that
in riote she could compare with Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, now being naked and
deserte should be oppressed with the scarcity of all things that are good.

Verse. 15.16. The marcha^ts of these things which were wared rich shall stand
a far of from her, for fear of her torment weping and wayling, and say alas,
alas, ye great city, that was clothed in fine linne^, and purple. etc.

WHo will blame there sorrow, which by her fall also are deprived of so fat
gain? for they which by her abundaunce are made rich, by her fall also are
brought to need and powertie. Therefore they cry, they yell, they howell,
yet nevertheless they depart far from her burninge, least they should be
made partakers of her torments. But they shall not escape the hand of God
which at length will catch them. Here is described the nature of the papists,
which although they dearly love there mother the Church, for gain, and
pleasures sake, yet they fly from her torment as much as they ca^, denying her
forswearinge, and cursinge her from the mouth forward, yet they are sorrowful
within, bewaylinge her fall, and saying, alas, alas, that great City, which
was beautiefullye clothed in fine linen, and purple, and skarlat, gold,
preciouse, stones. and pearls, how soon so great riches are brought into
desolation. If any man hear the Monks, the Priests, or other Papists of the
same rabblement, bewayling the ruins of there monastries, or temples: they do
almost with the same voices testify there sorrow. They reckon up with great
bitterness of sorrow the riches, the ornaments and there beauty, and
chiefly they do not forget there own commodity, which they miserablye
complain to be taken from them, now that these things are destroyed. But they
are wretched men, which no man does pity because when Babylon stood in her
iolity, they filled the whole world with pride, covetousness, lechery,
cruelty, and Idolatry. Worthily therefore they suffer the punishments of so
great enormities, if they walk destitute and and needy of all things, and
also if they them selves feel the torments which they prepared for others.

Verse. 17.18. For in one hour so great riches are come to desolation, and
every shipmaister: and all the people that occupy ships: and shipmen and
whosoever trauaill on the sea, shall stand a far of and cry when they see
the smooke of her burning: saying: what city was like unto this great City.
etc.

THe destruction of Babylon is not known upon the earth only, but it is so
great that it is beholden also from the sea. The governors of ships
therefore and all the multitude of people that occupy ships, which were
wont to carry one^ wares by whole nauies, when they shall behold a far of
our of the sea, the smoke of her burninge: they shall acknowledge that her
utter destruction is come, and therefore they shall cry out for sorrow,
bewayling her fall and saying, what city was like to this great City, or
deserved to be compared with it? O miserable destruction of so great and so
rich a City.

Verse. 19. And they shall cast dust on there heads, and cry wepinge and
wayling and say, alas, alas, the great City, wherein were made rich all that
had ships on the sea, by her costlinesse, for in one hour she is made
desolate. etc.

THis was a sign of the greatest mourning among the Hebrews, when they cast
dust and ashes upon there heads. The holy ghost would express under this
figure, the sorrow of those, which in the fall of Babylon complain that there
gain is also fallen away. Therefore here are brought in shipmen cryinge,
wepinge, and mourninge, for the hope of gain which is taken away: after that
Babylon, by whose costlinesse were all made rich, as many as did carye wares
with ships, is brought into dust and ashes. And the complaints of all those
that mourn are to this end, that the horrible destruction of the fall of
Babylon might be set before our eyes.

Verse. 20. O heaven rejoice of her, and ye holy Apostles, and Prophets: for
God has given your Judgment on her. etc.

WE said before that the holy ghost required 3. things of the faithful in
the fall of Babylon, whereof this is the last, yt they should rejoice, for her
destruction, and give thanks to god, that he is revenged upon her ungodliness,
and chiefly upon her cruelty against the saints, he exhorts therefore the
heaven it self, that is all those, which are in heaven for ye greater
vehemency of speech, and the holy Apostles of Christ and the prophets, that
is the preachers of his holy Gospel, that they should rejoice, be glad, and
triumph, for ye vengeance, which is taken upon babylon. Because that
altogether for a time God seems to forget his servants, whiles the whore
being made drunken with the blood of the godly, did sit like a Queen in her
seat, and should make the holy martyrs of God subject to all kinds of
torments: now at length god has taken vengeance on her wickedness, for the
revenge of the saints. Worthily therefore ought the saints to rejoice, as
many as do either abhor her cruelty, or that do acknowledge and reverence
the Justice of God, in her just torments. For we ought not to be moved with
any pity of there calamity, whom we confess to be condemned by the
sentence of the most righteous God.

Verse. 21. Then a mighty angel, took up a stone like a great milston, and
cast it into the sea, saying, with such violence shall the great city Babylon
be cast, and shall be found no more. etc.

IN the fifty and one Chapter of Jeremy the Prophet does seal up the
prophecy concerning the destruction of old Babylon with the like sign. He
commanded Sheraiah a certain godly Prince which should go to Babylon, that he
should bind a stone to the book of that prophecy, and should cast it into
the midst of Euphrates saying, after this manner shall Babylon he drowned and
shall not rise from the evil that I will bring upon her. To which place
without doubt the holy ghost alludeth in this vision, sauinge that in all the
circumstaunces there is a greater Emphasis. For here not a man, but a mighty
Angel, whose force does far exceade the strength of man, took up a stone,
not a little one, but a very great one like as it were a millstone, and cast it
not into a river, but into the sea, speaking these words before, with such
violence shall the great city Babylon be cast down and shall be found no
more. And this is put for the everlasting comfort of the godly, that they
might quietly triumph of her destruction because all hope of restoringe
Papisterie is utterly taken away.

Verse. 22. And the voice of harpers and musicians and of ^ypers and trumpetters
shall be heard no more in thee, and no crafts man of whatsoever craft he be,
shall be found any more in thee. and the sound of a mylston shall be heard no more
in thee. etc.

THat he may teach that a perpetual desolation should be brought upon
Babylon, he reckeneth up all those things which are wont to serve for an
ornament and use to wealthy, and rich cities. Never, says he, shall the
voice of singers be heard, or of them which handle Instruments of music, so
that whatsoever things serve for there pleasure are taken away. Neither shall
there ever be found in her, the artificer of any art: By this means
whatsoever perteyne to the use of a civil honest life, are taken away: Lastly
the sound of a millstone shall be heard no more in her, so all the aids of
necessary sustenaunce are wanting, what remaynethe therefore, but horrible
solitariness.

Verse. 23.24. And the light of a candle shall shine no more in thee, and the
voice of the bridegroom and of the the bride shall be heard no more. etc.

NO man shall dwell there which may light a candle by night, neither shall
the voice of the bridegroom and of the bride be heard, there shall be no family
which shall ever go thither to dwell, there shall never be any marriages
celebrated there, that for the hope of posterity the city might look for
some renewing, but sorrow, solitude, silence, horror and confusion, shall for
ever occupy and posses her.

Because thy merchants were the great men of the earth and with thy
inchantements were deceived all nations. And in her was found the blood of the
Prophets and of the saints and of all that were slain upon the earth. etc.
The reasons are rendered wherefore God punished her so sharply. The first cause
therefore is assigned to be covetousness joined with pride, because her
merchants seeking dishonest gain, have heaped together infinite riches with
which being puffed up they would be counted for kings, and Princes in the
world. Who knows not how great were the riches of Cardinals, Bysshopes,
Abbotes, and of other prelates? and how great dignity have they challenged to
them selves? the second reason is given that with the witcheries and
inchauntementes or perverse doctrine, they seduced all nations into error. And
who is ignorant? with what lies they bewitched the minds of men, that they
might make all obediente, and addicte unto them. Lastly to whom is it not
manifest, how great a slaughter the synagog of Rome has made of the
prophets, and saints? so that it does worthily agree unto her which Christ
said upon Jerusalem, that all the righteouse blood which was shed, from the
blood of Just habell, eue^ to the end of the world, ought to be required at
her hands.

The nynetenth Chapter.
LIke as in the Former chapter there are brought in Kings, merchants and the
company of shipmen, miserably bewaylings the fall of Babylon: so in this
Chapter is described the joy, and exultation of all the heavenly orders, that
now when the whore is abolished, Christ shall now shortelye be joined to his
spouse. Lastly is prophesied, the last battle of Antichrist against Christ and
his Gospel, after which at length follows his eternal damnation.

Verse. 1. And after these things I heard a great voice of a great multitude in
heaven saying, halleluyah, salvation, and glory and honor and power, be to
the lord our God. etc.

THe holy ghost a little before exhorted the heaven and all that dwell therein
that they should rejoice with gladness for the fall of Babylon. Now therefore
John hears a great voice in heaven, of those which reioysed were glad and
song eternal praises to God, for the sharpness of his Judgment, which he
has showed forth against the whore. Whiles the Papists therefore mourn, weep
and houle for ye ruin of there most dear mother the sinagoge of Rome, there
is one voice of the whole church of Christ, wherewith they being wholly filled
with heavenly joy rejoice for them selves, and give thanckes to God for the
destruction of the abominable whore. And this verielye is there triumphing
song, Halleluiah, salvation, glory, honor, and power be to the Lord our God,
the Hebrew word Halleluiah is a voice that does exhort stirring up to
praise God, afterward they express by what means god is praised, verily, if
to him alone all our salvation be attributed, if all honor* glory, and power,
of beginning, continuing and perfitting of this most magnificall work, be
ascribed to God alone.

Verse. 2. For true and righteouse are his Judgment. etc.

LEast they should seem rashly and without cause of great joy to rejoice, as
common the peopel are often wont to do they expound what abundant matter of
gladness is offered unto them, that God has executed the office of a true and
just Judge, in reue^ging the wickedness of the great whore. He often times
threatened her, the deserved destruction, which she deserved because he
differred the same, she accused God and his prophets of lying, but when a
while after it had fallen upon her head, she perceived and felt that god is
true, which admonished her that she should repent. But when she despised the
admonitions of God, and would make no end of committing whoredom, ravening,
and killing, at the length, she knew by proof the Just Judgment of God, which
can not always suffer, so cruel and monstrouse sins unrevenged.

For he has condemned the great Whore which did corrupt the earth with her
fornication and has avenged the blood of his servants shed by her hand.
etc. Because he has pronounced the sentence of eternal damnation, against ye
most impudent and shamlesse harlotte ye Church of Rome, which with fornication,
as well spiritual as corporal has corrupted ye whole earth, so yt their has
scarce remained any corner pure from her dealinges Which cruelly slew the
servants of God the martirs of Christ daily with her and sw^orde, and
exquisite torments, even as it were sheep appoincted to the slaughter: whose
most innocent blood he has now by good right revenged, whereas he has
condemned her to eternal torments.

Verse. 3. And again they said Halleluiah. etc.

THose heavenly spirits do not once only but with often repeated voices singe
praises to God, and they stir up and provoke all others also to yeald the
same obedience to the Lord. We see therefore that they celebrate the name of
God without any irkesomnes or werines at all, which burn with a sincere love
toward him and that the blessed orders of heavenly spirits do satisfy
themselves with no praises or thanckes giving, yt they may show themselves not to
be unthankful, for the benefit received of the delivery of the Church from the
defilings, and cruelty of the great whore. We be here admonished of our
duetye, that we are bound with unwearied study and endeavor to magnifye the
infinite goodness of god, both for all other his benefits bestowed upon us, and
also chiefly for the light of the Gospel spronge up unto us, whereby the
clouds of Poperye being daily more and more driven a way, the western
Babylon is brought very nere to utter ruin.

And the smoke of her torments rose up for evermore. etc. Even here the
heavenly spirits gathered to themselves sound matter to joy quietly that they
see the smoke of Babylon being set on fire, ascend up for ever, when God has
delivered her up to be tormented with the everlasting torments of hell fire.
We may learn here that the hope of the papists concerning the restoring of
the dignity of there Church is but vain, whose Just condemnation when we
know by the word of God, we are taught by the same word, that her
burninge shall be for ever.

Verse. 4. And the four and twenty elders, and the four beasts fell down and
worshipped God that sat on the throne saying Amen Halleluiah. etc.

WE have often noted before, with how great reverence y^ honorable senate of
the 24. elders, with the four Cherubicall beasts, do come to celebrate the
glory of God. For they fall upon there faces, whereby they acknowledge them
selves to be unworthy, which should magnify, and set forth the honor of god,
they cast down there crowns, and bowing down worship god, which sits
upon the seat of majesty and glory for ever. Which thing as we see, they do
in this place. After therefore yt they have testified there humility with such
submission as was meet, they answer to the most holy song of the angels,
which they song in the name of ye whole Church, Amen, Halleluiah. By which
truly they do signify, yt they desire nothing more in there minds with
ardent prayers, then that god alone may have his sound and perfect glory, and
yt all may acknowledge, what a be^efite god bestowed upon his church, when he
took vengeance upon the great whore. And therefore these do also exhort all
the faithful to ascribe praise, glory, honor and power to God alone. This
voice Halleluiah so often repeated, does teach that the desire to praise God
is easily slacken of among us, except one of us often stir up an other to
this office.

Verse. 5. Then a voice came out of the throne saying praise our god all ye his
servants, and ye that fear him both small and great.

THis voice proceaded either from the 4. beasts which bear up the throne of
God, or else from those infinite millions of Angels, which compass the throne
about admonishinge, that god is to be extolled with due praises, of all his
servants which fear him unfeignedly whether they be small, or great. As many
therefore as will be counted for the servants of god, ought not to be
slothful in this office, but to labor with endeavor, that his glory may be
celebrated through ye whole earth. For this voice does speak as well to the
great, as the small, yt is of what state or condition soever they shall be, least
any might suppose yt he should be free from this office. Afterward it also
teaches, who are in very deed the servants of God, when as instede of an
exposition he added, this, they yt fear and reverence his co^maundeme^ts from
there heart. All do in words acknowledge god to be there father and lord, but as
the Lord does expostulate, with the Jews in the first Chapter of mathewe. If I
be father where is mine honor if I be a Lord where is my fear? so this voice
by the fear of God definith his servant.

Ver. 6. And I heard like a voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of
many waters, and as the voice of strong thundringes, saying halleluiah, for
our lord god almighty has received. etc.

THis voice which he has described so diligently seems, that it was ye voices
of all ye heavenly companies, joined in one with this acclamation concluding ye
song and saying, halluiah for our lord god almighty has reigned the whole
church being taught of our savior Christ does desire ye the kingdom of God
may come, when as all his enemies being vanquished ye dominion of God alone
may excel in the sight of all creaturrs. The heavenly voice does testify, ye
kingdom has now come, when as the Church of Antichrist being abolished and
destroyed, God alone does rainge in the congregation of the faithful, because
now the subversion and ouerthrone of all the enemies of God and his church is
at hand, when as a little after the beast being overcome in battle is
apprehended, and the devil him self at length together with the beast and
the false prophet is thrown hedlonge into the burninge lake of fire.

Verse. 7. Let us be glad and rejoice and give glory to him. etc.

TO our selves say they let us rejoice for so happy a victory, and let us in
the mean time with delectation use our own joy, but let us not forget to
yield due honor to God if we ask what new cause of joy there is 2. the
answer.

For the marriage of the lamb is come, and his wife has made her self
ready. etc. For now the time is at hand, that Christ may bring the
Church which he espoused in time past to be his wife, home to his house, and
the Church even now about to come into the most acceptable imbracinges of
her dear spouse, does adorn and deck her self, that she may receeue him
when he comes according to his dignitye we are admonished here, that what
space of time soever shall be remain to the Church, from the destru^tion of
the Synagoge of Antichriste, even to the end of the world that the same is
granted unto her, that she being bewtifullye adorned with faith, godliness,
and innocence of life, may come forth into his presence, which thing I would
to God we all diligently considered, yt the most filthy garments of the flesh
being cast a way, we may garnish our souls with ye new ornaments o^
righteousness and holiness, yt we may be prepared to go forth to mete Christ in
what hour soever he shall come.

Verse. 8. And unto her was granted that she should be araied with pure fine
linen and shininge, for the fine linen is the righteousness of the saints. etc,

THat the Church should not come forth naked, or covered with torn garments,
seeing of her self, she has no clenelines or shining bewty, he shows that
marriage garments are otherwise prepared for her. For by the gift of God she is
decked with fine linen pure shininge, which are ye righteousness of the saints
that is those good works which are the testimonies of a lively faith. For after
that all the spots of the Church are washed a way in the blood of the lamb,
she is clothed with new righteousness also, that she studieth to please God by
good works, and through Christ, her obedience is acceptable to God although
it be imperfect.

Verse. 9. Then he said unto me write, blessed are they which are called unto
the lambs supper, and he said unto me these words of God are true. etc.

WE have said often, that as often as John is commanded to commit any thing
to writing, after that first commandment, which he received in the
beginning that he should write whatsoever things he saw, that it is a matter
of great weight which ought diligently to be weighed and considered of us.
When the heavenly voice therefore pronounces them blessed, which are called to
the supper of the lamb he signifies that they are happy, which by the
preachinge of the gospel are called to the partakinge of the heavenly life,
so that they themselves do acknowledge there own happiness. Which how great it
is it shall the^ perfectly appear, when the day shall come, which is appointed
for ye celebrating of the marriage of the lamb, and in y^ he repeateth that
these words of God are true, he does therefore yt with a^most weighty
affirmatio^ he might seal this doctrine concerning the felicity of those
which are made partakers of the calling of the gospel and verily we have to
much experience how necessary this sealing is, when we see such profane
co^tempte of the Gospel every where to abound.

Verse. 10. And I fell before his feet to worship him, but he said unto me see
thou do it not I am thy fellow servant and one of thy brethren, which have the
testimony of Jesus, worship God, for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of
the Prophecy. etc.

S. Ihon does not dissemble his own fall, seeing yt a profitable doctrine to
the Church should follow thereof. For there was so great dignity of person in
the Angel, that Ihon was ready prepared to give to him divine honor. But the
Angel suffered not the glory, which is due unto God to be transferred into
him self, for he confesses that he is not his Lord, but his fellow servant,
and one of his brethren, which bear testimony of Christ. That god alone
therefore is to be worshipped and not he, and therefore he declares, that he
is one of those whom god does use, to reuele his mysteries to the prophets,
which they should expound to other men, for the testimony of Jesus is the
spirit of prophecy in both. For to this end or mark are all prophecies
referred, and that only is the true spirit of prophecy, which leads unto
Christ. Of what sort therefore is the spirit of the popish doctrine, which
always leads us away from Christ unto creatures, when as the Angel being a
most excellent creature, so earnestly refused the honor offered unto him.
Shall we therefore worship Images, Crosses, and relics, seeing it is such
abominable wickedness to worship the Angels them selves.

Verse. 11. And I saw heaven open, and behold a white horse and he that sat
upon him was called faithful and true, and he judges, and fights
righteously. etc.

NOw remains the last battaylle to be fought against the wicked, in which
the strength and furniture of all the enemies being overthrown and slain
Christ alone has the victory, and extreme torments are laid upon the
reprobate. Ihon therefore sees the heaven open, from whence we look for our
Lord Jesus Christ, which with the breath of his mouth shall destroy
Antichrist, and by the brightenesse of his coming shall abolishe him. And the
white horse goes out of heaven, which represents the ministry of the
Gospel pure and sincere from all the dregs, and spotes of perverse doctrine,
whose office is to carry Christ, to this last battle which he will fight
against Antichrist. For by the preachinge of the gospel Antichrist is
overcome. Others by the white horse understand the white cloud, in which
Christ will come to judgment, but I think this vision is to be expounded not
of ye judgment, which is described in the next Chap. following, but of the
victory of Christ against all his ennemies, which goes immediatlye before
the last Judgment. He that sits upon this horse is called faithefull, and
true, for the help which he promises, he will bring unto his, he brings
in due time, and he Judges and fights in righteousness, by cause he has
not without Just causes taken the war in hand, as the Princes of the
World, for light or no causes do oftentimes take great battles in hand:
But here he does nothing rashely, nothing headlonge, but all things with
Judgment and according to the rule of equitye. Therefore being provoked
with innummerable injuries by Antichrist, he proceadeth forth into battaille
to vanquish and overcome him.

Verse. 12. And his eyes were as a flame of fire. etc.

THe sharpness of his eyes is more percinge, then any fire, and makes
passage to it self even unto the innermoste, and depest thoughts of the
heart. No Hypocrisye therefore, no subtilties can deceive the quick
sharpness of his sight. If Antichrist feign a thousand times that he
promoteth the glory of God, and acknowledge Christ for his King: Yet he shall
never fly the judgment of Christ, which will draw all his dissimulation in
to light.

And on his head were many crowns. etc. Antichrist of Rome against who^ he
proceadeth furnished unto battaill with great sacraledge usurped to him self
many crowns as though he had all the rule alone in heaven, earth and hell. But
Christ by good right of inheritance, has his head crowned with many crowns,
as he to whom the father has granted the rule of all thing, as he himself
witnesses saying, all power is given to me both in heaven and earth Matthew. 28.
He shall require vengeance of Antichrist because he so traitorously usurps
the ensigns of his power, when as nevertheless he is endewed with no divine
virtue or strength.

And he had a name written that no man knew but him self. etc. When as he is
partaker of the same essence, majesty, and glory, with the father, and the
holy ghost, which dignity no creature can by understanding thoroughly
comprehend, he is said to have a name, whose force he alone, which is the
wisdom of the father does understand. Except peradventure he allude to that
saying of Christ in the 11. Chapter of Math. When he says, that no man
knows the son, but the Father, neither that any man knows the father but
the son, and they to whom the son will reveal him, yet the former
exposition likes me best.

Verse. 13. And he was clothed in a garment dipte in blood. etc.

THey are deceived as I Judge which by the garment dipte in blood, understand
the manhood of Christ, in which by his blood, he has purchased the mercy and
favor of God toward us. For here Christ is described as a warrior, and
Judge, which has put on such armor as should make him terrible to his
enemies. And it is a manifest alluding to the vision of Esaias Chapter 63.
Which brings in the Lord, all bloody and red by the slaughter of the
Edomites. Christ therefore wears a garment dipped in blood, that he might
thoroughly fear his adversaries when as they are admonished by this sign what
slaughters he made in time past upon the enemies of his Church, that they may
know that the like or greater hangs over there necks.

And his name is called the word of God. etc. Before he said that his name
was known to him self alone, now he shows that he is called the word of
God. Therefore we may understand the former name, of his incomprehensible
essence, but this name of his office, in as much as he does vouchsafe to reveal
him self unto us in the person of the mediator. He is therefore that word of
God begotten of the father before all worlds, which in the time determinate by
the heavenly counsel, was made man, and wroughte the wonderful work of man's
redemption in our flesh.

Verse. 14. And the warriers which were in heaven followed him upon white
horses, clothed with fine linen white and pure.

ALthough alone he treads the wine fat of Gods wrath, as we are taught in
the next verse following, and alone is of might to subdue his enemies, yet he
joins to him self companions of war, even all the heavenly Armies, that
is the faithful ministers of his Church, and professors of his Gospel,
which he leads forth, not so much to bear part of the labor, as that he
takes them to the participation of the victory. Which we may easily perceive
by there deckinge, for after the manner of those that triu^phe, they sit upon
white horses, and are clothed in fine linen white and pure, which as we heard
before are the righteousness of the Saints, and when they are endued with
these ornaments, that is, with faith, and innocence, they dare go forth into
battle, as it were sufficiently armed against death and wounds.

Verse. 15. And out of his mouth went a sharp sword. etc.

THis sword as we also heard before in the first Chapt. signifies the word
of God, whose truth and certentie proceadeth out of his mouth: he teachethe
therefore with what weapon Christ will fight against Antichrist, verily even
with a spiritual sword, by the preaching of his word: this place makes that
I can not fitly interpret this battaill of the last Judgment. And S. Paul to
the Thessalo. Seems to foretell two degrees of his victory, the one whereby
he is slain with the breath of Christ's mouth, the other when which the
brightness of his coming he shall be utterly abolished.

That with it he should smite the heathen: for he shall rule them with a rod of
Iron: for he it is that treads the wine press, of the fercenesse and wrath
of almighty God. etc. According to the prophecy of David reciting the
ordinance of god Psalm 2. That he should smite the rebelliouse heathen; with a
sword and should break the raging people in peaces with an Iron rod, as it
were the potters vessels. And Christ him self also is the ruin of yt
reprobate, which treads the wine press of the wrath of almighty God, that
is he shall condemn all the reprobate, being overcome by his power, to the
eternal torments of hell. The emphasis of every word is here to be noted,
which is put to terrify the wicked. And he alludeth to the prophecy of Esaias
in the 63. Chap. concerning the slaughter of the Edomites, as we said before,
in which Chapter of Esaye, there are almost the same words concerning the
treading of the wine press.

Verse. 16. And he has upon his garments and upon his thighe a name written,
the king of kings and Lord of Lords. etc.

THat all may acknowledge his invincible power, he has a name openly written
in his garments and upon his thighe, which declares his majesty and
Dominion, verily that he is king of all kings, and lord of all lords.
Whosoever therefore challenge to them selves a kingdom or Lordship in the whole
world, are his subjects, but if that of there own accord, and willinglye
they do not acknowledge his rule over them, will they, nill they, they shall be
drawn to his obedience. In vain therefore is Antichrist proud with the
insolent titles of kingedome and Lordship, because he must be made subject to
the yoke of this chief and highest king of kings. For he sits at the
right hand of God until all his enemies be made his foot stole, Psalm. 110.

Verse. 17. And I saw an Angel stand in the sun who cried with a loud
voice, saying to all the fowls that flyed by the midst of heaven come and
gather your selves together unto the supper of the great God. etc.

IT is wont to be unlucky among men to singe the triumph before the victory,
and the enemies as yet not being vanquished to think of the spoils and the
pray is ridiculous. But the matter is far otherwise in those battles which
Christ sighteth. For he being always sure of a happy end, may boldly triumph
over his enemies. Like as this Angel which exercises the office of a heralde
taking his place in the sun, as it were in the middle market place of the
world, or theater proclaims with a loud voice yt victory of Christ obtained
against antichrist and that there shall be made such a slaughter of his
adversaries, that with great diligence, he bids all the fowls as many as
fly through the midst of heaven, to the supper of the great God, which he
has prepared for them with so innumerable dead carkases of his enemies which
are overthrown.

Verse. 18. That ye may eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh of the high
captains, and the flesh of the mighty men, and the flesh of horses and the^
that sit on them, and the flesh of all free men, and bond men, and of small
and great. etc.

THat the fowls might know with how deintye ^here they should be welcomed
in the supper of the great God, the angel nu^breth up, that they shall be
filled with the flesh of noble men, of kings, of dukes, of strong captains,
of horsemen and of horses, and moreover with the carkases of all both free and
bond both small and great. By which similitude he would signify how horrible a
slaughter should be brought upon antichrist, yt the men of no state or
condition, which came to ayed him, should ^ly from his torment whether they
were princes; or whether the common people, whether they were small or great.
For yt there shall none remain of ye whole army of antichrist, or yt should be
raunsomed with money, but yt all should be slaie^ and not on left, we are here also
admonished in yt he calls Christ ye great God, against y^ blasphemouse cauils
of Arrians, like as paul also in the second chap. to tytus, speakinge of his
second coming. For in either place yt holy ghost understands christ to be
most great and equal, with the father whom he sets forth and honoreth by ye
name of ye great God.

Verse. 19. And I saw the beast and the kings of the earth and there warriors
gathered together to make battle against him that sat on the horse and against
his soldiers. etc.

NOw begins the most grieuouse battle, for now Antichrist, with his wicked
confederate Princes, and with there whole army sets him self against Christ
ye victoriouse Captain. We read before in the sixtenth Chapter that by the
common counsel of the Devil the pope and his clergy, Legates were sent
forth, which like frogs boasting nothing, but bubles and a vain croking, yt
by there babbling they would stir up Princes that they might set them selves
in armor against Christ. Now therefore in this last battle they fight
under Antichrist, whiles they study by all means to establish his tyranny,
which God will have abolished, and with great labor they desire to overthrow
ye kingdom of Christ which is spread abroad by the Gospel. They fight
therefore with all there force against Christ and his army, that is against the
preachers and professors of his truth, as we daily see before our eyes.

Verse. 10. And the beast was taken, and with him that false Prophet^ that
wrought miracles before him, with which he deceived them that received the
beasts mark, and them that worshipped his. Image, these both were cast quick
into a lake of fire, burninge with brymstone. etc.

THe two verses which remain of this Chapter do teach, what end there shall be
of this last battaill, and first what remains for the captains the^ selves.
They are taken says he (all there army being overthrown) even the beast
and the false Prophet, that is the Roman Antichrist and his false
Prophetical clergy, which with feyned signs and miracles seduced the
nations into error, that they might bring into there minds to profess
bondage to the beast, and to worship his Image. These two therefore after there
infinite abominations, at length being taken, are cast headlonge a live into a
lake that burns for ever with brymstone: that is, they are condemned to the
most grieuouse damnation of all, verily to be tormented with so much more
grieuouse torments, as they have excelled, other men in more haynouse sins.
This shall be the end of the tyranny of Antichrist.

Verse. 21. And the remnant were slain with the sword of him that sat upon the
horse, which sword proceaded out of his mouth and all the fowls were filled
with there flesh. etc.

ALthough a most sharp sentence be uttered upon the heads of this wicked
conspiracy against Christ, yet the members there of shall not escape for as
many either kings, or magistrates, as have made them selves ministers of the
fury of Antichrist, with all the rest of the men of what state or condition so
ever, which had rather yt Antichrist should reign then Christ: All they are
slain with eternal death by the sword of Gods word, which they would not
obey that they might live. And that they should not please them selves in there
multitude all the fowls of the air shall fill them selves even to satisfey
with there slain karkasses. This end, this Judgment tariethe for all the
Profane contemners of the Gospel, which the most merciful God turn from
us through his son Christ Jesus. Amen.

The twentye Chapter.
THe joining of this Chapter with the former vision shall seem somewhat more
obscure, except we repeat the matter further of and from the beginning. In
the beginning therefore of this vision is that Dragon ye great Devil brought
in, as the principal enemy of the Church, under whom afterward do war
Antichrist and his clergy, with the Princes and people, which obey them, the
damnation of all which was set for the next before in the end of the 19. Chap.
now therefore in good order follows the comdemnation of Satan himself, which
shall be in the last day of judgment. But because ye wickedness of ye devil
against Christ and his Church, extends more largely the^ which may be
contained in the tyranny of the pope or of the Church of Rome: he composeth a
short history of all his subtle practice and treachery, from the time that
Christ suffered unto the end of the world. Which is diligently to be marked,
least we fall into the dotage of the Chiliastes, if we think these thousand
years of which S. Ihon speaks to be begun and counted from the time that
Antichrist was overcome.

Verse. 1. And I saw an Angel come down from heaven having the key of the
bottomless pit and a great chain in his hand. etc.

THere remain as yet the torments which are to be laid on Satan which is
the head, and Prince of all the persecutions moved against the Church. First
therefore is described his wickedness, that we may know that he has deserved
the most sharp sentence of eternal damnation. For before the incarnation of
Christ, he seduced the whole world except a very few of the nation of the
Jews, into Idolatry and most abominable life. But at length an Angel came
down from heaven, which represents Christ, or at the least his minister,
which had the key to shut the bottomless pit, which was the prison in which
Satan should be shut up, and in his hand a great chain, with which the
devil should be bound, so long as he should be kept in prison so we see that
Satan is not only shut up in prison, but also bound with a chain that he
might not hurt. For so great a just and desire to hurt is even bred in him,
that unless he be cast into bounds, and prison he will always raise up some
tormoyles and troubles. But there is no cause why the elect should be afeard
of his tyranny, because Christ as often as he will thrusts him down into the
bottomless pit, and holds him bound both hand and foot with a great chain,
until he shall think good to send him forth to seduce the reprobate. For as
he does shut him up in the bottomless pit, whiles he provides for the salvation
of his own, so also he suffers him losed from his bounds to range, that he
may work at his pleasure in the wicked children of wrath and perdition, that
at length with just punishment they may be tormented with him for ever.

Verse. 2. And he took the Dragon that old Serpent which is the devil and
Sathanas, and he bound him a thousand years. etc.

WHen as the Devil had walked at liberty through all nations almost from the
beginning of the world, and had filled the whole world with all kind of
wickedness and heynouse sins, at length in the coming of Christ, which had
chosen to him self a Church and much people among the gentiles, his
licenciousnesse is bridled, and although he striued very much to get forth,
yea verily he endeavored if he could by any means overcome Christ him self, by
the Pharisees and high priests: yet he was caught although he be a great and
terrible Dragon, though he be a most ancient and subtle serpent, which before
had seduced all me^, howsoever he became a sclanderouse reprocher of Christ and
his doctrine, and a most bitter enemy, he was caught I say and bound with that
great chain of sincere doctrine, that he can not range abroad at liberty as
he was wont. That S. John sets him forth with sundry titles, he did it
not only for this, that we may know whom he understands by the great
Dragon, but also he marketh him with these names, that we may learn to know
his manners and subtle nature, and learn to eschew and take heed of them. As
we have expounded before in 12. Chapter. And also in this place he recites hi^
diverse names, that we might understand, that although he be an artificer of a
thousand subtilties, and like proteus could transform him self in a hundred
shapes, yet he could not avoid this purpose of Christ, but that he should be
taken and cast into bounds. But the time which here is compassed in the space
of a thousand years, in which the Devil should be kept bound in prison, does
signify a long time, and uncertain to men. In which space of time the pure
doctrine of the Gospel should florishe in the world, and many men out of all
nations should be taken into the eternal inheritance of Christ and we see
that almost by the space of a thousand years after Christ some light of
sincere, doctrine remained in the world, at the least many did consent upon
the points of Christian religion which were chief and most necessary to
salvation: until at length the doctrine of Antichrist being brought in, of
merits, of satisfactions, of the sacrifice of the mass and other monsters,
the only foundation of faith and free Justification of faith was taken away.
In that whole space of time therefore, the power of satan was bound, so long
as by faith in the merits of Christ alone, the way was open for men to heaven.
And we must note that satan is said to be bound, and shut in prison, so long
as he does not seduce the greatest multitude to eternal destruction. For he
wrought in ye reprobate, all the time of those thousand years in which he was
bound, but because he could not wast the whole world together or the greatest
multitude thereof he is said to be shut up in the bottomless pit and bound
with a great chain.

Verse. 3. And he cast him into the bottomless pit, and he shut him up, and
sealed the door upon him. etc.

THe Angel cast Satan being taken and bound into the deep bottomless pit,
and after when the door of the prison was shut and locked, he printed the seal
of God upon the same, that no man should be so bold as to open or unlock it.
The similitude is taken of the costume of Princes, which shut those into the
innermost dungeonse of the prisons, whom they will keep in the strayghtest
ward, and then they seal the door with there own seal. In that Satan
needs so great enclosures that his wickedness might be restrained, we must
acknowledge, the desire and study wherewith he burns to do hurt, and the
nature of those men, which in continual desire of hurting resemble there
father the devil. And moreover that the rage of the devil should be
restrained with many fetters it was acceptable to the faithful, which desired
to have the kingedome of Christ spread furthest abroad.

That he should deceive the people no more till the thousand years were
fulfilled. etc. Nothing is more grieuouse to Satan, then if he can not work
his malice and fury, that he might draw the greatest company of men to
eternal torments, or at the least if he cannot bring some hurt or
discomoditie to the Church. The whole legion of devils besoughte Christ, that
he would not command them to descend into the deep, but at the least that
he would suffer them to rage upon the swine: Luke 8. Whereupon we understand
that satan is then cast into the bottomless pit, when the power of hurtinge
is taken from him. What a great torment therefore was it to Satan when he was
constrained to remain bound, for so long a time in the bottomless pit. But
it seems against reason, that ye devil was bound for a thousand years,
s^einge there were never more greuouse persecution moved against the Church,
then in the ages next after Christ, but we must note, that Satan was not
let to rage in cruelty upon the bodies but that he should not seduce the
nations as he was wont in time paste, to Idolatrye, and all kind of wickedness
which is to be refered to the great multitud of the elect, which were called
in the time of those thousand years under the Gospel, and have stood
constant in the faith of Christ in all adversities.

For after that he must be losed for a little season. etc. When as now the
pestilence of the Mahumet, and the Pope waxed strong and increased. He must be
losed for a little time, that he may seduce the nations into Idolatrye, as he
seduced the whole world before the birth of Christ. For after a thousand
years whiles the turks in the East, and the papists in the west possessed
all with there dotages, we may rightelye conjecture that Satan was losed out
of prison. But this evil shall not endure long, for the end of the world is
at hand, and the truth of the gospel being restored again to the world,
has disclosed the falshods of both the enemies.

Verse. 4. And I saw seats, and them that sat on the^, and judgment was given
unto the^, and I saw the souls of them y^ were beheadded for the writings of
Jesus, and for ye word of God and which did not worship the beast, neither his
image neither had taken his mark upon their foreheads or on their h^nds, and
they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years. etc.

IT is described in this Verse how blessed the estate of the faithful was for
the thousand years space, in which Satan is shut up in prison. Verelye
that all difficulties being overcome, yea even the fear of death also they
did happily depart unto heaven. For when as all wicked and carnal affections
are mortified, they are regenerate into a new life, so that they would not
refuse to be smitten with are, rather then they would deny the testimony of
Jesus or the the word of God, or would submit them selves by any means to
the tyranny of Antichrist. Therefore being delivered from the calamities of
this miserable life by the first death which is of the body, and being taken
up into heavenly joys, they live still and reign with Christ through the
whole thousand years, that is, so long as Satan shall remain in bonds,
not that after the thousand years they shall dye or shall cease to ra^gne
with Christ, but that he might express to how great a benefit it was to
the godly, that the devil was kept in prison for so long a space of time,
when as in the mean while a great multitude of the elect, not seduced by his
illusions, do pass this mortal life in hope, and being unclothed of there
bodies do pass the rest of the time in blessed happiness. In that he saw
thrones set for them being received to judgment, he does sufficientlye
declare, that the happiness which the blessed spirit of the dead inioye shall
endure even to the end of the world that then even as members joined to there
head, they may exercise the judgment of the world with Christ as Paul
witnisseth, that we shall judge the world and the Angels first Corinthians.
6.

Verse. 5. But the other of the dead men did not live against until the
thousand years were finished, this is the first resurrection. etc.

Like as he set forth in the verse goinge next before the state and condition
of the godly for the thousand years space. So in this verse he describes
the state of the wicked namelye yt they were dead in whom Christ lived not,
neither should they be raised up from the death of ye body into blessed life,
but should remain dead those whole thousand years, as well in body as in
soul: not yt there soul shall perish with ethre body, but that having died the
first death which is of the body, they should also be punnished with the
second death which is eternal damnation of the soul. For this is the
first resurrection, whereby the souls being raised up from sin, which
bringethe forth death, we rise into a new life, which being begun in
this world, after ye dissoluing of this body receives great increase, and at
length in the second resurrection after the restoring of the body shall be
fully perfected.

Verse. 6. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first resurrection: for
on such the second death shall have no power: but they shall be the priests of
God, and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand year. etc.

HE magnifieth the happiness and holiness of those whose part is in the
first resurrection, which is the regeneration of the soul from sin, because
on those the second death which is eternal torment of body and soul, has
no power and as Christ said before, he that shall overcome shall not be hurt
of the second death, but they shall be priests to god and Christ, which being
sanctified shall never cease to offer up the sacrifice of thanckes giving, and
they shall reign with Christ a thousand years, whiles the wicked shall not
rise from that death of the soul until they shall be judged to eternal
torments, We are taught here that they, which by the spirit of Christ are
regenerate into a new life, are delivered from the fear of eternal
damnation, neither can they ever fall from the grace of god into destruction,
but he which has begun the work of regeneration, the same shall make
perfect the same to eternal felicity.

Verse. 7. And when the thousand years are expired Satan shall be losed out of
his prison. etc.

WHen the time appointed of god shall come, in which the world for
vnthanckefullnesse and contempt of the gospel, deserved to fall into the old
errors, the power of seducing which before was taken away from Satan, is
permitted again unto him that he may draw almost the whole world with his
wonted deceyptes and illusions into false and adulterate religion. Truly this
is a horrible example of gods seuerite and sharpness, and this also Saint
Paul foretold should be, that GOD would send the strength and efficacy of
error upon those which despised the light of the Gospel. There is no cause
therefore why we should marvel if two most absurd and gross errors, the
one of Mahumete the other of the Pope took so great increase in the world,
seeing when the devil is losed all kind of evil must needs flow and
abound.

Verse. 8. And shall go out to deceive the people which are in the four
quarters of the earth. etc.

Saint Ihon says that Satan is sent forth by the certain and
determinate counsel of God, not that he might seduce and deceive some one
nation, but all nations which are in the 4. quarters of the earth, that he
might compel them to fall away from the faith of Christ which they professed
in mouth only, to Turkishe and Popish superstitions, so that very few
should remain through the whole world, which should embrace the true
Gospel of Christ and retain the purity of doctrine.

Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battaylle, whose number is as the
sand of the Sea. etc. There is no doubt, but that by these he means, the
privy, and open enemies of Christian religion, that is all his adversaries of
what sort so ever, for Gog, signifies covered, Magog uncovered. For the Pope
couerethe his wickedness under pretense of the name of Christ, when as he is
his sworn enemy, but Mahumete blasphemethe the name of Christ openly,
although under these names, all other Heresies, which are in the world are
comprehended. And there remains a notable clear Prophecy concerning these
enemies of the Church and there subversion, Ezekiel. 38.39. For there the Lord
commands the prophet that he should prophecy against Gog, and the land of
Magog, the Prince and head of mischief, and tuball. And we learn by the psalm
120. yt mischief signifies Arabia and tuball is said to have dwelt in
Italye. Magog gave the Original to the Scythians, these were all the
posterity^ of Iapheth. And we see that the chief enemies of the Church took
there beginnge of these regions. Mahumet of Arabia, the Pope of Italy, and
Othomannus the turk of Scythia. The devil must coth all these being seduced
into errors, into battle to be fought against Christ and his Church. And he
prepares to him self an army of those, whose number is infinite, even as the
sand of the sea. So great is the multitude of the wicked, which war under
Satan. Now let the papists go and boast of there multitude, yea we will
reckon the Turks, and all Mahumetistes with them, by whose access they shall
get nothing else but that all of them being compact together into one
company, they may be the army of the devil.

Verse. 9. And they went up into the plain of the earth and compassed the
tents of the saints about, and the beloved city but fire came down from
God out of heaven and devoured them. etc.

HE expresses in this verse how great the multitude of them was, in that there
army, covered the whole upper face of the earth, and they compassed the tents
of the saints about, that is the Church, and they beseiged the beloved city
the heavenly Jerusalem with a most straight sege. Here we are taught into how
narrow a room the Church should be brought, when as the army of the devil,
covered almost the whole earth, and compassed in on every side the tents of
the saints which possess only a small space of ground, with the
furniture of Satan. For we see that from the East the turk hangs over
Christendom, in the west the tyranny of the Roman Antichrist does raunge,
so that on either side they have beseiged the beloved city. But let us be of
good comfort that are beseiged, for God which loves our city will not
suffer it to be delivered up into the power of the enemies. Although gog and
magog assault the camp of the Saints with all there engines: yet the Lord
of hosts stands on our side, and compasses us on every side with so
deep a trenche that they can never spoil or drive us out of our camp. But
at length a horrible, sudden and unlooked for, destruction, as it were fire
from heaven upon Sodoma and Gomorra, shall apprehende them and consume them to
ashes: This shall be the end of Gog and Magog, which that the Lord would
vouchsafe to bring spedely, we ought vehemently to desire of him with ardent
prayers.

Verse. 10. And the devil that received them was cast into a lake of fire and
brimstone, where the beast and the false prophet shall be tormented day and
night for evermore, etc.

NOW at length comes the last damnation of the devil. For after that he
has persecuted the Church by all ways and means he could, as it is declared
in the 12 chapter, raisinge up against her the Roman Antichrist and his
clergy, settinge a whorishe Church against her, and at length also stirringe
the hatred of the Mahumetistes against her, last of all he is apprehended and
together with the beast and the false prophet shall be condemned to eternal
torments. This shall be his reward for so great labors, which although
Satan know well enoughe, yet he releaseth no part of his madness, wherewith
he rages against the godly, but how much nerer he is to extreme tormente, so
much more he waxes mad against the Church. But Christ when the faithful
are taken unto him, shall condemn him, as the head and aucthore of all
wickedness which flows in the world, together with his Angels, to be
tormented with the everlasting torments of hell. Then at the last, the
Church, when all enemies are overcome, even the devil, death and sin,
shall quietlye triumph for ever under Christ her King. In the mean time
whiles she as a pilgrim in earth, being sustained with the hope and
expectation of this happiness, with a quiet mind she suffers all adversities,
and despisinge the world she daily aspireth unto heaven.

Verse. 11. And I saw a great white throne, and one that sat on it, from whose
face fled away both the earth and the heaven and there place was no more
found. etc.

NOW he concludes this vision with a description of the last judgment for
though he were constreyned, often before to touch the same, yet he reserved
and kept the full form of it into this last place. He seethe therefore a
throne of wonderful greatensse, by the whiteness of the same testifyinge the
synceritie of the Judge, and the Iudgem^nte. For there shall be no corruptinge of
Judgment in that tribunal seat, no accepting of persons, bribes shall there
nothing preuarie, love or hatred shall do nothing, but he shall moderate all
things by Justice. Verelye the Judge that is our Lord Jesus Christ is of so
great Majesty, that the heaven and earth fly from his presence for by his
coming he shall change the whol^ face or shape of the world. To this we
may refer the darckeninge of the Sun and Moon, the shakinge of the powers
of heaven, the horrible roringe of the Sea, and the trembling of all creatures.
So great is the horror of that Judgment, that men being discoraged they
shall be tormented with fears of him before he shall come. What shall be the
terror therefore, when the Judge shall sit upon the tribunal seat. But that
he denies that the place of heaven and earth shall be found, he does not
understand that the creature shall be utterly abolished, but that this old
form shall be put of, that it may have a new, and a far more perfect put
upon it, as we read Psalm 102. and 2. Pet. 3.

Verse. 12. And I saw the dead both small and great stand before god and the
books were opened, and an other book was open which is the book of life, and
the dead were judged of those things which were written in the books
according to there deeds. etc.

FIrst of all is expressed the severity of the Judgment, that none either
great or small can fly or eschew it, for we must all appear before the
tribunal fear of Christ. Afterward the books shall be opened, which are the
consciences of every one. The^ shall hypocrisy nothing prevail, or feigned
holiness, when as the conscience being opened, every one shall receive sentence
by it, such as by his own Judgment he has deserved. For that which the
Poet says is always most true: this is the first reuengemente; that no
guyltie person is absolved, although he be his own Judge, howsoever unlawful
favor may deceive the Judgment of the praetor. But in the mean time what
salvation shall there be for the elect? For they also are gyltie to them
selves of many sins and sometime also of great and heynouse offenses. But
John answers this doubt; shewinge that an other book was brought forth
and opened, which is called the book of life, whereby it was manifest whom
God had before ordained to life, by his unchangeable decree. Here upon
dependethe the salvation of the elect, which they obtained by faith in the
worthiness and merits of Christ in whom there election is founded, and being
formed into new creatures by the grace of the holy ghost, they make the same
manifest in the world by good works, to the glory of his name. Therefore of
the works which every one has done in the flesh, Judgment shall be given
upon him, his own conscience being witness. But unfitly shall any man move the
question in this place, what kind of Judgment infantes shall have, which
have done neither good or evil. For these things perteyne to the instructing
of those which are grown to ryper age, and are to be understood of there
Judgment, for in those which have done noe works, only election or
reprobation shall have place.

Verse. 13. And the sea gave up her dead, and death and hell gave up there dead,
which were in them, etc.

Because by sundry kinds of death men are taken out of this life, as some
being drowned in the sea, some consumed with fire, some cut in pieces, it
seems incredible to flesh, that all shall rise again after the same manner.
Therefore Ihon reherseth as it was showed to him in vision, that the sea, death
and hell gave up those to Judgment, which were found dead in them. Whereby he
signifies that no man of what death soever he has died, shall perish, but
all and every one, by the voice of Christ our savior after the last trumpe
and the voice of the Archaungell, shall be raised up to Judgment with their
bodies. It is certain therefore that neither the bodies of the godly are
corrupted into nothing, neither that the karkasses of the wicked shall escape
torments.

And they were Judged every man according to his works. etc. Because nothing
is more easy to hypocrites, then to feign holiness in words, he repeatethe
again that every man shall be Judged by his works, his own conscience, which
is like to a thousand witnesses, alowinge the sentence as Just.

Verse. 14. And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire, this is the
second death. etc.

IN the words of death and hell, is the figure Metonomia signifying those
which were guyltie of the Judgment of death and hell. For the reprobate,
which by the testimony of there own conscience, are damned for there sins,
without all delay are cast into that fiery lake, that is into eternal
torments. And he affirms this to be the second death, when as the soul
having put on the body, shall be tormented in eternal torments of hell with the
devil and his Aungells. Let us do our endeavor therefore, that we may be
made partakers of the first resurrection, least we be thrown headlong into the
second death.

Verse. 15. And whosoever was not found written in the book of of life was
cast into the lake of fire. etc.

Now he expounds more plainly what he understands, by death and hell,
which he said should be cast into the lake, that is even all the reprobate,
which are not predestinate in Christ to eternal life. All these by the most
Just Judgment of God, although secret to us, are cast into the lake which
burns with fire and brymstone. For the elect only are free from this
damnation. We se here that sanctification follows election, the reprobate
remain in there corruption. For all are Judged according to there works, and
yet the elect only are saved, and all the reprobate are condemned to eternal
torment. As many therefore as have the spirit of election given us, let us
study to make the same firm and sure to our selves by good works, which god
has prepared that we should walk in them, to the praise and glory of his
name, to whom be given all honor and power for ever.

The twentye and one Chap.
NOW Follows the last vision of this revelation which is contained in the two
chapters which remain, in which is described the restoring of all things with
the happy estate and condition of the Church after ye resurrection.

Verse. 1. And I saw a new heaven and a new earth. etc.

HE propheciethe that the happy renewinge of the whole world shall be, when
Christ the redeamer of the elect shall once appear. And he alludeth to those
things which Esaye prophecieth Chap 65.66. Concerning the restoration of
the new heaven and the new earth. For as by the fall of man the whole world
fell in to ruin and destruction, so also with the restoring of mankind, the
other creature shall be repaired. Wherefore the^ do we so much esteem this world
which waxes old, and almost rotten for age, and not rather with daily prayers
earnestly groan for yt new heaven and new earth, in which righteousness does
dwell. For the first heaven and the first earth were passed away. etc. All
things are so subject to vanity and corruption, in this heaven and this
earth, in which we now live, that they must of necessity be abolished, yt
there may be place for the new heaven, and the new earth. Not yt the creature
shall be brought to nothing, but because yt glorious restoring into the liberty
of the sons of God, for which the creature mourns with us. Romans 8. shall be
as it were a new creation of heaven and earth.

And there was no more sea. etc. Nothing yt is terrible, or deformed such as
the sea seems to us, shall be seen in that blessed renouatio^ of the world.
Nothing which shall sever the elect dwelling as it were in one city, nothing
shall be to them any stop of passage, or any danger in there way. But it is
impertinent to inquire here, what shall be done with the elemente of water, when
it is not ye purpose of the holy ghost to describe the substance or matter
whereon the world renewed shall consiste but the qualities.

Verse. 2. And I Ihon saw the holy City new Jerusalem come down from God
out of heaven. etc.

NOt only the reparatio^ of the whole world shall be happy, but principally ye
state and condition of the Church shall be the most blessed of all, as for whose
cause the rest of the world shall be made partaker of the blessedness. And her
state is compared to the most holy city new Jerusalem, garnished with a new and
wonderful buylding, whose buylder is God him self, whose foundations are laid
from heaven, which does so much exceade ye glory and beauty of that old
Jerusalem, as it has more noble beginnings. For yt Jerusalem was set in an
vneue^ place, of ye earth and not well watered with springes, first builded of
certain profane Iebusites, so often vanquished and at length rased up from the
foundatio^s and made even with the ground. But this most holy city has god
for her buylder, and she came down from heaven, bringing all ye bewty of
heaven with her. Let us rejoice that we are citizens of ye city, which s. Ihon
so constantly affirms, that he saw, that we may understand that it is now
buylte already least after the manner of the common sort, which thinks the
end of all things to come to be doubtful and uncertain, because we see it
not, we should less believe that it is prepared.

Prepared as a bride trimed for her husband. He exposideth in what the
blessedness of ye saints does chiefly consist, namely yt they may be
perfectly joined to god, that the bride may come into the imbracinges of ye
bridegrom, yt the members may be joined to the head, yt his servants may be
received into the joy of there Lord. But the Church has not this decking of a
bride wherewith she comes so beautiful into the presence of god, of her self,
but she boroweth all her righteousness, wisdom and holiness of Christ* we which
ornaments being garnished, she excels all queen's in glory and beauty. And
until yt most renowned day of yt marriage shall come a great part of her does
wander as a stranger here in earth, which notwithstanding does possess these
dowries in the mean time by faith, but at length she shall perfectly obtain
the^ for ever.

Verse. 3. And I herd a great voice out of heaven, saying. etc.

AS often as it is said in yt scriptures yt a voice is heard without an aucthor,
it is met as we have noted often before, yt it proceaded immediately from the
majesty of god it self, and is to be received of us with great attention. And in
this place, the great voice, that is, a loud sounding voice, sent from heaven
ought to stricke all our senses, and frame them to a diligent marking.

Behold the tabernacle of God is with men. etc. Although the old tabernacle
was but a shadow, yet it was said to be the greatest glory of Israel, and it
was reputed of all the godly insteede of an incomparable treasure. Which not
withstanding was scarcely his footestole as Jeremy calls it lament 2. But
Christ has given much more excellent signs of his presence in the Church,
even as he promised that he would be with us even to the end of the world, but
then shall be indeed the fruit of joining together when God, will pitche his
eternal tabernacle with men.

And he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people. etc. Although the
tabernacle and arcke of the couenaunte were among the Israelites yet god
dwelled not always with them, for as much as he was provoked to anger with
their heynouse sins, as the Psalmist does singe, he often forsook the
habitatio^ which he had chosen among men. But when these times shall come there
shall be no sins, nor any other thing that shall separate us from the eternal
fellowship and cohabitation of God, for we shall be his peculier people, whom he
will always acknowledge for his, and we likewise, shall cleave wholly unto him.

And God him self shall be with them, and be there God. etc. There is a great
Emphasis almost of every word, God him self says he shall be with men, and
shall be there most loving God. The things therefore which it is mere, for God
to bestow upon those whom he holds most dear the same ought the faithful
to look for at his hands. Now great and how magnificall the things are
which God will grant to those men, whom he shall vouchsafe his presence,
and whose god he shall not be ashamed to be counted, can not be comprehended in
the thought of man, nor can not be expressed with the tongue or speech of
any man.

Verse. 4. And God shall wipe away all tears from the eyes. etc.

THe fear of evils aproching which does trouble men that are subject to
death, even in there greatest gladness, shall be furthest from the most happy
condition of the blessed ones. For no sorrow, no grief shall come upon there
happiness, by which they should less have the truitio^ of sownd and perfect
joy for ever. For god shall wipe away all tears from there eyes. For he shall
fill them being delivered out of the greatest miseries and calamities, with an
inspeakable joy of comfort and consolation. And there shall be no more death.
What soever evil sin brought in with it, all that same, when sin is abolished
shall be taken away. Therefore when as death is the reward of sin, it shall
have no place in those which by Christ have over come sin. For Christ
triumphed over death not for him self but for his chosen, they therefore
which shall be partakers of the resurrection from death by Christ, death shall
no more reign over them. Therefore they shall inioye immortal glory, and
felicity, whosoever they be which are called to the partakinge of his kingdom.

Neither sorrow. etc. The benefit of drawinge ou^e the life into eternity
should not be so great, if it should be often affected with mourning and the
bitterness of sorrow, as this our frail life is. Therefore the heavenly
voice does express by name, that all sorrow and mourning are utterly banished
from that life, least there should be any thing at all, which might spot or
darcken the glory of eternal felicity.

Neither crying. etc. The bitterness of sorrow does often times wring out of
us, beside tears, complaining voices also, and lamentable wepinges. Like as it
is given of nature, to all living creatures at the least, which utter any
voice, yt when they are grievously hurt, or do feel peine: by and by they send
forth miserable howlings, by which with out doubt they lame^tably crave ye help
of god after their manner, for their sorows. But the^ when all cause which may
bring sorrow and grief shall be altogether taken away, there shall no where be
heard weping, cries, and lamentable, howlinges, but of all creatures, that is
of as many as shall be received into the gloriouse liberty of the soones of God
there shall be one only voice of ioyfulnes praising god for his infinite
benefits, and rejoicing one with an other for the^ selves.

Neither shall there be any more pain. We attain nothing in this life that is
preciouse, without labor and grief and this is a part of the punishment, in
the sweat of thy brows thou shalt eat thy bread: but in that life there
shall be in a readiness, whatsoever things they be that may adorn our
felicity. Yea verelye the infinite liberality of God shall minister
perpetually all things in flowing abundaunce to us resting in quiet. But it
seems absurd, seeing God be fore man fell, would have him exercised in
dressinge the garden that he should not wax slothful by idleness, that
now when men are restored into a more higher degree of happiness, all labor
and care of work is taken from them. But it is easy to answer, that all
labor which shall bring ircksomnesse, weariness or grief, shall be utterly
abolished. But yet the blessed shall not live in idleness or sleep. But to
demand what shall remain for them which they may do when they have put on
there bodies, is superfluouse, seeinge it is not defined in the scriptures.

For the first things are passed. etc. The reason why none of those evils
which he has reckened up shall remain, is, because the first things, that is
all those old things are abolished, and in the world renewed none of these
shall be found. For like as with sin and for sin, all those plagues entered
into the world, to revenge the ungodliness of men, so when the corruptible
figure of this world shall pas away, they also shall be destroyed, and shall
not find any place in the blessedness to come.

Verse. 6. And he that sat upon the throne said, behold I make all things
new, etc.

THat there might be a full certentie of all these things to the faithful
God him self is brought in sittinge upon the throne of his majesty,
publishing a decree, concerning the renewinge of the world. Behold says he I
make all things new. That there should be no fear of those old evils, which
now cover the whole earth, he promisethe not only that those old things
to are passed away, but that he will create all things now.

And he said unto me write, for these words are faithful and true. etc.
Because this consolation which the remembrance of the happiness to come does
bring forth, is especially necessary to the Church being miserablye afflicted
with sharp calamities, God does not only establishe this decree concerning
the restoring of the world, but commands the same also to be committed to
writing, that by readinge and hearing the same the afflicted consciences of
the Godly might draw out comfort, and for the greatenesse of the rewards
might strongely bear all labors, for there is nothing more certain then this
decree concerning the eternal blessedness and triumph of the godly, of
which all those shall be partakers after the resurrection, which now do fight
valiantly under the banner of Christ.

Verse. 6. And he said unto me it is done, I am Alpha and Omega the beginning
and the end. etc.

IT does even in this place sufficiently appear, how sure and perfect Christ
would have this consolation be to his, that by so many constante affirmations,
he establishes this his fixed and immovable decree. It is done says he, as
if he should say, there is now no place left for doubting, for this felicity
is as suer, which ye now possess by hope, as if ye held it in your hands.
For the unchangeable and vnreuocable sentence of God, which can never be
broken, is passed upon it. It is also to be referred to this that he says,
that he is Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, that is, the eternal
God, whose stable and through all ages immovable will has decreed this,
which can neither deceive nor be deceived, whose word, though heaven and earth
should pass, does never fail, but indureth for ever. Here therefore the
faithefull, may atteyne most plenteouse matter of consolation as often as the
devil labors by his engines to overthrow there faieth, that lokinge to the
reward laid up for them in heaven, they may valiantly contemn all the vain
pompes, of the world. And may rather bear all labors, Crosses, reproaches,
with a quiet mind, for which so undoubted glory, blessedness and
everlasting felicity is laid up in heaven.

I will give to him that is a thurst of the well of the water of life freely.
etc. Because it is necessary ye ye minds of the godly should after a
wonderful manner be affected with the desire of this reward, neither can they
read or hear these things, but that by and by they thirst after most
earnestly, the most pleasant springes of eternal life. Behold Christ him
self meets them in the way that seek him, which liberallye profferrethe
drink to every one that thirsts out of the most clear founteyne of
eternal life. What wants therefore to the felicity of the saints? Of
which they shall freely be made obteyners if they be touched with a desire of
the same, here is no reason, or respect of merits, for eternal life is the
gift of God, not a reward due for works, but proceading of the infinite
liberality of him, which gives it. In the mean time here is the
slouthfullnesse and sluggishnesse of those condemned, which being wrapped in
the filthiness of this world, and more then droncken with worldly pleasures,
do never thirst after eternal life, but carelessly set at naught whatsoever
they hear out of the scriptures of paradise, of the new Jerusalem, of the
founteyn of the water of life, and such like rewards. These because they do
not thirst for the water of life, shall drink of the pure unmixed wine of
Gods wrath, and as the bound slaves of the world and the Devil, they shall be
subject to eternal torments.

Verse. 7. He that overcomes shall inherit all things, and I will be his God
and he shall be my son. etc.

THat we might not think that these ample rewards of happiness are set
forth to the idle and sluggish, he shows that we must fight and that
manfully, so that we may become conquerers, and then the inheritance of all
things, shall be ours by the testament of Christ, which he has sealed with his
blood. And if we be esteemed to be the soons of Abraham by faith, we shall be
appointed heirs of the new world with him, but that which extolleth all
things, we shall take possessetion of the inheritance of the sons of God.
For we ought not to look for a less ample and rich inheritance, then it
pleases God to assign to those, whom he has adopted in his only begotten
for we shall be the heirs of God and fellow heirs of Christ.

Verse. 8. But the fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers,
and whoremongers, and sorcerers and idolators, and all liers, shall have there
part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second
death. etc.

THat the wicked should not always securely please them selves in their
filthiness and conte^ne all friendly admonitions he denounces horrible and
eternal pains unto them who shall not only have this intolerable
punnishements to be shut out from this happiness, but shall moreover be cast
into the most grievous torments of hell. But he reckenenth up only certain
kinds of wicked me^, yet he co^prehendeth under these all kinds of iniquity,
he calls those fearful which fear me^ more the^ god, which are ashamed of
ye name of Christ through ye fear of those evils which men can lay upon the^,
which if they be ye greuosest they bring but the death of the body only, in
the mean time, they are not afraid to betray his cause, which can throw both
body and soul into hell fire. He calls those unbelieving which will not
embrace the doctrine of the gospel, neither will they sustain to lose things
present for things to come, they count it for a fable whatsoever is spoken of
eternal life or of Christ ye aucthor thereof. Those may be called cursed or
abominable, which having shaken of all ye yoke of ye fearee of god, do ru^ne
headelonge into all wickedness, as though they did all things in despite of
God. They also which defile themselves with Murders. Adultries,
inchauntementes, and other wickedness, and do not in due time repent of there
sins, are thrust down into the same dungeon of torments. And idolaters also
which worship the corruptible creature insteede of the incorruptible creator,
shall suffer the due punnishementes for their heynouse sins, unless they
spedely repent. Lastly all kind of liars but chiefly h^pocrites, which with
the fained visor of holiness think they can deceive both god and men, shall
have there portion in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone which is
the second death, which eternal torments of body and soul do accompanye.

Verse. 9. And there came unto me one of the seven Angels. etc.

Hitherto he has generally described the condition of the blessed after the
resurrection now he shows perticulerlye by what visions he was taught these
things.

Which had the seven vials full of the seven last plagues, and he talked with
me saying. etc It is not absurd that the same Angel is both a minister of
Gods wrath upon the reprobate and also appointed a mesenger of consolation to
the godly. One of these seven Angels also showed the damnation of the great
whore Babylon in the 17. chap. one also of the number does bring the
description of the chaste spouse of Christ new Jerusalem, but whether it be the
same that the former was it nothing perteyneth to us to know.

Come I will show thee the bride the lambs wife. God in time past betrouthed
the Church to his son Christ and now she being garnished with all her or
nature she prepares her self to the celebration of the marriage, that Christ
may lead her being his wife into his fathers house, that is into the
heavenly glory that she may enjoy all the goods of her husband which as yet
being but a spouse she possesses only by faith,

Verse. 10. And he carried me away in the spirit to a great and an high
mounteyne. etc.

THey must be carried in mind far from the center and lowest face of the
earth into an exceeding high mounteyne, which shall be beholders of this most
sweet vision, together there with John shows that he was taken up into an
high place and set a lofte, that from thence as it were from a beholding
place, he might in contemplation see the whole figure of new Jerusalem her
situation and placinge.

And he showed me the great city holy Jerusalem. etc. Although Babylon were
the greatest of all cities in earth that is the Church of Antichrist, and was
proud in her own greatness: but Jerusalem was small and despised, as being a
stranger in this world, yet after the renewing of the world, when all her
members are gathered together in one, she is an ample and a magnificall city
to behold. This is the first praise of the City taken of the greatness,
that with her largenes she sufficethe to conteyne all her Citizens, with a
commodiouse habitation for every one. Secondelye he calls it holy, not
only in respect of the profane Whore, and vnpu^e City Babylon, but also in
respect of her self whiles she was a Pilgrim in earth. For then she shall be
altogether beautiful without any spot or uncleanness from which perfection she
is now far and much distance. She is called Jerusalem, for the noble
promises sake, which remain as concerning her perpetual induringe, the
accomplishement of which perteyneth to these times.

Descending out of heaven from God. etc. God himself the maker of all things
is the buylder of this city, which he has framed, and made not of some
elimentall, or matter which is under the moon, but has adorned her with
heavenly and external glory. This seat is prepared a rest of all laborers to
to the faithful, and after long and hard pilgrimages, a firm and stable
byding place is appointed.

Verse. 11. Having the glory of God. etc.

BY the shining and or nature it self this City does testify her buylder
for the wonderful glory of God shinethe in it. So in one word he uttered
her glory, which by it self to our tongues is unspeakable. But because our
understanding can not conteyne heavenly things any otherwise then by the
similitude of those things, which are set before our senses: he compares her
glory to those things, which are most preciouse and beautiful among men, as
to gold, preciouse stones and pearls.

And her shininge was like to a stone most preciouse, even a Jasper clear as
Cristall. etc. First we must note, that nothing can be found in this world
of such beauty and shining, that deserves but even to shadow the glory of
this city. Wherefore he does not simply compare her shininge to a Jasper
stone or a Cristall, but he feyneth a certyne stone containing the greatenesse
and the most beautiful variety, of the Jasper and most clear through
shininge of the Cristall, and that preciouse stone also which should be of
great price, when among men the Jasper, and Cristall are of small valewe. The
first sight therefore of this city, if we behold it is all at once, is most
acceptable with wonderful shininge. In which that greenesse of the Emeraulde,
distinguished with the most beautiful variety of colors, wherewithe, the
Jasper excellethe the Emerauld, does promise, a City always florishinge and
flowinge in the happy abundaunce of all things. But the clear and through
brighte shininge of the Cristall, takethe away all corners, of obscurity and
darckenesse, finallye all things, even at the first syghte appear beautiful
and preciouse.

Verse. 12. And had a great wall on high. etc.

Walls are not only fortresses, but also ornaments to the famosest Cities.
Well therefore is this City furnished, and beautifullye also adorned being
environed with a great and exceadinge high wall, which can both defend the
Citizens and easily keep of the enemies.

And had twelve gates, and at the gates twelve Angels, and the names written,
which are the names of the twelve Tribes of the children of Israel. etc. This
is praised in the Sytuation of Cities, if they be of hard entrance to the
eunemies, and easy passage in for the Citizens. Therefore as the wall
restrayneth the enemies from entringe in, so the twelve gates do receive the
Citizens and friends coming on every side. And that all fear should be
absente, least any injury might bruste open the gates, there are placed so
many Angels, every one the keeper of a Seueralle gate, which as they know,
all the Citizens, so they can espy and take all traiterouse adversaries, and
will let them from entering. Upon every gate also are graven the names of the
twelve tribes, as it were the ensigns, whereby is signified that all the
number of the elect being graffed into the body of Israel has the fredome of
this city, and ought not to be shut out from the free passage into the same

Verse. 13. On the east part there were three gates, and on the north side three
gates, on the south side three gates, and on the west side three gaets.

Like as Christ shall send forth his Angels which shall gather the elect from
all the quarters of the world. Math. 24. So the gates of this heavenly city
are open to receive her inhabitants coming from all parts. Therefore the
banishments which are furthest of are not to be feared, which the citisins of
the heavenly Jerusalem are often compelled to suffer in this earth. From all
quarters of the world, the way is open to those which return to there
country, from which they now wander as strangers. Neither skilleth not in
what corner of the world any of the godly do dwell, for he may prepare his
journey from every region of the world to this city and be admitted into it.

Verse. 14. And the wall of the city had twelve foundations and in them the
names of the lambs twelve Apostles. etc.

THe wall which compasses the whole circuit of the city, and fortifieth the
city on every side from the adversaries, that is that sacred bond of unity,
wherewith the whole Church is bound together, and is defended from the
pernicious danger, of errors and ignorance: it is builded upon, the
foundation of the prophets and Apostles Jesus Christ being the head corner
stone. For under the names of the Apostels, are comprehended also the names of
Prophets in as much as the doctrine of the prophets and of the apostels is the
self same, but the apostolical doctrine is much more evident and clear.
Therefore if we embrace the unity of the Church, it must be builded on these
foundacions, if we seek a defense or fortress against heresies, let this be
a brazen wall never to depart so much as an here bredeth from the foundacions
of the Apostels.

Verse. 15. And he that talked with me had a golden read to measure the city
with all, and the gates thereof and the wall thereof. etc.

WE saw other where that is to say in the eleventh Chapter, to what use the
Lord is said to measure any cities, those verily which he will build up and
not destroy. The Angel therefore with a goulden reed measured this City,
that he might signify that the Lord will build up the same for ever and we
must note, that in the eleventh Chapter Saint John is commanded to measure
the temple, and those that worship in it, because then the Lord used the
labor of men to build up his Church, but this heavenly city is builded only
of heavenly workmanship. The instrument which the Angel uses is a goulden
read whereby the excellency of the work and of the divine workemanshippe is
shadowed. And he repeateth all the several parts, as the city, the gates,
the wall, that nothing to her eternal continuance might seem to be neclected
or omitted.

Verse. 16. And the city lay four square, and the length is as large as the
breadeth of it, and he measured the city with the read, twelve thousand
furlonges: and ye length, the breadth and the heyght of it are equale. etc.

NOW follows the form and measure of the city, and the form thereof is most
fyrme and stable that is to say four square and cubycall, of which form some
of the old philosophers did think the earth to be, for the vnmoueablenes of
the same. Moreover we lea^ne by this form to Imagen nothing earthlye of this
city, for the heyghte of no city is so large as the length and breadth thereof.
The measure if we count the greatness, which is of twelve thousand furlonges,
that is 1500 miles commends the largenes and capacitye of the city, which is
great enough to the commodiouse dwellinge of all the citizens. If we consider
the proportion of the number, it clearly conteyneth that most bewtifull
concord in proportion which we noted very often to be expressed in the number
of twelve.

Verse. 17. And he measured the walls there of an hundredth forty and four
cubits, by the measure of man, that is of the angel, etc.

THe measure also of the heighte of the wall is to be noted, both in the
quantity of the largeness, and also of the number. For the great height
thereof declares, yt the defense thereof is safe enough against all the engines
of the adversaries. And the number 144. rises of twelve multiplied in it
self, of which what is to be gathered, we have expounded otherwhere, but in
this measure, least we should according to the small proportion of our
bodies, measure the cubits, Ihon shows that they were not the cubits of
men, but of the Angel, which appeared in shape of man, but he exceaded in
wonderful greatness and far above the stature of man.

Verse. 18. And the buylding of the wall of it was o^ Jasper. etc.

OF the twelve foundatio^s rises the buyldinge of the wall, which is to be
compared to the most beautiful shining and variety of the Jasper. For as the
Jasper co^teyneth in it self, the diverse colors of all preciouse stones, so
of those twelve most preciouse stones, which signify the doctrine of all the
Apostles is this wall builded, and seems to be compacte of a most beautiful
composition.

And the city was pure gold like unto clear glass. etc. The buyldinge of
the whole City is aunswerable to the beauty of the wall, which is all
shininge and glitteringe of most pure gold, and that which is more beautiful
shining through as most clear glass. No earthelye glory may be compared to
this. Let us therefore, neclectinge the color of this gross metal, which
among us is most preciouse fervently desire this beautiful riches for the
heavenly gold is through shininge.

Verse. 19. And the foundations of the wall of the city were garnished, with
all manner of preciouse stones, the first foundation was Jasper, the second of
Sapphire, the third of a Chalcedome, the fourth of an Emerale. etc.

WE know that the twelve preciouse stones in ye breast place of Aaron signified
so many tribes, but here we are before admonished, that the 12. foundations
have the names of the 12. Apostles written in them, which are ye 12.
Patriarchs of the Church, collected as well of the Jews as of the gentiles. In
these are ye sundry and preciouse gifts of God, but yet all applied to the
buylding up of one temple. If there be any thing therefore in preciouse
stones, that is shining and preciouse, if there be any beauty and virtue, they
shall all be found abundantly in these foundations. Men do greatly esteem small
pieces and sparcke of preciouse stones, therefore what glory of riches is
there where the greatest foundations of the walls, consist of whole preciouse
stones? But to reason more subtly concerning the colors and properties of
every of the preciouse stones, seems to me more curiouse then necessary. I
had rather therefore, briefly and with sobriety dispute of them all, then
subtly and curiousely.

Verse. 21. The twelve gates were twelve pearls, and every gate is of one
pearl, and the streate of ye city is pure gold as shining glass.

THe wonderful beauty of the gates is described which co^siste every of a
whole pearl how small a portion of these gates was that pearl of Cleopatra,
which was so much magnified among writers, if it should be compared to this
greatness. All these things perteyne to the describing of the magnificence
and beauty of this city, under the figure whereof is shadowed the most sweet
and blessed dwelling of the faithful with God, which shall be after the
resurrection. And the streat of the city is pure gold like shininge glass.
We may conjecture even by this, how great the beauty, and magnificence, how
great the riches, and how preciouse the furniture is of the other parts of
the city, that the very streat also of this city, is paued with that
heavenly and shining gold. He that shall conceive these riches in his mind,
shall easily contemn that small pomp of gold, preciouse stones and pearls,
which even the most mighty Emperors could ever show. Neither can poverty be
burdenouse to him, which is persuaded that so great tresures of riches are
laid up for him in heaven.

Verse. 22. And I saw no temple in it, for the Lord God almighty and the lamb
are the temple of it. etc.

THe temple of Salomo^, was the chief ornament of the old Jerusalem, but of
this heavenly Jerusalem, the temple is no part, but the whole City is the
temple of god and Christ. Yea verilye, God, and Christ are said to be the
temple thereof, whose presence is spread over the whole body of ye Church For
the holy religion and worship of God, is not shut into one corner or streat,
but over the whole city, which is the seat of God, and of our savior Christ.
Whom verily without the outward sacraments of his presence, cleauinge unto
him in very deed, we shall know not in a glass or a darcke speakinge but
manifestly, and perfectlye. And this place fights against those profane
dogs, which deny the divinity of our savior Christ. For he to whom
equal glory of the temple perteyneth, with God, can be none other but
eternal God, but Christ, with god almighty is the temple of the blessed
city, and to be worshipped with equal honor with the father, therefore he
is god almighty. Which thing also he performs eue^ now to his Church, being
a stranger as yet in earth, to which he has promised his presence eue^ until
the and of the world. For god dwells not in a temple made with hands, of
which sort was that temple of Salomo^, but spreads forth him self by the
presence of this goodness every where through ye whole Church. Although now
we see him imperfectly, yet when these times shall come, all signs being taken
away, and also all stoppes whatsoever, we shall see him as he is, and we shall
know him even as we are known of him.

Verse. 23. And this city has no need of the sun, neither of thy moon to
lighten it: for the glory of God did light it: and the lamb is the light of
it. etc.

WHat need should there be of the Sun, or the moon* where every one of the
Just shall shine as the sun, where (as I say) the glory of God, and the
brightenesse of Christ, shall show it self openly. Verelye the sun and the
stars, as it were through certain riftes of heaven, do exhibit unto us
scarcely the least sparks of Gods glory to be seen. And when as we shall be
partakers of Gods glory, the shining of the sun and the moon shall seem
darcke. And the holy ghost alludeth to those things which the prophet Esaias
in the 60. Chap. prophecieth concerning the renewing of the Church.

Verse. 24. And the people which are saved shall walk in the light of it. etc.

THe earthly Jerusalem did abhor and deteste all the gentiles as profane,
but the heavenly Jerusalem does acknowledge them for the Citizens being
purged and sanctified in Christ, and not vnwillinglye does admit them into
the partaking of her happiness.

And the kings of the earth shall bring there glory unto it. etc. Not only
the common people of the gentiles shabe received, but also kings them selves
shall lay down their glory in it, and shall live in equal condition with
the rest, not that they shall lose any part of there glory, for they shall be
all kings, which shall be partakers of the heavenly kingdom, but because, if
there be any glory in kings, the same shall be common to all the godly. Kings
and Magistrates therefore are not shut out of the heavenly city as the
Anabaptists do dream.

Verse. 25. And the gates of it shall not be shut by day: for there shall be no
night. etc.

THey live safe and without care in that city, for they fear no hurt of the
adversaries, which never shut the gates: and verily the cities in earth
except they be beseiged shut not the gates by day time, but in the night they
are locked for sudden assaults or invasions. But where there is no night but
continual day, there the gates are always open. For the Citizens being
furnished with the safegarde of the most mighty god fear not any beseiginge
or sod^yne assault.

Verse. 26. And the glory and honor of ye Gentiles shall be brought unto it.

THat we might want nothing which we desire, which seems pleasant or
gloriouse unto us in this life, he shows that all the glory of ye gentiles
shall be heaped up into this City. Not that any thing can be added to set forth
the glory of god which by it self is heighest and greatest, but because we
shall be heirs of the world and of all good things.

Verse. 27. And there shall enter into it none unclean thing, neither
whatsoever works abomination or lies: but they which are written in the
Lambs book of life. etc.

Although the gates are always open, yet there shall be no passage in for the
reprobate, because they defile all things with there profane touching, and
they which commit detestable abominatio^s, and rejoice in lies and
hypocrisy, but for the elect servants of god only, and they which are
sanctified in the blood of Christ, we may note here that sanctification can
not be separated from the eternal predestination of god. For they are not
written in the book of life, which always geuinge over them selves to lies
and wickedness, do never think of newness of life.

The twentye and two Chap.
THE perpetual stablenes of the eternal felicite of the blessed is described
in the beginning of this Chap. by the perpetual founteyn of the water of life
and by the tree of life bearing fruit every month. Then after followethe the
conclusion of this prophecy, to which authority is procured, both of the
person of him, which uttered it, as also of the person of him which received it.

Verse. 1. And he showed me a pure river of water of life, clear as Cristall
proceading out of the throne of God and of the lamb. etc.

THe state and co^ditio^ of man might have seemed blessed enough, when straight
after ye creation he was placed in ye garden of Ede^, which was most ple^tifull
in all delights of pleasure. But his banishment was more bitter the^ any death.
For to have been happy is most wretched. But after we shall be received into this
heavenly paradise, we shall never be cast down from ye top, or heighe of
blessedness, for neither sin, banishmente neither death, shall be to be
feared. Therefore saint Ihon says, that the Angel which uttered these
mysteries, showed him a most pure river of water of life clear as cristall
proceading out of the throne of God and the la^be that earthly paradise had a
river of most wholesome water, which should water the garden on every side, and
make it most fruitful of all things, which are required to a happy life
Gene. 2. Yet much more delectable and wholesome was that fountain of most pure
water which Ezechiell saw flowing out of the temple, in the Chapter 47. By
which the renewing of the Church is described But this river flowing out not
of the earth, nor out of the temple of Jerusalem, but out of the throne of God
almighty and of his Christ, does minister the joys of eternal life most
abundantly to the Citizens of the new Jerusalem. They therefore need never
fear death, which drink daily of the river of the water of life. Neither can
sorrow or any grief happen to those, which draw water out of the most pure
founteynes of this river, which are more clearer then any crystal. For the
pureness, and clearenesse of this water is opposed to those troublesome rivers
and muddie waters, of which wretched men do quench there thirst, and
afterward are subjected to sundry calamities and diseases. For nothing that
is pure or sincere is bred in the earth. Would God therefore we would contemn
the muddie and unpleasant waters of this world, whereby with greater and
feruenter desire, we may pantinglye breathe after the heavenly waters, even
like the heart, which David speaks of, boylinge with the heat of the sun,
with runninge and poison. Moreover when as this water is said to flow out of
the throne of god and Christ, we are admonished that eternal life does flow
unto us from god alone, being reconciled unto us by Christ. Moreover the
madness of the Arrians is abundantlye confuted, which envy Christ equal
dignity with the father, when as here there is said to be the self same
throne of god the father and of his son Christ, wherefore there is the same
glory, majesty and power, for the throne is a sign of the glory and
majesty of God.

Verse. 2. In the midst of the streate of it and of either side of the river
was the tree of life which bare twelve manner of fruits and gave fruit every
month. etc.

IN the earthly paradise, there was one only tree of life in ye midst of the
garden which was a sacrament and pledge of blessed and eternal life, if they
should stand in the obedience of God and when man was cast out of the garden,
together he was deprived of ye sign of eternal life. Genesis 3. But after he
shall be received into yt heavenly blessedness, he shall eat of ye fruit of the
tree of life for ever. For to all the citizens of new Jerusalem, access shall be
open to ye tree of life, which shall spring forth most happily, not in one
corner only of the city, but in ye midst of the streat and of either side of
the river. And least we should fear the course of winter and summer, such as
is with us, every month shall be autumn, and shall yield and minister the
abundaunce of most sweet fruits. Also if variety have any pleasure in it, it
shall be so great, that no lothinge or weariness of the meat, can never come
upon them for every month shall abound with new delights of diverse and
sundry fruits.

And the leaves of the wood served to heal the gentiles. etc. There is no doubt
but that this tree does represent Christ, by whose virtue all ye wou^des and
diseases of ye gentiles are healed. But it is worthy y^ considering, how great
force there is in ye fruit it self to life everlasting, when as ye leaves of
the tree would suffice to heal so manifold and those so deadly diseases, of
ye gentiles. But wherefore are ye leaves attributed to ye healing of ye gentiles
rather then the Jews, when as all have perished alike, and have need of
medicine? It is certain that the first place is always given to the Jews,
for the covenant GOD made with Abraham, whom nevertheless the Gentiles
follow in there order. For Christ is the common salvation to all men,
although in the first place to the Jews and then to the gentiles. And it
shall not unaptly agree, if we say that the leaves of the tree are taken for
the hope of eternal life, which we conceive by the preachinge of the Gospel.
For as leaves and flowers which never fall nor fade, do promise timely
fruits, so by the faith of the Gospel, we have the most certain hope of
eternal life, whose most abundant fruit we shall receive, when as that
redeamer of ours shall appear. And Saint Ihon alludethe to the prophecy of
Ezechiel Chapter 47. As we said before. Who is able to comprehend in his
mind, but even the thousand part of this happiness of the blessed Citizens?
If there be any delights of the city, they inhabit a city most abundant of
all pleasures, if there be any pleasure of the country, in the midst of the
city, the streams of the founteynes, and most acceptable shadows of the
woods delight the mind. That whatsoever the Poets have feigned of the Gardens
of the Hesperides, or of the Elisean, yea if it were true, yet it deserves not
to be called a shadow of this felicity. Therefore that must needs be an Iron
breast, which is moved with no desire of the same.

Verse. 3. And there shall be no more curse. etc.

THe most miserable curse of the whole world, followed shortly after the
most blessed state and condition of man in the earthly paradise so that the
highest felicity, was changed so cleanly into extreme calamity: but in the
heavenly paradise, me^ need not any more to fear any curse, which should
trouble the state of the blessedness. The godly therefore shall have perfect
and perpetual joy. Moreover it is manifest, what horrible cursinges the law
thundreth out against the transgressors thereof yet that blessed seed of
Abraham, in which all the nations of the earth are blessed, has taken away all
these curses. For seeing that curse is the sentence of Gods vengeance upon
sinners, now that sin is taken away and abolished by Christ, all Gods curse
is also taken away, and with the curse all kind of evil which afflicte
miserable men with sundry torments. Rightly therefore it is said Chapter. 21.
and 4, Verse: that tears, death, sorrow, labor, and crying are banished from
the city new Jerusalem. This place ought also to in flame in us the desire
of forsaking this world, which for sin is subject to so many curses of God,
and that we may wish to be gathered to that number of the blessed ones, which
without any curse inioye perpetuuall felicity.

But the seat of God, and of the lamb shall be in it. etc. The reason why no
cursednesse can pearce to that city, is, because the throne of God and of our
Lord Jesus Christ, shall defend and keep the same free from all curse. For when
as the curse, as we have noted before, is the execution of gods wrath, God
shows him self pacified to these, in the midst of whom he does vouchesafe
to place the throne of his magnificence. And that lamb which was slain from
the beginning of the world which has the throne of majesty common with God
the father, is he, which became the mediator, to draw men out of the dungeon
of malediction, and to bring them being purged with his blood, into the
presence of God.

And his servants shall serve him. etc. Here is an other reason joined, why
there shall be no more curse. That is to say, because the servants of God, after
this shall not be disobedient to the commandments of there Lord, but shall
yield perfect obedience unto him. There shall be no punishment therefore, where
there shall be no transgression of the law. But that servitude shall not hinder,
but that we may also reign with Christ our head, for it shall be no
constrained subjection, such as is seen in tyranny, but a voluntary
submission, such as is of sons to there Father, under whom they shall live,
nevertheless well and blessedly. And also to offer to God his due obedience,
is a more gloriouse Empire the^ all the Kingdoms of the world: according to
that saying to serve god is to reign. In vain therefore proud men and those
that are puffed up in arrogancy, endeavor to make all things subject to them
selves, when in the mean time they are found rebels to God, which sets
himself against the proud, and vouchsafes his grace only to the humble.

Verse. 4. And they shall see his face. etc.

THe countenance of God is most acceptable to all those, which love him with
sincere affection of godliness, and David places the fullness of pleasures in
it Psalm. 16. because when god is merciful nothing can be wanting to the full
heap of felicity. And S. Paul reasons magnifically of the beholding of his
gloriouse countenance 1. Corint. 13. And to conclude there are six hundredth
testimonies of the holy scripture, by which all things happy and pleasant are
promised, in the favorable countenance of god. Whom we shall behold, not as
we do now as it were in a glass or a darcke speakinge, but face to face, with
great delectation.

And his name shall be in there foreheades. etc. They have now also the name of
God written in there foreheades, whom the Lord does acknowledge for his own,
and will have them to be known among men for his servants, but it does not
yet appear of what sort we shall be. But after that Christ shall appear we
shall be like unto him, because we shall see him as he is 1. Ihon. 3. And then
it shall plainly appear what reward is laid up for the faithful servants
of God.

Verse. 5. And there shall be no night, and they need no candle, neither light of
the sun: for the lord God gives them light.

IN the presence of God, with whom there is no shadowing of clearenesse, there
shall be no changeable course of day, and night. The sun of righteousness
and glory never goethe down to this city, as the Angel showed before also,
Chap. 21. Verse. 23. and 25.

And they shall reign for ever more. etc. Now he plainly expresses that the
servitude of the sons of God, is not repugnant to the Kingdom, which is
promised them. Together in one word he comprehends all there happiness,
that they shall reign for ever more. In this place the ignorance of the
Chi^iastes is thoroughly confuted, because the elect shall reign not for a
thousand years, but for ever, and it does sufficiently declare that those
thousand years in the 20. Cha^ter are otherwise to be expounded, then of the
state of the blessed after this life.

Verse. 6. And he said unto me these sayings are faithful and true. etc.

NOw follows the conclusion of this prophecy, in which authority and
reverence, is gotten to this doctrine, by many means: for first the Angel
which uttered the mysteries, makes his preface, that these sayings are true
and worthy to be believed, which thing when he has done once or twice before,
now he does it chiefly to increase the hope of heavenly rewards in us. For
we know how hardly the mind of man does suffer it self to be pluct from the
beholdinge of things present, whether they be prosperouse, or adverse, that
they might conceive and nourish new hope of eternal life. Therefore the
Angel repeateth, that these promises are proceaded from him which can not
deceive, as he cannot be deceived, wherefore without great injury of him we
can not doubt, concerning the faithfulness and truth of these things.

And the lord God of the holy prophets, sent his Angel to show unto his
servants, the things which must shortly be fulfilled. etc. That same God,
which spoke up the mouth of all the Ancient prophets of whom the authority
is most holy in the Church, is the aucthour of this prophecy. We must not
therefore with less reverence embrace the same, then the oracles of the most
holy prophets, whose end has proved their faithfulness. And least we
should esteem any thing more basely in the manner of the revealing, God has
sent his Angel, which should show to his servants, the things which
should shortly come to pas. Concerning which chause, because there is enoughe
said, in the Chapter 1. Verse 1. I pass over many things.

Verse. 7. Behold I come shortly: happy is he that keeps the saying of this
prophecy. etc.

FOr the greater credit, Christ him self is brought in speaking, and
promising the certeyntie and spedinesse of his coming, in which the effect of
Gods promises, shall take place in all the godly. But in the mean time he
lays up the doctrine of this prophecy with them as a passing great treasure,
whose words if they will diligently imprinte in mind, and keep the^ so
imprinted, he pronounces that they shall be blessed. Neither shall the perils
hanging over the Church oppress them unawares or unprepared* neither shall
there faith be overwhelmed with any storms of temptations, neither shall there
simplicity be deceived with the pestiferouse illusions of Antichrist, and
even in the midst of death they shall nourishe the most assured hope of
eternal life, the fruit whereof at length in the coming of Christ, shall
manifestlye declare forth it self, to establishe perpetual felicity unto them.

Verse. 8. And I am John which saw these things and herd them, etc.

NOw of his own person, he procures aucthoritye, and credit to this
prophecy. For least it might seem to have proceaded from some frantic
false prophet, or diuilishe inspired person: S. John testifies, that it was
him self which has seen these things which which were delivered unto him
after the manner of a vision and has heard these things which the holy ghost
commanded to be written. And we know sufficiently by the history, how
famous, the name of Saint John, and how holy his aucthoritye was among
these Churches, to whose custody this book was committed. But that some do
conjecture, that this John was surnamed mark which ministered to the Apostels
Paul and Barnabas: It seems not to me agreeable, both for other reasons, and
also even of that, that so often he names him self John without the addition
of the surname Mark, which thing it is very like that he would not have
omitted, seeinge this only might make for difference: And it was the purpose
of John to bring forth the aucthoritye of his name. But that other John seemed
to have been more known by the name of Mark then of John, whom Paul calls
the kinsman of Barnabas, Coll. 4. of whom also he makes mention 2. Tim. And
also in the Epistle to Philemon, whom they think to be the very same which
wrote the Gospel which is entitled the gospel after S. Mark.

And when I had heard and seen I fell down, to worshipe before the feet of
the Angel, which showed me those things. etc. Saint John does not hyde or
dissemble his own fault, that he has suffered himself now twice for the
excellency of the person of the Angel, to be drawn away to give the
honor that is due to God alone to a creature. Whereupon may be gathered the
weakness and frailty of man, so ready to Idolatry, when so great an Apostle
dasshed his foot twice against the same stone. Moreover we may note what kind
of honor he gave to the Angel, when he fell upon his face, for that fond
distinction (which the papists make) of (...), and (...). For he would not
worship the Angel for God, whom he knew suerlye enoughe to be an Angel
and not GOD, but he thought religeously to exhibit some reverence and
honor, as to a heavenly creature. Which nevertheless the Angel by no
means does allow.

Verse. 9. But he said unto me, see thou do it not, for I am thy fellow
servant, and the fellow servant of thy brethren the prophets, and of them
which keep the sayings of this book: worship God. etc.

THis forbiddinge is grounded upon two reasons, first that it is not equal
for a servant to be extolled with ambiciouse honor of his fellow
servants. For he confesses him self to be the fellow servant, not of
John only, but also of all his brethren the prophets, that is of all the
Preachers of the Gospel, and not of these only, but of those also, which keep
the sayings of this book, that is, of all the faithefull. The second reason,
that is an vnworthtie act, that the creature should attempt to draw to him
self the honor of adoration, which is proper to God alone. And there is no
doubt, but that all the Saints departed this life, are of the same mind,
that they refuse the importunate honors, which folishe men offer unto them,
and desire to have God worshipped alone with all kind of worship. The
Papists therefore do very great injury to the Saints, whiles they obtrude
such things upon the^, not only, such which can be colored by the fond
devise of (...), but which co^teyne manifest Idolatry. Whiles they do not
only set up Images unto them, and worship the same, but also erect temples,
and they apoint festival days, for them, then which things what can be more
wicked.

Verse. 10. And he said unto me, seal not the sayings of the prophecy of this
book, for the tune is at hand. etc.

BEcause so many secreat and holy mysteries of god are revealed in this book.
Saint John might have doubted, whether he should publishe them or not but
that he had been flatlye forbidden, by the heavenly oracle, to seal up ye
sayings of the book of this prophecye, as it it were certain unspeakable
words, Although an other reason also is added that is to say that ye time was
at hand, in which this prophecy should take effect. For even then did the
misterye of iniquity work, and prepared the way for Antichrist 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Chapter. Therefore even then was the use of this Revelation in the Church.
Daniell and other prophets were commanded to seal up many things, the
execution whereof should be deferred alonge time after. But S. John is
forbidden to seal up the sayings of this prophecy, because the time of there
fulfillinge was at hand. And this place does abundantlye confute the follye
of those, which think that nothing is contained in this book, but doubtful
and dark speakinges, out of which we can draw nothing that is certain or
determinate. For the sayings of this prophecy are not sealed, but that the
godly and diligent reader may understand very many things very profitable to
be known. For the holy ghost commits nothing to writing in vain, so that
we come soberly and reuerentlye, as it is meet to so great misteryes, to
expound the same.

Verse. 11.12. He that is unjust let him be unjust still, and he that is filthy
let him be filthy still: and he that is righteous let him be righteous still,
and he that is holy let him be holy still. etc. And behold I come shortly and
my reward is with me to give every man according as his work shall be. etc.

LEast the minds of the godly should be broken with yrckesomenes, by
continuance of so great evils, Christ again stirs up the hope of his
coming not long to be differred, that by the vprightenesse of his
Judgment, he may restore into order althinges which are now confused and
out of order, that is that he may apoincte, rewards for the godly and
punnishementes for the wicked, for we see that the greater part of men do boast
them selves in wrong dealinges, and being given to the enticements of filthy
pleasures, boast yt all things are lawful for them to do, so long as God
does not thunder from heaven against there ungodliness. And hypocrites think
that they can pleasantly mock both God and men. In these so great corruptions
and offenses, it is hard for the godly to retain and keep there godliness,
least that either they should be hurt by example, or should be overcome with
injuries, or should be offended at the prosperity of the wicked. Therefore
Christ confirms the godly and holy ones, that they should not by any
means depart from there holiness and innoce^cye of manners for neither shall
the wicked bear there stunes without punnishmente, neither shall the godly
want there reward, seeinge he will shortly come, and will give to every one
such reward as his works require, but as concerning the merits of good
works, there is no need to show here what is to be thought, saying it is
expounded often other where. For rewards are given by the mercy of God, and
not as due for good works, seeinge we are debitours to fulfill the whole law
if we will require reward for the deserts of our works.

Verse. 13. I am Alpha and Omega, ye beginning and the end the first and the
last.

THat we may believe that nothing is surer then this doctrine concerning ye
rewards of the good, and punnishments of the reprobate, ye unchangeable decre
of god is interposed, yt is to say, that this is ye sentence of him, which is
alpha and Omega the beginning and the end, that is ye eternal Iehoua, of
whom all things have there being, and to whom all things are referred which
alone is without beginning and without end of him self. He has given eternity
to other things being his creatures to which he would.

Verse. 14. Blessed are they that do his commandments, that there right may
be in the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the City.

IT is a blessed servitude to obey his commandments, which does adorn with
so great rewards those that harken unto him, and has determined so horrible
punishments against the rebelliouse and stubborn. For as many as obey his
commandments, shall be satisfied with the fruit of the tree of life, from
eating whereof our first parents were deprived for there disobedience. And so
free access shall be open through the gates into the city, to the Citizens of
the new and heavenly Jerusalem which the rebelliouse Ada^ was banished with
all posterity.

Verse. 15. For without shall be dogs, and enchaunters, and whoremongers, and
murderers, and Idolatours, and whatsoever loves or makes lies. etc.

THese verily which being deceived with the enticements of this world, had
rather be inhabitants of the cursed earth, carelessly contemning the precepts
of God, they have no right in the holy city, into which nothing that is
profane or vnpure shall enter. Not dogs which in madness rage against
those which cast holy things before them. Not wicked inchau^ters, which abuse
the sacred name of God, to Deuilish impiety. Not fornicatours, nor
adulterours, which have defiled the^ selves with filthy iustes, like swine.
Not murderers, which like wild beasts do thirst after the blood of men. Not
Idolatours, which frame to the^ selves new Gods, with most great and horrible
injury of the only true God. Not false hypocrites, not lying heretics, the
Aucthors of false opinions, neither they which willingly apply there ears to
such delusions, shall have place in the holy city, in which dwells
holiness, cleanes, charity and truethe. And least we should Imagen a mean or
some certain third place or state between, the chiefest felicity and extreme
misery, he places all the wicked with out the city, whom before in the 21.
Chapter he cast into the lake of fire and brimstome. Away therefore with those
fables of the papists, concerning those places which they call ye limbus of
Fathers and of children not baptized with other monstruouse lies of the same
sort, which idle belies and well fed, panches have dreamed. For they which
are without the citi are most miserable, not only because they want those
good things which the Citizens of it do inioye in her, but also because they
shall be tormented with the eternal torments of hell.

Verse. 16. I Jesus have sent mine Angel to testifye unto you these things
in the Churches. etc.

Now Jesus Christ does plainly and without any allegorical darckenes
confess yt he is the aucthour of this prophecy, which sending his Angel,
has opened it to John after the manner of a revelation, to the great profit
and commodity of the whole Church. Admonishing also in the end. Those seven
Churches of Asia, with which this treasure should be reposed, like as he did in
the beginning, how great honor he has bestowed upon them, that he would
appointe them kepers and witnesses of this revelation. And how necessary this
admonition was, we may well perceive by this that the devil has made all the
assaults he could against the authority of this prophecy, that ye
subtilties of Antichrist might the better be cloked which in this revelation
are clearly discovered. Whereupon this book was very necligently kept in the
old time notwithstanding the Christ commanded it should be pre^erwith great
diligence.

I am the rote and generation of David and the brighte morning star. etc.
That those things might be ratifyed with the godly, which he has spoken
concerning the blessedness to come: Christ professes him self to be the
rote and generation of David, to whom that eternal and most blessed Kingdom
is appointed, by the prophecies of all the prophets. That he is that brighte
and morning star, which promisseth that the day of most clear light
shall shortly come, when as all darckenesse being driven away, the faithful
shall inioye perpetual light.

Verse. 27. And the spirit and the bride say come. etc.

SO soon as Christ gives the hope of his coming, by and by that spirit,
which helps our infirmities, and makes intercession for the Saints with
groninges that are unspeakable, with ye whole Church, which is the spouse of
Christ, as it were goinge forth to meet him and embrace him, she brusteth
forth into this voice of prayer. Come, and do not defer thy coming.

And let him that hears, say come: and let him that is a thirst come: and
let whosoever will, take of the water of life freely. etc. Those that are the
prayers of the whole Church, the same ought to be the prayers of every
several person, therefore the holy ghost does exhort every one that
hears this prophecy, to love the coming of Christ, and to pray diligently
for it, and Christ that he may comfort his servants, even in the middle
course of this life, gives freely by faith the waters of eternal life to all
that thirste. But he seems to attribute eternal life to our will. He that
will (says he) let him take. It is true, but yet that any may will, it
behoue^h him to be prevented by the grace of God. Although we ought not to
understand, the will for some light motion of the will, but rather for that
ardent desire, which he has expressed before by thirste: such a will except
it be framed of God is in no man, by nature. For it is neither of him that
wills, nor of him that runs but of God that shows mercy. Romans 9.

Verse. 18. For I protest to every man that hears the words of the
Prophecy of this book, if any man shall add unto these things, God shall
add unto him the plagues that are written in this book. etc.

Verse. 19. And if any man shall minishe, of the words of the book of this
prophecy, God shall take away his part out of ye book of life, and out of
the holy city, and from those things which are written in this book. etc.

THe holy ghost for knowinge the controversies which the devil would raise
up concerning the authority of this prophecy, moves and inforceth S. John
to seal the same with a most weighty protestation. And yet nevertheless
Satan has left nothing undone against it, but all in vain. Therefore that
the authority thereof might be established equal with the other oracles of
God, to which it is lawful to add nothing, neither to take any thing from
them, he threateneth horrible punishments to those, which shall be so bold as
to attempt any such thing against this prophecy. That he says his part
shall be taken out of the book of life, he means not that he had a portion
in it before, but he follows the Antichesis, seeing before he had spoken of
adding.

Verse. 20. He that testifies these things says suerly I come quickly.
Amen, even so come Lord Jesus. etc.

THat it might not seem to be the protestation of a man only, when as men
often times in vain cast for the horrible thunder boltes of threatninges,
Christ him self for confirmation sake does subscribe, and promises that he
will come shortly, that by effect he may ratify the^e decrees. Saint Ihon
makes answer in the name of the whole fellowship of the faithful. Saying
Amen, come Lord Jesus make an end of all calamities of the Church, that the
glory may shine over all things, and the faithefull may obtain the promised
inheritance.

Verse. 21. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.

HE concludes the Epistle which was sent in common, to the seven Churches
commendinge there health and salvation to the grace, of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The end of the Commentaries of William Fulke Doctor of Divinity, upon the
sacred revelation of Saint John.


Imprinted at London, in Paul's Churchyard: by Thomas Purfoote, at the sign of
the Lucrece. Anno. 1573.


