A GODLY and learned Sermon, preached before an honorable auditorie the 26,
day of February. 1580.

Imprinted by Henry Middleton for Thomas Man.

A GODLY AND learned Sermon, Preached in Lent last. 1580.
THE place of scripture (most honorable and well-beloved in our Savior Christ)
which I have chosen to entreat of, is written in the 24. Chapter of the second
book of Samuel in these words. Vers`l'

And the wrath of the Lord was yet more kindled against Israel, and he moved
David against them, in that he said, go number Israel and Judah, etc.

The whole Scripture of God (as the holy Apostle S. James teaches) is compared
to a glass, wherein al estats and degrees may see, what to embrace and what to
eschew: and it is commonly said of al histories, that they are ye looking
glasses of man's life. Therefore this text being both a story and parcel of
holy Scripture, must needs be a most clear glass, in which are represented
unto us diverse things worthy to be seen and looked upon. Among which I have
thought good to show unto you three especial and most notable images. The
first, is the justice and righteousness of God, the second, is the malice of
Satan, the third is the frailty of man: not meaning to describe them all at
large, which would require much longer time then is granted to this exercise:
but only to show every one of them so far forth as it is set forth with
in ye compass of this text which I have read unto you. Concerning the first
therefore, which is the justice of God, it is described in these words.

And the wrath of the Lord was yet more kindled against Israel, etc. By the
wrath of the Lord is here meant, the justice of God provoked to punish sins,
as in an hundredth places of scripture besides. By the wrath of the Lord
therefore, we must not understand any passion, or disordered affection, such
as is the wrath of man, of which the Apostle says, that it works not ye
righteousness of God, but is often provoked with small causes, or with no
worthy causes at all, and yet boileth immoderately in the heart of man, whereby
he is immeasurable desirous of reuengement: but the justice of God, which is
figuratively called his wrath, is never stirred up to reuengement, but upon
great and weighty causes, neither rages with blind fury, but keeps a most
perfect moderation in all things. And there are two reasons which may be
yielded of this figurative speech, wherefore Gods righteousness is called his
wrath, the first is to strike through our hearts with terror of his justice,
for the name of wrath is more terrible then the name of justice, and our nature
is more familierly acquainted with the one, the^ with the other, ye wrath of a
man if he be of power to hurt, is greatly feared. The wrath of a Prince says
Solomon in the 16. chapter of the proverbs is the messenger of death: how much
more ye wrath of ye Lord of hosts in comparison of whose power and glory al
earthly princes are but dust and ashes. The second reason why ye justice of god
is called the wrath of God, is that we may learn and understand, that as the
wrath of man wherewith we are acquainted is not pacified but by two means,
either by reconciliatio^ or reuengeme^t, so it is with the justice of God.
Therefore when soever we have provoked ye wrath of God against us by our sins
and wickedness: (which we do daily and hourly) we must either seek to be
reconciled to him by true repentance, or else look for sharp punishment: we
must either humbly submit our selves, acknowledge our offenses and humbly
desire pardon, or else we must assure our selves yt the wrath of the Lord being
once kindled against us, there is no way to escape vengeance. We see now
wherefore the justice of God is called the wrath of God. Now must we look for
what cause the wrath of God was kindled against Israel: and how the Israelites
had provoked the justice of god to punish them. The cause in deed is not set
down in express words, but it is easy to gather by the effect: for it is
manifest, yt when the justice of God is kindled against Israel, it is for none
other cause but for their sins, and it is needles to inquire what particular
sins were the cause: for it was not one or two, but all kind of sins, and
especially their unthankfulness: for the Lord had given them David a most
excellent governor, who both had established the purity and sincerity of
Gods true religion, and also had kept them in peace and tra^quillity, for many
years together. But as it usually comes to pass through the corrupt nature
of man, which is made insole^t with prosperity, ye people not considering
those great benefits of God, were not only unthankful to him for so happy a
government, but fol lowed every one the lusts of his own heart, not fearing to
tra^sgresse ye commandments of the Lord: but yet retaining an outward form of
Godliness by external exercise of religion, the virtue and power whereof they
denied in life and conversation, and so provoked ye wrath of the Lord of
hoastes to be kindled against the^: but we must consider wherefore ye scripture
says The wrath of the lord proceeded or was yet more kindled, you must
understand as we read in ye 21. cha. of this book, yt the wrath of the Lord
was kindled before this time against ye people, so yt he plagued the^ with
three years famine for the cruelty that Saul, to gratify them, committed
against the Gibeonites who^ he had slain, and sought to root our contrary to a
covenant which their auncetors had made, and confirmed with a solemn oath, in
yc days of Joshua. These three years of hunger were now past, and this was the
fourth year in which God after he had avenged the blood of the Gibeonites upon
the posterite of Saul, had restored ple^tie and abundance of al things for the
maintenance of man's life, with external peace and prosperity: for which
benefits and blessings of God bestowed upon the^, they were bound to have
served God in holiness and righteousness before him all ye days of their life:
like as by the former plague they were admonished to forsake their sins,
which were the cause thereof, and truly to turn to him. But they clean
contrariwise abusing his mercy, took occasion to provoke his justice, even as
the froward nature of man is: so long as they are plagued, and the hand of the
Lord is heavy on them, they humble them selves before him, or at least pretend
so to do: but when the plague is seaced, and they find them selves relieved,
they return again to their former wickedness. So was it with the Israelites,
they had been punished with famine, but they were not thereby reformed, and
therefore the wrath of the Lord is still kindled against them. By which example
we ought to be admonished, that we deceive not our selves after the manner of
the world, to think that the wrath of the Lord shall be turned from us before
we turn from our sins: wherefore let us not flatter our selves as the
reprobate do, when they have escaped some particular punishment, this danger
is overcome, this brunt is past, this storm is blown over etc. For so long as
we continue in our sins, and seek not to be reconciled unto the Lord, the
wrath of the Lord will be still kindled against us, yea more and more provoked
to punish us: and if one plague be ceased, an other shall begin: when famine
is stayed, the pestilence shall rage: and if that will not reform us, some
other plague shall be sent upon us. The Lord can want no whippes, so long as
his wrath is bent to scourge us, therefore let us not obstinately set our
selves against him, to try whether he will be sooner wearied in striking, or we
in bearing his stripes: but let us humbly and at once cast down ourselves,
acknowledge our sins, be sorry for them, and forsake them: and then the way
to reconciliation shall be opened by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in
whom the Lord shall be pleased with us, and his wrath pacified toward us. We
have further to note the reason of the metaphor, when the holy Ghost says: The
wrath of the Lord was kindled, which kind of speech is very often used in the
Scripture, to compare the wrath of God to fire, whose force when it has taken
strength, can not easily be stayed, and whose property is to consume all
things that ministers matter unto it: and for that cause the Lord him self in
respect of his justice, is called a consuming fire. To the end therefore that
we should stand in fear of Gods justice: and that we should be as careful not
to provoke his wrath against us, as we are careful not to minister matter unto
fire, which will be ready to consume our selves, and all that ever we have:
our GOD is said to be a consuming fire: and the wrath of the Lord is said to
be kindled against us. Therefore as there is no dallying with fire, when any
light substance is near which is ready to take flame: so there is no
dissembling before God, the fire of whose wrath and justice is kindled with our
sins and wickedness: for as ye Lord hates and abhors all sins and
ungodliness, so his justice is kindled like fire against ye same, to purge and
cleanse the world of all unrighteousness. Let not sinners therefore think to
stand in his presence, which is a consuming fire, before who^ they shall melt
even as wax, and vanish away as smoke, before whom they shall be as stubble
and chafe, that is set on fire, and can not be quenched. And let us which
trust in his mercy, not be high minded, but stand in awe of his justice, and
provoke not his wrath to bekindled against us through our manifold sins and
wickedness, whose wrath if it be but a little kindled as the prophet says, no
man is able to stand in the presence of his justice, but it will appear how
happy they are which put their trust in his mercy. And if the wrath of God
being but a little kindled has so notable effect: what is to be looked for,
when it is wholly inflamed in fury against us, for gross and manifest contempt
of his glorious majesty? For as contempt in men is the chiefest cause in
provoking them to anger, and the greatest contempt provoke the greatest
anger: so it is with the Lord, whose justice is despised in all sin, and
disobedience of his law: but chiefly in that profane and professed contempt,
which we see to bear the sway among great numbers of the wicked, which openly
and without all fear of his justice, have sold them selves like Achab, to
commit all manner of sin with greediness. Thus we see what the spirit of
God means, when he says: The wrath of God was yet more kindled against
Israel.

Now we have to consider how it stands with the justice and righteousness
of God, that Israel having provoked the wrath of God, the heart of David is
moved to number the people: that the wrath of the Lord being kindled against
Israel, he stirred up David against them. For it seems contrary to reason,
that the people having deserved punishment, the Lord should deal with the
Prince for them. But for so much as the Prince is as it were, an helm or
stern, by which the Lord governs the whole comminaltie of people which the
Lord has committed to their charge, it stands well with his justice and
wisdom also, to move and stir up the Prince against them, when so ever
their transgressions shall provoke his righteousness to chasten them. And even
so says Solomon, Prouer. 21. As the streams of waters, or as it is now
translated, as a vessel in the streams of waters, so is the kings heart in the
hand of the Lord, and whethersoeuer he will he inclmeth and moves it, either
to the haven of prosperity, if the people serve him, or to the shore of
danger and adversity, if they provoke his wrath against them. Therefore as the
stirring of a ship by the master directs the ship whither he thinks
good: even so the Lord moves the hearts of all Princes, which are as the
stern of the ship of the common wealth in his hand, that they are not
carried at all adventures whither the stream of waters will drive them, but
whither so ever it pleases him: either to the great and singular benefit of
that people which fears the Lord, or for the correction and punishment of
them which transgress his laws, and contemn his justice. Ye hear now how
well it agrees, not only with the justice, but also with the wisdom of God,
that he should move the heart of the king according to the disposition of the
people. Besides this, we must also understand, that as Princes are public
persons in respect of their government of whole nations committed to their
charge, so also before the Lord, they are private persons, to be called to
account, not only for such things as they do in their public government, but
also for such offenses as they commit privately, as the sons of Adam: Among
which there is none found so righteous, but that in many things they
transgress the law of God: and therefore the justice of God is not to be
accused of any unrighteousness, when the people have provoked his wrath, and
David can not justify him self before him, if he stir up David's heart
against the people for their punishment, and take occasion of the peoples
sins to punish David him self.

For although here is no transgression of David expressed, whereby he might
seem to have brought this punishment upon him, yet David him self will
confess, that there was always sufficient cause in him, why the Lord might
chastise him: for so he acknowledges in the 51. Psalm, that not only for that
gross and notorious sin of adultery and murder, he had deserved Gods
vengeance, but generally he accuses his whole life of sin, and transgression
of Gods laws, that the wrath of God in his punishments, what so ever it should
please him to lay on him, might of all the world be acknowledged to be just and
righteous. For thus he cries, Against thee, against thee (O Lord) I have
sinned: that is, I have done nothing but sinned, and done that which is evil
in thy sight, that thou might be justified in thy sayings, and have the
upper hand when thou art judged. And least we should think that he speaks
of some short time of his life, in which the devil had so greatly prevailed
with him, he declares in the next verse, that it was even from his nativity,
yea from his conception, that this corruption has remained in him, which is
contrary to the righteousness of God. Behold (says he) I was borne in sin,
and in iniquity did my mother conceive me, whereas thou love truth in the
inward parts. This confession of David therefore, is sufficient to clear the
Lord from all unrighteousness, and to show manifestly, that David is not
punished for the peoples sins as an innocent, which has deserved nothing in
his own person, nor is beaten altogether for the faults of other me^, which
could not stand with Gods righteousness, except in that case, where our
savior Christ willingly offered him self to be punished for our
transgressions. But here the Israelites provoking the wrath of the Lord,
deserved ye a good governor should decline out of ye right course for their
punishment. And David him self can not deny, but ye when so ever the Lord shall
chastise him, he shall not do it with out his deserts. So yt every way it
stands with Gods righteousness, that Israel having caused his wrath to be
kind led against him, he should stir up David whom he had given to them,
being a most excellent Prince for their benefit, now to give occasion of their
punishment. But against this doctrine of the justice and righteousness of god,
two kind of adversaries do rise up. The first are the Pelagians, and Papists so
far as they agree with the Pelagians. The second are the Atheistes: the
former sort reason after this manner. If you say yt God moved David to number
ye people, which was sin, do you not thereby make God ye author of sin? God
forbid: let God only be righteous, and all men sinners. For he only is holy,
he only is pure from al corruption, and there is no unrighteousness in him. But
how can you avoid that inconvenience (say they) that follows of this
assertion: God moved David to do that wherewith he was displeased, therefore he
was the cause of the sin in David. It is easily avoided. For the same story
is set down in 1. Chro. 21. Chap. where it is said, that Satan or the
adversary stood up against Israel, and moved the heart of David to number ye
people: by conference of which place of Scripture with this my text, we may see
how God moved David to number the people, and yet moves him to no sin. For
whereas it is here said, that the Lord was angry with Israel, and moved
David against them (for we can not aptly understand any other, but either the
Lord, or the wrath of the Lord which moved him) and in the Chronicles it is
said, that Satan moved him, it is manifest, that God and the devil concur
in one action. God as a most righteous judge, and Satan as a most malicious
enemy. By which wese that there proceeds nothing from GOD but justice, and
that the sin which is evil comes from the devil: so that the Lord God,
although he be the first mouer in all our actions (for in him we live, and
move, and have our being) yet he is not author or cause of any evil in us.
Nevertheless, he uses Satan to punish us, who although he be a malicious
enemy, yet is he a minister of ye righteous judgment of God, although against
his will: and even then when he opposes him self against God. For Satan is
not suffered to reign and rage at his pleasure against the elect of GOD, for
then he would in one moment overthrow the whole Church of Christ, but kept in
chains of darkness, so that he can not stir, but where and when it pleases
God in justice to use his ministry and service. Therefore when the wrath of
the Lord was kindled against Israel, Satan also stands up against Israel as
a minister of Gods wrath, by necessity of Gods ordinance, though a cruel
adversary by his own will and malicious affection. So that neither by color
of this text, nor of any oother in the whole Scripture, the Lord can be
charged as the cause of the same evil which he punishes either in the elect,
or in the reprobate, for what so ever proceeds from him, as it proceeds
from him is good, and to a good end, who uses well even Satan the adversary
of all goddnesse, and his members the reprobate: and so orders, brideleth,
and governs their sins and wickedness, that even their evil he turns to
good, and out of their wickedness as it were, light out of darkness brings
his glory. So he hardened the heart of Pharao, yet was he not the cause of
Pharaos sin, but the cause was in Pharao him self, who of his own
corruption did set him self against God: and of Satan who rules in the
reprobate, and stirs him up to rebellion, and obstinate resisting of Gods
commandments. Thus was the heart of Pharao hardened by God, as by a righteous
judge: by Satan, as by a malicious enemy against God and mankind: by Pharao
him self, as by a man who being clean void of Gods spirit by corruption of
his own nature, is inclined to nothing but to contempt and disobedience of
God, and ye whole matter so ordered in all points by the divine providence,
that the glory of his justice might be set forth in Pharaos destruction, even
as ye Lord says unto him even for this cause have I stirred thee up, that I
might show forth my power in thee, and that my name might be renouned in all
the world. Therefore the same God which makes an hypocrite to reign for the
sins of ye people, and gives a king in his fury whom he takes away again
in his indignation (as ye prophet says) even the same God, by the same
authority, wisdom, and justice, moves David a good king against Israel, yt
he might punish them without all contagion or infection of yt sin and evil by
which he was moved to number ye people, which caused god to punish them, so yt
although god gives the first moving, power, and strength, in all manner of
actions, which we must confess to be good, as proceeding from him, and ordreth
and disposes al evil, which is a per uerting of yt good which comes from
God, and proceeds from Satan and the corruption of man's nature, so yt he
conuerteth ye same always in ye end to his glory, and the benefit of his
elect, as we see in ye persecution of ye wicked, and the infirmities of the
godly: yet is he by no means to be charged as the author and cause of sin
and evil. If this will not satisfy you, but yt you will further urge me with
that question of the Maniches, whence comes evil, seeing nothing but good
comes from God, and yet you affirm, yt God is the cause of all things. I will
answer as I have learned out of the ancient writers, who were troubled with yt
sect of ye Maniches, which affirmed, yt there were two beginnings. When it
pleased ye almighty to show forth his infinite power, wisdom, and goodness in
ye creation of things visible and invisible, bodily and spiritually, it pleased
him for ye illustratio^ and setting forth of ye glory of his goodness, to
ordeine (for so they have taught me to speak) yt evil should proceed out of ye
frewill of his reasonable creatures. And this his ordinance is good. For
although evil be naught, and cursed be he yt says evil is good, yet yt there
should be evil (which is Gods ordinance) it is excellent good. If this seem
strange to any man, I will make it plain by two manifest reasons: the first is,
the excellency of goodness can not so well appear and be known, as by ye
comparison of the contrary, which is evil. Therefore it is perfect good, that
evil should be for the manifestation of that which is good, we see that in all
ye creatures and works of the world, GOD has ordained that his glory should
shine in contraries. As to the intent yt the beutie and glory of light should
be seen and known to be such as it is, he has ordained darkness. For if he
had created light to be perpetual without any change of darkness, how had it ben
possible for men, although living in the light, to have known the excellency
of light, and so should God have been defrauded of ye glory of so beutifull,
profitable, and comfortable a creature. Therefore even as by darkness we learn
how to esteem light, and by bitter that which is sweet, and every other thing
by his contrary: even so by the deformity of evil we are taught, how great
is the excellent comlines of that which is good, therefore the ordinance of god,
that there should be evil, is perfect good. Althtugh this reason be plain
enough, yet the second reason is more manifest, even to ye meanest capacities.
For yt the glory of gods mercy might appear in the salvation of his elect,
and his justice in the condemnation of the reprobate, it was necessary that
there should be evil and so necessary that otherwise there should have been no
matter for the mercy and justice of God to work upon: For if there should
have been no sin nor evil, wherein should the mercy of GOD in pardoning
and forgiving of sins have been seen? if there should have been no
transgression, how should the glory of Gods justice have shined in
punishment? Ye see therefore that God by no means may be compted the author of
evil, which he has not created, made or wrought, but ordained that it should
proceed from the freewil of his reasonable creatures for the illustration of
his glory. Let us therefore tremble at his righteous judgments who does all
things according to the good pleasure of his will: and has made the wicked
man for the day of his wrath (as Solomon testifies) and yet by no means is
the cause of his wickedness. If any man be not satisfied with this answer, he
may enter further into ye unmeasurable deapthe of Gods judgment, into which he
may rather find an entrance, the^ a way out, except it be to his everlasting
destruction for his horrible presumption. You have heard now the justice of
God defended against the Pelagians and Papists, it follows that I speak
some thing to the confutation of the second enemies thereof which are the
Atheistes, who because they will not be troubled with such thornie and
doubtful questions, as these are, imagine that they have found an easy way
unto wisdom, and a solutio^ for all controversies of religion when they say
in their hearts there is no God. Against whose impiety and madness, the time will
not serve me to spek so much as their wickedness deserves, and yet if time would
permit never so large a discourse, I could say in effect no more against the^,
then ye prophet David writes in the 14. Psalm. Amar Hanabal. The greatest and
most doltish fool of all fools has said in heart, there is no God. But what
means the prophet so to befoole them, when of all other men they are, or
would seem to be the finest witted, the best learned, and most full of all
wisdom and knowledge: even because of all other they are most void of all
true wisdom, which although they fancy to the^ selves that they only have
found, yet is there not one among an hundredth that dare acknowledge it. A
goodly wisdom that they are ashamed to profess and stand in defense of it,
for although they nourish that monster in their hearts and are bold sometimes
to show forth the same, where they think themselves to be the best learned:
yet is there not one of them that dare encounter with a Christian Philosopher,
to mainetaine by reason that which they hold against all reason, they obiecte
perhaps, you will oppress them with the authority of Gods word and the
holy Scriptures, where unto they give no credit, nay we will lay the Bible
aside, and dispure with them out of the great book, even out of the beutifull
theater of the world in whose creation and preservation if they can not read
written in great capital letters, the almighty power, wisdom and goodness,
and the justice and mercy of God in the government thereof, they are the most
blind, blockishe and insensible of all other creatures. And yet they fancy in
their frenzy that they have found out the greatest and the deepest point of
wisdom, when they are fallen into the greatest absurdity or folly that can
be. For what can be more contrary to reason the^ to affirm an effect without
a cause or to follow their dreams, an eternal effect without an eternal
cause? Therefore the holy Ghost most aptly exprobrateth unto them extreme
folly, because by their monstrous position of denyinge God, they take away
the fountain of all knowledge and wisdom, that is, the cause of all things.
But as the ass yields to no other reason, but to a clubbe, so they are more
worthy to be knocked down with a betle, then to be confuted with any reason,
which no less then the authority of Gods word written in the scriptures, and
the law of nature written in the hearts of all nations, is most contrary and
repugnant to their most folish and damnable persuasion. The Lord deliver us
from the devices, practices, and doings of the Atheistes: as for their wit,
learning, wisdom and reason, in which they please them selves above other
men, we are nothing afraid of, it they durst take upon them the defense of
their devilish persuasion, and let them assure them selves that the justice of
God which now they contemn, they shall hereafter feale, and how soever they
would fly from it, it shall find them at the length, whereof a restimonie
also remains still in their conscience which the prophet in the Psalm
forgets not to note where he says, There have they feared, where there is
no cause to fear: For of all other these profane Atheistes that can so
boldly and lustily despise God and his righteousness in any appeara^ce of
danger, yea where no danger at all is, are most fearful cowardes and
trembling dastards, and no marvel: for what good courage can there be, where
there is no hope but in this life, nor comfort of help, but in men which are
not able to help themselves. But I am to blame to use to much speech against
the^, who either hear it not, or though they herd it, would make no account of
it, saying that it is not unprofitable for the godly and religious to have the
madness of these men made manifest, that they may the more deteste them, and
better beware of them. Thus have you heard the justice of God delivered from
the malice of the gretest enemies thereof. God grant that as many of them as
be recouerable, may in time see against whom they have been bold to oppose
them selves, and understanding how little it is possible for them to prevail,
they may no more kick against the prick, nor strive against the stream, but
in all humility and submission acknowledging their heinous rebellion, they may
desire rather to be relieved by his mercy, then by contending any longer to
try the rigor of his justice. One other thing more to be noted in this
example of Gods justice, which the scripture testifies: that the Lord in his
wrath remembers his mercy toward his elect, and that appears in this
history. For when the people had provoked the wrath of the Lord to be kindled
against them, and that he in justice was to procure a punishment and
correction for their amendment: yet he so ordered the whole matter by his
merciful and divine providence, that in the end it turned to ye singular
benefit of his Church, so that even the rod by which he scourges the^, was a
demo^stration of his mercy toward them. For as it appears in the 22. Chap.
of the book of Chronicles, by occasion of the plague which God sent for the
punishment of the peoples sins, David found out ye place which ye Lord had
appointed for ye building of his temple. Marvelous therefore is the providence
of the Lord, which (as the wise man says) extends it self from end to
end mightelie, and disposes al things sweetly, and wonderful is the loving
kindness and mercy of God toward his elect, which even then when his wrath
is kindled against them, forgets not like a most loving father in
chastening of their faults to seek their amendment, and to change the very
correction and punishment it self into a singular benefit and blessing. For
what a singular benefit was it to all the Church of Israel, when the Lord had
appointed his resting place in Sion, and the building of his Temple in
Jerusalem, which place the Lord reueiled by occasion of this punishment and
David perceived that the Lord had heard his prayer, when he sacrificed in the
threshing flower of Aranna the Iebusite so that the angel was commanded to
put up his sword, and the pestilence was stayed from raging any longer among
the people. Wherefore we see that although the justice of god in his punishment
be terrible for the time, yet in the end he turns all to the benefit of
the faithful, By which we learn not to be faint hearted or discouraged, when
the Lords wrath is kindled against us: but with patience to bear his anger,
when we have sinned against him, and with the eyes of faith to behold his
mercy, which he never forgets toward his chosen, no not when he deals
most sharply with them. For not only his rodd and staff (as the Prophet
says) shall comfort us, as they are the tokens of his fatherly chastisement
for our reformation, but also the very means which he provides for our
punishment he conuerteth oftentime to our benefit: thus does faith overcome
the terror of Gods justice, when it assures us, that it is so far off, that
the same should take any place against us for our destruction, in as much as
it is satisfied by the death of Jesus Christ: that contrariewise his
punishments are merciful, and his chastiseme^ts are beneficial unto us. Only
let us take heed that we despise not his long suffering in his favorable
correction, least with ye wicked we procure his warth to be upon us unto ye
end. An other lesson, we have to learn in this example of gods justice, as
profitable in all ages, so most necessary in our time. The wrath of ye Lord
was here kindled against Israel, for whose punishment David is moved to number
the people whence now proceeds ye cause of this punishment? not from ye
government of David, but from the sins of the people. For while the people
please God, and serve him according to his word, he blessed David for their
benefit in all his consultations and affairs: but when ye people provoke the
wrath of God against the^, then is David made an instrument for their
punishment. It is not unlike but the people in David's time among other their
sins by which they provoked Gods punishment, were also infected in this vice,
yt they took upon them, as it is usual with people that are unthankful for
the great travel which princes bestow in their government, to enter into
finding of fault with ye state of regiment, and to remove the cause of their
punishments from the^ selves, unto him which had less deserved it. Nevertheless
the holy ghost testifies plainly yt the cause of this plague was not the ill
demeanor of David, but the sins of Israel. Let Israel therefore walk in the
ways of the Lord and serve him with an upright heart, and there shall be no
error in ye government of David, but he shall have a prosperous reign over
them. A lesson very needful for ye people of our days, who were never so
curious to enquire of princes causes and matters of the state, of which for
want of knowledge they are meet to be no Judges although they had authority, as
they be in this time. But sirs you forget your place, God has made you
subjects and not governors, to be governed, and not to rule, enter not
therefore, neither intermedle you with princes matters, but enter into your
selves and look yt your sins and wickedness do not cause an error to be in the
government, for if there be any at any time, it proceeds from you, your sins
are the cause as it appears plainly in this example. The sins of Israel
provoked the Lord to wrath, and then David's heart is moved to number the
people. From whence proceed ill humors which trouble the head and cause it to
ache, out of the head? no, they ascend out of the body into the head, and so
causes the head to ache, and then the aching of the head is ye disquietnes of
all the body, and yet the cause is not in the head, but in the il humors which
proceed from the body. Take heed therefore that ye minister no ill humors out
of the body into the head, and the head shall be well enough, able to govern
the body. Look therefore to ye purging of the body from sin and
wickedness, that no distemperature thereby do rise into the head, and doubt
you not, but the Lord God as he has always hitherto, so he will from hence
forth direct the head to your singular benefit, quietness, and commodity:
And in this behalf we have earnestly to pray to the Lord for the
preservation of our sovereign, considering how greatly we have provoked his
wrath, and given him just cause to withdraw his bountiful graces from her,
which hithert to it has pleased him most plenteously to bestow upon her
highness to our singular benefits and comfort, and likewise we have to praise
and magnify the Lord, for his infinite mercy, declared in his long
suffering and patience toward us, who notwithstanding we have so often, and so
much provoked him to indignation through our manifold transgressions, contempt
of his word and unthankfulness: yet has he so blessed her estate and
government, and that for so long time over us, that searching all monumentes
of stories from the beginning, the like examples of prosperous and peaceable
regement shall never be found, I say the like happy and quiet government in
all godliness and honesty for so many years together, is not to be showed in
this Island out of any records of antiquity. Turn over the book hardly and
spare not, and bring me forth no small examples, but only such as our most
sovereign Lady may vouchsafe to excel, if ever the like prosperous and godly
estat can be showed of so long continuance. Let us therefore yield glory unto
his majesty, from whose only goodness this, as all other goods gifts have
proceeded, and thankful obedience unto her highness who^ he has used as a
mean and instrument to procure all this happiness unto us. And as we have thus
long enjoyed this blessed government, so that we may enjoy it twice as many
years or more if it be his will, let us become humble suitors to our heavenly
father, that he will bless her majesty with long life to the glory of his
name, and the benefit of his Church, but especially considering we have
provoked the Lords wrath to be kindled against us, let us make have to be
reconciled unto him by unfeigned and hearty repentance and amendment of life,
for when the Lord shall see us turned truly unto him, he will turn from the
fearcenesse of his wrath, and turning away from us all such plagues and
punishments as we most righteously have deserved, he will turn unto us the
cheerful light of his countenance in Jesus Christ, in whom and for whom he
is well pleased with us. And thus much touching the righteousness of God,
which is the first part.

The second point we have to consider is the malice of Satan, which is
noted to us in the 21. Chapter of the first book of Chronicles where it is
said, that Satan stood up against Israel, and moved the heart of David
to number the people. Although the malice of Satan be manifold, and almost
infinite: yet I will note it in two points only, out of this text. First
in the person with whom he deals, and secondly in the sin whereunto he
provoke him. Concerning the first, it is said that Satan stood up against
Israel and moved the heart of David. For when Gods wrath was kindled against
Israel, Satan was Gods minister to execute his just judgment, not of
obedience to God, but of malice to Israel. Therefore how does he execute it? he
goes straight to David. For Satan findinge himself loosed of that chain by
which he is restrained from assaulting the people of God, whom he defends
with his grace, and boiling in malice against the Church of GOD, whose
prosperity he enuieth, and seeks her destruction, imediately he sets
upon the chief governor thereof. All his malice is against the Church of
God, and therefore it is said, Satan stood up against Israel: but he knowing
where to do most mischief, begins to show his malice against David, he
seeks to infect the head that he might destroy the whole body. He knows
that a godly and virtuous prince is the principal instrument that God uses
amongst men to procure ye wealth of his Church and chosen people: and therefore
of hatred against ye church, and rankor against gods people he seeks by all
means to corrupt a good prince, and to cause a godly governor to be
unprofitable to the^: see therefore how great cause we have with earnest and
daily prayers, to commend unto the gracious protection of our God, the
preservation of our godly Prince and Sovereign. Because we see the malice of
Satan to be so great, yt whenever he is let loose to stand up against Israel,
he will begin his assault, where he knows he may do most hurt to the Church
of GOD. And therefore not without cause the Apostle so vehemently exhorts,
that prayers, supplications, intercessions, and thankesgiuings be made,
specially for Kings, and all that be in authority, because Satan's malice
which he bears against Gods Church, he seeks specially to execute by them
whose power is greatest, and whose example carries the multitude after them.
For eue^ as the Lord in wisdom and justice uses to punish the people by
their Princes, even so Satan of hatred and malice, seeks the overthrow of
the Church by the same persons. The second point, wherein the malice of Satan
is to be considered, is the vice or sin whereunto he moved the heart of
David. The text says, he moved David to number the people. For a prince to
number and muster his people, of it self it is no sin, but a thing indifferent
of his own nature, which at sometime is not only lawful to do, but also
necessary: and therefore it is no hard matter to gather what sin David
committed in numbering the people, namely his heart by Satan contrary to his
former faith and humble trust in Gods promises, was lifted up with pride and
presumption. For having no lawful cause either Ecclesiastical to levy a
subsidy for the maintenance of Gods religion, as Moses prescribes in the 30.
of Exodus, or else civil, as was oftentimes lawfully practiced in time of
war: he alleges only his vain curiosity (that he might know the number of
them): thus did Satan begin to plant the root of pride and insolency in
the heart of David, which as it is a vice in all men most odious, so to be in a
Prince is most dangerous, and that for many causes. All which Satan did well
foresee, when he makes his assault unto David with the sin of presumption
first of all, for that of all othervices Princes are most easily drawn to
pride and insolency, both because the nature of all men is most prone and apt
to fall into pride in prosperity, and for that Princes and high estates, being
advanced to such greatness above all other men, have so many occasions to be
pfst up with presumption, if they be not mightily and maruelously defended by
the singular grace of God. So that a Prince that is humble and lowly in heart,
is one of the greatest miracles of the world: and in deed so great a wonder,
that it can not be brought to pass, but by him which only works great
maruelles. Thus Satan being most malicious and most subtle in his malice,
to bring his purpose to effect more speedily, uses such a mean, by which he
may work most easily. Neither has he regard only to the easiness of his
enterprise, but that the same also is most apt to overthrow the Church and
people of GOD. for by pride and insolency, most of all other vices, a Prince
is made unapt to exercise his office and duty. The office of a King stands
in two points. The first is, in maintenance of true religion: the second is
provision for the common wealth, and public peace of his subjects: but
neither of these can he exercise to the glory of God, and benefit of men, if
his heart be overcome with presumption: for touching the first, if pride
possess the heart of a King, he will either neglect religion altogether, or
else think that he may do and decree in religion what he list. If he neglect
the cause of religion, he will have no regard to set out Gods glory, he
passes not whether ye word of God be preached or not preached, whether the
sacraments be ministered or not ministered, discipline exercised or not, or
whether all things be well done or ill done: finally he cares not whether
religion goes backward or forward. But if he will intermeddle with religion
with a presumptuous and insolent mind, he will imagine, that all things in
religion are subject to his will and pleasure. Vzzia otherwise not the worst
Prince, was so lifted up with pride, that he usurped the Priests office, and
would needs offer incense: but he was plagued for his presumption, and
stricken of the Lord with a leprosy. Achas commanded Vrias the high Priest
to remove the altar of the Lord out of his place, and to set up an other altar
of an other fashion, according to the pattern which he sent him from Damasco.
Jeroboam, thinks it lawful for him to change the decree of GOD concerning
worshipping at Jerusalem, and sets up an new form of worship in Dan and
Bethel. Saul thinks long to tarry for Samuel, and offers sacrifice without
him. These examples and many other do show how dangerous to the state of
religion, is the sin of pride and presumption in the heart of a Prince. No
marvel therefore, if Satan which maliceth most the good proceedings in
religion, that he might undermine the tower of the church to the utter
overthrow of ye same, prepares his way by puffing up ye Kings heart with pride
and insolency, knowing that he which is proud and insolent toward men, can
not be humble and obedient unto God. The second part of the office of a king
is, to provide for the common wealth, the peace and prosperity of his
subjects, which can not be without great travel and labor of mind and body.
But if the Prince be overcome with pride, he will never abase him self to take
such great pains as he ought to do, for the benefit of other men in so
difficult and dangerous a matter. Therefore Moses in the 17. of Deuteronom.
where he describes what manner a King is to be chosen by the Israelites, and
what is the office of a King when he is elected, joins both these parts
together, and for the performance of the later, especially admonishes them to
beware of presumption, when the King (says he) shall sit upon the throne of his
kingdom, he shall write out by a copy received of the Priests, a book of the
law of the Lord, and that shall be with him to read therein all the days of his
life, yt he may prosper, and learn to fear the Lord his God, and to keep al
ye words of ye law to do the^: thus having prescribed the book of ye law to
be ye direction of his government, as well in religion as in affairs of ye
co^moon wealth, to which burden yt the king might submit his shoulders, and not
think scorn to bear it, he adds i^mediatly, yt his heart be not lift up
above his brethren, what means Moses by this, yt a king should not show him
self to be a king. When by Gods ordinance he is advanced and lifted up above
all other men? no verily, he means not so: but that the king is lifted up
above his brethren, to be a father unto them, and to have a fatherly care,
which he can not have, if his heart be lifted up above them to contemn them,
whereas he ought not only to retain his love to them which he had before he
was a king, as unto his brethren, but also to put on a greater affection of
love when he is a king, as of a father toward his children. Wherefore the
meaning of Moses is, that the Kings heart should not be lifted up above his
brethren, to contemn them, to tread them under feet, to exercise tyranny
over them, but to be humble and lowly minded of love, willingly, and cheerfully
to take such travels, and to overcome such difficulties, as is necessary for
all them which shall govern well, and to the profit of others. We see that
natural parents, which have the greatest authority over their children of
whom they are to be honored, notwithstanding their dignity, do willingly and
gladly endure any travel, which they think may be profitable and beneficial
to their children: even so ought the parents of the country (whose honor and
obedience is confirmed unto them by none other, but even by the same
commandment) not disdain any labor, travel, or industry which is
necessary to be employed, for the wealth and preservation of their subjects.
But such Princes as have not learned out of Gods law to be humble, neither are
led with the meek spirit of Christ, but with the proud spirit of Satan will
either think scorn to take pains for the safety of their inferiors, or
else by violence oppress them, and tread them under feet. As though to
govern were nothing else but to command, whereas clean contrariwise, (as
that noble Emperor Theodosius said) to govern, is to take charge of the
health, wealth, and prosperity of other men, which charge is so much the
greater as they are more in number, which are under their government. And
whereas every man finds enough to do to take care for him self, and his own
well being, we see how heavy is ye burden of Princes, and them that be in
authority, which have the charge, and are to provide for the safety of so
many, and that with such condition, yt if any one do perish through their
negligence or misgouernement, his blood shall be required at their hands. That
vice therefore by which they are made unapt and unwilling to take so great a
charge upon them, how dangerous it is, Satan was not ignorant, when he
tempted David with pride, as we may easily see. But all the danger is not yet
expressed. For whereas it is not possible, that any one person, though his
wisdom, care, and diligence be never so great, should bear the whole burden
him self of any great government or kingdom, all good governors have
thought it necessary to use the assistaunce of wise and faithful counsel: so
that in matters of religion they would decree nothing without the advice of
them which are learned in the word of GOD: and in matters of the common
wealth, they would attempt nothing, but by the counsel of them that are wise in
politic affairs, thinking truly that to be subject to wisdom, is to rule
most honorably. But where pride preuayleth with any Prince, he will neither
give ear to the messingers of God yt shall speak unto him out of the law of
GOD touching religion, nor follow the prudent advice of trusty Counselors,
which shall inform him in matters pertaining to the Common wealth: by which it
is not possible that either the one or the other can be well ordered and
governed. Therefore great is the danger both unto the Church and to the Common
wealth: where the Prince grows to be insolent and opinatiue, that always
thinking him self to see most clearly in every matter, he disdaineth to be
directed after any counsel or advice that can be given by any man. And
therefore Solomon says, see thou one that is wise in his own conceit, there
is more hope of a fool, then of him: and this began to appear even in this
example of David. For when Satan had stuffed his mind with a proud desire to
know his forces, he gives no ear to Ioab, that with some reasons sought to
dissuade him from so vain an enterprise. Thus presumption causes Princes to
shut their ears against godly and prudent advice of their Counselors. And
that which is worsse, when pride has overcome the Princes heart, he shall
hardly find any that will give faithful and profitable counsel. For when the
Kings humor is once perceived, that he will hear no counsel which is
contrary to his affection, few or none will adventure to speak the truth,
which they know will purchase them selves displeasure. So the King being not
defended with faithful and trusty Counselours, lies open to clawbacks and
flatterers, which will devour him whilst he is alive worser then any wild
beasts, which pray only upon dead carcases. You see the drift of Satan's
malice, in provoking the Prince to pride, to leave him bare of all such
necessary helps as he may have rightly to discharge his office. But being
destitute of all assistaunce upon earth, is there any aid trow you to be
looked for out of heaven? no verily: for by pride the king makes him self
incapable of that, whereby all Princes in solemn title profess that they do
reign, namely the grace of GOD, without which as it is not possible for any
Prince to govern well, so no Prince can be partaker thereof that is thrall to
pride, and enemy to humility. For God has said in express words, that he
resists the proud, and gives grace to none but such as are humble of heart,
how then can they prosper which have God to their open enemy, which are void
of all the grace of God, without which no King dare affirm, that he is able to
govern well? wherefore it were a good remembrance for all Kings and Princes,
when so ever they read or hear their style rehearsed, that they would be
admonished how necessary it is for them to be endued with humility, which if
they be not, they may be well assured never to partake of Gods graces, to the
good government of their realms, and discharge of their conscience,
whatsoever they pretend in their titles. Last of all, the conversion from this
peryod of pride and presumption is so dangerous, no less for the state of a
Prince, then for the safety of every other person, that the most wise King
Solomon, who well considered the beginning, proceeding, and end of al things
(which is ye ground of wisdom) doubts not to affirm in the I6. of his
Proverbs, that pride goes before destruction, and a high mind before ye fall.
This when Satan knew by experience of his own fall and destruction, he
tempted David to pride, whereof not only the inconveniences before rehearsed
might ensue, but also the final overthrow and confusion of David and his
kingdom might follow. The Lord which preserved David, that Satan's malice
had no full effect in him, defendal Christian Princes from the like temptation,
and give them true humbleness of heart, with all such graces and gifts of his
holy spirit, as are needful to discharge so high a calling.

The third and last part I promised to entreat of, is the frailty of man,
which in this text is offered to be considered in two persons. First in the
person of David: and secondly in the person of Ioab. Concerning David, I need
not to stand long in discovering his frailty, not only at this time, but at
other times also, as it is set forth in the Scripture, How excellent a man
he was, and how plentifully endued with the graces and gifts of God, how
noble a King, and how godly a Prophet, I shall not need to describe, he is
sufficiently known unto you: and yet he is not exempted from the common
fragilitie of men. He is highly commended in the Scriptures, and his example
alleged for a pattern of all good Kings that followed him, and yet you see
his Chronicle is blotted with this, and two or three other offenses. Of whose
fall we ought to make this profit to our selves, yt therein we may see our
own weakness, and when we see our own frailty in an other man's faults, we
may be admonished thereby to pray unto the Lord for the continual and mighty
assistaunce of his holy spirit, yt seeing our weakness is so great, we may
always find his grace, whose power is made perfect in infirmity to be
sufficient for us, so that although of frailty we fall often, yet by grace
we may always rise again, so that we never fall away.

Finally, we have need (I say) in respect of our infirmity, to pray for
strength earnestly of God: for if David being a man after Gods own heart, did
but trip, surely we are ready to fall down right, and yet we see yt David did
not only slide out of the way of humane slipprinesse, but also did fall into
some great and notorious offenses. David therefore was a Saint, but he was no
Angel: it is an Angellike perfection to do the will of God in all things. The
Saints upon earth must pray for the same, and contend to come as near it as
they can, and by their imperfection be instructed to humility, until by the
grace of God in Jesus Christ they be brought into the same estate of perfection
with the Angels. In the person of Ioab we have to consider two things, first
the advice which he gives: and secondly his execution of the Kings
commandment, Ioab was a man as his story declares, endued with great
courage, and diverse other good qualities* and yet not simply to be commended,
for there were great faults in him. He was a man in who^ virtues and vices were
almost equal, such a one as Alcibiades is discribed of ye Grecia^s, and Marius
of the Romans. But his chiefest virtue was valiancie and courage, yet in his
example he is noted by the holy ghost in giving counsel to David to be faint
hearted and cowardlik. For first ye holy ghost testifies yt he utterly misliked
this interprise of David, and as a man well acquainted with the affairs of ye
realm, and knowing there was not just cause why the people should be mustred,
he did easily conjecture yt the kings commandment proceaded of vain pride and
presumption: and therefore he had no good will to execute it. In so much that
it is showed in the book of Chronicles that he did perform the Kings precept
negligently, for he not only omitted to number the tribe of Leui for which he
might have some excuse, because they were addicted to the service of religion,
but also he left out the tribe of Benjamin. The reason is alleged because the
kings commandment seemed abominable unto him, and as he did abhor and
detest the kings commandment, so he showed diverse reasons of his misliking:
for after protestation of his goodwil and desire of ye kings honor, in yt he
wished the Lord might increase the people an hundredth times as many as there
were, yt the king might not suspect him as one that refused to take pains in
his service, first he shows that there was no sufficient cause of this
muster, when he says, wherefore does my lord the king desire this thing: And
again he says are not they all the servants of my Lord the king, For one
cause of numbering the people was used even of heathen princes, that the
sublectes thereby should profess their obedience, but at this time there was
neither suspicion of war abroad, nor rebellion at home. Moreover he did also
insinuate that the kings transgression would be ye cause of Gods punishment to
fall upon the people, where he says, and why should this be an offense or
guiltines unto Israel? by using these reasons to diswade the king from his
evil purpose he mght seem to some men, to have discharged the duty of a
trusty and faithful counselor. But the holy Ghost notes him of great
frailty and fainte hartednes, when he says, nevertheless the kings
commandment prevailed with Ioab and with the capitaines of the host. The
rest seeing the kings humor held their peace and said nothing only Ioab uses
some speech to alter the kings mind: but perceiving with what affection the
king was carried, he thought it was not best for him in policy to set himself
altogether against the kings affection, though he bare the king good will,
and wished to have him removed from that unprofitable attempt, yet he durst
not adventure to incur the kings displeasure by doing his duty thoroughly,
and discovering ye hidden wound which he thought was to sore to abide any sharp
medicine, for in such a case as this he thought it was not best to be to
earnest and vehement a persuader and so followed Machiauils philosophy 2000.
years and more before Machiauil was borne. His cowardnes in this case is rather
to be noted, for that at other times he had showed great courage and valiantnes
and given such faithful advise and counsel, that his example is worthy to be
followed of all good counselors. For in the I9. Chap. of this book we read
that when David after the slaughter of Absalom yielded so much to the natural
affection of a father, in lamenting for the death of his unnatural son, that he
forgot the duty of a king, which was to encourage and reward his good
subjects for their service, in so much that when ye people heard what
lamentation he made for Absalom they were clean discouraged and came by
stealth into the City, more like to men that had fled from the feelde, the^
such as had obtained so notable a victory against the kings enemies. As Soon as
Ioab heard thereof he came boldly into the kings presence, and with great
courage he did the duty of a faithful counselor: for he told the King of
his fault plainly, and showed him the danger thoroughly, you have discouraged
(says he) the hearts, and made ashamed the faces of all your faithful
servants which have delivered your life; and the lives of your wives, and of
your sons and daughters, and have established the kingdom this day in your
hand: you love the^ that hate you and hate the^ that love you. For you have
showed this day that you make no account neither of your princes, nor of your
people. For I perceive if Absalom had lived, and all we had been slain this
day, you would have been well pleased with it. But now I advise you leave
your mourning and goeforth and speak comfortably unto the people, or else I
swear unto you by the Lord, you will utterly alienate the minds of your
subjects from you. So that you shall not have one man tarry with you this
night. And this affliction shall be greater then all the troubles and dangers
you have sustained even from your youth. Whereupon David arose, and went and
encouraged his soldiers, so ye kingdom was established in his hands. you se
how roughly and effectually Ioab dealt with the king in that case. But at this
time he is noted to have dealt faint lie and timerously. For although he
apposed some reason against the kings unlawful desire, yet he did it with a
weak arm and so of frailty failed of his duty. Concerning the execution of
the kings commandment there is some controversy. Whether Ioab should have
obeyed the kings precept, when he knew it proceeded from an evil affection.
The time will not serve me to discuss the reasons on both the sides: therefore
I will speak of the case briefly and generally. If the prince command any
thing to be done which of it self is unlawful and against the commandment
of God; that commandment of any subject is not to be excuted, for we are so
bound to obey earthly princes, that we disobey not the God of heaven and earth,
and therefore Ioab should have suffered death rather then to have obeyed David's
commandment in betraying and murdering of Vrias with ye sword of ye Amonites,
which was a faithful subject and a valiant captain, I say he should have
suffered death rather then to have executed such a commandment: because ye
fact was altogether ungodly and unlawful of his own nature. But in this case
where the fact of his own nature was indifferent and lawful of it self, as
to number the people in some cases is not only lawful but also necessary. If
Ioab had done his duty thoroughly in admonishing the king of his corrupt
affection and of the vengeance of GOD like to ensue if he proceeded therein,
and that when he had done all that he could and ought to have done to dissuade
him, his advice would take no place, but the king would still urge his
commandment, and enforce Ioabs obedience, I see no cause, but yt he might have
executed ye kings commandment: the conclusion of ye whole matter, because I
see ye time is past, and I would be looth to abuse your honorable patience too
long, in few words is this. The justice of God is set forth to this end,
that we might be affraide by sin to provoke his wrath, the malice of Satan
is described, that we might be careful to beware of it and by faith to
withstand it, the frailty of man is showed, that seeing our weakness we
might be humbled thereby, and taught to seek for strength only at the hands
of GOD, whose grace through our Lord Jesus Christ shall be sufficient for us,
To whom with the holy Ghost one eternal and everlasting God be all honor
and glory would without end.

Amen.

