DAVID'S HAINOVS SIN. HEARTY Repentance. HEAVY Punishment.


EXODUS 35. 23. And every man, with whom was found -- Goats ^aire, and red
skins of Rams, and Badgers skins, ^rought them. [to the building of the
Tabernacle]

Ad Zoilum.
Thy Lays thou vtt'rest not, yet carpest mine,
Carpe mine no longer, or else utter thine.
By THOMAS FVLLER Master of Arts of Sidnye College in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Cotes, for John Bellamie, dwelling at the three Golden
Lions in Cornehill. 1631.

To the Honorable Mr. Edwar^ Mr. William, and Mr. Christopher Montagu, Sons
to the Right Honorable, Edward Lord Montagu, of Boughton.
Fair Branches of a Stock as fair
Each a son, and each an heir:
Two Ioseph-like, from Sire so sage,
Sprung in Autumn of his age;
But a Benjamin the other,
Gained with losing of his Mother.
This fruit of some spare hours I spent
To your Honors I present.
A King I for my subject have,
And Noble Patrons well may cra^^^
Things tripartite are fit for three,
With Youths, things youthful best (...)
Take the^ therefore in good part,
Of him that ever prays in heart,
That as in height ye wax apace,
Your Souls may higher grow (...)
Whilst your Father (like the green
Eagle in his Scutcheon seen,
Which with bill his age does cast)
May longer still and longer last:
To see your Virtues over increase
Your Years, ere he departs in Peace.
Thus I my Book, to make an end,
To You: and you to God commend.
Your Honors in all service Tho. Fuller.

DAVID'S Heinous Sin.
1.
HOw Zions Psalmist grievously offended,
How Isreal's Harper did most foulely slide,
Yet how that Psalmist penitent amended,
And how tha^ Harper patient did abide
Deserved chastisement, (so fitly styled,
Which wrath inflicted not, but love most mild,
Not for to hurt, but heal a wanton child.)
2.
How one by her own Brother was defiled;
And how that Brother by a Brother slain;
And how a Father, by his Son ex^led:
And by a Subject, how a Sovereign:
How Peace procured after Battles fierce,
As Sol at length does sullen clouds dispierce;
My Muse intends the subject of her Verse.
3.
Great God of might, whose power most Sovereign,
D^pends of none, yet all of thee depend,
Time cannot measure, neither place contain,
Nor wit of man thy Being comprehend:
For whilst I think on Three, I am confined
To One, and when I One conceive in mind
I am recal'd to Three, in One combined.
4.
Thy help I crave, thy furtherance I ask,
My head, my heart, my hand direct and guide,
That whilst I undertake this weighty task,
I from thy written lore start not aside:
Alas, it is nothing Lord with thee to break
The strong, it is nothing to support the weak,
To make men dumb, to make an Infant speak.
5
EAch one begotten by immortal seed,
Becomes the pitched field of two deadly foes,
Spirit and Flesh, these never are agreed,
With trucelesse war each other does oppose;
And though the Spirit often the Flesh does quell,
It may subdue but can it not expel,
So stoutly does the Iebusite rebel.
6
Now David when on Bathsheba loose eyes
He fixed, his heavenly half did him dissuade;
Turn, turn away thy sight from vanities,
Exchange thy object, else thou will be made
Unmindful of thy Soul, her corpse to mind,
Made for to lose the truth, such toys to find,
By looking long, made at the last, stark bli^de.
7.
What though her face, and body be most fair,
Behold, the Sun her beauty does surpass;
His golden beams surmount her yellow hair,
As far as purest Cristall, dyrtie glass:
Her skin, as is the sky, not half so clear,
Her curious v^ines, for color come not near
Those azure streaks, that in the Heavens appear,
8.
There let thy hungry sight her famine feed,
Whereon it cannot surfeit with excess:
Whilst tongue, heart, harp are tuned up with speed,
The grand-contrivers glory to express:
Framing with words, to raise his mighty name,
That with a mighty word, did raise this frame,
And by his providence preserves the same.
9.
(...) let no lustful thoughts lodge in thy mind,
^^fore that they be borne, they must be killed,
Or else the man is cruel that is kind,
To spare the foes, wherewith his Soul is spilled*
And if a wanton motion may request,
Leave for to lodge a limb, th'incroaching guest,
Will soon command room to receive the rest.
10.
Look toward the midday Sun, and thou shall see,
A little The Tower of Eder, nigh Bethle^, 7. miles from Ier^sale^.
tower, over topps of hills to peep;
That is the birth place of thy pedygree:
Full often there have thou fed thy fathers sheep,
And kept his flocks upon the flowery plain.
But now the Sheepe-hook of a country swain,
Is turned the Scepter of of a Sovereign.
11
God made thee great, oh do not him disgrace,
And by his weighty Statutes lightly set,
He honored thee, oh do not him debase,
He thee remembered, do not him forget:
Why should fat Deuteronomy. 32. 15.
Ieshurun so wanton grow,
As at his Masters head, his heels to throw?
Master; that all his feeding did bestow.
12
Behold high Cedars in the valley set,
They in thy eyes like little shrubbs do show,
Whilst little shrubbs upon mount Oliuet,
Seem lofty Cedars; men whose states are low
Their sins are not so obvious to sense,
In Princes persons of great eminence,
A smaller fault does seem^ a great offense.
13
But grant, no man thy wickedness espies,
Surely the Searcher of the reins does mark
Even infant luft, can figg-leaves bleare his eyes?
Or can thy shame be shrouded in the dark?
Darkness shall then be turned into light,
Yea Darkness, is no Darkness, in his sight,
But seem the same to him, both day and night.
14
The Spirit had resolved more to speak,
But her halfe-spoken words, the Flesh confounds,
Nor wonder is it, she so used to break
Gods Laws, not passing for to pass their bound^,
Against man's rules of manners should offend,
Which now impatient longer to attend,
Began before her Rival made an end.
15.
If ever Nature la^ishly did throw
Her gifts on one, which might have served more,
Yet make them comely, if she e're did show,
The prime, and pri^e, and plenty of her store.
Lo, there is the form wherein she has expressed
Her utmost power, and done the very best,
Her maister-peece surpassing all the rest.
16.
(...) if those careless tresses were attired?
Sure then her face for comelines tra^ scends,
What now seems lovely, then wo^ld be admired*
If Art might but begin, where Nature ends.
Alas, ten thousand pitties it is indeed,
That Princes, on so common fare should feed,
Whilst Common men, on princely meat exceed.
17.
Always the same does glut the appetite,
But pleased is our palate, with exchange,
Variety of dishes does delight,
Then give thy loose affections leave to range:
Forbidden things are best, and when we eat
What we have slily gotten by deceit,
Those morsels only make the daynty meat.
18.
But oh, reserve thy self, my maiden Muse,
For a more modest subject, and forbear
To tune such wanton toys, as may abuse,
And give distaste unto a Virgins ear:
Such rotten reasons first from Hell did flow,
And thither let the same in silence go,
Best known of them, that did them never know.
19
Thus he that conquered men, and beast most cruel,
(Whose greedy paws, with fellon goods were found)
Answered Goliah's challenge in a duel,
And laid the Giant grovelling on the ground:
He, that of Philistims, two hundred slew:
No whit appalled at their grisly hue,
Him one frail woman's beauty did subdue.
20
Man is a Ship, affections the Sail,
The world the Sea, our sins the Rocks and Shelves,
God is the Pylot, if he please to sail,
And leave the stearing of us, to our selves,
Against the ragged Rocks we run amain,
Or else the winding Shelves do us detain,
Till God the Palinure, returns again.
21
YEt Da^id bold to sin, did ^eare the shame,
He shunned the sheath, that ran upon the knife,
With a fine fetch, providing for his fame,
^ee fetches home Vriah to his wife:
So under his chaste love, to cloak his own
Unlawful lust, to fault most careless grown,
Most careful that his fault should not be known.
22
(...) in their plots, God does befoole the wise,
(...) ways that none can trace, all must admire:
(...) of his house that nigh Vriah lies,
(...) David so came short of his desire:
The man a nearer l^dging place did use,
(Which made the King on further plots to muse)
And sent home, home to go, did thus refuse.
23.
The pilgrim Arc does so journe in a tent,
In open fields, Ioab my Lord dothlye,
And all the soldiers of his Regiment,
Have Earth their beds, the Heaven their Canopy:
Where bitter blasts of stormy winds are rife.
Shall I go feast, drink, dally with my wife?
Not, as I live, and by your Lordships life.
24.
Then by his servants David did conspire,
Vriahs lust so dull, with wine to edg^:
( Venus does freeze, where Bacchus yields no fire)
By their constraint, he condescends to pledge
One common cup that was begun to all
Captains encamped nigh to Rabba wall;
O^e specially, unto the General.
25
Abishay next is drunk to, Ioabs brother,
And this cupp, to a second paves the way,
That orderly does usher in another;
Thus wine once walking, knows not where to stay*
Yea such a course methodicall they take,
In ordering of cupps, the same did make
Vriah quite, all order to forsake.
26
His false supporters soon begin to slipp,
And if his faltring tongue, does chance to light
On some long word, he speedily does clip
(...) train thereof; yea his deceitful sight,
All objects paired does present to him:
As double faces, both obscure and dim*
Seem in a lying looking-glass to swim.
27.
My prayers for friends prosperity, and wealth,
Shall never be wanting, but if I refuse;
To hurt my self, by drinking others health,
Oh let ingenious natures me excuse:
If men bad manners this esteem, then I
Desire to be esteemed unmannerly,
That to live well, will suffer wine to dye.
28.
Well did blind Homer see, for to express
This vice, that spawnes all other; when he faines,
Dame Circe, an enchanting Sorceresse,
Who^e cupps, made many men forgo their brains*
Whilst with the witless Ass, one purely doats,
Others mishaped are, like lustful Goats,
Or swil-ingrossing Swine, with greedy throats.
29
Though bad, yet better was Vriah left,
Not quite a beast, though (...) a man, disturbed
In mind, but not distracted, nor bereft
Of wit, though (...), yet sob^^ly h^e curbed
His lust, being wise, though ignorant, to cross
The Kings designs, who now new thoughts does toss,
Finding his former project at a loss.
30.
The Night with mourning weeds, the world be^ladd,
When re^tlesse David, for to mend his matter,
Did make it worse; his na^ed sin was bad,
More Monstrous being mas^t; they often do scatter
The chain, that of Gods laws unloose a link:
He swam before in sin, nigh to the briuke,
But now he means in midst thereof to sink.
31
Then for a light, he speedily did call,
(Thou Dark^es with his project best agreed)
For paper, pen, and ink, to write withal,
Though sure a poniard, might have done the deed,
Better if he in blood had dipped it,
And on a sheet of paper what he writ,
A winding sheet far better did befit.
32
This certs I know, as Sepian juice did sink
Into his spongy paper, sabling over
The same, with various-formed specks of ink,
Which was so pure and lilly-white before:
So spots of sin the writers soul did stain,
Whose so ylie tincture did therein remain
Till brinish tears had washed it out again.
33
Next day, when day was scarce an infant grown,
Vriah, (that no mischief did mistrust,
As none he did deserve, but by his own
Did measure all men's dealings to be just)
Bearing this letter, on his journey past
With speed, who needed not to make such have
Whose death, had he gone slow, did come too fast.
34
Thus crafty Masters, when they mind to beat
A ca^elesse boy, to gather birch they send him;
^he little lad, does make the rod complete,
^hinking his Master therefore will commend him:
B^t busily employed, he little t^ough^,
He made the net, wherein himself was caugh^
And must be b^^ten, with the birch he brought.
35.
His journey came well to the welcome end,
Safe to the Rabba, 2 Samuel 12. and 27.
Town of Waters he attaines,
Town which to force, Ioab his force did bend,
(Naught is so hard, but vincible by pains)
Some with their heads did plot, some with (...)
Did practice, yea as ready was the band
To serve, as was the Captain to command.
36.
So busy Bees, some fly abroad at large,
Of f^owry Nectar for to fetch their fill,
Some stay at home, for to receive their charge,
And (...) ^stily, the liquor do distill:
Or bottle it in wax, whilst others strive,
Like ^^urdy Martialls, far away to drive
The drowsy Droanes, that harbor in the hiue.
37
The strong-arm'd Archer, from his crooked Bow,
Made a strait shaft, with dismal news to speed
Into the town which never returned to show,
The sender, how his message did succeed:
Yea heavy bodies, mounted were on high,
Dull ston^s, to which Dame Nature did deny
Feet^ for to go, Art made them wings to fly.
38
Whilst i^ the town, one with his friend did talk,
A sudden stroke did take his tongue away,
Some had their legs arrested, as they walk,
By Martial law, commanding them to stay:
Here falls a massy beam, a mighty wall
Comes tumbling there, and many men does ma^le,
Who were both slain, and buried by the fall.
39.
Were there not used in the days of yore,
Enough men-murdering Engines^ But our age,
Witty in wickedness, must make them more,
By new found plotts, men's malice to inrage:
So that fire-spitting Canons, to the cost
Of Christian blood, all valor have ingrost.
Whose finding, makes that many a life is lost.
40.
Whilst thus the well appointed array sought,
Winding in worm-like trenches near the wall,
To humble the proud towers, Vriah brought
The speaking paper to the General.
Who when such language he therein did find,
H^e thought himself, or else the king was blind,
Himself in body, or the king in mind.
41
Then he the letter did peruse again,
The words, the words of David could not be,
And yet the hand, for Da^ids hand was plain,
He thought it was, and thought it was not he:
Each little line, he thoroughly did view,
Till at the length, more credulous he grew,
And what he thought was false, he found too tr^e.
42
Now Ioab let thy valor be displayed,
Act not a midwife, to a deed unjust,
^y fear or favor, be not ouersway'd,
^o prove a Pandar, to a Princes lust;
Return a humble answer back again,
Let each word breath submission, to obtai^^
By prayers, a conquest of thy Sovereign.
43.
Show how when God and countries good requires,
Then substance, soul and body to engage,
Is the ambition of thy best desires,
Foes foreign to resist, to quell their rage,
How willingly would thou thy self despise,
Count losing of thy goods, a gainful prize,
Lavish thy blood, and thy life sacrifice?
44
But when Gods lore, directly does withstand,
And where his laws, the contrary convince,
We must not break the heavenly kings command,
Whilst we do seek to please an earthly Prince:
The burdens they impose on us to bear,
Our duty is to suffer them; but where
Kings bid, and God forbids, we must forbear.
45
Behold the man, whose valor o^ce surmoun^ed
In sacking Zions mount, (mount not so high
As men therein were ha^ghty) and accounted,
Of Worthies chief, does most unworthily:
He^ that to sum the people of the land
Withstood the King, now with the King does stand
Too buxome for to finish his command.
36
Next morn, when early Phoebus first arose,
(Which then arose last in Vriah's sight)
Him Ioab in the forfront did dispose,
From whom, the rest recoyled in the fight:
Thus of his friends, betrayed by subtle train,
Assaulted of his foes, with might and maine,
He lost his life, not conquered, but ^laine.
47
His mangled body, they expose to scorn,
And now each cravin coward dare defy him,
Outstaring his pale visage, which beforne
Were palsy-strook, with trembling to come nigh him*
Thus heartlesse hares, with purblind eyes do pee^^
In the dead Lions paws, yea dastard Dear,
Over his breathless corpse dare domineere.
David's hearty Repentance.
1
THE tongue of guiltless blood is never ti'd
In the earth's month, and though the greedy ground
Her gaping crannies quickly did provide,
To drink the liquor of Vriah's wound,
Yet it with moanes, be scattered the skies,
And the revoicing Echo, with replies,
Did descant on the plain song of the cries.
2
Hereat the Lord, perceiving how the field,
He sowed with grace, and compast with an heap,
Of many mercies, store of sins did yield,
Where he expected store of thanks to reap,
With flames of anger, furnace-like he burned
For patience long despised, and lewdly spurned
Is at the length to raging fury turned.
3
Then all the Creatures, mustered their train,
From Angels unto worms, the biinde did see
Their Lord disgraced, whose honor to maintain
Things wanting life, most lively seem to be;
R^fusing all to serve Man, that refused:
To serve his God, all striving to be used,
To punish him, his maker that a bus'd:
4
Please it your Highness, for to give me leave,
I Will scorch the wretch to cinder^, said the Fire;
Send me, said Air, him I Will of ^reath bereave;
No, quoth the, earnest Water, I desire
His soylie sins with del^ges to scour;
Nay, let my Lord quoth Earth; employ my pow^^
With yawning chapps, I will him quick deuou^^
5
Soon with a word, the Lord appeased this strife,
Injoyning silence, till he did unfold
That precious volume, called The book of life,
Which the the Printer, priuiledg'd of old,
Containing those he freely did embrace,
Nor ever would I wish an higher grace,
Than in this Book to have the lowest place.
6
Within this Book, he sought for David's name,
Which having found, he prof^ered to blot,
(And David surely well deserved the same,
That did his nature so with sin bespot,
Though none are blotted out, but such as never
Were written in, nothing Gods love can sever,
Once written there, are written there for ever.)
7
Strait from his throne, the Prince of peace arose,
And with embraces did his Father bind,
Imprisoning his arms, he did so close,
(As loving (...) on an oak did wind,
And with her curling flexures it betraile)
His father glad, to find his force to fail,
Strugled, as one not willing to prevail.
8
Thus then began the Spotless lamb to speak,
(One wo^d of whom, would rend the sturdy rock;
Make (...)-scorning Adamant to break,
And unto (...), persuade the sensles stock,
Y^a God hims^^f^, that knows not to repent,
Is made by his petitions, penitent,
Hi^ ^^stice made, with Mercy to relent)
9
Why does my Fathers fury burn so fierce?
shall Persian laws unalterable stand?
And shall my Lord decree, and then reverse,
^nact, and then repeal, and countermand?
Tender thy credit, gracious God, I crave,
And kill not him, thou did conclude to save,
Can these hands blot, what these hands did ingrave?
10.
Has not thy wisdom, from eternity,
Before the worlds foundation first was laid,
^ecree'd, the due time once expired, that I
should Flesh become, and Man borne of a Maid?
To live in poverty, and dye with pa^ne,
That so thy Son, for sinners vilely slain,
Might make vile Sinners b^e thy Sons again.
11.
Let me, oh let me, thy feirce wrath assuage,
And for this sinner, beg a full di^charge,
What though he justly does provoke thy rage?
Thy Justice I will satis^ie at large.
If that the Lord of life must murdered be,
Let (...), this murderer may go free,
My Meritts cast on him, his Sins on me.
12.
Thus speaking, from his fragrant clothes there went
A pleasant breath, whose odor did excel,
Myrrh^, Al^^s, and Cassia for sent,
(...) all perfumed his Father with the smell,
Whereat his smoothed face most sweetly smiled,
And hugging in his arms, his dearest child,
Returned these welcome words, with voice (...) mild^
13
Who can so pleasing violence withstand?
Thy craving, is the having a request,
^uch mild entreaties, do my heart command,
The 'mends is made, and pacified I rest:
As far as Earth, from Heaven do distant lie,
As Ea^t is parted from the Western sky,
So far his sins, are severed from mine eye.
14
^ereat the heavenly Quire, lift up their voice,
Angels and Saints imparadis'd combine,
Upon their golden Violls, to rejoice,
^o raise the praise of the celestial Trine,
All in their so^gs a sacred strife expressed,
Which should sing better, and surpass the rest,
All did surpass themselves, and sang the best.
15.
Then said the Fire, my fury I recant,
Life-hatching warmth, I will ^or him provide:
I^ David's breathless lungs do chance to pant,
Said Air, I Will fan them with a windy tide:
With moisture, I Will said Water, quench his heat,
And I his hunger, quoth the Earth, with meat,
Of marrow, fatness, and the flower of Wheat.
16
Thus when a Lord, long buried in disgrace,
A King ^o former favor does restore,
With all respect the Court does him embrace,
Fawning as fast, as they did flowte before:
Whose smiles, or frowns, are but the bare reflex^
Of the Kings face, and like to this direction,
Where he affects, they settle their affection.
17
PLaine-dealing Natha^, presently was sent:
Nathan, than whom, was none more skilled to lanch
(...) festred soul, and with a se^rching tent,
(...) sound the sore; more cunning none to stanch
A bleeding-hearted sinner, nor more kind,
With swaddling clothes of comfort, for to bind
Vnjoynted members, of a troubled mind.
18
(...) did not flow with wealth, which envye breeds,
^^or yet was he with pe^ury oppressed;
^^ant is the cause, from which co^^^mpt proceeds:
(...) means were in the mean, and that is the best.
High hills are parcht with h^^te, or hid with snow,
And humble dales, soon drowned, that lie too low,
Whilst happy grain, on hanging hills does grow.
19.
For sundry duties, he did days devide,
Making exchange of work, his recreation,
For prayer, he set the precious morn aside,
The midday he bequeathed to meditation:
Sweet sacred stories, he reserved for night*
To read of Moses meeknes, Sampsons might,
These were his joy, these only his delight.
20.
But now dispensing with his daily task,
To court he comes, and wisely did invent,
Under a parable, his mind to mask,
Seeming to me^ne naught less, than what he meant*
And Lapwing-like, round fluttering a while,
With (...) praeface and a witty wile,
He made (...) King himself for to beguile,
21
Thus he that thought all mortal men to cheat,
And with false shows, his secret sins to shade,
Was couzned by the innocent deceit,
Of one plain Prophet, and directly made,
As he a Judge sat on the bench, to stand,
At bar a prisoner, holding Thou art the man.
up his hand,
The man that has done this thing shall dye.
But first condemned by his own command.
22
Go^ fond affectors of a flanting strain,
Whose sermons strike at sins with slenting blows,
Give me the man that is power^ull and plain,
The Monste^ Vice, unmasked to expose:
Such Preachers do the soul, and marrow part,
And cause the guilty conscience to smart,
Such please no itching ears, but pierce the heart.
23.
This made King David's marble mind to melt,
And to the former temper to return,
^hawing his frozen breast, when as he felt
The lively sparks of grace therein to burn,
Which under ashes cold, were choakt before;
And now he weeps, and wayles, and sighs full sore,
Though sure such sorrow, did his joy restore.
24.
So have I seen one slumber'd in a swound,
Whose sullen soul into his heart did hye,
His pensive frien'ds, soon heave him from the ground*
And to his face life-water do apply:
At length, a long-expected sigh does strive
To bring the welcome news, the man's alive,
Whose soul at last, does in each part ariue.
25
^hen to his Harp, he did himself betake,
^His tongue-tide harp, long grown out of request,)
and next to this his glory must awake,
^he member he of all accounted best:
Then with those hands, which he for grief did wring,
He also lightly strikes the warbling string,
And makes one voice serve both to sob and sing.
26
that heavenly voice to hear, I more desire,
^han Syren's sweetest songs, than music made
^y Philomele chief of the winged quire;
Or him, whose Lays so pleasing, did persuade
Stones for to lack^y, when he went before,
Or that brave harper, whom unto the shore,
His hackny Dolphin safely did restore.
David's Heavy Punishment.
1
MOst true it is, when Penitents by grace
Acquitted are, the pardon of their sins,
And punishments release, do ^oth embrace,
Like to a pair of undivided twinns,
Parted they cannot be, they cleave so fast,
Yet when the tempest of Gods wrath is past,
Still his afflicting hony-shower does last.
2
But let the Schools, these thorny points dispute,
Whose searching sight can naked truth discry,
Sculking in Errors arms, and are acute,
^ine-^ingred with distinctions to ^ntye
Knotts more than Gordian, these men never mist
The slender mark, like ^^dges 20. 16.
those in whose left fist,
There did so much dexterity consist.
3
Mean time, my Muse, come see how prettily
The patient Infant does it self behave,
Infant, but newly borne, now near to The death of King David's Child.
dye,
That from the cradle, posted to the grave,
See with what silent signs, and sighs full feign,
Poor heart, it would express where lies the pain,
Complaining, that it knows not to complain.
4
Stay cruel Death thy hand for pity hold,
Against some aged grand-fire bend thy bow,
That now has full, twice forty winters told,
Whose head is silvered over, with ages snow:
Dash out this Babe, out of thy dismal bill,
And in exchange, let him thy number fill,
So may be life, his friends enjoy him still.
5.
Those hands to hurt another, never sought,
Which cannot help themselves, they are so weak;
His heart did never hatch a want on thought,
His tongue did never lie, that cannot speak:
By wrong and violence, he never did wrest
The goods, wherewith his Neighbor is possessed,
Whose strength scarce servs to suck his nurse's breast
6
^ut ah, this Infant's guilt from him proceeds,
That knew the least, when most he sought to know,
Who was most nak't, when clothed in his weeds,
Best clothed then, when naked he did go:
In vain the wit of wisest men does strive,
To cut off this intayle, that does derive
Death unto all, when first they are alive.
7
As when a tender Rose begins to blow,
Yet scarce unswadled is, some wanton maid
Pleased with the smell, allured with the show,
Will not reprive it, till it has displayed
The folded leaves, but to her breast applie's
Th'abortive budd, where coffined it lye's
Losing the blushing Dye, before it die's*
8
So this babes life, newly begun, did end
Which sure received the substance, though not signed
With graces seal; God freely does attend
His ordinance, but will not be confined
Thereto, when'ts not neglected, nor despised,
They that want Water are by Fire baptized,
Those sanctified, that never were circumcised.
9
Sweet Babe, one Sabbath thou on earth did see,
But endless Sabboths, do in heaven survive,
Grant, Death of joyful hours deprived thee,
Thou had seen years of sorrows, if alive:
True, thou went borne a Prince, but now art crowned
A ^ing by Death, sleep therefore in the ground
Sweetly, until the Tr^mpet last shall sound.
10
By this child's death, King David did sustain
One loss; but wh^re this misery did end,
More miseries began: as in a chain,
One link, does on another link depend:
His l^st, with lust, his slaying with a slaughter
Must punished be: proportioned thereafter
To Mother sin, is punishment the Daughter.
11.
AMnon advised by Ionadab, a fit
Of sickness faines: Men wickedly inclined,
Worse counselors, (that with great store of wit
Have dearth of grace) most easily may find;
And Thamar's The deflowring of Thamar.
hands, his meat must only make:
Ah happy age, when Ladies learned to bake,
And when Kings Daughters knew to knead a cake.
12
Rebecka was esteemed of comely hew,
Yet not so ^ice ^er comeliness to keep,
But that she wa^er for the cammells drew;
Rachell was fair,^ et fedd her fathers sheep,
But now for to supply Rebeck'as place,
Or doc as Rachell did, is counted base,
Our dainty dames, would take it in disgrace.
13
But quickly did his ^ea^tly lust declare,
That he, to eat her daynties, had no need,
He for the cook, not for the cates did care,
She was the dish, on whom he meant to feed:
Oh how she prayed, and strove with might and maine
And then from striving, fell to prayers again,
But prayers, and striving, both alike^ in vain.
14
Thus a poor Lark imprisoned in the cage
Of a Kites claws, most sweetly sings at large
Her own Dirge whilst she seeks to calm his rage,
And from her jailer, sue's for a discharge;
Who passing for no music that surpast,
To feed his ^ares, whilst that his gutts do fast,
On her that prayed so long, does prey at last.
15
Then with dust-powdre'd hair she sore bewayles,
And punished on he^selfe, her brothers sin,
Parting her maiden livery with nails,
That parted was with colors, and wherein
White streaks, their owners innocence did show;
The bashful Red, her modesty; the row
Of Sable, sorrowed for the wearers woe.
16
Comfort thy self more virtuous, than fair,
More fair, than happy virgin, mourn with measure,
Sins unconsented to, no souls impair,
That must be done perchance with bodies pleasure,
Which with the grief of soul may be constrained
The casket broke, the jewel still remained,
Untouched, which in the casket was contained.
17.
IN his breast The murdering of Amnon.
Absolon records this wrong:
Out of our minds, good turns do quickly pass,
But injuries there in remain too long,
Those scraul'd in dust, but these ingrav'd in brass,
One Sunset for our anger should suffice,
Which in his wrath set often, often did arise,
With yearly race, surrounding twice the skies.
18.
Now when his fruitful flocks, which long had wor^
Their woollen coats, for to make others hot,
Were now to forfeit them, and ^o be shorn,
(Sure from the silly sheep, his ^ivelish plott,
Their owner never learnd) he finds a way,
To work revenge, and called on that day,
His brothers to a feast, which pro'vd a fray.
19
What Amnon drunk in wine, in blood he spilt,
Which did the dainties mar* and meat defile,
Cupps* carpetts, all with goary streakes were gilt,
Seeming to blush, that cruelty so vile*
So fowly savage, should the banquet stain:
Thus he that being well, did sickness feign*
Not being sick, was on a sudden slain*
20
The rest refused on the meat to feed,
Whose bellies were so full with grief, and fear
To feel, what they had seen; away they speed
To ride: but Fame did fly, fame that does wear
An hundred listening ears, an hundred eyes,
An hundred prating tongues, she daily plies,
Tongues, that both tell the truth, and tattle lies*
21.
She gets by going, and does gather strength,
As balls of snow, by roling more do gain,
She whispr'd first, but lowdly blazed at length,
All the Kings Sons, all the Kings sons are slain:
The pensive Court, in doleful dumps did rue
This dismal case, till they the matter knew,
Would all bad news, like this, might prove untru^
22.
Go silly souls, that do so much admire,
Court-curious incertainment, and fine fare,
May you for me obtain what you desire,
I for your fowls of Phasis do not care,
If that such riots at your feasts be rife,
And all your meat, so sowrely sauc'd with strife*
That guests to pay the shot, must lose their life.
23
Happy those Swains, that in some shady bower,
Making the grass th^i^ cloth, the ground their board,
Do feed on mellow fruit, or milks fine flower,
Using no wine, but what their wells afford:
At these did malice never bend her bow,
Their state is shot f^^e, it is set so low,
They overlooke, that would them overthrow.
24
FAst unto Geshure, flies the fatricide,
To shelter there himself, the sentence sore
O^ angry justice, fearing to abide,
Oh happy turn had he returned no more,
Who wonted guise, kept in a country strange,
Those that abroad, to foreign parts do range,
Their climate, not conditions do exchange:
25.
Returned: at entrance of the Court he Absolons aspiring to the kingdom.
stands,
If any suitors there he chanced to find,
He steals their hearts, by taking of their hands,
And sucked out their soul, with kisses kind:
He of their name, cause, city cloth inquire,
Proud men prove base, to compass their desire,
They lowest crouch, that highest do aspire.
26.
Before such kisses come upon my face,
Oh, let the deadly Scorpion me sting,
Yea rather than such arms should me embrace,
Let curling Snakes about my body cling:
Than such fair words, I Would rather hear the foul
Untuned schreeching of the doleful Owl,
Or hear the direful mountain Wolf to howl.
27
Some men affirm, that Absolon does sound
In the worlds oldest tongue [of peace a father]
But certs I know that such mistake their ground*
[Rebellious sonne] sure it imports rather:
And yet why so? since since I call to mind,
Than the Clementes none were more unkind,
Then Innocent, more nocent none I find.
28
Then borrowing the plausible disguise
Of holiness, he mas'kt his plot so evil,
Under the good pretense of sacrifice,
(A Saint dissembled is a double Devil.)
But sure were these the vows, he went to pay*
His Sire, that harmless sheep he vowed to slay,
Who over mount Olives weeping fled away.
29.
This makes me call my Saviors grief to mind,
Who on Luk^ 19. 4^.
this mount, because the Jews were grown
So wicked, those that said they saw, so blind,
Mourned for their sins, that mourned not for their own:
Much did he weep for others that forbad,
Others to weep for him, whose being sad
Has made his Saints, for ever since, full glad.
30.
Down comes the King to Jordan: on the sand
^f that the saylors chance to ground the boat,
^ flood of tears they straitwayes did command,
Whos^ large accession, made the vessel floate:
And if a blast of wind, did chance to fail,
So greivously the people did bewail,
Their very ^ighs might serve to stuff the sail.
31
Thus was the King* in his own land exiled,
His subjects were his host, and he their guest,
Whose place was ill supplied by his child,
(Unhappy Bird defiling his own nest)
That took his fathers wives, in open ^ight,
Those that do want of grace the shun-shine bright,
Extinguish often dim Natures candle light.
32*
The blushing Sun, no sooner did behold
^o beastly lust, but sought his face to shroud,
And shrinking in his beams of burnish't gold,
Was glad to sculke within a sullen cloud:
The shamefac't birds, with one wing feign to fly,
Did hold their other fan before their eye,
For fear they should such filthiness epsy.
33
What needed he, to keep alive his name,
Erect a pillar? Sure this damned deed,
Makes us remember, and detest the same,
That in the worlds last doting age succeed:
Yea when that Brass, that seems time to scorn,
Shall be by all-devouring time out-worne,
His name they'se bear in mind that are not borne*
34*
But Ac^itophel hanging himself.
he that gave this counsel, did not speed*
Who speeding home on witless ass amain,
(Ass that for wit, his rider did exceed,)
'Cause he his will at Court could not obtain,
Did make his Will at home: the peevish el^e
Amongst his household parts his cursed pel^e,
Careful of that, but careless of himself.
35
Oh sudden thought of thy mortality!
Thou art not yet so thorough worn with age,
None in thy sace such Symptoms can espy,
Which should so near approaching death praesage:
Thy state is not distempered with heat,
Thy working pulse does moderatly beat,
All outward things seem whole, seem all complete.
36
But ghostly is thy g^iefe: thou that by treason,
Against thy Liege, so lately wast combined,
Thy passions now rebel against thy Reason*
Reason, that is the Sovereign of thy mind,
And seek for to disturb it from the throne:
Strive, strive to set these civil broils at one,
Order thy self, and let thy house alone.
37
A chain of hemp, he to his neck made fast,
By tying of which knot, he did untie
The knot of Soul and Body, and at last
Stopping the passage of his breath, thereby
A passage for his Soul, wide opened he:
Thus traitors, rather than they should go free,
Themselves the hangmen of themselves will be.
38
His friends, to balm his body spare no cost,
With spices seeking to perfume a sink,
For certs I know, their labor was but lost,
His rotten memory, will ever stink,
His soul thereby was nothing bettered,
Because his corpse were bravely buried,
Tombs please the living, profit not the dead.
39
How many worthy Martyrs vilely slain,
Made meat for fowls, or for the fire made fuel,
Though ground, they could not for a grave obtain,
Were not less happy, but their foes more cruel,
Unburied bodies made not them unblest,
Their better half, did find an heavenly rest,
And does enjoy, joys not to be expressed.
40
Leave we the Traitor thus, upon whose hearsse,
My Muse shall not a precious ^eare mis-spe^d,
Proceeding to bemoane in doleful verse,
How The battle betwixt Absalon and David's men.
two great bands, with cruel blows contend,
Whole clouds of arrows, made the sky to lowre,
Dissolved at length, into a bloody shower,
Till Steel killed many, wood did more devo^re.
41
Oh, let it not be published in the path*
That leads unto the incestuous seed of Lot*
Tell not these tidings in the town of Gath,
In Ascalon, see ye proclaim it not,
Least these rejoice at this calamity,
Who count your fame, their greatest infamy,
Your woeful jarrs, their welcome melody.
42
Had Rachel now revived, her sons to see,
Their bloody hands, would make her heart to bleed,
Each a Benoni unto her would be;
Had Lea^ lived to see herself agreed
To fall out with herself, with tears most sure,
She would have made her tender eyes past cure,
Who ever wonn, she must the loss endure.
43
The conquest (which her verdict long suspended)
Hovered aloft, not knowing where to light;
But at the last, the lesser side befreinded
With best success; the other put to flight,
More trusted a swift foot, than a strong fist,
Most voices often of Verity have mist,
Nor in most men, does Victory consist.
44
The graceless son was plunged in deep distress,
For earth his weight, no longer would endure,
The angry heavens denied all access,
Unto a wretch so wicked, so impure:
At last the heavens and earth with one consent,
A middle place, unto the monster lent,
Above the earth, beneath the firmament.
45
His skittish Mule, ran roving in the fields,
And up high hills, down dales, over woods did prance,
Seeming with neighing noise, and wanton heels,
In token of great joy to sing and dance,
That now her master, she should bear no more,
(An heavy bulk, whose sins did weigh so sore)
Now rid of him, that rid on her before.
46
Cry Absolon, cry Absolon amain,
And let thy winged prayers, pierce the sky,
Oh to the spring of pity, soon complain,
That never is dammed up, not drained dry,
Thy fault confess, his favor (...) implore,
Much is thy misery, his mercy more,
Thy want is great, but greater is his store.
47
Condemn thyselfe, and he shall thee acquitt,
Do thou but pray, he will pity thy estate,
Confess thy debt, he will the same remit,
It never was too soon, its never to late:
Alas; long sinners scarce at last relent,
He gives not all offenders to repent,
That grants pardon to all penitent.
48
Whilst thus his life suspended was on high,
Bold-ventrous loab opened his heart,
(Heart, where much treason lurked privily)
And peir'ct his body with a triple dart:
Then Crimson blades of grass, whereon he bleeds,
Did straitwayes dye, and in their room succeeds
A fruitful wilderness, of fruitless weeds.
49.
When David heard the Victory was gained,
But his son lost (as Jordan waxing rank,
Over flows the land, and scorns to be restrained,
To have his Tide, ti'de in a narrow bank)
Surges of sorrow in his heart did rise,
And brake the watery sluices of his eyes,
Who lightened thus himself, with heavy cries*
50
My son, whose body had of grace the fill,
My son, whose soul was so devoid of grace,
Without my knowledge, and against my will,
My son, in cause so bad, so strange a place:
My son, my son, for which I most complain*
I fear in soul, as in the body slain,
Would I might dye, that thou migh'st live again*
51
Now when this grief was swallowed, not digested,
The subjects ^lock't, King David to restore,
Who in an instant, love what they detested,
Detest in the instant* what they lo^'d before:
People like weather-cocks waved with the wind*
We constant, in unconstancy may find*
As time counts minutes, so they change their mind.
52
Amongst the rest, that came the King to meet,
Lam^-^egd Mephibosheth, but loyal hearted,
Was one, that never washed his clothes, or ^eete
(Except with tears) since David first departed*
Feet, which by fall from nur^e^ arms began
To halt, with him a child* so fast she ran,
That he could never go, when grown a man*
53.
Not much unlike, if it give no distaste,
That real truths. I do with trifles match,
Whilst that my posting Muse, with headlong haste
Does strive her rural Lays for to dispatch,
Halting Invention, for the want of heed,
And lame unjoynted lines from her proceed,
And seldom things done speedily, do speed.
54.
But here an unexpected jarre arose,
Whilst people, for most part in Prince contended*
Which grew from bitter words to bloody blows,
The King, quoth Judah, of our Tribe descended,
He of our flesh is flesh, bone of our bone:
Nay, answered Israel, in the King we own
Ten parts, a single share is yours alone.
55
Whilst sparks of discord thus began to smoke,
To ^inde the bellows, Sheba did conspire,
( The son of Belial.
Sheba that proudly did disdain the yoke)
And blowing of a trumpet, blew the fire:
Then those that claimed ten, disdained all part
In David, taught by his seducing art,
They discontented to their tents depart*
56
This Rebel, Ioab whilst to quell he strives,
A nameles woman (in the book of life
Her name is kept, that kept so many lives)
Procured that he, who stirred up the strife,
The body of the Commonwealth to rend
From Prince the head, whereon it did depend,
With head, from body rent, his life did end.
57
By his death many Citizens survived,
The loss of Traitors blood, did prove their gain,
Soon cea'st the flood of Discord, thence derived,
When they the factious fountain did restrain.
This war, a vile man with What part have we in David, etc.
a word did raise,
Unto his shame, which to her endless praise,
A worthy Woman with a His head shall be thrown, etc.
word allaies.
58
So in our land, a noble Queen arose,
As we have heard our fathers often relate,
A Maid, yet Manly to confound her foes,
A Maid and yet a Mother to the State:
Which she weak, like to crumbling brick did find,
Which strong, as lasting marble she resigned,
Gold and Gods worship, both by her refined.
59
She having flourished in great renown,
In spite of power, and policy of Spain,
Did change her earthly, for an heavenly crown,
And cea'st to rule over men, with God to reign:
Forty and four Novembers fully past,
(Aie me that winged time should post so fast)
To Christ her love, she wedded was at last.
60
This Sun thus set, there followed no Night
In our Horizon, strait another Sun,
Most happily continued the light,
Which by the first was hopefully begun:
And, what might most amaze all mortal eyes,
Never before out of the Northen skies,
Did men behold bright Phoebus to arise.
61.
Arts did increase his fame, he did increase
The fame of Arts, and counting twice eleven
Twelve months upon his throne, this Prince of peace,
By falling to the Earth, did rise to Heaven:
Then down our chee^ stears hot and cold did flow,
Those for the Sire decea'st, expre'st our woe,
Those joy, for his succeeding Son did show.
62.
Live gracious Liege, whose Virtues do surmount
All flattery, and Envy them admires,
C^nter of grace and greatness, liv^ ^o Count,
Till that thy kingdom with the world expires:
We subjects wish thee worst, that love thee best,
Who here long to enjoy thee, ^oe request,
That late thou may enjoy an heavenly rest.
63
And thou young Prince, hope of the future age,
Succeed to Fathers Virtues, Name, and Crown,
A new Star did thy Saviors birth praesage,
His death, the Sun eclipsed did renown:
But both of these conjoined to adorn
Thy welcome birth, the Sun with ag^ so worn,
Did seem half dead, and a young starr was borne.
64*
But what do thou, my ventrous Muse, praesume
So far above thy dwarf-like strength to strain?
Such soaring soon will melt thy waxen plume,
Let those heroike sparks, whose learned brain,
Does merit chapletts of victorious bays,
Make Kings the subjects of their lof^y lays,
Thy worthless praising does their worth dispraise
65
Strike sail, and to thy matter draw more near,
And draw thy matter nearer to an end*
Though naught prayse-worthy in thy verse appear,
Yet strive that shortness may the same commend:
Return to see, where Ioah homeward goes,
To see his Friends, that had subdued his foes;
His soldiers, and himself there to repose.
66
Thus when two adverse winds, with strong command,
Summon the Sea, the waves that both do feel,
Dare follow neither, but in doubt do stand,
Whilst that the ships with water drunk do reele
With men, for grief of drowning, drowned in grief,
Until at length, a Calm brings them relief,
And stills the storm, that had so long been brief.
67
Oh that I might but live to see the day,
Day, that I more desire, than hope to see)
When all these bloody discords done away,
Our Princes, in like manner might agree:
When all the world, might smile in perfect peace,
And these long-lasting broyls, at length might cease
Broils, which (alas) do daily more increase.
68
^he Neatherlands, with endless wars are tossed,
^ike in success, to their unconstant tide,
^osing their gettings, gaining what they lost.
^enmarke both sword, and Ba^tick seas divide:
More blood, than juice of grape nigh Rhine is shed;
And Brunswicke Land will not be comforted,
But cries, My Duke, alas, my Duke is dead.
69
The wars in France, now laid aside, not ended,
Are only skinned over with a scarre,
Yea haughty Alps, that to the clouds ascended,
Are ouer-climbed with a bloody War:
And Maroes birth place Mantua, is more
Made famous now for Mars, and battle sore,
Than for his Muse, it famed was before.
70
Sweden to stopp The Imperial flood provides,
(May his good cause, be crowned with like success,
And they, that now please none, to please both sides
May they themselves, his trusty friends express.)
But Turks the Cobweb of their Truce, each howr^
Do break, they wait a time, but want no power
Nor will, warr-wearied Christians to devour.
71
But let the cunning Chymicke, whose exact
^kill, caused Light from darkness to proceed,
Out of disorder order can extract,
Make in his due time all these jars agreed,
Whose greiuances may be bemoaned by men,
By God alone redressed; and till then
^ hey more befitt my Prayers than my Pen.
(...).
FINIS.

