A comfortable Sermon of Faith, in temptations and afflictions. Preached at S.
Botulphes without Aldersgate in London, the. xv. of Februarye. 1573. By Master
William Fulke, Doctor of Divinity.

1. JOHN. 5. 4. All that is borne of God, overcomes the world: and this is
the victory that overcomes the world, even our faith. Imprinted at London by
John Awdeley, dwelling in little Britain street without Aldersgate. 1574.

To the right worshipful and godly Gentlewoman Maistres Mary Harrys Wyddow.
I Have always liked well (as you know) the plain dealing of our friend
Master Fulke with the Scriptures of God, which is so much the more commendable
in him, as he is berter able to make a show in the perswasible words of man's
wisdom, if he were disposed, For although he be ignorant of no kind of
learning, by which a man might set forth him self unto the world, and
understands more strange languages then a great number of our brethren: yet
when he shows the testimony of God, he takes not upon him to know any thing
as saint Paul sayrh, but Jesus Christ, and him crucified. For by this
foolishnes of preaching the wisdom, power, and goodness of God appears
greatest, and woorketh most essectually in them that are the children of God.
And therefore I maruail not, if you which have heard him and others that use
the same simplicity in teaching, do covet to hear them still, where as many
are more desirous of variety to delight their itching ears, then careful of
sound doctrine, to convert their sinful hearts. But where as you were not only
content to have heard this Sermon preached once at Saint Botulphes without
Aldersgate in London, but that you did instantly desire to have the copy
thereof, that you might read it often: As it was godly for you to require it,
so it was hard for me to obtain it. For our friend will sooner be entreated
to preach ten Sermons, then to write one. Nevertheless at the length by many
persuasions he was overcome to put it in writing, so that I got the copy out
of his hands, which now I send unto you, not doubting but you will use it,
both to the renewing of your own remembrance, and to the profit of many others.

I need not to add any commendation of the matter, especially to you which
knows it, and as to any others, I wysh them first to read it, and then to
judge of it as they shall find it. Thus I commit you to God.

Yours to command in the Lord. I. Y.

A Sermon preached in S. Botulphes Church without Aldersgate in London, the 15
day of February. 1573. by Master Wylliam Fulke Doctor of Deuinitie.
Matthew. 15. 21. And Jesus departing from thence, went aside into the parts of
Tire and Sydon.


A comfortable Sermon of faith,
THis part of scripture (beloved in our savior Christ) declares how our
savior Christ began to show some bright beams of his grace unto the Gentyls.
For although the full time were not yet come, that he should show him self
openly unto the whole world, yet by this and such like examples he would give
some foretaste of his goodness, which afterward should be offered universally.
Even as the Sun before it ascend in the Morning above the upper face of the
earth where we dwell, yet casts up some beams of his light, whereby we know
that he shall shortly arise: so our savior Christ, by stretching forth some
fruit of his grace unto the heathen would give good hope of that common mercy,
which shortly afterward was exhibited both to the Jews and the Gentiles
indeffere^tly. Which thing is both profitable and comfortable for us that are
of the Gentiles to consider, that we may know by what means and degrees the
Gospel which is ye power of God to salvation, was brought unto us

There is also set forth in this Gospel a wonderful commendation of a most
strong and invincible faith in a woman that was a Cananite, to set forth the
great infidelitye and ingratitude of the Jews, y^ were the chosen people of
God: yt by comparyng them together, we might understand how justly the Jews
were deprived of the promised redemption, which so disdainfully rejected it
being offered, that the Heathen so willingly embraced when they heard of it.
Which thing also we may note in the occasion of his departure out of the land
of Iewrye into the parts of Tire and Sidon, which the Evangelist discribeth to
be this, in the beginning of this chapter. The Scribes and Pharisees that came
from Jerusalem, picked a quarrel against him, because his disciples did eat with
unwashed hands, whereby they transgressed the tradition of the Elders: our
savior Christ in defense of his disciples, charge ye Scribes and Pharisees
which were so zealous to mayntame their own ceremonies, yc they were careless to
break the commandment of God. And so it comes to pass always, that they
which are most earnest in upholding and defending traditions and ceremonies
invented by man, are most forgetful in keeping the commandments of God. But
this is the just judgment of God against those yt invent a new worship of
their own brain: That first they leese their labor, that so seek to please
God: and secondly that they are deprived of al right understanding, because
they have presumed to be wiser then God. And therefore our savior Christ
co^futeth them by the testimonye of Esaias, where God complains that the
hiprotical people came near unto him with Esaias. 29.
their mouth, and honored him with their lyps, but their heart was far from
him: And, in vain do they worship me (says God) while they teach doctrines
that are the precepts of men. Therefore I will again do a marvelous work in this
people even a marvelous work and a wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men
shall perish, and the understanding of the prudent men shall be hyd. And as the
same Prophet threatens in another place: Their eyes shall be blinded that they
shall not see, their Esaias. 8.
ears stopped that they shall not hear, their hearts made gross yt they shall
not understand, least they see with their eyes, and understand with their
hearts and be converted, and God should heal them. This got the hye Priests,
Scribes and Pharisees by multiplying their ceremonies, and namely ablutions and
washings, It is true that God in the law commanded diverse Leuit. 15. Number. 19.
ablutions and washings, which did rather testify their uncleanness, the^ purge
away their filthiness: but they had added many others, as washing of cups and
cruises, dishes and platters, brazen vessels and tables, and often washing of
Mark. 7.
their hands before they did eat, and especialy if they had come from the
market, they might not eat before they had washed their hands, rant: they were
Jews, she was a Gentile: they were of the blessed seed of Abraham, she was of
the curssed race of Canaan: they were of the chosen people of Israel, she was
of the excommunicate and castout people of the Cananites: they were brought up
in the knowledge of God and his laws, even from their infancy, she was brought
up in the supersticio^s of idolatry: they were Doctors and teachers of Gods
people, she had but small knowledge, as one yt was an Heathen woman, and
therefore might not come into the congregation where Gods people were taught.
Yet they rejected Christ when he was offered, she followed Christ when he
departed from her: They were Infidels, she was faithful, and endued with such
faith as might be a shame to all the Israelites that began so long before her,
and yet were left so far behind her. For of her it might be said which our
savior Christ speaks of the faith of the Centurion: Verily I have not found
such faith in Israel. The Centurion was an Heathen Math. 8.
man, a Roman, a man of war that came to subdue the slavish nation of ye
Jews, yet God gave him so great faith, that he excelled even the Israelites
them selves. And surely if the circumstances of this poor woman's faith be
considered, it shall appear far more excellent then his. And especially if we
behold with what bitter temptations her faith was examined and tried, we shall
plainly confess how far it passed: for her faith was tried unto the uttermost.
And first with great and extreme adversity: for her Daughter was miserably
tormented with a Devil.

Good Lord what a temptacion was this to her that was of the curssed stock of
the Cana nites, which Gods people were commanded utterly to destroy, and to
make no leage or covenant with them: then having newly forsaken the religion of
her forefathers and people where she lived, and lately received the religion of
the Jews? What a great temptacion (I say) was it to her, that her daughter
should be pos sessed with the Devil? She might either have thought that she had
made an evil change of her old religion, to be thus welcomed by the Devil into
a new religion: Or else, that God the author of this religion, would not accept
her to be one of his worshippers, being a cursed. Cananite, and therefore
suffered the devil to have such power over her daughter, as that he did wholly
possess her, and miserably torment her. For of al adversities that can be laid
upon a man or a woman this goes nerest, to make them think they are out of the
favor of God, to behold that they are given over as it were a pray into the
Devils possession. The loss of tion was openly talked of among the Jews, so
the promises of God concerning Christ their Redeemer were commonly known among
them, as: That all nations of the world should be blessed in him: That
whosoever calls Genes. 12. and, 8. and, 12.
upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved: That he shall deliver the poor when
he cries, the needy also, and him that has no help: He shall be mercyful to
the poor and nedy, and shall Joel. 2.
preserve the souls of the poor: He shall redeem their souls from deceit
and violence, and Psalm. 72.
dear shall their blood be in his sight: That he that puts his trust in
him, shall not be confounded. Esaias. 28.
Upon these and such like general promises of God, contained in the old
Testament, her faith was builded and founded so steadfastly, that no storm of
temptacion was able to overthrow it. Which thing is very necessary for us to
consider, that when our faith shall be tried and examined, as this womans was, we
may know how to wythstand all the assaults of most grievous temptacions, as
she did. That the trial of our faith, which is much 1. Pet. 1.
more precious then gold yt perishes (though it be tried by fire) might be
found unto our praise, honor and glory at the appearing of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Let us therefore make much of the general promises of God, let us
willingly embrace the^, diligently wey them, and daily remember them: For in
them our faith being grounded, it shall stand like a most sure bulwark and
invincible fortres against any thing yt shall assault our everlasting salvation.

Upon this boldness and confidence this wretched woman comes unto Christ. For
thus her faith concludes: Seeing all nations of the world shall be blessed in
him, the very Cananites are not excluded. For although the Cananites were once
curssed of God above al other nations, yet by this blessed seed al curse
should be taken away, seeing he is not restrai ned to one nation more then
another, but is the common blessing unto al nations. And seeing he shall hear
the poor that cry unto him, and succor the needy that has none other helper,
he must hear me also being so poor a creature and helples that cries unto
him. And for as much as whosoever puts his trust in him, shall not be
confounded, he ca^nnot refuse my humble request, yt repose my whole trust and
confidence in him. Therefore she is bold with open mouth to cry out unto him: O
lord thou Son of David, have mercy upon me.

These words are diligently to be considered: first that through confidence of
faith, although he do not call unto her, yet she cries after him. And the
vehemence of her request is expressed by the word of crying, y^ she does not
speak unto him, but with open mouth she cries unto him. For a strong faith
sends forth earnest requests, as a foeble faith utters cold and formal
prayers. And concerning the form of her peticio^, it declares that her faith
was not a conceued fantesy of her own brain, but an assured persuasion out of
the word of God. For seeing ye Messiah was promised to be the son of David,
and that al felicity was promised in ye kingdom of David, according to the
holy oracles of God, she calls Christ the son of David. For she had learned
yt God said of Messiah, figured in the 2. Sam. 17
person of Solomon, which was the son of David: I will be his father, and he
shall be my 1. Cro. 22.
son. She had heard the prophecy of Esaias, ye God promised that out of the old
withered Esaias. 11.
stump of I say the father of David, a rod should come forth, and a graffe
should grow out of his roots: the spirit of ye Lord shall rest upon him: the
spirit of knowledge and understanding. etc. And that which Jeremy writes of
the righteous branch that God would raise up unto David, which king should
reign and execute judgment, whose name should be, The Lord Iere. 23. and. 33.
our righteousness: Upon these or such like places of Scripture her faith was
grounded, by which she had learned to call him the son of David. Whereby she
declared yt she acknowledged him to be the same which was described and set
forth in the scriptures, and that she looked to obtain at his hands those
things which were promised of him in the scriptures. In which it was promised
yt he should hear the cry of the poor when they made their humble Esaias. 22.
supplication to him: that he should succor ye afflicted, who had none to help
them: that he Math. 8. Luke. 4. Math. 11.
should take upon him al our infirmities, and bear all our diseases: that he
should preach sight to the blind, lyms to the lame, life to the dead, and
deliverance to all that ar afflicted.

This request of hers therefore, being in the compass of those things which
were promised to be granted by him, she is bold to call and cry unto him,
saying: O Lord, thou son of David, have mercy upon me, my daughter is
miserably tormented with a devil. And note yt she desires him to be merciful
unto her, where as her suit chiefly co^cerned her daughter. For not only the
natural love of her daughter made her to account ye miseries of her child to
be her own grief, but also she acknowledges that God in plaging of her
daughter, plageth the mother also, and therefore she desires Christ to have
mercy, pity and compassion of her self, as well as of her daughter. And further
note, yt she challenges nothing by desert, merit, or worthynes, but only of
some comfort of deliverance. So this poor woman no doubt rejoiced not a
little, when she heard that Christ was come into those quarters: but when she
comes unto him, whom she was glad that she had found, she finds no comfort
at al in him, but great discouragement and discomfort, if any thing could
discourage a strong and lively faith. We see therefore what a strong temptacion
her faith endured.

But it is marvel how she could retain such constancy of faith, when he that
is the only Author and finisher of our faith, even Jesus Hebr. 12.
Christ, disdayneth to speak to her, in whose word all our hope and trust
consists. But here we must understand that Christ by this his silence did not
reject her suit, but rather inflamed her with greater feruency to continue the
same. For although he suppressed his audible voice for a time, yet in time of
this silence he spoke unto her by two most effectual kinds of speaking?
First, by his general promises contained in the Scripture, which sounded so
loud continually in ye ears of her heart, that by them she was assured ye
Christ called her unto him, although by his temporal and particular silence he
seemed to reject her from him. Secondly, although he spoke no word with his
tou^g, yet by his spirit he spoke continually to her soul, settling and sealyng
the truth of Gods promises so steadfastly in her heart, that she knew it was
impossible for her to mysse of his grace at the length, although for the time
she seemed to be refused of him. And so undoubtedly almighty God deals often
times even with his best beloved children, when he differreth ye answer of
their request for a time, so yt he seems to hold his peace, notwithstanding
that he has promised to answer the^ when they pray. In which perplexity they
must remember, that how so ever he seems to keep silence by not grau^ting
their request, yet he speaks to them continually in his promises contained in
his holy word, by which they must be assured that God will be merciful unto
them, albeit that he withhold his promised help for a season. So Christ at one
time speaks and holds his peace, not to extinguish the faith of this
Cananite, but rather to inflame her earnest affection in prayer, which thing we
see took effect in her.

Then if so small light of knowledge as was possible to be in her, according to
the state of the time, and her own condition wrought such constancy of faith:
if so little seed of doctrine brought forth such abundant fruit: what shame
is it for us in so clear light of the gospel, not to see with ye eyes of our
faith the immovable and unchangeable truth and certainty 1, Pet. 1.
perish before he send his deliverance. For God can no more forget our
delyuerance in due time, then he can deface his own glory.

And touching the mean time in which he suffers us to be afflicted, that all
shall turn to our everlasting comfort, for thereby he tries our faith,
patience, obedience, and other virtues. And the trial of our faith, as S.
Peter says, being much more precious then gold which is tried in the fire and
yet perishes, shall 1. Pet. 1.
be found to our praise, honor and glory, at the appearing of our Lord Jesus
Christ. And lest we should doubt to faint in troubles, we are taught that God
is faithful, and will not suffer us to be tempted above our strength, but in all
1. Cor. 10.
perplexities and most desperate cases will open a way how we shall avoid
them. For as he sends us affliction and temptation with the one hand, so he
will send us strength and comfort with the other hand. And this was lively
figured in the wrestlyng of God with Jacob: where the Lord by wrestling and
striving with Genes. 23.
him, seemed to fight with him with one hand, and by giving him strength not
only to abide temptacions and afflictions, but also to prevail and to
overcome them, he declared that he did sustain him with the other hand.

Let us not therefore be discomforted if God him self seem to wrestle with
us, and to fight against us by sending us great troubles and temptacions, for
his purpose is in this most noble combat, both to give us strength to
overcome, and also the praise of the victory, as s. Peter testifies in the
place even now alled ged. Such a noble champion was this simple woman, that by
faith contended even with Christ him self, and in the end obtained the
victory. Declaring thereby, that altthough she were a cursed Cananite according
to the flesh, yet she was a true Israelite by faith, which prevailed even with
God him self. Such and so wonderful are the works of God, yt when all the glory
of our salvation is properly his own, yet he vouchsafes to give us such
strength of faith, that thereby we are received into part of that praise which
is due unto him, but yet so yt all the glory redoundeth again from us unto him
only, to whom properly it belongs.

Well, hitherto we have heard yt our savior Christ refused to speak one word
with his mouth, and yet inwardly he spoke by his spirit to her mind: It
follows now in the text, That his Disciples came unto him and besought him
saying: Send her away, for she cries after us. Here his Disciples do not
entreat him to show her any favor, but only to dispatch her either one way
or other, because she made such a bawling and crying after them, yt they were
ashamed to hear her. And herein as in many other things revealed in the
history of the Gospel, they take upon them to be wyser the^ their Master. For
if he had thought it convenient, he would have dispatched her sooner, for he
heard her importunate outeries as well as they, but he respected another
matter, which they could not conceive. It were best therefore for men to let God
alone with his own affairs, and not to presume to give him counsel what he has
to do, but rather to look what he commands them to do, and therein to
occupy their heads and their hands. But such curiosity reigns in many men's
minds, that they had rather take upon them to teach God how he should govern
the world, then submit them selves quietly to obey his commandments.

But the Papists are here to be pytied, that for lack of better arguments to
prove the invocation of saints, are feign to abuse this place of ye Apostels
request, to have this woman dispatched: But alas we what color or likelihood
of reason? For first this woman desires none of them all to be her spokesman,
but cries unto the Master him self: O Lord thou son of David, have mercy
upon me. Secondly, they make no intercession for her, but only desire that she
might be sent away, because she troubled them. But whether she obtained her
request or no, al was one to the^, so they might be rid of the exclamation and
outcry that she made after them, to cause all the world to wonder at them.
Thirdly, Christ grau^teth nothing at their request, but rather flatly denies
yt he will have any thing to do with her. Fourthly, if she had prayed to them,
and they made intercession for her, and obtained their desire: yet there is
great difference between praying to them that are dead, and praying to them
that be alive. And therefore it is marvel what they mean to gather an argument
for the invocation of dead Saints out of this place, where neither the woman
prays to the Apostles, nor the Apostels pray for her, nor Christ grau^teth
any thing at their request, and beside all this, the Apostles were not dead, but
alive. They should have small comfort I trow in this example: yet such for all
the world be the rest of their arguments. The virgin Mary prayed for the
Bridegroom when she said, They have no wine: If this was a John. 2.
request, what was her answer? woman what have I to do with thee? But above the
rest they have one notable example of the rytch man, that being in ye torments
of hell, prayed Luke.
unto Abraham. No doubt a worthy example for us to follow, that of a damned
spirit in hell we must learn to make our prayers to saints in heaven. By such
authority the doctrine of Devils may well be established: but the children of
God are taught an other form of prayer by their heavenly Schoolemaister. But
what remedy found the rich man by praying to Abraham, that we might be
encouraged by his example to pray to Saints? He made two requests, and neither
of them both was granted. Alas what comfort should any man take by these
examples to pray to dead Saints? and yet these be the best reasons they have
out of the scripture. Sure it is a pityfull case, that men will leave God, who
has commanded us to call upon him, and promised to hear us, Psalm. 50.
to call upon dead men, to whom we have no commaundenent, nor example of any
godly person to pray, neither have they made any promise: neither if they had
made any promise, were they able to perform it.

But let us leave the Papists with their woeful arguments, and return to the
Apostels in their request made unto Christ: Dismiss her (say they) for she
cries after us. By these words we may easily perceue how importunately she
continued her suit, although he held his peace, and answered her not one word:
for still she cried and was nothing discouraged, whereby we see that this first
repulse did so little deminish her desire, that it kindled it more and more. And
so does God often times in suspending and differring the answer and effect of
our prayers, provoke us most earnestly to pray: both that we may know of whom
we have received a benefit, and that we may the more esteem it when we have
it, and so render worthy thanks to him that is the author of it For such is our
malignitie, that if we be prevented with Gods benefits (as often times we are)
or else obtain them immediately upon our request, we forget that we received
them of God, and so become unthankful for the^. Also we do not greatly esteem
those things which we have not long wanted, nor much desired, whereby, as for
small benefits and not great gifts we render slender thanks to God. Therefore
God in great wisdom prolongeth some times the performance of his promised
benefits, that men might acknowledge of whom they obtayn them, worthily esteem
them, thankfully receive them, and profitably employ them.

But now let us see what answer our savior Christ makes to the request of his
Disciples: I am not sent (says he) but unto the lost sheep of the house of
Israel. An vncomfor table answer doubtless to the poor woman, whereby he
pronou^ceth that he has no commission of God to do any thing for her, in
as much as his vocation extended only to ye Israelits, was promised, for unto
the^ all it was first offered: which because it was of them refused, it was
afterward made common unto the Gentiles. For our savior Christ acknowledges a
little before his passion, that he has other sheep which were not of the Jewish
fold, who^ he must bring home, that there may be one John. 10.
told, as there is but one Pastor. And in that most earnest and hearty prayer
which he made immediately before his death, wherein he commends to God the
preservation of his Disciples, whom he sent to convert the whole world, he
prays generally for his whole Church, collected both of the Jews and the
Gentiles, saying: I pray not only for these, Ioh. 17.
but for all the^ that shall beleuein me through their preaching, that they all
may be one, even as thou father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may
be one in us, that the world may know that thou have sent me. So that the
Israelites have now no privilege nor prerogative above the Gentiles. For in
Christ Jesus there is neither Jew nor Gentile, for Christ is now as common unto
the Gentiles, as before Galat. 3.
he was proper unto the Jews. Then seeing we be grafted into the body of
Israel, this say ing is as comfortable to us, as it was uncomfortable to this
poor woman. For Christ can now make no more excuse by his vocation, for we are
all the Israel of God, though sometimes we were Gentiles, now we are Citizens with
the Saints, and of the household of God, though sometime we were strangers from
the commonwealth of Israel, and foreners from the covenants of promise. But
this especially is worthy to be considered, y^ Christ calls them the lost
sheep unto whom he was sent: In which saying we have two things to be
observed: first, that we must acknowledge that we are al lost, or else Christ
has nothing to do with us. We must every one confess with the Psalmist, yt I
have wandered like a lost sheep, O seek thou thy servant. They therefore that
are proud in opinion of their own good works, and think to be saved by their
deserts, are not for Christ to meddle with al: for he is sent but unto the lost
sheep of the house of Israel, or as he said unto the Pharisees: The whole have
no need of the Physician, but the sick. First therefore we must acknowledge
that we are altogether cast away, and that we have no more wit nor power to
return or save our selves, then has a sheep that is wandering in the
wilderness among the Woolues, Bears, and Lions. Secondly, if we confess and
find our selves to be such, then are we here comforted, yt Christ is properly
appointed of God to save the lost sheep of the house of Israel, like as he
says in another place: The son of man is come to sane that which was lost.
And in S. Math. 18.
Lukes Gospel, concerning the conversion of Zacheus: The son of man is come
to seek and to save that which was lost. Therefore it ought to be no
discomfort unto us to confess yt we are utterly lost, seeing thereby we are
assured that we appertain unto Christ, who came of purpose to seek and to
save that which was lost. O the wonderful wisdom, power and mercy of God,
showed us in Christ that even then when we feel our selves lost, we are found:
when we see our selves destroyed, we are saved: when we hear our selves
condemned, we are justified, only in beleuyng these words: The son of man
is come, to save that which was lost. Let us therefore with invincible courage of
faith take hold of these general promises of God, and apply them un to our
selves, as this poor woman did, and we shall find it to be true which our
Savior Christ says unto us: There is nothing impossible Math. 17. Mark. 9.
and. 11.
unto him that believes.

Let us now consider the weight of this te^ptacion, how heavy it was for the
woman to bear this answer: that where as the did repose her whole confidence
in him, he affirmed that he has nothing to do with her, because he was not
sent, but unto ye lost sheep of the house of Israel. Of all other temptacions
it is the sorest, when the word of God seems to be contrary to our hope. As
when God commanded Abraham to kill his son Isaac, in whom Gene. 2^.
his hope was that the promise should be fulfilled, as God him self had said:
In Isaac shall Gene. 21. Gene. 17.
thy seed be called, and my covenant will I establish with Isaac. After the
same manner it is here with this poor Cananite, for even by the word of
Christ, in whom she trusted for grace, according to the promises of God
concerning him, she is excluded from grace, because she is a Gentile, and none
of the lost sheep of the house of Israel, to whom only, and not to the
Gentiles at that time he was sent to offer grace. What could be said more to
discourage her, then to tell her that the promised redemption pertayned not unto
her? Again, who could have been chosen out of all the world, to put her so much
out of comfort, as Christ him self? For if an Angel or an Archangell had come
from heaven, and told her that Christ would not accept her peticion, and bestow
his grace upon her, she might easily have riected him, because her faith was
grounded upon the word of God, against which if any Angel should speak, we
may hold him accursed. But when the son of God him self, even the promised
Messiah, in his own person, and by his own word, which is the same truth in
which the Oracles of the Prophets were delivered, when he him self refuses
her request, and denies his grace to her, how can she retain any hope, but
that her faith is quite over come, and all comfort taken away from her? And yet
so mighty and strong was the fortress of her faith, that this most bitter
assaut prevailed not to overthrow it. For as though she had felt no discomfort
at al by this his answer, she approaches nere un to him, and falling down
before him, she continues her humble suit, saying: Lord help me.

And here we may see how much true faith differs from proud presumption:
yea, we may plainly perceive that true faith is always joined with great
humility. The Papists call the assured confidence in Gods mercy, by the odious
name of presumption, but rather we may justly call yt proud persuasion that they
have of their own merits and deserts, by the right name of presumption. For
who so trusts most in god, has least opinion of his own worthynes: as we may
plainly see in this example of the Cananitish woman, who as she had most
certain persuasion and assurance of help in the mercy of God, so had she no
presumption at al in her own worthiness. And yt she declares plainly by her
humble submission: Therefore she falls down at his feet, most lowly
beseching him to be good unto her and to succor her. Whereby she testifies yt
she requires nothing of duty, in respect of her own worthiness, but only of
favor and mercy, in respect of Gods promises. Woe be therefore unto the papists
yt call true humility presu^ption, and contrari wise pride they term humility.

But here we may well doubt how the faith of this woman should be so highly
commended, when it seems to presume against the word of God, where as true
faith is always grounded upon the word of God. And secondly, seeing al ye
promises of God are Yea and Amen in Christ, and be steadfast and established in
Christ only: when she hears by Christ's own mouth, yt the promised
redemption pertayneth not to her, how can she continue her confidence in him? I
answer, that first her faith was grounded upon the word of God, which because
she knew most certainlye to be an undoubted truth, she will not be brought
from that by any thing that may seem contrary unto it. And what so ever she
hears of Christ, although she do acknowledge it to be true, yet she is per
swaded that it is so true, that it takes not away the truth of Gods former
promises. And seeing Gods general promises did appertain to her yt did believe
them, she retains hope against al hope. And as Abraham believed that God would
raise up Isaac from death to life to fulfill his promise, and therefore doubted
not to obey the commandment of God in sacrificing him: so this woman doubted
not, but God must needs find a mean whereby his promises might be verified to
her, howsoever Christ was not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel. And therefore as she does not reason nor dispute against the word of
God, so she does still simply continue her suit, and says: Lord help me.
Which imports as much as if she had said: Although thou art not sent to offer
thy grace unto the Gentiles, but unto the Jews only, yet in as much as God
has promised, that whosoever puts his trust in thee, shall not be
confounded, and I am one of Isay. 28.
those that put my trust in thee, thou can not send me away confounded, and
therefore help me. For Gods promise must needs be true.

Let us learn here so firmly to hold the general principles of our salvation,
yt we admyt nothing that may seem contrary unto them. For of this we may be
assured, that how soever any thing may seem contrary unto them, yet from god
proceeds nothing either in word or deed that is contrary unto them. And as
for all the creatures of y^ world beside, if they should oppose and set them
selves against them, they are not able to prevail. Therefore saint Paul says
with great confidence: I am persuaded Romans 8.
that neither death nor life, neither Angels nor principalities, nor powers,
nor things present, nor things to come, neither height nor depth, nor any
creature can separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord. For if God be on our side, who can be against us? or if any be against
us, how can they be able to hurt us? But if God him self seem to be against
us, who^ have we then to comfort us? For the justice of God pronou^ceth
damnation to all that transgres his law. But for as much as God of his infinite
mercy has promised salvation to al penitent sinners, he has found a mean by
which both his justice is satisfied, and yet no penitent sinner that believes
his promise shall be damned.

This only mean is Christ our Savior, who by his obedience has thoroughly
satisfied for all our disobedience and transgression, as many as believe to have
remission of our syns by him. Seeing therefore we have not only the general
promises of God contained in the old Testament, but also the full execution, per
formance and establishment of them in Christ: what shame is it for us, to be
found inferior in faith to his Cananitish woman, which had no more but the
first: whereunto nevertheless she cleaned so fast, yt by no means she would be
drawn from them. And surely even the very general promises of God are
sufficient that our faith being builded upon them, should never be removed. For
by them God has so bound him self unto us, that by no means he can revoke his
promised salvation. And yet for more confirmation, and to take away all scruple
of doubt and wavering, as the Apostle says to the Hebrews, he has established
them with an oath, that by two things immutable (in which it is impossible
that God should lie) we might have consolation and comfort, as many as flee for
refuge to take hold of the hope that is propounded and set forth unto us.

Therefore the ancker of our faith has two most unchangeable holds, namely
the promise of God, and the oath of God: In both which it is impossible that
God should lie. For as it is impossible that God should lie when he simply
affirms: so is it more impossible (if there may be degrees in
impossibilities) that God should lie when he swareth. And as it is impossible
yt God should lie or be forsworn: so is it impossible that any man or woman,
which takes hold of Gods promises by faith, should mysse the performance of
them, whatsoever seems to be lets or impediments unto them. For there can be
no let or impediment so great, as should be able to compel God to lying or
perjury, which be as great impossibilities as can be thought of. For if the
general or universal promises of God should not be granted to any one person
that embraces them by faith, God should be no more true of his word and his
oath, which is as impossible as that God should be no more God. For example,
seeing God has said: whosoever calls Joel. 2.
upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved, if I pore wretch embracing this
promis of God by faith, do call upon the name of the Lord, whatsoever lets or
impediments be in the way, it is impossible but that I shall be saved. Therefore
if all the Angels in heaven should tell me on their own credit, or as it were by
Gods commandment, that I should be damned, I must hold them all accurssed,
rather then to grant that God should be a liar or perjured person. And for
as much as Christ has said: who soever believes and is baptized shall be saved,
if I being baptized into the name of Christ, repose my whole trust and
confidence in him: whatsoever can be objected against me, I must of necessity
be saved. For neither the justice of the law, nor the gyltynes of my syn, nor
the accusation of the Devil, nor wytnes of mine own conscience, shall be able
to condemn me, so long as I depend upon the promise of God. For there is now
no condemnation Romans 8.
to them that are in Christ Jesus. For what soever can be objected out of the
word of God, how soever contrary at the first sight it may seem to be, yet it
is not in deed directly contrary to these and such like general promises. As
these sayings: They that are in Christ, walk not after the flesh, but after
the spirit: Romans 8.
If Christ be in you, the body is dead unto syn: They that are Christ's, have
crucified the flesh Gala. 5.
with the lusts and concupiscence thereof. It is manifest that these and such
like places are not to be understood of perfect innocencye free from all syn,
but only of such innocencye as is but inchoacted and begun in this life, and
made perfect in the life to come Therefore if thou feel in thy self with thy
faith in God, an hatred of syn, and a desire of righteousness, which refraineth
thee from much wickedness, and styrreth thee up to some works of virtue,
although there remain in thee the relickes of syn, yea a lust unto syn,
contrary to the spirit of God, which also breaks out some times into actual
syn: yet by the spirit of Christ that dwells in thee, thy body is dead unto
sin, thou have crucified the flesh with the lusts and concupiscences thereof,
thou walk in the spi rit, and not in the flesh, and therefore according to
Gods promis thou shall be saved through thy faith: For thy syns and infirmities
shall not Romans 4
be imputed unto thee, but the righteousness of Christ shall be imputed to thee
by faith.

Let us therefore admit nothing yt may seem contrary to our assured confidence,
which is grounded upon the word of God: for in the word of God there is nothing
contrary to it, and whatsoever else does wythstand it, is of no force to
overcome it. For heaven and earth shall Mat. 24
pass, but the word of God shall not pass. But let us follow the faith of this
woman, which though she had never so many repulses, yet would she never be
driven away, until she had obtained her request: still crying, Lord help me,
as though she would say: thou may well differ thy help, but thou can not
deny it me. Yet see what answer Christ makes unto her: It is not good (says
he) to take the Chyldrens bread, and cast it to the whelps, What an hard and
discourteous answer is this? Not only to deny her humble request, but also to
account her no better the^ a Dog, and to tell her that it is no more reason yt
she should obtain her suit, then that bread should be taken from childrens
mouths, and given to a Dog.

What a great temptation was this? that he which only has the bread of life
to bestow upon all that he will, does count her no more worthy to have part of
it, then a Dog to eat yt which is provided for the sons of God. For seeing
that God made a covenant with Abraham and his seed, they only were the sons
of God, and therefore those special graces and gifts of God that were appointed
for them, were so proper unto them, as who soever should make them common to
the Gentiles, should abolish the covenant of God. Christ therefore with all his
benefits, was the bread appointed to feed the holy children of God, which at
that time were the Jews only. Al other nations of the world were but profane
Dogs, and therefore not worthy to be fed with that holy bread which was ordained
for Gods own children. Therefore this Heathen woman presuming to leap upon the
table of Gods children like an vnmanerlye Cur, deserved even like a Cur Dog to
be beaten down, and whipped out of the house, rather then that the childre^s
bread should be taken from them, and cast unto her: For so much is employed in
ye words of Christ. For as it were not meet for him to take the Childrens
bread, and cast it to Dogs, so she like an importunate Dog, ready to pull it
out of their mouths, deserved great punishment. Alas poor woman, how could
she avoid this temptation? And yet by force of faith she found means how to
with stand this most eger assault, and in the end to obtain the victory.

But here to beat down the pride of the flesh, we are taught what we are al
by nature and without Christ, even no better then Cur Dogs. For this which
Christ says of Dogs, is meant of all the Gentiles and Heathen people, as we are
all. Emperors, Kings, noblemen, gentlemen, wisemen, valiant men, ritchmen,
poor men, all Dogs without Christ. For although Man by his first creation was
ye most excellent of all creatures in the world, and in deed the son of God:
yet by his fall and transgression, he is become the basest and the vilest, and
no better then a Dog, except he be raised up and restored by the benefit of our
only savior Jesus Christ. By this we see what merit or worthynes we have to
plead before God, and likewise what cause we have to be proud among men.
Which thing if all men would consider, that by kind without Christ they are no
better then Dogs, they would learn to make less of their painted sheathes,
and more to esteem the benefit of Christ, by which they excel, if they find
them selves to be better by grace, then they are by nature.

But to return to this poor woman: Although she be called and accounted of
Christ no better then a Dog, and that she wyllingly confesses: yet she will
not therefore give over her suit, because her faith could not be overthrown by
this assault. For of faith proceeds invocation and earnest calling for Gods
help and salvation. For although the answer Romans 10
of Christ seems to take away all hope from the Gentiles, yet because she
knew that he was promised also to the Gentiles, she is certainly persuaded
that this promis must take effect, and that does Christ him self partly
signify by these words which are rehearsed by S. Mark: Let the Children be
first satisficed. Whereby he shows that the first place was Mark. 7
for the Jews, which then were the children of God. But this helps not her,
because the time was not yet come in which the Gentiles also should be made the
children of God. And therefore she flees to an other refuge, and thus she
answers: Yea Lord, but yet the whelps eat of the crumbs that fall from their
Lords table.

First by this answer it appears how much the certainty of faith does
differ from vain and foolish importunity of ignorant persons, which will be
answered by no reason, and yet have no reason to continue their suit. For this
woman does not here directly contrary the words of Christ, but shows how
the words of Christ may be true, and yet she obtain her request also.
Therefore where as he had first said she was a Dog, she willingly confesses it,
that she was no better then a Dog, it is true Lord says she, I am no better.
Secondly, where as he had said: It is not good to take the Childrens bread, and
cast it to Dogs, she confesses that also, saying: Yea Lord it is true, neither
will I presume further then the place of a Dog, and that is under the table. For
although it is not convenient that Dogs should be equal with their Masters at
the table, yet they are allowed to weight under the table, and to lick up some
few crooms that fall from their Masters. I know Gods children are so liberally
and plentifully feasted at Gods table, that some little crooms may fall from
them, and they have enough to satisfice them. No man in the world could devise
a more proper answer, to avoid the objection of Christ. For although the grace
of God was peculiar unto the nation of the Jews, yet it was never so scantly
and pinchingly poured upon them, but that some drops might ouerflow unto the
Gentiles. And although the bread was prepared according to Gods dispensation
only for the Children, yet it could not sparingly be parted among them, but
some crooms might fall from their table, unto the Dogs that lay under and
waighted for them. For Naaman the Syrian, the woman of Samaria, the Centurion,
and some such other, were refreshed with some crooms that fell from the table
of the children of God the Israelites, even at such time when God was known
only in Iewry, and Christ was proper unto the Jews. She grants therefore
that Christ may fulfill the office whereunto he was called of God, namely to
satisfy the Jews with the bread ordained for them, and yet let some crooms or
chyppinges of the same fall down to refresh her a poor whelpe that lay under
the table.

Here also we may note the true humility y^ follows this certain persuasion
of Gods mercy. This woman confesses her self to be no better then a Dog, and
yet she trusts in the mercy of God. By this place also we may perceive what
horrible punishment the Jews deserved at Gods hand, which either negligently
or disdaynfully loathed those dainties of Gods table offered unto them, which
other poor wretches so greedely desired, and could be content even with the
crooms that fell from their table. And we our selves also have two matters here
to consider: first the unspeakable goodness of God, which of cur Dogs has made
us his own children by adoption: and of such as had no place in ye house of
God, but of greatest favor to lie under the table of his children, having
converted us from Dogs into his children, has advanced us to sit at his own
hye table with his Children, even with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as he says
in the Gospel: Many shall come from all parts of Math. 8.
the world, and sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of
heaven, when the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into utter darkness,
where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. The second thing that we have here
to consider is, that we being turned from Dogs into Gods children, do not
retain still the nature of Dogs, that is, to return again to their filthy
vomit, which they have 2. Pet. 2.
once cast out: yt being extolled to such dignity that we are made partakers of
Gods heavenly table, we do not behave our selves irreverently, unthankfully,
vnholyly, but as it becomes the children of God, the table of God, the
presence of God, with all reverence, obedience and thankfulness, to express the
nature of Gods children, unto which honor we are called.

Ye know the punishment of him which presumed Mat. 22.
to sit down at the marriage feast with out his wedding garment, he was pulled
out by the ears, and thrust into utter darkness, where shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth. And the same penalty remains all hipocrites, which
entruding themselves into the Church of God, never care for repentance, newnes
of 1. These. 4
life, holiness and righteousues, whereunto we are called of God, and not to
uncleanness and filthynes. Remember that which was read in the first Lesson this
day at Morning prayer, concerning Esau, who because he was a profane fellow,
that made no more account of his birthright Gene. 25.
(in which was encluded all the hope of the Church) but that he sold it for one
mess of potage, Gene. 27 Hebr. 12.
as the Apostle says to the Hebrews, he was afterward deprived of the
blessyng, and could not be restored unto it, although he sought it with
tears. Remember also the Jews, who being compted the Children of God, for the
covenant that God made with their fathers, because they did obstinatly refuse
the grace when it was offered, and would not believe the promise when it was
exhibited, they are broken of from the stock of Israel, and we that were
strangers, and branches of the wild olyue by kind, are graffed into the
tree by faith: But so, that if we fall from faith (as S. Paul says) God shall
no more spare Romans 11.
us, then he did spare them, yea we shall be bro ken of, and they graffed in
again. For God is able to graffe them in again. Let us therefore continue in
faith, and show forth the fruits of faith, for by the fruits the tree shall be
known.

Hitherto we have heard how the faith of this woman has been tried to the
uttermost, which having three repulses even of Christ himself, yet cease not
to put her trust in him: Now let us see what success she had in the end.
Although she had never so many repulses and discouragementes, yet because she
continued still constant and immovable in faith, she departed not away
confounded. She obtained her request, she enjoyed the promise, that who soever
puts their trust in him, should not be confounded. Let us therefore with
invincible courage of faith hold fast upon Gods promises, and it is impossible
that we shall mysse of eternal salvation.

But some will peradventure object, she sued here but for a temporal benefit,
namely the recovery of her daughter, what pertayneth this to eternal
salvation? I answer: This temporal benefit was to her a confirmation and
assurance of everlasting salvation, which she had conceived by faith. Which
thing the answer of Christ plainly declares, who does not only grant unto
this her faith the deliverance of her daughter from the devil, but generally
what soever she would: O woman (says he) great is thy faith, be it unto thee
even as thou wylt. First he commends the greatness of her faith, by which he
is overcome that he can no longer withhold his grace from her. Secondly he
says, Be it unto thee what soever thou wy^t. Who doubts but that she would
as well have remission of her sins, and assurance of eternal life, as the
health of her daughter, and rather to? Therefore he says: Be it unto thee even
as thou wylt. As though he would say, with this faith thou may obtain
whatsoever thou will. Let us therefore bring such a faith to God, and we shall
obtain whatsoever we will. Mark. 9.


If it were true would some man say, that I might have whatsoever I would, I
would wish to have this Church full of gold, or some such like matter. But ye
must remember that Christ here speaks of faith, which is grounded only upon
Gods promises, and therefore whatsoever ye will ask by faith that God has
promised, you shall obtain. Moreover, they that be endued with true faith will
wish nothing that is contrary to Gods glory, and therefore there is no such
vain wishyng nor woulding with them. And therefore what soever God has
promised unto them, they make their full account to obtain it: that which he
has not promised, they require but under con dition, if it may stand with his
will, and the setting forth of his glory.

Wherefore as we are taught by this example, let us in all temptacions and
afflictions flee unto the general promises of God, with invincible courage of
faith. For thereof we shall be sure to prevail in the end, howsoever it
please God to try our faith in the mean time. For faith does not only
overcome the whole world, as S. John says, 1. John. ^
which is in deed a noble victory, but faith prevails even with God him
self: when he proves and tries us by most great temptacions. Let us
therefore follow the faith and confidence of Jacob, when he wrestled with God:
For by faith we wrestle with God when he proves our faith by temptacion.
Therefore as Jacob answered, when the Angel, which represented God that
wrestled with him, required him to let him depart, because it waxed day: I will
not let thee go (quoth Gene. 22.
he) before thou bless me: So let us boldlye answer God when he wrestleth with
us, assailing our faith by sundry temptacions, we will not let thee go before
thou bless us. For this example has God left in writing for our comfort, and
by this example he has commanded Hose. 12.
us by the Prophet Hosea to trust in God. For Jacob by faith had power with
God, and had power over the Angel, and prevailed, whereby he was called Israel,
that is, one that prevails with God. And we, if we be true Israelites, by
faith must prevail with God. Therefore let us not faint in any temptacions,
but rather (as S. James says) James. ^.
let us rejoice when we fall into sundry temptacions, knowing that the trial of
our faith works patience, which if she have her perfect work, we shall be
perfect and sound, not faynting in any thing.

Wherefore as temptacions increase, let us increase our confidence and prayers.
Let us say with the Prophet David: Even as the eyes of servants look unto the
hand of their Masters, Psalm. 123
and as the eyes of a Maiden unto the hand of her Maistres, so our eyes weight
upon the Lord our God until he have mercy upon us. Finally let us follow this
woman of Canaan, whose faith could not be overcome by three repulses, even of
Christ him self, but in the end obtained even that she would. For God by
te^ptacion seeks not our overthrow, but our greater victory, that the trial
of our faith which is much more precious then gold (which though it be purged
with fire, yet perishes not) might be at the last to our prai^e, honor, and
glory, at the appearing of our Lord 1. Pet. 1.
Jesus Christ: To whom with the father and the holy Ghost be all honor, glory,
power, and dominion both now and ever.

AMEN.

