THE VVIDDOVVES MITE, Cast into the Treasure-house of the Prerogatives, and
Praises of our B. Lady, the Immaculate, and most Glorious Virgin Mary, the
Mother of God. With Reasons why we are to have great confidence in her Prayers.

WHEREUNTO Is annexed, A Prayer, for the Love of God, made in Contemplation of
the Passion of Christ our Savior.

Published by allowance of Superiors. ANNO M.DC.XIX.

TO MY NOBLE AND MOST DEAR FRIEND S. A.
I Should have been most glad to print your name at large, and in capital
Letters, in this front of the Dedication; which might have passed for some
little testimony of the much service, that I owe, and desire to pay you. But
instead of doing you service, I would be sure not to do you displeasure: and
we are fallen into so miserable times, as wherein I might better cheap
entreat you to protect some thief or outlavv, then to patronize a work that
tends to the honor of our B. Lady. It shall therefore suffice that herein we
know the mind of one another. And although there was no remedy, but I must
needs spare to mention your name; yet I could not think of failing to address
the Treatise to your Favor. Both for the entiere devotion which you carry to
the Glorious Queen of Heaven (and that of the best kind, because it leads you
to as exact an imitatio^ of her high Purity, as ever I have discovered in any
creature of your condition and vocation:) and besides for that this Pattern
was most due to you, to whom the whole Piece of that belongs, vvherby I may
any way acknovvledge the noble Favor of a most worthy and well deserving
Friend. I hope you will excuse it for his sake by whom it is written; nay I
know you will esteem it for her sake of whom it is written. And I hope,
that both you, and I shall one day be so happy, under the patronage of this
immaculate Virgin, the Mother of God, as to discover, and behold that
inco^prehensible Glory, which she obtained by cooperating with Gods
incomparable Grace.

Your humble Servant, and true Friend. A. G.

Faults escaped in printing.
Page. Line. Fault. Correction. 2. 20. which with 6. 14. dele of degrees 9. 16.
their turns the turns 15. 17. and not but rather. 27. 1. most moist 43. 13.
is were 44. 22. which with 46. 2. believe to believe 46. 8. with which 62. 4.
were need were in need 79. 6. speech her speech 122. 21. done due 124. 15. is
no question is question 124. 24. plain great 126. 9. of the by the 133. 25.
comfortable comfortably 137. 4. for now and now 143. 4. misery mystery 184. 16.
duty drily 155. 14. distinct distinctiu^ 159. 1. assumeth assures 18^. 14.
tottering torturing 184. 3. thy taste the taste 192. 1. This not It Is not 195.
24. protection proiection

THE WIDOWS MITE. CAST INTO THE TREASVRE-HOVSE OF OUR B. LADIES PRAISES. With
reasons why we are to have great confidence in her Prayers.
CHAP. I.
THERE was never found within the compass of Morality a more excellent Receipt
and Secret, then that of Friendship, toward the softning and sweetning of all
the miseryes of this life. Friendship it is which doubleth our comforts, it
divides our cares, it locketh up our secrets, it reuengeth our wrongs, and it
makes a large and liberal contribution of succor toward the relief of all
our necessityes. I speak not this of the thing which some miscall by the name
of Friendship, and which indeed is no more, then a mere acquaintance, or
familiarity of conversation; though the world be grown to the conceit of
taking such froath as this, for the quintessence which I here commend: But I
mean that most faithful and inviolable Friendship which mingleth or
confounds fortunes, and unites minds, and which accompteth it for one of the
greatest heart soars it has that it cannot ever reach out the giving hand.

And yet even this truest Friendship (which being all that I have said) is
subject both to imperfection and destruction; for sometimes it is changed by
ficklenes, sometimes it is vnstitcht by absence, sometims it is torn in sunder
by vnfaithfullnes, at least it is sure to dye when they dye that did profess
it; and in fine, it ever carries such a testimony, and superscription in the
forhead of it, as serves to point men out to somewhat else, assuring them that
it cannot possibly be complete, because all the parties to this contract are no
better then sinful and mortal creatures.

One help there is, whereby we may feed upon this sweet bitt, without being
troubled and tired with gnawing upon such bones as these, and it is by
translating our affection from these inferior objects to those other of Saints
and Angels, in whom there lives a faculty of corresponding with us much more
nobly, together with an impossibility of transgressing the true laws of
Friendship, which consist in the entire communication of all things, and has
for spurs an extreme ardour of affection, and for bridle an impuissance to
offend in the least degree.

A pattern or proof heerof may be taken from those extaticall wishes of the
Patriarch Moses, and the Apostle S. Paul, who did so thirst after the eternal
happynes of their brethren, as that they seemed content to lay aside the
consideration and care of their own. Now ^f whilst they were yet encumbred
with the heavy clothes of flesh and blood, they could soar so high into that
spher of fire; how much more eminent are they now in this kind, together with
all those other celestial spirits, since now they are freed from all
impediments, and stand enjoying, and feeding face to face, upon the essence of
God, which is the fountain of Love it self, into which by him they are
transformed?

We are also taught by holy Scripture, with what zeal the holy Angels do
behold, and protect their several charges here on earth. Genesis 32.
The Angel Guardian of Jacob, was a Champion that defended and drew him out of
all inconveniences. The Angel Raphael mentioned in the book of Tobias, Tob. 11.
was both a Physician in restoring his sight, and a sollicitour, or Master of
requests in preferring his suites, to the throne of Almighty God. Our Savior
Christ himself has inferred, Matt. 18.
that if we scandalize any of his little ones, their several Angels (who see
the face of God) will resent their wrongs. And (which yet may seem more strange)
the Angel to whose care the Medes were committed, Dan. 10.
did contradict and oppose to that other Angel of the Persians, in the
quarrels and combats which their people had with one another; to show us that
they do not only watch over our souls, but even over our fortunes and bodies
also, with all which depends thereupon, concerning our good.

This care and love of those happy souls and spirits, toward the poor
inhabitants of this world, proceeds from the knowledge they have of the
bounty which his divine Majesty has used in bestowing parts of his own
perfection, and in designing that unspeakable glory which he has prepared for
us; so that in their loving of us, and cooperating to our salvation by their
assistance, they perform an act of reverence, and homage to our common
Creator. And therefore if the Angels and other Saints desire and procure our
happiness, if they have compassion of our affliction, if they interpose for us
the merits of Christ's death and passion in the degree of one, there can be no
question amongst Christians (if indeed they be so) but that the Queen of
Saints and Angels, the sacred and perpetual Virgin, the immaculate and
glorious Mother of God, does perform to us all these things (with infinite
others which through our baseness and blindness we cannot think of:) I say not
in the degree of one, but in the degree of so many millions of degrees as she
exceeds all the Angels and Saints of Heaven in the perfection and height of
the knowledge and love of God.

One particular reason of her unspeakable tenderness toward us all (to omit
many others) may be the consideration of Christ our Lords humanity, with he
took wholly of her, and which he spent wholly upon us; besides that upon the
Cross, he resigned her as it were, to be the Mother of all mankind, whereof
hereafter I shall have occasion to make further mention. Now, as the
unspeakable love of God which he inspired her heart withal, and wherewith so
admirably she cooperated, makes God unspeakably to love and delight in her: so
it is reason, that for her love to us, we procure to correspond in all such
devotion and reverence to her who is so gracious in the sight of God, and so
well deserving of us, as may be affoarded to the most incomparably sublime
Creature, of a mere creature, that ever was, and the most abundant, and dear
benefactour of mankind that can be thought of under God.

There is not in this world so great a Monarch, to whom if we had obligation,
and meant to make any retribution we might not impart somewhat which might
concern him in a substantial and solid manner. For a very wealthy man might
make him somewhat the richer, a valiant man might make his dominions the
larger, a wise man might make his government the happyer, a skillful man might
make his health the firmer, and a confident faithful man might chance to make
his life the safer. But with the Saints of heaven, it is not so; for all they,
and especially this Queen of Heaven, has such a fullnes of all that, whereof
they are capable, as excludes the possibility of mankind from giving any thing
to them, and much less to her, which may increase her happynes in any thing
that inwardly concerns her; but whatsoever we can offer, is extrinsecal unto
her, as namely Honor, whereof she is only capable at our hands.

The expression of this Honor may be made by diverse ways: by praising her, by
praying unto her, by imitating in some small measure of her admirable virtues,
and by carrying in our hearts a continual tenderness of devotion toward her.

By this time, if the Reader be a Caluinist, he begins to shrincke, he
desires to be excused, he reuerenceth (forsooth) the Mother of God as he
ought, if you will believe him, but he would feign be thought a zealous
preserver of Gods honor; and holds that the terms we use in professing our
devotion to her, with the custom which we have in directing to her our prayers
is to carry our selves idly, if not impiously: and he will needs take upon him
to ground himself upon holy Scripture.

It is strange to see how these young Prentices will needs be Merchant-venturers
in the art of understanding that divine book; to the deep sea whereof they lanch
out in the shallow Cock-boats of their own conceits, and think they are
sailing into some safe port, when indeed they are splitting upon rocks. Stra^g
I say it is, to see how they are blinded by the desire they have to make the
Scripturs serve their turns of their passion, which suffers them not to
discern the evidence wherewith it establishes often times the very point in
Controversy which they contradict. For how could they otherwise make themselus
believe, as they usually object, that the Scripture authorizeth any lessening
of our Ladies honor, that it excludes her Invocation, and abridgeth her
Praise, whilst indeed it does abundantly testify her excellency, and give
great warrant for all that the Catholic Church does practice concerning her?

There be holy, and learned men that affirm (and it is full of reason) that if
the Scripture had said no more of her, but these only words, Maria, de qua
natus est Jesus, Matt. 1.
Mary of whom Jesus was borne, it had said sufficiently of her, or rather that
it had said so much, as to which no point of dignity could be added. For to
affirm, that the Virgin was the Mother of God, is to give a title which
evidently inuolueth supreme excellency; and which is so great in regard of the
alliance, and conjunction it has with God himself, as that no power of mind
created, no man, no Saint, no Angel, nor they all together are able entierly,
and exactly to comprehend what dignity it is to be the Mother of God. If
therefore we are so far from being able to conceive the excellency of the
glorious Virgin; shall we fear to express it in such poor fashion, and with
such short terms as we are able to use? Or can we be in any danger of
committing excess heerin, so that we swerve not (as we never do) from making
her a mere creature, and from imputing the first cause of her greatness to the
infinite goodness of Almighty God?

The Adversaries of her glory might consider, that the words of holy Scripture
are not to be valewed after the rates of number, but of weight: and who has
arms wherewith to weeld the balance, into which that massy quality of being
the Mother of God, is laid? It goes not, even in ordinary Audits, by the great
number of figures, but if one be placed before a greater number of ciphers,
that alone may stand for many others: and so this half line alone, whereof I
spoke, may and does import a greater eminency, then could have been expressed
in the whole Bible without it; although both these Testaments, and all those
pens of all the Prophets and Apostles had spent themselves in the celebration
only of her praises.

But because all their cunning-men and women, though they should be able to
write and read the Scriptures, cannot yet cast account, especially after this
manner; and that vulgar eyes are never satisfied with the riches of a Jewel,
unless it consist of many stones; I will therefore endeavor to let them see,
that in holy Scripture there is no scarcity of that which themselves desire, or
rather of that which I fear they desire not, which is, the great advantages,
prerogatives, and privileges of the B. Virgin.

CHAP. II.
IN the first place I conceive that by the way of express praise, as meant for
praise, there is little said in the new Testament of our B. Lady, no more then
of our B. Savior himself. I call that express praise, as meant for praise,
when a person is ex professo commended, and extolled for this or that virtue,
to this principal end, that he or she may win estimation among men: and in
this sense I do not find, that either of them are greatly praised: only they
testify some little things of themselves, and that concerning the self same
virtue, which is Humility. Our Savior said, Learn of me for I am Humble, and
Meek: and our Lady said; that God had carried respect to her Humility. Many
other persons are particulerly commended in both the Testaments. Genesis 22. Number.
12. Reg. 1. c. 13. Job. c. 10. Reg. 3. c. 10. Genesis 6. Luc. 1. Matt. 11.
Abraham as the tipe of Faith; Moses both of zeal and meeknes; David, as
being a man after Gods own heart; Job for patience, S^lomon for wisdom, Noe,
Zachary, S. John Baptist, and S. Joseph for being just: But Christ our Lord,
and our B. Lady are not praised directly for this or that virtue, though the
Apostles may secondarily, and upon occasion be said to comme^d the life of
Christ, when they exhort the people to whom they wrote, toward an imitation
of his virtues.

We need not go far to seek a reason that may be subject to our capacityes why
the holy Ghost might think good to take this course; for to have expressly
commended them, had been to imply, after a sort, that words might have
declared how much they ought to be commended; and a Reader might thereby have
imagined, that their excellency had not surpassed all humane thought, if it had
been made subject thereunto by speech; and therefore they are both set out much
more to the full, in that their praises are covered with the sacred veyle of
silence, then they would have been, if they had been exposed to sight, by the
pen even of the very Apostles themselves. Whereas now by saying nothing in the
way of praise, but by delivering so much by way of prerogative, there is left a
liberty, or rather there is imposed a necessity, for men to conceive as highly,
and nobly as they can; and yet to know, when all is done, that the least part
of their excellency is not attained.

Hence it is, that for reverence the Prophet I say (when he was to describe God
himself in a vision that he had received) represented him al covered with the
wings of Cherubims. And this course carries so great proportion, even with the
very nature and mind of man, as that the famous Poets, and Painters of the
world, have graced their arts with this point of Rhetorique, whenever they
have had occasion to describe the emine^cy of an unspeakable passion; for in
such case they thought they could do it best, by not expressing it: and so in
the funerals of such as were dearest to the Suruiuers, they set forth the
ordinary mourners by several postures, and countenances of lamentation; but as
for a husband of a dear Spouse, or the Father of an only daughter, they have
no refuge, but to hide the faces of those persons, in the decyphering of whose
passion they cannot satisfy themselves.

But though there be no particular, and express praises mentioned as praises,
and not as lights, for imitation given in holy Scripture to the several
virtues of our B. Lady, any more then (as I said before) they are to them of
our B. Savior; yet as the Apostles, and Evangelists recompt those high and
heroical actions, and the irrefragable testimonies from heaven, whereupon we
may infer the supreme virtue and sanctity of our B. Savior: in the same
manner are their books the Chronicles of many passages in both those kinds,
aforesaid, from whence the excellency of the B. Virgin may be deduced, which is
infinitely inferior to that of our B. Savior, but incomparably superior to
that of all the other creatures, and is propounded to us for the mark of our
admiration in some things, and of imitation in the rest.

By the Genealogy of our B. Savior which is set out by the Apostles, we
understand what also that of our B. Ladies is; for he has no Ancestors but
hers. By them we therefore know, that her extraction and blood has as much
prerogative in it, as a mere creature can receive; for she is derived from the
Royalty of Kings, from the sanctity of Priests, and from the illumination of
Prophets.

The gifts of Nature, and beauty of person which she had, are not so literally
expressed in holy Scripture, otherwise then by the Prophetical speech which is
used of our Savior Christ; Speciosus forma prae filijs hominum: Psalm. 44.
He was beautiful beyond all the Sons of men, whereby her beauty also may be
known, since his holy humanity had no visible natural beauty at all, but that
which it received from her. And howsoever among persons who are begotten by the
course of mankind, we often see both that uncomely parents have handsome
children, and the contrary: yet in the present case there can be no conceit of
that difference, which proceeds in others from the effects of original, and
many times of other sins, whereof without blasphemy there can be no question
made in the Incarnation of our Savior Christ, which was wrought in the pure
womb of the B. Virgin by the operation of the holy Ghost. And concerning the
unspeakable dignity, and majesty of her presence to such as beheld it with pure
eyes (and even they who beheld it with other, were altered by a singular
privilege of hers, whose beauty instead of kindling, did quench al unruly
appetite in such as saw her) I cannot but digress so far, as it is from the
Apostles to one of their disciples, to wit, S. Dennis the Areopagite, of whom
it is related, Dionys. Carthus. comment in c. 3. l. S. Diony. Areop. de divine.
nom. art. 16.
that having the honor and happynes to see her, and enjoy her presence, found
something in it so far exalted above the stamp of dignity and authority, which
is wont to be imprinted upon creatures, as that he protested, if he had not
known by faith, that Christ was God, he had not been able to detain himself
from adoring her as God. And it is particulerly to be noted, that he through
whose mind this passed, and under whose name it is left registered to all
posterity, was no Babe, nor old wife, nor ignorant Minister, but one of the
prime Doctors of Athens, afterward a disciple of S. Paul, and still
accounted for a most sublimely learned, wise, and holy Father in the Catholic
Church of Christ.

CHAP. III.
THESE external things being so little esteemed by the servants of God, and
least of all by her (who was so much the more his servant, as she was more
favored, and honored by him then all the rest) I may with the more reason
pass over with breuity, though I could not persuade my self to pass over any
thing entierely in silence, which concerns her excellency any way. But the
spiritual graces which she received, and the testimonies of her dignity, which
were given from heaven, are they which we ought more seriously to ponder and
reflect upon.

Her life being such as seemed ordinary, though interiourly it were not so, and
her vocation being so extraordinary as that she was to be made the Mother of
God himself (when once he should be made Man) it was agreeable to the wisdom
of the divine Majesty, to proclaim and publish to the world, the perfection of
this creature, by an irrefragable evidence. Luc. 3.
Therefore as in the Baptism of our B. Savior, whereby he might seem to have
contracted sin, the Holy Ghost himself descended upon him, to witness the
infinite sanctity of his soul: In like manner, when before that time, there
was question of incarnating and bringing forth a Savior of the world in humane
flesh, one of the highest Angels in heaven was dispatched in Embassage to
witness the eminency, Luc. 1.
and fullnes of her holiness; and that the world might know how that her
bringing forth a son should not carry with it the least impeachment to the
spotlesnes of her purity.

The Arch-angell then did thus salute her; Luc. 1.
Hayle Mary full of grace, our Lord is with thee. Our Adversaries, the enemies
of our B. Ladies Honor, will needs translate the Greek word (...), according
to that sense (of the three several ones which it has) whereby they may hope
to disadvantage her most; and therefore they will not allow it to signify Gratia
plena, Comment. in cap. 1. Luc.
full of grace, but Gratis dilecta, freely beloved. It is plainly showed by
Tollet in his Comment upon those words, that S. Ambrose, S. Austine, S.
Hierome, S. Athanasius, S. Epiphanius, and in effect the whole Church has
used, and received the translation of Gratia plena; though yet if it had been
otherwise, I see not greatly why they should triumph as after a victory: since
if our B. Lady were as they must confess, Freely beloved, with such an
eminency above all other creatures, as to be made the Mother of God; it does by
necessary inference of congruity imply all those perfections, in contemplation
whereof the Catholic world does homag unto her, with attributes incomparably
superior to them of all other creatures. But she was found full of grace
whether they will or no; and if then she were full, through the beauty of her
soul (which being first adorned by Almighty God, drew his eyes afterward so
down upon her, as even to be enamoured with her when he was yet to make her
the Mother of the Eternal Word;) let them conceive that can, how she ouerflowed
therewith afterward. And the example of the good Chananaean who did as it were
oblige our Savior to bestow of those crummes upon her (being a Gentile) which
fell from the table of the children of God, (who were the Jews) may inuit us
to beg, that some drop of those ouerflowings which cannot through the goodness
of God but descend from the superabundance of that grace, wherewith the B.
Virgin was so much more then filled, may be applied to our benefit, and to the
making of us gracious in his sight in some measure, which she was beyond all
measure.

It cannot but work in us an extreme reverence on the one side, when we hear
by the voice of that Archangell Gabriel, that our Lord even then was with her
in a most particular, and plentiful manner, Luc. 1.
saying Dominus tecum, Our Lord is with thee: as if he had said, He is indeed
with all his creatures, and especially withal his servants; but yet he is so
with thee per excellentiam, as if he were with no body else: and on the other
side they are miserable, who be not drawn to affect this Sacred Virgin with
unspeakable dearnesse and tenderness, for the infinite benefit which they
receive by her, since they are capable of salvation by the mystery of the
Incarnation, which (having been decreed in that high Consistory of the Holy
Trinity) did receive effect and execution in the immaculate womb of the B.
Virgin by her free consent. And as in the Passion of our B. Savior (when he
came to make a full point upon the periode of his life) he did as it were
resign his Mother to mankind in the person of S. John, Joan. 19.
when he said to him, Fili ecce Matter tua, Son behold thy Mother: so in this
Incarnation of his she may be said after a sort, to have transferred the
propriety which she had in Almighty God, Luc. 1.
who was with her (Dominus tecum) to the protection, and preservation, and
sanctification, and redemption of all mankind; for immediately afterward, he
grew to be called not, Dominus tecum, Our Lord is with thee, Matt. 1.
but Emanuel, which is, God with us.

The Angel proceeds (upon occasion given by the sacred Virgin) to express
the manner how the mystery of the Incarnation of the Son of God, was to be
accomplished in her sacred womb; and he declares to her, that she had no
cause to fear the least spot in her purity, that she had found grace with God,
that in her womb she should conceive and bring forth a Son, Luc. 1.
and should call his name JESUS, that he should be great, and be called the
Son of the most High, that our Lord God would give him the seat of his
forefather David, that he should reign in the house of Jacob for ever, that
his kingdom should know no end, that the Holy Ghost should descend from above
into her, and the Virtue or Power of the most High should ouershaddow her, and
therefore, that he who was to be borne of her should be called the Son of God.

Quis surdus sicut populus meus? says the Holy Ghost by the Prophet: Isa. 42.
Who is so deaf as my people, that will not hear? And in this case it may be
said, who is so blind as he that will not see, what a cluster of heavenly
grapes may here be gathered out of Holy Scripture, distilling in abundance the
wine of Grace and Glory upon the imaculate Virgin, by describing the nature and
quality of that Son, of which she was to be the so happy Mother? What
doubling, and redoubling is there made here of her felicity, and sanctity? For
notwithstanding that formerly she was full of grace; we see here she has
found more grace, her Son was to be the Savior of the world; he was to have
an Eternal Kingdom; the Holy Ghost was yet more plentifully to descend upon
her; and the virtue or power of the most High was to enuirone, and ouershaddow
her, whereby she might be enabled to enclose, and as it were again to
ouershaddow the Son of God.

The consideration heerof made the ancient and holy Fathers fly up, as if they
had been in Ecstasies, when they entered upon the praises of this Blessed Virgin
(which afterward I shall with better opportunity relate:) and in the mean time
they who cannot see the high titles of Honor that are imparted to the B.
Virgin in Holy Scripture, are in a miserable obscurity of mind, which they have
deservedly fallen into, through the pains they take to bear no tenderness of
devotion toward her. I think I say well, in affirming, that they take pains
to this purpose; for otherwise it seems impossible that men who profess
themselves Christians, and who take upon them to understand so well what is
recommended in Holy Scripture, should carry such an auersion, as it is certain
they do (howsoever sometimes they profess the contrary for very shame) from
the Mother of that Son, by whom they say they hope for their salvation,
notwithstanding that the Holy Ghost has taken pleasure, to express all the
circumstances that belong to her; and that he did not only employ the
Evangelists thereabout when Christ was to be Incarnate, but the Prophets also
so many hundreds of years before, who fortold what kind of creature she was to
be. To which purpose these are the words of S. Bernard; The generation of our
B. Lady is known to have been granted from heaven, Bernar. ser. in c. 12.
Apoc.
for the singular privilege of sanctity which she had. Her birth was
forepromised by the ancient Fathers, it was prefigured by mystical miracles,
it was insinuated by prophetical Oracles, the Sacerdotall Rod which flourished
without a root, the Fleece of Gedeon which grew most in the midst of a d^y
floor, the Oriental gate spoken of in the vision of Ezechiel, which was never
open to the access of any, did design, and prediscouer this Virgin.

CHAP. IIII.
THE next Publication of the admirable privileges of our B. Lady was in the
Visitation which she made of S. Elizabeth, at which time our B. Savior (being
then incarnate in her sacred womb) did also visit S. John the Baptist, whom
S. Elizabeth had conceived in hers, some months before. The excellency of our
B. Lady appears in lively colors by the happy change which was wrought in S.
Elizabeth by her presence. Luc. 1.
For S. Elizabeth had no sooner heard her salutation, then (by the testimony of
the sacred Text) the infant in her womb did even spring which joy; S.
Elizabeth her self was replenished with the holy Ghost, she cried out with a
loud voice, and said to the Virgin to this effect; Blessed art thou among
women, Luc. 1.
and blessed is the fruit of thy womb: and how come I to receive this honor
that the Mother of my Lord should visit me? for behold (says she) as soon
as ever the voice of thy salutation did approach mine ears, the Infant in my
womb did spring with joy; and happy art thou who did believe, for those
things shallbe performed which were told thee by our Lord.

What stupendous privileges, and prerogatives are here expressed by the Holy
Ghost, to have been imparted to the glorious and immaculate Virgin? Upon the
first approach of her presence, and the least sound of her voice, an infant in
the womb of his Mother did spring with joy: Luc. 1.
which joy supposes, and takes for granted that he was already then endued
with the use of reason: for such creatures as are not reasonable, are not
capable of co^ceauing joy. And howsoever the working of this miracle may
principally be imputed to the presence of our B. Savior, as to the cause, yet
who sees not, that he was not pleased to impart such an unheard of benefit,
but by the condition of his sacred Mothers presence, to which also she did so
nobly concur? and in conformity heerof, it is plain, that S. Elizabeth her
self reflected upon her, as a great means thereof.

Again, the Mother was for her part, immediately upon the hearing of the
Virgins salutation, replenished with the Holy Ghost, in the strength whereof,
she did with a loud and Prophetical voice, proclaim the blessedness of that
Mother and Son, and confound her self with the mercy which was vouchsafed
her, in that the Mother of our Lord would descend so low, as to visit her.

This heap alone of miracles, which did as it were ouerwhelme S. Elizabeth,
and the acknowledgement she made of her own extrem unworthiness to receive such
graces from the mother of our Lord may justly kindle an unwonted ardour of
devotion in the hearts of Catholics toward the Blessed Virgin; and as justly
humble the proudest Caluinists heart in the world with shame enough, to consider
how straitely at least they conceive of the glorious Queen of Heaven, who
reigns and shines with immortal majesty, when they see a S. Elizabeth, a
near kinswoman of Christ himself, and consequently derived from the loins of
so many Kings, a Saint in so eminent degree, a Prophetess, and the Mother of
the greatest among the children of Men, who was the very Precursour, and
Baptist of Christ our Lord, so loose her self as it were with admiration,
which she discovers by those interiections of exclamation, to see that the
Mother of God whilst yet she was but mortal, and the Savior of the world not
yet borne of her should diminish her self so much, as to vouchsafe her a
visit. But I shall afterward resume this point, by occasion of the impiety, and
fearful blasphemy of some Caluinists, when I compare the base mention which
they tremble not to make of her, with the most honorable memory which the
lights, and ornaments of the Catholic Church, the holy Fathers, have every
where expressed. And in the mean time such as love the Son (as no man does
indeed who will not give all due honor to the Mother) must rise to more then
ordinary veneration and devotion toward this perpetual Virgin, to the end,
that the visits which she vouchsafes to impart, not once, but often by her
motions to us, and her prayers for us, may make the spiritual fruit of our
hearts which is our actions, spring up with joy, upon the presence, and approach
of Christ in the Holy Sacrament; and that we may keep such account of the
inspirations, which she procures for us, and sends so often into the ears
of our soul, as may make it prove a fit house for the holy Ghost to inhabit.

Well may we say with S. Augustine; Aug. li 1. Confess. cap. 4.
Angusta est domus animae meae, dilata eam; ruinosa est, refice eam. He
confesses to God that the house of his soul is strait, and he beseeches him
to enlarge it; he confesses that it is ruinous, and he beggeth of him that he
will repair it: and by what better means can we as it were engage Almighty God
to bestow those mercyes on us, through Christ our Lord, then when we present,
and put him in mind of this Sovereign Virgin, who was enabled by his
omnipotent hand to make room in her sacred womb, not only for the reception,
but even for the regaling and delighting of him, whom Heaven cannot contain;
according to that salutation which the Church uses to the B. Virgin; Quem
Caeli capere non poterant, tuo gremio contulisti: So also will she know how to
assist us in the reparation of these our spiritual houses, as well as in the
enlarging of them; she I say who has concurred more then all the whole world
together, under God (by the faith she bare, and consent she gave) to the
Incarnation of the Word, and consequently to the reparation, and redemption of
the World. This may then be our contemplation, who are Catholics: and before
this discourse be at an end, even some of the Caluinists, I hope, will see,
that they have not wholly such reason to dissent herein, as hitherto they have
imagined.

To my understanding there is no one circumstance that more sets out the
unspeakable excellency of our B. Lady then that which now I shall express. As
soon as S. Elizabeth had ended that holy speech of hers, our B. Lady being
also the much more plentifully inspired with prophesy, did enter into that
divine Hymn of the Magnificat, whereof the Church does every day serve it self
in offering up her praises to God. It is certain that the humblest pure
creature, without all exception, that ever was, or will be, was the B. Virgin
In so much as that although the perfection of al those virtues (which afterward
are to be mentioned) did flourish and fructify beyond al humane imagination in
her sacred heart, yet in comparison of that height, or rather depth of humility,
which reigned in her, she may be accounted to have scarce excelled in those
other virtues: or rather to speak both more safely, and most truly, as in the
other virtues she without all comparison excelled all other creatures, so in
this she excelled her self.

Such as hunt after praise (and whosoever does not, has reason to give God
thanks, for he has been enriched by him with a great treasure) do know that
there is not in the world a greater thirst, then they have to obtain their end,
and that they find no torment more insufferable then if they be undervalued and
contemned. And yet this other truth is as certain, that the person who is
ambitious of praise, does not more abhor to be despised, then the soul which
is truly humble, does apprehend and hate to be applauded. And if it endure not
to be praised by others, how well, and how worthily soever it may deserve it;
how much would men be ashamed to praise themselves, which not only the
perfection of virtue, but even modesty and ciuility so far disswadeth, as that
whosoever (being of piety and discretion) does it, we must suppose both some
unquestionable and known truth of the thing itself, and some most necessary
and just motive or mystery which urges him to it.

Hereby it may easily be inferred, what auersion our B. Lady must be confessed
to have had from making honorable mention of her self upon any occasion; and
so it appears how that at the instant wherein she grew the Mother of God (and
by that means became so far superior to all the creaturs both of earth and
heaven) she would know herself by no other title, but of a bondslaue. Yet
nevertheless the Holy Ghost entering at that time into her, in a most particular,
and abundant manner, did so possess all the powers of her soul and so as it
were inebriate, and transport her with the spirit of unspeakable joy, as that
she fell, in this Canticle (as soon as she had first done her homage to
Almighty God, in acknowledging, and adoring him as the Author of all the
Graces that had been powered upon her) to declare and auow to the world, how
humble and abject she was in her own eyes: but that yet withal she was so
gracious in the sight of God as she said, would not only serve to make her
Blessed, Luc. ^.
but that all generations should profess, and publish her to be such.

Happy were the man, that could but feel the least part of that which passed
in her pure soul, when she spoke those words; in heaven we may hope to have
some notice thereof, and at the present it may serve us for an invincible
demonstration of her being inco^parably prayseworthy, the paradise of whose
heart being hedged in with so much humility, was yet content to celebrate her
own praise, or rather which was over wrought by the Holy Ghost himself, to
profess how she was to be honored, and admired for all eternity; to the
confusion of al such as repine thereat, and to the entire comfort of devout
Catholics, since they, and they alone, are the men who daily strive to
accomplish the prophesy of her glory.

CHAP. V.
BUT how much soever we shall endeavor herein, it will never come to that
height which it deserves; especially if we consider what succeeded in the
person of our B. Lady, to whom the Scripture says, the Son of God and her,
was subject. This testimony was given upon the return he made with her from
disputing in the Temple amongst the Doctors. And as it is evident enough that
in all his life till that time (which were twelve years) he had been subject,
and obedient to her; so it is yet more evident, that in the residue thereof,
(which continued for the space of eighteen years till he came to preach and
publish himself) he continued to be so. The Scripture says, Et erat subditus
illis, Luc. 2.
and he was subject unto them: That is, both to the B. Virgin, and S. Joseph,
and if to S. Joseph, who was but his supposed Father, how much more to the B.
Virgin, who was (for as much as concerned his sacred Humanity,) all the parents
of flesh and blood that he had. To S. Joseph, even for that former reason he
lived in so plain subjection, as that when afterward the Jews (making
reflection upon his admirable doctrine) said, though it were with scorn; Nonne
hic est faber, and filius fabri? Is not this a Carpenter, and the son of a
Carpenter? Whereby diverse things are insinuated, both that in the eyes of all
that knew him he appeared as S. Joseph's son, who was a Carpenter (and
consequently that they noted in him such a carriage as became the obedience of
a Son to his Father:) and secondly, it is clear, that the Wisdom of God
becoming flesh for our sake, did abase it self so far, as to perform the
actions, and office of a Carpenter. And from thence it might come, that he
took the manner of speech which he often used afterward for expressing his
mind, and declaring his doctrine by Parables and Similitudes (as the ordinary
custom of the Jews did bear) taken from the Plow, Matt. 13.
and Husbandmen, and Tilling, and Sowing, and the like, in which actions the
instruments that are made by Carpenters be employed. This last I say, is most
probable, and conceived generally to be true: but in the other point of being
subject even to this supposed Father of his, there is no place of doubt,
without impiety, and heresy, since the Holy Ghost himself affirms it.

By the way I cannot but here ask leave of the Reader, to extol and magnify
the height of dignity, to which this holy Patriarch S. Joseph was advanced, who
as the B. Virgin was chosen from out of all mankind, to be the Mother of our
Savior Christ, so was he designed from all eternity, as the fittest and
worthyest in the whole world, to be the Guardian both of him, and her. He it
was that assisted in the Nativity, Adoration, Circumcision, and Presentation;
He that secured the honor of the spotles Virgin from suspicion; He that
defended both him, and her, by his incessant labors, and endless cares (though
accompanied with unspeakable comforts) from dangers in that peregrination of
Egypt; He that had so familiar commerce with Angels, and was as it were the
interpreter of Gods ordinances to them both; He of whom it may be literally,
and in the highest degree of truth affirmed, that he was indeed, Fidelis seruus
and prudens, quem constituit Dominus super familiam sua^. Mat. 24.
A faithful servant and wise, whom God did place over his family. O blessed
family! or rather O Empire of Heaven upon Earth, which consisted of the Son
of God, who was, and is God, and of the Mother of God, who was and is an
imaculate Virgin.

But it is no disparagement to S. Joseph, yea it is honor to him, that the B.
Virgin be infinitely preferred before him, both in dignity otherwise, and in the
obligation as it were of duty, whereby our Savior Christ was more tied to her,
the^ to him. So as since our external actions are qualifyed, and ought to be
denominated by our intentions; how much more was our Savior Christ to be
accounted subject to our B. Lady, then to S. Joseph, and consequently how much
greater was the superiority which she had over him, then S. Joseph had?

Let us consider then, what a sea, or rather what a world of excellency is
hereby inferred, to have been in the person of our B Lady, of whom the Son
of God was not only borne for our salvation, but to whom he continued (during
very many years) so truly subject for her exaltation, and for our instruction.
Let us consider what prudence, and power to govern, had been infused into
that soul of hers, which the Wisdom of God, the Word Incarnate was
appointed to obey? And now if you will look a little upon the mislike which is
taken, that we account her for the Queen of Angels, and Saints; consider both
how impiously, and how childishly withal she is denied to be so, they being but
servants and sons adopted; whereas she cannot without blasphemy be denied to
have been so many years Superior to the true, only, and begotten Son of
God, who is the Lord both of Saints and Angels. Let others who have not the
light of faith play the Hyprocrits in saying they fear to exceed in honor to
our Lady, least thereby they should derogate from that which they owe to our B.
Savior: but let us have scruples of offend God, and let us continue to know
that he receaueth a most acceptable honor at our hands by our professing
devotion, and profound subjection to this sacred Virgin, to whom the Lord of
life was not only subject, but the notice of it is left to us upon record, that
we might learn thereby how to carry our selves toward his Mother by this
example, and that so much the more, because afterward she was to become also
ours.

And indeed though Christ had not been subject to her, but that only she had
received the happynes to cohabite with him so long, under the same roof; even
from thence a great reason might be drawn for the proof of her unspeakable
sanctity. Therefore was the Prophet David so careful, to keep wicked persons
out of his house, because he knew that, Cum Sancto sanctus eris, Reg. 1.22.
and cum peruerso peruerteris. The company of wicked persons will pervert thee,
but the society of Saints will sanctify thee. What then must be our B. Ladies
case, through her continual conversation with this Saint of Saints, but that
her Understanding should be inestimably illuminated by the presence of that
Sun of Justice, which to her never set, and her Will be inflamed with the
neighborhood which she had to those excessive ardours of that sphere of Fire,
whose very countenance has served to heat frozen hearts, though it found in
the B. Virgin no such matter, as that to work upon. And (to conclude) that
from the sea of perfection, upon the top whereof she was so long sailing with a
full and prosperous gale of the holy Ghost, she must needs be adorned and
enriched with inualuable treasures, which by moments is cast up into her lap.

The Scripture is not therefore so barren in description of the excellency of
our B Lady, as they who envy her honor would feign make themselves believe,
but in diverse parts thereof it points out sundry things with their
circumstances, whereby we may, (and must if we will not be as bad as beasts)
acknowledge her to be of so incomparable an excellency, as whereof the least
part cannot be arrived to, by our highest thoughts. Nor were the flowers which
grew in that delicious garden of her heart without abundance of fruit, nor were
those causes, I mean the privileges, and great prerogatives which she had,
without the effect of most Heroical virtuous actions, which may partly appear
by the observation of her proceeding in all things, but through the depth and
massines thereof, cannot by any created understanding be penetrated, and admired
as they deserve.

There is nothing which serves more to humble men, then to employ themselves
in reading and pondering well the lives of Saints; for thereby we are taught to
think our selves to be those poor creatures that indeed we are. But whosoever
shall meditate upon the actions of our B. Lady, will find that in comparison of
her, even eminent Saints do fall much more short, then we of them. And indeed
they deserve to be thought of in the way of meditation, which a kind of
Constructio loci, as they call it, which may represent to our imagination, as
well the circumstances as the substance thereof. They are innumerable amongst
our writers, who have at large discoursed heerupon: as for me I am so mindful
both of my disability and of breuity, that I will but touch and go, like those
dogs upon the banks of Nilus, one of which might yet more easily drink that
deep River dry, then any man can with the studdy of his whole life, express
the least perfection of her least Virtue.

For by way of Parenthesis, or rather by way of a short Preface, two
ponderations are to be made. First that our B Lady did whatsoever she did with
perfect liberty of will, though prevented and assisted by the rich grace of
God, to the very last point whereof, she did most eminently cooperate as a most
elevated, active, and lively instrument; and was not of no more use unto her
self then a very stock, or stone could be, according to that Manichaean, or
Mohammedan Principle, to which I would to God the Sectaries of our age did not
approach so near. But as she was Blessed who believed and consented to the
message of the Angel, by the testimony of S. Elizabeth; so could she not have
been so in believing and consenting, if she could not have chosen but believe
and consent, and with the self same elevated and entire liberty she performed
all the rest of her incomprehensible actions. The second point to be pondered,
and well imprinted in our minds, is the intense perfection, with all her actions
received from the great degree of hergrace and the sublime quality of her
person she being the Mother of God, who performed them; and the eminency
wherewith she did them, being answerable to the dignity of a most worthy Mother.

CHAP. VI.
FIRST then let it be weighed with how great humility and charity (immediately
after that she was made the Mother of God) she went up with have, toward the
mountaynous part of that Country, to visit and salute S. Elizabeth, It was no
walk of recreation, but a long and laborious journey of fourscore and
fifteen miles after the English account, from Nazareth to Hebron.

It is already showed by the exclamation of S. Elizabeth, how far it is from
the power of proud flesh and blood, to fall into a due consideration of such
humility, as this was for the Mother of God, and the bearer of him then in her
sacred womb, to honor thus her old kinswoman, with a visit that cost her so
much pains. But as S. Paul said afterward, Charitas Christi vrget nos, we are
urged to these things by the love which Christ has borne us: Cor. 2.
so did she find her self more deeply wounded with the love of God, for the
Incarnation of his Son (the Mystery whereof was then wrought) nor could she
find any rest, till she had made others happy by knowing of it, and especially
such as would be well disposed for the receiving of such glorious news. And it
may serve us both for an endless cause of consolation, and for an invincible
reason of encouragement to hope for great blessings at the hands of God by her
means, since the first action that we find her to have performed (after her
being made the Mother of God) was to communicate her self to his creatures,
before whom, upon that occasion, so many wonders were instantly wrought in
that house of S. Elizabeth.

For my part I can hardly meet with any thing in the life of our B. Lady which
I find more admirably strange, then the contempt she showed of reputation, in
not discharging the suspicion of S. Joseph by some little protestation of her
innocence, when he reflected upon her being so great with child. She could not
but know that he must needs observe in what state she was, and it can hardly be
imagined, but that the little countenance which peradventure he cast toward
her, might give her assurance of how ill he took it; wherein he went so far,
as that the scripture speaks of a design in him to dismiss her secretly.
Matt. 1.
Yet do we not find, that she did ever so much as open her mouth toward her
own justification. She knew that Time would be his Teacher of Truth; she knew
that she had already given her self away wholly to God; she knew it was a
defect to seek or care for comfort at the hand of creaturs; and chose rather
to be ill understood, and mistake^, then she would discover a matter which
might so far make to her honor and advantage, as to have declared her self to
have been made the Mother of Christ, by the ouershaddowing of the Holy Ghost.

When the time was come, wherein she was to bring forth the Blessed Infant that
she had borne, who is able to comprehend the merit that she (being then the
Mother of God, as much as she is now) should vouchsafe to go in the midst of
winter as far as Bethleem from Nazareth, that being the space of fourscore and
sixteen miles, to have her name enrolled, and her head taxed by the Officers of
a profane Emperor; and at that iourneyes end to content her self with a
Stable for want of better commodity, and with clouts instead of robes, wherein
to lodge, and wherewith to cloth the King of Glory. Which though it do
infinitely more weigh in the person of Christ then of hers, he being God, and
she being but a pure creature; yet so far is that from diminishing her
excellency, as that thereby is it sublimed. For without him that patience and
poverty had not been exercised by a Mother of God, but only by her as she was
otherwise, though even otherwise she was the most excellent creature in the
whole world, the most perfectly, and highly virtuous, the most beautiful and
the most nobly borne.

Our Savior Christ was not only her Son, but her Savior, her God, her
Father, and her Master, and there was never any disciple who followed on so
near in imitation as she did of him. And therefore, because afterward he was
pleased to be circumcised, whereby he stiched a badge of sin upon his sleeue
(not that he was bound thereto, but that he might leave an example of Obedience
to us) she thought it would become her also to be purified according to the
ordinary custom of women, whereby it was supposed that she was unclean, and
had reason to seek such remedies as were resorted unto by others; whereas
indeed she had no more need of Purification, then Christ had of Circumcision:
for as he was without sin, so had she ever been without the commerce of any
other spouse then the Holy Ghost: but the imitation of our Savior, and the
holy zeal she had to give high examples of virtue, made her glory in nothing,
but that which might serve to make her inglorious.

Her flight to Egypt gave her not only shame, but pain, which yet she entered
into, and accepted with that proof of unspeakable humility, which gave most
bright luster to all her actions. According to the discourse of flesh and blood
she might have made answer to S. Joseph when he declared the Angels message,
that in all liklyhood he was mistaken: That it became not the Son of God, and
God himself to fly from the face of an angry Tyrant: That if any such thing
had been ordained, it was rather for her to have received the Order then for
him: That the warning was to short, the provision too strait, the journey too
long, the way too dangerous, the country too Idolatrous, and Barbarous,
themselves without attendance, and without language, and such other cogitations
of humane prudence, or pride might easily have occurred to any creature, her
self only excepted. But she who had dedicated her self already to the service
of Almighty God, by the name of Ancilla, that is a Bondslaue, or Handmayd,
meant nothing less then to resume her grant; but did that which King David
describes in the Psalm; Psalm. 12 2.
Sicut oculi ancillae in manibus dominae suae etc. As the eyes of the handmayd
are upon the hands of her Mistress, so were her eyes upon the hands of her
Lord, and Master. She expected not that he should reveal any thing to her (as
he had done to S. Joseph) by his own, or by an Angels voice, but she
contented her self with Beckes or Signs, that is, with the least
signification of his divine pleasure. In conformity whereof, this being at
midnight, she instantly put herself upon the departure, and consequently upon
the sustayning (for the space of time to which there was no limit put) of more
incommodityes then we are able to imagine; not feeling or rather not weighing
(for that delicate constitution could not chose but feel to the extreme
offense of flesh and blood) the ardour of that intemperate Climate, through the
much more excessive inward heat of love, to the sacred humanity of our B.
Savior, which did both consume, and yet withal incredibly comfort her dear
and tender heart.

They had not been long returned from thence into Palestine, but that every
year at Easter, they began to perform a pilgrimage from their poor Home
(which was then in Galilie) to Jerusalem being fourscore and ten miles
forward, and as much backward, that so they might assist at the Ceremonies and
Sacrifices of that holy time and place. In this she continued till the very
death and Passion of our B. Savior. Two other feasts there were besides that
of Easter, one called Hebdomadarum of the Weeks, or of Pentecost; the other
Tabernaculorum, of the Tabernacles, whereupon men were tied to go to Jerusalem
by obligation, though women were not obliged otherwise then by voluntary
devotion. But our B. Lady, whose business was to fill the world with the odor
of a most excellent example, did in all likelihood put her self to the pain of
both these other iourneys, as well as we are certainly told by Scripture, that
she performed this of Easter. And as a man had need be a great Saint, who would
enable himself fully to conceive and co^prehe^d the least degree of that
sanctity wherewith our B. Lady (having ever the Son of God in her eye, and the
will of God in her heart) made so many millions of most holy pases: so he is no
Christian, yea and not so much as a reasonable creature, that shall not carry a
kind of compassion, to a person every way so conditioned as she was, who
measured so many thousand miles with her sacred, but weary feet, although there
had been nothing in it, but the very labor, which yet in her case was the
least.

How good cheap do our Gossips speak impiously, by speaking meanly of this
sacred Virgin? But their muddy souls are far from considering, that
notwithstanding hers was full, not only of innocence, but absolute perfection,
yet her body was never free from being employed upon penal actions of fasting,
watching, praying, passing through the heates, and colds of most tedious and
laborious iourneys, with that object for her eyes to look continually upon,
which old Simeon had set before her; Luc. ^2.
Et tuam ipsius animam doloris gladius pertransibit. And the sword of sorrow
shall even pass and pierce thy very soul. Our Savior Christ had the chalice
of his bitter Passion always in his sight, and the B. Virgin had the sword of
sorrow in hers, which was spiritually indeed, but most truly, and really to
strike her through.

CHAP. VII.
THE height and perfection of her own condition, made her not condescend the
less toward the feeble, and frail state of others, as the manner often is
with the men and women of this world to do. A proof heerof may be taken from
her gracious proceeding at the marriage of Cana of Galiley, where she found her
self, and that for the present, without her Son. For the Text affirms,
That he was invited afterward, together with his disciples; and it is most
probable that she was the cause thereof, as she is now incomparably more the
occasion of the coming of our B. Savior, I say not, to the marriage of others
but to espouse himself to the souls of such as desire it by her means.

It was much for our B. Lady to let her self fall so low, as to be present at
the celebrating of a marriage: Which howsoever it be an honorable, and lawful
state, yet is it far from the purity and perfection of Virginity; as al
Virginity of others is incomparably inferior to that of our B. Lady; and the
objects thereof are such as yield no pleasure to a soul that means
inuiolably to be chaste. It seems to have been made amongst the poorer sort
of people, whose conversation she chiefly, and only loved, when she saw the
King of heaven so impouerished for our sakes, that he wanted a cradle after he
was borne, a house wherein to live, and a bed whereon to dye.

Her eyes gave her to understand, that at the wedding dinner the wine had
failed, and she who had those very bowels of compassion about her, wherein
Mercy it self had taken the nature of man, could not chose but declare their
necessity to him who was best able to relieve it. Joan. 2.
Vinum non habent, They have no wine. And howsoever the late Adversaries of our
B. Ladies Honor, tax her of presumption in so doing, under the color of I
know not what Pedanticall, or Grammatical interpretation of some words in the
text (which afterward I shall have occasion to mention) yet the effect which
instantly followed (namely the working of the miracle, and that as she desired,
and which our Savior did rather show that he had no inclination of his own to
work at that time, if his B. Mother had not, as a man may say, even induced
him a little to break his pase) gives sufficient assurance that her
memorial, which he subscribed so easily, was grateful to him, and that it was
to be no ill way for us to obtain any thing at the hands of Christ, if we
should make his B. Mother our intercessour.

If she had found that they had been in want of bread, which is the most
necessary sustena^ce of man's life, it seems that in charity she had even been
obliged to beg, and procure relief for them, but since she had so much
compassion for their only want of wine, which is a creature that serves rather
for recreatio^ then for necessary refection; we are taught hereby how dear a
Mother she is toward her children; and that her piety extends not only to
the obtaining of such things without which we cannot live at all, but of such
others also as without which we cannot live with comfort. That wine was good,
and for such it was praised in the Gospel; Cant. 1.
but meliora sunt vbera tua vino, thy breasts, o Blessed Lady, are better then
the best wine, that is, the dearnesse of affection and favor wherewith thou
do obtain helps for us, is no less estimable and honorable often times,
then are the very helps themselves.

Out of these degrees of Humility, Purity, Patience, and Charity grew that
height of Fortitude which she expressed at the Passion of our B. Savior, at
which time in effect there was nothing else amongst the creatures to content the
eyes of Almighty God. The Synagogue was corrupt, the Apostls were fled all but
one who was there to receive (as it were by letter of Attorney, from al
mankind) the rich legacy of the B. Virgin for his Mother, and in his person for
ours, Ambros. lib. 10. c. 13. in Lucam.
as S. Ambrose does teach us. One of his Apostles had out of frailty denied
him, another with prodigious malice, avarice, and hypocrisy betrayed him, the
rest forsook him: but the B. Virgin failed not there to present her self to
receive the fullfilling of that Prophesy, which old Simeon made at the time of
her Purification, concerning the sword of sorrow to pierce and pass through
her heart, whereof I have already spoken. This sword did she receive into her,
not so as to be defeated of her senses by it, as some bold or silly Painters
have represented; but she did it standing fast by the Cross, Joan. 19.
to show that still she was full Mistress of her self, and that her sorrow
though it were without limits (upon the sight of such affliction laid upon that
sacred Humanity of her Son) was yet ouerwrought by a perfect resignation of
all, into the hands of God, and an entiere approbation of all that Passion for
the redemption of the world, howsoever the Action on the Crucifiers part did
highly offend her, though our Savior felt not the least offense in his body
which did not slice as it were her very soul in sunder.

There was nothing in our B. Lady which deserves not to be esteemed, as long
superioris ordinis, and therefore when after the Passion, the Resurrection of
our Savior was by some, in some sort, expected (among whom the mirror of
Penance the holy enamoured Saint Mary Magdalen was one, who with incredible
affection rather then faith (because it was compounded of hope and fear) ran
to the sepulcher to see what there had happened) it is not read of the glorious
Virgin (the rock of whose says was not only not to be battered, but even not
so much as touched with the lightest wave of infidelity, or doubt) that she so
much as once stirred from those contemplations wherein she was employing her
high thoughts; but she attended the accomplishment of that whereof she was
already more certain without seeing, then her eyes could make her. Though we
doubt not, but that both our B. Savior appeared instantly to her after the
Resurrection, and that the cause why she forbear to record her appearance at
the Sepulcher, was not for want of thirst to enjoy the first moment of our B.
Saviors presence, but to show both what her faith was, and what kind of thing
ours ought to be.

The Holy Scripture indeed says, that first our Savior appeared to S. Mary
Magdalen, and of the truth thereof no Christian doubts; but so yet withal we
understand those words to be meant of ordinary persons, and who were need to
have their faith confirmed, and ever with exception to our B. Lady, of whom S.
Ambrose, who well had weighed the afornamed place of Scripture, does yet
affirm, that she was testis prima Resurrectionis Dominicae, our Blessed Lady
was the first witness of the Resurrection of our Lord.

These are the most express Attributs, Excellencies and actions of our B.
Lady, whereof the Holy Ghost in the Gospel makes mention in few, but
infinitely massy words; for there is not one of them which concerns her, that
contains not Mysteries beyond man's capacity. And as in humane knowledge it is
the fashion for Professors to hid^ their ignorance when they cannot gi^^ a
reason of hard things by turning it over to certain sympathies, and secret
propertyes: so in the understanding of Scripture, it is as ordinary on the
other side, with me^ that would be thought to know all, to make a poor
Paraphrase upon a Text, and to say bouldly that no other thing is meant by it,
then the little which they have been able to express. Whereas yet in truth
there is no doubt, but that the passages of holy Scripture, and especially when
they speak of our Savior Christ, and that which concerned him so near as
does his holy Mother, do contain infinite misteryes. They look both upward
and downward, forward and backward, and on all sides, as I shall show
afterward; and are not to be comprehended by any one, till we may see as we
shall be seen in the next life. And as for many other prerogatives and
excellencyes of our B. Lady which appear to such as peruse the Ecclesiastical
Historyes, both concerning her most devout educatio^ continually in the Temple
from three years of age, till immediately before the Annunciation, of her divine
life after the Passion in the society of the beloved disciple of Christ, then
her Son S. John, and of her miraculous Assumption into heaven, which is
recorded (to omit others) by S. John Damascen, that great Saint, and great
Scholar, and great Chapplaine of our B. Ladies, to have been at that time
(which is almost nine hundred years ago) believed and received in the Church
by a Tradition, which then he said was Ancient. These things, I say, with many
others I pass over, partly, because with Catholics they would be needles, as
being already so notoriously known, and by them so piously embraced, and
partly because for the instruction of Caluinists they will not be of much
weight, because forsooth they are not registered in Holy Scripture.

I proceed further, and will show in few words how little reason they have,
who laying aside so many and express passages of holy Scripture as I have
mentioned, which do highly honor our B. Lady (both in the Attributes it
gives, and by the actions which it describes) do catch greedily at three or
four others, which when they have construed like Schoole-maisters rather then
Deuines, they hope the excellency of our B. Lady (which in their hearts they
cannot endure) may be obscured thereby: whereas if either grace or reason did
prevail, it would teach them rather to rule doubtful, and obscure passages by
plain ones; then on the contrary side such as are express, by others that are
obscure; and in true account, conclude nothing but by way of inference made
without book.

CHAP. VIII.
I Will therefore in this place by way of conclusion, for as much as concerns
Scripture in relation to our B. Lady, extract a few periodes, which I have
found in effect together in that holy man Canisius, writing of this admirable
subject, where he sets down in a cluster, that which is found in Scripture
but in several passages, as so many distinct grapes of the old Testament, being
so interpreted by the Fathers and Doctors of the Catholic Church; and those
others also of the new, being expressed plainly without figure as my self have
here already related them, but in a more scattered manner. and now to make a
fair full point, I thought good, to see if by drawing all these several
beams into one burning glass, I might inflame the Reader to more devotion. He
shows then in his first book of the B. Virgin, and 2. Chapter, how she was
the Bern. hom. 2. super missusest.
woman whose seed was promised in Paradise; She was Bern. sermon. de B. Virg.
the true Rebecca; The true Hier. ad Saluianum.
Judith; The true Lyra supra Esther.
Esther; The true Rupert. in Cantic.
temple and Sanctuary of God prophesied by Ezechiel, and the very way of
Saints; She was abundantly celebrated in spirit by Bern. hom. 2. super
m^ssusest.
Solomon; She was that which Moses saw in the Ibid.
bush and fire; That which Aaron Bern. ser. signu^ magnum
saw in the rod and flower; The Oriental gate of Ibid.
Ezechiel; The fleece and dew forshewed to Bern. hom. 1. super missusest.
Gedeon; The star which rose out of Amb. sermon. 80.
Jacob, and from whence that beam proceeded which did illustrate the whole
world; She was the mystical Arc of the Ber. de assum. B. Virg.
Testament, which contained the bread both of men and Angels; She was the
golden propitiatory; The throne of that true Bern. ibidem.
Solomon; The Princes Court; The Bern. ibidem.
bed of honor, wherein the Lord, and King of heaven did most delightfully
repose.

Now in the new Testament, behold that united which before you saw scattered,
and consider the weight of those words of the Gospel spoken, either to her,
or by her, or of her. All hayle, O thou full of grace, Our Lord is with thee,
Canis. l. 1. de B. Virgin ^ cap. 2.
Thou have found favor or grace with God, He has done great things to me who
is powerful, All generations shall call me Blessed, Blessed is the womb which
bare thee, Blessed are the breasts that gave thee suck. How comes it to pass
that the mother of my Lord should visit me; Blessed art thou among women, and
blessed is the fruit of thy womb; She alone it is of whom the world does
joyfully profess, that it is of the holy Ghost which is borne in her; She
alone unto whom the Angel did promise, that the Holy, which was to be borne of
her, should be called the Son of God; She alone to whom the Archangell who
was sent from heaven, and S. Elizabeth upon earth did celebrate with such
sublime praises. Thus says Canisius, and this he shows.

In fine I do much desire, that Catholics for their comfort, and Caluinists
for the conversion of their souls to devotion, and tenderness toward this
sacred Virgin, may resort to this excellent work of Canisius, where they shall
see, besides the evidence of these things whatsoever they can expect from any
man, concerning the greatness of our B. Lady, most excellently delivered, and
clearly proved not only by the Scripturs of both Testaments, but by the
authority of the Fathers of the Church in all ages, and of these Fathers I will
in due place use a few testimonies, before I end this discourse, and by those
few, the spirit of the rest may be conceived. Therefore it is great perverseness,
and a sin even against common sense, that since there are so many places of
Scripture, which testify our B. Ladies perfections, those few others which they
imagine to be in her prejudice, must yet be rather opposed unto those former by
these men, then any way reconciled, or ranged under them.

Yet indeed what can they argue out of those very places? They say, that the
words of our Savior; Quid mihi, and tibi mulier, which he used at the marriage
of Cana, in answer of her suite, concerning their want of wine, do show that
she was worthy of reprehension, and that he rebuked her. They translate those
words, Woman what have I to do with thee? and they infer thereby, that our
B. Savior gave therein a great check to his sacred Mother; whereas it is
plain, that they were only spoken for the instruction of them that heard, and
of us that read them; to show that he was not to manifest himself as God by
working of Miracles, till the time appointed by his Father, and therefore it is
that he said also further; Nondum venit hora mea, My hour is not yet com, as
also to make the world know that we are more to respect the immediate and
known ordinance of God, then the suite of friends, though never so pious and
meritorious.

I omit to show that those words do more naturally signify to this effect;
Quid mihi, and tibi? What have thou, Joan. 2.
and I to do with their want of wine. As if he had said; This is not such
necessity as ought to urge me toward the working of miracles so soon. But
whatsoever the words crudely taken may seem in some construction to say;
certain it is, that when our Savior had made us know by them, that which he
intended we should learn, he not only disposed himself inwardly to show that
mercy by means of our B. Ladies prayers (even as it were before his own time
appointed) but by the manner he held in speaking the words, and by the gracious
countenance which he used, he gave her puidently to understand that he would
grant her suite. For otherwise, it would not have become her discretion to
have so instantly required them that served at the dinner to be punctual in
performing of whatsoever her Son should require of them. Yea, and by the
circumstances of the Text (which describe the action succeeding after a most
particular manner, in such sort, as if they had not been forwarned, it is
morally certain that they would have made some fault) it is most probable that
our B. Savior did not only let her know that he would do the thing, but in
what manner also he would do it And this at least is confessed, that the
miracle was wrought, immediately after our Ladies suite was presented: which is
a real proof of her greatness, and the acceptablenes of her prayers in the
sight of God: and this truth deserves to put to eternal silence whatsoever
conceit is framed out of those words te her disadvantage.

In like manner do they urge, how our Savior Christ (being sought by our B.
Lady, and S. Joseph, and found at last in the Temple, and made acquainted with
the much care which they had used in seeking him) answered thus; Luc. ^.
Quid est quod me quaerebatis, an nesciebatis quia in his quae Patris mei sunt
oportet me esse? Why did you seek me, knew you not that I was to employ my self
in those things which concern the service of my Father? But as in the former
case, so in this also it is clear, that when he had taught the world by those
words, that men were to prefer their obligations to God before any tenderness
toward their flesh and blood, to be sure that they should have no color to
persuade themselves, upon this occasion, that he would disparage, or discontent
his holy Mother, the text immediately adioyns, that he went away with them who
sought and found him, and that he came to Nazareth, Et erat subditus illis, and
he there lived under them in subjection: whereby if men were not wholly blind,
they would both be content to acknowledge this truth, That it is infinitely a
greater dignity to have God for her Son, and her subject, then to be the
Superior and Empress of all things created; and consider also here, as soon
as he had performed the office of a Doctor, he made have to restore the B.
Virgin to her possession of him again as his Mother.

Another offer there is made to impeach the excellency of our B. Lady upon this
occasion. Mar. 3.
Our B. Savior having wrought a miracle in the Synagogue, was sought by the
Pharisyes to be destroyed, he retired himself to the sea side, and on shipbord
he preached to the people in huge multitudes, he wrought there innumerable
miracles, he retired himself but was yet so pressed by the people, as that
they gave him not so much as time to eat. Out of the tenderness of love, both
in regard of his hunger, and of his danger, his B. Mother, and some of their
kindred were sollicitous, and they of the people who were next, interrupted his
speech with saying, thus; Ecce Matter tua, and fratres tui foris quaerunt te.
Mar. 3.
Behold thy Mother, and thy Brethren (that is thy kinsfolks) stand without and
seek thee; and he answearing said, Quae est matter mea, and fratres mei? Who is
my Mother, and my brethren? and behoulding them that sat about him he said,
Behold my Mother, and my brethren; for he that does the will of God he is my
brother, my sister, and my Mother. This place is much in the discourse of some,
as if it were indiminution of our B. Ladies eminency, which yet yields so
little ground for an objection, as that, even for this very reason, it is
hardly capable of an answer. The occasion of that speech was this. Our B.
Savior was most wickedly and foolishly slaundred by the Scribes that came down
thither from Jerusalem, that he was himself possessed with Beelsebub, and
that in the strength of that maister-diuell, he did cast out others of
inferior rank. Our Savior did not only demonstrate the falsehood, and the
extreme absurdity of that allegation, but he did withal insinuate, that even
they knew as much; and that of mere and perfect malice they had laid that
imputatio^ upon him against the dictamen of their own conscience. With all he
denounced against them the final danger that they were in, by saying that all
other sins should be forgiven to the sons of men, only that the sins and
blasphemies against the Holy Ghost (whereby the sins of desperate and
confirmed malice which impugneth a known truth, are understood) should never
be forgiven, but punished with eternity of hell fire. The representatio^ of
which verity being made by our B. Savior, with so great liberty, in the very
teeth of them whom it concerned as parties, and who did so viperously desire to
bite him to death, might reasonably move his friends, to retire him out of
those dangers, wherein they understood him to be, and to ask for audience. But
our Savior desyring not to secure himself, but to save those people, seemed
to lay aside that petition, and still to attend to their instruction. So as
this exception taken by the Caluinists can proceed from no other cause, then a
great ingratitude to God, a great opposition to our B. Lady, and a great
contrariety to common sense, that the speeches which our Savior used to make
it apparent to the world how infinitely, dearly and tenderly he would love both
all them and us, who would perform the will of God his Father, by saying that
he would reckon of them no worse then if they were his own flesh and blood,
should serve to no other end with the^, but only to derogate from that same
flesh and blood, yea from his B. Mother her self, who was the only precious
creature from whom he fetched al his sacred humanity.

Another like this last is, the exception which is taken from a like speech of
our B. Saviors, which he uttered upon a like occasion. He was instructing his
disciples both in what manner, and in what words, they were to make their
prayers to God; and at the end thereof, he was also conuincing some of the
Jews, by proving, that he did not cast out one devil by another, but by the
power of God. The multitude admired, though some few calumniated him; and
whilst he was delivering most profitable doctrines, a woman in the company
(being as it were rapt into an Ecstasy of admiration, to see both his divine
presence, and his supernatural works, and to hear withal those words of
Eternal Life, which were delivered by his heavenly mouth) could not contain
her self from exclayming thus; Beatus venture quite portauit, Luc. 11.
and vbera quae suxisti: Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the breasts
that gave thee suck. Whereupon he said; Quinimo beati, qui audiunt verbum Dei,
and custodiunt illud. Yea, blessed are they who hear the word of God, and keep
it. These men (who are so wisely zealous of the Sons honor, as that they
cannot forbear to be carping at his Mother upon all occasions) would infer
also by this passage, as if our Lady were no better then one of us, if we shall
procure to be the servants of God; drawing (as I said before) a reason of
honoring her less from that which ministers none at all, but gives us only
cause thereby to consider the dignity of our own vocation.

But indeed, it is not our B. Lady, who is immediately and principally commended
by the good woman of this Gospel, but it is our B. Savior; and she is
praised there, but upon the reason of having brought him into the world, and
for being the choice cabinet of such a precious Jewel as she esteemed him; and
therefore it is so much the more absurdly done, to infer by the declining
which our B. Savior made from his own praises, that he meant any way to
diminish the dignity of his Mother. And yet abstracting this consideration for
the answer of our Savior, it is it self so pregnant in the proof of what I
say, as that it needs not to be much enforced.

For first it may be considered, that he was in a great multitude of people,
That he was treating about the state of their souls, That he was in the act of
working a miracle, at the end whereof the people were already drawn into
admiration, and whilst he might expect to reap the fruit of their conversion
(which was to be ripened by driving away out of their minds those clouds of
ignorance and obscurity, and those storms of malice and envy; this passionatly
affection at and devout woman with more fervor of loving zeal, then exact
consideration of all due circumstances, brake off by her exclamation that
profitable discourse of our B. Savior, to which he with divine wisdom made
the aforesaid answer: Whereby they might understand how true it was, that as
his Mother was incomparably happy, so should they also be, according to their
measure, if they would make their benefit of those instructions, that from
time to time he gave them; and about which he was in a particular endeavor at
that instant, and therefore it it is no marvel if he did not cherish the
distraction which speech had caused in the hearers.

But least of all other places does this decrease the extent of our B. Ladies
felicity, for by it we learn that she was doubly happy. Happy she was, because
her womb had borne the Savior of the world, and because her breasts had given
him suck; for our Savior Christ did not reuerse this sentence of the holy
woman pronounced upon her which though it were not then so seasonable, was yet
in it self most highly true. Nor could he who was Truth it self say that to be
untrue, which the holy Ghost by the B. Virgins own sacred mouth, had formerly
pronounced concerning her being Blessed, in that divine Canticle of the
Magnificat. And happy again we find that she was, since by the testimony of
our B Savior they all are happy, who hear the word the word of God and keep
it; for what creature did ever come so close to the keeping of the word of God,
as she who had in her sacred womb kept God himself, who was, and is the
Word, to which she communicated all the Humanity that it had, whose presence
afterward she continually enjoyed, during the whole time of his abode on earth?
whose perfections she imitated, whose Church whilst she suruiued she
instructed, and whose kingdom, now that she is assumed into heaven, she has
beautifyed. And all this because Almighty God who made her the Mother of God,
made her in all respect to be as worthy of that incomprehensible vocation, as
the state of a creature could be capable, and with which also she did concur
after an vnconceuable manner. Now to be a Mother, and a Mother worthy of God
himself implies such mountains of perfection, as even fill, and exceed the
world, and from which the least grain cannot be taken in any discourse of
reason under the pretense either of holy Scripture, or common sense.

But it were well (since it is so ill) that it were no worse, Melanc. ad c. 2.
Joan. Constant. Copron. apud Theo. orat. in S. Niceta^. Melchior Hoffma^nus
asserens Christum non suscepisse carnem ex Maria Virgin apud Bulling. aduers.
Anabap. l. 2. c. 13. in euang. Domin. 2. Epiphan. Calvin. harm. in Luc. 2.35.
edit. Gal. Calvin. harm. in Matt. 12.48.
but that our Adversaries would only diminish the Honor of our Blessed Lady by
seeking to prove, that she was less excellent, and not expressly to affirm
things of her, which make her to have been an unworthy and sinful
creature. In the strength of which spirit of giddines, many say, That she was
but like to other women in virtue; others, That she was but as a saffron bag,
whereby they infer that having lost the spice, she was no more to be esteemed;
others, That she was but as a Channel, or Conduct of water, insinuating
thereby, as if Christ had scarce taken flesh of her, or else that at the best
hand he infused not any virtue into her. Luther is often disgracing her, and
ranking her with the rest of creatures in general, and Calvin does as good as
deduce that proposition into particulers, and draw Conclusions out of those
principles: now saying, That the Virgin was at least inconsiderate, That she
was importune, and did preposterously endeavor to break off the course of her
Sons doctrine; Calvin. harm. in Joan. c. 2.
That she sinned by exceeding her bounds, and by intruding her self so far,
as that she might chance to have obscured the glory of Christ thereby; and,
that our Savior made in a manner no account of that which the woman in the
Gospel did only extol, which was her being his own Mother, as also when the
Angel announceth the Incarnation of the Son of God, he finds, Calvin. harm.
in Luc. 1.34. edit. Latin.
That she had want of faith, he says, That she did not with less malignity
restrain the power of God, then Zacharias had done before upon another
occasion, and when he has done, the blasphemous Heretic concludes, Quod non
sit magnopere laborandum etc. That there is no cause why he should take much
pains in excusing the Virgin from not having committed some fault. Iouin. apud
August. haer. 82. Petr. Martyr. ad c. 4. epist. ad Romans Apud Can. l. 2. c. 8.
marial.


To this let it be added, that they think, and often say, That she was
delivered of our Savior after the same laborious, vulgar, and uncomely manner
to which other women are subject by their descende^ce from Eve. Some again,
That she lived afterward with Joseph, to all purposes as women use to do with
their husbands: With a thousand such other beastly blasphemies, and heresies as
these. For Heluidius by the testimony of S. Hierome was condemned as an
Heretic within four ages after Christ, for only houlding that our B. Lady did
not continue in virginity after the birth of our B. Savior until the end of
her mortal life: and I would to Christ that our poor Country did not swarm
with these vile, and far worse opinions. But as the soul is infinitely to be
more esteemed then the body, so may she be concluded to have received more
offense by Caluins tongue who wounded her in her soul, by his charging her
thus with sin, then by these others who have subjected her sacred body to so
much shame: and yet even in that kind, In the Preface to the Christian
Directory.
Calvin himself has hardly gone so far as our Countreyman Bunny, who imputes
to her, with a most blasphemous mouth, the having committed no less then four
mortal sins, in the short time of our Saviors Passion.

And those famous, or rather infamous Magdeburgians, who are called
Centuriatours, being certain Lutheran Doctors, who in corpse and by public
Authority pretended to draw down an historical narration of the Church from
age to age speaking in the first book of the first Century, of the life of our
B. Savior, took occasion thereby to tax most boldly and blasphemously the
immaculate Mother of God, and to say, that when she lost her Son in the
Temple, she committed so great a sin, as that they tremble not to compare it
with that first most grievous sin of Eve, and so doubt which of the two
sins were the worse.

CHAP. IX.
THE belief and practice of the Holy Catholic, Apostolic, Roman Church is
very different from that of these men, and has been most express in this
point; for it has, throughout the whole course of so many ages, decerned, and
applied the highest honors, under God, to our B. Lady, by giving her most
glorious titles by erecting in memory of her most sumptuous Temples, by
enioyning Christians to keep in contemplation of her most solemn festiuityes;
and by pouring out before her continual supplications and prayers, that by her
intercession of meditation, the intercession of Redemption which was performed
by Christ our Lord, and could only be performed by him, may be applied to the
saving of man's soul.

When I name the Catholic, Apostolic, Roman Church, I mean not, by Roman,
that Congregation of Christians only, which is comprehended within the walls or
diocese of the City, or Sea of Rome (as some would feign impose upon us, and
thereby infer an absurdity upon that proposition, as if the same Church
whereof we speak, were both universal in being Catholic, and particular in
being but of the City of Rome:) but when I say the Catholic, Roman Church, I
mean the Church of Christ which is spread into all the corners of the earth,
but yet communicating every where in the same faith, and Sacraments, does
acknowledge the Bishop of Rome for the visible and supreme Head thereof under
Christ. The dignity and eminency whereof if it be considered, and be weighed
withal, how devout it has ever been in tenderly honoring, and religiously
praying to our B. Lady. I think there is no man of modesty, and even common
sense, who will not be induced not only to an excuse, but even to an imitation
thereof.

August. confess. l. 6. cap. 11.
Non vacat, non estinane, quod tam eminens culmen authoritatis Christianae
fidei toto orb diffunditur. It is no trifle, it is no matter of small
importance that the Christian faith has obtained over the whole world such a
sublime top of authority. These are the words of S. Augustine, which he spoke
being yet no Christian; and the same weight which that kind of discourse had
against Paganism, or Manicheisme in his time, the same has it, at the least
in favor of Catholic Religion, concerning the honor and invocation of our B.
Lady, amongst and above all the other Saints of God, against Caluinisme, or
whatsouer other such Innovation. Non vacat, non est inane, it is no toy, it is
no contemptible thing, which the whole Body of Catholics, has so long, and so
devoutly practiced, concerning the honor of our B. Lady, and the need which it
finds mankind to have of her helping hand. Yea, and a Protestant, that is
either morally wise, or discreetly modest, as S. Augustine was before he was a
Catholic Christian, will think and speak reverently of this Church, though
he shall abstract from this belief, That it is the only true Church of Christ,
and do but confess (which no body in his wits will deny) that it is a
congregation of great Order, Wisdom, Virtue, Learning, Extent, and
Continuance.

Though indeed (whatsoever may be pretended by our opposits) it is both more
true, and more evident then the Sun is bright, That either Christ has no
Church at all, That the prophesyes of the old Testament were false, and, That
the promises of the new Testament were feigned, or else that this church is the
true and only true Church of Christ, since all those marks, and plain tokens,
which were delivered as belonging thereunto, do clearly apply themselves to
this Church and to no other. For what other but this can (without the impudent
face of an harlot) pretend, Tertull. l depraes. haer. Vita B. Bern. l. 2. c. 7.
Beda in 6. Cant. Ambr. epist. 13. Ose. 2. 1. Tim. 3.
To have converted Nations, To have been fostered and nursed by a long series
of Kings and Queens, To have embraced even the very ends of the world, To
have been espoused to the Messiah with an indissoluble bound of Matrimony, as
was fortould by those men of God in the old Testament? Or what other then this,
can with any color affirm, That it is the pillar, and ground of Truth, as S.
Paul did witness, That it is but one, That it is, and has ever been, and is to
be ever Visible, That it has been, and ever must be Infallible, as is
clearly to be convinced by that one direction which our B. Savior gave, Dic
Ecclesiae, Tell the Church: And Si Ecclesiam non audierit, sit tibi tamquam
Ethnicus and Publicanus, let him be to thee as a Pagan, and Publican, if he
obey not the orders of this Church. For unless this Church were ever to be
endued with Unity, with Visibility, and with Infallibility, impossible it were
either for that counsel of our Saviors to be followed (and this were to
impute folly to him) or else though it were followed, it would be impossible for
men to be saved by means thereof, and that were to lay a worse note if worse
may be, upon the fountain of all Wisdom, and goodness? Or what other Church
then this, Ephesians. 4.
can apply to it self, that Legacy, which S. Paul to the Ephesians affirmed to
have been given to mankind by our Savior Christ, when he ascended up to
heaven, namely Doctors, and Pastors to continue from that time till the end
of the world, that so the body of Christ might be built up, and Christian
souls be kept by the ancker of true faith, from floating (after the fashion of
Heretics) by the winds, or waves of fantastical and foolish doctrines.

No other congregation then the Catholic, will so much as pretend to many of
these true marks of the Church; at least none but she can prove that they any
way belong to theirs or the^, who therefore by a miserable necessity are
constrained to hide themselves in certain castles of the air whilst they
talk of Scripture, whereby they mean nothing else but that interpretation or
conceit of their own which the interest either of their profits or passion
does suggest. By all which I infer, that since we make so fair a claim to be
the true, and never erring Church of Christ, which even our moderate
Adversaries will confess to be of great appearance; that doctrine which it
teaches, and from whence the honor and invocation of our B. Lady proceeds,
ought not in any reason to be so blasphemed, even by them who will not yet
embrace it.

This Church has also further (being inspired and guided by the Holy Ghost)
framed an Office of our B. Lady, that is to say, it has composed a Service out
of the Psalms, and other Scriptures, together with the writings of the Holy
Fathers, which it commands to be recited at such time as her festival days
are celebrated; and now and then it interposeth certain affectuous versicles,
to show the admiration wherein it has her supreme dignity, through the
vouchsafing which God Almighty has pleased to use with her, in making her a
fit Mother for himself. Sometimes it exclameth thus, Faelix namque es sacra
virgo Maria, and omni laud dignissima: quia ex te ortus est sol iustitiae
Christus Deus noster.

And again; Sancta and immaculata virginitas, quibus te laudibus efferam
nescio: quia quem caelicapere non poterant, tuo gremio contulisti! Beata es
Virgo Maria quae Dominu^ portasti Creatorem mundi: Genuisti qui te fecit, and
in aeternum permanes Virgo. Beata matter, and intacta virgo gloriosa Regina
mundi, intercede pro nobis ad Dominum. Happy art thou, O sacred Virgin Mary,
and most worthy of all praise; for the Son of Justice Christ our Lord is
borne of thee. O thou holy and immaculate virginity. with what praises shall I
extol thee, since thou have contained him in thy womb, whom the heavens
themselves could not comprehend! Blessed art thou, O Virgin Mary, who have
borne our Lord the Creator of the world: thou have borne him that made thee,
and thou eternally remaynest a Virgin. O blessed Mother and immaculate Virgin,
O thou glorious Queen of the world, pray for us unto our Lord. In this manner
does the Church perform to her all due honor. And in other parts of the same
office it applies many other places of Scripture, and especially out of the
Canticles, the book of Wisdom, and the Apocalypse, toward the dignifying,
and celebrating the praises of our B. Lady, vesting, as it were, her person,
with all those appellations, and other terms of honor which are there to be
found in full measure, and among others these; Veni columba mea, veni sponsa
mea, veni electa mea, veni coronaberis, pulchra vt Luna, electa vt Sol,
terribilis vt castrorum acts ordinata, mulier amicta sole, and Luna sub
pedibus eius. Astitit Regina a dextris tuis circumdata varietate: and a
thousand such passages as these are sung by the Holy Church, in honor of our
B. Lady, as being the Dove, the Spouse, Vide August, de symb, ad Catec. c. 1.
Epipha^. sermon. de laudibus Mariae. Bernard. sermon. in eundem locum. Apoc. 12.1.
the eiect of the King of heaven, one clad, and environed with the Sun,
supported by the Moon, a Queen all clad with variety of riches, and standing
at the right hand of God.

Which sentences of Holy Scripture howsoever they are also applied otherwise,
as sometimes to a Soul in grace, sometimes to Heavenly Wisdom, sometimes to
the celestial Jerusalem, yet this is no impediment why they may not also
truly, and most properly be applied to the person of our B. Lady, since the
same Scripture has several senses, and all of them may be true, so that they
be not co^tradictory to one another. And the Holy spirit of God delivering them
by the pen of the Prophets, and Apostles, had several regards and aims at
several things to be expressed by the same words, which the Holy Fathers, and
Interpretours (as children of the Catholic Church) were directed, and enabled
by the same spirit to declare. Which howsoever it may seem strange, to such as
in themselves are strangers to the truth of that which passes in this
particular, yet it must be confessed to be, as I say, by such as will not
generally tax the Holy Fathers, both of folly, and falsehood, since they have
expounded the Holy Scriptures according to four several senses, namely the
Litterall, the Moral, the Anagogicall, and the Allegorical. Nay it is
certain, how strange soever it may seem, that the same Scripture has
sometimes diverse senses even Litterall: and so has that of, Expedit nobis vt
vnus homo moriatur pro populo, ne tota gens pereat, Filius Cyril. in psalm. 2.
de humana generat. August. de aetern.
meus es tu, ego hodie genuite. Omnia Psalm. 8. Aug. de nature. human. and Chrysostom.
peculiariter de Christo orat. 4. in ep. ad Haebr. c. 2. August. confess l. 12.
c. 25. and 31.
subiecisti sub pedibus eius: and the authority of S. Augustine alone may
suffice to show, that out of the same words of Scripture may be drawn, magna
copia verissimarum sententiarum, great abundance or variety of senses, which
be all true. This he says by occasion of the several interpretatio^s of those
only words, In principio fecit Deus caelum and terram: In the beginning God
made the heaven, and earth. And he shows afterward, why Moses may be
conceived to have forseen al those true several senses of those words which
should afterward be gathered, Per quem Deus vnus sacras literas vera, and
diuersa visuris multorum sensibus temperauit. God did by the pen of Moses, so
temper and dictate those dim books, which he wrote, as that all the senses
might be true, and yet differing from one another, according to the variety of
interpretations which diverse men should make thereof

CHAP. X.
BUT to return to the aforsaid Office of the Church, there are further brought
in upon occasion diverse passages of many ancient and Holy Fathers (for I will
not touch upon them of the later times) which may excite the Readers to bear
all due devotion to our B. Lady, through the pathetical and tender speech which
they deliver of her. And I will accompany them which are taken out of the
Breuiary with some others of the same authority and time. Hearken then a while
whosoever you be, who are so miserable as not to be devoted to the B. Virgin,
that you may perceive how dangerous and different a way you take from those
lights and ornaments of God Church, who are ready if you will to be your
guides. And note that except S. John Damascen, S. Anselme, and S. Bernard,
there is none of this full Jury but above a thousand years old.

And to begin with the most ancient, S. Irenaeus in his third book against
heresies 33. Chapter, has these words, Sicut Eua inobediens etc. As Eve by
disobedience was made the cause of death; so Mary was made a cause of
salvation, both to her self, and to all mankind.

S. Athanasius in his Epistle to Epictetus, Athan. epist. ad Epict.
says thus: Idcirco gratia plena etc. Therefore is the B. Virgin called by the
name of full of grace, because she did abound with all graces by the filling of
the Holy Ghost, and was ouershaddowed by the virtue of the most high.

Cyrill. Alexan. hom. co^t. Nestor.
S. Cyrill of Alexadria being assembled with other Bishops upon a time of
solemnity, spoke thus in a sermon made against the Heretic Nestorius; Hilarem
video coetum fidelium omnium etc. I see this Congregation of all the faithful
to be full of alacrity, who are come together with cheerful minds, being
called by the holy Mother of God, and yet ever Virgin Mary. Praise and glory be
to thee, O Holy Trinity, who have conducted us all to this solemnity. Praise
also to thee, O thou Holy Mother of God. For thou art that precious pearl of
the whole world; Thou art a lamp never to be extinguished; The crown of
virginity; The scepter of true faith; A temple not to be dissolved, containing
him who could within no place be contained; A Mother and a Virgin. Blessed art
thou amongst women, being the parent of him, who being blessed came in the name
of our Lord. By thee the Trinity is glorified; By thee the precious Cross is
celebrated, and adored throughout the whole world. By thee heaven triumphs,
Angels and Archangells rejoice, Devils are driven away, and man himself is
recalled to heaven. By thee all creatures (once deteyned in the error of
Idolatry) are converted to the knowledge of the truth. The faithful are come to
Holy Baptism, and Temples are built throughout the whole world. By thee do the
Nations come to penance. What shall I say more? By thee the only begotten Son
of God, that true light did shine to such as sat in darkness; By thee the
Prophets did foreshew salvation to the Gentiles; And by thee did the Apostles
preach it. Who can unfold the eminency of thy praise, O thou Mother and virgin
Mary? Let us celebrate her, most beloved Brethren, adoring her Son the
immaculate spouse of the Church, to whom be honor and glory for all
Eternityes. Amen.

S. Ephrem in an Oration of the praises of the most Holy Mother of God, Ephr.
orat. de laudibus SS. Dei Matris.
Intemerata prorsusque pura etc. The untouched and entierely pure virgin the
Mother of God; The Queen of all men; The hope of such as despair; My most
glorious and best Queen; More sublime then the celestial spirits; More pure
then the Sun beams and splendours; More honorable then the Cherubim, and
more holy then the Seraphim.

Hear what the holy and learned S. Ambrose says in his book of the
Institution of Virgins. Christi lilia etc. Ambr. de Instit. Virgin. cap. 15.
The lillyes of Christ are especially virgins, whose virginity is bright and
immaculate; for that Virginal womb was the beginning, and root, and
perpetually springing fountain, from whence by that most powerful example of
the Mother of God, all the Quires of Virgins did proceed.

A Maria etc. (says S. Epiphanius) of the Virgin Mary, Epiph. l. 3. hares. 73.
post med.
life was borne unto the world so that she gave life to him that lives and
Mary was made the Mother of such as live.

S. Hierome upon the eleventh Chapter of Isay, Virgam de radice etc. Let us
understand the holy Virgin Mary, to be the Rod that springes out of the root
of Iesse.

S. Theodoret upon the Canticles, Inter tot animas omnium hominum etc. Amongst
the souls of all the men and women that shallbe saved, that only one is as the
elected dove, who brought forth Christ, a virgin, a Mother, a maid, who
doubtless did excel in purity both the Cherubim and the Seraphim.

Aug. l. de nature. and great.
S. Augustine in his book of Nature and Grace: Cum de peccatis agitur etc. When
there is any speech of sin, I will make no question of the Blessed Virgin,
for we know that more grace was given to her for the total ouerco^ming of
sin, who deserved to conceive, and to bring him forth, of whom it is evident
that he had no sin.

August. tract. de symb. ad Cach. l. 3. c. 4. tom. 9.
The same holy Father in a Treatise of the Creed unto Catholics, the third
book, and 4. Chapter, in few but massy words speaks thus of the B. Virgin,
Per feminam etc. death came by a woman, and life also by a woman. By Eve came
destruction, and salvation by Mary.

Greg. in 1. lib. 1. c. Reg.
S. Gregory the great upon the first book and Chapter of Kings Potest huius
montis nomine etc. The ever most B. Virgin Mary Mother of God, may be designed
by the name of this mountain. For she was a mountain who by the dignity of
her election did transcend the altitudes of elected creaturs. Was not Mary a
high mountain, who that she might arrive to the conception of the Eeternall
Word, did raise the top of her merits above all the Quires of Angels, till she
came unto the throne of the Deity: for of the most excellent dignity of this
mountain the Prophet I say does say; Isa. 2.
In the last days there shallbe a mountain of our Lord prepared in the top of
the mountains. For she was a mountain in the top of mountains, because the
height of Mary does shine above all Saints. And she is aptly called both a
mountain, and house, who being illustrated with incomparable merits, did
prepare her sacred womb wherein the only Son of God might repose.

S. John Damascen in his book of Catholic faith, affirms of our B. Lady,
that reuera Domina facta est etc. Damasc. de fide orthoxa.
She was indeed made the Lady with dominion over all creatures when she was
made the Mother of the Creator. And in his second oration of the death of the
Mother of God: Clamemus cum Gabriele etc. Let us cry out with the Angel
Gabriell, All hayle, O thou full of grace, All hayle O thou inexhausted sea of
joy, Al hayle, o thou especial lightner of our burdens; All hayle, O thou
medicine of all the afflictions of our hearts, All hayle, O thou holy Virgin, by
whom death was banished and life introduced.

Anselm. de co^cep. Virg. and peccat. orig. c. 18.
S. Anselme in his Treatise of original sin Chapter 18. Decebat vt illius
etc. It was fit that the Conception of that man (he speaks there of Christ
our Savior) should be made of the most pure Virgin, and therefore it was fit,
that this virgin should most sweetly shine with so great purity then which a
greater cannot be imagined under God, to whom God the Father resolved to give
his only Son.

S. Bernard in his sermon upon the corporal Assumption of the B. Virgin into
heaven says thus; Quis cogitare sufficiat etc. Who is able to conceive how
gloriously the Queen of the world went forward as upon this day, and with how
great entiernes of tender devotion the whole multitude of those celestial
legio^s came forth to meet her? With what canticles she was co^ducted to the
throne of glory? With how serene a face, with how dear a countenance, with how
divine imbracements she was received by her Son, and with that glory which
became such a Son.

In his fourth Sermon upon the Assumption, after he had with this protestation,
Non est quod me magis delectet etc. There is nothing wherein I take more joy,
and so yet there is also nothing which puts me into a greater trembling of
fear, then to discourse upon the glory of the Virgin Mary etc. he proceeds
shortly after to say this; Quae enim vel Angelica puritas etc. What purity
though Angelical will presume to compare it self to this virginity, which was
made worthy to become the sacred repose of the Holy Ghost? But how great and
how precious was the virtue of thy humility with so great purity, with so great
innocence, with a conscience wholly free from sin, yea with the fullnes of so
much grace? Whence had thou humility, and so great humility, O thou blessed
Creature? Indeed thou were worthy whom our Lord should regard, whose beauty the
King should desire, by whose fragrant odor he might be drawn from that
eternal resting place of his Fathers bosom. Behold, O B. Virgin, we
accompany thee a far off, as we may, with these acclamations, whilst thou art
ascending to thy throne. Let it be an effect of thy piety to make known unto
the world that grace which thou foundst with God, by obteyning through thy holy
prayers pardon for such as are faulty, cure for the sick, strength of mind for
the weak, comfort for the afflicted, and help and liberty for such as are in
danger. And now in this day of thy solemnity and joy, by thee, O gracious
Queen, let thy Son Christ Jesus our Lord (who is God for ever blessed above
all things) bestow the gifts of his grace upon us his poor servants, who
with praise are calling upon the sweet name of Maria.

These are some of those passages, which I find recorded amongst many others of
some few Fathers, who partly speak, though but compendiously, in the Roman
Office or Breuiary, and some other few which I take out of their own undoubted
works, whereby the Reader may see not only the judgment of the Church, but
how express, and earnest the most excellent members thereof have been, and
how devoutly they have not only celebrated the praises, but recommended
themselves to our B. Ladies prayers And there would never be an end if I should
strive to deliver the almost infinite attributes of excellency which they have
given to her, which some of her devout servants, having gathered out of their
works, they grow even to fill whole books. Among others the Margarita, and
Hebdomada Mariana may be considered, where the Reader shall find S. Irenaeus,
S. Cyprian, S. Athanasius, S. Ephrem, S. Epiphanius, S. Ambrose, S.
Chrysostom, S. Augustine, S. Gregory, S. John Damascen, S. Anselme, S. Bernard
with the rest of these later ages, who have al striued to express themselves,
as there you may find particulerly cyted, in calling her; The window of heaven;
The treasure of the Divinity; The solace of the world; The woman which
transfused grace into us; The ensign of faith; A cause of salvation to
mankind; The throne of the Divinity; The Captain General; The fountain of
all Consolation; The joy of Saints; The Queen of Angels; The Mother of Mercy;
The mother of the living; The succor of such as are in danger; A Queen
assisting, and reigning at the right hand of her Son; The vnlocker of Heaven
gates; The scepter which commands all; The root of glory; The rose which
has perfumed all things with heavenly odours; A temple beautifyed by the holy
Ghost; She who confounds all heretical prauity; The scepter of orthodoxall
Faith; A mountain of our Lord prepared in the top of the mountains.

Innumerable I say are the Attributes of honor which the Holy Fathers have
given to this sacred Virgin, and many of them have been delivered, though with
great profit, and piety, yet in such affectuous terms, as the Catholics at
this day dare scarcely use, through the extreme malignity of our Adversaries
and hers: because as there is no word which may not have diverse significations;
so they will be sure to interpret them ever in the worst sense: whereas
Charity requires just the contrary. And if they proceeded according to the
rule thereof, they would never charge, either the holy Fathers, or us their
children with derogating any thing from Almighty God, by the honor we do to
our B. Lady. But whenever they find us to ascribe any quality or title to
her, which to a weak, or wrong judgment may seem only to belong to him; they
may know once for all, that we impute such things to God as to the Tree, from
which she took her growth; he is the fountain, she is the stream; he is the
great Artificer and primary cause, and she a most elevated Instrument; he is
the Sun, and she the Beam, whereby he has communicated his light, and heat
to this dark and frozen world of ours.

So that they need not thus peruersly continue to ask us what it is, that we
can say more in honor of Christ, then we say in honor of our B. Lady? For we
can say, and we do say according to these most true professions, and
protestations following, which may for ever serve to the justification of our
whole practis^ herein, and for the discovery of their either folly, or malice
that oppose it.

We profess this difference between the excellency of Christ our Lord, and
that of the B. Virgin, That the B. Virgin is no more but a pure creature, but
that Christ is God, and so there is no comparison at all between the
excellency of God, and her; That in respect of God she is infinitely less then
the least grain of dust is less then the whole world; That it was the only
goodness of God, that chose her first out of all mankind to be his Mother; That
all her greatness, and perfection depends upon the first grace that God gave
her. This I say, is that we all profess, and this being supposed and kept
inviolable, it is evident that whatsoever honor or excellency we ascribe to
her, so far we are from robbing God Almighty of his honor by it, as that on
the contrary side we highly honor him, in acknowledging his unspeakable
benignity and bounty toward mankind, a part whereof he has so much enobled,
as to make it the Mother, and the so worthy Mother of Christ our Lord, who is
also God.

Now, since the honor we do to the most sacred Virgin, proceeds only from
this root, and the dependence thereupon: let it be considered what a ridiculous
proposition this is? That we dishonor Christ by the excess of honor which we
do to the Mother of God, whom yet we chiefly honor, because she was his
Mother, and whom we honor not at all beyond the capacity of a pure creature.
These propositions being then supposed, it wll be leudly done hereafter, by
such as shall take exceptions at the terms wherewith the Catholic Church, or
her children, have thought fit to celebrate our B. Ladies memory. For if they
be not rather school boys, then school men, if they be not such as had
rather find a knot in a rush, then untie it, they will follow the counsel of
S. Augustine in his book de vtilitate credendi cap. 7. That whenever any
phrase, or speech is used by Catholics which may sound less plausible, men
are to travail up and down over a whole world, if need be, for the finding of
an excusable interpretation thereof, rather then to infer thereby that the
doctrine or practice of the Catholic Church is impure.

And so much the rather are they bound to do it, because there is no word which
has not in this respect, the nature of a Medall, that is, it has a right
side, and a wrong; and so has every garment which they wear. And as he were a
foolish servant that would apparel his Master with the wrong side outward,
because there are two sides: so they are to be contemned, and cast out as
wranglers who will needs take the words of another man in the ill sense,
especially when he protests to mean them in the good; and most certain it
is that by the same measure whereby they would take honor from our B. Lady,
under the pretense which they make of our using terms that are subject to the
misconstruction of malice, a man may as well take credit from the holy
Scripture it self which says; That God Almighty has arms, and legs, and
passions of the mind like mortal and sinful creatures.

For if those words be not understood by a Religious discretion, that manner
of speech will prove as unsafe at least as any other that we use, when there is
question of doing honor to our B. Lady. But as our case stands, we need not,
that our Adversaries should put themselves to over much pains, since by the
professions that are already made it is evident, how all titles of honor under
God may agree to the B. Virgin, and not only that they may be given without
sin, but that it is both piety in them that do it, and impiety in them that
oppose to it.

What dishonor is it to an earthly King, if his Mother be called the Queen of
his Country: the kingdom is known to belong in right of propriety to the King
and she leaves not to be a subject though she have the honor to be called,
and to be the Queen? Or what dishonor were it to a King, if that Queen were
called the Queen of his subjects, of whose persons howsoever the King alone can
dispose in rigor, yet who among them (being indeed a loyal, and loving
subject to the King) would not hold himself for happy, in being able to
execute any just commandment of his Mothers?

Thus things do pass even here on earth, and it is well that they pass so;
for these are not apish customs, nor humorous inventions, nor effects of
servile flattery, but they flow from reason, and nature, and they are
warrantable by all laws, both divine and humane. And when any thing is so
warrantable, a man may well infer, that in the spiritual Kingdom of Christ
such things are practiced with much more eminency, and perfection. Nor does it
by infinite degrees so well become an earthly Monarch, that his Mother be
acknowledged for the Queen of his Country, and of his subjects, as it
becomes the Humanity of Christ our Lord, that the sacred Virgin (from whom he
took all the humanity that he had, uniting it hypostatically to the Godhead)
should have the honor to be the Queen of heaven which is his Country, and the
Queen of Angels and Saints who are his subjects; and who are glorious, and
immortal by the merits of that blood which he took from her alone, and united
it to himself.

CHAP. XI.
THvs stands the case concerning the Attributes of honor, which Catholics
are glad they have the grace to give our B. Lady: and touching the other point
of her invocation, which is also both auowed, and devoutly practiced by the
Fathers, whom I have alleged, and with whom, and in whose company I might
cite the rest, Council. Calced. act. 1. Dionys. Areop. 2. Eccles. hierarch.
Ambr. l. de viduis vltra medium. August. sermon. 84. in Joan. Athan. sermon. de
annunt. Deiparae circa fine^ Basil. orat. in 40. Mar. etc.
I will leave for the present to press our Adversaries with their authority,
remitting the more patient Reader to whom he will of an hundred Catholic
Writers, who have clearly euicted this point of controversy: and for my part
(who could not pass it over wholly in silence) I will in very few words debate
how the case stands with them in reason, according to the grounds of their
Religion.

If invocation of the Saints in general, and in particular of the glorious
Virgin be rejected, our Adversaries must do it first (if they will be true to
their own grounds) for reasons drawn from Holy Scripture. When they press us
to prove it by testimony thereof, they are justly told, that they proceed
impertine^tly. For they are the men who should prove it to be forbidden by
Scripture, and not we that it is expressly enjoined. For unless it be forbidden,
they cannot upon that reason disclaim from the use thereof, who do themselves
practice diverse things, whereof there is no express commandment in Holy
Scripture, as namely they baptize Infants, and they observe the Sabbath upon
the Sunday etc. Exodus 20
The later of which points is so far from being commanded, that it rather
seems to be forbidden, Act. 15.
when the Saturday is clearly assigned for that purpose. Nay the eating of
blood, and strangled meats, was prohibited to the Christians of the Primitive
Church which yet the Caluinists make no scruple to eat as well as we, which in
us is no offense, who obey the Church, which tells us that the time of
keeping the Sabbath was ceremonial, and consequently abrogated by the coming
of Christ, and that the Precept about abstaining from those meats was but
temporary, and that now the date thereof is expired. But our Adversaries, who
say they are only guided by that which is delivered to them in Scripture, are
convinced by their own practice to be Hypocrites; and may justly, be doubly
accounted so, if whilst they practice those things which are expressly against
the Commandment of Holy Scripture, they do yet reject the Invocation of Saints,
only because we do not show as they say, that it is expressly enjoined by
Scripture.

Two reasons they use to bring against it, the former whereof pretends to
show, that it is not lawful, the latter that it is not convenient. But
whosoever marketh their proceeding well, shall find the weakness of their cause
by this, that howsoever these reasons be of very different nature, and
independent of one another; yet if they be well encountered, they never stick
to either of these pretenses a part, but are ever hopping, or rather halting
from one to the other. The former of them is, That (forsooth) invocation of
Saints is both derogatory to the honor of God, and injurious to the mediation
of Christ; and then they display their colors (for they are but colors)
Gloriam meam alteri non dabo: Vnus est mediator Christus Jesus; Isa. 42. 1.
Tim. 2. Matt. 1.
Venite ad me omnes qui laboratis etc. I will not give my glory to any other:
There is one mediator Christ Jesus: Come unto me all you that labor, and the
like. But what of all this? Therefore Christians may not pray to Saints? Who
sees not the childishnes of this consequence? And when once we convince them,
that it is of not dishonor to God, they have nothing to say, but that the
Saints cannot hear us; and when again we prove that the Saints do hear us,
they return to their impertinency of telling us, that we dishonor God.

But howsoever to the first place of Scripture it is truly answered, that the
Glory which there is spoken of, is the Glory incommunicable, and only due, and
proper unto God himself; but that the Glory given by us to Saints in
beseeching them to pray for us, is both so far of an inferior nature, as that
we impart it to sinful men and women, as often as we recommend our selves to
their prayers; and we also give by them, a particular increase of honor to
God, in acknowledging the mercy he shows to his creaturs whilst he enableth
his better servants to assist us.

To the second, no more occurreth to be said, but that Christ our Lord is the
only mediator of Redemption, whereof the Apostle speaks in that place; but
if he were also the only mediator of Intercession between God and man, not
only should all the Children in England be ill brought up, when they are
appointed to ask their Parents blessing, but the holy Apostle himself when he
commended the necessity of his soul to the prayers of the Romans, Romans 15.
had committed a most injurious act against the Savior of the world whose
faith he preached.

The third place breeds so little difficulty, as that it scarce deserves an
answer. For our B. Savior therein exhorts all men who were either
ouerburthned with the obligations of the old Law, or frighted with the horror
of their old consciences, that they would resort to him, as to one that would
deliver them from both. But he was far from diuerting the members of his body
from participating with the rest of their own communion, and from approaching
to his mercy, by the means of his dearest servants, whether they lived still
in this earthly pilgrimage, or were transplanted into that Garden of Eternal
glory. And if the meaning of these passages of Holy Scripture had been such as
the Caluinists pretend, it were strange that no one Father of the Church in any
age should interpret them toward the impugnation of the invocation of Saints.

Nay even by the Scripture it self which cannot be contrary to Scripture, we
are taught that this place does contribute nothing to the Caluinists opinion;
since we find diverse instances of men, that came to God by means of the
prayers of other men, who yet were so far from derogating thereby, either from
the glory of God, or their own good otherwise, as that thereby they obtained
their just desires. There was a time when Almighty God made the children of
Israe know, that he would not pardon them, Exodus 32.
but by the means of such prayers as his servant Moses should make in their
behalf And the irreuerend friends of Job were instructed by God himself, Job.
42.
that if they would obtain remission of their sins, they should make
intercession to Job that he might pray for them, expressing plainly that for
his sake, and at his suite, they should find such favor as would have been
denied them for their own. Nor has any reason been ever yet alleged, why
it should be of dishonor to Almighty God, that men should recommend themselves
to the prayers of Angels and Saints, and that it should not be more
dishonorable to him, that we should invoke and pray sinful men to
intercede for us.

The second reason which they bring against the invocation of Saints, is
because they say, they cannot hear us. Let this therefore be considered of, and
let the^ talk no more of the former, since these depend not upon one another.
It is evident in the history of Tobias, by the relation of the Archangell
Raphael, Tob. 12.
that he offered up the old man's devotions of prayers and alms to the
acceptance of Almighty God: But this Book forsooth must be Apocriphall. If
they mean not also to cast Christ out of the Canon, what answer can be made
to that amorous speech of his, which tells us, that the Angels of heaven do
so rejoice at the conversion of sinners? Luc. 15.
Or what to the testimony of the beloved disciple, to whom this amongst other
things was revealed, Apoc. 9.
That the Angels were still offering up their prayers which were made upon
earth? We are taught also by Truth it self, Matt. 22.
that the Saints are as the Angels of heaven: and to convince the Caluinists
in one, is to do it in both. But can either of them offer up our prayers,
unless they know them to be such? Or can they rejoice at my conversion unless
they see the acts of my contrition, and of the faith whereby I believe the
promises of Christ in general; and of hope whereby I apprehend, and apply them
in particular; and of the charity whereby I am grafted as a living branch into
that true vine, and in a most particular manner of the desires I have of their
prayers for me? It is the part of a mad man to call these things in question.

Again, Genesis 49.
the Patriarch Jacob when he was upon the point to leave this world bequeathed
his children to the protection of his good Angel, beseeching him that as he
had preserved him, so he would also bless them. S. John the Evangelist in the
very entrance of th Apocalypse in these words, Apoc. c. 1.
Gratia vobis and pax ab eo quiest, and qui erat, and qui venturus est, and a
septem spiritibus, beseeches God and the seven spirits reigning with him to
be gracious to them. Luc. 15.
And though Dives in the Gospel were a damned soul, yet he was not condemned
for praying to Abraham after he was dead; and much less can it be affirmed,
but that Abraham heard his prayer though it were not granted. The Angels
therefore and the Saints may even out of Scripture be proved to hear our
prayers, since we find thereby that men prayed to Saints without any note of
that folly, which would have been done to them, if the Saints had not heard
their prayers.

2. Match. 15.
Moreover since the Scripture teaches us otherwise, that Onias, Ieremias, and
other Saints, after they had departed out of this life, did instanily, and
incessantly make their prayers for the inhabitants of this world; what
inconvenience can be imputed by our Adversaries to the belief we have, that in
his face who sees all things, they see also the prayers we make to him by
their means? And since we all profess that the Saints of heaven are
completely happy, how envious deserve they to be accounted who would abridge
them of all power to help and hear miserable creatures, who rank themselves
under their patronage, and recommend themselves earnestly to their assistance?
Not as they would do to God upon whom their good originally depends, and
from whom all grace and glory flows; but as to his friends, and fauorits,
who on the one side have had experimental knowledge of our miseryes and on the
other side have been assumed to the reward of eternal happynes, and are as so
many conueyances, and rich conducts of celestial graces to the souls of men.

CHAP. XII.
THERE is no article of our Religion which is more impugned by the enemy of
mankind, then this of Saints: and I could name a great Caluinist, and a great
man that lived not long ago, who could patiently enough be told that he was
not truly called to the place he held, who yet when there was speech of the
invocation of the B. Virgin, grew abruptly into such a passion, or rather fury,
as that he seemed to be little better then possessed. And as all of them are
extremely auerse in the generality of praying to Saints, so particulerly it
has place when there is no question of honoring, or imploring the aid of our
B. Lady. But it has pleased Almighty God in his goodness, that after the rate
of their malice who impugn this article; so is the evidence, whereby they are
to be convinced, plain, and testified not only by the practice of the Church,
the express inference of Holy Scripture, the conformity with nature and
reason, but with infinite arguments of miracles which God has set as so many
seals upon this Truth.

It is strange (and would be incredible, if we were told by less then
experience it self) that there should be such a deal of infidelity in the
world, as to make men doubt, and of impudence as to make them deny, that the
power and gift of miracles is still in the Church, and that they have been
abundantly wrought by the providence and power of God, in proof of invocation
of Saints, and above all of the glorious, and immaculate Virgin the Mother, the
Daughter, and the Spouse of God. There is no corner of the Christian Catholic
world, which is not full of them; but no time or place will be able more redily
to rise up in judgment against our Caluinists, then the mercy of this kind
which God has showed, in honor of the sacred Virgin, in these very days of
ours, and even in the next confines of our Country.

For they are great numbers of most certain miracles which have been wrought
in Brabant near to Sichem, in a Chapel there devoted to our B. Lady. The
stories of the men, and women that have received miraculous cure by the prayers
of the B. Virgin, to whom they recommended themselves, after exact, and severe
examination of the parties themselves, of the persons who knew them both before
and after, of whole Colleges of Physicians and Surgeons who had been formerly
privy to their infirmityes, have been proved and enrolled in the records of
principal Cittyes. Yea and the providence of God has been such, as to make
some one of these miracles, fall upon the most known begging cripple of a whole
Country, John Clement.
and of whom for his notorious deformity from his mothers womb, together
with the importunity of his begging, all the states of the Court, and Town
from the Archduke, and Infanta themselves, to the meanest Tradesman in Bruxells
have taken precise and perfect knowledge. There was I say a most impotent lame
creature, who came deformed out of his mothers womb (and by occasion thereof he
was her death) whose knees by continual cleaving to his breast, had made deep
holes therein, whose legs hung down like a couple of drum-stickes, and who in
his life had never made one pase, but on his hands and hipps; this man, if he
was not rather a monster, they all saw when he was thus, and within a fortnight
after (when he had been miraculously, and in an instant cured by the prayers
of the most gracious, and glorious Queen of heaven in that Chapel devoted to
her self) they saw him again of a good stature, of good proportion, of good
health and strength. And not only he was seen by them, but many of those noble
English Gentlemen who accompanied the Earl of Hartford in his Embassage to
that Court, did also see him, and speak with him, and so may yet as many more
as will in Bruxells, where he continues to this day, and his name is John
Clement.

They are wont to tell us, I know not what of counterfaited miracles; and I
doubt not but diverse may have been counterfaited, and that even in the
Apostles days, as well as ours: but so far off is that from proving that there
are no true miracles, as this would be a ridiculous inference: The Kings hand
is counterfeited, therefore the King knows not how to write his name. It would
rather hold on the otherside, That because sometims either for pride, or
profit some men are so wicked as to counterfeite miracles, it is an evident
sign that true miracles are wrought sometimes, which no man would else be so
sottish as to counter faite, as no man would counterfeite the Kings hand if the
King could not write.

But howsoever, I assure the Reader in the word of a Christian, and as in the
presence of God, who needs not that any man should tell a lie in his behalf,
and who will grievously punish such impostures wheresoever he finds them,
That the Church our Mother detesteth all such impotent, and impure proceeding;
and excommunicateth such as concur to the countenancing thereof. And as by
occasion of the frequent miracles wrought lately in diverse parts of Brabant,
there have been some found so wicked, as to the uttermost of their power, to
make some very few false miracles pass for true ones; so (the providence of
God working by the prudence of such as have the office of looking into those
matters) they have been detected, and grievously punished with whipping,
having their tongues bored through, and being banished out their Country, as
appears upon record in Bruxells.

And in those parts where miracles have been so frequently seen in these later
times, the examination of the truth of them does not (as God would have it) lie
there in the hands of Ecclesiastical persons (whom the rage of heresy is
wont to charge with at least conniuency in this point, if not collusion) but
the custom has been of many years, for the secular Magistrates to take
knowledge thereof, who will not be pretended even by our Adversaries to be so
partial as those others.

Now, for as much as concerns the truth, or falsehood of our miracles, although
it should be true that the most part of them are wholly false (which yet is no
more possible then that the whole world except our Adversaries, should be all
grown fools or knaves) yet if all that were granted, and that yet either
they shall confess, or it may be justified that any one miracle was ever
wrought by God upon the prayers made to our B. Lady, with the invocation of her
aid, (which truth the Devil himself is not so dogged, or so damned as to
deny) one of these two things will follow, that either Almighty God has
cooperated so far to a false doctrine, as to credit it by supernatural means
(which cannot be conceived without blasphemy) or else that the invocation of
Saints, and in particular of the immaculate and most glorious Virgin, cannot be
impugned, or denied without heretical impiety.

And if the infere^ce of one true miracle be so pregnant, what will that be
which may be made from so many hundreds, which howsoever they be most evidently
true, and most easily known to be so, we are the less to wonder at the
incredulity of our Adversaries, through the doctrine which is delivered in the
person of Abraham, and recorded by the Evangelist S. Luke, Luc. 16.
where he says that the friends of Dives, who then suruiued, had Moses among
them and the Prophets, and if they refused to hear them, neither would they
believe though one should rise to them from the dead. By changing only the
terms it falls out to be the Caluinists case, who having the Church of
Christ in such a visible, and undoubted manner before their eyes, do yet
contest, yea and detest the authority thereof; for the punishment of which
perverseness, the most undoubted miracles which are wrought by God, in
confirmation of the doctrine which she teaches, Luc. 8.
are denied to be true by them who have eyes, and see not, who have hearts, and
understand not, but are incapable of all instruction; and which daily ripen
toward damnation if they free them not from sinning thus against their
conscience, as the Jews did notwithstanding the infinite miracles of our
Savior Christ, which yet they would never be drawn to acknowledge but did
impute those arguments of his Omnipotency either to collusion with the parties
who were cured, or to the use of Sorcery in casting out some Devils by the help
of others.

The corporal miracles wrought by God at the intercession of our B Lady are in
a manner innumerable; yet are they few in comparison of the spiritual
miracles, which are daily seen by the conversion of souls to Gods service,
through the prayers of the Mother of God and us. It is most certainly true and
known to be so, that innumerable sinners have been reduced to penance before
their death, to which grace they were never known to have had any other
disposition, but by some tenderness of devotion, though imperfect, which in
their hearts they ever carried to our B. Lady. Innumerable they are who only
coming into those Sanctuaryes, where God has been most honored in the
devotion borne to his B Mother (as particulerly in that holy house of Loretto)
and there having recommended themselves (though unworthily enough) to our B
Lady, they have yet found themselves, sometimes strocken down with the
horrible fear of Gods judgments, sometimes raised up with an extraordinary
hope of mercy sometimes strocken through with reflecting upon the vglines and
baseness of sin as that in the same very instant they have resolved upon a
whole change of their lives, without taking any longer time then of so many
minutes as might conduct them, and cast them at the feet of a Ghostly Father,
for the making of entire Restitutions, the quitting of sensual conuersations,
the deposing of mortal or rather immortal emnityes, and the performing of
such other heroical, and high acts of mind; which as they cannot be purchased
but by the infinite merit of Christ's passion, so that is never more
comfortable, and effectually applied, then by the means of our B. Ladies
sacred protection, and dear prayers. And although the acts and records of
these spiritual miracles be not so well kept in parchment as are the
corporal; yet I appeal to the conscience of observing and curious Catholics,
which cannot fail to bear witness with me of this truth, that the bowels of
our B. Ladies compassion do by the providence of God extend themselves as much
more frequently to the strange cure of souls then of bodies, as the body is
less considerable then the soul: in so much as a whole City in Italy has
been found upon some devotion which it has taken to our B. Lady, Luca.
to make within the space of a few years such a total change from vice to
virtue and piety, as there is difference between a disorderly Tavern, and a
devout Church.

In the same manner if the State of Brabant, and the Provinces adjoining (for
as much as concerns Morality or Religion) be considered, and the difference
well weighed concerning the great example of virtue, and manners, and the
integrity of Faith, to the contrary in both these respects, whereby those
countries were endangered until the miracles (wrought by the intercession of
our B. Lady, near Sichem, and other places) made them cast a quicker eye of
humble devotion toward her: If it be considered I say, how all the states of
people are admirably improued since that time, all such, as together with
common sense have not the poison of preiudicate passion in their hearts, and
heads, will acknowledge the powerful and gracious hand of our B. Lady in this
heavenly work, and will not fail to esteem it for a spiritual miracle.

It is time that I grow to a conclusion, and I will procure to tie it up in as
strait a compass as I can. I have endeavored to show, how highly our B. Lady
is honored by the testimony of holy Scripture, and to remove such objections
as her Adversaries take from thence, whereby to do her disparagement. I have
showed her Genealogy, her Beauty, her perfection of virtue which filled the
whole world with heroical actions. I have accompanied that discourse, with
showing how the whole Church has employed it self in her devotion, and how
the ancient, most holy, and most learned Fathers have endeavored to excel one
another in piety toward her, wherein the Sectaryes of our time are as wholly
unlike them as in other things. I have offered to the Readers consideration
the authority both of corporal, and spiritual miracles, whereby Almighty God
has as it were laboriously concurred, in this age of ours, toward the
planting of a Trophey to our B. Lady in the hearts of all men. Happy are they
who mean to take occasion hereby, either to begin, or to increase in a most
reverend, and filial affection toward her: and most happy should I account
my self, if the little which I have been able to say, or do, might cause
some few mites, after the example of this of mine, to be cast into the rich
Treasury of her Praises.

CHAP. XIII.
BUT it is to be considered (for now I chiefly speak to my fellow-Catholikes)
that the knowledge of our B. Ladies greatness, and goodness must not go for a
speculatiue, but for a practical kind of knowledge, because it does excitare
animum ad amorem, excite the mind of man to love, as also it must be remembered
that true love is not idle, but operative, and does show it self by a
conformity of the will toward that of the party beloved. And therefore as in
the beginning of this discourse, I moved my Reader to contract friendship with
the Queen of Angels (for as her Humility holp to make her so, so her greatness
makes her not yet the less humble, or depriueth her of vouchsafing to
contract an indissoluble league of amity with the meanest of those souls, for
which the Son of God and her was pleased to dye) so now in the end of it, I can
advise nothing more to purpose, then that the law of true friendship toward
her may be performed, which is idem velle, and idem nolle, to will, and not
will the same thing. We have already seen how she stood affected in this
life, al which was spent with extrem joy of heart in Poverty, Chastity,
Recollection, Mortification, Humility, Patience, and Charity. The things that
she cared not for, were the contrary of all those virtues, and now that she is
assumed both in body and soul, into that height of glory which exceeds the
capacity of all the rest of Creatures put together, what other thing can she
will, in respect of her self, but the good Will of God; and what other thing
can she will concerning us, but that every one in his several calling should
adore with her the same Will of God, and procure to ariue at that iourneys end,
by those ways which she has traced out for our wandering steps-

It will not become me to deliver any opinion, or to give any advise of the
particular devotions, which men should do well to nourish in themselves, toward
this B. Lady. The natures, and affections, and spirits of men are different,
and it would be hard for a wiser man then my self to chance fair, in the
giving of any such address. The most generally embraced deuotio^s which are
performed to her be two. The former whereof is the reciting of the Rosary,
which was cast into that method by that great Patriarch S. Dominicke, the
Founder of a most flourishing Order. It is a most excellent kind of prayer,
compounded both of mental and vocal. The Vocal consisting all of Pater
Nosters, and Aue Maria's (which are also of that kind the most excellent
prayers) and the Mental part, having no less matter for the subject, then all
the principal Mysteryes of our B. Saviors incomprehensible Incarnation, his
most admirable life, his most dolorous Passion, and most glorious Resurrection,
and Ascension.

The other is of the Sodality of our B. Lady, so called by the society which
men have one with another, in doing her honor and service, and consequently in
being happy by her assistance. It was principally instituted in remembrance of
her most glorious Assumption. The practice thereof consists in men's resolving
at their first entrance, upon a renouation of their life, by making then a
general confession, and by growing afterward in spirit through the
frequenting of Sacraments at certain times, under the happy conduct and
direction of the Fathers of the Society of Jesus. And in particular, besides
the fasting upon the eues of all our B. Ladies feasts, and the recyting of
those Psalms, and Prayers every day whereof her Office is composed, it does
recommend a careful and daily examination of the conscience, especially for
the getting and keeping of that purity, which makes the soul so grateful in
the sight of God. They meet together at least once a week, and then they
receive light and help toward the performing both of that which has been
said already, as also for the exercising of such works of charity, whether
they be corporal or spiritual, as in their several callinges they can reach
unto, namely visiting the sick, burying of the dead, releasing of prisoners,
reconciling of enemies, and the like. And both to this Sodality, and to that
other company of the Rosary, great Indulgences are applied by the Sea
Apostolic, and the particulers as well of privilege as obligation, may easily
be learnt, by such as will, of their Ghostly Father.

As for private devotions some exercise themselves in saying their Beads, in
contemplation of the most holy actions of our B. Lady: Others say the holy
Office before mentioned, which the Church has composed in her praise of
Psalms, and Lessons taken out of Holy Scripture for that purpose: Others
recite her Letanyes, whereby she is both highly praised, and by her principal
attributes prayed unto: Some fast upon the Saturday, because that day is
particulerly dedicated to her service: Some take a discipline or wear a
haircloth in union of the spiritual Martyrdom that she suffered: Some make a
vow of Chastity in conformity with her more then Angelical puri y: And some
there be who give often alms for her sake with as good a will as if it were
for the relief of her wonted poverty.

These devotions with many others are performed by good Christians in the
Catholic Church, wherewith to honor the Mother of God. Let every man continue
in that, wherein he finds himself most to profit; for there is none of them
which procures not, to the reverend users thereof, extraordinary comforts in
this life, and which lays not up incomparable rewards for the next. I only
desire leave, that I may express a poor thought of mine. It is, that for as
much as our B. Lady has the office of assisting our souls when they are to
depart out of this life (as does evidently appear by the practice of the
Church which commands her children to call daily and hourly upon her for
that purpose) I think it would be profitable, and nothing painful (for such
as have the means) to give daily (by way of addition to their other devotions)
some little alms, though it were but a penny (or even less rather then
nothing, where less coin is to be found) in honor of the immaculate
Co^ception of our B. Lady, to which misery English Catholics have reason to be
particulerly devoted (because in England it grew soonest to be most declared)
and this to be offered to the end that she may be pleased in particular manner
to assist, and comfort their souls in that fearful passage.

Such as will not charge their memoryes to call this to mind, or will not
trouble their hands in disposing of so miserable an alms, shall do well
(though yet less well) in commanding some very honest servant to do that duty;
but with this further caution, that if by negligence the alms of one day
should be forgotten, the next day it must not fail to be doubled; and they who
are so poor as to want this means, whether they be Religious persons or
secular may instead of that little alms make some little prayer in honor of our
B Lady, in contemplation of the same Mystery, and in expectation of the same
benefit: I have not heard of a shorter, or a sweeter prayer then this which
was used by that holy Archbishop of Canterbury S. Ans^lme, and may in this case
be thrice repeated, P^e Domine Jesus, parce seruo Matris tuae. Amen. O dear
Lord Jesus, forgive the servant of thy Mother. Amen. And I have also known
this other, used by some great servants of God, and with admirable success in
their necessityes, Maria Jesus, sponsa Joseph, per immaculata^ Conceptionem
tuam, and purissimam Virginitatem tuam adiuua me. O Mary the Mother of Jesus,
and the spouse of Joseph, by thy immaculate conception: and thy pure virginity
I beseech thee to assist me. For as we cannot better express our love to
Christ our Lord, then by giving honor to our B. Lady; so neither can we more
obligingly honor her, then by reverently remembering her only Son, and her
dear Spouse S. Joseph, as here is done.

But to make either of these prayers with good hope of grace, a man must indeed
be her Servant, as is expressed in the former of them; and though I do but
point out the other particular devotion, without daring to advise in the
election, I must needs adventure to recommend two general considerations,
whereof the one will facilitate the other. The first of them may be, to
accustom ones self after an easy, and liberal manner, and without over
paineful reflection, to conserve in the eyes of his mind, the continual
presence of our B. Lady, and to consider the Nobility, and Solidity, together
with the extreme Facility wherewith she performed all her actions: and the
second to breed, and cherish a kind of tender, and sweet affection to her name,
to her praise to her festiuityes, to her devoted servants, and to be frequent
in giving God entiere thanks for the infinite graces which he imparted to her,
and wherewith she did so divinely cooperate.

This practice of this devotion, need not distract any man from others, it need
not displace his temporal business, the use of it rather may be to fill up
vacant tyms; and I know no cause, why a man may not hope from hence to find
such helps, as may serve to make him run with pleasure through the cariere
of this disordered, and distasteful life. For whosoever be the author of this
conceit, to me it seems no ill one: That as the strength of a spiritual man's
life must proceed to him from the blood and consideration of the Passion of our
B. Savior: so his comfort, and delight in God is the usual effect of the
sacred milk, and the contemplation of the life of our B. Lady. Of whose
goodness to mankind let us hear and ponder what S. Bernard says, Sileat
misericordiam tuam Virgo beata etc. Let him, Bernard. hom. 4. super missus est
O blessed Virgin, conceal the praises of thy mercy (if any such there be) who
can remember that thou did ever fail him, when he inuoked thine aid in his
necessity; but as for us thy poor servants, when we consider the rest of thy
virtues, we rejoice rather in respect of thee; but in this of thy mercy we are
glad in regard of our selves. We praise thy Virginity, we admire thy Humility,
but yet thy Mercy is to us of a sweet taste. We embrace thy Mercy more dearly,
we remember it more frequently, and we inuoke it more fervently. Thus he. And
whosoever shall consider the life of Saint Bernard, one of the most devout
servants of our B. Lady that she ever had, and see how full it was on the one
side of extrem austerity, and sickness, and yet on the other how his soul did
even regorge again with the excess, and satiety of spiritual comfort, will
easily find in the passages of it, that our B. Lady is a Mistress well worth
the serving, and that she did cast some such ingredient into the bundle of
myrrh, that S. Bernard would needs lay next his heart, as made him even
languish and half dye with love.

CHAP. XIIII.
How fit then it were, that since the Caluinists will not follow the instinct
of this most holy Father, in giving high honor to our B. Lady, they should at
least hear the voice of the very Mahometans themselves, who notwithstanding,
that they believe not our B. Savior to have been the Son of God, but only
that he was an holy man, and an extraordinary Prophet, yet after the rate of
the Mother of such a Prophet, they frankely yield so high honor to our B Lady,
and they mention her purity and excellency upon al occasions with such tender
and entiere respect, as no Caluinist in the whole world has been ever known
to do. For howsoever when a Catholic shall join issue with a Caluinist in the
hearing of moderate men of his own Religion, concerning the excellencyes of our
Lady, he will be drawn to say (though duly enough) that she was a most happy
creature, a blessed Virgin, and in fine our Saviors Mother: yet as it is
evident that they do not penetrate and ponder the unspeakable dignity which the
being of his Mother does inuolue; so they are never carried to do her honor
with any willingness and cheerefullnes, but only as it were by constraint, and
violence. Some of them will praise her faintly, when they see that they must
dispraise themselves if they do it not; but otherwise if a man leave them to
the work of Nature, and of the principles which indeed they hold concerning
her, a man may live amongst them so many years as to make even Matthusalem
seem young, before he find them once enter voluntarily into any affectuous
speech in honor of her, exprofesso.

For the proof here of I might appeal to every man's particular experience,
and to the conscience of my Reader at large. But to show it yet better, as upon
Record, let it be considered, that since Caluinisme was set on foot, there has
not been (for ought that ever I could learn) any one discourse or book written
by any one of that profession in honor, and admiration of this B. Virgin,
either to publish her prerogatives, or to reflect upon her virtues, or to make
contemplations upon her most holy and happy actions; and much less to exhort
the world to imitate that most excellent Original of piety, which she did set
before us by her life and conversation. Nay in all my days I have not been
able to understand that ever they bestowed so much as one express sermon in
honor of her, wherein howsoever they might (according to their erroneous
belief) have discredited the doctrine of her invocation, yet withal they
might at least have largly described, and praised her virtues, they might have
magnifyed her prerogatives, they might have persuaded men to the imitation of
her examples, if in their hearts they had prosecuted her with true affection and
admiration.

For could this omission peradventure come from want of matter worthy to be
observed in the B. Virgin? Or be these things but fables which have been
brought out of Scripture, and laid here before your eyes? No. But the true
reason is, that there is something in the spirit of etrour, which is not
compatible with a true, and tender, and filial reverence of affection to the
sacred Virgin, which makes them all carry a kind of tooth toward her: some
grinne, and show it, others bear it with more appearance of modesty, but with
no less malice, and generally all of them have some kind of antipathy (whereof
some of themselves do scarce know the root) against her. By whom although
their souls may be assisted and favored as soon, and sometimes before they
have the grace to desire so great a blessing; yet their opinions are hated by
her who brought him forth, that has been the destruction of all former, and
will be so of all future heresies. And it should seem that the enemy of mankind
finding the wound to be so deadly which he has received in great part by her
means, procures to revenge himself in a particular manner, by arming such as
he has drawn into error, toward an auersion from her.

For whereas Catholics are taught to know that they do not honor her too much
in giving her whatsoever a pure creature is capable of, and in believing her to
have been preserved by the special prerogative of Almighty God, from those
shames, and sins to which all the rest of mankind is subject; and even the
Mahometans though they do not so much as believe in the divinity of our Savior
Christ, yet do they admire, and magnify her out of the very historical
relation that they have of her life: These other adversaries of Gods Truth, and
Church (whereof they once were, though now they are departed from thence) such
as are only Jews, and Heretics be the only two races of men, that can be
found under the cope of heaven (for the Pagans know little of her) to have lift
up their hands, and opened their mouths to the reproach and blasphemy of this
sacred, and immaculate Virgin.

But I would beseech them even by the bowels of Christ Jesus our Lord (if they
care indeed for those bowels of his, who carry no more reverence to these
bowels of hers which brought him forth) that if they will not be as pious
toward her as they ought, they will at least not be so dangerously imprudent
as they are to themselves. Let them take heed how they continue to arm
themselves toward the assault of this Tower of strength: Hier. in Ierem. 31.
and Zach. 14.
Christ himself is the corner stone, and our B. Lady is the Quarry, or rather
the Mine of spotles marble, out of which he would be taken, without the help of
any other hands the^ those of the Holy Ghost. Our Savior has said of
himself, in the similitude of this stone, Luc. 2^.
He that stumbleth upon it shall fall, and he upon whom the stone falls,
shallbe driven to powder: which howsoever it be principally, and literally
true of him, in regard of them who offend him first, and afterward provoke him
to take vengeance of them for their other sins; yet experience tells us,
that it carries some proportion toward such others as oppose themselves, and
offend the honor of our B. Lady, who have come, after lives led in extreme
obscurity of mind and misery, to end wretchedly in despair.

I remit my self to good obseruers, whether some such as having been
Catholics, and coming after to loose (together with their Religion) the very
reputation both of Christianity, and common honesty, have not been formerly
known to carry a secret, and subtle spite to the honor of our Lady: and on
the other side, I could for a need name some Caluinists, who being in a fair
way to obtain both temporal, and eternal felicity by finding themselves to
be moved internally to grow into some tenderness of devotion toward our B.
Lady, upon an express resistance of those good motions, and a fortifying
themselves in the contrary purpose, have fallen into such poverty, and misery,
and disreputation, and confusion, as that, at the instant wherein now I speak,
they are grown to be the very By-wordes, and Proverbs of the places wherein
they live.

And as for such as are, and by the grace of God are to continue of our
communion, whether they be of England, or any other Country (as there is a
latitude in the natures, and inclinations of men) and some even amongst us are
much more devoted to our B. Lady then some others (yet so that none of us do
not take joy in giving her gladly all her rights, none of us that do not extol
her, none of us that do not desire her prayers, that God Almighty may be
merciful unto us through Christ our Lord:) so I can protest, as in the divine
presence, that whosoever they be amongst us, that are, and appear to be the
most tenderly affected toward the honoring, and loving of this sacred Virgin,
are also found to be the men who in other respects deserve to be acknowledged
as most eminent in all kind of Angelical virtue. So that devotion to her, is
not only a distinct sign between good and bad, that is, between Catholics and
no Catholics, but it is in like manner a sign of difference between good,
and better, that is between ordinary Catholics and such others, as are the
best amongst us. And though some may have their mouths and pens full of her
praises, whilst their hearts are void of her virtues (and I beseech Jesus from
my very soul that my self may not be found the foremost of that rank) yet in
the generality, that proportion which I first delivered is most certainly true.

Toward the further building up of her greatness, in the judgment of any
reasonable man, I will desire him yet to let one only other stone be added, by
remembering that Parable of the Penny, which was given for the days work in
the Gospel, and by considering that speech of our Savior which he used
against those envious old laborers: Is it not lawful for me to do what I will
with my own? Matt. 22.
and, Is your eye therefore evil because I am good? For hereby he may
understand, that Almighty God is not any bodies Ward, that he disposes of his
treasures according to the latitude of his own heart; and that he would have
the world rather enlarge it self toward the admiration of his unspeakable
bounty, powered forth upon his creatures, then be accustomed, through certain
mechanical, and envious little thoughts, to paint him out, as if he were some
miserable aged Prince, that were in fear of being deposed, if he should raise
his fauorits to any extraordinary degree of greatness.

But the case stands far otherwise; for as God is infinite in all things, so
is ^e most eminently infinite in the communication, and effusion of himself
upon all such souls as do nobly serve him, and especially such as do it with
greatest perfection, and are enabled by him to undertake, and discharge the
highest functions. The Patriarchs were made wonderfully fit for their offices,
the Apostles for theirs, the Precursour of Christ for ^his, his supposed Father
S. Joseph (who really was his conductour, guide, and governor) for his. And so
the immaculate, pure, most gracious, and most glorious mother of God, was above
all made most fit for hers. But we may first descend a great deal lower, and
yet not loose the sight of her greatness. For there is not the meanest of us all
who shall not at the day of judgment, if he dye in the state of Grace, have a
body which shall then be knit to the Soul, more glorious then the Sun, as
impassible as the Angels, incomparably more subtle then lightning; and we
cannot now so easily translate a thought from one end of the world to another,
as then we shallbe able to transport our selves, as it were in an instant. We
shall be immortal, we shallbe Heirs of the kingdom of heaven, we shallbe
Coheirs with Christ, and if he be a King, we shall all be also kings of heaven.
Fellowship in possessing of that kingdom does not weaken, or lessen the
excellency of dominion, as it would do here on earth: but it does highly
beautify and increase it through the union of will, which reigns in those
happy souls.

Our Savior speaking to his Apostles and disciples, and in their persons to
such as would keep his commandments, enters so far by words of tenderness as to
despoyle them of servitude, and to cloth them with the precious robes of
friendship; Joan. 15.
Vos amici mei estis etc. as if he had said, No longer will I account you now
my servants, but I will advance you to the rank of being my friends. Luc. 13.
He had formerly auowed to the Apostles, that he disposed of his kingdom to
their use as his Father had disposed thereof to his, Again he assumeth them,
Matt. 19.
that they who had left all, and followed him, should sit upon twelve seats,
and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel, whereby the whole world is signified.
1. Cor. 6.
And S. Paul takes upon him to warrant, that Christians shall judge even very
Angels at the last day. Now this Judicature is an act, and exercise of a Kings
royalty, and the reason why earthly Kings do it not in their own person, is
because, either they want knowledge, or industry, or for that they cannot be in
so many places in so short a time as were convenient: but none of these things
can be said of Christ, and therefore when he makes his Apostles judges, it is
not to excuse himself, but to impart to them a kind of supreme honor and
authority over the rest his creatures.

We see then the unspeakable bounty of Almighty God toward all such as are to
praise and serve him in the Court of heaven for all eternity; we see that some
of us shall judge the world; That we shall judge Angels; That we shall be Kings
of heaven, heirs to God, and coheirs with Christ; yea and, That even in this
life such as keep his Commandments are already entitled by the name of
Friends, or Fauorits of Christ Jesus. And is it possible for any Christian to
have so little, and so poor a soul, as to think that the Mother of God is
not to be honored in a manner much superior to all this? Is it possible that
since God does not make Officers as earthly Kings make the^ (who take such as
they find, whether they be good or bad, and so they continue) but he first
makes men fit for the places to which he calls them? Is it possible, since
the dignity of the Mother of God, does unspeakably exceed the dignity of
Patriarchs, Prophets, Precursours, Apostles, and whatsoever employment whereof a
pure creature is capable, that any man should be so void of natural Logic as
not to draw an argument from the less to the greater: That if the less has
much excellency, the greater has much more? Or rather that he should have so
little wit, or common sense, as not to see, That as in numbers the more do
exceed the fewer, so our B. Lady does outstrip all the other creatures of God
in greatness in grace, in authority, and in Majesty.

Let not therefore our Adversaries, (for so in respect of their opinions they
will needs deserve to be called) deceive themselves. Conclusion.
They may think it is zeal which they have in abasing the honor of our B,
Lady, whereas indeed it is but ignorance in the most innocent of them, and in
others either hypocrisy, or envy. Mat. 2^.
Many of them who saw how Caiphas did in that solemn assembly of Priests, and
Doctors of Jerusalem, cast up his eyes to Heaven, and rend his Pontifical
garments, and exclaim with horror against Christ himself, affirming that he
had blasphemed, did doubtless judge by the appearance of it, that the High
Priest had some reason. And some covetous, or malicious Jew, who had been
present, when Judas censured the matchles enamoured Penitent of our Lord S.
Mary Magdalen (as wasting that precious ointment upon his head, and crying out
that it should rather have been employed upon the poor) would as willingly,
and perhaps with as much reason, have given his voice with Judas against
Christ, as these men do eagerly malign and of whom I have seen some grow
pale, and even sick through the rage of envy, when they observe how curious,
and costly we are content to be in our desire, not only to anoint as it were,
and adorn the head of this sacred Virgin with our praises, but to cast our
selves at her pure feet by our Inuocations. Therefore here the Proverb may
well come in, All is not gould that glistereth; and that twinkling Brother,
who in the zeal he pretends to carry to Gods honor, does secretly repine
and snarle at that of our Blessed Lady, instead of making for himself a Crown
in heaven, may then be hammering out eternal chains for his soul in Hell.
This may serve to them for a word of advice, that at least they may use modesty
in this matter, if they will not be drawn to use piety.

But we Catholics are far from needing such advice as this, who know our
duties toward the blessed Mother of Almighty God, and who are not, in this
respect, to be drawn from less wandering, but to be encouraged toward a
faster going. I do therefore presume to cast my self, with most entiere
veneration, at thy pure feet, O thou most gracious, and most triumphantly
glorious Queen of Heaven, the Mother of my Savior, and my God, the sum and
top of all excellency, and perfection under him. I beseech thee by those thy
immaculate bowels of mercy which embraced, and enclosed the Lord of life by
those sacred breasts which gave him suck and fed him toward the
accomplishment of our Redemption, look down upon us with those eyes, which
since they be thine, cannot choose but be of extreme compassion. Look not only
upon us but upon those others also whom before I mentioned who howsoever they
be our Brethren according to the flesh, yet they will needs make themselves
strangers from the Covenant of thy Son, rightly understood, and particulerly
from doing thee the honor that belongs to his most worthy, and most sacred
Mother, Tros, Tyriusque tibi nullo discrimine -- Intercede for us who are now
begging thy assistance; intercede for them, who do not so, to the end that they
may have the grace to do it. Tota pulchra es amica mea, and macula non est in
te: Thou art all fair, and sweet, thou wast as entierely immaculate in thy
Conception, as in thy Assumption. There was never any sin in thee, or any sad
aspect toward us. Then let me resort to that notion of Friendship, wherewith
I began this discourse, which I yet am making in thy honor.

We Catholics are thy humble, and obsequious servants, and Serui are humiles
amici; a kind of humble friends we are in being thy servants: nor will thou
disdain to know us by the name of Friends since Christ himself thy Son our
Savior vouchsafed to call, and account them his friends, that follow his
directions, as has been said. Perform to us therefore, all those parts of
Friendship, and protection, which thy State of Glory may affoard, and our State
of misery does need; and obtain Grace for us, that we may never fail of
Faith, and loyalty toward thee. Thou art the Woman who were not only clothed
by the Sun, but thou did also cloth the Sun of Justice, whilst thy
immaculate flesh, and blood was imparted to the Son of thy womb. By him we
beg of thee, that thou will intercede for us to him, that we may live in his
fear, and dye in his favor: and that as here we have the comfort to enjoy
thee, as our chief Mediatrix of Intercession toward him; so with thee and at
thy feet, we may praise, and glorify him in all eternity, as our only Mediator
of Redemption.

FINIS.
A PRAYER FOR THE LOVE OF GOD, Made in Contemplation of the Passion of Christ
our Savior.
1.
EVEN by the mist of sighs that ouergrew
Thy sacred face, which was designd to be
The spotles mirror, where al souls might view
The quintessence of their felicity:
2.
Even by the Sea of those salt tears, wherein
Thine eyes like Suns did set, whose only sight
Was able to have made even Hell begin
To be competitour, with Heaven, for light:
3.
Even by the storm of bloody hayle, which fell
From thy faint limbs, and did the palid ground
With Rubies of the Rock, dissolved so well
By fire of Love, as does man's skill confound:
4.
By that fierce agony, that deep distress,
That desolation, and that bitter woe,
That fear, that care, that hart-sicke heaviness,
Which in the Garden did exhaust thee so:
5.
(To thee no garden, but a bed of thorns,
Whereon thou were kept waking, to foresee,
And count (together with my sins) those scorns,
And payns, which soon thou wast to feel for me.)
6.
Dear Savior of my soul, by all the Story
Of that nights work (that night that had no end)
Lend me thine ear of mercy, for thy glory*
For with what face can I my good pretend?
7.
They are not Thine, my sovereign Lord, but Thee
Which I affect, with restles appetite:
Thy creatures all (though Heaven included be)
Fall short of giving me complete delight.
8.
Give me thy self, and (if a beggar may
Become a chooser) give thy self just so,
As in thy Passion thou did go to pay
That huge Rentcharge, which I, not Thou did owe.
9.
Thy Passion, which alone does make me know,
That as in other things thou do surpass
Angels and men: so here thou do outgo
Thy self, as far as Diamondes do Glass.
10.
For thee, to do all that thou can conceive,
Is nothing, for thou art Omnipotent:
But for a God to suffer, and bereave
Himself of power, shows power of more extent.
11.
For thee to govern such a world as this,
Declares thy wisdom to be infinite:
But to reform a world, that runs amiss,
By dying on a Cross, shows more insight.
12.
It Was matchles goodness, that thou would inspire
This poor dark body, with a soul divine:
But it was much greater, that thou did desire
To save it, with such prejudice of thine.
13.
I grant that all thy life a Passion was,
And as it were one act of suffering pain;
In the first turn of thy lives houre-glasse,
I think thou did, and know thou might complain,
14.
Of bitter cold, and so great poverty,
As that in a whole world, which thou have framd,
Even for thy birth, there was but on^ hole free,
Lent thee by beasts, of man's hard heart ashamd.
15.
From thence thou wentst to Circumcision,
Learning as soon as borne, to shed thy blood,
Which first in drops, and then in showrs ran on
So fast, that at the Cross they made a flood.
16.
Then did thou in the Virgins bosom range
To Egypt, where thy beauty was did black,
And forcd (being grown at thy return) did chang
Thy mothers bosom, for thy Fathers back.
17.
Thy rest of life was full of care, and pain,
Spent in obedience; thou did pray, and fast,
And preach, and travail, and receive disdain
From such, as of thy bounty most did taste.
18.
All this, I say, I grant; but yet in this
Thou had some comforts, thou did hear and see
Thy sacred Mother, that full Sea of bliss,
And thine Apostles, rude, yet loving thee.
19.
But in that later part of thy sad age,
Which we most properly thy Passion call;
I see thou art sold over, to the rage
Of men most diuellishly tyrannical.
20.
There were few comforts, there few blubbered eyes,
Few bleeding hearts, few hands held up on high
In wonder of those vast impietyes,
Wherewith they chargd thy dear humanity.
21.
How did they rend that venerable hair
From those rich Temples of thy royal head;
And thus vnseeled the roof, that they might tear
The walls, so low as to be buried?
22.
These walls they first vnhung, and off did take
Thy coat, which once those virgin hands did frame*
But now their sordid eyes, a prey did make
Upon thy nakedness. O sin, O shame!
23.
Prodigious sin in them, and shame to thee;
Saving that instantly those scourges came,
Which veyld thy flesh, with an imbrodery
So thick, as then it did not seem the same.
24.
A purple garment did they cast with scorn
About thy back: it was single, but did grow
Soon after double; for thy skin was torn
All off with it, and serud to line it so.
25.
How did they, under color of a Crown
Pierce thy fair brow, the casket of that brain,
Wherein the wisdom even of God came down
To ransom us from Hells eternal pain.
26.
Then took they up a Cane, more hate to show,
And often beating it about thy head
With skillfull rage, each thorn, by every blow,
Made a new wound, and they all inward bled.
27.
Thy face so bruizd, and swollen, did make thine eyes
As hollow, as their hearts that looked on thee,
Hearts hugely hollow, that could so comprize
The NON PLUS VLTRA of Iniquity.
28.
Thine Eyes I say, by swelling of thy face,
Became the sinckes of that foul house of thine,
Or like two durty valleys, which have place
Between high Mountains, where no Sun can shine.
29.
So ghastly did thou look, and let me say
So ugly (for thou would deserve that name)
Their malice did find means, to make away
The highest beauty, that even God could frame,
30.
Yea thou a God in substance, yet in show
Were scarce a man, but rather a poor worm;
A leaper, nay an ulcer, which did flow
So fast, as even to drown thee in that storm.
31.
Thy Nose, thy sacred Ears, were springs of blood,
Thy pores of sweat, but that which paind thee more,
Was thy dear cheek, where still engraued stood
The kiss which Judas gave not long before.
32.
Thy Beard, which never rasour durst offend,
Their hands and hearts, more hard then hardest steel,
And in some kind more sharp, did strive to rend:
Nor is there torment which thou did not feel.
33.
For where the winged Angels use to build
Their neast of pleasure, and of sweet repose,
They all with filthy dirt, and spittle filled,
Incorporated to thy mouth with blows.
34.
Thus dressed, thou were led forth, to act thy part
Of bitter sorrow; thus they hid thy back
Under that Cross, which did such weight impart,
And pain withal, as made thy shoulders crack.
35.
And as a building, which top-heauy is
Upon a weak foundation, ruins all;
So thou thus feeble, with such weight as this,
Were forced to stumble often, and often to fall.
36.
There first thy Mother most disconsolate,
Thy Passion saw, and through her eyes down came
Thine Image to her soul, which did create
Sharp swords of sorrow, that transpierst the same.
37.
But what she felt in soul, did back rebound
Upon thy body, and that served alone
Thy sense with greater anguish to confound,
For now one pain, to be two pains was grown.
38.
Pain which thou likd'st so well, as not t'indure
That those good women should once pity thee:
Thou car'dst for nothing, so thou might be sure
By suffering much, to show more love to me.
39.
At last thou leftst the City gates behind,
And crawling up (for then thou could not go)
That hill which for thy murdering was designd,
Again they stripped thee, though even shame said no.
40.
Thou did not then (because thou would not)sue
A just appeal, against their Tyranny,
Whilst they, being Captains of the damned crew,
Made have to hell, in spite of God and thee.
41.
Thine Arms and Thighs they rackt, to make the^ find
Those holes, which bored through the Cross had been:
The^ brought they nayls, which with their points refind
Wounded thy limbs, but killed their souls with sin.
42.
And so they reard that Cross, half discontent
To have thus freed thee from more crueltyes;
But what they could they did, that is, torment
Thy patient ears, with hideous blasphemies.
43.
With some I could more easily dispense;
But for that wretch, that had no parallel,
And gnashing cried, Vab, come down from thence,
I curse him to the lowest pit of Hell.
44.
The Rocks could cleave, the Temples veyle could rent,
The Sun could mourn, the very dead could rise;
Yet this enraged Impe would not relent,
But heap high scorns, on thy deep miseryes.
45.
Compard with this, those other sins were small
Of loosing Barabbas, of placing thee
Between two thieves, that so thou might have all The marks of Honorable Infamy.
46.
Of giving Vinagre, and Gall to drink
In thy last deadly thirst, a savage part;
That reached thy mouth, but this foul scoff, I think,
Was that which battered, and did break thy heart.
47.
And thus dear Lord thou wast content to dye;
This is thy story, which in blood was pend;
But I mistook the Author, for it was I,
Not they, that brought thee to so sad an end.
48.
My sins, my grievous sins, did cause all this,
My serving thee, not ill in outward show,
Whilst yet in heart I sinnd, was Judas kiss
Which treacherously betrayed, and sold thee so.
49.
My Loathnes to amend, were ropes to bind
Thy hands behind thy back, my thoughts unchaste
Were spittle, which almost did strike thee blind,
By issuing from my festered soul so fast.
50.
My pride did make thy Crown; my shamelesnes
Plucked off thy clothes; the pamp^ring of my sense
Did urge those hands, which were so merciles,
To scourge, and wound thee, with extreme offense.
51.
My heart of steel did yield those rayles, that past
Thy well deserving hands; my Gluttony
Made thee of vinegar, and gall to taste,
And I blasphemed thee by mine Heresy,
52.
All this did I, and yet thou diedst for me;
And not content therewith, wast pleased to add
Such circumstances of thy Charity,
As may confound, and make man's reason mad.
53.
For when thou wast upon thy hard deathbed,
And should have thought of making a new Hell
For lewd mankind, thou were by goodness led
To rain down treasures, which no tongue can tell.
54.
Thou praydst thy Father to forgive my sin,
As if such malice were but want of wit;
I see the eager thirst thy soul was in,
That mine might in thy glorious kingdom sit.
55.
Thou taughtst me, that I ought to hope for grace,
By that good theefes example, who was brought
From state of sin to see Gods brightest face,
Selling so cheap, what thou so dear had bought.
56.
And, as if wickedness were good desartes,
Thou gave me, in the person of Saint John,
Thy sacred Mother, the true Queen of Hearts,
A royal stock to build all bliss upon.
57.
If then thou could have spok, thou would have said;
Come soul, most sinful, yet most dear to me:
Dear, for so dear a price as I have paid;
And dear, for that dear Love I bear to thee.
58.
Thou see where I am plas't, then ponder well
What I have done, and suffered for thy sake*
I who am God, for thee poor Impe of Hell,
For so thou were, till I did mercy take.
59.
Thus does the Eternal Father treat his Son,
His only Son, who could not sin at all;
And if the Suretyes to such streightes become,
How will thou escape who art the Principal.
60.
O Penetrate my shame, my pains, my tears,
My wounded body, my disfigured face,
My soul oppressed with grievous cares, and fears,
Least thou should live, and dye in Gods disgrace.
61.
See how my feet are nayld thus to a tree;
To show that I will never stir from thence,
Till thou may be procurd to pity me,
Who seek to save thee, with my lives expense.
62.
My head hangs down, to offer thee a kiss
Of friendship, which shall never be dissolud;
Mine arms are spread, that so thou may not miss,
By chains of endless love to be inuolud.
63.
And that thou may be sure of what I say,
Nor think my words can be as vain as thine;
A lance shall pierce my side, and make a way,
VVherby thou may discern this heart of mine.
64.
If Justice cannot win thee to preserve
From sin thy soul (that spark of fire divine)
If no respect of gratitude can serve,
To make thee his, who is so truly thine:
65.
At least let Interest (whose reign of late
Extends it self to all but fools and Saints,
Neither of which thou art) make thee change state,
And cease thy miseryes, with my complaints,
66.
For what can thou, poor wretch, presume, or hope
To purchase of the world, whose slave thou art,
The world, which is but a plain Pedlers shop,
Of wares (small wares if measured with man's heart.)
67.
And what are these, but Honor, Pleasure, Riches,
Which it sets forth, and cries, See what you lack,
And so the eyes of simple men betwiches,
Who do the Nutshell, for the keruell take.
68.
For whom did Honor ever yet content,
Most kind to them to whom it makes resistance;
For as for those, to whom it gives consent,
It fayles them most, when most they crave assistance.
69.
Look upon them, who by the steady lance
Of furious death, are thrust even under ground;
Whom Honor made in that wild Maze to dance,
Where is much motion, but no measure found.
70.
Look upon them that live (if they do live
Who all their life do nothing else but dye)
Serving in Courts, and who themselves do give
To care, which sleeps in their waking eye.
71.
For when they hope to rest on bed of ease;
Their tottering mind conuerts it to a rack,
Which winds, and winds it up, with such disease,
As makes their poor, ambitious heart stringes crack.
72.
And justly, since it is the forge of plots
How to take Justice prisoner, and the spring
Which issues out of poisoned mouth, and rotts
Those high reports, which glorious virtues bring.
73.
Infamous mouth; foul host of that foul guest
A double tongue; a sword with edges twain;
A Rasour and a Saw, for with this best
They put their foes, with that, their friends in pain.
74.
And never speak their thoughts, but their words all
Are like false thrusts which seem not what they mean
Promiscuously deceauing great and small,
And most themselves, when least thereof they dream.
75.
Next after Honor, Pleasure comes in play;
Not that which God by his sweet law permits,
But the unlawful, which presumes to say,
I am thy God, not he that in heaven sits.
76.
Pleasure, thou ill deserust true Pleasures name;
Who art of woes the Mother, and the Nurse;
Thy Roots are plotted, and contriud in shame,
Thy Flower is sin, thy Fruit an endless curse.
77.
Due curse, for thou commitst Adams offense,
Adam whose sin was seen, though he was hidden;
Both guilty are of disobedience,
Re tasting fruit, thou touching flesh forbidden
78.
Which the old Enemy of all mankind
Keeps in his shambles, saying: Stolen flesh is sweet;
Yet it is not stolen but bought, and when men find
At how high rate, their sweet meats prove unsweet.
79.
For first they loose their souls, that substance rare
Which Gods wise hand knew only how to frame,
And next their servile bodies hired are
For base delights, more short then is their name.
80.
And those, besiegd and hedgd about with fears*
Impatience, dotage, sickness, endless cost,
With dangers, and suspicious eyes and ears,
With lust at hand, but wit and judgment lost.
81.
Lastly this kind of man is made a slave,
The very slave of slaves; for all the rest
Pay tributs, more or less, of what they have,
But this of blood is bound to pay the best.
82.
Yet what do endless Riches, do they leave
A man in greater liberty of mind
Then Honor, or then Pleasure? they deceive
Themselves that travail with a guide so blind.
83.
All is but change of Tyrants, and this last
Perhaps is more imperious then the rest,
For Honors raise, Pleasures refresh thy taste
But care of Wealth holds the whole man oppressed.
84.
Ambitious persons have an open hand,
And carnal men with alms would cover sin,
But greedy minds are like to Pooles that stand
Where nothing issues out, that once gets in.
85.
And if they seem their doubtful steps to bend
To virtues sacred Temple, you may fear
It is not love of God, but hate to spend,
Their hearts are absent, though their face be there.
86.
Now if the greatest plague God sends be sin,
What shallbe said of wealth, which breeds a vice,
(A door by which all others enter in)
Known by the odious name of Avarice?
87.
Other sins make men vicious, and profane;
Besides all that, this makes them vile, and base;
Thou art the Anti rack, that does restrain
Man's spacious mind, to thy penurious place.
88.
For what is thy object? Gould, what is gould? fair dust;
Who are thy friends? continual thought, and care;
Thy Counsailour is general Mistrust,
Thy foes thou think all them, that richer are.
89.
Thou art the Mist that does benight Mankind,
Before their time thou makst their heads grow gray,
Their minds grow black, thou makst their reason blind,
In all their life they keep no Holiday.
90.
Thou fillst them with insatiable thirst;
And when they have obtaynd abundant store,
Thou tellst them they have less then at the first,
And still do preach to them, Get more, Get more.
91.
Thou starust their bodies with thy penury,
Which thou calst Thrift, thou makst their souls fall sick
Of inward dropsy, and of Lethargy:
Others do kill, but thou do bury quick.
92.
These are the Pageants that do stalk about
The worlds wide streets, and which men follow so;
I call them Men, but yet wise men will doubt
That they are beasts, although like men they show.
93.
Let muddy headed fish be so surprizd
With slippery worms, that cruel hooks do cover;
Let simple flies, that seek their death, disguisd
With glorious flames, about such candles houer.
94.
But thou, O man, who art of heavenly race,
Have power to decipher this dumb show,
And take it for no better, then a case
Which maskes the rotten stuff that lies below.
95.
Pluck off this mask, and thou shall see the face
Of that foul Idol whom thou did adore,
And hate the cause of thy so great disgrace,
Wondering at it, but at thy self much more.
96.
And if thou be desirous to enjoy
True Honor, Pleasure, Profit, follow me;
I Will be thy guide, and teach thee to employ
Thy pains on him, whose service makes men free.
97.
Recall thy thoughts, which Rauen-like do feed,
Upon the Carrion of inferior things,
And send them up to Heaven, where they shall read
Thy fortune written in the Book of Kings.
98.
Of Kings of Heaven, for God who only is
The King in his own right, adopteth thee,
To reign with him in everlasting bliss,
For all his Sons, mine own coheires shallbe.
99.
Therefore my blood upon this Cross is sold,
To save thy body, and thy soul from Hell;
Changing thy house of clay, to Church of gould,
VVherin the Holy Ghost himself shall dwell.
100.
Ordeyning Sacraments, whereby mankind
May purge offenses, and acquire new grace;
Misterious Sacraments, which not thy mind,
Much less thy pen, can paint without disgrace.
101.
Bidding his Angels serve thee, and unfold
The secrets of his love, and Satan's hate;
Confound thy self with wonder, to behold
Such honor added to thy base estate.
102.
Honor, with Pleasure: for what earthly joy
Does equal that which a good conscience gives?
And does full fill, whilst yet it does not cloy
The Spirit, and the soul wherein it lives.
103.
Not like to worldly pleasure, that transformes
It self to pain through sad remorse of mind;
But in the middst of fortunes bitter storms,
A quiet passage, and safe port does find.
104.
So shall thou see that they who take most care
To bear this Cross of mine with humble heart,
To ecstasy of joy transported are,
Their bodies here, in heaven their better part.
105.
Although they cannot long enjoy that glory,
Till after death, the end of all restraintes;
But then, they shall contemplate the whole Story
Of all Gods Attributes, with all his Saints:
106.
And understand one God in Persons three,
Vniti^g that which seems so far asunder;
Whom even the Angels tremble when they see;
No trembling of base fear, but of high wonder.
107.
Where God is feign to give a special grace,
To keep man's soul from melting with delight;
In whose comparison the withered face
Of worldly things, though great, does vanish quite.
108.
Look up to Heavens high vaute, consider right
The Stars, so big, though they so small appear;
The Sun (except this instant) swollen with light,
Yet void of heat, although it heat men here.
109.
Look on the earth, and wonder at her seat,
See how the Sea moates in her fortress fair:
Which though it be a Mass so hugely great,
Has no foundation but unstable air.
110.
Behold her garments wrought with curious cost,
With bushes purld, with streams of silver last;
With flowers imbrodered, with fair woods embost,
Buttond with hills, which bind it all so fast.
111.
This on her back she wears, but in her womb
Rich mettalls are, and Jewels beyond price;
Which lie interred, as in a regal tomb,
Till men do raise them up, by strange devise.
112.
All this God made, and made man Lord of all;
And of himself, by giving him Freewill;
A Memory, and wit Imperial,
An Understanding both of good and ill.
113.
A soul that might the seat of Virtues be,
Of Justice, Temperance, Prudence, Strength of mind,
A hand, which with extreme facility
Acts that, which is by buisiest brains designd.
114.
A curious knot of senses, Hearing, Smell,
Sight, Taste, and Touch, which men so much adore.
These are but patterns, which may serve to tell
Of richer wares, that God lays up in store.
115.
For if his Footstool (and the world is such)
Be so inricht, what is his Princely throne?
And if man's miseryes do shine so much,
What shall his glory do? God knows alone.
116.
And man may say no more thereof but this,
That when he has deuisd the most he can,
The world to come, as far excelling is,
As God immortal does exceed frail man.
117.
But thou, though frail be not so fondly bent
As to destroy thy soul, to flatter sense,
And sell a Crown of glory permanent,
For trash, which yet thou can not carry hence.
118.
For here all dies with thee, thy sins excepted,
And (that which follows sin) eternal pains;
For having so preposterously neglected
A Sun so full, to choose a Moon that wanes.
119.
How much more noble were it, since thou art
Composd of Beast and Angel, to procure
Thy flesh, to do her homage to that part,
Which is superior, incorrupt and pure.
120.
So shall thou grow like God thy heavenly Father;
And suffering here with me, with me shall reign,
Thou shall receive the Holy Ghost, or rather
Be filled top full, with showers of his sweet rain.
121.
That spotles Virgin will behold thy state,
As tender Mother does her dearest Son,
The Angel that attends thee, will relate.
The glorious course that thou beginst to run.
122.
Thou shall be bidden to a daily feast
By thy good Conscience, which all plenty bringes.
And thy fair soul, from sinful flesh releast,
Shall mount to Heaven upon bright Angels wings.
123.
This not for need that I inuit thee so,
For know my glory will as brightly shine
In thy damnation to eternal woe,
As in the saving of that soul of thine.
124.
My love alone did force me to descend
Into this Nothing, Love the loadstone is
Which makes the iron rod of Justice bend
To mercy, pardoning all thou do amiss.
125.
And so I ask no retribution
But only Love, and if thou grant not this,
Tigers may teach thee more compassion,
And softnes flint, for thy heart harder is.
126.
Such speech thou would, nay such thou did impart,
Not to mine ears (for then thou were grown domme
And I was deaf) but to my sinful heart,
Then take this answer which from thence does come.
127.
Dear Lord, I grant that thou all reason have,
And I should rage in Hell, who thus neglect
Of thy still present love, the pledges past,
To which my soul does owe supreme respect.
128.
Wretch that I am, I want not grace to know
The endless obligation I am in,
The little that I pay, the much I owe
To thy dear Passion, that huge price of sin.
129.
But all this knowledge of what I should do,
Detects me of unkindness so much more,
Because mine actions do not suit thereto,
Which are as cold, and careless as before.
130.
My taste, my touch, my smell, mine ears, mine eyes,
I grant were given for scouts, who might fetch home
A ladder, by the which my soul should rise
From creatures, to the love of thee alone.
131.
The facultyes, and powers of my Mind,
Mine Understanding, Will, and Memory,
I grant, were lent as locks and keys, to bind
My heart to know, and love, and think on thee.
132.
All these thy mercyes, and a million more
I have misspent, and with the self same arms
Which thou had willed me to keep in store
For my defense, I did my soul most harms.
133.
So that they are not my foul sins alone,
Which strike me with a sad remorse of mind;
But even thy mercyes, to such height are grown,
As that in them more cause of fear I find.
134.
For how can I, to whom thou give such grace,
As would have serud to make some men great Saints,
Adventure to appear before thy face,
In whom thou findst no cause but of complaints.
135.
From hence it is dear Lord, that I decline
That seat of Justice, and that royal Throne
Where purest Angels, who most brightly shine,
Do loose their luster, when by thine it is shown.
156.
From hence it is, that I am trembling still,
When I consider that dread Majesty,
That light inaccessible, which does kill
All souls, wherein it finds impiety.
137.
From hence it is, that I did beg of thee,
Not only that thou would thy self impart,
But that it might in such a fashion be,
As should engraue thy Passion in my heart.
138.
For on the Cross, thou art all sweet, and soft,
And poor, and humble, and surchargd with pain,
For my ungrateful soul, which has so often
Renewed thy wounds, and made them bleed again.
139.
O thou fair fountain with five springs of love,
Which make such streams as that by running still,
They grow to be a Sea, which flows above
The bancks of all, that has the name of Ill.
140.
Not only quenching the hot flames of Hell,
(Though vulgar men conceive that this is all)
But sanctifying wicked men so well,
As makes them lead a life Angelical.
141.
Lend me one grain of that dear Love of thine,
Which, by protection, may transmute me so
From Lead to Gould, as that these debts of mine
May both be paid, and I more rich may grow.
142.
Or rather I presume to beg of thee,
Not that so much my Love may be increast,
As that the object may quite changed be,
And I love most, what I have yet loved least.
143.
For there was ever planted in my heart
Great power to love, and happy had I been,
If only I had well applied that part,
To serve my God, instead of serving sin.
144.
Nay happy should I be, if from this hour
My love were all diuorst from humane things,
And so espousd to thee, as to want power
Of seeking ought, but what thy service bringes.
145.
How soon would thou forget my follyes past:
Thy Grammar which must conster the expense
Of all mine hours incongruously plast,
Has Futures, but no Preter perfect tense.
146.
Here then receive all that does yet remain,
I take thy word, which once thou gave to me,
That thou would draw all souls to thee again,
When, on the Cross, thou should exalted be.
147.
Draw me, but draw me home, for else my heart
Which is so slippery, and so heavy grown,
Either by fraud, or else by force will start
From such conjunction, as should make us one.
148.
Speak to my soul, but with so loud a voice
As I may hear; and in a tune so sweet,
That, deaf to other things, I may rejoice
To tread the happy steps of thy pure feet.
149.
Turn back sometime, and breath upon me so
That with delight I may advance my pace;
And not remembering how to creep, and go,
May run, and reach these odours of thy grace.
150.
I ask not that I may be worldly wise
Nor learned, strong, nor rich, nor much esteemd,
Such trash as this I hope I shall despise
Who am from all erroneous faith redeemd.
151.
I ask not to be free from anxious thought
Of sudden death, or dropping down to Hell:
The matchless price, wherewith my soul was bought
Persuades me that thou love it much too well.
152.
I ask not that thou would these fetters loose,
Which do my soul from heavenly bliss detayne:
For it is more noble, and I rather choose
To suffer for thee, then with thee to reign.
153.
But let me only by thy hand be blessed;
Lend me one cast of thy propitious eye,
Inflame me with desires to do the best;
For good is naught, when better does stand by.
154.
O that I could consider, as I know,
The little which thy Law of me requires,
The much that to thy ardent Love I owe,
And yet I freeze enuirond by such fires.
155.
Thou bidst me love thee, and I beg the same;
How come I then to miss what I intend?
It Is, that I ask it of thee, but for shame,
And no strong purpose that I have to mend.
156.
For love consists not in words, but works;
Not in velleities, but constant will,
To root out passion (which so falsely lurkes)
And make stiff war against all show of ill.
157.
Herein I fail, and do not only crave
Strength for the time to come, but humbly sue
For pardon of sins past; the more I have,
The greater praise is to thy mercy due.
158.
Let not thy sword of Justice take my head;
Let not my wretched heart be stond to death;
Let not thy wheel of vengeance, which lies spread
Against all sinners, take my dying breath.
159.
But, if I may not live, and please thee still,
Rather let fire of Love consume me quite;
Or let tears drown me, if it be thy will,
Or endless sighing break my heart outright.
160.
And for my tomb, I neither will ask more,
Nor care for less, then those dear arms of thine;
Which have such virtue, as to keep in store
All that they touch, free from the wrack of time.
161.
Let others seek for life, and liberty,
And in that course eternized to be;
The highest thoughts of my ambition, fly
But to be dead, and buried thus in thee.
FINIS.

