THE HISTORY OF THE TROUBLES OF HVNGARIE: CONTAINING THE PITIFVLL LOSS AND
RVINE OF THAT KINGDOM, AND THE WARS HAPPENED THERE, IN THAT TIME, between
the Christians and Turks.

By MART. FVMEE Lord of Genille, Knight of the Kings Order.

Newly translated out of French into English, by R. C. Gentleman.

Tout pour l' Eglise. BY WISDOM ^ PEACE BY PEACE PLENTY.
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON.

Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON.

1600.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR ROBERT CECIL KNIGHT, SECRETARY OF ESTATE TO HER
MAJESTY, MASTER OF THE WARDS AND LIVERIES, AND ONE OF HER HIGHNESS MOST
HONORABLE PRIVY COUNCIL.
Right Honorable,
HVNGARIE after many afflictions endured by her sworn enemies (the Turks) for
her utter ruin and decay: and after as many entreaties, requests, and earnest
petitions made to the Princes of Christendom, and to diverse persons of great
reputation and authority amongst them, for the asswaging (or rather quite
suppressing, if possible it could be) of these her woeful and intolerable
miseries: does now at last wander abroad, and is come into our little Island
(it being as it were in the uttermost confines of Europe) in ragged and
mournful habits as a distressed Pilgrim, and with like zeal does importune
your Honor to assist her with your favor; which though her attire be plain
and sad: yet such is her magnificent and illustrious mind, that under these
mean and withered weeds, she only in plain and sincere manner, discovers
the condition of her lamentable estate: which happily if your Honor will
vouchsafe to peruse this her pittefull discourse, she makes no doubt, but that
(according to your accustomed goodness, whereof most do taste) she shall with
like favor be graced as other distressed strangers are. If any defects appear
in her presence, I humbly beseech you they may be favorably imputed to the
ignorance (not wilfulnes) of her guide, whose desire was rather safely to
conduct her into England, then curiously to furnish her, had his ability been
fully aunswerable to his good meaning. Yet herein to manifest his willing
mind, he has adventured to present her to your Honor, whose favor and
countenance may greatly grace her. In doing whereof, Hungary (who now waileth
for want of relief) shall think her self highly comforted; and I, for her so
good success, shall not only pray for the prosperous continuance of your
honorable estate; but shall also rest most bound in all humble duty and
service at your Honors command.

R. C.

to the Reader, health.
FRiendly Reader, after J had (for my private content) translated some few
notes out of this excellent History, J was requested by some of my good
friends to take further pains in the whole: which J was the rather desirous to
perform, as well to satisfy their friendly requests, as also for diverse other
respects. The first whereof was, for that my self had been a trauailer in this
Country of Hungary, and had (in regard my aboade there was not long) but
superficially noted the manners and disposition of the people there, and
specially in their martial affairs, wherein (during my residence there) J
spent my time with some observation of those parts, where then J had been:
which notwithstanding did now with delight draw me on to begin and proceed in
the finishing of this History. The second reason that induced me hereunto,
was, in regard that it seemed no fiction or fabulous toy, but a History of
gravity and credence, as witnesses the memorials of Stephen Broderic
Chaunceler of Hungary, and of Castalde Lieutenant for Ferdinand (who was King
of Hungary) in that country, and diverse others: which being so, J rested with
assurance that it would greatly benefit thee for thy experience in many
pollitike affairs. And the third reason that persuaded me to undertake this
work, was, that J did, and also do still, heartily desire that it might be, in
things appertaining to us, as a president and caveat to these parts of
Christendom that now think themselves as secure, as once the Hungars did, and
they then as safe from the deluge of Infidels, as we do now. But alas, such
was their pride and dissension (unhappy people) that (through their own
misgouernment) God inflicted this punishment upon them, which now as
remediless, and altogether in despair, they with woeful laments too late
bewail: for though that some neighboring Princes (whom the cause does also
nearly concern) may affoorde them their best aid, somewhat to withstand and
bridle the Turks mighty incursions; yet surely far unlikely, and more
unable they are to reconquer that which they have lost: the reason is too
apparent, for both in regard of multitudes of men and military discipline,
they far exceed the Christians, and it may be that those who may, will not,
and those who would, cannot affoorde them that succor which is needful; so
that, what between the one and the other, this miserable Hungary (which is
one of the fertilest and goodliest Countries in Christendom) is more shaken
and torn by the Turks violence and insolency, then is a young Lamb between
the Wolves jaws. Herein I must crave your patience to rest in silent
melancholy (for mirth it affoords none) until the end, and lend your patient
ear unto detestable complots, impieties, and seditions; unto ignominious
conspiracies, immanities and cruelties; unto horrible massacres of men, women
and children that be Christians; unto pitiful laments and mournings of husbands
for loss and forcing away of their wives, and wives for their husbands; unto
violation and rapines of maids; and to be brief, unto sacriledges, burnings,
and deuastations of all manner of creatures: which when all these things shall
lively be discifered unto you in this History, then judge of the state of this
poor Country into what an abisme of misery it is fallen. J omit to write of
many particulars concerning the Turks politic proceedings, for the incroching
upon Christendom: touching all which (because J would not be tedious) I refer
you to the History it self, wherein more at large you may discern their
intercourse and temporising with Christians, which indeed is nothing else, but
only for their own commodity to make use of them, until they find fit
opportunity to advance their intended practices against them: and then adue
league and all society of friendship: only this J say, and humbly desire God
of his merciful goodness, to inspire Christians with that humility and
faithful repentance, that it may assure our hearts of turning this judgment
from us, which our Lord of his mercy grant for Jesus Christ's sake, and
extirpe these Mahometaines, who (as our own eyes may witness) daily (with
tears and grief we may speak it) infringe the confines of Europe with their
heathenish and barbarous proceedings; as more at large this History will
amplify.

R. C.

The Authors Epistle to the people of France.
TO you (French people) and to no other do I dedicate this History, and I do
diuulge it to the view of the world, under the protection of the best advised,
to the end that it being by them received and defended, it may remain sound
and perfect, and be as a mirror to those who know not themselves; and (who
being attained with a spiritual leaprousie) have no more feeling in them, then
as if they had utterly lost all their understanding: not regarding (as
vnpitifull) the tears and sighings of the poor afflicted, happened through
their occasion: not being able to taste the delicate fruits, which sage and
wise council brings with it; not being able to sent the infection and stink
which proceeds from the imbecillitie of their corrupted brain: not being
able by their touching to taste what is the blood which themselves draw from
the bottom and deepest of their veins: neither see they the extreme misery
wherein they are plunged, drawing with them thereinto, the soundest part of
their bodies.

To these do I present this mirror, that looking into it, they may the better
know what is their present estate; and if they could see (as they may if they
will) their gross deformities, and great defects, they ought without doubt to
believe that they are the same persons, which have made themselves such by the
corruption and grossenes of their humors, giving themselves over to their
desires, through a contempt of the Deity, by a private ambition and avarice.

When as therefore you shall see in this History the division of a people
fleshed one against another, for sovereign and regal dignity: when for this
effect, you shall read herein of Towns and Castles forced, the inhabitants
spoiled of their goods and lives, the wives at the mercy of the soldier, the
maids violated, many fair buildings burnt, the subjects rebelling against
their Lords, Peasants against Peasants; you would asluredly think they are
acts committed in a Country far remote.

But it is you, who amongst your selves, and upon your selves, have committed
the like enormities: when for the like effect you shall find it strange that
these miserable and unfortunate people, having called in amongst them their old
and ancient enemies, under color for them to be revenged one of another: and
(which is yet more bestiall) submitted themselves both of the one part and on
the other, to a stranger. I know not then what sound judgment or good opinion
you can conceive of your selves, being attainted and notoriously convinced of
the self same fault, when you shall note the great ruins and desolations of
so goodly and rich a Country, you may well perceive even at this present,
yours reduced into the like estate, and if the calamity be not in all points
answerable: yet think that you touch it with the very tip of your finger,
except the acknowledement which you may have of your selves, preserve you not,
and diuertit from you. In examination of your selves, you shall find your
selves all kinsmen, there being neither race or lineage amongst you, which is
not allied one to another, except it be some stranger newly come in: you shall
find your selves all of one nation: you shall find your selves all subjects
of one Lord and Prince: and you seeing your selves to be all of kindred, allied
of the same nation, and under one government: and being able to observe these
conditions in your selves, you shall certainly judge, that you are culpable of
all the disorder which at this present is seen amongst you, and that the fault
happened not but from your selves, without imposing it upon a stranger, who by
your loss, seeks his own advancement, maintaining his triumphs with heaps
of your ruins, which serve him for many solemnities. This fault once
acknowledged, you shall embrace your selves, even one another as kinsmen: you
shall frequent one another lovingly, as true countrymen: and you shall make
your selves wholly obedient to your Prince, by a mutual and friendly agreement,
remitting all controversies that may spring amongst your selves, to those who
are admitted to execute Justice: propounding to your selves the similitude
which sometimes Menewnius Agrippa a Roman, alleged to his Citizens, who were
infected with the same malady that you your selves are, he comparing a common
wealth to a human body, which being composed of many members, has need
(for the better subsistence of it) that all with one accord do accomplish
their natural functions the one for the other thy a mutual and reciprocal
duty; even as in our necessity we do naturally practice the same every one
by himself. If the head does ache and is ill, we presently apply to it both
our hands to comfort it again, and it receives some ease thereby; by means
of the feet it is carried here and there, that it may the better divert the
grief; we cherish it, because the loss of it does overthrow all the roast, and
we are not so ill advised, upon the distemperature thereof, to cut it off from
the other parts. That which nature does instruct you, for the preservation of
this little body, you ought to think it to be an instruction which it has
prepared for you to walk in the entertainment of your likes, who are united
to you by a mutual frequentation and such as is necessary amongst your
selves, which we name society, and from whence comes this heap and mass of
people, which we comprehend under the name of a common weal; the which, all
those that are borne in the same, ought to maintain and preserve (and not
seek the ruin and spoil thereof) as being all members of the body of it.
And concerning the default that herein you commit, you may clearly see the
calamity which shall happen to you therefore, by the example of this miserable
Realm of Hungary, which was in former time no less replenished with warlike
men, then you, and which was no less enriched with fertility, riches, and all
other things necessary for the maintenance of life, then yours. In beholding
your selves therefore in this, presently mark withal that the like misfortune
may happen to you, that has overtaken them, seeing the cause thereof is alike;
and so labor, that in the end you may become more wise then they, who seeing
before them a like accident proceeding from the same cause in the Empire of
Constantinople, could not make use of it, but have suffered themselves to fall
into the fulness of evil and misery. In doing of which, if the first and
second have committed such a fault as they cannot recover, yet he not you the
third which should commit the like. There is not any he that is not deceived
the first time; being misled because he had not made proof thereof: for the
second time a man may be also sometime deceived, under a certain pretense of
frindship: but there is no excuse to the wise, when it happens the third
time. If these first, if these second of our age have been thus deceived and
overtaken by their own rage and retchlesnes, suffer not your feet to stumble
against the same stone, after you have seen two of them to stumble before you
with so foul a fall. Stay your selves a while, and give ear to the woeful
reports, which daily are made of loss, of ruins, of fire, of great effusion
of blood, of captiuities, of violations, and of the execrable miseries which
are daily committed among the rest of the inhabitants of this miserable
Hungary, and even by those whom they had drawn so indiscreetly into their
country, under the color of succor and aid.

And upon this report, refrain your rage, take again your wonted spirits, and
endeavor that your follies may be so momentarie, that in every wisemans
judgment, they may be esteemed better then heretofore.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF HVNGARIE.
THE ARGUMENT OF THE FIRST BOOK.
A Philosophical and Theological discourse, concerning the revolution of
things. Lewis the second of that name, King of Hungary and Bohemia: of his
descent and qualities. The governors and Counselors of his estate. Solomon
prepares to invade Hungary. The diligence of Paul Tomoree Lieutenant general
of the Kings army. Lewis soliciteth the Christian Princes for aid.
Ecclesiastical treasure is levied for the war. The Turks army passed the
river Sauus. The description of Hungary. A brief recital of the places,
where happened the greatest force of the war. The riches of Hungary.
Aduertisements to the King for the ordering of this war against the Turks.
Lewis goes into the field. Varadin Peter taken by the Turks. Soldiers
repaired from all parts to the King lying at Tholne. Wylak taken by the Turks.
The privileges of the Barons of Hungary. The King determined to go into the
field with a small force, and the Soldiers importune to fight. The
description of the town of Mohaz, where the King fought and lost the battle.
A disswasion from fight, and further consideration thereof. Tomoree advises to
fight. The Christian Army no more but 25000. men: and the Turks were 300000.
The means to preserve the King in battle: the order and place of the
battle. The King is shown to the Hungarian Soldiers. A deliberation of the
enemies purposes, and of his appearing in the field. Tomoree importuneth to
fight: the beginning of the battle, the loss of the King, and overthrow of
the Hungars. The Kings body found dead. A certain Ghost appeared in man's
shape. The Turks spoil and harrie all over Hungary. Buda taken by the
Turks: 200000. Christians overthrown, slain, and taken prisoners in this
expedition.

SEeing the Heaven is such as it represents it self to our sight, that is,
proportioned like unto a Sphericall or round form: and since the same Heaven
enuironeth, besides the mean of this great concauitie The revolution of al
things.
certain ancient Philosophers esteemed that all things had their reuolutions.
For since so it is, that the lowest part of a circle is that, which is in the
midst thereof: and that the lower parts or bodies are governed by the
superior That nothing Sentence.
is done, nor nothing said, which has not been done, or said before.

What is there now that has not been?
And shall not that, at last,
Which is to be, receive his being
From that which once is past?
That which is made unmade shall be,
And eke again be made:
And, being made again, it shall
Be seen to waste and fade.
And this is that which oftentimes vpholdeth many good spirits, which otherwise
would be terrified through the innumerable evils, wherewith men are often times
environed. For, wrestling against such torments, they are supported by a
certain hope against such terrors, namely this, that one day good shall come
in steed of evil: like as when it raineth, we still hope for fair weather.
These reuolutions, nevertheless, are not always equal, or of like
perfection, by reason of the multiplicitie of meteores and 2
The diversity of reuolutio^s.
certain combining together, or be as a consequence of things fore-happened;
as for example, in time of war many evils do infallibly accompany it, and
are engendered thereby. Other reuolutions there be which are 3
name supernatural, although we see the^ to happen by the sequel of certain
precedent causes, and to have bin practiced before in certain worldly matters.
These reuolutions sometimes fall out sooner then the natural course of the
stars: because that Gods justice (whereof they do depend) does hasten and
address it self to punishment, even as the weight of the misdeedes requires.
The two first kinds of these reuolutions may be noted to happen many times
naturally in those who are altogether abandoned and forsaken of God, and are by
him left to the course of their own lust, as we see amongst the Barbarians,
and in the person of Pharaoh. The third kind was inflicted upon the children of
Israel, who have often felt one self same justice

The calamity happening to the kingdom of Hungary, (whereof I undertake to
write the history) may well be referred to one of these three punishments.
For when this country at an instant was overthrown, there was not in Europe
(yea it may be not in all the world) any place, where the people was more
proud, effeminate, and cold of courage then in this; they giving themselves
over to such infamous vices, through the great riches and marvelous abundance
and wealth of the country, (which is the cause of all wickedness) and because
they did (to say the truth) often make head against the Solomon, who assures
us, That cursed is that country whose King is an infant. Notwithstanding as
young as Sentence.
he was, yet was he soon taken out of the world, leaving no certain heirs
behind him, but unfortunate and cankered hatred, yea a desire in the hearts of
certain Princes to reign, which continued and perfected the utter subversion
of this miserable Province.

But discoursing thus freely upon ye evil of another, it may be objected, that
I have matter enough at home, without borrowing from elsewhere, to make the
like discourse. There is (truly) enough, and more then we should desire: That
it is unseemely for a man Sentence.
to be judge in his own causes, or make his own accounts. For to write and
discover our vices, is a vain foolishnes: and to magnify and extol our
praises, is no other but mere flattery. I had rather imitate those, who use
the good examples of others to enrich their narration, and know so well to
accommodate them to the subject or matter which is propounded, that the
auditors are more drawn by them, then by their principal and chief
arguments. Nay, I will speak boldly; as similitudes are not in all respects
alike, so it seems France miserable.
that we are in worse condition, then was Hungary: for that the misery Julius
and Augustus: as afterward this French Monarchy did under Pepin, and
Charlemaigne: and as, before that, Italy did under Romulus: and Assyria under
Merodach: and before them, the like mutations happened under Ianus, and under
Moses. The miseries that accompanied the alteration of the Roman state are
sufficiently known. The cruelties were not such under Pepin, as they were
under Hugh Capet. The revolution of divine Justice did not extend it self, but
upon the three sons of Philip the fair, (for the punishment of their wicked
lives) who successively were kings of France, and dying without issue the
kingdom was transferred Valoys. Also it is a necessary and usual thing, that
when a good or bad State is come to his complete perfection, it presently
declineth and reuolueth, by reason of this circumuolution, commonly called in
all ages the wheel of Fortune, to which revolution God has fastened The wheel
of Fortune.
all humane actions, as well active as passive, as to a fashion or form the
certainest of all others: so that we neither see nor read of any thing, but a
continual returning of good and evil, having his course or period more short
or long, according to the variety of things, or disposition of Gods will. When
we see Religion, Justice, or Policy to be in his full force of virtue, we may
assure our selves to rest in good estate and great content. But of the
contrary, to Captains and men of war, and converted to the dowries of
women; unlawful bargains, and foul enormities covered with the veil of
Justice, The immortal spirits not subject to the stars.
spirits, which by reason do stay or change them; it falling out that a
wiseman commands even the stars, not causing them to change their
natural course, as some heretofore have thought of Sorcerers, but in making
their natural power frustrate and without effect, through a good and advised
foresight. Concerning such chasticements, as ordinarily fall upon us by divine
justice for like faults, even those nevertheless may be somewhat stayed by
good and true repentance, contrition, and daily prayers, seeing that God is
altogether good and full of mercy. Also when such virtues The misery of
France.
self and daily increases: because that together with celestial influence,
rancour, malice, and all manner of wickedness has in such sort seized and
possessed the spirits of men, that all manner of foresight, of wisdom, of
prudence, of humility and patience does abandon it self from thence, even as
it happened at the time of the deluge: in so much that it truly seems that
this unhappy country (at the least for his own particular) is ready to
receive even as great a fall, as then did the whole world: except some (in whom
we see some spark of wisdom yet to shine) do take the bridle in their
hands to stay the violent course of this heavenly chariot, and by laying apart
and casting from amongst themselves all disagreements and privy A necessary
union.
grudges, (which they pretend one against another) do alike for their
Friendship contains in it self all virtue.
in it all virtues, especially when the same has relation to two things, that
is to say, toward God and our country, for which we are not bound to travail
only in all kinds of businesses, but also to expose our lives, as well men as
women, yea children themselves, as it is often seen at sieges and assaults of
towns, where both the one and the other sex do employ themselves with one
mind and great courage) every one which is nobly borne, ought to endeavor
himself to cause his excellency the more to appear. Charity.
proceeding of natural friendship is deeply rooted, and that not only amongst
Christians, but also amongst Jews and Painims, and even amongst the Atheists
themselves, which also makes us by this means greatly to differ from brute
beasts. According to this we may conclude, that it is not without cause that a
grave personage said, That we were not altogether borne for Sentence.
our selves, but for one another: as if every man (who has in him any spark
of such amity) ought according to his ability (whilst he is in this life) to
endeavor 1
shocke of common calamity, and particularly without falling into despair,
which often proceeds of unthankfulness and forgetting of God: and also to the
end that others more discreet and advised, may by another man's harm avoid
the inconvenience to come, or at the least may prepare themselves 2
to receive it in such sort, that their noisome wound be not to them over
dangerous, offensive, or prejudicial: and also to the end that those who 3
The preservation of another and of his own government necessary for a State.
only to preserve and maintain their own, but also to be vigilant that the
next neighbor be not invaded by any other, least that by their negligence and
carelesnes, the third increasing by the overthrow of another, he do not
afterward overthrow their State, and in the end bring it under his government:
as those who have aspired to great Monarchies know well how to practice this,
and whereunto they could never attain, if every neighbor State would
maintain and assist one another, as sometime they well do when necessity
constrains them, and when they are not possessed or incensed with any mutual
hatred. But this vice not leaving them any long in hand to write of, then the
history of any other strange country, to the end that it being Christian, it
may with more remorse wound and pierce our A history serves for instruction.
might leave to their posterity some fair and large memorial, within the
Broderic Chancellor of Hungary, Castalde Lieutenant unto Ferdinand.
history, collected out of the records of Broderic, the Chauncellor of
Hungary, and out of the memorials of Castalde Lieutenant unto Ferdinand in the
same country, and of sundry other writers.

LEwis the second of that name, King of Hungary and Bohemia, the son Lewis
the second, and of his birth. Anne of Candale, Queen of Hungary. Anno. Dom.
of Vladislaus and of Anne of Candale who came out of France; after he Soliman
Emperor of the Turks, invaded Hungary with a great and puisant army. He, a
little before his father dyed, was betrothed to Marie, sister to the Emperor
1526.
Charles, and Ferdinand Archduke of Austria, whom he afterward married Marie
Queen of Hungary.
being come to years of discretion, giving at the same time his sister Anne in
marriage to Ferdinand. Lewis was a comely young Prince, tall and well Anne
Archdutches of Austria. The qualities of Lewis.
formed, excelling any of his age, having a singular and natural bounty, and
adorned with so many goodly virtues, that certainly he had proved a most
excellent Prince, if he had lived but a longer time. He was of a sweet

At that time the dignity and honor of Count Palatine (which is the Count
Palatine.
chief among the seculars next to his royal Majesty) was in the possession
of Stephen Battor, son of Andrew Battor, and nephew to Stephen Battor,
Stephen Battor, Count Palatine. John Zapoly, Vayuode of Transiluania.
who immediately before him possessed the same dignity, and governed
Transiluania with his great honor under King Mathias. John Zapoly Count of
Sepusa (who afterward was King of Hungary) governed then Transiluania, having
in his possession great store of wealth to be divided with his brother George,
which they had gotten by the death and succession Stephen their father. He had
in such sort procured the favor and good will of all the Nobles and States of
that country, that, even from his youth, every one set their eye upon him, as
the right inheritour of that kingdom, if it so happened that, for want of
lawful heirs, it should be vacant. Stephen commanded in great Walachia,
which is named Moldauia, and among Stephen of Walachia. Raoul of Transalpina.
Francis Bathian Ban of Slauonia.
the Turks Carabogdania; and Raoul governed the less Walachia, otherwise
named Transalpina; both the one and the other nevertheless being subject to
the kingdom of Hungary. Francis Bathian, (well esteemed of the King, in
respect of his continual and faithful service from his youth) Peter Peren
governor of Themeshwar.
were under the defense and government of Peter Peren, who with the Count of
Sepusa did keep the royal Crown, which was left unto him by Emeric Peren his
father. Paul Tomoree a gray Friar, and Archbishop of Colocense, Paul Tomoree, a
gray Friar, and Archbishop of Colocense, governor of Sirmia.
commanded Sirmia, and all that circuit which is between the rivers of
Sauus, Drauus, and Danubius. This Archbishop was a great personage, Frauncis,
had made sufficient proof of his virtue in many exploits, valiantly many times
fighting against the enemy. The Archbishopricke of Colocense being vacant, and
the possessions and profits thereof having no less need of a good defender,
then of a Pastor and dispenser of sacred and holy things, for the late loss of
the town and fortress of Belgrade: in a public assembly of the kingdom it
was by every one importuned, that Tomoree should be forced (if he would not
otherwise) out of his Monastery, and by the authority and command of the
Pope should take the Paul taken against his will out of his Covent.
charge of this Church, and defend the goods and revenues thereof. Christopher
of Francapine (being certain months before drawn to the Count Christopher
of Francapine.
service of the Realm with fair promises, whereupon they had caused him
Ferdinand) in steed of receiving some preferment according to their promises,
in the end was rewarded with a great injury, and returned again unto
Ferdinand. Stephen Broderic, Stephen Broderic Chauncelor.
(borne in that part of high Panonia which some particularly call Slauonia)
after he had been Ambassador for the King to the Popes holiness, and had a few
months before been created Chauncelor, had more affection to a zealous life,
then to earthly things. Alexis Thurson (a man greatly abounding Alexis Thurson
Treasurer.
in wealth according to common opinion) was Treasurer, and had in former time
executed this office very diligently. The Castles of Poson and John Bornemissa
governor of King Leuis.
Buda were in the custody of John Bornemissa, who had so great authority with
the King, that he could incline his will to which side he would, because he had
the government of him from his cradle. He was also very well esteemed of every
one, as well for his reverend old age, as for the severity which was seen in
him, accompanied with great bounty, and for the fidelity which he bare
toward his King. Behold here, these were they who then managed the greatest
places of the kingdom.

The other Prelates and Barons gave themselves every one to their private
Lasdilas Salcane Archbishop of Strigonium, Metropolitaine of Hungary.
affairs, except Lasdilas Salcane, Archbishop of Strigonium, Metropolitan
Stephen Broderic, had nevertheless a good part of the ouerseeing of all the
affairs, which were for the most part governed by his advise and council.
Also the King reposed great trust in him, as well for his dignity, age, and
wisdom, as for the experience which he had, having a long time managed the
affairs of the State.

In this sort was Hungary governed, when news came to King Lewis, that
Solimon, having made peace with all his other neighbors for many years,
prepared himself to make war against the Hungarians by land and water, the
passage being sufficiently open to perform this, by reason of the towns of
Belgrade and Sabasia which not long since were under his government; and the
fortress of Zalankemen, and all other towns on this side the river of Sauus,
unto Varadine Peter, being raced and thrown to the ground; which compass or
circuit of the Country is yet, until this day, called by the ancient name
of Sirmia. All this ruin and loss gave Sirmia.
the enemy such entrance into Hungary, that it was a difficult matter for him
to be hindered from any his attempts, but as often as he thought good, Paul
Tomoree, who not content to have advertised The diligence of Paul Tomoree. From
whence comes this word Coche.
the King, by many messages, of the Turks coming into his Realm, with all
speed transported himself with post in little wagons, named Kotcze (which
bear the name of the place, from whence the first of them came) toward the
King, who was then at Vicegrade the twentieth day of March, unto whom he gave
notice of the Turks enterprise, of his preparations, and how great the danger
would be, into which he saw the Realm might then easily fall, aduertising him
of the small force which he had in his government to hinder them; that it was
needful to use all possible diligence;

The King being much troubled with this news, which elsewhere in many places
was confirmed for certain and true, appointed a public assembly George his
day. At that time and thither repaired all the States of every Province, and
determined of all things which apperteined to the defense of the kingdom: and,
among other things, it was concluded, that all the Princes, as well
ecclesiastical as secular, and all the nobles with good store of able
peasants, should be at Tholne, at the feast of the visitation of our Lady the
blessed Virgin Marie, which is the second of June, and to march all with the
King himself, against their enemies. In the mean time the King advised of
that which was necessary for the maintenance of the war. He sent his
Ambassadors to the Christian Princes (especially to Lewis soliciteth the
Christian Princes.
his neighbors) declaring to them the danger and peril, which was to them
imminent. By pithie and perswasiue letters, and by experienced men, he
solicited the Bohemians, Morauians, and Slesians, to send him what aid they
ought him, and urged them with their promises and assurances, which they had
before given him to the like effect. He solicited the Pope as much as he could,
that he would increase the treasure which he disbursed in Hungary for the
levy of Soldiers, whereby he might have the better means to defend
himself. But he solicited not Sigismond King of Polonia his Sigismond King of
Polonia confederate with the Turk.
Uncle, for that he a little before had made truce with the Turk, minding by
that means to chase out of his kingdom the ruin and loss of it; since that
Lewis very well knew the integrity of this Prince, that he was an obseruer of
his faith, and did assure himself he would afford him no aid against him,
with whom he was confederate. Also he had the like opinion of the Venetians.

In this aforesaid assembly, it was granted to the King, to take a portion of
the Churches treasure (if want did urge him to it) to supply the want of The
Ecclesiastical treasure levied for the war.
his own treasure, which was but little, his cofers being wasted by those who
had very carelessly governed the common wealth. This permission and grant was
confirmed and approved by the Pope, for discharge of their Christopher
Francapine. Nicolas Count Salms.
charge of this war, namely Count Christopher (of whom we have spoken
before that he went to Ferdinand) and Nicholas Count Salms.

These things and many other being thus disposed of in this assembly, the
King, after he had advised with himself, gave every one leave to retire
themselves; and for his part, he put in practice and executed (as speedily as
he could) that which had been determined of in the assembly. And first of
all, he writ to the Christian Princes, informing them of the present danger
which he saw, demanding aid of all, and chiefly of the Emperor Charles, and
of Francis King of France, who a little before was delivered out of prison.
Francis the first, King of France, challenged of his promise.
which he frankly made him offer, and assured to aid him with forces and
succors, if God did restore him to his full and whole liberty. Declaring to
him that the time did now present it self to perform his friendly promises,
Ferdinand, and to other Princes of the Empire, who then were assembled at the
Imperial diet at Spire. He dispatched letters again into Bohemia, Morauia,
and Slesia. He treated with John Anthony, Baron of Bourgh, the Popes Nuntio,
Lieger with his Majesty, to solicit and entreat his holiness, that he would
aid him with greater sums of money, to support the burden of this war. He
gave commission to Lasdilas Macedonien to take half the treasure of the
Churches, who, a Lasdilas Macedonien Bishop of the 5. Churches.
little before being Bishop of Sirmia, was chosen Bishop of the five Churches,
Nicholas Gerendi, to have a care of such sums of money as should be
collected, Nicholas Gerendi.
and to distribute and dispose of it only for the maintenance of the war,
with the Nuntioes consent. Certain sums of money were also demanded of the
Abbots, of the governors of towns, and of the corporations Sums of money.
of Villages, who said they were free: and the like was demanded of the
Saxons, the Transiluanians, and the Jews. In fine, they did on every side so
seek out money, the sinews of war, that within few days was collected no
small quantity of treasure.

During this time, letters were daily brought, messengers came as well from

All Hungary (which for certain is now held to have received this name by the
Hunes, or Hungers, a people come out of Scithia, who there made The description
of Hungary. The river Danubius.
their aboade) is parted and divided in two, by the insition of Danubius, which
is the greatest river in Europe, taking his original in the forest of
Martian, nigh the town of Vlmes, and so making his source overthwart Buda the
capital town of Hungary. Hungary on this side the river.
Germany. By this division Hungary does part it self into two parts, whereof
the one is on this side the river, and the other beyond; and we write it, as if
we were at Buda, which is the capital town of the kingdom.

That part on this side the river is anciently called Pannonia, and is
separated from that, which we call beyond the river, by Danubius, by Austria,
Bauaria, The river Drauus. Slauonia. The river Sauus. Bosnia. Rascia. Walko.
Posegan, and Sirmia.
and the skirts of the hill Cecien. The river Drauus separateth it from
Slauonia; and the river Sauus from Bosnia and Rascia. For, along the river of
Danubius, drawing toward Belgrade, even unto the mouth of the river Sauus, do
these three goodly countries stretch themselves, that is to say, Walko,
Posegan, and Sirmia, which are named Counties, and which do part Hungary from
Slauonia. The principal town on this hither part and side of the river is
Buda, which is the capital seat of the kingdom. The The town of
Alberegalis, the place of Coronation and burial of the Kings.
the place of Coronation, and sepultures of the Kings; Strigonium which holds
the Metropolitan place; Five Churches, which is a Bishops seat. Besides there
are Sopronia, Iauerin, Sabaria, and Stridon: which last is noted to be the
place where S. Hierome was borne, and in that last saving one Saint Martin
took his birth. Besides the rivers of Drauus and Danubius, there are
Strigonium. Five Churches.
others worthy of note. There be also two great Lakes of special note named
Balator, and Freton, one of which is about thirty miles long, but the
Sopronia. Iauerin. Sabaria. Stridon. Balator and Freton two great Lakes.
Slauonia.
other not being so long has a more large compass. When you have passed
Croatia. Dalmatia.
the Adriatique sea; part whereof is under the obeisance of the Venetians, and
part under the Turkish government, and the lesser part thereof is subject
Bosnia. Rascia. The town of Zagrabia.
to the King of Hungary. The Bosnians and Rascians, who in times past have
been called high Missians, do possess the countries which are within the
same, and are further from the sea. The principal town of Slauonia is The
town of Bigihon.
called Zagrabia. That of Croatia is now called Bigihon, and in times past it
was named Fumium. That part of Dalmatia, which does obey the Hungers, The town
of Segnia.
has for the chief town Segnia. Bosnia has Iaycza. And that of Rassia or
The town of Iaycza. Seruia.
Seruia has Belgrade. And such is the situation of Hungary on this side the
river, and of the countries which are between Danubius and the Adriatique
Gulf. The town of Belgrade.


As for the other part which is beyond Danubius, that is, by the hills
Carpathes, The further Hungary.
which begin above Poson, and by a long soil stretch themselves The river
Tibiscus.
unto the Euxine Sea, separated from Morauia, Sclesia, Polonia, and Russia unto
this Province, which we name Maromarusia, in which the other mountains The
river Zamosse.
and forests, advancing themselves toward Seuerin, do sever it from The
river Marosse.
Transiluania, and from Valachia Transalpina. This furthest Hungary is The
towns of Poson. Tirnauia. Trincin.
watered in the midst of it by the river Tibiscus, the which, of al those that
are in that North part, does most abound in fish. It does spring from the
mountains Maromarusians, and, besides many other lesser streams, he receives
The I Will of Comar. Nitria. Bistricia. Vacchia. Pesthe. Agria. Cassouia. Colocia.
Bacchia. Zegedin. Varadin. Debrecin. Chenadin.
into him the rivers of Zamosse and Marosse, coming both from beyond
Transiluania. In this part of Hungary are seated toward the North these most
noted towns, namely, Poson, Tirnauia, Trincin nigh ye river of Vagus, (which
glideth toward the I Will of Comar, falling into Danubius) Nitria, Bistricia with
certain others, situate among the mountains, wherein are the Mines of Silver
and Copper. Besides there is Vacchia Pesthe which is right Themesuar. Mines of
gold, silver, and tin.
which is a government that possesses the third place among al those of the
kingdom. Seuerin is in the same preciuct, where one may see at this Seuerine.
present, the relics of a bridge, built by the command of the Emperor
Traian, and many other towns, which for the brevity of this history The
bridge of the Emperor Traian.
I will omit. Tibiscus does mingle it self within Danubius, near to the town
of Titulia, seated on the other side upon the shore, not far from Varadin
Titulia.
Peter. On the other side of these mountains which we have said to extend
themselves from the hills Carpathes, unto Seuerin, is Transiluania, Transiluania.
the which in former time did make a part of Dacia, and for this cause it was
anciently called Pannodacia, a name compounded of Pannonia and Dacia, Dacia.
and at this day it is commonly called by the Hungars, Ortell. The principal
town thereof is Albe-iula, so called of Julius Caesar, or rather of Hijula,
Albe-iula.
Prince of the Huns. Besides this town, there be others which are rich
Sibinio. Brassouia. Colosuar. Bistricia. Saxon. Sicilians.
founded and built by the Germans, whom we call Saxons. There does also
inhabit in this Province, Sicilians, who are a people austere, stout, and
warlike; they have not any distinction of Nobility, nor of peasants, but they
follow the same conditions as the Swissers do. Transiluania is abounding in
all things, principally in Mines of gold and silver, and other metals, and of
The riches of Transiluania.
Salt Mines. It breeds courageous and excellent horses, and brings forth
great quantity of wine, but not so excellent as that of Hungaria, or of
Slauonia. It is compassed about with both the Valacchians, Transalpina, and
Moldauia. Valacchia. Transalpina. Moldauia.
Transalpina is upon Danubius, and Moldauia by the Euxin Sea. These two with
Transiluania, do now comprehend this part of Europe, which by ancient writers
was called Dacia. Therefore all this great circute, that is beyond Danubius,
which contains not only further Hungary, but Dacia.
also Transiluania, with both the Valacchians, is enclosed of Danubius, of the
hills Carpathes, and of the Euxin Sea, but specially of Danubius. And thus much
for the general situation of Hungary.

Now we must a little discourse more particularly of the places, wherein
happened all the force and vigor of the war. Beneath Buda, a long the river
side (besides other villages) is the town of Rakos, and near unto that,
Rakos. Tholne. Batha. Mohacz.
is Tholne, which is threescore Hungrish miles from Buda: after that, follows
Soclosia. Valpo.
Beyond Mugach unto Drauus is counted four miles, and a little more. On the
other side the mouth of Drauus, upon the shore, is seated the town of Ezeck,
and in the same quarter, in times past, was to be seen, the Monuments Ezeck.
or remembrances of a certain town, built in the time when the Romans
enjoyed the Pannoniaes, which (it may be) was a Roman Colonie. Erdunde.
of Thitetie. This place is environed with a Forest, and in respect of the
situation thereof, with a little labor, it may be made very strong. Beneath
Baroth. Walko. Zatha. Bachia an Archbishopric. Wilak. Sirmia a wealthy
country.
Metropolitan towns of Hungary, situate in the plain, so that it is
naturally all the whole circuit of the country, which is between Tibiscus
and Danubius, and for this cause it is very commodious to breed store of
cattle. Along Danubius, beneath Zatha, is seen Wilak, with his excellent
Fortress, and there begins this fortunate and firtile country of Sirmia,
not only abounding in wine, the most commended of all the Northern parts, but
also in all necessary things for the use of man: and has been renowned by so
many Emperors, and from whence is sprung a man who has greatly adorned the
Roman and Apostolic sea. The countries of the same, yield Bannomostra.
Varadin Peter.
seat of Sirmia: and before you arrive at Varadin Peter we find by the way
Kamanche, a town of good account. This town of Varadin Peter, with Kamanche.
Zalonkemen.
the Castle, is subject to the Church of Colosence, and for the loss of
Belgrade, Zemlen. Belgrade.
which in that place, by reason of the entrance thereof into Danubius, makes
it a large and deep current, which is enjoyed by the town of Belgrade, so
much renowned for famous battles, being fought in that place against the
Turk, which being once almost surprised by the enemy, John Huniades, then
governor of Hungary, father to King Mathias, with his brother John Capistrum,
chased out of Hungary Amurath the Turkish Emperor, John Capistrum.
Nandor-Albe. Albe-grecque. Taurinum.
the ancients call it Taurinum, and at this day it is called
Griechsuueisneburg. It is placed upon a steep Rock, which on that side
Hungary is seen, and at the foot thereof is the town, having on the one
side Sauus, and on the other Danubius.

And thus much for the situation of Hungary, and the places wherein the
Hungars have received an incurable and desperate wound. As for the riches of
this country, to say the truth, it exceeds all the Provinces in Europe. But
we will say no more hereof at this time, for that it would require a large

And now to come to the subject of our discourse. The King understanding that
certain troops of Turks had already passed Sauus, fearing that they marched
to Drauus, and that (before his coming) they should seize Vrbine Batian (who
then was dispatched to go into Moldauia) to advise upon this what was most
expedient and behoofull to be done for the safeguard of the kingdom. And if he
esteemed the counsel good, he was commanded to turn his forces, and those of
Transiluania, with Transalpina also toward that quarter: and this in part was
a special cause that the Vayuode could not be present at rende vous appointed
to be at Tholne, was already expired: yet nevertheless they were not yet in
readiness, and it seemed that all were not pliable thereunto, but only the King:
neither (said they) ought they to come to Tholne, before they understood of the
Kings being there.

In the mean while the brute of the Turks approaching, and of his passage of
Sauus daily increased, in such sort, that in the end certain news came, that
after, he passing the river, and having thrown down certain Castles, he
held on his course toward Varadin Peter, and did besiege it both by land and
water, though it were a town of no great force. In the end Lewis goes into
the field.
yet not willing to be reproved as tardie or negligent concerning this matter
of import, he departed from Buda (called at this day Ofen) the 24. of July,
Ofen.
marching along the shore of Danubius, coming by little and little to Tholne,
hoping that the other would shortly come to him.

A little before the King went from Buda, Stephen Battor of Somlie was

When the King departed from Buda he had but 3000. men as well foot as horse,
counting those that did belong to Queen Marie, and the Archbishop of
Strigonium. The first day that they departed from Buda, they made their nights
rest at the village of Ambroise Sarkan, named Erd, distant from Buda two miles.
In that place the Kings best horse, and that which he loved most, suddenly
dyed, whereupon he was much disquieted, and many diuined Andrew Battor, one of
the principal of that kingdom, with a good number of soldiers, and they
marched along Danubius unto Pantelee (which is a place, as we have said, of
Ezeck) where is to be seen the remaindes of an ancient Roman Colonie. There
George Basi (coming from the Vayuode of Transiluania) found the King, who
imparted unto his Majesty that the Vayuode was in great care what he should
do, in respect of the diversity of messages Iaspar Horuuath of Wimgard, one
of his chief gentlemen, by which he was commanded to come to the King; and
that afterward there arrived Vrbain Batian, who brought him certain
specialties, that according to the former, he might assail the enemy behind
with the Transalpinians: after him there arrived Stephen Battor of Somlie, who
brought him the same and first command, but did not make it openly known to
him, that the King did mean, that the aduertisements sent by Batian should
come to effect; and for that occasion he was uncertain what to do in so many
alterations, not knowing which to follow, being nevertheless George Basi,
dislodged, and arrived the same morning at the town of Felduar, situated by
Danubius: and there conferred with his Council of that which Basi had reported
to him. At the same Basi to journey day and night with as great diligence as he
could to the Vayuode, and to tell him that the King allowed well of his
counsel, and that it was sound and good, considering that the enemy had
already entered into the kingdom, and marched toward him: and that therefore
he leaving all other determinations, he should as well with all all the
Transiluanians, as those which he met in the way coming toward

To this effect letters were dispatched unto the Transiluanians, to John
Gozthan, Chauncellor to the Queen, and Bishop of that Province, and to the
Vayuode, by the persuasion of George, who desired the same, according to the
advice that he had received of the King his master. These letters were of
purpose framed sharp and severe, and sent, to the end that the Vayuode should
show them to all, whereby to excite and animate every one. He was specially
commanded by them, upon pain of disloialtie and treason, that he George Basi,
John Statile, a man of ready and quick wit, and well seen in learning. He
was, by means of their sister, nephew to Peter Berizlas Bishop of Vesprimie,
and to Martin Ban, a man greatly esteemed both in the affairs of peace and
war.

These messengers were not yet departed, when even then evil tidings Varadin
Poter taken by the Turks.
came of the taking of Varadin Peter, which the Hungars otherwise call
Petrouar, after it had been valiantly defended for many days, and all those
who were within it, for the defense thereof, were cruelly put to the sword; the
Castle being old and decayed, was the more ruinated by the force of the Cannon;
and further, that the enemies did advance themselves by water George Count of
Sepusa, who was said not to be far from Alberegalis with 5000. men. Also unto
Francis Bathian Ban of Croatia. Unto Count Christopher, who was thought to be
departed from Ferdinand, and to be already in Croatia with his father, unto
whom he was first of all retired, with an intent to have drawn from thence
armor, horses, and soldiers, that so he might with Ladislas the Macedonian,
was commanded to go with speed toward the Queen, who then was at Buda. She
was willed to importune her brother Ferdinand, and in his absence the
governors of Austria, to the end that it would please him presently to send
him aid, and especially Artillery, for which he had been before required,
and whereof the Hungars stood greatly in need, and the Turks to the contrary
were plentifully furnished. Moreover, she was entreated to hasten the Bohemians
with their troops, for the leauying of whom the Queen had disbursed of her
own charges great sums of money to Mezericie. Thomas Nadasdy was written
unto, that he should solicit Ferdinand, unto whom he was sent, and to declare
to him the double lineage and affinity which was between them two, and the
common peril like to happen; in consideration whereof, he importuned that he
would not leave his master in such and so great necessity, giving him
sufficient notice of the danger of his person, of the kingdom, and the loss
of Varadin Peter.

In the mean while Paul Tomoree (who before the taking of Varadin, having with
him 3000. men, left within the Castle of that town 1000. footmen,

The King, after he had understood of the loss of Varadin Peter, marched
Provinces called Counties.
in Hungary, as well on this side Danubius, as on the other, repaired great
store of Soldiers to this town. Count George of Sepusa was also there with
300. horse good and bad, and 1200. foot, or there abouts. Thither Succors
from the Pope.
also came Hanibal Carthaginois of Cyprus, with 1300. Soldiers, leauied
Pollanders came to the succor.
they are held commendable people, surpass all the rest, they were under the
conduct of Leonard Gnomsky, who was said to be a man very expert and ingenious
to lodge and seat a Camp, for which experience he was chosen and allowed. At
the same instant came to that town Paul Vardagy Bishop of Agria: Francis Peren
Bishop of Varadin, and many other, as well Bishops as Seculars. During their
abode, almost every day they sat in Wylak taken by the Turks.
Castles which were along Danubius. The said Count Palatine was then presently
dispatched to seize upon the passage of Drauus, before the enemy approaced.
Many of the principal men were commanded to follow The priueledges of the
Barons of Hungary.
with their troops; but many notwithstanding repugned the Kings command,
under the color of their priueledges and custom of the Barons, which is, not
to go to the war, but under the Royal ensign: in regard whereof this
enterprise was omitted, although that the Palatine, notwithstanding his grief,
did endeavor himself, and gave sufficient demonstration, not to refuse any
travail or labor. He being on his journey to go before to Mugach or Mohacz,
and not being followed by any of those, the King even in open Council, where
the affairs were treated of, being moved by their undutiful allegiance, said;
I see, quoth he, (being willing to put his words in writing) that every one
would assure his own head, by the danger of mine. But as for my part, I am
marched, as you see, even unto this place, and do willingly thrust my self
into this danger, and to expose my person against all hazards of fortune, for
the safety of you and the kingdom. For fear then least any should excuse his
own cowardlines upon the safety of my life, and that nothing should be
imputed to my proceedings in time to come, I will (by Gods grace) march to
morrow with you in person, into that place which you would not

These vehement words being spoken, and this sudden resolution being
apprehended by the applauding of many, but with the admiration of all those
present; proclamation was presently made of his departure the next day.
Certain of the wiser and grauer heads, who were not ignorant of the great
inconvenience which might happen of this inconsiderate voyage, importuned to
dissuade the contrary, but it was in vain. The Army being then dislodged
from Tholne, upon the even of the assumption of our Lady, they arrived at the
town of Zeckzard, and the day following at Batha. Upon this brute and
certain knowledge which was had of the Turkish George Pauline Bishop of
Boznia, a man of good and commendable life, and well seen in the civil Law,
was sent unto Paul Tomoree to advertise him of what he knew, and that he should
find the King in that place.

They being all arrived in this town, and the time requiring to make election
of some one to command the Army (which was deferred until that day, not
without great ill hap of oversight:) the King having heard the particular
advise of every one, and seeing the greatest part esteemed the Paul Tomoree a
graie Friar chief commander of the Army.
George of Sepusa, brother to the Vayuode. Yet all of them notwithstanding
approved not this election, and chiefly they disliked that election which was
made of the Friar: nevertheless all willingly obeyed these Chiefetaines
command.

Tomoree knowing the pleasure of the King to be such, for his own part
refused of a long time this charge, sometime alleging his profession and
ignorance, then the corporal imbecilitie which was in him, not being able to
endure so great travail; saying further, that the King had excellent secular
Lords, to whom this charge did better appertain. He named the George, and
Peren, who although they were young, yet nevertheless had no defect of
understanding, and men who were more worthy to manage and conduct this army
then he. Further, he declared

Having thus as well in public, as in private, used these or the like
speeches, with like protestations in vain: the King notwithstanding proclaimed
him Lieutenant of the Army, giving him (as we have said) Count George,
brother of the Vayuode, for his companion and colleague. He also would not have
accepted of this charge, and instantly desired that his Majesty Paul (for so
he called him) and that so soon as his own brother the Vayuode should arrive,
it should be permitted him to be dismissed of his charge. This was easily
granted him, for that already it was determined at the beginning to make the
Vayuode, with Paul Tomoree and Count Christopher, commanders of the Army.

After the election of these Chieftaines, they went together to take council,
concerning a place convenient and commodious to incampe themselves near the
town of Mohacz. This town apperteyned to the Bishopric The description of
Mohacz and the place of the battle.
Batha and the mouth of Drauus. A little above Batha, Danubius does begin to
open, and make two currants, of which the largest stream runs a long the
further Hungry, and passes with a gentle calm source, stretching it self in
those great and large plains. The other part waters the towns of Batha and
Mohacz. These two arms of one river, joining together again in one, and
shutting up beneath Mohacz, make an Island. This borrowgh or town of Mohacz, is
sufficiently known: it is environed on all sides with a great plain, which is
not any thing covered either with woods or hills. Toward the West, it looks
to the town of five Churches, a town of good fame Tomoree was encamped with
five or 6000. horse, who were part of those which at the first were gathered
together, and part of others, who with Peter Peren, and other Captains,

The place then being chosen commodious, to lodge the Army by Mohacz, and the
same being directed and appointed by Leonard Gnomsky, and the quarters thereof
for every company: Tomoree went with Peter Peren to his Soldiers, who were
yet encamped beyond the Marshes (as has been said) to lead them, if they
could, to the Kings Camp. They being now arrived

Whilst these soldiers did thus vaunt themselves, all the army was lodged
almost entirely together, every man in his quarter. The King did not yet depart
from the town of Ville-neufue of the Macedonians, which is between Batha and
Mohacz, having with him but a small troop, being there in great danger, if the
enemy, who was not far of, might have discovered Michael Podnamisky, coming
from the Camp, and sent on the behalf of the Commanders, who came to give
advertisement, that the Turk had already passed the river of Drauus, with the
greatest part of his army, and that the rest followed with all expedition;
that the fight could not be deferred; that all the Captains vrgently
importuned his Majesty to come with all diligence to the Camp, and advise
with them concerning the battle.

The King understanding this news by Podnamisky, called to council that small
company that was with him, acquainting them with this business, demanding of
them what was to be done in so doubtful and urgent a matter. His Majesty then
did call to mind the counsel and opinion which the Vayuode and Count
Christopher had sent him, by those who were dispatched toward them, who
certain days before were returned, by which advertisement from them both,
they greatly blamed the counsel of those who had brought the King into that
place so near the enemy, before it was time, John Statile, that he would
bring with him from Transiluania great troops of soldiers, who for force and
number should be so secure, that the King, upon their fidelity and valor,
might have a special hope of victory. This came into the Kings mind, and he
well considered of this counsel; and of the other part he well weighed that
which the Chiefes of the army did importune him, to whom if he condiscended
not, Christopher, and that if in the mean time the enemy approached nearer,
or pressed, them, whither they should remove the Camp into some other place of
better safety. For this cause he sent to the Camp (even at the same instant
that Podnamisky was come) the Chauncellor (who was Christopher, and to explain
unto them how clear and apparent the ruin of the kingdom was, if the King,
with so many Princes, and the flower of all the Nobility of the realm, should
expose themselves to so eminent a danger. For if it happened (which we ought
to be mindful of, considering the multitude of soldiers, and the great
preparation Christopher with the Croatians, Bohemians, Morauians, Slesians, and
other succors should come: that Hungary should so many Lords, and such brave
soldiers remaining safe, and preserving all

The Chauncellor having the same night made this speech, first of all to the
chiefest, visiting and talking with them apart, and after in general to all
the Council: his reasons nevertheless were of so small efficacy, as if he
had said nothing to them: such was the haughty courage of every one, being
eager to fight under a vain hope of victory, being notwithstanding otherwise
by a certain fear withheld, which did hinder them from dissuading the fight,
although the contrary was so earnestly desired by the soldiers.

The King then came by break of day to his Camp, and for that the vessels
which did bring by water his Majesty's Tents and Pauilions, were not yet come
from Buda, he retired himself for the present into a Bishops house, which was
adjoining to the town, there to prove that, which as yet he understood not by
the Chauncellor. They commanded the Counselors of all estates and nations, to
assemble before the King, which failed not presently to visit him with many
expert Captains and hardy soldiers, among whom were certain Bohemians and
Morauians, who were already arrived there. In this assembly it was propounded
to the Counselors and soldiers what was needful to be done, not any being
yet come from Paul Tomoree, who Paul Tomoree advises to fight.
the night before, was commanded to come from the other Camp for the Tomoree
answered; touching the first point, in his judgment, he thought that there
were no more but 20000. fighting men, as well in the Kings Camp, as in his
(those two being divided, as we have said): Tomoree presently adjoined unto
his former speeches, that for all their multitude they were not to fear the^,
in regard that their great number was for the most part without armor, and not
any thing acquainted with the war. The King further demanded, how many he
thought the enemies were, armed, and in state to fight. Tomoree answered,
Tomoree said, the Turks had 300. great Cannons.

In the mean time whilst that these affairs were considered of, as well by
the counsel and instigation of the Friar, as by the desire, and courage of all
the soldiers, greatly importuning to fight (except such, whowere, I know not
how, possessed by a foolish fear, that durst not proffer themselves, nor openly
declare their opinions:) there came at that time certain messengers from the
other Camp, who being admitted before the Council, said, that

Upon such speeches so vehemently urged in the Counell, the Kings presence, and
of all the other Lords; there being also those among them, who were of a
founder and deeper judgment, for the good of the common Christopher, or the
Bohemians, could in time arrive at the day of battle. Francis Bathian, Ban of
Croatia, (who was at that time not far from the five Churches with his
troops of Slauonians) gave some hope to be at the Camp within two days, as
it afterward fell out. There were some among them (after all things being
determined, and the Council risen) that did greatly blame the resolution,
which was determined, so suddenly to fight. Francis Peren Bishop of Varadin
was one of them, a man young, quick, and of a brave spirit, who wrote and
indicted his letters so excellently Thomas Zalahazy Bishop of Vesprimia. But yet
he had been far more commended, if he had as well employed his wit to virtue,
as he otherways spent his time in slourh, and other frivolous matters, in the
which young men of good parentage, do too often take pleasure in, to their
own ruin, and overthrow of their Country. He then, as it were, divining of
that which presently happened; said to the King, and not without great
admiration of all the standers by: that that day which was appointed Spoken
merrily and earnestly.
to fight (since their resolution was such) should be dedicated unto 20000.
Hungarian Martyrs (the number of the Army being no more) slain for the
religion of Jesus Christ, under the conduct of Paul Tomoree, and that they
should send the Chauncelor to Rome, to have them canonised (as men say) if so
be he then escaped the battle, for that he was well known to the Pope, and
Cardinals, by reason of an embassage which he had been used in, to his Holiness.

I would to God that this Bishop had been a false Prophet. There may Reason
persuading unto fight.
be some that would accuse the Hungarians of over much temeritie, for that they
so fervently desired the Battle, and they say this hardness ought rather
Tomoree, had some secret notice, and special practices with many of the
Turkish army, namely with those who were Christians, or with such as were
borne of Christian parents, Tomoree went to his Camp, which, as we have said,
was not far from thence, and with much a do persuaded his men to retire a
little back, and Alexis Turzon with certain Cannons: himself with the Bishop
of Vesprimia were remaining at Buda with the Queen. These two were appointed
for the guarde and security of her Majesty, and did serve her at the retraict
and flight, which afterward she was constrained John Tahy, John Banfy, and
certain other of the principal Lords of the kingdom of Slauonia. The day
following, there came also in the morning to the Camp (the King being there
and ranged his men in Battle, for that it was thought the same day the enemy
would fight) Simon Erdeund Bishop of Peter Erdeund, bringing with them in good
order and well armed, more then 700. horse. At the same time came thither
Stephen Azel with 300. horse, which John Bornemisse had sent to the aid of the
King, with many thousands of crowns, which was the last present, made by the
father to his nursling. About the evening of the same day John Zerechen came
with 2000. foot, which he had gathered along the river Drauus, as well in his
own territories, as in the Chapter of the Church of the five Churches, they
being reported to be very good archers. During these three days, many other
came to the Camp, especially those who were nigh, among whom Philip More
Bishop of the five Churches, and his brother Vladislas More. The forces of
Lewis and of Solomon.
This Army being thus assembled together to the number of 24. or 25000. men,
not counting the companies which were on the water, who served not at the day
of Battle, the enemy being with his puissant Army of 300000. men, no
further from them then two miles: three days were expyred before the Battle
was begun, during which time, daily skirmishes, and fine stratagems
interchangeably past between them, wherein still the Turks received more
damage then the Hungars. In the time of their aboade, it was also consulted how
and in what place they should fight with the enemy, and in what sort they
should ordain and range the Battle, and in what place thereof they should
appoint the King to be: where and how they should The means to preserve the
Kings person in the Battle.
of his Majesty, some were of opinion, that it was convenient for him to be a
good distance from the Battle, with some thousands of his best troops, but
seeing the Army could not spare them, and for that the soldiers would have
him present therein, (following their ancient custom) it was advised that
some one should represent his person in his coate-armour: but presently they
thought that the same could not be done without being discovered, and without
great tumult of the Army; the which by this deed would be Jasper Raskay, to
Valentine Toronke, and to John Kalay, most excellent men, and doubtless very
faithful to the King. There was also appointed certain swift and light
horses, by means of which the King might escape, if need required.

But now to come to the order of the battle: there were many, and amongst The
order of the Bataile.
others, Leonard Gnomsky was of opinion, that it should be very needful to
inskonse the army with the wagons (whereof the Camp was sufficiently
furnished) like the fight at Barriers and upon a Bulwark, alleging, that by
that means they should frustrate and annoy the enemy from their hemming them
in, which was the only and material thing they most feared. Radich Bosich did
well allow of this devise, as also Paul Bacchie, who was Soliman against his
enemies. This counsel then was accepted of, and thought good by all; the
execution whereof was committed to Gnomsky, and certain other, but it was
effected more slowly then was needful, for it was but thought upon the night
before the battle: and so this policy, among many other, was quite
neglected. The 29. of August (which is dedicated to the beheadding of S. John)
being the day of battle, the army of the Hungars was ranged and lead by
those (which we have spoken of) in such sort, that they advanced the front of
their army as far as was possible, to the end, they might be the less
enclosed by the enemy, and after they divided it into two battalions. In the
first, the Commanders thereof had no certain place of aboade, but thought John
Tahy; and the left wing was governed by Peter Peren, in the absence of the
Vayuode of Transiluania. In the first battalion there was many of the
principallest of the army, and among them there was Anthony Poloczy, Francis
Hommonay, Gabriel Peren, Thomas Zechy, Andrew Battor, Emeric Cibak, and many
others. The artillery was planted next after the first ranks.

The second Battalion, which we commonly name the maine battle, and in which
was placed the King, was more furnished with horsemen then Nicholas Tharczay, a
man of good courage, and very faithful to his Prince. There were also the two
Controlers of the Kings house, Peter Korlatkey, and Andrew Trepka, Polanders.
Stephen Slijk, a Bohemian, was with the Bohemians and Morauians hard by the
Kings person, and before him. After the

Of spirit, beauty, and virtue all one
With that which is celestial,
Bearing a mind to his countries boon,
But Destinies made denial.
Upon the right hand of the King was the Archbishop of Strigonium, and the
Bishop of Zagrabia; and the Bishop of Agria was sent from Batha to Buda. Next
unto him of Zagrabia, were the Bishops of Varadine, the five Churches, and of
Sirmia. Those of Iauarin and Vacchia, were upon the left he did valiantly his
duty, sometimes being in the Vauntgard, and by and by in the battle. Whilst
the Palatine continued not in his Czetricz, Malliart, and Horuuath, Master of
his horse. All these Lords had behind them the best and most resolute men they
could choose for their guard and defense. In the midst of this battle was seen
the Ensign royal, which was borne by John Dragfy, Marshall of the Kings
house, which among the Seculars is the third dignity next to the King. This
battle was environed with light horse, and certain footmen upon the flanks.
Upon the right wing, after the Bishops and Secretaries, were ranged these three
ranks, in which (as we have set down) was placed the Kings person. The place
wherein this army was The place of the battle.
from Danubius half a mile, having near unto it a long and large plain,
which was not any thing annoyed with wood, bushes, hills, or water; but only
upon the left hand toward Danubius, there was a muddie marish, and ouergrowne
with rushes, within the which afterward many men lost their lives. Before the
army, a far off, was a little hill, which was of great length, and in form
of a Theater, behind the which Soliman was encamped. At the foot of this hill
there was a little village with a Church, it was named Feulduuar, and in that
village was planted the artillery of the enemy, with many soldiers,
specially of Ianisaries, who on this side the houses of the Soliman, as after
was known. This artillery being thus planted, was as in a valley, and for
that cause was less offensive to the Hungars, then if it had been upon the
plain, in so much that the fear thereof was more offensive, then the hurt.
The army being thus ranged in good order, in the morning presently after the
Sun was up, the day being clear and calm, Count Palatine lead the King out
of his place, and did Count Palatine shows the person of the King, to
encourage the Hungars.
show him to all the soldiers, riding along the ranks of the army, as he
had done the same three days before, to the end, to frustrate the distrust
which some had, that his Majesty was not present in the battle, openly
showing

After that the King and Count Palatine had thus reuisited all the ranks of
his men of arms and footmen, and used to all of them the like orations, the
King retired to his former place. A great part of the day was spent in
attending 1
to draw the Hungars within the straights of these hills; or faining to defer 2
the fight until the next day; he might in the mean time assail them, and in
the night following (they being unprovided) to set upon them in their Camp,
which he might easily do, as well for the infinite number of his people, as
also for the great store of Cannon which he had: or else that he might 3
rather molest them by a protracting fight. They knew not which of these three
devises the enemy would execute, but all the day the Hungars were in

The Friar thinking that they which now came in sight were of the Vauntgard, to
force and break his Camp, or to enuiron his people, commanded Jasper Raskay,
with two others, who were appointed for the guard of the Kings person (as is
said before) to discover what the enemy would attempt, and force them take
some other way. Jasper knowing what charge was committed to him, to have a
special eye and care of the Kings person, most honestly refused (as much as he
could) that commission: but in the end perceiving Paul does importune the fight.
motion, came with his companion toward the King, and did advise him in any
case not to delay the fight, alleging, that there was less danger to fight
now with part of the enemies army, then to stay until the next day, at which
time he was to fight against all their army, and as for the rest, he needed
not to doubt of victory. At this his speeches, the King incontinently
commanded to sound the alarm, and presently all the Trumpets, Clarions, and
Drums made a marvelous and terrifying noise, and all the soldiers
(following their accustomed manner) inuocating the name of Jesus, made a
Soliman himself. Then they gave the King his head-peece, who upon the receipt
thereof, looked very pale, as a presaging of evil fortune at hand. And then
the signal to A sign of evil hap to the King.
fight was given to those who were in front, who very courageously charged The
beginning of the battle.
the enemy, and all their artillery was also made ready and discharged. But
Andrew Battor hasted to the King, declaring to him that the Turks had turned
their backs, that the victory was now in him, that he should not doubt but
set forward, and that it was needful presently to second his men, who were in
chase of the enemy that fled. The loss of the King.
for that he passed beyond the first ranks, which were before him, (as we
have noted, and as was before determined upon, to the end that he should not
be too much known, remaining in the same place) or whether that he was forced
from the danger by those who were behind him, for both the one and the other
might well be. Some said, that having gone beyond the ranks which were near
him, he thrust himself into the front of the battle, where he valiantly
fought with the enemy: but neither dare I affirm it, nor altogether deny it.
For my part I know this for truth, that These are the words of Broderic,
Chauncellor of Hungary, who was present at the battle.
he was not found in that place, neither in the rank wherein he was at the
beginning, after the Cannon of the enemy began to play, and when those of the
left wing of the Vandgard were seen to fly. At the same instant was missing
the Archbishop of Strigonium, who was side by side by the King, and also
certain others who were by his Majesty. I will not impose this fault of the
loss of our King upon those, to whom he was committed in custody, nor to
those (which may be) carried him by force, or ill hap out of the battile; but
even to the hard fortune of the Hungars, to the end that together with the
loss of their King, they might not only suffer that which they endured of a
stranger, but also endure the infinite evil which they afterward him, it is
most certain they could not return from the enemy, against whom they had
been sent, before our army was put to flight: yea one of

The battle of the Hungars being greatly troubled by this inconvenience, as
we have said, and shaken in such manner, that it altogether tended to a
flight; nevertheless they fought a long time, not in that large plain, but
even before the Cannons mouth of the enemy, which was but ten paces from them:
so that the Hungars, as well for the fear which they had thereof, as for the
smoke which darkened them, were forced, for the most The discomfiture of the
Hungars.
to flight, they also were forced to turn their backs. Every man then, as his
commodity would serve, began to fly, drawing for the most part toward that
place, wherein an hour before they had passed in great mirth and brauings, and
full of hope to obtain the victory, traversing their Camp, which was now
already sacked and rased by the enemies, wherein there was nothing

The Turks seeing the flight of the Hungars, thinking it to be but some
stratagem, or else feeling themselves weary of the fight, continued a long
time at a stay, in so much that they did not pursue them, in respect of the
night, which had already covered all the earth. This partly was the cause, and
also the vehement rain that fell that night, for the safeguard and preservation
of many. The violence of the fight endured at the most but an hour and a
half, and many were swallowed up and smothered within that marish. The body
of the King (who was said to have ended his days in that The body of the King
found dead.
place) was afterward found in a great whirle, or rift of earth, above Mohacz,
when he was newly borne, he had no skin that covered his body, which he
nevertheless recovered by the help of Physicians, who by their art succored
A strange aparation.
(as the custom was) a certain Ghost in form and shape of a man, evil
favored, with crookedlegs, came haulting and knocked at the gate, and with a
loud shrill voice, desired to speak with the King, to acquainte him with
Saul; but yet different, for that which the one required was not offered to
him; but this of it self, was presented without seeking for it, which one may
enterpret diverse ways.

But let us return again to the subject of our history. In this place where
Andrew Trepka, and Stephen Azel. It is said that the Friar ended his life
valliantly fighting in the Vauntgard; the day following his head being cut off,
was carried upon the top of a lance round about the enemies Camp, in token of
joy, and some said, that it was for a time placed before the Pauilion of
Soliman. The day after the Battle 1500. Hungers who were taken prisoners,
among whom were the chiefest of the Nobility, being all commanded to be set
in a round form, were presently beheaded, their blood, serving in stead of a
sacrifice to the Gods of these Infidels. Very few prisoners had been saved, if
it had not been to inform Soliman, and Abraham Bascha were desirous to know.
Among those was Nicholas surnamed Hertzek, which in the Hungarish language
signifies Duke, as he was indeed, and the Kings Treasorer. John Pileczky, and
John Maczieouusky Polanders were also of that number. They were gentelmen of
the Kings chamber, and being returned unto the Queen, they discovered many
matters, which for the brevity of this history we will omit to write of.
Michael Fekete, and Bartholmew Martine were also saved from death, and within a
while after were redeemed, paying a great ransom. Among those which dyed in
the fight and flight, besides the King, were these: Ladislas Salcane Archbishop
These slain in the Battle.
of Strigonium; Paul Tomoree Bishop of Colocense and Lieutenaunt general of
the Army: Francis Peren Bishop of Varadine: Philip More Bishop of the five
Churches: Blaise Paxy Bishop of Iauerin: Francis Gzacholy Bishop of Chenat:
George of Pauline Bishop of Bosnia: George of Zapolia Count of Sepusa the other
commander of the Army: John Dragfy Provost of the Kings house: Francis Orzag
chief gentelmen of the Kings chamber: Peter Corlathy, and Andrew Trepka
Captains of the watch at the gate: Simon Horuuath the Thomas Zechy: Gabriel
Peren: Ambriose Zarchan: Anthony Poloczy: Mathias Czethingny, Count of
Francapin: Sigismonde Bransy: Francis Hampo: John Bathian: Stephen Slyk a
Bohemian, with certain other Bohemians and Morauians. And these were the
principal Barons of Hungary. Among the Nobles and other Lords of the
Country, there are worthy of note Francis Balasse: Nicholas Tharza: John
Paxy: John Istuuanfy: Emeric Warday: Michael Podnamisky: George Orlouuchicz
Captain of Segin: Stephen Azel Castelane of Poson: Sigismonde Pogan: John
Torualy: John and Stephen Kalnay: Nicholas Forgach, and besides these about
500. other. As for the foot men, there escaped three or four thousand, and
they were in all 12. or Hanibal Cypryan. All the pieces of Artillery as well
those which were planted before the Battle, as those which were remaining
within the Camp, and in the boats, were all taken by the enemy; the charge
thereof was given too late, being but the night before the fight, to John
Hadek, a man of good courage, and well managed in such affairs, and who had
always frequented the Kings court, of whom he was so loved, that few had the
like favor of his Majesty. The night and day after this unfortunate Battle,
the enemies running all over, made wonderful waste and ruin of all the
neighbor countries, set fire on all, not sparing any person, having no regard
to sex nor age, nor to march with that expedition as he would, and desiring
notwithstanding to be at this battle, which, as he understood, could not in
any sort be deferred, Christopher was also arrived at Zagrabia. One part of the
Bohemians which came to succor the King, were about Iauerine, and the rest
were not far from Alberegalis. George Marquese of Brandenburg, and the
Chauncellor of Bohemia named Adam Newhuis, were about the same quarter.

The Queen understanding this untimely news, of such an unfortunate The
retraict of Queen Marie.
overthrow, suddenly retired her self, with the Bishop of Vesprimia, Alexis
Thurson, and the Popes Nuntio, to Poson, which the Hungars name Presburge, and
transported the best and richest of her mouables by Danubius, Andrew Orbancz,
who commanded the Castle of Strigonium, which at this day is called Gran.
Nevertheless, he that writes this history, and recites this vile and
infamous outrage, does greatly err, when he added to it, that certain of his
light horsemen (who are commonly called Vssarons) behaved themselves toward
the Queens maids, otherwise then their honors required, for that in a
meriment they put off their shoes to dance with them.

The Emperor Soliman soiourning there a certain time where the battle was
fought, and after having reunited together all his companies, the which he had
sent here and there to ruinate and spoil the country, set forward toward
Buda, and there within six or seven nights he arrived himself, marching
along the shore of Danubius, fiering all the towns, boroughes, Buda taken by
the Turks.
and villages by the which he passed. He found this town forsaken of all the
garrison, and caused it to be fired, not any thing being exempted from the
violence thereof, but the Castle, and the Kings stables, and the house of wild
beasts.

From thence the Turk sent many horsemen to spoil and rob the country on
this side the river. They put all to fire and sword whom they met between
Waste made through all Hungary by the Turks.
Andrew Orbancz, of whom we have spoken before, nevertheless it was valiantly
defended and Places forsaken by the Captains, and preserved by men of mean
condition.
preserved by a man of base and servile condition, and who a little before lead
to the war the footmen of the Chapter of the great Church of the town called
Mathieu Nagh, he being retired thither with a few men. The Fortress of
Vissegrade, wherein the royal Crown was always kept, was also saved by the
Peasants, and Friars, it being forsaken of the soldiers: so greatly was every
man amazed at the Turks coming unto Buda. These

As these Barbarians did exercise their enormious cruelties in every corner, so
there was no place in Hungary where they had more resistance, then at Maroth
by Strigonium. This was a fine place of retire, and pleasantly The great
massacre of the Hungars happened in Maroth.
seated, belonging to the Archbishop of Strigonium, situated in the midst of
those Forests, which we name Wiertesies, with which it is compassed about.
Into the said place certain thousands of Hungars retired themselves, with
their wives and children, trusting upon the straight and narrow passages which
were strongly shut up. With those the enemy often came to handy strokes, and
always they received the worst, and were put to the foil. In the end, the
Turks seeing by no means they could force the barracado, which the Hungars had
made with their wagons, they were constrained to bring thither their
artillery, by means whereof al those wagons and other such defenses were
broken and ouerthwrone to the ground, and almost all the people 200000. Hungars
slain and overthrown.
of Drauus unto Iauerine, being thus spoiled and harried with the Infidels (as
we have said) not without the great astonishment of the neighbor countries
adjoining, others further remote, and even of those of Vienna: Soliman also
causing a bridge to be made over Danubius, which reached to Pesthe, the 14. day
after he was arrived at Buda, transported his men to the other side of
Hungary, where he made the like waste, as he made on this side.

The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF HVNGARIE.
THE ARGUMENT OF THE SECOND BOOK.
AFter that the Hungarians were thus overthrown, Solomon inuesteth John Zapoly
(who was Vayuode of Transiluania) in the kingdom of Hungary, and then he
returned to Constantinople: whereupon Ferdinand of Austria pretending title to
that kingdom, and seeing he could not obtain it by peace, enters thereinto
with a great army, and John forsakes Buda, and retireth into Transiluania, is
pursued by Ferdinandoes forces, and overthrown, who then flies into Polonia,
and Ferdinand is crowned King of Hungary. John seeks aid of Solomon, who
undertakes his defense: whereupon Ferdinand sends to Solomon for peace, but
he denounces war against him, and enters into Hungary with a puissant
army, who takes Buda and Altenburg, and besieges Vienna, from whence he is
repulsed and discouraged by the gallant exploytes and resolution of the
assieged, and in the end retireth from thence. Many hostilities pass between
Ferdinand and John, and after an agreement made between them, John dies, and
left a son named Stephen, to whom was governor Izabella his mother, and one
Friar George. After John's death, Ferdinand sent to the Queen for the yielding
up of the kingdom of Hungary, which now he pretended title unto, but is
denied by George, who, to withstand him, demands aid of the Turk.
Ferdinand sends forces into Hungary, besieges Buda, and is there
overthrown by Solymans army, who takes Pesthe. Mustafa warreth in
Transiluania against Malliat, Ferdinandoes Lieutenant there. Malliat is
betrayed, taken, and sent with other prisoners to Constantinople, who there
dyed, and the Transiluanians swear homage to young Stephen, whom Solomon
greatly desires to see, who is sent, accompanied with many of the Nobility,
and are all detained prisoners but only Stephen, whom he returns again to
his mother at Buda, which treacherously is taken by the Turks, and Queen
Izabella dispossessed thereof, and sent into Transiluania to govern there.
Ferdinand again sends to Solomon to demand peace, and to be invested King
of Hungary by him, who returns him a most scornful answer. The Queen
being received into Transiluania, George manageth all things, and little
esteems the Queen.

AFter that the Hungarians had received this cruel overthrow at Mohacz,
wherein were slain about 30000. men, with many of the chiefest Lords and
gentlemen of the country; and after that Lewis their last King was thus
stifled in this Quagmire or Marish of the aforesaid place, Solomon Ottomans,
The custom of the Turkish Emperors.
(which is, that the Prince ought rather to repose himself in his army, then
to be enclosed within a wall) would not therefore rest himself therein one
night, but presently retired himself into his Pauilions in the midst of his
Camp, which was hard adjoining to the town; whither being come, there was
presented to him seven Bishops heads, and the heads of other Hungars, being of
the number of those who were left dead in the field, Ladislas Salcane
Archbishop of Strigonium, who for his extreme covetousness was greatly The
censure of Solomon concerning the Hungarish Lords, who were slain in the
battle.
blamed of Solomon, in respect he would neither aid the King, nor himself,
with his treasure, which was found about him to be very great. There was also
much fault imputed to George Sepusa, brother to John Vayuode of Transiluania,
for his riches: and also to Paul Tomoree, Bishop of Colocense, for his riches,
who further was condemned for his imprudencie and rashness, having so foolishly,
and without reason, counseled Lewis to fight with so little an army, against
one who was eight times as great and mighty. But on the other side, Peter
Peren Bishop of Varadin, was greatly commended and esteemed, for that
contradicting the opinion of Tomoree, he advised in any

And after that Solomon had seen and viewed all those, and had given his
soldiers leave to spoil and massacre (who failed not presently to cut,
mangle, and cruelly tear them in pieces) they presented unto him the pictures
of Lewis and Marie his wife, upon which casting his eyes, and considering their
The compassion of Solomon upon the fortune of Lewis and Mary.
young years, he lamented their sinister fortune, greatly blaming all their
Counselors, who rashly advised them to fall into such extreme misery: Lewis,
the which had taken from him all means whereby in effect he might show the
truth of his words, the which were, that he would have placed him again in his
fathers kingdom, under certain good conditions of an honest and reasonable
tribute. But he now seeing this Realm to be unprovided of a King, and that
there was not any of the blood, to whom it ought of right to be given; it
seemed that he was willingly inclined to inuest John the Vayuode therein:
always provided that he were found to be of the blood of Lewis, or at the
least, to be

Whilst he retained his Camp about Buda, he sent into diverse quarters the
greatest part of his Army, to pill and wast the champian Country and
neighboring places, leading with them an infinite number of prisoners, and an
inestimable booty, giving to all the Provinces thereabouts an incredible
amazement, there being by so cruel and sudden a surprise, taken and put to
death more then 250000. souls. After which he minding to retire into Brazen
Statues carried from Buda to Constantinople.
brazen Statues of Apollo, Diana, and Hercules, which with marvelous art and
judgment were made by King Mathias Coruin, for an ornament of that place. And
besides those, he caused to be carried away certain brazen Colombes, with some
great pieces of Artillery, (which in times past were belonging to the King of
Bosnia) and caused them in token of victory to be Solomon his returning to
Constantinople.
transported to Constantinople, and he willed they should be erected in the
market place, to the end they should publicly be seen and admired; and not
long after, himself arrived in the same City in great triumph.

In this time John Sepusa the Vayuode, conducting the Soldiers of John Zapoly
Count of Sepusa, Vayuod of Transiluania, aspyred to the crown of Hungary.
Transiluania to the aid of the King, and being arrived too late, even at the
time they were defeated, and brought into the extremity of misery: seeing now
there was none left of the blood royal, who might succeed in the Kingdom,
began then in himself to aspire to that high degree: and this did he so much
the rather, for that he found himself amongst these people in great esteem,
and conceived no small hope of it, by reason of the victory which he a little
before had against the Peasants, who did rise against the gentlemen; (in
respect whereof the principal of the land bore him some favor) thus taking
heart and courage to him (using notwithstanding wise Stephen Battor fell out
fitly for his purpose, who was gone toward Ferdinand, and unto whom (because
Stephen Battor the chiefest among the Princes of Hungary.
both in respect of his Nobility, and of his blood, being one of the
principal) the administration and government of the kingdom appertained
rather, then unto John. There being then assembled at the Diet, held at
Alberegalis, all the great Lords of Hungary: whither was brought the dead
body of the unfortunate Lewis, which a little before was drawn out of the
Marish at Mugach, to be there enterred with royal pomp, and intombed in the
Sepulcher of his ancestors; and where (after such magnificall and sumptuous
The funeral of Lewis.
funerals were selebrated, accustomably done for so great a King, there was
incontinently published the foresaid Diet, and the Council of the Soldiers
Rhakos) was called thither by the authority and disposition whereof the King
ought to be chosen. In this assembly John the Vayuode not finding any
Competitour, with John Zapoly Vayuode, chosen King of Hungary.
the general consent and good liking of every one, was chosen King, and
crowned with the ancient crown of gold, (which then was in the coustodie of
Peter Peren) by Paul Archbishop of Strigonium, and by Stephen Broderic

After that the feasts and triumphs (accustomed to be done at such Coronations)
were consummated, King John made John Emeric Cibacchy Bishop of Emeric Cibacchy
Bishop Varadin, and Vayuode of Transiluania.
Varadin, and Vayuode of Transiluania, disposing afterward among gentlemen of
other degree (according to their qualities) martial preferments, and in like
sort with great discretion and indifferency, in general toward the people,
and especially toward those who were at his Coronation, and who were the
principal cause and means for him to aspire unto that puissant dignity of
such a kingdom. Of the number of those were Stephen Verbetz, Nicholas Glesse,
Gregory Peschen, Paul Artand, and all the Colonels, Captains of soldiers
and men of war, who were come out of Transiluania, and many other. Whilst he
was intentive to confirm and strengthen his forces in this his new inuestiture
of the kingdom, by all good and vigilant means, Ferdinand, who not long since
as heir of Ladislas (who by the deceit of George Pogghy Bracchy, aspiring to
such a Seigniorie, was upon The pretenses of Ferdinand of Austria to the Crown
of Hungary.
the day of his marriage poisoned) setting before him his reasons
(notwithstanding the ancient strife which had been between Mathias Coruin and
the Emperor Frederick his great grandfather) was chosen King of Bohemia, and
perceiving himself to wax great, and more puissant and mighty, Albert of
Austria, and of Anne his wife, sister to the late King Lewis, wanting not
thereto the aid of many great Hungarian personages, who being already pricked
with new alterations, and extreme greedines of novelties, and besides, for the
secret envy they bore to King John, were retired to Ferdinand, instantly
inciting him to make war upon John, assuring him also that he was created
King more tumultuarily, then legitimately, by the common people, being deceived
therein by his craft and subtlety, there being (besides Battor) many other
within the John: and namely, those were Balthazar Pamphille, Iaspar Sered, Paul
Bacchit, Ference Guena, Valentine Turkey, Stephen Maillat, and John Salle,
besides many other whom they named not. At the vehement persuasion Ferdinand
enters Hungary with a great army.
of those, Ferdinand (who of himself was willingly inclined thereunto)
gathering together a great army, as well foot, as men of arms of Bohemia,
Austria, Germany, and other places, drew himself directly toward Buda. Upon
his arrival, John finding himself environed with extreme lack of all
necessaries, was greatly troubled, wanting sufficient forces to resist the
mightines of his enemy: and seeing all things in a feeble and weak John
forsakes Buda, and retireth himself into Transiluania.
and there (as the shortness of the time served) exhorted and desired his
Captains, not to forsake him during these turbulent broils, in the midst
whereof they saw himself deeply plunged: and thus in great haste they flying,
passed the river of Thyssa, anciently called Tibiscus, and lodged in a Castle
Ferdinand, incontinently he caused his army to enter and possess the town of
Buda, who without the loss of any one man, was master thereof. He stayed not
there long, but the Council assembled together, to know whether they should
follow King John, or no. Among the diversity of opinions, it was thought best
that at all adventures they should pursue him, before he migth be able to
increase his forces, and to admit him no time to repose himself in any one
place, nor to expect for any aid out of any place, and to perform that even
now, while he was disfurnished of men and counsel, and in a manner put to
Ferdinand gave leave to his people to follow King John, as far as they
thought it convenient: whereupon they presently set forward on their journey,
and with great travail, without any delay, arrived at the river of Thyssa,
which they passed with boats that they brought with them upon wagons, and they
in camped by King John, before he was aware, who, for the little or no inckling
he had of them, never dreamt of so sudden a thing. Being astonished at so
present an arrival, he began now to confer with his people, what course was
best to be taken. They answered, that they would fight, and that he should
withdraw himself from the danger thereof, that if it should fall out ill, he
might have sufficient time to Ference Bode, a man of great reputation and well
esteemed, to whom (for his virtue, Ference Bode a valiant Captain.
fidelity, and experience) King John had committed his Standard royal, and
the Lieutenantship General over his army. He foreseeing the miserable
success which might happen of this war, did deliberate and resolve with
himself to dye, rather then to fly or forsake his King by a cowardly and
dishonest flight. And among many opinions and aduises which were propounded 1
is, that we ought to preserve your Majesty safe and sound: and the other, 2
that we may maintain our honor and reputation; for it would be imputed as
a base and servile thing, for us Hungars (who are borne and always and so much
the rather also, as the necessity of this war does take away all benefit and
commodity of the time, by the sudden arrival of our enemies: and yet more
then

These speeches being ended, presently he began to form and order his
Battle, committing the right and left wings to the Transiluanian soldiers,
The appointment of the Battle.
and to ye Caualary of the same Country, as reposing greater affiance in them,
then in the other, and he impaled himself in the midst of the Hungarish and
other soldiers, newly gathered together. Opposite to these Battalions: the
Ferdinand ordained their squadrons in form of two wings, giving the right to
the soldiers of Austria, and to the horsemen of Bohemia, and the left wing to
the soldiers of Stiria, and to the horsemen of Carinthia, and Valentine was
placed in the midst of all with the royal Standard, environed and followed of
all the Hungars, and Paul Bacchie (a man expert in feats of war, being well
acquainted with Turkish deceites) with a good company of Vsarons (who are like
our light horsemen) withdrew himself into a secret ambush, where he might (as
he did) suddenly assail the hinder part of the Army of King John, and
according to the accidents of fortune, annoy him. At this instant the
soldiers, as well on the one part as on the other (without Ference Bode his
squadrons (who were but fresh water soldiers lately leauied) and passed
through them, and brake their arraies. In the mean while the Hungars as well on
the one part as on the other, valiantly fought with equal art and industry,
force and courage, John's, was broken and overthrown by the Bohemian armed men,
who came in to the skirmish. At this alteration offortune, Bode enforced
himself to reunite certain companies which were dispersed, and again to make
head against the enemy, and to pursue the battle: in executing of which,
Paul Bacchie, who, until then, held himself in covert, and there Bode was the
second The overthrow of King John's army.
time broken, and himself taken prisoner, and all his army defeated and cut
in pieces, and the royal Ensign of John's taken, with all the Artillery and
baggage. King John seeing fortune incline to Ferdinand, and to be opposite to
him, and all his army overthrown; and that there was now no more hope left
unto him of any good, took his flight toward the confines of Sarmatia, John
flies into Polonia.
(which we at this day call Polonia) and the Conquerors ranging all over the
country, reduced Transiluania, with the rest of Hungary, under Ferdinand, to
whom was sent Ference Bode, with all the Ensigns won in the battle, and
many other persons of note, whereof he received great content: and causing the
fidelity of Ference Bode to be sounded, to see if he would forsake John's
part, and swear allegiance to him. But not being able to draw from him in any
sort that he had a meaning to break his oath and promise, which he had given
unto John, he was in the end, by his command, sent prisoner to a Castle,
where, in great penury, and not without a pitiful example of fortune (and to
the great ignominy of him, by whom he was imprisoned) he ended there his life,
having been a man of singular virtue and wisdom, who well might have been
compared to any The death of Ference Bode
one of the ancient or worthy Captains; and one might justly judge, that

Ferdinand obtaining this victory, and publishing at the same time a Diet of
the Hungars, to be held at Alberegalis, was in like sort, after the same
manner, as John was, with Anne his wife, crowned King of Hungary, and that
Ferdinand crowned King of Hungary.
by the hands of the same Archbishop of Strigonium, and of Peter Peren, who had
forsaken King John, who being brought into poor and mean estate, was retired
into Polonia, he being entertained by Hieromic Lasky, a Hieromic Lasky
receives John.
mighty man both in possessions, and also well followed in those countries,
who exceedingly rejoiced at the arrival of so great a personage, and received
Lasky being of a haughty spirit, and a man who with deep judgment had often
managed affairs of great import, as well in the wars, as in the peaceable
government of a kingdom, and other public Estates: persuaded John that he saw
no other means more behoofull to redress and reduce this present extremity
of his affairs into better order, nor none more proper nor convenient for the
recovery of his kingdom, then that which might befall him by the aid and
help of Solomon the Turkish Emperor. And therefore hold his kingdom of him
by faith and homage, as depending upon the Ottoman house, and to pay him some
reasonable tribute, such as Solomon himself I asky practices at
Constantinople to obtain some succor for John his guest.
between them, Lasky desiring greatly to favor and aid the cause of his
friend, and receiving of John the sum and charge of an Embassage, he set
forward to go toward Constantinople with a good train, where at the length
being arrived, he presently endeavored himself, by gifts, to win the favor
and grace of all the Bashaes, and of the Captains of the grand Seigniours
Port, and of all other principal persons of his Court, who with his presents
he in such sort gained, that they served him as a ladder to mount to the top of
his desires, who being at last admitted to the Turks presence, and after
humble reverence to him made, was by him (according to the custom) Luflefy and
Abraham had the most authority, command, and credit, the one being alied to
the grand Seigniour, because he had married his sister, and the other being a
Visir, Visit.
which is the chief of all officers, and one that keeps the Turks seal,
and signeth all expeditions, or dispatches, Lasky gained, and that beyond all
expectation, these men's amity, by means of their wives, whom he had possessed
and corrupted with rich and costly presents, with whom also he discoursed so
familiarly in the Slauonian and Turkish languages, as if he had been naturally
bred and brought up among them. His fair and good speeches caused him to be
gracious and amiable to all, and by such pleasing courses, John, specially
tending to this purpose, that he might be restored again to his kingdom,
being unjustly chased out of it by the forces of Ferdinand, and by the envy
and wickedness of certain Hungars, being before by them iuridically chosen, and
crowned King; for the recovering of which, he did offer (besides a reasonable
tribute) to acknowledge and hold it of the grand Seigniour, and to be called
the subject of the Ottoman house; and in token of true fidelity and
allegiance, and for the perpetual memory of such a benefit, he would yield
himself to be his subject. Lasky further declaring, that it was better for
Solomon to have King John, with a weak force, for his neighbor Ferdinand, who
because he was brother to the Emperor Charles, and King of Bohemia, and
Archduke of Austria, and Lord of many other countries, would make show rather
to be feared and redoubted by his neighbors: and he further declared, that if
he would not listen thereunto, it might possible be, that one day he would vex
and disturb him more, then he now presently thought of. And besides that, he
should do in this, as beseemed a magnanimious and virtuous Emperor, in ayding
those, who by others are wrongfully oppressed and injured, and to favor the
just cause of him, who for ever should remain his bounden and loyal subject.
These reasons being heard by the Bashaes, and reported to Solomon (who by a
secret Solomon undertakes the defense of John.
resolved to undertake it; with such conditions notwithstanding, that King John
should observe from point to point, all that which he had caused to be promised
him.

In the mean time, Ferdinand not without cause mistrusting (the which indeed
happened) that John might seek aid of the Turk against Ferdinand sends to
Solomon.
and friendship that Ladislas and Lewis, Kings of Hungary, had in former time
sworn with the house of Ottoman, and the which truce the King of Polonia then
enjoyed, not doubting but he would willingly condescend to his demand, if he
would sufficiently apprehend his reasons. For this cause he sent his Ambassador
John Oberdansch to Solomon, to practice and negotiate this confederacy. He
being dispatched, with good expedition arrived at Constantinople, and was
honorably entertained as was fitting for an Ambassador. Solomon, and the
little credit he had amongst his people, and he manifestly knew that King John
had already prevented his purpose. And receiving his answer, that the grand
Seigniour would not by any means accept into friendship, them who in former
time had been such and so great enemies to his house, and by whom his people
had received infinite outrages; and especially considering his Master had so
unjustly usurped that kingdom, which he possessed not, but only by force
expulsing the true King; the just titles and allegations of whom, being before
from him concealed by the late victory which his Master obtained against him,
John in his true and lawful possession. For these causes Solomon Solomon
denounces war against Ferdinand speaking to his Ambassador.
absolutely denied Ferdinand all his demaundes, as unworthy of his friendship,
and instead of peace, he denounced open war, commanding presently his
Ambassador from Constantinople; who with all expedition departed, and within a
short time came to Vienna, imparting to the Kings Counsel what was the issue
of his Embassage. The councillors giving no credit to his words, but judging
his report to be false, sent unto Ferdinand, who then was at the diet at
Spire, and when he heard it, he was greatly

The Spring time approaching, Solomon caused to be proclaimed, that al his The
Army of Solymans in Hungary.
forces of Europe and of Asia should resort to Andrionoplis, where he would
make a general muster, and presently after with great diligence to march to
Belgarde (which is in Hungary) with all his forces where he so iourned not
long, but incontinently King John with a great company of the Hungarian
Nobility, which he brought with him, came to kiss his hands, and to John
kisseth the hands of Solomon.
acknowledge himself to him, as his subject and tributarie. He found him
sitting under a Canapie where he made no great countenance to move himself at
the reuerences which he made, but showing a great Majesty, Solomon said to
him; that he doubted not but with ease to reconquer all that which unjustly had
been taken from him, and that by the justice of his forces, which being done,
he would liberally render it to him again. King John departing from Solomon,
went to visit Abraham Basha, whose friendship he had already obtained, (as is
said before) by means of Lasky, who also was the only cause to procure him
such favor with Solomon, and drew to him Lewis Gritty, who was the son of
Andrew Gritty, Lewis Gritty a Venetian, with the favor of Solomon, aided John.
then Duke of Venice, and who easily and friendly ruled Abraham, and so
familiarly also, that it seemed he could not live without his company. Also
Lasky, as having intelligence of the Bashaes affairs, and with the Lords of
Solymans Court, had specially practiced the friendship of the said Gritty, for
by the industry of him (by means of Abraham Basha) he obtained of the grand
Seigniour that which he desired. And King John had in this so good success,
that he found in this army the aforesaid Abraham.

After that Solomon had reposed himself with his army certain days at
Belgrade, he marched directly to Buda, which was forsaken by the citizens, Buda
taken by the Turks.
under the government of the enemy, without any resistance: only the Fortress
was kept by 700. Germans, who very courageously for a time did their endeavor
to defend it. The Turks seeing they could not so soon be masters thereof as
they thought, began to mine and sap it, whereby they might make the defenses
and walls saultable, and having thoroughly performed it, the fire and the thick
smoke which darkened the element, ascended even to the noses of the assieged,
who greatly feared to be destroyed therein, and seeing their companions
already begin to fly in the air, caused them (maugre Nadasky their Captain,
who commanded that place) to sound a parley and treaty of a composition with
the Turks, conditionally, Solomon, that this composition was only made by the
soldiers, without the agreement of Nadasky their Captain, he presently sent
after them, in the way toward Poson (to which place they would make their
retraict) his Ianisaries to put them to the sword, as unworthy to live, having
already suffered them too long to breathe.

This town and Fortress being thus taken, the army marched directly toward
Vienna, all the Camp resting in the way before Alteburg, which Alteburg taken
by the Turks.
such a fury entered the town, that they put all to the sword. This town
being won, the grand Seigniour was advertised, that he should not now find
any hinderance neither in towns nor field: whereupon he sent before the
Accanges to the quarters of Vienna (which are, as in former times, like the
Accanges.
of all their goods besides. They now following the command which was
prescribed them, executed incredible cruelties, bearing away with them all

Ferdinand along time foreseeing these events, had put into Vienna all that
little aid which then he had, causing new Rampires and fortifications to be
built, and fearing worse would afterward ensue, he travailed to all the towns
Count Palatine of Rhene enters into Vienna.
with 20000. Launsquenets, and 2000. horse, to the end himself, with many
other Captains of mark, might enter into Vienna, to take possession and
defend it, and hinder the Turks further proceedings, as it was an easy matter
for him to do. Among other voluntaries, there went William Roccandolph,
Comptroler of King Ferdinands house, John Gazianer a Slauonian, Hector Ransach,
Nicholas Salm, who was at the taking of the King of France at Pauia, Leonard
Velsch, and Nicholas Turian, and many other renowned

In the mean while, the enemy not being able to march so fast as was
requisite for them, in respect of the great store of rain that fell in the
month of September, and especially by reason of the passage of Danubius, which
was then ouerflowed; in the end they arrived before Vienna, upon the 13. day of
the same month, who with all their army environed it, dividing their The Turk
before Vienna.
Camp into four quarters, the circuit of which was so great, that one could
not see nothing but the ground covered with Tents and Pauilions Abraham Basha
was encamped under a hill right over against the city, that he might the more
commodiously observe 1
and take view thereof, himself being lodged in a little ruinated Castle which
was thereby, where also was lodged all his people, as well foot as horse. On
the otherside, toward the Port of Purgatory, right over against S. Vlderios
Church, was the Beglerby of Natolia, with the choicest soldiers of the army.
2
The third siege was toward Saint Vit, under the conduct of Micalogly, within
the village of Smireng, above the which, upon the descent of the hills, 3
was lodged a strong squadron of soldiers. The fourth was toward the
Scottish Port, where were many Asapes, (who are Archers very expert) and 4
amongst them were also some Ianisaries, along the rivers side of Danubius.
Those of this side suffered not any within the town to appear upon the walls,
but straight they were brought to the ground, and sometime they sent such an
hayle of arrows into the city, that those who walked in the streets, were
grievously annoyed and wounded, except they had on some headpiece for their
heads, or armor for their bodies. The last squadron, which was the most
warlike, and valiantest of all the army, and wherein was Solomon 5
Marks Church, within a great cloase, walled with brick, where was fixed the
Turks chief Standard. On that side, the Asapes began to remove the earth,
that so they might overthrow the walls into the ditch, by means of their mines
and other inventions: but having no Artillery to batter, their travel and
labor did not greatly profit them.

During these approaches, as another part of Solymans army came in boats
rowing up Danubius, Wolfang Oder (who was then Governor of Poson) being
Wolfang Oder defeated the Turkish vessels upon Danubius.
advertised thereof, caused a good company of Launsquenets, with certain
pieces of Artillery, and some few horsemen, to lie in Ambuscado under the
Wolfang in this victory not losing any one of his own people, retired
himself with his company John Ardech, who sallying out on that side to
skirmish with the Turks, had such ill success, that it little wanted that
they were not wholly overthrown by the thick shot of the Accanges and
Ianisaries; he who bore the Cornet was taken, and after sent back (not without
The constancy of the citizens of Vienna.
and courage of every one was such, that they had all rather dye, then hear of
any such disloyal matter: having this firm hope, not only to warrant the
town, but also to effect incredible damage (as they after did) to Solomon. The
citizens seeing that the greatest violence of the enemies (being deprived of
Artillery) did consist in mines, began to look well to that, and with diverse
instruments to discover the places where they were made, and to this end they
used basins full of water, dice upon a Drum, The means to discover a mine.
which might happen, by making countermynes, which would frustrate the other,
and make the enemies labor frivolous and to no effect; and fortifying behind
the walls with counter walls of roots and trees, in such forcible manner, that
the assaylants should receive more loss and damage then the assailed; and with
such dexterity they rampired behind, that they Clares

In this manner both the one part and the other, with great effusion of blood
did often fight, and amongst others at the Port of Carinthia, where was also
fallen down a great part of the Courtian; at the fall whereof, the enemies
presently gave the assault, only with sword and target, having forsaken sides.
During which assault, there was slain (with Ambust Ottinge a valiant Colonel)
many Captains and men of special mark: and of those without, Solomon
thoroughly vexed to see such a bucherie of his people, urged by a kind of The
general and last assault given to Vienna. Anno 1529.
Turks with all their force and last endeavor in diverse places, and
especially by the Port of Carinthia, began again to assail the town with so
great a multitude and fury of the soldiers, that it seemed the world would
presently have ended, thinking by their shouting and fearful cries, to enter
the town, and darkening the day by the great clouds of arrows, with which
they filled the air. But the Germans who held themselves gallantly aloft,
were advanced before the insolency and boldness of the enemy, opposing and
hope of winning the town, and no more dreading the threats and menaces, nor
the blows of their commanders, of two extremes, they chose Solomon seeing
fortune contrary to him, and considering the valor of the assiedged; not
willing to attempt any more so cruel a loss, determined to pack up and
depart. And before his departure, he caused certain prisoners to be apparaled
in robes of Veluct and Ferdinand, and specially, because he meant to possess
those kingdoms which were not his; and further, that he was so much the more
displeased that his enemy was retired into the midst of Germany, and had not
attended him in Hungary, that there he might be revenged the better of the
injuries offered to Kind John his friend: and that if they would yield to him,
he assured them, that he would not enter into their town, but leave them in
full liberty, promising to the soldiers who were within, that they should
retire themselves to any secure place where they would, and that afterward
Solomon departs from Vienna.
three parts, (and he took the way toward Constantinople) one part whereof
marched by Strigonium, the other by Gran, and the third by Bosnia. And in
order, with such an innumerable quantity of spoil and prisoners, Solomon
retired himself from Vienna, and Abraham Basha remained in the rerewarde, to
defend that none should charge or assail the squadron of the grand Seigniour
marching along Danubius; upon the which also softly floted another part of the
Army, to give relief of victuals, munition, and of men, to those who were on
land if need should require it.

At the departure of so great and puissant an enemy, all Germany and Hungary
greatly rejoiced. But when news was brought how the Turks lead captive more
then 60000. prisoners, that all the villages and houses in

The great Turk being arrived at Buda, and willing to perform his promise
John confirmed King of Hungary by Solymon.
which he had made, confirmed John King of Hungary, with privileges written
in letters of gold, and invested him in his kingdom, calling him his friend
and vassal of his house, leaving with him Lewis Gritty to advise and aid him
in all necessary things, and to be an assistant to him in his kingdom. Gritty
remains with John.
And after proceeding on his way with tedious iourneys, by reason of the
vehemency of the winter (which with snow and frosts was already at hand) at
length he arrived at Constantinople, where with great reioycings and triumphs,
he was as well received of his subjects, as if he had conquered all Austria.

Now after that Lewis Gritty had soiourned a certain time with King John,
Solomon. He attained to this honor by the means of Abraham Basha, The savor
of Solomon to Gritty.
(a special friend of the Duke his father) through whose friendship he was so
conversant with the grand Seigniour, that one day he invited him to a feast at
his house, unto whom the said Seigniour vouchsafed him the favor to go, the
rather in respect of the haughty spirit, and deep judgment in all things,
which he knew was naturally grafted in him: in regard of which, he had
oftentimes sent him to execute great enterprises, as this was one, wherein he
used such marvelous wisdom and great expedition, and carried himself so
indifferent to all, that his greatness was not envied of any Gritty called to
Constantinople, and after sent into Hungary again.
with him of many matters, which were of no small importance, which when they
had advised upon, he was presently dispatched again into Hungary to his
charge, with ample commission and great authority; being, among other things,
commanded to remain at Buda, and with his uttermost ability to maintain in
those quarters, the glory and renown of the Ottoman house; charging him to
be continually present at all the Councels, which should be held, as well for
war as for peace; the grand Seigniour furthermore not minding that they
should alter any thing in that kingdom, whilst he was absent in making war
against the Persians. Moreover, he was commanded to enquire if the report which
was bruited, were true: namely, John (at the instance and request of the
Hungars) would accord with Ferdinand, and have peace with the Germans and
Bohemians, who continually made incursions into his country, upon these
conditions, that as long as he lived, he should peaceably enjoy all Hungary;
and that after his death he should leave the possession, and all such right as
he could any way pretend therein, to the children of Ferdinand, as we shall
hereafter more at large treat of.

At the time when Solomon went into Armenia, Gritty arrived in Valachia, having
for his conuoy certain Turkish horsemen, and companies of Ianisaries, and
those of the grand Seigniours guard sufficiently tried, with some Vrbain
Batian, and John Doce with their companies, they in all making about 7000. men,
as well horse as foot. He was besides, in outward show for war, well
furnished with Camels, Mules, Horses, cattle, and other munition for the
service and relief of his Camp. And with this train (which rather seemed an
army) he caused Peter, Vayuode of Moldauia, Peter, Vayuode of Moldauia, friend
to Solomon and Gritty.
(who before was made Solymans friend) he having sent unto him many rich
presents, to request his favorable assistance for his going into Hungary, and
to aid him with men and victuals, and with all other necessaries which he
stood in need of, until he had accorded the strife of Ferdinand, for the love
of whom he undertook this voyage. This league being confirmed by oath of either
side, Gritty thinking himself to be sufficiently strong in those parts, to
manage such affairs at his pleasure, entered presently into Transiluania,
Gritty enters into Transiluania.
causing open proclamation every where to be made through all the provinces of
Hungary, belonging to the Emperor Solomon, that all the towns, Comminalties,
and Lords of that kingdom, should have recourse to him, as an Arbitrator and
Lieutenant for all the provinces of Hungary, for the grand Seigniour, and as
the sole Judge of all their debates, strifes, process, and discords. But this
did not greatly please King John, and it was afterward the cause of Grittys
fall.

At this time lived Emeric Cibacchy Bishop of Varadin, and Vayuode of Emeric
Vayuoyde of Transiluania and Gritty were enemies.
Transiluania, a man who for his noblenes, puissance, and virtue, was very
famous among his people, being (in regard of his calling) the second person
John Doce bore special hatred and open malice, for receiving a blow of him
with his fist upon the nose, about a certain question and controversy moved
between them. He upon the brute of the coming of Gritty to Bresouia, made no
such haste (it may be) as Gritty expected he should have done, in respect of
the honor he looked for: but making slow speed, it thereby seemed that he
little regarded those whom the grand Seigniour had sent, which made him odious
and displeasing to Gritty, who sought nothing more, then to increase the
authority which he had, and to make it appear how greatly, above others, the
Transiluanians had honored and reverenced him. Upon this, a common opinion
went, Emeric used this manner as beseemed a good Christian, being greatly
displeased in his heart to see the Turks in his country, where they never
came before, and that he should consent to open to them a passage, whereby they
might have more ample knowledge of the store of towns, boroughs, and villages;
of the infinite number of horses, of the fertilenes of the land, and the fat
pastures which are therein, by the which they might be enticed in time to make
themselves masters thereof. But all such opinions were in the end found false,
for that without any suspicion he went as a friend to receive and visit him.
When Gritty was already arrived at Bresouia, and that from thence he meant to
go to Megest, where he was by many messengers informed, that Emeric would come
to see him, and that he marched well accompanied, Gritty. These men, together
with Emerics train, ranged in the midst of a field, seemed in a manner a
good army. This wonderfully Gritty, who ambitiously aspired to haughty
attempts, and probably to the usurpation of that Country, considering that the
authority of that Bishop might molest and frustrate the greatest part of his
deseignes; and imagining that it was necessary to parlie with him in the
plain field with an appointed battle, as it were against his professed
enemies. For this cause, after Gritty had dined, not being able any longer to
smother the vehemency of his cholor and arrogancy, he took his hat off his
head, which was agglated and made of Martens Sables, after the Turkish manner,
and with a swelling pride cast it on the ground; saying, That that hat could
not serve for two heads, since it was so necessary that but one alone By these
and such like speeches, John Doce incensed Gritty against Emeric.
John Doce took occasion to revenge himself upon Emeric, and answered him
thus: Truly Seigniour Gritty, a man cannot better apply this which you have
said to any thing, then to this Realm, which by no means can tolerate two
Lords, nor two governors. And I assure you by the living God, that you can
never use your puissant and magnificall authority so maiestically, as long as
Emeric shall remain alive, against whom you ought this day to maintain the
authority and royalty of Solomon, and your self. I now perceive by this his
insolency, which I have long before known, what this cruel beast Emeric is,
the boldness and pride of whom (if you please) shall Solomon, and that dares to
despise thy name, manifesting thereby, that he rather aspireth to make himself
an absolute King, then to maintain the dignity of a Vayuode. Therefore it is
necessary by some devise to make him away, whereby every one may be freed from
his insolency and pride. This counsel was specially praised by Gritty, who
encouraged him to execute it. And the better, and in more safety to attain to
the period of his enterprise, he caused to be given unto him, by Vrbain
Batian, a good troop of Hungarish horse. And although it is said that Gritty
commanded not Doce to kill Emeric, but only Hierome Lasky Vayuode (who then
was with him, and by whom, as we have before recited, the affairs of King
John was greatly furthered) nevertheless, the Lasky aspyred to be Vayuode of
Transiluania.
common brute was, that Gritty, by envy and the false suggestion which was
reported to him, gave command to Doce to kill him, feining of his part an
intent but to go and visit him. Thus Doce secretly in the night dislodged,
and came on a sudden to the Camp of Emeric, being a little before advertised
by his spies, that Emeric was without guard, or any fear, being before they
should encounter with Gritty. This little mistrust of Emeric, increased the
courage of Doce, and gave him good hope to execute his Emeric dreamed not on
such unhappy and miserable fortune, which by the wickedness of another,
untimely happened to him, he was laid upon his bed to take his rest, when
suddenly Doce and his soldiers were within his Tents, who, before himself,
orany of his household were awaked, or before any noise or neighing of horses
were heard, seized presently on his body, without having any reverence Emeric
Vayuode of Transiluania slain by Doce.
to the quality and condition of his calling, and forgetting all Christian
piety, he cut off his head, afterward giving leave to those Turks, who had
accompanied him in this murder, to sack and pill all the moueables and
baggage of this poor Bishop, and to lead away his horses. All the rest of
Doce retired himself to Bresouia, carrying the head of Emeric hanging by one of
the ears, and presented it to Gritty, who laughing, did behold it with Hierome
Lasky, who Lasky moved at the death of Emeric.
was then with him. This man stirred up with so vilanous and infamous an act,
conceived in him a great indignity, at the miserable fortune happened unto so
venerable a man. But dissembling ye grief, which touched him at the heart, and
which of a friend made him an enemy, made semblance as though he little cared
therefore. Gritty turning himself to him, said: Seigniour Lasky, do you know
this shaven head? believe me it was the head of a great At these speeches,
Lasky oppressed both with anger and grief at one time, answered, that it was
then at no hand like to that which he had seen when it was alive standing on
his shoulders. These words nearly touched Gritty, who presently replied, as
one repenting himself of that deed, and that he could not contain himself
from shame, in respect he was so unjustly put to death, and that he gave no
such command that he should be slain, but only taken prisoner. After he
caused certain Hungarish and Turkish horsemen to seize upon a Castle, which
was reported to be the place where his treasure was. By this time the issue of
this pitiful and lamentable death, was diuulged into the The Transiluanians in
arms for the death of Emeric.
of Polonia) with all possible discontent felt themselves greatly outraged with
grief, and assembled together against Gritty, to revenge the death of so
honorable and reverend a man, and within few days they were about 40000. men,
they having for their Commanders Gottart a Saxon, and Stephen Gottart.
Maillat, who always bore great affection and honor to Emeric, and in Stephen
Maillat.
their public Diet condemned this foul act and detestable cruelty, judging
Gritty worthy of any kind of infamouse death, and his adherents as murderers
and thieves, ought to be pursued and punnished with death. Gritty Gritty
retired himself to Megest.
him, and that his company might amount unto some 4000. men, they shut the
gates against him: but in the end, by the entreaties and persuasions of Doce
and Batian, they condiscended to lodge them below in the town, reserving to
themselves the advantage of a hill, where they had a large Church, walled
about, and well furnished of houses, into the which they all retired with their
richest moueables, fortifying themselves within as well as they could. And as
afterward they understood when Gritty took the way to this town, he had an
intention to seize upon that hill, and to fortify it, as well as the shortness
of the time would permit him, there to defend and keep himself, until some
little aid should come to relieve him, by means whereof he might for a time
save himself, either by a little brook which ran not far from thence; or by
the river of Alute, which does pass upon the left Maillat and the Saxon seeing
the assault to be too hard and sharp for them, gave over, and would attempt it
no more, and willing to prove better fortune, caused their people to retire
from the town, and entrenched themselves so closely about it, that none could
neither enter nor sally forth. During this siege, Gritty daily expected that he
should have such Solymans officers, (who said it was not in their power to send
him any aid, John, (who in his heart rejoiced to see such a tumult) of the
Moldauian (of whom he more relied then of any other, for the aliance and peace
which he had made with him) and withal being forsaken by Vrbain Batian, (who
fearing likewise that which happened, saved himself by flight, by means of
certain Hungars his friends) he secretly by a post practiced with the
Moldauian, that he should command his people, who were Gritty taken by the
Transiluanians, and afterward executed.
and safety, did massacre his people, and as it were by a public edict
condemned them to death, suffering him to fall directly into the hands of
Micola, Francis Chendy, and Maillat, cousin of Count Thomas Nadasdy then
Palatine of Hungary, before whom being brought, that cap which he did wear of
Martens Sables, made after the Turkish manner, being from his head cast down to
the ground, he was by a general consent left in the custody of Chendy, to see
him executed. Being lead all about the Army, he was in the midst thereof
stayed: and being demanded for what cause he willed Emeric to be slain; he
answered, that he commanded no such thing: but in the end he was made a
president to all the world (according to the example of Polixena, sacrificed
upon the tomb of Achilles) for an oblation to appease the ghost of Emeric; and
in cutting off his head he spoke nothing else The custom of the
Transiluanians. John Doce torn in pieces.
piece of his harness in his blood. With the same coin was also John Doce
paid, who was not only beheaded, but, as a savage beast, was torn and drawn
in pieces, in such pitiful manner, as though he had never bin in the world. He
which executed them, vnclothing Gritty, found within his skarlet breeches,
which he was wont to wear, a purse full of precious stones, as Rubies,
Diamonds, and Emeraulds, which, by estimation, were worth 25. or 30000.
Ducats, and those afterward were given King John. This being performed, Chendy
Ference, one of the principallest and richest Lords among the Gritty, remaining
at Seghesuar with 500. Turks, which did always accompany them, who being
advertised of their fathers lamentable death, and how Chendy Ference did pursue
them, began with all diligence to search the means to save themselves: but in
the end they were intrapped and taken in a plain, saying one to another; We
greatly misdoubted our selves of the Turks, and now we shall dye by the hands
of Christians. And they were presently, without any compassion, beheaded, and
all those who The children of Gritty beheadded.
accompanied them slain. Behold the miserable end of Grittyes intolerable
Grittyes returning into Hungary, by the appointment of the grand Seigniour,
was permitted him by the means of Abraham Basha, The deseignes of Abraham
Basha.
who determining to have slain Solomon, and made himself Emperor of
Constantinople, had already acquainted Gritty with part of his determinations,
Gritty, to put all those to death whom he esteemed great in reputation, and
such who might oppose themselves against him, and somewhat impeach his
enterprises. But often it is seen that human practices, although they be not
periudiciall to any, do seldom happen according to the desire of the party
who manageth them. And therefore how much less ought those to succeed to a
wished end, which are wicked and detestable? which for the most part light upon
the backs of those who invent them, to Ferdinand of Aragon said, That evil
Sentence.
council does for the most part bring more damage to him who gives it, then
to him who does execute it: as it happened to these two, far from that which
their ambitious minds forethought upon, for one of them died miserably, as
has been said, and the death of the other needed not to be any occasion of
envy to the suruiuour: For that not long after, Abraham Basha was accused by
an Eunuch, very domestical with the great Turk, to whom he discovered his
intention, thinking he could not execute his practice without his assistance:
and upon this accusation (although it was then said, that it was for negligent
governing the martial affairs of Persia) or as some say, Rosa, Solymans
concubine, was greatly incensed against him; saying that this was done in
contempt of her, in that she would first have bought it, before it was shown
to him, he was in the night strangled as he slept in one of the grand
Seigniours chambers, who also presently commanded Abraham Basha strangled.
all his goods to be confiscat, leaving his wife in great care and distress
for want of the benefit and commodity of her dowry.

Gritty being thus defeated, the Transiluanians determined not to admit into
their kingdom any of those two Kings; namely King John, and King Ferdinand;
but to maintain themselves Neuters, electing a Captain, who should rule and
govern them, until it might be determined which of John within a while after,
reduced them under his obedience. In the mean time, these two Princes did
daily make war one upon the other, fortune being now favorable to one, and
immediately to the other, and never any intermission was of their quarrels,
until it was concluded between them, that John as long as he lived, should
enjoy all that then he possessed, and after his death, all should succeed to
Ferdinand, The agreement between Ferdinand and John.
or to his successors, with such conditions nevertheless, that if John left
any children legitimat, Ferdinand was bound to give them in recompense, so much
of the reuenew of his patrimony in towns and castles, The death of John King
of Hungary. Stephen the son of John, also called John.
the Vayuodship of Transiluania. Within few days after, occasion presented it
self to execute these agreements, by the death of King John, who left one only
son, borne eleven days before his death, named Stephen, who afterward by the
commandment of the Turk, was also called John, in memory of his Father. This
Infant was borne of Queen Izabella, the Izabella daughter of the King of
Polonia, and mother of Stephen.
daughter of Sigismonde Kind of Polonia, who was his guardian and gouernesse
George, who commonly was called the Friar, for so he was by profession. This
George was a Croatian borne, and descended of a noble family, but in great
poverty, and brought up in the house of John's Mother, where he was employed in
servile and mean affairs, George the Friar, tutor of Stephen surnamed John. A
discourse of the life of George.
and he never had, during his youth, a more liberal employment then the
carrying of wood and coals to offices, and making fires. He seeing by this
kind of life, he could attain to no higher promotion, being urged with
despair, or incited by destiny, (which may be did provoke him to do it)
became a Friar, of the order of Saint Benedic, in the Monastery of Saint Paul
John, whilst he was in Polonia chased from his kingdom; for whose affairs he
travailed into many places, and always returned again with quick and
faithful expedition, ayding himself greatly with his habit, under the color
of which he freely passed through every place, for none suspected, that under
that habit he could perform such weighty affairs, and it helped him much to
escape from many great dangers and travails. After John was returned into
Transiluania, and that he had recovered his kingdom, he was then mindful of
John gave him not so great means, as willingly he would have done; yet
nevertheless by his diligent services (being a man who well could temper
himself, and who had a passing subtle wit, and who naturally in his mind
aspired to great things) gained the favor of the King in such sort, who
noting in him such great prudence and excellent wisdom, made him of his
counsel, and gave him the John drawing near his end, not seeing any about him
that was more provident and circumspect then Friar George, left him to be his
sons guardian, and coadiutor in the administration and government of his
kingdom, Izabella his wife. But he (who was of a turbulent and subtle
conceit; and one who would not be satisfied with a little) disposed of the
affairs in such cunning manner, that within few days he had them all in his
government, and nothing was dispatched without his consent and appointment.
Thus the affairs of the common weal being directed by his only Council,
Ferdinand had now sent to the Queen to demand that part of the kingdom,
which she yet possessed in the name of her son Stephen, the lawful
inheritour of John, offering to give him of his patrimony, all that which in
his fathers life time he promised him, and to perform all the covenants which
was concluded between them. The Queen with George, as Protector, would by no
means consent thereto, for that George hinders the performance of the
agreement which was between Ferdinand and John.
he would not lose his reputation wherein he now was, considering that he
should not so easily strip his puple of such a kingdom, and also seeing that
by such a surrender, he should greatly abate his own estate and dignity.
Wherefore he retired himself with the Queen and her son into Buda,
entertayning Ferdinand with delatorie words, and every day alleging to his
Ambassadors new excuses, and in the mean time, gave notice to the George
demands aid of the Turk against Ferdinand.
Turk of all that which had passed, requesting of him present aid, foreseeing
that the end of this business could no ways be determined, but by Ferdinand
seeing how with vain hopes he was delayed from day to day, in prolonging the
time, and knowing all these things to be wrought by the subtlety of the Friars
invention, would no longer temporize in the matter, but assembled 40000. men,
and 40. great pieces of Artillery, under the conduct of a Germane Lord, called
William Roccandolph, high steward of his house, (who, as is a foresaid, was
with Count Palatine within Vienna, when William Roccandolph Lieutenant for
Ferdinand in Hungary.
it was besieged by the Turks) and sent him as his Lieuetenant general with
this Army, to assail the town of Buda, commanding him to do all that was
possible to take the Friar who was within it, and to send him unto him
Roccandolph being departed, marched with his Army directly to Buda, where
being Buda besieged by Roccandolph.
come, he besieged it on all sides, making two batteries where the Artillery
did desperately batter, finding the town well repaired, and otherwise then it
was in former time. For John by the art and industry of an ingenious
Boullenois, had so strongly fortefied it with Bulwarks, environed it with
walls, and enclosed it with deep ditches, that it seemed very hard for those
to win it, that did behold the difficulty thereof. Toward one side of the
town there was a hill of some little height, as high as the walls, having a
little valley which pleasantly reached unto the side of the ditch of the
fortress of the town. Upon the top of that hill was built a Church, named
Girrard, from whence one might see the roofes of the Kings Palace, and the
gilded porches. Upon that hill, Roccandolph (the more to amaze and terrefie the
Queen) caused there to be planted certain pieces of Artillery, wherewith he
battered the Palace, and especially a tower, which he so greatly shaked, that
it was like to have line on the ground (if the day following he had continued
his battery) by the fall whereof it had broken and greatly ruinated the
Palace. But fearing the loss of such a work, he caused his battery George,
who under the color of an ouerseer and guardian of his Ward, aimed at no other
thing but her ruin and utter overthrow, assuring her (in the bounty of
Ferdinand) that he had appointed a goodly principality for her and her son,
where they both should live in great pleasure and friendship with their
neighbors; declaring to her, that if she was not determined to accept of these
honorable conditions, he should be forced presently to plant greater battery
against the town, and to overthrow and ruinate all George made answer, that
the Queen should show little judgment, to change a kingdom for a Sepusian
principality, and from the royal dignity of a Queen, to become an ordinary
Lady. Thus the Friar deriding Roccandolph, did so spite and provoke him, that
he swore he would destroy and utterly ruinate the town, and caused all the
force of his Artillery to be brought to the place where the Jews were buried,
toward the Jews Port, lying between the East and South, by the gate of
Sabatia, where was the strength of the Hungars, and good store of Bohemians,
under the conduct of Peren, and commanded that without any intermission the
Cannon George seeing the Germans retired, and that they prepared Friar George
a diligent Captain.
themselves the next morning to give assault; during the night, he caused
certain trenches and rampires to be cast up behind the breach, sufficient to
hinder and annoy the victory of Roccandolph, which fortune had presented to
their sight. When the dawning of the day was come, the Germans Peren, against
whom those of Buda gallantly opposing themselves, they behaved themselves so
bravely, that they constrained their enemies to retire, who lost at that
assault about 900. men, and 2000. were wounded. By this disgrace, Roccandolph
being greatly incensed, commanded that all violence should be used to conquer
the town by art and cunning, seeing that by force he could not effect his
purpose, wherefore he began to apply himself to mines. But the Budians being
advertised of this practice, took such diligent care thereof, that all their

There was at that time within Buda a Hungar very wealthy, named Bornemisse,
who harbored a special hate against Friar George, for some injury which he
pretended he had done him. He, to be revenged, caused secret Bornemisse a
traitor to the Budians was executed.
notice to be given to Francis Ryuall his friend, who was in the Camp of
Roccandolph, that if he liked thereof, he would in the night deliver into their
hands the Port, which was by the Church of the Germans, called S. Marie.
Roccandolph understanding of this complot by Ryuall, well allowed thereof, and
having concluded between themselves touching the manner that should be
observed therein: the same night, upon which they had agreed of amongst
themselves, Bornemisse failed not to open a posterne which was in the wall, by
which the enemy entered into the town. But the watch walking the round,
perceiving this surprise, began to make an alarm, so that every man had
speedy notice thereof. At this brute and tumult, Vrbain Batian, and Peter
Vicchy (who for that night were Captains of the watch) ran presently to the
place, where the one part and the other were fighting with great obstinacy:
but in the end the Germans were forced to turn their Bornemisse. Those, after
due examination, discovered the treason of Bornemisse, who was presently
attached, and all his goods seized and confiscate, who after, by diverse
torments, confessed all the fact, and was by the command of Friar George
cruelly tormented and executed as a Traitor to his country. Roccandolph seeing
all his purposes came to no effect, and that fortune hourly did change from
prosperity to adversity, determined with his Captains to avoid the
occasions of handy strokes, and only by a long siege to attempt that, which by
force of arms he could not perform.

In the mean time, Solomon understanding the evil entreatie which was used to
the Queen, and how greatly Ferdinand forced himself to take that kingdom
from him, which he had given to her husband; after setting his affairs in
order, which he had against the Persians, leaving Archane an Eunuch in
Mesopotamia, to make head against them, if they attempted any thing, sent
Mahomet Basha to aid the Queen with all his Europian soldiers, Mahomet
Basha came to succor Queen Izabella.
who among the Turks are commonly called Rumilar, or Rumiler, and vulgarly
Vrumilar, of this word Romania, which they call all Greece.

Izabella not being assured of any such succors, was brought into great fear
and extremity, not knowing well what might betide her in this behalf:
Ferdinand, for former matters, was grievously offended, and that he conceived
of this matter at the heart against her, which also did not a little trouble
her, because she knew that she maintained an unjust cause, in not observing the
conditions made with him, during her husbands life. Upon these considerations
she was often incited to render the town, and especially knowing Ferdinand to
be a Prince so meek and courteous, that he would commit no act which should be
any thing derogating from her honor, she determined George would by no means
consent thereto, for that he daily expected succors from the Turk, who at
last having notice of their coming, he then thought that these matters were
not so slightly built, but that his affairs would be well ordered, as they had
been already begun.

Thus during the siege, Solomon came to Andrionopolis, to be more near if need
required it, retaining with him Rostan Basha; and he sent Mustafa into Mustafa
Basha sent into Tra^siluania.
Transiluania against Maillat, and commanded Peter, Vayuode of Moldauia,
Mustafa should have Forces of Mahomet.
need of. Peter with all expedition, after he had received this command,
failed not in his favor to furnish him with 30000. horse. Mahomet, whilst
Peter Vayuode of Moldauia.
Solomon came to Andrionopolis, and Mustafa drawing toward Transiluania,
hasting on his voyage with the greatest expedition he could, got to Belgrade,
in which place he joined with the Sangiac of that province, who also was called
Mahomet. Among them he found sufficient men of war of Bosnia, of whom Oliman
a Persian was Sangiac. This name of Sangiac, or Oliman a Persian.
Sanzac, does properly signify an Ensign of war, made of a round piece
Mahomet being together with all his troops, made a good army, and marched in
great iourneys toward Buda. Upon his coming, the Germans of Roccandolph
being thereof certified, began among themselves to take advice what was best to
do. Some counseled to forsake the siege, and others to encounter and give
battle to the Turks. After such and like opinions, that of Roccandolphs was
followed, which was, that it was more expedient to preserve the army whole and
safe, then so rashly to adventure it, and to do an act which Roccandolph
remoueth his Camp.
of S. Gerrards hill, having the river Danubius on the one side, and on the
other side toward the East a great plain, where he was well entrenched, being
first possessed of the top of the said hill, where he well furnished himself
with Artillery. And in this manner he attended his enemies, with this
determination, that if they should assail him, he would fight with them, and
molest them with his Artillery from the top of that hill, and if he should be
the weaker, or in any peril, he would retire himself to the river, where he
had many boats for that purpose, to go and come to Pesthe, from whence
Roccandolph being thus busied, the Turks began to approach, and Mahomet had
sent to view the situation of his Camp, and what courage his people were of.
Roccandolph performed the like by Mahomet, who approached so near him, that his
Tents were no further from the Germans then half Mahomet encamped by
Roccandolph.
a mile, causing all his Camp to be environed by the Asapes with a trench,
and certain rampires. The other Mahomet of Belgrade was lodged upon the next
hills which compassed that plain, where Roccandolph was encamped, and lodged
himself right over against S. Gerrards hill, near unto the Hungars of
Ferdinand, who were lodged in that quarter. After that the Mahomets sent their
Ambassadors to salute the Queen, and presented her with a great quantity of
Sheep and Presents sent to Queen Izabella by Mahomet.
Lambs, which they had brought along with them out of the country. These
Ambassadors entering into Buda, greatly admired at the diligent preparations
and defenses which they saw made in the town, for the defense thereof, greatly
commending the force and constancy of the Budians, Ferdinand, saying unto
them, that they always bore them special good will, and that they came for no
other intent, then to revenge all the wrong and injuries which was offered to
them. And having conferred with the Queen of all that which was given them in
charge, they returned again, receiving presents double as rich as those which
they brought with them, being honorably and pleasantly entertained. The
Turks, by many assaults, suffered Roccandolph to take no rest, whilst on both
sides he was hindered by providing boats and barks to keep firm before one
part of the Turkish army which came up Danubius, and was already arrived at
an Island called Chep, nigh unto the bank side, Solomon, and that the army of
Ferdinand, by the carelesnes of the Commanders, should be broken and
overthrown, blinded Roccandolph Mahomet, who was not in any thing negligent,
perceiving another hill, which was by the Island where the Germans had the
guard (being very drowsy and sluggish in their charge) did deliberate with
himself to assail them on the sudden, whilst in another place he caused the
alarm to be given to the whole body of Roccandolphs Camp. Following this
determination, before the dawning of the day he commanded his vessels to sail
before the I Will, and give the assault upon those of Roccandolph, which were also
by the I Will, and against the bridge, which he caused to be built, that upon any
occasion he might save himself and retire to Pesthe. The I Will of Chep taken by
the Turks.
the soldiers who had the guard thereof, and of whom before they were wakened
from their dead sleep, and that they were somewhat safe from the fear that
had before possessed the^, there remained slain upon the place well near 600.
The brute of this alarm being spread abroad, our soldiers, who were on the
other side, putting themselves in order, began to discharge certain pieces of
Artillery, which were under the covert of a wood, lately cut, by the rivers
side, and so greatly annoyed the army of the Turks, that they were very
rudely disordered: and if those of Roccandolphs army had that day acquitted
themselves of their uttermost deuoire, they had quite overthrown Roccandolph
being taken and broken, the greatest part of the bridges cut off, and the I Will
under the Turks command. At the same instant Mahomet commanded that the rest
of Roccandolphs Camp should be assailed in two places, which then by the
prowess and valiantnes of the Bohemians and Hungars, and certain Germane
Captains, they held good, and for that time maintained firm and sure footing.
But Ferdinand waxed faint and weary: and to the contrary, those of Buda, by
reason of the Turkish aid, increased their courage.

Solomon being advertised of all that which passed until then, departed
Solomon enters into Hungary.
from Andrionopolis in great iourneys with 200000. men to come to Buda, and
marching with great diligence, gave notice to Mahomet of his departure, which
being also known to Peren, who was one of the chiefest of Roccandolphs army,
caused presently the Council to assemble, persuading them instantly to retire
to Pesthe, and not to attend the arrival of all the Turkish Roccandolph
answered, that he could not depart without the command of Ferdinand: and upon
that resolution, Salm was dispatched to go toward Vienna, and whilst within
a Brigantine he went a long Danubius, fear and necessity in the end
constrained Roccandolph to raise and retire himself to Pesthe, beginning in
this manner to march with Roccandolph raises his Camp.
his people. First, he sent before all the Hungars with the great Artillery,
wagons, and other baggage, which should any thing annoy his army upon the
way: after those, all the Germane and Bohemian Caualarie marched, with a good
troop of infantrie: and in the rereward marched all the footmen, with the rest
of the baggage. Even now the Vauntgard and battle Mahomets were advertised
thereof, by two Vsaron horsemen (who fled from Roccandolphs Camp) they
presently assembled together, and caused their people to march in two places,
sending the Ianisaries of one side, with a good troop of Caualarie: and on the
other side, the remainder of all the horse, with all the infantrie that The
overthrow of Roccandolphs army.
remained. The beginning of their assault was with cries and horrible shrikings
directed upon the Germane quarter, which they presently fired. The Germans and
Bohemians, who already were at the rivers side, were greatly astonished at so
sudden a charge, endeavoring themselves to dissemble Roccandolph nor his
commands were of any force or authority to stay them, who also, besides the
incomparable grief which greatly oppressed him, was sore wounded, and by his
indisposition, the rest Peren were the first that were charged by those of
Belgrade; and the Germans, who kept S. Gerrards hill, were overthrown by the
Ianisaries and Turkish Caualarie, and with great John, charged upon the flanks
of the Bohemians, overthrowing all those who were before them. The Turks who
were at the guard of the I Will of Chep, understanding of this tumult, caused
their vessels to flote up against those of Roccandolphs, under the charge of
Casson their Captain, who after a long fight against their enemies, and seeing
the disgrace of fortune (which upon all sides was poured out against our
soldiers) unloosing themselves from the hands of the Turks, and being more
George in the mean time, in another part set fire on the Kings stables, which
were possessed by Roccandolphs people, and which was full of hay, which burnt
so cruelly, that the light thereof was seen in Pesthe, and by the vehemency
thereof, it seemed all Danubius had been on fire. By such an unlooked for
alteration of fortune, all the rest of Roccandolphs Army having lost both
courage and men, they fled in great route, and 3000. soldiers of several
nations, (who flying the cruelty of the enemy, retired themselves into the
Church of Saint Gerrard) were all cut in pieces, not sparing the life of any,
but those which they could sell or keep for slaves. Casson Pesthe taken by the
Turks.
were newly saved, that presently forsaking their habitation, they left him to
be Master of the town, without any further impeachment. Upon his entering into
this town, he committed the most horrible massacres amongst the poor
inhabitants, that ever was heard of, and so general was the slaughter, that
the blood ran down the streets like a little brook, not sparing any of what
degree of sex so ever.

Roccandolph now seeing his Army to be wholly discomfited, was constrained to
take a Brygantine, and save himself in the I Will of Comar, where The death of
Roccandolph.
the Turks, with great loss of his nation, victory, in which defeature,
besides the loss of 36. great pieces of Artillery, and 150. lesser, there was
slain 25000. men, not counting the infinite number of those who were made
slaves. Solomon (who greatly desired to give such a check) under the color to
aid the Queen and the Friar, marched with as great diligence as he could, and
made very great haste; but first conceived with himself, to be secure of the
suspicion which he had of Stephen Maillat, (who at that time governed
Transiluania in the name of Ferdinand) against whom (as we Mustafa. This man
assisted with 30000. horse by Peter, Vayuode of Moldauia, with the Vayuodes of
Transalpina and Valachia, and with the Mustafa warreth in Transiluania.
men of Achomet, who was Sangiac of Nicopolis, together with this Army, which
besides the infantrie, amounted to 50000. horse, set forward against
Transiluania, whereinto he entered by Sicilia, notifying to the Transiluanians,
that he was not come with any intention to spoil or destroy them, but only to
negotiate and treat of certain important affairs with Vayuod Maillat:
against whom notwithstanding he caused his people to march. Maillat seeing
himself environed with so great a multitude of enemies, Maillat Lieutenant for
Ferdinand in Transiluania.
and finding himself in feriour both in men and other forces, and being out of
hope to have that aid which Ferdinand promised him, (by reason of his late
overthrow before Buda) doubting of that which afterward happened, determined
with himself to retire to Fogar (a Castle in Transiluania) which by reason of
situation and art, being marvelous strong and defensible, was presently
environed by Mustafaes Army, and furiously battered Fogar besieged by Mustafa.
with Artillery. But the enemies seeing neither by 1000. assaults, which in
vain they had attempted, nor by any force they could win it, advised with
Achomet, to use some cunning and deceit, to effect his enterprise; whereupon
they sent to Maillat, persuading him by all effectual reasons, that he should
yield himself to Solomon, and to seek this reputation and favor, rather to
be in the number of his friends, then of his enemies, and from whom he could
not choose but hope for infinite clemency and many great favors; they further
assuring him that he would freely leave him the degree of Vayuodship, with the
whole seignorie of that province, and that he would demand of him no other
thing, but a certain reasonable and honest tribute: and besides they persuaded
certain Transiluanians, to go and negotiate with him about this business, if
they would have peace and quietness Maillat of all that which they had incharge,
greatly importuning him with earnest entreaties, that if he respected the love
and good of the whole country, he would not refuse so honest and large
conditions of peace, nor yet contemn the friendship which in the name of
Solomon, was liberally offered to him. Maillat although he reposed no trust in
the words of Mustafa and Achomet, in respect of their inconstancy, nor in
those of the Moldauian, who Mustafa, if Achomet would give his son for
pledge. But it was refused by Achomet: saying, that he had already given him
to Solomon, and that he was not now in his government, therefore he could not
dispose of him without his commandment; but in place of him, and that he
should think himself well satisfied, he would give him four principal
Captains of his Caualarie for hostages and performance of his faith; which
offer Maillat refused. But the earnest entreaties of the Transiluanians, (who
persuaded him with a goodly company to the Turks Camp, he being conducted to
Mustafa Achomet, of whom he was honorably received. And for the more
commodious treating of such things as should be concluded upon between them,
upon the conditions which were offered to him, the parley was deferred until
another day, and upon that day the Moldauian invited him to dinner, and he in
the mean time returned to Fogar. The appointed day being come, the Moldauian
caused a sumptuous banquet to be prepared, and commanded those who should be
present, that at the sitting down at the table, they should propound certain
pleasant and facetious speeches, and that from them they should proceed to
outrageous words, and after that to arms, and that upon this tumult they
should seize upon Maillat, and Maillat being come to the Tent of the Moldauian,
was by him entertained with great mirth, and cheerfully. And dinner time being
come, he placed him at the table with all the other invited: who, after they
had exhilerated themselves with pleasant discourses, performed that so well
which they had in charge, as taking arms in hand, they would needs offer
violence to Maillat, who in such an act minding to Maillat arested prisoner
among the Turks by treason.
cry out treason, and to defend himself (being a very strong and stout man)
and to accuse the Moldauian of that infamous deed, he was presently seized
upon, and bound, and spoiled of the richest things he brought with him, he
exclaiming that he had thus vilanously, and under pretense of friendship,
Achomet came in, who, faining bitterly to reprehend the Moldauian for such a
dishonorable act, advised him not to violate that faith, for confirmation
whereof, pledges had been given, and that he should not be an occasion of the
death of those Captains which were sent to Fogar. To whom (in manner of
disdain) the Moldauian made answer, that he caused him to be apprehended for
certain injuries which he had received of him, and that he would keep him
alive, and send him to Solomon, who afterward should judge whether he were
justly taken or no.

This being done, the Castle of Fogar (after the pledges were set at liberty)
by the treason and wickedness of those who commanded it in the absence of
Maillat, was within a while after yielded to the Turks: although some say that
it was for the delivery of Maillat, and those of his train. By Fogar taken.
this means Maillat, and (as we shall hereafter speak of) Valentine also (who
were the two principallest of the Hungars, and who alone were remaining of the
ancient Huns) unfortunately happened at one time under the tyranny of their
enemies, who caused them to dye in prison at Constantinople: and not being able
otherwise to vanquish them by arms, they were in the end subdued by the deceit
and treachery of Peter the Moldauian.

Mustafa and Achomet having the possession of Fogar, and not seeing The
Transiluanias swear fidelity to Stephen.
any who opposed themselves against them, caused all the Transiluanians to
swear fealty to Stephen, the son of King John, under whose government every
one lived peaceably, having been, before that, thirty years in subjection to
his father, unto whom they were very affectionate and faithful subjects.

These things being thus pacified in Transiluania, the two Mahomets took their
way toward Solomon, who travailing in great have, received Mahomets obtained
at Buda, which was the cause that afterward he marched more slowly, and
performed his journey at his own ease, and with great pleasure. In the end, at
the beginning of August, Anno 1531. he arrived within two miles and a half of
Solomon arrived near unto Buda, Anno, 1531.
Buda, where he lodged his Camp, being come, not so much to restore the Queen
and her son to their first estate and tranquillity (as to every one he
bruited abroad) as to reduce this town under his tyranny, and to settle
himself there, without any great expense, knowing the commodity and succors
that he might receive thereby in his wars, which he hoped to commence against
Ferdinand. The Armies of the two victorious Mahomets being joined to his Camp,
he did highly commend them; and also Mustafa and Achomet, because without
effusion of blood, they had with such good expedition, brought the affairs of
Transiluania to so wished an end: and after that, they presented to him Maillat
as a prisoner, who within Maillat sent to Constantinople.
a while after was sent to Constantinople with Valentine Turkey. Afterward
there were brought before him, and before the Sangiacs and Bashaes, all the
other prisoners who were taken at the overthrow of Roccandolph, and were bound
with long cords four and four together, being about 800. amongst whom were
certain Captains of mark, namely Baltasar The massacre of prisoners executed
by the Turks.
Pocan, Taisch, Bursicchy a Bohemian, and others, whose lives were saved

This being done, Solomon sent three fair horses to King John's son,
furnished Presents of Soliman to Stephen, and to the Hungarish Lords.
with golden harness, pearls, precious stones, and rich plumes, apparel, and
cloth of gold. He also sent to other Hungarish Lords, and the chief men of
his Court, certain fair long gowns after the Turkish manner, and chains of
gold. His Ambassadors being admitted to ye Queens presence, Solomon, who
greatly desired to see him, Soliman requested that Stephen might be sent him.
and that she would not distrust any thing; assuring her, that all should
fortunately succeed to her own content; this being his usual manner, not
only to maintain and increase the kingdoms and estates of his friends, but
also to defend and preserve them: and that for that cause he desired to know
and embrace his son, who had been so great a friend unto him, and in token of
perpetual amity, to be acquainted with him: and in respect of her, that he
bare no less regard and honor unto her, then if she were his own Solomon
made this request, to the end that he might with more ease get possession of
the town of Buda, (as within a while after by a certain deceit he did) and
also to see if this child were a son or daughter, George interrupted her,
and prayed her that for the avoiding of doubt in the minds of the barbarous
Stephen, by the persuasion of George, is sent to Solomon.
Turks, she would not fail but send him, offering to accompany him himself,
and to bring him back again safe and sound. By such speeches the Queen was
somewhat appeased, and caused her son to be richly Solomon, who, with all
lenity and courtesy, friendly received him as a Vassal of his house, and
son of a King, which had been his great friend, being also willing that his
children, Selim and Bajazet, (borne of Rosa his wife) should do him the like
Mustafa his eldest son, and borne of Cercassa his first wife, was then sent
into Amasia, upon the frontiers of Persia, by the subtlety of the said Rosa,
who aspired to exalt her own children, and debase and suppress the other.
Solomon having courteously entertained this child, and making show to him of
all possible good will, commanded the Bashaes to inuit all the Hungarish
Lords to dine with them, and that they should prepare a bountiful banquet,
furnished with all sorts of dainty cates. Afterward he commanded certain
Captains, that (during this feast) they should feign themselves to go and see
the town of Buda, and also find the means to seize thereon without Buda
taken by the Turks with deceit.
any brute or tumult, making show, that as some entered, others should come
forth, to the end that the Budians might not distrust this matter, which was
wisely performed. For many entered by troops by the Port of Sabatia, with
semblance only, as though they had been strangers desirous to be hold
novelties and the singularity of a town: but few came forth, and many of them
remained within, in so much that for one of them that came out, there entered
seven. And by this policy (when they thought themselves of sufficient number)
they suddenly forced the guard of that Port, who nothing distrusting such a
treachery, were content to yield, and these being seized thereof, they gave
thereby entrance to a good troop of soldiers, quiet, they should render up
their arms into his custody, which was presently done; and in token of their
fidelity, every citizen took a Turk into The marvelous obedience of the
Turks.
there was never enemy entered into the town, nor any Turk whosoever durst
give his host a foul word.

Solomon understanding that Buda was taken, and all things quiet therein,
(although it was almost night) sent the Queen her son again, retaining
Stephen sent back to Buda, and the Hungarish Lords were stayed.
with him all those Princes and Lords who accompanied the King, namely, Friar
George Bishop of Varadin, Peter Vicchy, near kinsman to King John, and one
whom the Queen greatly respected, Batian Vrbain, Governor of Buda, Stephen
Verbetz, great Chauncellor of Hungary, and Valentine Turkey, Solomon, instantly
requesting him not to violate or offer injury to the fidelity, which she had
reposed in him, and which he confirmed unto her by many his Letters patents,
and A Council held upon the delivery of the prisoners.
were different, and did not agree together. Mahomet, Governor of Belgrade,
with many other, would that all those Lords that were prisoners Rostan Basha
(unto whom the Queen had sent rich presents) refuted the opinion of Mahomet,
and of his adherents: saying, that if Solomon followed their advice, he would
greatly blemish the reputation of his renown, and that his faith and promise
would not be any whit at all esteemed among other nations, when they should so
apparently see that it was not observed, especially to those, unto whom at
their own requests and entreaties, he had given it for aid and succor; and
that the example of Buda considered, never any would afterward call him to
succor Solomon not determined of any resolution, dissolved the Council, seeing
the Sacrifice made by Solomon in the great Church of Buda.
Priests, to consecrate for him the great Church, according to the Mahometaine
manner. And they overthrew all the Aulters, and pulled down all the Images,
clensing and hallowing the Church after their custom. That being done, Solomon
with his Sacrificers entered into the town, taking thereupon occasion to
dismiss the Council, and would not execute any thing, concerning that which
his Bashes had counseled him unto. But taking a more mild and pleasing
course, he gave notice to the Queen, that she Solomon sent Queen Izabella
and her son Stephen to govern in Transiluania.
and her son should presently depart the Castle, and that she should retire
to Lippa, which is beyond Tibiscus, to govern the kingdom of Transiluania,
Sigismond King of Polonia her father, and there they should remain until her
son should come to age, and be able to govern and rule that kingdom, of
which he offered himself to be an ouerseer and protector, promising to make
restitution thereof unto him at that time; alleging for his excuse, that it
imported her son no less to have sufficient and careful overseers to
govern Hungary, then of other persons able to defend and preserve it for him.
Whereupon he nominated Peter Vicchy to be Governor of the County of Themesuar,
and of Peter Vicchy Governor of Transiluania.
the neighbor countries bordering thereon, and willed that Stephen Verbetz,
Stephen his Vayuode, and George with the Queen ouerseer of Stephen.
confirmed the Queen to be his gouernesse, reigning in Transiluania, and made
Friar George her coadiutor and Treasurer, following therein the last will of
King John, bequeathed to him by his Testament, of which he said he was and
would be an executor. The Queen having understood this cruel and unlooked for
command, and bathing her face with tears, did extremely blame and grievously
cry out against the natural impiety of so damnable and faithles a Lord, who
(against his vowed faith) deprived her both of her kingdom, and of all that
which she held most dear: but seeing no remedy, The Queen departs from
Buda.
of the which the Turks would not suffer her to take any Artillery nor
munition, but only her moueables) and took her journey out of the town of
Buda, with such provision of wagons and horse, as Solomon would appoint her.

Upon her departure, the Turk presently set at liberty all those Lords The
Hungarish Lords set at liberty.
which he kept prisoners, except Valantine Turkey, who, as has been said, was
Maillat to Constantinople, where within a while after they both dyed. The
other, although they were greatly offended to see The death of Maillat.
themselves so fraudulently deprived of their lands and goods, yet were they
exceeding joyous, seeing themselves free and secure of their lives, whereof
they stood in great dread. They being thus at liberty, they presently went to
the Queen, who, together with them and the Friar, and certain other of her
household, took their way toward Transiluania, being often constrained for
want of horses, to draw her Coach with oxen, which she notwithstanding endured
with an invincible and noble courage: already very well The constancy of the
Queen.
perceiving that her affairs were in a manner declining; and besides, seeing

In the mean time while the Queen with these complaints and griefs drew
near Transiluania, Ferdinand having received under the conduct of Roccandolph
this bloody overthrow, and wonderful loss of people, Leonard Velsh to the
I Will of Comar, (after the death of Roccandolph) to reallie Ferdinand sent to
Solomon to demand peace.
the remnant of his Army, and with all speed to conduct them to Vienna, and to
fortify the said I Will with the best defense he could. And seeing on the other
side his brother the Emperor Charles so busied in the affairs of Germany,
that he could not then send him any succors, did deliberate with himself by
Ambassages to require peace, and to prove how Solomon was affected toward him.
To this end he sent an Embassage by Nicholas Rich presents sent to Solomon by
Ferdinand.
Salm, and Sigismond Litestan with rich and excellent presents to him, among
Maximilian. These Ambassadors arriving at the Turks Camp, first presented
themselves to Rostan Basha, and afterward to Basha Casson, who lodged them in
honorable tents, and the day following, Bashaes at their own table. The feast
being ended, they took from them their weapons, and also their knives,
(according The manner to present an Ambassador before the Turk.
to their custom) and were by the Bashaes (every one of them between two
Bashaes that lead them arm in arm) presented before Solomon, whose hand they
kissed, and after offered him their presents, which greatly pleased him, and
especially the vessel of gold, that bore this admirable dial, which he so
curiously beheld, that he could not therewith sufficiently Solomon the
exquisitnes thereof, and caused him to see the excellent workmanship that was
with in it, and how wonderful the work was. Solomon after he had
sufficiently perused this rare jewel, gave audience to Nicholas and Sigismond.
They demanded Ferdinand demands to be invested King! of Hungary by Solomon.
that he would give to Ferdinand, together with Buda, the kingdom of Hungary,
with the same charges and conditions, upon which before he had agreed with
John, promising that the Emperor his brother, for his greater surety, should
send Ambassadors to be comprised in the same peace, and that he would yield to
the conditions that should be mentioned John acknowledging to possess that
kingdom unjustly, had in the time of his life, of his own accord compacted
with their Master, that after his death, it should be rendered to him,
allotting to his son such a reuenew as should be convenient to maintain his
estate, he knowing himself to be chosen King, rather by the favor of fortune,
then by his own demerits. Therefore they besought Solomon to accept into that
kingdom, rather their Master for his friend and Vassal, then for his
neighbor and enemy, considering he was

Solomon having well understood their demands, and greatly commending their
presents, answered them that within three days they should know further of his
pleasure. When two days were expired, he caused Rostan Basha to impart unto
them his whole intention, who told them, that Ferdinand should render all the
towns which had been in the possession of King Lewis, which he did enjoy, and
that he should utterly renounce the kingdom of Hungary; and that Solomon for
the injuries which he had received of Rostan said that Solomon was content to
entertain peace and friendship with their Master, or else if he would not
accept thereof, that then he would not cease to make continual war upon him,
and would presently send to destroy, and wholly to ruinate all the Country of
Austria.

The Ambassadors seeing they could not obtain any thing worthy their
coming, and that all these their proceedings would dissolve into Ferdinand;
which was not granted to them. They thought verily that the Turks in denying
all that they demanded, would easily notwithstanding entertain truce,
considering that the winter approached, and that to avoid the inconvenience
thereof, he should be forced to take his journey toward Constantinople. But
these Ambassadors made show as though they understood it not, and in stead of
propounding other matters, they took occasion to demand Balthazar Taish, who
was taken at the overthrow of Roccandolph, and put in chains among other
slaves. Rostan answered them, that he should be restored without any ransom,
when the premised conditions of peace should be entertained; or if war
happened, that then occasion would be offered to exchange him for some of
their own. Thus they being excluded from all agreement, and deprived of all
hope of concluding peace, they in this sort returned to Ferdinand.

Whilst those were in their way to Vienna, Solomon after he had fortified all
the frontiers, dislodged from Buda with his army, taking the way toward
Solomon returns to Constantinople.
Solomon, who was turned Turk, and who for martial affairs should defend and
govern the town; appointing besides for the executing of justice (willing
thereby to gratify the Budians) Stephen Verbetz, whom they all knew to be a
man of sincere life.

As these affairs were dispatched at Buda by Solomon, the Queen travailed
continually until she approached near unto Transiluania, when she was
advertised by all the principal of the kingdom, that they would not suffer
her to enter thereinto, least by the like deceit it should happen to them,
George, that by the friendship and favor of The Queen was received into
Transiluania by the favor of George.
certain of the chiefest, who were specially affected to his part, and many
other of his friends, she might by their good liking enter peaceably into the
kingdom. George, by the help of his friends, effected so much, that the
Transiluanians were content to receive her as their Queen, and use obedience
to her son, with no less duty, then if he had been John his father,
allowing him as their King, and his mother as his gouernesse. Besides, the
Friar managed the affairs so well, that he was again elected and confirmed by
Peter Vicchy the government of the County of Lippa, and Themesuar, in respect
of the confidence she reposed in him, to the end that he receiving so large a
command of her, she might have more confidence that he would hold and defend
it in her sons name and to his use. But this government did, together with
the time, so puff up his heart with pride, that he durst adventure to possess
those places as his own inheritance, and not as things moveable, or depending
upon the Crown of that kingdom; and yet notwithstanding he did not this but
by some secret consent of the Queen. She being arrived Queen, that much ado
she had wherewithal to suffice her own wants. George uses the treasure of
the kingdom and begins to govern, and little respects the Queen.


The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF HVNGARIE.
THE ARGUMENT OF THE THIRD BOOK.
THe Queen complains to Solomon of George; he seeks the favor and aid of
Ferdinand; of which the Queen having notice, aduertiseth Solomon thereof;
whose puissance George fearing, he retireth and fortifieth himself in
Sassebasse, and the Queen leauieth forces against him. Solomon sends a
Chiauss into Transiluania in favor of the Queen: the Transiluanians forsake
her, and incline to George, who accords with the Queen for fear of the
Turks power marching toward him; against whom George takes arms, and
forces them to retire, and he still uses the Queen after his accustomed
manner: she incenseth the Transiluanians against him: whereupon he unites
himself to Ferdinand, who makes John Baptista Castalde his Lieutenant, and
sends him into Hungary. The Queen publishes a Diet, and George
interrupteth and dissolueth it. Castalde besieges the Castle of Dalmas, which
is yielded to him. The Queen accords with George, and Albe-iula is yielded
to him. Many suspicions passes between Castalde and Friar George, and the
Queen yields her self to Ferdinand: but George seeks to frustrate that
agreement, who in the end is made Vayuode of Transiluania, and created
Cardinal. The Queen resigneth all the royal ornaments to Castalde with the
Crown, which are sent to Ferdinand, unto whom the Hungars swear homage. The
Queen departs out of Hungary, and George seeks again the favor of the
Turks, who lie in wait for the Queen travailing to Cassouia.

QVeene Izabella seeing the affairs between her self and Friar George
succeed from worse to worse; and also diligently observing his bad and evil
demeanor, which was more then her patience could digest or tolerate; and that
notwithstanding she knew not any means how to withdraw him from his obstinate
wilful course, being highly offended therewith: had no The Queen complains
of George to Solomon.
her; desiring him that since he was content to appoint and leave her in
possession of that kingdom, that in like sort he would vouchsafe to assist and
aid her out of such a miserable subjection, wherein she was now fallen into,
specially in suffering the cruel tyranny of the Friar, which was more

Solomon understanding these complaints, made no other show at that time for
the redress of them, but only writ to the Friar, that he should use the
Queen as was fitting and answerable to her calling; and that so much the
rather, for that she was recommended to him: and if he did to the contrary,
George seeks again the favor of Ferdinand.
of Ferdinand, who was already crowned King of the Romans, with an intention
to be able by his means (at every assay that might be offered) Solomon,
demanding of him oftentimes (besides the yearly tribute which was paid him)
sometimes victual, sometime munition, and other extraordinary subsidies which
were infinite, by reason whereof, not being able to satisfy his greedy
ambitious mind, the treasure was in the end spent and consumed, in so much
that there remained little or nothing thereof; so that he to content his
barbarous appetites, was constrained to impose upon the kingdom new taxes, and
tributes, whereby he procured the dislike and hate of every one.

In this time was Count Nicholas Salm Lieutenant general for Ferdinand
Nicholas Salm Lieutenant general for Ferdinand in Hungary. Tocchay.
in Hungary, who (as has been said) was sent upon an Embassage to Solomon, to
treat of a peace with him. Long before, Friar George desired conference with
him in the Castle of Tocchay, where King John (as we have said in the first
book) was overthrown by Ferdinands Lieutenant, where (by the means of a
river) Hungary does divide it self from Transiluania. But there never falling
out any opportunity to see one another; one day (as they both desired) it
happened (they nothing thinking thereof) but either of them minding to go some
other way, that they met in the midst of a way The conference between George
and Count Salm.
coming from Hungary to that place, the Friar continually soliciting the well
accompanied with sufficient bands of footmen, and troops of Caualarie, refused
not to hearken to the Friar: whereupon he went to lie at Tocchay George, who
all the whole night continued together in private, with long conference
concerning his purpose, saying, that he had notice that Peter Vicchy,
Governor of Lippa and Themesuar, had intelligence with the Turk, and under
color to give up these countries (into which he had invested himself, as if
it had been into his own inheritance) under the Crown of King John's son:
and to comfort and aid the Queen the more, he would wholly take away the care
and administration of the kingdom from him, and reduce it into extreme
calamity, and transfer it (as already he saw some likelihood thereof) under
the government of the Turk: which did not much displease him for his own
particular, as for the great damage Ferdinand might then with grief easily
discern what preparation and mean this would be, to enter into his country
of Austria and Germany, which he could by no means hinder: considering the
weakness of his forces, and his brother the Emperor Charles greatly incombred
by the dissentions of Germany, in regard whereof, he could by no means send
such succor as was needful for him; and that for his part he saw him already
to be old and sickly, and without means to defend this country, against the
mighty puissance of such an enemy, who John, to do otherwise then procure
that this kingdom might remain free and peaceable to his son Stephen, he
had advised and determined with himself, to have recourse to the majesty and
princely regalitie of Ferdinand, desiring his help to frustrate and dissolve
such enterprises, importuning the Count to recite amply this weighty matter
to him, praying him he John had by his last will and Testament decreed;
excusing and acquiting himself by such like offers, of al dislikes which
before had passed, promising to do him faithful service in time to come, and
to observe and entertain inuiolably, whatsoever it would please his Majesty
to command

Count Salms made him answer, that he would very willingly undertake to
advertise Ferdinand of all which had passed between them two. And to animate
and confirm him the more in this his good purpose, he promised him to perform
it, both by word and deed, assuring him that Ferdinand would not fail but
condescend to all that which he had demanded: nevertheless with this
condition, that he should still persevere in his faith and promise, Ferdinand
the whole discourse which had passed between them.

This conference was not so private, but the Queen had present notice thereof:
and well knowing that the Friar sounded all the means to do her the greatest
mischief and spite he could, she understood that he secretly practiced to
accomplish fully his thoughts, and put her to all travail and pain, which he
thought good and meet to chase her out of her kingdom: she well knowing that
for this end, and not to do him service, nor for any other occasion, then that
which he falsely and wickedly pretended, Ferdinand, and take part with him: and
knowing her self to be a Queen of weak force, and a woman without the aid
of any Christian Prince, and even of Ferdinand himself, by the friendship and
favor of whom she hoped to prevail in her necessities, being deprived thereof
by the subtilties and crafts of the Friar; she was constrained that she might
not behold a man (to whom she wished so much ill) to triumph over her and her
son; rather to serve her present need with the promise and offer of the
Turk, esteeming it better for her to endure all that which should happen to
her, by the violence of this great disaster, then the evil (although it would
prove but little) which might betide her by the Friars wicked policies John
Solanze (a man of good esteem, and greatly renowned in those countries, The
Queen sent to Solomon, aduertising him of the Friars practices.
and who was very much devoted to her) to go to Constantinople, and acquaint
Solomon with the practices that Friar George wrought against her. He travailing
with good expedition, arrived in short time before the Turk, to whom he
imparted all the effect of his Embassage. Solomon, who by his own people had
been already advertised of all the affairs which were done in Transiluania,
and namely of the Friars proceedings, was at this new information, provoked and
incensed the more, and sent presently one of his Chiauses to the Basha of Buda,
with express command that he should

The Chiauss was scarcely departed from Constantinople, and these commands
dispatched by Solomon, but Friar George had presently secret and particular
notice thereof by many his friends. Upon which occasion, being well advised, he
retired himself from the Queens Court, to a town of George retireth and
fortifieth himself with Sassebesse.
and fortified, putting therein a good strong garrison, clensing and deepning
the ditches, heightning the rampires, repayring the walls where they were
decayed, and furnishing it with Artillery, sufficiently to sustain the brunt
of a siege; and in the mean while, he forgot not by the best means that he
could devise, and particularly by good words, to clear himself to the Turk.
During this time, whilst he was careful with expedition to effect this
matter, yet nevertheless (as being very vigilant) he omitted not to practice
on the other side what was fitting for him, that he might not be surprised.
Therefore he called together all his friends, and especially the Sicilians

The Queen understanding of all these preparations, and certainly knowing, by
such intelligence as was brought her, that the Friar made full account to
possess all, and that then for the present she had no other means but take
him by force, and fearing withal that she should be chased out of her
kingdom, before any succors could come to her aid; writ with all speed to
the Basha of Buda, and to the two Vayuodes, that according unto the ordinance
The Queen gathers forces against George.
her present aid, she speedily aduertising them in what estate the Friars
affairs were. They not omitting any time, caused their people to be in a
readiness, and in the mean time, while they were in coming, the Queen leauied
7000. men, and sent them to besiege the Castles of Brancich and Vincky, which
Friar George had built from the ground, upon the river side of Marosse.

Peter Vicchy understanding of all that passed, as well on the Queens part, as
on the Friars, assembled as many men as he could in his government of Lippa and
Themesuar, and through his persuasions drew to his party Serpietre Vicchy, who
was a Ratian, and one of the greatest of his country, and who before time
expected to have been King: he brought with him 8000. Ratians, and joined
himself and his forces with Peter Vicchy, and they went to Peter Vicchy
besieges Senath.
besiege the Castle of Senath, which was belonging to ye Bishop of Varadine,
situated in the lower Transiluania, which was kept for the Friar, Bishop of
Varadine, by Jasper Perusicchy a Captain of his, who failed not valiantly to
defend it, until he was relieved by Thomas Varcocce, although Serpietre used
all his skill to win it by battery. This man being particularly certified of
the estate and manner of this siege, was sent with all expedition by the Friar
Varcocce having diligently ordered all things, and having gathered a sufficient
number of foot and horse, as well hirelings, as others bound to perform that
service, and seeing himself no less gallant and forward to fight, then his
emies, as a valiant and prudent Captain, that would not through his negligence
let pass any favorable occasion of fortune, after a thousand deliberations,
and as many premeditations, resolved upon the sudden to set upon Thomas
Varcocce defeated the army of Vicchy.
Varcocce might with great facility overthrow and defeat them. They having
with good vigilancie suruaied this drowsy leager, returned again to Varcocce,
acquainting him with all that they had seen and known. This increased his
courage, and redoubled his desire to give them battle: and in the mean time
giving notice to those of Senath, of that which he determined to do, martialed
his squadrons in three parts; placing in the first good store of Caualarie,
with many Infantrie; and in the other (which was toward a little hill) making
a left wing thereof, he placed the rest of his Infantrie, which were flanked
with Varcocces hand, who thereupon made a great butcherie and slaughter of
them, pursuing them even to their homes, and ranging the country as
victorious, and in his retraict led with him 4000. prisoners, with great and
rich spoils of his enemies, of whom he put to the sword

Nicholas Serpietre, chief leader of these Ratians, escaping half naked from
this tempest, retired himself safe and sound into a Castle of his own, The
marvelous courage of a Ratian wife.
his blood and house, which chiesly he had lost, otherwise, that she would
never consent to be called the wife of him, that was worse then the basest and
cowardliest woman whosoever, and that he deserved not to have an I would to God
(said she) that thou had rather been brought to me in a thousand pieces, if
thou had dyed in glory and renown, rather then to live in health, as I now
behold thee, bringing with thee naught but dishonor and ignomie: knowing well
that thou never tookest this reproachful example of thy forefathers, who never
yet fell into such unseemly cowardlines, whereinto thy self art now deeply
plunged. And who of our time is he, that by so base and vile a courage has
committed so foul and enormious a fault? and who has ever left unto his
heirs so great and infamous an outrage, She having ended these words, inflamed
with ire and great indignation, departed from him, being many days and months
before she would once vouchsafe to see him again.

Whilst fortune in this sort favored the affairs of Varcocce, the Friar went
to Megest, not in respect he misdoubted the strength of Sassebesse, but only
to be more near unto the Sicilians, upon whose forces he greatly reposed The
Chiauss of Solomon in favor of the Queen threatens the Transiluanians.
Queens part, to who^ they were very favorable, until the Chiauss (of who^
we have before spoken) being without hope any longer to delude the Friar, or
obtain him by any stratagem, did diuulge to them the Turks command, telling
them, that if all of them did not presently take arms against the Friar, he
would procure the Basha of Buda, and the two Vayuodes of The Transiluanians
forsake the Queen.
shadow his ambitious proceedings, imparting to those Lords, that if they any
longer favored the Queens part, they might be well assured, that it

By these and such like persuasions, the Lords were drawn unto his faction,
absolutely leaving the Queen, and they amassed and united themselves George
encamped before Albeiula.
abode, with such few men as she had of the country, the chief and Captain
general of whom was Peter Vicchy. Both parties being thus certain days
without performing any memorable act, the one against the other, the Sicilians
began to mutiny; saying, they would return home again, and that they would
no longer remain in that place against the Queen. The Friar not knowing the
cause of this mutiny, armed himself with his Curasse, and being well mounted,
went into the midst of the mutiners, who understanding the cause that did
thus move them to this tumult, answered them in this sort; that they should not
be astonished at so great to seek an agreement between himself and the
Queen, who also was The agreement between the Queen and George.
greatly inclined to peace, (for that she doubted no aid would come from

Whilst Friar George and the Queen were in terms of reconciliation, the
Basha of Buda on the one part, and the two Vayuodes on the other, being
carefully solicited by the Queen, were already in their way, whilst these
broils were in motion, and every one of them brought a sufficient army to
relieve her: and although she was advertised thereof, yet in stead of coming
forward, she writ unto them that they should retire, because the Friar and her
self were now accorded and in terms of agreement, and that their coming
would be little profit or commodity to her. But neither the one nor the other
would hearken thereunto, for that they determined among themselves, before
their retraict, to enter into Transiluania. The Queen imagining nothing less,
then of the evil which might ensue of The arrogan cie of the Friar
coldly, that they should cause them to return, who were the cause of their
coming: and as for presents, he was not accustomed to send any to George
seeing it was not George takes arms against the Turks.
behoouefull for him to omit any time, presently leauied his people at Torde
and Egneth, which are two great towns of Transiluania, and instantly thereupon
that from thence he might march against the Basha of Buda, of whom (by Deua.
is one of the principallest rivers of that country. When the Friar dislodging
from Sassebesse and began to march against him, he dispatched upon the way John
Chendy (a man of good regard, and of a noble house among the Hungars) with a
good troop of horse and foot against the Transalpinian, Chendy, Lieutenant of
George, defeareth the Transalpinians.
to defend and stop the passages, whereby he must of necessity pass, if he
would enter into Transiluania, and also to hinder him that he should not Chendy
diligently proceeding on his journey, and gathering together of the next towns
(besides the number which he brought with him) almost 4000. men, arrived
privately with them, hard adjoining to the enemy, where they were (as they
thought) securely encamped without any fear: and being assured by certain
Spies, what form and order they held, he appointed his companies to be
stretched forth at large, and so gallant was the show, that they appeared to
be infinite; and about day breaking, he began to assail the Transalpinians
with great noise of Trumpets and Drums, that with the number of men, whereof
they were greatly afeard, and the long troops of their enemies which descended
from certain hills, ranging themselves in battle, they seemed thrice as great
as they were, they Chendies soldiers taking courage and following the
victory, pursued them so nigh, that in this confusion of slight, they killed
more then 5000. and took as many prisoners, bringing with them from their
chase 3000. horse, and many Ensigns. By this victory, Chendy so terrified the
Transalpinian, that flying from this overthrow, through the cowardlines of his
people, he drust not in a long time after take arms against the
Transiluanians. The enemy being thus chased on this side the country, George,
enriched with many prisoners, and so great spoil, as it was a wonder to see.
The Friar after he had dispatched Chendy against the Transalpinian, at the same
instant commanded the Sicilians, with all expedition they should repair to
defend their most important towns, which they thought the Moldauian would
assail; that they should fortify the passages, which naturally by the favor
of the steepy mountains, were very inaccessible, and such that they might well
defend with few men. The Sicilians, who naturally are ancient enemies to The
Sicilians and Saxons natural enemies.
the Saxons, being continually catching the one from the other, seeing they
must pass by Sassebesse, a principal town of the said Saxons, and from not a
little waste and endamage that people, carrying with them all the booty which
they got.

Whilst they were thus occupied in such enormious cruelties, they gave leisure
to the Moldauian to enter into their country, and without any impediment, to
ruinate and pill their towns, and in destroying and burning all their
villages, to turn all topsie turuie, which thing (to say truth) was justly
permitted of God, to the end, that in reason they might endure from their
enemies the same calamities and miseries, which so unjustly they had caused
those to suffer, who in consideration of common safety, ought then at the
least to have been reputed their friends. Whilst the Sicilians and Moldauians
practiced these cruel exploites, Friar George with tedious Thomas Varcocce
into the County of Varadine, to gather what force he could, as well Infantrie
as horse, with intent, that if the Basha would perhaps attempt to pass the
river of Marosse, being received at the half passage, he should assail and
fight with him before and behind, or else that he should be forced to retire
half broken and overthrown. But the Basha also distrusting The retraict of
the Basha of Buda.
the same, and being advertised that the Friar came in person to fight with
him; and fearing that if he proceeded any further, he imagined he might be (as
he well considered thereof) surprised in the midst, and charged in the
rereward, by the companies that were under the conduct of Varcocce, assuring
himsefe that he was deceived by the Queen: whereupon Turchy John, the which
before his Vauntgard dislodged, he had sent into the country Turchy John.
of Deue, to range as well for victuals, as also to discover if there were no
ambushments to hinder or annoy his retraict. This Turchy was sent by the Friar
to prevent him of the passage, and to annoy him in his rereward: but the
quicknes of the Basha caused that he arrived too late, and took away from him
all occasion of being able to join with Varcocce, much less to

The Friar being now assured by these two, that the Basha was retired in the
greatest expedition he could, turned his Camp against the Moldauian, who (as
we have said) spoiled and burned the country and towns of the Sicilians, and
went forward with a vehement resolution, cruelly to be revenged of the
injury, which he esteemed more intolerable, then any that ever he received.
But the Moldauian having notice of the Friars intent, and knowing besides what
had happened to the Transalpinian, found it good The retraict of the Moldauian.
by the advice of his Council, not to attend his coming: whereupon, after
great spoil made in the country, he speedily retired himself with his

After that Friar George had thus chased all the enemies out of Transiluania,
he retired toward the Queen, where with consent of all, in respect of The
peace confirmed between the Queen and George.
again confirmed between them two, with such conditions which should like
them both: among which he importuned, that the Queen would write to the Turk,
and acquit and clear him of all such matters, whereof before he had been
accused. Which request, though it was contrary to her disposition (for women
like not to countermaund their own proceedings) yet notwithstanding she
presently did it. But the Turk being well informed of the verity of the
cause, and of all that which passed; and withal seeing how mighty and
puissant the Friar was, and that the greatest part of the kingdom was
favorably addicted to his part; he smoothly dissembling Solomon sends to the
Transiluanians that they should obey George.
directed to all the kingdom, by which he commanded that every one should
obey and reverence him, as being again confirmed in all his former honors and
degrees. But yet the peace lasted not long, for the Queen in the end seeing
the Friar respected not any thing which he had promised by the last agreement,
omitted no time, but by the occasion of his absence, (being then in his
Bishopric of Varadine to recreate and solace himself) The Queen incenseth
the Transiluanians against George.
and especially those whom she reputed most faithful and affectionate to her,
and most opposite against the Friars proceedings, manifesting to them how his
natural disposition was inconstant and cruel, and how he used her badly, not
willing to keep nor observe any laws, covenants, promises, nor faith, but
aspiring to the universal tyranny of that country, he did thus wickedly
demean and behave himself toward her, with this intent to chase both her and
her son out of the kingdom, and to remain sole and absolute Lord himself;
assuring her self, that for the love and fidelity John her husband, and
always maintained the same (notwithstanding all sinister fortune) in the
behalf of Stephen her son and her self; in regard whereof they would never
endure this injury, nor tolerate such a cruelty far surmounting all other
practiced against her person, in falling from so high and eminent dignity of a
Queen, to become an ordinary and poor Lady, and their King of Transiluania
to become a servant: esteeming it of greater moment, that they should rather
desire to have the son of him and their natural Prince, for their Lord and
Patron, then a Friar void of all faith and honesty, and only gorged with
ambition.

By such like demonstrations, she so awakened the spirits of every one, that
all in general (not willing to submit themselves to any other Lord, then to
King Stephen and her self) concluded to take arms against the Friar, with
intent to expel him the kingdom. George having notice of this, and of all
their other proceedings which was practiced against him, and seeing himself
weakened of men, and deprived of such forces, which were necessary to resist
the scourges and assaults of such unlooked for fortune; after he having George
agrees and united himself with Ferdinand.
accord and link himself with Ferdinand, and to conclude with him the
practices, which oftentimes without effecting, he before had acquainted him
with, he being induced and in a manner constrained thereunto by his extreme
ambition and troublesome mind (the enemy of quiet repose) it being told him,
that if by that means he could expel the Queen, he might easily compass his
intention; which was, to see himself absolute Lord of Transiluania, which he
so much esteemed, that he would often say, he cared neither to be Pope nor
Emperor, and that he would never go out of it. By

Now, Count Salm being dead (with whom he had already begun to treat of
this affayre) and knowing not how to effect his determination, finding himself
now nearly driven, resolved to negotiate this business by Ambassadors, sending
secretly to Ferdinand one of his gentlemen, by whom he gave him to understand,
that he greatly desired that either one way or other, they would put in
practice that which he before time had given him notice of by Count Salm,
instantly praying him again, that he would not fail to Izabella should wholly
and entirely yield to him the possession of that kingdom: but with this
condition, to observe such covenants as he had before offered, and concluded
John: which if he did execute and perform, then he did not only promise, but
also liberally offer (giving him quiet possession of all the places and
Fortresses which were in his government) to use such means, that he should be
thereof absolute Lord and King: and swearing not to fail him in this, he
greatly importuned him that he should quickly resolve.

Now Ferdinand (although he knew well the mutabilitie of the Friars
disposition, and that he might not repose any great credence in his words) well
remembering how many times before he had cunningly deceived him: and that he
apparently saw that he was not moved to do him so good a deed for that
purpose which he propounded unto him, but only for his own private interest
and commodity, and that he might mount to the top of that, of any, for not
doing his uttermost ability, which belonged to a true

Thus upon these considerations he took upon him the charge of this honorable
and godly enterprise, and respecting not the inconstancy of Friar George, but
the travail and peril which might circumuent him, if he deferred time,
presently sent to the Friar 1000. Hungarish horse, paid for four Ferdinand
sends aid to George.
months, and certain pieces of Artillery, to maintain and defend himself,

Behold now the state wherein this poor and miserable Transiluania was, which
(as a man may plainly perceive from the death of King Lewis, until now) was
tormented with so many discords, civil wars, and assaults, that it was
ruthful for any Christian to behold, seeing of the one side the Turk, and on
the other side Ferdinand, and the Lords themselves of the country (bandying
themselves with one, and then against the other) continually practiced al
manner of cruelty in it, using against it such rigor and violence, John, as
in that of Ferdinand, as it oftentimes happens in such broils, where surely
the favor that men bear to the victorious, is no less hurtful and offensive
to either part, then the disgrace into which he vanquished falls: because
that neither the one nor the other receives any thing, but with the loss and
damage of the very inhabitants and naturals of the country.

Ferdinand with a resolute determination, willing to prepare a remedy for so
many mischiefs, and to unfold and vntagle himself from those who had been the
cause thereof, and not to omit the occasion which fortune so favorably
presented unto him, for the conquest of that kingdom (which justly by
succession, by election, and by an agreement appertained to him) determined to
undertake this enterprise, and therein to employ his uttermost endeavor with
all his skill and force. And for that this expedition required a man that
should be very wise and circumspect, and one who had good experience in
martial affairs, and who should be vigilant and wary in resisting and
apposing himself against the Turkish ambushments, and be Charles the fifth,
that it would please him to assist, and not to fail him in this so important
business, and withal to send him so sufficient a man, who could with good
discretion conduct

The Emperor understanding at large this enterprise, and considering of what
importance this war was of, and regarding the distrust which he had Frederick
Duke of Saxon, and of Philip Lantgraue of Hesse (whom as yet he held prisoners)
he could not of a sudden so well determine what to do, not willing to forsake
those Commanders, whom he knew in all stirrings and tumults to be necessary
for him: and further understanding of certain motions of war, that Henry
King of France intended against him: and besides, the dislike of Duke Maurice,
whom he had in great jealousy, for that he would not deliver his father in law,
observing the promise which he had made to him before, which was a thing that
within short time after (as in place convenient we shall at large more speak
of) procured him such hate and toil, as never in all his life time he endured
the like. Having well considered John Baptiste Castalde, Count of Piadene,
whom he a little before created John Baptiste Castalde chosen to go Lieutenant
into Hungary for Ferdinand.
Marquess of Cassan, and who at that time was Master of his Camp, and of the
Council for war, a man sufficiently experienced in all the former wars
under the old Marquess of Pescara: who being called to him, he commanded that
he should prepare and employ himself in the expedition of his brother
Ferdinand, making him Lieutenant and Captain general to his nephew Maximilian
King of Bohemia.

Castalde graciously accepted this charge which the Emperor had imposed upon
him, and being well furnished with good store of horse and arms, which were
bestowed upon him by many Lords of the Court, of whom he was well beloved and
favored. And among others of the Duke of Alba, the Bishop of Arras, the
Marquess John of Pescara, and of the Duke of Sessa, he put himself in good
equipage: and taking his leave of the Emperor, he set forward toward Vienna:
where being at last arrived, with a reasonable company, he was received of
Ferdinand, and with great mirth and sports by the King Maximilian, with whom
spending certain days, he was instructed by them of all things which were
needful for this war, and of the manner which he ought to use toward the
Friar, and how he should govern and Ferdinand promised him yearly 8400.
Florins of gold, to maintain his estate, besides the rewards that should
particularly be given him to dispose among men of mark and authority who
followed him. And to the end there should be no default for the true payment
of this money, he made him a more ample and sure assignation. George, according
to his nature, but with special discretion, whereby he might at the beginning
the better know and enter into his conditions; according to which, and to the
experience and practice of things, which daily would present themselves to him,
he might govern and behave himself, and not to contradict him in any thing,
but agreeing to all reasonable matters which he demanded, he should always
show himself toward him liberal, mild, and gracious, knowing well that he
was ambitious and covetous: that being the only way whereby he must walk and
temper with him. He also commanded him that he should make a memorial of all

Instructions for the conduct of an Army, and maintenance of the same.
1 That first special choice is to be made of a good and discreet General
Lieutenant general of a Camp.
of a Camp, who before has been practiced and experienced in that office,

2 That he must have a general Comissarie over victuals, one that has A
general Comissarie of victuals.
experience therein, who has the charge to distribute them; and to have Bakers
to make and bake bread; Butchers to give every one a sufficient quantity of
flesh; Victulars, Tauerners, Hostlers, and others who are accustomed above the
price which the General has already rated them at.

3 Also that he ought to be provided of a faithful and politic Treasurer A
general Treasurer.
general, who knows means to get and bring in money when there shall be
need thereof, and to negotiate with Merchants, or others, to have it at the
lowest rate, whereby the soldiers shall not altogether be entertained with
words and hopes, but with deeds themselves, suppressing thereby the mutinies
and tumults, which often upon that occasion are stirred up in a camp.

4 That he ought to have a diligent and careful Secretary, who is to A
secretary.
have the books, accounts, and registers of the whole army, and to keep the
roles of payments that are made to the Generals officers of the Camp,
Colonels, Captains, Ensigne-bearers, Comissaries, Sergeants, and other
officers.

5 Also he ought to make choice of a wise and subtle Comissarie, who A
Comissarie.
should have the charge to know and understand, whether all the Colonels and
Captains, as well of foot as horse, have as much and the same pay, as their
roles binds and prescribes unto them, whereby the King shall not any ways
be defrauded, nor the soldiers deceived of their pay: and that the Captains
do cause their Colors to be well guarded by the soldiers, to whom they shall
be committed unto, punishing those who do not their duty therein. And that
to the said Secretary and Comissarie, he ought to allow as many officers and
clerks to be under them, as they shall need, to the end every man may be
furnished of their due; and that upon any occasion

6 That he ought to have a good and experienced General of the Artillery, A
General of the Artillery.
who may have the charge to cause it to be conducted and planted, where want
is thereof, and to bestow them in such convenient places as shall be
appointed. This General of the Artillery ought to have such officers as is
needful for him, and to every piece a Canonier, with his Pioners and overseers
to govern them, as well in their iournies, as in places where they are lodged,
and every number of Artillery ought to have his Captain, with so many Pioners
as shall be needful for the voyage, and for the occasion of time.

7 Besides, he ought to appoint a sufficient guard for the Artillery, as well
footmen as horsemen, under the charge of two Captains, who ought The conduct
or guard of Artillery.
to have a special care often to visit and ouersee them, to the end that they
be not choked, and that the munition be not fiered.

8 That the Canoniers ought to be lock Smiths, black Smiths, Carpenters,
Canoniers.
and Masons, because such men are necessary for a Camp, to shoe the
Artillery and horses, when need shall require, to build bridges, Bulwarks,
walls, and other engines upon any occasion.

9 And because that oftentimes it happens upon the way, that the Artillery,
Ingins to mount and dismount Artillery.
by default of the wheels and carriages, does break and fail, by which
inconveniences it does much hinder the speed of an army: therefore to avoid
such lets, he ought always to have (in such necessity) other instruments and
engines which are fit and necessary to mount and dismount the Artillery.

10 The manner being, that after the Artillery, the munition and instruments
follow: therefore he ought to make provision of as many wagons Wagons and
carts.


11 He ought to have over the said munition, a wise and provident Comissarie, A
Comissarie over the munition.
who particularly may have the charge to distribute and dispose of them,
according to the opportunity and necessity of the time, and a good Saltpeter
or gunpowder maker, and others who can make and invent al sorts of artificial
fires, and to beat the powder for the Artillery and small shot,

12 And considering that it is well known what profit Pioners bring to Pioners.
a Camp, to make trenches, rampires, mines, and countermynes; to make plain
and mend the bad ways, to sap the walls, and holds of towns, or Castles
that are besieged; to cut trees, and necessary wood for the fortification of
any place; to dig pits for the commodity of soldiers, as well to have
water, as also to throw thereinto all the filth and ordure of the Camp.

13 That he ought to choose a Captain who may have the care and charge Captain
of the Spies.
of the Spies, and another to have regard to the Guides, they both being very
necessary, and among other things to conduct the Interpreters. These two
Captains shall have the charge to dispatch all the Spies and Guides that they
will employ, to enquire and know by their voyages and travails, that

14 In like sort he ought to ordain and appoint certain officers to cleanse
Officers to cleanse the Camp.
the Camp of the filth and excrements, which is done as well by men as beasts,
(which oftentimes causes a great mortality) for that the air should not be
corrupted, nor the soldiers fall sick, and they ought to carry it by
wagons or carts to the river, or to throw it into deep ditches made for that
purpose.

15 That he ought also to make provision of good store of wagons, Wagons or
carts to carry victuals.
drawn either with horse or oxen, furnished with coffers for bread, biscuit,
meal, salt flesh, salt fish, cheese, oil, pulses, and other kind of
victuals: with wine, vinegar, and salt, to use as occasion serves, and also to
carry prouender.

16 He ought also to have carts to carry piles, stakes, pickaxes, hatchets,
Carts to carry implements and tools.
sawes, pincers, and other instruments fit for Pioners; and good store of
helues for piles, stakes, and other iron instruments, as occasion shall serve
in

17 He ought also to carry with him in the carts, Mils to grind corn, Mils
and Ouens.
and Ouens to bake bread on the way, where they can find no such necessaries,
and to leave them as they pass by in Castles and strong Forts, where they have
none, and to assist them therewith in time of necessity, which often happens
unlooked for.

18 That he ought to be furnished with boats and bridges portable; of Boats
and bridges.
beams, boords, cords and cables to bind them together; which things he ought
in like sort to have carried upon the carts, whereby he may be the better able
to pass any river, ditch, bogge, or any bad passage.

19 He ought also to make good provision of Pikes, Lances, Caliuers, Pikes,
Lances, Caliuers, etc.
Swords, Murrions, Burgonets, and Corselets, and also good store of Harquebuzes
a crock, and men who are able to use them, and serve therewith at need. These
weapons ought to be carried in carts after the Camp. He ought also to have
good store of Saddles, Bridles, Bits, Stirrops, Spurs, and all such like
necessaries which are fitting for a Camp.

20 That he ought to have with the army good Physicians, Surgions, Barbers,
and Apothecaries, to attend and heal the sick and wounded. Physicians,
Surgions, Barbers, etc.


21 He ought also to appoint a diligent Master of the Post, who ought
continually to be well provided of good horses, and to follow the Camp, A
Master of the Post.
and still hourly with diligence to carry the aduertisements and answers
which come to his hands.

22 And to the end that the soldiers do not of a greedy mind Priests.
rob and spoil others, it is necessary that they forget not what
appertains to good Christians. Therefore he ought to make choice of Priests
to follow the Camp, with their Vestments and other ornaments, fit publicly to
sing Mass, whereby they enclining and addicting themselves somewhat to
religion, may undertake the war for honor and glory, and not for spoil, or
to enrich themselves unjustly by the goods of their neighbors: seeing that in
every army, the fear of God, the respect of religion, and the observation

23 That the said Priests ought to have the charge of the Hospital, which That
the Priests have charge of the poor and sick louldiours.
for the common good of the poor soldiers, shall be ordained in three or
four Tents, at the Kings cost and charges, and the Camp to be provided of
Physicians, Surgions, and Barbers to heal those who are sick and wounded: and
that they also be provided of servants sufficient for their turn. And if any
of the sick be at the point of death, the Priests shall be ready at hand to
confess them, and minister the Communion and all the Sacraments to them, as is
fitting for good Christians: and if they dye, to be buried with as great honor
as may be.

24 He ought also to give command to certain officers, not to suffer
Commands that none disbandeth themselves.
any to disband themselves out of their ranks, and especially when the camp
marches, and that they may have authority to punish them accordingly.

25 And lastly, he ought to make choice of a Captain for the baggage, A
Captain of the baggage.
who shall conduct them under an Ensign, but in such sort, that by the way he
do not intermeddle himself with the army.

I have hither unto written more amply of this note, to the end it may serve
to all Kings and Princes who would manage and exercise martial discipline,
whereby they may know how to provide and conduct their armies in their
iourneys. And whosoever has a desire to see more of this subject, I refer
them to the five treatises that the Lord Ascagne Centorio has made of war,
wherein he shall more at large see all things distinctlie written.

These Articles being finished and presented to Fredinand, he gave special
order to execute them, if not in all places, yet at least in as many as for
that time they could conveniently. And whilst they were busy in these George
fearing, that by too long a delay of succors, which he daily expected, the
Queen should assemble so great forces, that the preparation of Ferdinand would
be in vain, and to little effect to aid him: wherefore he ceased not by
messenger upon messenger to solicit and urge him, that his army should march
toward him with as great expedition as was possible, because that in
temporising and deferring time, he feared the loss of so fair an occasion in
the conquest of the kingdom. Ferdinand being advertised of this, and judging
it best not to omit any time; after the accomplishment and delivery of the
said Articles which they presented unto him, and perceiving that it was best
that Castalde should depart with such Castalde a very large Commission, by
which he gave him power and authority to cause him to be obeyed, and to
command every one, not only in Hungary, and Dalmatia, but also through all
Croatia, and even to the other parts of Slauonia, and lower Austria, minding
that he should be chief in all the Councels and assemblies which were held in
those countries: and he commanded him that before he went to the Camp, he
should visit the I Will of Comar, and other holds, and enquire in what estate the
frontire places were, that so he might diligently provide what was necessary
for them; because that they were then but meanly munitioned, through the sloth
and

Following this command, the first day of May Anno 1551. Castalde departed
Castalde goes into Hungary An. 1551.
from Vienna, and took the way leading toward Agria, where the soldiers
were that he should lead into Transiluania, first going himself to the
frontier places (as we have said) which he commanded to be repaired the best
he could, foreseeing that a time would shortly come, which would manifestly
declare how profitable it might be, not to have been slothful and negligent in
these things, which in semblance are thought little and of no validity, and
yet afterward do cost very dear: for besides the loss of honor, men many
times lose for them, both State and life it self. Castalde Bernard Aldene,
Camp master of seven Companies of Spaniards, which Ferdinand at his costs and
charges entertained in those quarters, and those to attend him were lodged by
the town. He spent there certain days, until he had gathered all his
soldiers together, and in the mean time he labored to furnish himself of
all necessaries, which was behoouefull for a battle. And he seeing this town
Castalde caused Agria to be fortified.
to be one of the most important of Hungary, and that it was neither Erasmus
Teufl to fortify it, and (by the command of Ferdinand) not to omit nor
defer the fortifying thereof, until he had fully finished it.

Having gathered together all his army, and seeing that in expecting the
Cannons (which by the negligence of those who had the charge to send them, were
not yet arrived, and which might be the cause of some Ferdinand, that he
should cause them to be sent with as great expedition as could be. Resting
upon this determination, he departed from Agria the 26. of May, appointing his
army to march in this manner. He placed in the Vauntgard seven Ensigns of
Spaniards, who were in number 1200. and 500. Hungars, called Aiduchs, and 1000.
of light Hungarish horsemen, named Vsarons, who after the Turkish manner fought
with Targets, Aiduchs. Vsarons.
Turkish Lances, Maces of iron, Sables, and Murrions: they were under the The
army of Castalde.
conduct of a Lord of Slesia, named Captain Christopher, and after them
followed 4. field pieces. The Battle was led by Count Felix of Arco, and
John Baptista of Arco, they had under them one Regiment of 3000. Almaines, all
good experienced soldiers and well armed, with 4. other field pieces, and two
small Culuerins, with 400. horse, whereof were 300. of Lances, and 100.
Pistoliers. He caused to march in the Rereward, the Hungarish Infantrie, with
300. light horse, and the baggage with three field pieces, the whole army
making 5700. soldiers, and 1700. horse. With this small army, Castalde
proceeded on his journey to conquer Transiluania, against so puissant a Prince
as the Turk. And hereof may be said, as King Tygranes scoffingly said of the
Romans army, which came to encounter Lucullus: That they were too many for
Ambassadors, and too few for fighters, for that they seemed but a handful of
men, in respect of his which were 250000. Castalde being arrived in this
Military order at Tisse, anciently called Tibiscus, which is a large and deep
river, which takes The river Tibiscus or Tisse. The hill Carpatus.
his beginning in Poland, at the foot of the hill Carpatus, and thwarteth
Hungary, and stretches it self toward the South, until it enters into
Danubius between Belgrade and Cenedin, where then it loses his name. It is in
some places eight miles broad, by reason of Quagmires, and Marshes which it
makes, as it finds the ground there flat and even, and it glideth so soft
and smooth away, that one can scantly see it move. The water Castalde by this
river a while reposed his Camp, and willing himself the first to pass it,
the better to encourage his Captains and soldiers: some say that upon the
shore of this river he made to them this or the like speech.

If I had not known (my brave and valiant soldiers) that your spirit The
oration of Castalde to his soldiers.
and courage desires rather the glory and renown of God, then your own
proper safeties, I would never have ventured my self thus far under your
favor the friends thereof, and pursue the enemies: and think that we being
in a strange country, and in another man's house, to do but that which

Having thus ended his speech, he presently passed to the other side of the
river, causing also the rest of his army to follow, which was eight days in
Castalde enters into Transiluania.
passing, in respect of the largenes of the river. After they were all beyond
the water, they continually marched in battle, until they came to Debrezen,
Debrezen.
a small town of no great strength, where they found Andrew Battor, and Thomas
Nadasdy, who were the greatest and richest Lords of Hungary, and Andrew Battor.
such who already had obtained great reputation through the whole country.
Thomas Nadasdy.
One of them was General of the Hungarish Caualarie, and great Comissarie; and
the other was Lieutenant general. These two were in this town with 500. horse
to receive Castalde, and to conduct him into Transiluania, according to the
means and experiences which they had in that kingdom. Castalde knowing that
they would at their entrance into the town, observe and note what number his
army might be of, commanded the Sergeant Mayor, and Camp master, that they
should presently cause the army to march in the best order and form they
could, and so, that it might seem he had more men, then in truth he had.
This presently was done they came to Zalnoch, which is a Castle environed with
water, where, for Zalnoch.
the guard and safety thereof (before he departed) he left 50. Spaniards.

During the march of this army, and that they hasted to arrive at the place
The Queen caused a Diet to be held at Egneth.
where Friar George was, the Queen had published a Diet to be held at Egneth,
(which is one of the greatest towns of Transiluania) there to deliberate and
advise what means was best to chase and expel the Friar out of that Province.
He at that time (as we have said) was at his Bishopric of Varadine, and
understanding the drift of the Queen, and to what purpose she labored,
omitting all things, which then he was greatly busied about, called for his
Coach, and in the greatest haste he could, took the way that lead toward
Cheresuania. Upon the way, passing a little brook which runs by a valley,
it happened that his Coach ouerturned in such dangerous Erictonius placed in
heaven, should among other signs stand him in stead of a guide: and so with
expedition continuing on his journey, within short time he approached near to
Torde, from whence he wrote to all the Lords, who were with the George
dissolueth the Diet at Egneth.
they would not fail, but presently come to the place where he was, and where
he daily expected them, that they might speedily provide for the common good
of all. Within a while after, there came to him certain bands of soldiers
and companies of horse, which he caused to come from Varadine, which being
come together, made a good number of men, with whom he determined to go to
this Diet, shadowing his intent, that they came with him for no other cause,
but only to be a guard for his person. Peter Vicchy was Captain the forces
which Ferdinand had sent were already on their way, and that Castalde came
with no small aid, presently determined upon this occasion to George besieges
Albeiula.
besiege Albe-iula, thinking that if he were able to be master thereof, he had
effected the greatest part of his desires. Being there arrived, with this
resolution he very straightly besieged and battered it in many places with
great store of Cannon. But those within being nothing possessed with fear,
valiantly defended themselves, and more courageously then the Friar expected.
He now seeing the constancy and resolution of the besieged to be such, and
that Castalde made but slow speed, although every day by letters and Posts
upon Posts, he willed him to hasten on his journey, and so much the rather
because he besieged this town, which defended it self so gallantly, that it
Castalde arrived at the confines of Transiluania. But since it now very fitly
falls out, I will for a while leave the continuation of this history, and
will largely describe the situation, the inhabitants, the strength, the
quality, and fertility of that country.

Transiluania is a Province of the kingdom of Hungary, making a part The
description of Transiluania.
thereof, environed on all sides with high mountains, resembling a well walled
town, having all his entries and passages very difficill and narrow, which
makes me think that it took his name thereof, being anciently named Docus,
who was Lord and King thereof. Toward the North it boundeth upon Polonia, and
of one part of Moldauia, having in the midst the hills Carpates. Toward the
West it does confine upon Hungary: and toward the East it stretches it self
to the shores of Danubius, and takes his ending against Walachia: the
inhabitants whereof are called Walachians, Walachia.
anciently dissended of some Roman Colonie, sprung from the family of the
Flacchians, who were sent to subdue that country, of whom that Province
afterward took the name of Flaccia, which at this present is corrupted into
the name of Walachia, which also contains in it Moldauia, being Moldauia.
two several Provinces, which now are separated, comprised in time past under
Transalpinia^s.
Transalpinians, and Seruians named Slauons, and the Rascians, vulgarly called
Rhatians, who in a manner are as natural Walachians, for that they all
Rhatians.
live under one law and custom: they are Christians, and observe the decrees
and ceremonies of the Greek Church, they obey the Patriarch of Constantinople;
they use the Italian language, but so corrupted, that it is hardly understood
to be the same; they use arms like to those of the Turks; they have been and
are yet a warlike nation, cruel, and endures travail and wearines of war
more then any other people, for that they are naturally very strong. Within
Transiluania there is a Province in a manner linked to a mountain, which
separateth it from Moldauia, which is named Ceculia, Ceculians.
Sicilians, who are of the Hungarian nation, and of the same quality and
Sicilians.
disposition, living according to the laws and customs of Hungary. The other
part of the kingdom, which is the greatest, is inhabited by the Saxons, Saxons.
who ever since the time that Charlemaine overthrew them, by mean of that
great battle which he obtained against them nigh the mountain of
Charlemaine defeating them, caused a good number of them to be led into Gaul,
and forced the other who would not observe and obey the laws (which he would
have established) to go seek some other habitations. Of these a great part
entered into Transiluania to conquer it, and making themselves masters thereof
by force of arms, they there set up their abode, and built seven towns or
Castles, whereof for a long time that Province took the name, which continues
until this day, and in respect whereof, it is called in their language
Sibemburgen. These live after the Germane manner, and observe their customs,
speaking the ancient Saxon language; they are affable people, and of great The
river of Marosse.
the North, and runs from one side to another of that country, until it
enters into Tibiscus, near the frontier towns of Lippa and Themesuar, The
river of Cheres.
at this day the inhabitants call it Cheres, which springs at the foot of
Mount Carpatus, about the place where it joins with the other hills of
Moldauia. There is also other small rivers, wherein are found amongst the
gravel, many grains of gold of great value and price. Toward the South
dwells certain people named Rhatians, which were relikes of the ancient
Rhatians.
Rascians, who remain until this day, since the time they were chased forth
of their native country of Macedonia, by Lysimachus. They are to be hired of
any who will give most: one while they take part with Ferdinand, and then
again they are in the Turks pay. They are unconstant people and of little
faith; they are Christians, and live after the Greek Church; they are poor,
having no towns peculiar to themselves, and they are in great dislike with all
other nations for their inconstancy and perfidiousnes. They dwell among the
Bulgarians and Seruians in two places of the kingdom, and on the other side
among the mountains by the Transiluanians,

This kingdom of Transiluania, after it was reduced to the faith of Jesus
Christ, was subject to the Crown of Hungary; for the government and rule
whereof, one of the principallest of the Court was deputed and nominated with
the title of Vayuode. The capital town is called Sibinium, taking Sibinium
called Hermenstat. Pressouia called Cronenstat.
that name of a river which passes by it. This town is named by the Germans
Hermenstat, others call it Pressouia, alias Cronenstat, and it is of great
traffic. Thither is brought great store of merchandise from Greece, which
from thence is dispersed throughout Hungary. There are many other towns, as
Corone, Torde, Cassouia, and Albe-iula, which was built by Corone. Torde.
Cassouia. Albe-iula.
the Romans, and established for one of their Colonies. This Province had no
absolute King but John, who reigned after the death of Lewis King of Hungary;
and after that, Stephen possessed it, (who for the present is King) Stephen
King of Transiluania called John.
who also was called John in memory of his father, and by the Turks favor
and assistance enjoys it peaceably: and from hence forward we will call him
John, and not Stephen.

Castalde (as a little before has been said) being arrived in Transiluania,
sent Andrew Battor and Thomas Nadasdy before, to foresee and suruay the
passages of the mountains, by which he must of necessity pass, giving them
a good troop of horses, with other soldiers. Which being well foreseen by
the Queen, she sent the Marquess of Balasse, a great Lord of The Marquess of
Balasse.
some disgrace offered by Ferdinand, for that he had thrust him out of
certain Castles situated in Hungary, under the color of rebellion, which was
said to have been pretended against his Majesty) to possess those passages
with 700. horse, and a good troop of soldiers. Castalde being assuredly
informed of this, was by the advice of two (although it was a thing very
tedious and difficult) constrained to seek other passages and ways, which
being in the end found, he commanded them to be repaired the best they could,
which assuredly was a work long and tedious: but nevertheless Castalde by
that new unaccustomed way, entered with all his army into Transiluania,
without any disturbance, and the day following marched in battle, and was
forced to pass by a Castle of Dalmas besieged by the people of Ferdinand.
the Queens named Dalmas, seated in the way upon the top of a mountain, from
when he was saluted with the force of the Cannon: he being Felix, and Count
John Baptista of Arco (who then led the rereward) to continue the siege with
their Germans, and to batter it with four field pieces, and two small
Culuerins which they brought with them, with intent to prove them, if through
fear they would yield. Which thing Felix was thus busied about this place,
Castalde proceeded on his journey with the rest of his army, and lodged by a
town named Colosuar, from whence he sent to the Count 300. Haquebuziers of
Spaniards, to be at the siege of Dalmas.

The Queen being persuaded by the Friar to accord with him, refused The Queen
accords with George.
not any agreement, specially after she understood that there should come to
his aid 10000. Spaniards, and great store of Caualarie from many places: even
as Fame (a messenger as well of false as of true matters) is accustomed to
increase and multiply in the mouths of men, sometimes stretching things
beyond the compass of truth. And knowing that he was already Albe-iula
yielded to George.


Presently upon the taking of this town, he failed not speedily to send
advertisement to Castalde of all that which had happend until then; and
withal sent to him a certain Comissarie to guide and direct him through
Castalde Castalde at Egneth.
being there arrived, he was lodged with the Spaniards within the town, and
disposed the Caualarie and the rest of the soldiers in places convenient
thereabout, whereby they might keep every man in the greater security,
attending there a certain time, to find the means to join with the Friar,
who after the taking of Albe-iula, went to see the Queen, and Castalde,
further persuading her to command those of Dalmas, that they should yield to
him, and not hold out any longer against them which did besiege it, nor against
the Artillery which greatly endamaged them; especially considering that she
very well knew, that granting to their accord, this Fortress should become
hers. The Queen consented to it for two causes: the one, that she might not
see those within the Castle so greatly oppressed for the love and affection
they bore to her, and the place to fall in decay and ruin: the other, to the
end that the Count (for the hope which the Friar gave him) might not by the
loss of Dalmas yielded to Castalde.
this command, failed not to surrender the place into Count Felix possession,
even at the same instant when a mine was almost finished to have blown it up,
in stead of the Cannon; and withal to have given a fierce assault.

As this Castle was yielded, and Castalde remained at Egneth, the Friar came to
confer with him, who although he was councelled to come unlooked The meeting
of George and Castalde.
for into the place where he was lodged, yet was it not done so secretly, but
it was discovered half an hour before his coming. Castalde having Castalde,
presently descended his Coach, and mounted upon a well paced horse, which
always he caused to beled with him, and coming to Castalde, he embraced him
very kindly, manifesting what infinite content he received at his coming, there
passing between them a thousand speeches full of courtesy, and showing
exceeding Aldene Master of the Camp, and other Spanish Captains who also were
there present, entertaining them with many friendly and kind speeches, he
made it known to them what singular comfort he received, in seeing them so
safely arrived and conducted thither. After all these friendly salutations,
they entered together into the town, and went directly to Castaldes lodging:
where after they were refreshed, and had discoursed together of many important
things, Castalde showed him the letters of Ferdinand, acquainting him with the
authority and command that his Majesty would he should have in managing
these affairs of the kingdom; The subtilties between Castalde and George.
in the administration and rule whereof, he was expressly charged to obey and
submit himself to his judgment, considering that for the time to come, all
things should pass through his hands, as already they had until then done;
yielding to him all authority to dispose of things at his pleasure, knowing
that such was the will of Ferdinand, from whom he had express command, to
content and gratify him in any thing which should please Castalde himself, as
also for the honor which was done him, and of the fair words which (in the
name of Ferdinand) was reported to him. For being by his natural disposition
of a proud and haughty spirit, and puffed up with honor and renown, would by
no means endure that any should be his superior. And considering the great
authority and command that Castalde (as Lieutenant general for the King of
Bohemia) had, and the reverence, honor, and submission which nevertheless he
made show to use toward him, he esteemed it a good beginning to continue his
pride and greatness, and that in all the affairs of the Castalde) he presently
seized upon Albe-iula for himself to lodge and remain in, not acquainting
Castalde therewith, saying, that that place was the most commodiest and fittest
to find him, when need should require, and the necessariest to treat of all
businesses that might fall out. That being George went to the Queen.
done, he posted to the Queen to Sassebesse, to inform her of all which had
passed between him and Castalde.

During the time the Friar was on his way, the Queen (who nothing was idle nor
slept) had by one of her Lords, who was a Polonian, a man of good esteem in
his country, sent another way to visit and salute Castalde. By him, and by the
offers which she made to him, Castalde did prognosticate what the issue and
event of all the affairs of that country would sort unto, and principally of
those which concerned the Queen, he well knew they would succeed to his
desire, and have such ending that Ferdinand should think himself well apayd
therewithal. Certain days being passed before any news was heard of the
Friar, in the end there arrived a messenger from him, who gave notice to
Castalde, that he should not fail the 6. of July to find him at Albe-iula,
to confer together upon their affairs. The time Castalde without any guard,
only accompanied with certain Castalde went to seek George
of his own household, went to the place appointed. The manner of this
departure was against the counsel of Andrew Battor and Thomas Nadasdy, and
many other, who thought it not convenient so slightly to repose himself in
this man, who because they knew him to be so mutable in his opinions, and so
variable in his doings, might be able within a short time after, under the
color of any occasion whatsoever, to invent and stir up some new matter, and
be more hardy and bold to execute the same, seeing Castalde alone, then
otherwise he would be, if his forces were with him: and for that cause they
persuaded him, that he would not depart but with a good troop. But Castalde to
stand upon terms, an act which in no sort he found to be convenient for the
beginning of such affairs, and specially seeing he had to negotiate

But proceeding on his determinate journey, in the end he arrived at Albe-iula,
where (according to the foresaid advertisement) he found not the Friar, for
that he was yet at Sassebesse with the Queen, unto whom he was gone, without
giving him any notice thereof. Whereupon those of his company thought it not
amiss (since the Friar and the Queen were yet together) Castalde went to
seek the Queen, and to declare his charge.
the night, finding the Queen accompanied only with those of her Court, for
that a day before, Peter Vicchy (seeing he could not conclude any league with
the Friar) retired himself to his command of Lippa and Themesuar, with all
the men of war, leaving thus the Queen alone at Sassebesse, in which place
two days after, Castalde sat in council with Friar George, and many other
great Lords of Transiluania, where he declared the occasion of his coming,
which was tending to this end; that the Queen should restore Ferdinand,
according to the articles concluded with King John her husband, he himself
being ready to accomplish all which his Majesty had promised, declaring that
upon the accomplishing of these covenants, it could not happen but (besides the
general contentment that every one should receive thereby) all things would
succeed better and more expedient, and specially to her self profitable and
commodious then to any other, if she would duly consider with what travail and
sorrow she possessed those countries, and with what suspicion and doubt she was
maintained amongst them, only depending but upon the Turks good liking,
Ferdinand was, who might at all times be a curb against the force and violence
of the Turk, and might hinder him from further proceedings: and the rather,
that she ought to have such a desire, for so much as she saw her self (though
a Queen) yet of no force nor command Ferdinands offer, as the most sure and
peaceable for her, although it were less, then remain in continual danger
and travail, and to reign in a kingdom, which was not in her power to
preserve nor keep. Besides Castalde for the more assurance and confirmation
Offers made to the Queen by Castalde in the name of Ferdinand.
of both parties, offered the Queen in the name of his Majesty the Infanta
Ioane his youngest daughter, with 100000. Crowns for a dowry, and to give her
in marriage to her son John, and to enter into bonds to satisfy her in every
thing which he promised her, and to pay all the interest which she could
pretend, and in like sort to satisfy all the debts which were found to be due
since that time. These offers seemed generally good, and reasonable to all, and
specially to Friar George, who also made show to be well pleased therewith.
And after many aduertisements, it was concluded that he should cause the Queen
to understand thereof, and bring an answer from her. Ferdinand, and that it
was a means for her to wade out of that subjection, wherein the Friar so
peremptorily held her: she presently answered, that whatsoever he did, she
esteemed it greatly beneficial to her, committing all her actions and affairs
into his hands; of which particularly and by peecemeale they conferred together
by the space of fifteen days. But the Friar continued still without
resolution, now saying this, then that, apparently showing that he had no other
respect John, who was his raiser and maker, and of whom depended all which he
possessed in this world, being raised by him of nothing, and exalted to this
high degree of honor wherein he was now. And thus cunningly did he dissemble
and draw back the most he could.

As these affairs proceeded on in this manner without any resolution, it
happened one day the Queen, without the Friars knowledge, found opportunity
The Queen conferreth with Castalde, and complains of George.
to have some private conference with Castalde, and in such a convenient place
where she might freely discover and impart the conceptions of her own mind;
assuring him what singular contentment she received, in that Ferdinand King of
the Romans, had sent so sufficient and worthy a man as he was, to negotiate
in these affairs; the virtue and renown of whom, she had before heard an
exceeding good report of, and she thought her self thrice happy of his
coming, greatly commending the choice that was made of him, and the judgment
of the King, in giving him that absolute authority to dispose of things in his
name as he thought good of, thinking thereby she should have occasion speedily
to bring her miseries to an Castalde, that for her discharge he would amply
advertise his Majesty, that for the time passed she was not of her self
withdrawn from the agreements between them, but that all proceeded through
the Friars subtilties, who never would agree nor consent that they Ferdinand,
especially considering

Thus to release her self out of the Friars snares (which she reputed a worse
and more intolerable subjection, then that of the Turks) as she had been
before constrained peaceably to depart from one part of her kingdom, so for
The Queen yields her self to Ferdinand.
the like effect, she would now willingly forsake the other, with a resolute
determination to deal with him so, that besides the consideration of the
service which she meant to perform to Ferdinand, he should find great
contentment freely by her means, thus without any condition to surrender
Ferdinand was, who no doubt would defend it, and never lose it; and who might
repute it for no small good fortune, seeing so voluntarily she suffered her
self to be by him deprived of her kingdom, with so small a number of men and
Artillery, of which others with great armies could not dispossess her.
Castalde in Ferdinands name answered her, that he accepted of her good and
sincere affection, John, as to his own children. And for his own particular,
he offered in all her affairs to remain her obedient and faithful Ferdinand
himself who sent him thither.

After such like discourses, they took leave one of another, the Queen
retyring to her chamber, and Castalde to his lodging. In the mean time the
Friar began to practice a dissoluing of all the agreements which already were
The devises of George to dissolve the agreements of the Queen and Castalde.
but lately propounded, and mistrusting the disposition and humor of the he
Queen, to bring that to better effect which he desired should happen, would
never consent to any conclusion, but deferring it from day to day, busied his
brain about no other things, then trifeling delays. And that his purpose
might not be frustrate, and to the end also that he might not be The second
agreement between Ferdinand and Queen Izabella.
they should begin to treat of that which concerned them, that so he might at
the length perceive what conclusion he might make, minding also that before any
act of renouncing the kingdom to Ferdinand should pass, his Majesty should
be first bound to give and perform to John the Queens son, a yearly
reuenew of 25000. crowns, to him, his heirs, and successors, even as had been
already promised him, and that out of such estates which were free, peaceable,
and sure. Which was presently accepted of by Castalde, and promised
(notwithstanding that when such offers were made, Buda was not then lost, nor
other principal places of the kingdom, for the loss of which John) he should
pay to the Queen the 150000. crowns, which for her dowry was imposed upon
King John her husband: and until she was fully satisfied and paid it,
Ferdinand should be bound to give her some town in pawn, whither she might
retire with her son, and remain there until such time they had performed

After they had concluded and decreed in this manner, of all which appertained
George Vayuode of Transiluania.
to the Queen and her son, the Friar began to negotiate and practice for
himself, and demanded that they would bestow upon him the John was wont to
give it, which was 15000. crowns by the year; which request was granted him,
nevertheless with this condition, that he should have for his copartner and
companion Andrew Battor. But by no means he would admit thereof, alleging
that he had always been accustomed to command and rule alone, and not
accompanied, neither would he receive into his government an equal, in respect
it would rather be a charge and burden to 1500. horse for the guard of George.
and further, he desired to have the Salt pits at Torde, which were exceeding
profitable, and he at that time was in possession of them. He motioned this
last demand with such craft and subtlety, that he thought thereby to find
some just cause to frustrate the former conference, assuredly thinking The
custom and manner of Princes.
and discretion would he should have credited the contrary, in respect
himself was often wont to say; That it was requisite for him who would reign
and govern, although he had not the gift to accomplish them, yet to give fair
words and promises to every one, and to perform but a little thereof: which
well he might imagine to be practiced upon him by Ferdinand, since he saw
that so readily they condiscended to all that he demanded. He having now
obtained all which he desired, yet could he not thus suppress the great thirst
of his covetous and greedy mind, but altering every hour from the purpose,
he often repented himself even in a moment of that which he had Castalde
being one day with him, marueiled greatly at his uncertainty, and that he was
so changeable in his proceedings, telling him that he was greatly astonished at
this his mutabilitie, for that he saw his nature was to speak of one
particular matter, at one time this, and another time that, by this means
causing every one to be doubtful, and without any resolution he deferred the
time, until he found the occasion such as he desired, and seemed favorable
for his affairs.

Whilst these affairs were thus trauersed between them, one day he
acquainted Castalde, that he greatly desired to be a Cardinal, and desiring
Ferdinand to write to the Pope concerning it. Castalde promising him his best
endeavor, speedily advertised his Majesty thereof, giving direct intelligence
of the Friars ambition, and of the special desire he had of the Cardinals hat.
Ferdinand having notice hereof, lost no time, but presently dispatched a
messenger, writing Ferdinand entreats the Pope to make George a Cardinal.
to Pope July the third, that it would please his holiness to receive Friar
George into the College of Cardinals, amply reciting to him his virtue and
prowess, and how for many years with his own forces and industry, he had
defended and maintained the kingdom of Transiluania against the puissance of
the Turk, whom he had often foiled; greatly praising him, that from an
incredible poverty (although he was dissended of a noble to that dignity. He
also writ to his Ambassadors who were at Rome, to use the best means they
could to further this suite, and to have answer of the

Whilst this matter was negotiated at Rome, the Archbishop of Strigonium
George made Archbishop of Strigonium.
died, by whose death the Bishopric was void, which was yearly worth
150000. crowns. The Friar omitted no time, but presently made suite for it,
which was as readily granted by Castalde in Ferdinands name, to whom he writ
with all speed, praying him that with like diligence he would send him the
confirmation thereof, seeing they had to deal with so variable and inconstant
a man, it was therefore requisite to make a brief conclusion, for that in
prolonging time to bestow it of him, and not to yield to that which he
demanded, was too much to adventure and hazard the present George disswadeth
the Queen from the agreements made with Castalde.
her, not so easily to pass these articles, which were already accorded,
telling her she might do it without bringing her honor and name in question;
in saying, that she would not depart out of the kingdom, until Ferdinand had
accomplished all that which he had promised: for the rest he Castaldes army
out of Transiluania, and to deliver her out of that subjection wherein she was,
promising her by fair words, that he would always be faithful to her, and
never contrary her in any thing, further persuading her, that this kingdom
because it was justly come by, did appertain rather to her son John, then to
Ferdinand. Whereto the Queen made no great semblance neither with yea nor nay,
giving him thereby to understand, that it was neither just nor lawful to halt
and dissemble so often in his words: and on the other side she told him, that
she had committed all her affairs into his hands, from which she rather
desired to be delivered Ferdinand, as he had effected with the Queen, and that
he should not be any more of that great command in those quarters, as he had
been, began to manifest exceeding great contentment of that which in private
they had agreed upon, faining afterward, that the Queen would never condescend
to such agreements. But the Queen much doubting that the Friar would not fail
to practice most cunningly that which he had said to her, caused Castalde The
Queen accuses George to Castalde.
once again to come and speak with her, aduertising him of all which had
passed between her and the Friar since the time of their two meetings; plainly
telling him, that those whom Ferdinand had chosen for arbitrators in George,
who brewed new inventions to dissolve all that which had been concluded amongst
them, acquainting him with some particulars of his disposition, and instructing
him of that which was requisite for him to do in time to come, that so he might
the better treat of these affairs with him, against the next Diet; because
besides that which he understood already touching his condition, deceits, and
subtilties, he should yet

The Friar seeing his devises succeeded not to his liking, was in the end The
agreements decreed.
content to accept thereof, and conclude all the articles contained in their
parley: that is to say, that the Queen among other points should depart Peter
Vicchy, that the Queen would forsake the kingdom, and that also she would
leave to Ferdinand the low countries, wherein Lippa and Themesuar are situated,
and that they would in recompense thereof, give her in Hungary, or in some
other places, so much as would satisfy and content her. And to the end that
this business might with better expedition be dispatched, there was safe conduct
sent him, that he might with more security, and without any suspicion come
himself to the Court. Vicchy mistrusting that it was a train of the Vicchy
reposeth no trust in George.
Friar to get him into his clutches, and not thinking that the Queen would
Peter Vicchy would not otherwise come, for his greater security, and also
speedily to remove all distrust, Andrew Battor should be sent to manage those
affairs with him. Thus they went together from thence, and Andrew Battor
notwithstanding led with him 2000. horse for Vicchy daily expected succor from
the Turk (to break all this agreement) who presently after, as he had
advertisement of that which the Friar practiced with Ferdinand, gave command
to the Basha of Buda not to fail, but aid him. And truly if these succors
had been arrived before Battor had spoken with Vicchy, this peace had never been made, neither had they spoken any more of it.

Battor being now arrived at Lippa, whilst he conferred with Vicchy concerning
Battor and Vicchy confer together.
the effect of his charge, there departed from Sassebesse a French gentleman,
who was called Monsieur de Santon, whom Ferdinand had sent to be entertained
amongst the Spanish companies, he being recommended A French Spy in the army
of Ferdinand, who advertised the Turk of the occurrents of Transiluania.
to him by the Emperor Charles his brother. This man (as it was reported)
Castalde had great distrust of him, thinking (as it proved) he was a Spy for
the Turk, and sent thither by Henry King of France, to the end that he might
Ferdinand. Within a while after he was departed from Sassebesse, it was
certainly known that he was a Spy, and what diligence so ever was used to
recover him, yet he could not be found; and at the same time came command
from Ferdinand, that his head should be cut off, being advertised by the
Emperor that he was a Spy for the Turk. In the mean time, while they
expected news of him, he saved Peter Vicchy, to whom he was sent. Vicchy
understanding the decree, and the proclamation that was made against him, and
how they sought him in every place, gave advertisement to Castalde that he was
arrived at Lippa, and that if he so pleased, he would send him to him: but
during this message, he caused him safely to be conducted with a good guard to
Belgrade, from whence he took the way directly to Constantinople, to advertise
the Turk of all which was done in that country.

At the same time the day came that was appointed for the Diet to be held A
Diet held at Colosuar, where the Queen resigned all the royal ornaments to
Castalde.
at Colosuar, where should have been all the principal of the kingdom, and
where (as it was determined) the Queen should renounce and resign to
Ferdinand the kingdom, and acknowledge and approve himself King George and
Castalde, the one riding on the right hand, the other on the left. Two days
after they were departed, they arrived at an Abbey, distant from Colosuar eight
miles, where they lodged; and there it was concluded between them, to execute
all that which before had been a greed upon. And the beginning of this solemn
resignation, was by the royal ornaments, which were, a Crown made of plates
of gold, mounting on high in form of a The ornamets of the King of Hungary.
high crowned hat, enriched with stones and pearls, and having a little cross
The sorrow of John, seeing his mother give ye Crown to Castalde.
turning her self toward Castalde, said in Italian, such or the like speeches.

Although inconstant Fortune following her cruel alterations, cutting off and
confounding at her pleasure the affairs of this world, has in such John of
most happy memory (but now unhappy that we be) and to resign into the
hands and protection of others: yet notwithstanding she shall not for all this
hinder me, but that at the least in my troubles and anguishes, I may take this
only contentment, seeing them to fall into the hands of a Prince, who is not
only a Christian, but also so puissant and benign, as is the King of the
Romans, whom I repute for my Lord and father, who also shall Seigneur John
Baptista Castalde, I present them into your hands, with intent (of my part)
they may be sent to his Majesty, giving him to understand, that we yield him
not this kingdom and Crown, under the bond of any condition or covenant
whatsoever, but freely. And we, my self and my son, cast our selves into his
merciful arms with all our fortune, beseeching him he would have regard of
our miserable destiny, which, besides that we are Christians, has caused us
to spring of royal and princely blood. And that

After these speeches of the Queen, her son being yet but young, and John
yet a child manifests not to consent to the Queen his mother.
knowing notwithstanding how greatly it imported him, to see himself deprived
of his estate, and of that wherewith his father sometimes was crowned, making
some resistance, he showed to the Queen his mother the little contentment
which he conceived of this surrender, and appartly manifested

But the Queen turning her self toward him, said: Since (O John my dear and
tender son) that I know thy fortune and mine is not sufficient and able to
defend this kingdom, without the aid and help of others, by occasion of the
great number of those, who either by envy, or of some certain malice, or by
some wicked disposition, make themselves masters of others, continually
searching with the loss of the same, our ruin and destruction: Thou ought
not to conceive ill thereof, if having a care rather to public good, then to
our particular profit, which we cannot maintain against the Turks power, who
by the daily provocation of our enemies end that thou may (at the least) yet
live as a great Prince, if thou can not

Having ended these penitrating speeches, which were of that efficacy to have
mollified a stony heart, and could not be spoken without being interrupted,
George, she gave the Crown and the other ornaments to Castalde, who kindly and
with good words gave her infinite thanks, as well for the good will he
perceived in her, as also for the magnanimity which she had declared, and for
the bountiful liberality by which she did give unto Ferdinand this Crown,
and the absolute entering into this kingdom. And applying comforts to her
adversities, Ferdinand, whom she drew and bound to be a continual friend, and
father unto her, who would never forsake nor leave her in all her needful
affairs; and encouraging her the more, he assured her that he would entirely
and religiously keep it for him, and that he would perform to the uttermost
all whatsoever he had promised her. And with this doubtful hope, the poor
afflicted Queen departed to go toward Colosuar.

Castalde having in this manner received the Crown, caused it to be carefully
kept, being above all things by the Kings of Hungary highly esteemed, in
respect of the vulgar opinion which is held thereof in that country: the
report being, that an Angel brought it from heaven to S. Ladislas King The
common opinion which is held in Hungary of the royal Crown.
of Hungary; and that the King which does not possess it, cannot be the true
nor lawful King, nor iuridially govern the people, nor execute justice to
them. Men do yet say further, that if by chance this Crown should by some
casualtie be lost, and found by any whosoever, although he were the poorest in
the world, presently without any other trial, he should be created King, and
they should swear fealty and homage to him, as to their lawful and undoubted
King. But whether this be true or no, I know not; yet upon George had. All the
Gentlemen and Lords who were present at the delivery of this Crown, judged
that which the Queen had done, was of no small importance, esteeming the
validity of the Crown to be of equal price with the kingdom it self.

For this respect Castalde caused it continually to be kept in his chamber
with great vigilancie, until with a good conuoy he sent it to Ferdinand, by
The Crown of Hungary sent to Ferdinand.
the Lord John Alpohnse Castalde Pescaire, his nephew. The Queen being arrived
at Colosuar, Castalde also arrived there within a while after, where he
remained certain days, attending those who should be there, and that were
Castalde acquainted them with all the passed proceedings, whereof every one was
well contented. And if peradventure there were some, yea, and of the chiefest,
to whom it seemed not good what the Queen had Ferdinands part was then the
strongest. And thus they all with one accord did swear fealty The Hungarians
swear fealty to Ferdinand.
to his Majesty, manifesting great joy to see themselves returned under the
government of their natural Lord and King, to whom of right that kingdom
belonged. And although Castalde discovered the affections of many (who rather
inclined to the amity and league of the Turk, then to that of the King) yet
faining notwithstanding to reduce and bring all to his devotion,

I have always esteemed it (Lords, and chief Commanders of this kingdom) to
be a thing very convenient and necessary, not to speak at any time for any
grace or friendship, which we have purchased from other men; nor for the favor
which we have, or hope to receive from them; nor for any instinct which we
have toward any: but only sincerely to explain and declare what we take to
be good and praise worthy, as well for the particular, as public benefit;
and not at any time to persuade any thing which is not Paleologians, Comins,
Buccals, and other of the principal of Greece, who for their conceived
hatreds, thinking by the Turks aid wholly to banish and expulse their
Emperor, did not only ruinate the Empire, but also lost their own goods,
honors, themselves, and lives, the the bounty of the King had not foreseen
it, opening the eyes of your understanding, to remember the passed glory and
renown which your Kings Ferdinand your King and Lord, with such homage as you
are bound to perform, and to persuade you, that you ought so much the more to
settle who have begotten, produced, and brought them up; and will nousle them

These speeches animated Friar George, with all the rest and chiefest of
Transiluania, presently to yield themselves (knowing the verity of the
Ladislas Endef, was then greatly recommended, because he had induced them to
such their acknowledgement. And they deliberating together upon the war, that
they meant to Ferdinands The ratifying of Ferdinand upon the agreements.
packet of letters arrived, by which he confirmed and ratified all that which
Castalde had promised and agreed upon with the Queen and Friar George. And
besides, gave thereby further authority to Castalde, that if possible it could
be done by a Proctor or Deputy, to celebrate the espousals between the
Infanta Ioane his daughter, and John the Queens son; which The betrothing of
the Infanta Ioane the daughter of Ferdinand, with John the son of the Queen.
within a short time even in the very same place was after performed, with
great joy and contentment of all the kingdom, being the general opinion, that
this new aliance and agreement made between these Kings, would bring forth
among them a perpetual quiet.

These affairs being thus decreed and concluded, the day following, which was
the 9. of September, the Queen departed from Colosuar, with a conuoy of 400.
Hungarian horse, which Castalde sent with her, accompanying The departure of
the Queen out of the kingdom with tears and sorrow.
her himself from that place two miles, which makes four French. The Queen
being thus accompanied and in a Coach with her son (who was very sick) and
travailing on her journey, she that day plainly manifested the Castalde, not
without great redoubling of sorrow and tears, the one returning toward
Colosuar, the other proceeding on their journey toward Cassouia.

Scarce was the Queen departed, but news was brought her that Peter Vicchy
had agreed with Andrew Battor, into whose custody he had already Vicchy
yields the low countries to Battor.
yielded Lippa and Themesuar, with Becch, Becherech, and Chinad, and all the
other Castles which were under his government, not being willing before to come
to this agreement, until he was acertained by the Queens letters, of all
which had passed until then. And after he had thus yielded his whole command,
he set forward on the way toward the Queen, to accompany her to Cassouia.
Whilst he was proceeding on his journey, Battor entered into the said towns,
and taking ample and sure possession of them, furnished the^ with a garrison of
such soldiers, as he had drawn out Ferdinand, and had declared that they
were content to live under his Majesty's devotion, and to serve him in all
occasions of war which

The affairs of Lippa and Themesuar being thus with diligence dispatched,
Castalde thought then he had fully effected his most important business; because
that whilst these two Fortresses were not yet under the government of
Ferdinand, men thought, that that which he had negotiated before, was to little
or no purpose, for that those two places were of great importance, Lippa and
Themesuar towns of importance.
and specially Lippa, which was esteemed and reputed the key and port of all
Transiluania. The same, besides it was of great importance, was exceeding
profitable and commodious, and therefore necessary to be more carefully
maintained and kept, in respect of the great revenues which come George
demanded this toll of the King, importuning that his Majesty would give it
him: but afterward the King understanding it was yearly worth 300000. Florins,
he would not entirely give it him; but yet he had it at a reasonable rate,
although the other would not so accept thereof: and because he was not willing
to give him any occasion to complain of him, he liberally George had the
third part of the toll of salt.
gave him the third part thereof. All Transiluania being reduced under the
obedience of Ferdinand, and the Marquess of Balasse, and Francis Chendy, men
of special authority and credit in their country, being also entered Bernard
Aldene Campe-master of the Spaniards, desired Bernard Aldene a Spanyard, sent
to to command Themesuar and Lippa.
Castalde, that since he would send other Captains for the defense of
Themesuar and Lippa, that it would please him to send him thither, being the
rather desirous to go, for that he understood he would send Spaniards thither.
Castalde was therewith well content, and presently dispatching him, he gave
unto him 300. Spaniards, and sent with him Captain Rodrigo Vigliandrando, who
then was come to the service of Ferdinand, during this expedition, and who was
by the same Aldene, earnestly desired to have him in his company, and that to
the end that he might assist him both by his virtue and good advice in any
Martial affairs, for that he was a man of trust, experienced, Castalde caused
these fortifications to be repaired, to no other end, but only to stop the
Turks incursions, in case he would enter into the kingdom; and that in the
mean time Ferdinand should send him, if need so required. And for that in the
late Diet of Colosuar, the Transiluanians being for that particular cause
required to aid Ferdinand with certain sums of money, they had excused
themselves in respect of the great poverty of the country, which was an
occasion they could not contribute thereunto: therefore by the command The
reuenews of the Bishoprics employed to the fortification of the country.
of the King it was ordained, that all the revenues of the Bishoprics in

Whilst these things were thus in doing, the Friar made semblance as though he
had been very glad thereof, but especially because he had thrust out the Queen
before him: and thinking that his purposes had at the beginning taken good
effect, he hoped (as it many times chances to men who often deceive
themselves in their own affairs) that also the midst and the end would
succeed fortunately, as his own conceits had already promised him. Now the
Friar knowing that he had greatly offended the Ferdinand into this Province,
he endeavored by all means to clear himself thereof, and again to creep
into his former grace George seeks again the favor of the Turk.
and favor. Thus by his subtilties thinking to hold Ferdinand in one sleeue,
and the Turk in another, and to content them both, he meant now to kindle that,
which afterward in the end he could not extinguish. And to execute this his
intention, he departed from Colosuar to go to a Castle of his own, which he
had built from the ground, named Wiuar. He had given order that there he would
meet the Chiauss, which the Turk sent to receive the tribute which that
Province yearly paid him, to the end they might live in peace. The Chiauss
was already arrived at this Castle, whilst they negotiated Castalde, who
presently came thither, and by their general agreement and consent, he paid
the tribute to the Turk, the time being almost expired, in which the said
tribute Tribute paid to the Turk by the Transiluanians.
not good to Castalde (and specially at that time) to give the Turk any other
occasion to infringe or break it, then that he had already done, which was,
in lifting him out of Transiluania; which he meant not to do for many
respects, and specially because he had a purpose with speed to provide for the
fortifications of the places before mentioned; and because that in the mean
while he meant to gain the good wills of the ablest and mightiest men in the
country, and to increase himself both with men and money to maintain and
keep it: but fortune would not suffer that he should long enjoy his desire.
For being one night at supper with the Friar, news was brought The Turks in
field to take the Queen.
him, that by the command of Achmeth Basha, there was gone out of Buda
Ferdinand, assuredly thinking that she would carry it with her as a precious
Jewel. But she (as good fortune was) took the way toward Cassouia, going in
the poorest habit and painfullest travail The misery of Queen Izabella.
that could be imagined, not any thing dissembling the extreme grief which
still heavily oppressed her. To her uttermost ability she manifested Sic fata
volunt, So the Destinies will have it, Izabella the Queen.
and underneath it, Izabella Regina, which is as much to say, Ainsi le veulent
les Destinees, Izabella Royne. After she had engraven these words, she again
presently took her Coach and proceeded on her journey, and arrived in The
Queen arrived at Cassouia.
safety at Cassouia, making by that means the Turks sallie out of Buda vain
and frivolous, who knew not what to do, for that she took another way more
unusual and less frequented, and quite differing from that which they were of
opinion she would take: but the Queen being exceeding Achmeths frivolous
enterprise, and his followers found little contentment of their laborious
desires.

The end of the third Book.
THE FOVRTH BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF HVNGARIE.
THE ARGUMENT OF THE FOVRTH BOOK.
Solomon prepares an army to invade Hungary, and George (Vayuode of
Transiluania) leauieth forces against him. Themesuar summoned by the Turks,
and diverse towns with Lippa is yielded to them. Themesuar besieged by the
Turk, but he raises his forces and retireth from thence. George is vehemently
suspected by Ferdinand, who sent aduertisements to Castalde to kill him. The
town of Lippa besieged and taken by Castalde, but the Castle held out, and
George endeavors to save Oliman, who was Governor thereof, who in the end
upon composition departed in safety from thence: but was set upon by our men,
who were overthrown by him. Aldene made Governor of Lippa. The conspiracy of
George, his death, who was slain at Buise; his burial, and his moueables
seized upon to Ferdinands use, for whose death the Sicilians began to mutine:
but were appeased by Chendies wisdom.

AFter that the agreement passed between Ferdinand King of the Romans, and
Queen Izabella was ended and concluded, and that the Queen peaceably leaving
the kingdom, was wholly freed out thereof; the Transiluanians for two causes
thought happily John in league with the now present King, and to have taken in
marriage the Infanta Ioane his daughter, which aliance and amity did
indifferently minister to every one an assured expectation of a perpetual and
quiet repose, and that in time, by means of Ferdinands clemency and bounty,
the way should not altogether be taken from John one day, to reenter again
into that kingdom. The other was, that for the late sustentation which by
these new Ferdinand, and of the Emperor Charles his brother, durst never more,
or at the least not so often as he had done, molest and spoil them: but on
the contrary, in consideration of this he would greatly fear and doubt them:
so that by this Ottoman violence.

But fortune not minding to satisfy their expectation, unhappily shuffled all
the cards in their hands, and altered that sweet desire of peace, into a
trembling fear and suspicion of war. For this Frenchman (of whom we have
before spoken) being arrived at Constantinople, declared how he fled from
Sassebesse, upon suspicion that he was a Spy for the King of France; and being
retired to the grand Seigniour, informed him of all that which had passed
between Ferdinand and the Queen. Solomon now knowing Solomon prepares an
army to muade Hungary.
Ferdinand should have no time to prevent it, norfortifie himself there.

Castalde having notice of this by special advertisement, in the greatest
haste he could, mustered his men of war, and began to persuade with the
Friar, that he should prepare his forces to encounter the enemy, and give
prevention the best he could to the sinister chances which shortly might ensue,
because that they were not able to provide for the time. The Friar greatly
dreading the Turk, in respect he was vehemently incensed against him, for his
former proceedings: answered (dissembling his thoughts) Castalde, that he
would not fail him in any furtherance. But on the other side he George
negotiateth with the Bashnes.
cunningly practiced his atonement with the enemy, to whom faining to
Ferdinand, he only writ for his own safety and commodity, and sending
certain presents to Rostan Basha, and to him of Buda, to draw and allure them
to his friendship, he assayed as much as he could to shake the blame from
himself: saying, that if the Turk should send an army into Transiluania to
conquer it, because they had put the King of the Romans into possession
thereof, that for that purpose he need not send thither, seeing that all was
done by the Queen, and not by him; who had already married her son John with
Ferdinands daughter, to whose Lieutenants also she had freely, and from the
persuasion of her own opinion, entirely relinquished her country and crown,
and her self was retired soldiers and men of war which Ferdinand had sent
thither, and that he would continually pay the ordinary tribute, and that
according to such order The Turks army in Hungary.
troops, which he brought with him from Constantinople. He being arrived at
Belgrade, he began to muster and assemble his Camp, and after having prepared
certain bridges over Danubius, he passed to the other side, and went to lodge
by the river Tibiscus, upon which he also caused likewise another bridge to be
made, and from thence passing on a long, he came

Whilst the Belerbey busied himself to gather the rest of his Camp, Castalde
commanded Aldene the Master of the Camp (who then was in the low countries
for the defense and assurance thereof) that Stephen Lozonse, a famous Knight
among the Hungars, should with George Sotede enter into Lozonse Lieutenant for
Ferdinand at Themesuar.
Themesuar with 600. horse, for the guard and defense thereof. And further,
Aldene himself should enter thereinto with all the Spaniards which he had,
making Lozonse Governor of those countries, and General over all the warlike
affairs. He with Aldene caused Themesuar and other places to be fortified with
the best defenses they could: and knowing that the enemy was already in the
field, they daily labored to fortify the town with Rampires and Bulwarks of
good sufficient strength, giving advertisement of all things which he heard or
they did to Andrew Battor, who was then at Lippa. Battor seeing the necessity
of the time that vrgently pressed every one, began to leauie as many Battor at
Lippa.
men as he could, instantly soliciting all the people of his Province, and
admonishing Ferdinand: that he might yet win their good likings the more, he
entertained 4000. of them into pay, with many Captains, who voluntarily
offered to be also entertained into Ferdina^ds service, as the others were. And
having Castalde at the same time diligently suruaied and munitioned the
fortifications, and specially the frontier towns of Transiluania, as he saw
was most needful. And George, George, Vayuoyde of Transiluania, raneth his
army against the Turks.
that instantly (as being Vayuode) he should assemble all the soldiers of
the kingdom, to march with them and relieve Themesuar, commanding Andrew
Battor that he should send to Lozonse as many men as he could, whereby he might
hinder and withstand the Belerbey from the passage of Tibiscus. The Friar was
very slow, and fearful to leauie the inhabitants of the

Now when they would by the authority of the superior Lords raise amongst The
custom of Transiluania to leauie the soldiers of the country.
them such Infantrie and Caualarie, as every town is bound to furnish, and
that specially for general defense; the custom of this Province is, to send
one Lance and a Sword stained with blood, and borne on horseback by one of
the principallest officers of every town or place, and carrying them on high
(in token of great and present necessity) shows them to all thereabout, with
another man on foot, who goes crying; The common enemy comes against us
all, let every house prepare a man for general good, and send him speedily to
that place which is appointed you. At this cry every one causes speedily to
depart, all those who are apt and able to bear arms, and sends them to the
rende vous. And thus within a Castalde had thereof, greatly assisting them in
that business, who specially hastened the men, which he caused to be leauied
through the kingdom, George suspected by Castalde.
and so much the rather, because he had vehement suspicion of the Friar, who
continually ceased not to his uttermost, to drive him out of those countries,
whereof he was well advertised by means of one who was very familiar with the
Friar, and acquainted him with all such occurrants. Yet Castalde dissembling
the matter, used Friar George in the greatest kindness as was possible, and
endeavored himself by all means to gain his good liking, and States confirmed
to George.
with 4000. Florins by the year, and also Vaynode of the kingdom, with 15000.
Florins by the year, as he had requested, and with authority in time of
necessity to have 800. horse, and 500. foot for his guard; and besides, 200.
Ferdinand, yet he omitted not The inconstancy of George.
secretly to practice with the Turk, to accord with him, and in recompense
Ferdinands people.

About that time came news, how Maximilian King of Bohemia, was Maximilian
espoused Marie daughter of Charles the Emperor.
returned out of Spain, with Mary daughter of Charles the Emperor, and that
having passed through Italy, he arrived at Vienna, where, by reason thereof,
was made him great feasts and sports: and how some brought letters from Rome to
his Majesty, by which (in the first creation of Cardinals) the Pope promised
to include and create Friar George in the number.

Ferdinand understanding that the Basha of Buda labored thus that he might
increase his army, did (besides the people which he sent into Transiluania)
reenforce the garrisons which were on the frontiers of Hungary, for fear that
the Basha turning his course on that quarter, yet should he not be so soon
master thereof as he imagined. Whereupon he dispatched Andrew Succors sent by
Ferdinand to Castalde.
Branday with a Regiment of 3000. Germans, and Charles Seheretin, a Lord of
Slesia, with 400. horse, the most part whereof were men of arms, and the rest
Pistoliers, all under the conduct of the Marquess Sforce Palauicin, who then
was Comissarie general of the Camp. Being all arrived at Varadine, they
soiourned there a time, attending that which Castalde would command Sforce,
that with the people which he brought out of Germany, he should come and
join with him where he was; and in the mean time, he leaving in Albe-iula one
company of Germans, another at Sassebesse, and two at Sibinio (it being the
greatest and most important town of Transiluania) with those few Spaniards
which he brought with him, and the rest of the Germans, he departed to go
and join with the Friar. And then he understood that the Belerbey had already
passed Tibiscus with a great army of 80000. men, as well Infantrie as
Caualarie (as the Spies, and those who secretly had knowledge of his Camp,
reported): and that he brought Lozonse, that he should without Themesuar
summoned.
any further delay, in the name of the Grand Seigniour, presently yield this
town to him, and that if he would not, he protested to race it stone from

Lozonse at this proud summons answered him thus: That that town belonged to
the King of the Romans, and that in his behalf he would undoubtedly Lozonse,
he made him no other answer, but only sent to him by writing these four
verses taken out of Virgil.

Ante leaves ergo pascentur in aethere cerui,
Et freta destituent nudos in littore pisces,
Ante pererratis amborum finibus exul
Aut ararim Parthus bibet, aut Germania Tygrim.
Minding thereby to demonstrate, that Hearts should rather bruze in the air;
the fishes forsake the sea; a banished man see the end of the world; a
Parthean drink up the river Saone; or a Germane, the river Tygris, rather then
Saone, or Sagona, a river in France.
he would return from his intended course. And so proceeding on his journey,
he came before a little Castle which stands almost upon the passage of the
river, and is named (as is above said) Becche, and there in camped Becche taken
by the Turks.
himself before it, and seeing it would not yield, he began so rudely to
Becherech taken.
which being astonished at the late misfortune happened to Becche, whilst he
was occupied about these attempts, the Rhatians of Ferdinands part, seeing the
Turks Camp approached with great force and violence, and Ferdinands power
deferred too much time before they came into the field, they all persuading
themselves, that it was neither shame nor dishonor The Rhatians revolt from
Ferdinand, and incline to the Turks.
to break their words and oaths which they swore to the King (although they
had received pay) they wholly retired to the Belerbey, sending to him for his
greater assurance, their wives and children, and that because the Turks are
not accustomed to repose over much trust in them, knowing their extreme
inconstant dispositions. After he had entertained these Rhatians, he caused
those of Senath to be tempted to some agreement, promising them that if they
would yield, he would preserve both their honors and lives, and he would
permit that peaceably every man should enjoy their Senath yielded to the Turks.
came under his command, and leaving therein a good garrison, he speedily
marched toward Lippa, which was ten miles distant from thence, leaving
behind him Themesuar, which then he would not besiege, but reserved that
enterprise until better opportunity, and performed no other thing, but
diligently observed the situation and commodities thereabouts, and after that
proceeded on his journey.

Every one was of opinion that he meant not to enterprise any thing against
this town, because that he was certainly informed there was a strong garrison
within it, and that it was sufficiently munitioned and fortified, Castalde was
forced to send all the succors that were necessary for him) and that
afterward he seeing himself deprived of all hope, he made no doubt, but
that either by force or composition he should carry it. He being now within
one days journey of Lippa, presently sent his Vauntgard, to know and suruiew
the Camp of Andrew Battor, who was suddenly advertised thereof by his
Sentinels, which he appointed Battor (who was then at Lippa) that the Turks
drew near to that town, Battor confusedly quitteth Lippa.
and that they had already discovered the Vauntgard. Battor upon this news
even the very selfsame night retired so confusedly with his people, yt all his
Camp was in a manner quite defeated, because that every one for his own part
sought the means how by flying he might save himself. Dislodging in this
confusion, he left in the Castle Captain Pete a Hungarian to govern it, a man
of good reputation as well to manage arms, as also for other politic
affairs, with 300. horse, and certain Aiduchs, who are (as we before Andrew
Battor departed, when in the morning the Burgomaster of Lippa (who is the
principal officer of the town, and every year one is chosen and created, for
the administration and The Burgomaster of Lippa yields the town to the
Turks.
Pete, plainly (yea and like a jolly stout Burger) telling him, that he would
yield the town to the Belerbey, since he saw no forces left to defend it, it
being forsaken by Battor, and that there was not one citizen that would hazard
the loss of their children, wives, sisters, and revenues, all of them being
well assured, that if they should stand upon their guard, the Belerbey would
without mercy put them all to the sword, and that for this fear, neither
they, nor the other Rhatians who were remaining in the town, would adventure
that, which within short time was probable to bring them to utter confusion,
nor foolishly hazard such a miserable end which now was eminent, if they stood
upon defensive terms, well Pete seeing the cowardly resolution of this
Burger, and assuring himself, that the Turks being in the town, he could
not possible defend the Castle, esteemed it better and more profitable for the
service of Ferdinand, in preserving those soldiers which he had with him, to
retire with safety, then to expect and adventure the loss of all. Upon this
deliberation he forsook the Castle, and the greatest part of the town, and so
departed out of it with all his soldiers. And of the other side, the
Burgomaster Solimos defended against the Turks.
Lippa only but a Culuerine shot. The soldiers who were within were Castalde
would relieve them (as for certain he did) and showing their valiantnes and
courage, which was exceeding great, they daily made sallies out upon the
enemy, and endamaged and annoyed the Belerbey as much as they could, so that
he seeing neither by promises, good words, nor by more then reasonable offers
he could win it, he was forced in the end to depart, and let them live in
peace, persuading himself that he should in the end have it either by a long
siege, or of their own good will.

Thus leaving within Lippa 5000. horse, and 200. of the best Ianisaries which
were in his Camp under the charge of Oliman Bech a Persian (who a little
before for some indignation which he conceived against the Sophy, was come
from Persia to one Turks service) departed with the rest of his army to
besiege Themesuar, thinking that upon the conquest thereof, he should not
leave any thing behind him which was not firm and assured to him, and that
he should not have any more occasion to conceive any fear Ferdinand: and for
the better notifying of this town of Themesuar, I will make a brief
description thereof.

Themesuar is a little town environed with the river Themes, whereof Themesuar.
the town takes his name. The half whereof is enclosed with a mud wall, and
built up with wood in form of a Rampire, and before it are great Ditches,
Marshes, and Quagmires full of water, in regard whereof it makes the town in
that place so strong, that by no means it can be battered, and much less
besieged. The other half is enclosed with a wall of quarters after

This town being thus fortified, they got thereinto all the victuals which
were in either of the Suburbs, and fiered the greater of them, for that the
enemy should not find commodity to lodge therein; and the other part
Themesuar besieged.
this firm resolution, behold the Vauntgard of the Turks arrived the 14. of
October, to peruse and suruay the place: and whilst they were busied and
attentive about their view, Lozonse sallied forth with 400. horse, somewhat
against the liking of the Master of the Camp, Aldene. Captain Vigliandrando
Alphonse Perez of Saiauedra, to whom a little before Ferdinand had given a
company of Hungarish horse. Lozonse on the other side with his horse performed
as much that day, as was possible for a man of experience and valor to do
against his enemy, so that being well seconded by the vigilancie and dexterie
of the Harquebuziers, he forced the Turks (which were 2000.) mauger their
braueries, to retire themselves to their maine squadrons. And this skirmish
continued until the Master of the Camp sent to them, with command to retire,
fearing were very hotly charged even to the very entrance of the Suburbs,
where Vigliandrando well foreseeing the event, had placed certain
Harquebuziers to relieve them, when they should make their retraict. And this
prevention stood them in singular good stead, and greatly endamaged the enemy,
who for fear of the said shot, were forced to make a stand, and in the end
retire

The day after this skirmish, the Belerbey presented himself before the town
with all his Camp in a well ordered battle, who (by reason of the Rhatians
that had forsaken and disbanded themselves from our part, and were linked to
the Turks) was grown to the number of 90000. men, whereby he thought to amaze
our people only with the sight of their army: and Lozonse and the Master of
the Camp had begun (as good fortune was) to fortify. Which thing when our men
had understood (by the confession of certain prisoners, whom they had taken in
their sallying Aldene had already sent to Castalde, to certify him that if
within 20. days he was not relieved, he should be forced to render the town)
esteemed as nothing the Turks violence, for that they assuredly thought, they
were well able to maintain the defense of their town, unless perhaps they
should be so battered with a great number of Artillery,

Now whilst these things passed thus at Themesuar, Castalde having first
furnished all the Fortresses with Germane garrisons, and after that he had
appeased the disorder which was at Bressouia by the soldiers (who were A
tumult at Bresouia.
risen against the citizens, and had offered them great outrage: and to appease
Castalde had set in order these affairs, he came and joined with the Friar,
who with great diligence and promptnes had already leauied The army of
Castalde.
as well horse as foot an army of 70000. men, which daily increased, and
Sforce Pallauicin, who came thither with 3000. Germans, and of Charles
Scerettin with 400. horse, and lastly by the arrival of Andrew Battor with
10000. men, who after his retraict from Lippa, had thus redressed and reunited
his army, which so timerously and by such a confusion was disbanded and fled.
By this augmentation Castalde and the Friar had in their Camp well near
90000. men, as well those of his own pay, as also those which were sent him by
others, and 50. pieces of Artillery. But although the number was great, yet
were they of little ability to perform any matter of moment, for that they
were men of small experience, The Transiluanians for the most part are
soldiers of small actio^.
and such as were sent of every house, (as the custom is in this kingdom
always to send upon such necessity) meanly armed, and merely ignorant of any
warlike discipline: so that they are more fit to move trouble and fly, then to
fight or pursue the enemy. For these respects Castalde had no great affiance
in them, but only upon a few men which were in the Kings pay, of whom, and of
no other he made special account for any important service, which number
might amount unto 15000. horse and foot of all nations: but specially he
reposed singular confidence in 500. Spaniards which continually he had with
him, in whose quarter, as well in the field, as elsewhere, he always pitched
his Tent and lodged. And because that among so Castalde seeing the
inconvenience thereof, and endeavoring to abate and suppress all their
particular dissentions, and to reduce and unite them into one atonement, that
he might not by the means of such tumults and disorders, cause Ferdinands
forces; caused the principal and chief men of mark among them to assemble
before him, and used to them this or the like perswasiue admonitions.

My loving and friendly fellows in arms, your famous predecessors in
Castalde his oration.
times past flourished by good and commendable customs, and abounded in all
excelling virtue, and specially in warlike affairs; where in former time they
usually attained to the period of eternal glory: yea, and in such famous
sort, that they thereby were greatly admired of all Nations, Kings, and
Provinces. But since, this path of virtue has been left by their posterity,
and that it has been covered on all sides, and darkened with innumerable
vices; which our ancient custom and observation requires: which is impossible

By virtue of these and such like speeches, all the people which before were so
disordered, did now unite themselves lovingly into one, having more respect to
the person which did thus speak, then regard of their own particulars, and
were content to be ordered and mustered with the other.

This done, Castalde and Friar George with this army and Artillery, began to
march with great iournies, desirous in time to relieve Lozonse and Aldene, who
were besieged at Themesuar. In the continuance of their marching, the Friar
would always lead the Vauntgard, having all his people with him. But when he
approached the enemy, Castalde took the conduct with the best and approved
soldiers which he had, leaving the battle to the other. And marching in
this manner, he himself appointed the quarters for the army to lodge,
always choosing the places of most strength and commodity, whereby his people
should not receive any detriment, continually causing his Camp to march in
good order, although it was with some difficulty, for that the army was
great, and the way where they should pass very Castalde, seeing that thereby
the succors which he determined should enter into Themesuar were slackened,
which he knew to be violently battered by the Belerbey.

Now whilst the Camp marched, the Commanders of the army discoursed A
consultation held among the Commanders of Ferdinands army.
among themselves, whether they should go to Lippa or Themesuar: and after
many and sundry opinions, it was thought fittest that they George firmly
opposed himself, saying, that it was much better directly to go to Lippa;
alleging for his reasons, that the Belerbey to relieve Oliman, would raise
his Camp from before Themesuar, and that he would assuredly come to them; and

Castalde took these opinions not to be good, and proving his speeches by
diverse reasons, in the end persuaded every one to determine upon this
resolution, to leave a Camp before Lippa, which should be sufficient to
maintain a siege there, and so to hinder Oliman that he should not by sallies
be greatly offensive to them, neither escape himself: and with the rest of his
people (since he had sufficient) he would march on toward Themesuar, Lozonse
and Aldene, and that if he did otherwise, it would redound to small profit; and
this enterprise could be subject to nothing else, but to inconstant fortune,
void of all reason.

After (I say) such aduices discoursed and determined of, the Friar at the same
instant called to him Battor, that he might be present at that which he would
speak; and said to Castalde, that he had altered his mind, and that he
thought it not good to go with this army to relieve Themesuar, being assured

Castalde answered him, that he had reason to be as he was, especially in
important affairs, in which it was behoouefull to take good counsel, and use
a consideratiue foresight, it being commendable for him sometimes to change his
opinion from good to better; but only he now meant to persuade him to go to
Lippa, where (according to the event of things) they would agree amongst
themselves either to assail Lippa, or relieve Themesuar. The Friar replied,
saying, that he well knew Themesuar to be a place not very strong, and that by
a Polacque, (whom he had of purpose sent thither; and after that he had
diligently considered all that which was done there, as well within as without,
he was again returned to him) by whom he had also notice that the Turks
expected more Artillery to be sent them, Castalde hearing these things, with
other more colorable reasons, strengthening still his own, told him he
should Lozonse and Aldene, as they had demanded, having protested, that if
during the limited time of twenty days, they were not relieved, they Solomon;
or else that he thought not his Camp to be sufficiently furnished of such men,
upon whose valor he might adventure the hazard of a combat, I know not, but
for these reasons he would not upon had I wist, neither adventure his person
nor the kingdom, nor march any further, and less relieve Themesuar. But in
the end he manifested with an evil will to go toward Lippa, and thinking to
escape from thence (since otherwise he could not do it) he held on his pace
Oliman might retire himself, for that he thought he would never adventure nor
attend him within so weak and unfortified place. Thus the Friars idle excuses
was not without some considerations best known to himself. And whilst some
were disputing to proceed on, and others to make no haste, news was brought
how the Belerbey, after he had battered Themesuar eight whole days together,
was now retired; notwithstanding there was brought The Turk retireth from
Themesuar.
him more Artillery and munition, esteeming it to be his best safety not to
attend there any longer, understanding that Friar George and Castalde approached
near with a great army. And thus upon the day that our men thought to receive
the assault, at the dawning of the day, they perceived the Turks Lozonse and
Aldene being advertised of this departure, would not that any should yet go
out, fearing the enemy was not wholly retired; but caused certain Aiduchs to
go forth to suruiew the Trenches, and discover the occasion of so sudden a
removing. These being abroad, saw that the Turks were assuredly retired, and
that in to assail Lippa, (and not leave it behind) then to follow the enemy.
The army proceeding on in this course toward Lippa, they had notice how Oliman
determined resolutely to defend it, and as they marched (being already within
four miles of Lippa) there arrived the 20. of October in the night, a Currier,
who brought news, that Pope July the third, at the request George made
Cardinal.
and instance of Ferdinand, had created Friar George a Cardinal, and brought
him the red Hat, with many Cardinals letters, who not knowing him, but being
only induced thereunto by the good and commendable reports which were spoken
of him, sent to him this news, with great and magnificent salutations,
aduertising him with what good affection of all their College, the Hat was
bestowed upon him, assuring him also, that not only this

As these and Ferdinand had written to him these particulars, and that
according to the great information which was reported of his virtue, greatness,
and courage, he seeing such commendations to be greatly to his renown, could
not so much contain himself within the bounds of temporance, but that he
apparently declared to all men great tokens of joy in his Ferdinand, should in
respect thereof, and in time to come greatly suspect him, and upon these
reasons might have just occasion not to repose the like trust in him, as he
before, even until that time, had done. By reason of these two contrarieties
which he had in his mind, there were contrary shows in him: for unto them
which did little know and understand his practices, he made show as though
he little regarded the Hat: but to others who were of a deeper reach, he to
veil their judgments, endeavored himself by many inventions Castalde
commanded that a Salve should be made with all the Artillery, to the end
that the Friar being thoroughly provoked with such signs of honor and joy, he
might resolve himself wholly to follow Ferdinands part, and that with such
sincerity as he ought, and that he would wholly give over himself to his
service, and not have so many Irons in the fire. But all this was done to small
purpose. For with his deceits and shifts, he still continued to mask his
falsehood, little regarding any person of what quality soever; which was a
thing that greatly Castalde, as all the other Commanders who were adhearing to
the Kings part. This, and the ambitious desire of power and great The cause of
the hate that Castalde had against George.
places, were first the cause of the hate which was engendered against him, and
in the end procured his death, because that all the Commanders seeing he did
not any thing esteem nor favor them, but on the contrary held them in
disdain and contempt, began to apprehend a suspicion of being betrayed,

Now while Friar George by his malice, in concealing his purposes, dissembled
one thing, Castalde with as great policy and wisdom fained another, always
shadowing his intention with such discretion, that none had any perseverance of
the dislike which he conceived in his heart against him; and having before
noted the Friars deceitful proceedings, as it was said, he reposed no trust in
him at all, but continually had a vigilant and suspicious eye over his actions.
As these affairs proceeded on in this sort, two days after Advertisement from
Ferdinand to Castalde, to kill George.
there arrived with Castalde a gentleman of Ferdinands retinue, named Julius
Salazar, who was come post from Vienna, with letters of credence, which
Castalde was not then departed out of Transiluania, he should not now stir
from thence, but resolve to keep and maintain himself there so strongly,
that the Friar should find no devises to expel him out: and that he should
invent the best means he could presently to have him slain, for that he
perceived not only by his own letters, but also he understood for certain,
by special aduertisements from those who were come from the Turks Court, and
from the King of Polonia, and some of his Secretaries, that he intended to
enter league with the Turk, and to seek the destruction of him and of all his
army, and thereby to make himself absolute Lord of Transiluania: and that
before he should put in practice his determination, he advertised him to have a
special and vigilant eye of his proceedings, Castalde then understanding
Ferdinands pleasure, he thought it no new or strange thing, because that he
already very well perceived that the Friar used but little sincerity and true
dealing in those affairs which concerned the Kings service, which possessed him
in a confirmation of the distrust, which he not without cause conceived of him.
Now to frustrate his jealous brain from suspecting any intended practice
against him, he by Ferdinand had to see a good end of this war, and what
special hope he had of his valor and integrity, to obtain by his means
some renowned victory, attributing all the glory which should be gotten
thereby, to his virtue and prowess. With such colorable fictions he
continually entertained him, until that time which then should present unto
him the means to execute his enterprise, even as he well hoped it would come
to

In the mean while the Camp approached very near to Lippa, and then the Friar
for that day would needs lead the Vauntgard, which Castalde by George and
Castalde disagreeth for the conduct of the army.
to be exceeding bad for the Artillery, the way being very narrow, by reason
of the mountain and river which fronted each other: but yet not so rough that
it should be any occasion to hinder or slack that which he desired to do;
yet did the Friar find it to be a sufficient subject, to execute his wavering
intention. Thus he now seeing it was time to accomplish that which he had
imprinted in his brain, having suruaied the passage, declared to Castalde that
he thought it would be impossible for the great Artillery to pass that
place, and that he was of mind that it was good to leave it there,
notwithstanding Castalde not liking of that which the Friar advised him of,
went himself to view the said passage, and saw it was not so bad, as that it
should stay or hinder the Artillery from passing: and thinking the Friar was
not so simple, but that he knew this passage might easily be fitted, judged in
himself that he set before them these difficulties to no other end, but to
slacken the deseignes of Ferdinand. Upon which consideration, Castalde caused
good store of Pioners to be set on work, and made them bring many pickaxes,
who within a short Castalde with the other Captains to bring the work to an
end, began themselves to set to their hands, and there they labored so long,
till it was far in the night, in respect whereof he was forced there to lodge
his Battle and Rereward, and commanded certain Spanish Captains who were
then with him, that although it was not yet day, they should march with the
Artillery the rest of the night, notwithstanding it was then time rather to
repose and rest themselves, in respect of the former days wearines; Julian de
Carleual) he said to him, that he should not be astonished, although they came
to him at that time of the night, and in that manner (as he saw) to speak
with him, for it was for no other purpose, but to know the cause that moved
him without any occasion, to wish him to leave the great Artillery, being so
nigh the enemy, against whom notwithstanding courageously marching, they
should be sure to get incredible and great astonishment to the enemy. The
Friar answered him; that the occasion which moved him to come unto that place
with the army, was, for Oliman bouged not from Lippa, but resolved to
withstand all the inconveniences and hazards of a siege, not believing that
such a resolution did proceed from any other thing, but only of the
confidence which the said Oliman reposed in the near assistance of the
Belerbey, and that if it were so, he could see no assurance to proceed any
further, for that heretofore he never incountered with so great an army,
composed of so many warlike soldiers, as that of the Turks was, and that for
this occasion,

Castalde told him, that specially they were to consider the foul offense
which would be greatly imputed to them, if they retired without some just
Ferdinand. Therefore to avoid that stain of dishonor, he most instantly
prayed him, that at the least he would go to Lippa, and (by Gods assistance)
he would promise him to deliver it into his hands within six days. In the end
he pursued his persuasions so effectually, that he was content to go as far
as Lippa, although he often alleged the great inconvenience which might
befall them for want of Artillery, which by good fortune, and by the diligence
of the Spanish Captains, arrived that day at the Camp, to the great
admiration of the Friar, who assuredly thought they could not be there in
eight days. This animated Castalde presently to troop on with 3000. Hungarish
horse, and Lippa.
keeps the circuit of an ouall form, so that it is more long then broad.
The length thereof is 720. paces, and the breadth 380. being of one part (for
that the river Marosse waters it) very strong, and of the other it seems
very weak, by reason of a mountain which does greatly command and annoy the
defenses thereof. It is altogether mured with a wall after the ancient
Castaldes approaching, he lighted from his horse and walked on foot, and
passing through certain gardens, accompanied with Julian Carleuall, and two
other Spanish Captains, he went to peruse the Ditch, having first sent a good
troop of those which he had brought, to dare the Turks to skirmish, who by no
means would adventure forth to fight, employing themselves from the wall
wholly to annoy our men with the harquebuze, and hinder Castalde having well
and diligently viewed all, and after he had caused his men to retire, the same
night he returned again to the Camp, where he found the Captains Roderic
Vigliandrando, and Francis Henry Tescieda, who were come forth of Themesuar to
be at the assault of this town. He fully learned of them the adventures which
had passed in that place, and the manner of the Belerbeys retraict, having not
before understood any thing for certain.

Upon this news, the 2. of November they all marched to Lippa, where Lippa
besieged by Castalde.
all the Camp being arrived, Castalde martialled all his battalions and
Artillery before the Turks, with a marvelous cry and confused noise of all
those barbarous nations, and continuing there a certain time in such
appearance, Castalde possessing all the hill, (which commanded in manner of a
Caualier) quartered those highest who were entertained by Ferdinand, namely the
Spaniards, Germans, and Hungars, and caused his Tent to be erected in the
midst of them. Whilst the Camp lodged there, the Turks came forth to fire
one of the Suburbs, which was well provided of victuals, and specially of wine
which grows in that quarter, as good as could be desired. Castalde
understanding hereof, commanded Captain John Vilioa that presently he should
take 100. Spanish covering the walls with men, and with their harquebuzes they
made a great slaughter of these Aiduchs, who like beasts were easily
discovered;

During this time, there arrived at the Camp a Hungarish Lord named Patocche a
Hungarian Captain.
Patocche, with 400. horse and 600. foot, which he leauied and brought with
him at his own proper charges, to be employed in the service of Ferdinand,
during this war of Lippa. He also brought with him four good pieces Patocche
with his people proceeded on his journey, leading prisoner with him the
Captain, by whom understanding of what quality and condition he was of, he
determined to give him to Castalde. But Patocche had taken him from him:
whereupon being possessed with despair, he suddenly discharged his piece against
him, between his shoulders, and so mortal was the wound, that he suddenly
fell dead to the ground, he not minding that any other should possess that,
which himself could not enjoy. This Captain, as it was afterward known, was
of such quality and parentage, that if the line of the Ottomans

Patocche being arrived at the Camp, was honorably received by Castalde, and
great mirth and joy was made for the good success and taking of this Castle;
and not without cause, since voluntarily and at his own expenses, without any
particular hope of profit, but only in regard and expectation Gala a Castle
taken by the Hungars, disguised in Turkish apparel.
they could win it, they environed it, who being discovered by the Sentinels,
and perceiving that the Turks made not any shot of Cannon against them, nor no
other show for their own safeties, they were determined to give an assault to
it, and force the Port, and assay if by that means Ferdinands army, which
they knew should presently march against Lippa: and they seeing our men
coming, did verily think that they had been the same which they expected,
insomuch that they were not any thing moved or feared therewith, and the rather
in respect of their habits, who were apparelled after the Turkish manner, which
they had gotten of those who were dead in the Camp: and being by this train
deceived, and thinking our people had come to their aid,

After such joy and mirth, the night being come, it was decreed that during
John Viglioa, Don Antonie Azinetta, and Thomas Varcocche. To another part were
dispatched Captain Vigliandrando, and the Alferus of Lewis Barientos. And
Andrew Lopes Sergeant Mayor, Julian de Carleuall, and certain other Spanish
Captains, had the charge of another quarter. The diligence was great Castalde,
he caused the very same night certain pieces of Artillery to be planted upon
the hill which was above the town, near to the place of Justice, with which
the day following he made many a shot, to hinder and annoy the enemy that he
should not fortify himself, and to force him to quit the streets and
passages about the walls, which from that hill might easily be discovered. The
second night being come, Castalde commanded to begin the battery on that side
which Vigliandrando had viewed, as it was generally thought to be the weakest
and least defencible of any part thereof. That being done, after the vapouring
away of the fogge (which toward the Castalde seeing that the Artillery had
sufficiently effected his purpose, was determined the same day to give the
assault, and not suffer the Turks to have so much leisure to fortify
themselves any better, and not minding to impart it to all, he told it
notwithstanding to some few, in whose friendship he greatly affied for all that
which he purposed to do. But upon this determination they discovered the Fort
which the Turks had erected within, insomuch as they were forced to alter their
opinions, and commanded the Canoniers to increase their battery and ruinate
it,

Whilst they continued their battery, and that Castalde was gone to Friar
George, to give order for that which should be fitting for an assault, fifty
Spaniards (who then were out of their quarters, within the Trenches for the
guard of them, and to see what was done by the battery) began to discourse and
confer among themselves of it: the breach seeming good and commodious to give
the assault: these men taking resolution, because they only Castalde that they
should have gone alone to the assault. As they discoursed of this enterprise
among themselves, a private soldier greedy of glory, offered himself to
go and view it: but he so badly viewed it, that he was afterward the cause of
great disorder (as we shall presently declare) for he reported that it was
very reasonable, not any thing perceiving the Trench which the Turks had made
within, half a pike in height, and a whole in breadth, raised up with two
ranks of baricadoes were attentive to the signal which should be given, for
that they

While Castalde was with the Friar, accompanied with all the Colonels,
Captains, principal Lords, and many other soldiers of the army, it was
concluded to go to the assault, and generally encouraging every one, and
promising to them liberal rewards, he spoke unto them after this manner.

If it be true (as the truth is so) that Gods goodness never fails those,
Castalde his oration to encourage them to the assault of Lippa.
who for the maintenance of infallible faith, for justice, and for the good of
many, employ their uttermost endeavors: I make no doubt (my soldiers) but
that this day, fighting for the defense of our Religion, the just cause of the
King our master and Lord, for the delivery of Lippa, and for the recovering
and preservation of this kingdom, that we shall not only receive more import
then any other, valiantly endeavor your selves this day to show your uttermost
virtue and courage; because that in this day you may in the

Presently after he had ended these speeches (and having heard the report of
this Spanyard who had viewed the breach (as we have aforesaid) who had also
certified that with little labor they might easily mount to assail it) and
that every one had offered himself, either to win it, or else there
honorably to end his life; he appointed the Ensigns should march to the
Trenches, which he commanded to be made in every place, that the Turks
Georges, that whosoever should first enter into Lippa, if he were a gentleman,
he should have given him in recompense The means to encourage soldiers to an
assault.
200. Ducats of yearly reuenew, and 200. slaves: and if he were meanly
dissended, that the King would make him noble, and give him 100. Crowns of
yearly reuenew, with 100. captives. Upon this proclamation, those who were in
the Trenches, seeing the Ensigns to march toward them for the assault,
desirous to win glory, and to be the first, began directly to march to the
breach. The others who came after with the Colors, Don Antonie de Enzinellia,
and Captain Vigliandrando, without further respect of the quality of the
place, approached to the battery, and thrust themselves in, and having with
them 30. this they would willingly have given notice to Castalde, to renew and
strengthen the battery with more Artillery, and make the breach more large
and Aldene arrived there with his Ensigns, with whom (not giving respite to
those to execute that, which they not without cause had advised upon) suddenly
he began to renew the assault, and with certain Hungarish gentlemen (who to be
known from others in fighting, had fastened to their caskes certain marks)
resolutely entered with the Colors into the breach, courageously forcing
themselves upon their enemies, it being bruited that these were the first who
mounted upon the wall: but among the Spaniards and Germans, the honor thereof
was given to Julian de Carleuall to be the first that vaunted himself upon the
top of the ruins, Castalde gave the due honor and promised reward. But the
Friar would have attributed the praise thereof to the Hungars. At this assault
there began a horrible and bloody fight, with great loss of our people, and
advantage to the Turks, who were 3000. only to defend that little breach, and
who also fought so courageously, that they often durst sally out of their Fort
or Baricadoes, to fight pell mell amongst our men, and that even hand to hand.
They first slew Captain Aldene, and Don Antonie de Enzinellia, and many other
valiant and expert soldiers. Captain Vigliandrando was wounded in the foot
with a shot, which forced him to fall down among the dead, and he presently
was stricken with a greater bullet, which took away the creast of his murrion,
and if a soldier had not by Peter de Auila, named Ferrant Botto, who in the
absence of the right Alferus, that day bare the Colors, which already he had
fixed on the top of the Turks Fort, and a Turk causing him to fall with a
harquebuze shot, and minding to pull it out of his hands, he never could do
it, until assisted by others, he cut off his head, lifting up by that means
his Ensign all tainted with his blood, sprinkled upon the Colors which were
azure and sables. They also within a while after slew the Alferus of Captain
Aldene, and wounded those of Captain Diego Velez, and Mendoze, out of whose
hands they violently plucked away Aldene and Antonie, and of certain others
whom they thought to be of the principallest, either for that they saw them
valiantly to fight, or else, in that they were better set forth in arms and
abiliments then the other. And seeing they had won 4. of our Ensigns, they
became by this victory so peremptory and proud, that they adventured to come
forth of the breach to fight with our people, and so shamefully to chase them
from their walls and Ditches, with such a slaughter, that it Ferdinands people
were thus miserably beaten, and the Turks so courageously resisted their
assaults, Castalde advised and resolved that this night Lippa should be taken,
how dear soever it cost him, in respect to avoid the peril which might
afterward ensue, upon the coming of the Belerbey, who was said to be on his
way to relieve Oliman. Upon which advertisement, calling all the Captains into
his presence and the Friars, reproving their cowardice,

If ever the memory of high exploytes and glorious acts of any whosoever, has
had the force to move the hearts and courages of men, and to prick Castalde his
oration to encourage the soldiers to the assault at Lippa.
them forward to a like commendable desire; it is even this day, and that by a
more vehementer reason (my soldiers) by the vile and infamous retraict, that
against all expectation, you have untimely shown, which ought now to have
power and command over your. For which I see you, with an unlooked for loss,
so much discouraged, that hardly (containing my heart from breaking) can I with
patience endure to behold you. And although that we know how the Belerbey of
Greece, and Basha Achmeth are on the way with an huge number of horse and foot
to relieve Lippa; If they should

This said, having first reenforced the battery with more Artillery, he
presently caused an alarm in the whole Camp. At the brute whereof, they all
in good order went to the wall with ladders and other engines to mount upon it,
and to obtain the breach, which now was somewhat enlarged, enuironing the
town with more then 40000. men. There was within it only Oliman, there was
some 5000. men appointed in places convenient. Thus they began cruelly to fight
as well within as without, and very fiercely with so great cries of those
barbarous nations, and such a thunder of our Artillery, sounding of Drums
and Trumpets, that it seemed the world would presently have ended. And the
great disorder which Castalde, he presently caused all the men of arms and
Caualarie to march with him, appointing both the one and the other where they
should attend with their squadrons, considering that there was less peril and
danger in such disorder, then to cause his men to retire, upon whose retraict
he judged greater inconvenience would ensue. And approaching nigh the breach,
he saw that Oliman had appointed 600. horse in a place by, and very near to
them, well foreseeing the end which would betide him, who had appointed them
there not only to succor the breach, but with a resolute purpose also to save
himself with them, seeing already he could not any longer resist, nor
withstand Castalde perceiving this, and the more to expel Oliman from all hope
of safety and succors, he sent John Turkey with 4000. horse, and Charles
Scheretin with his 400. men of arms to possess the other side of the river
Marosse, by which passage might come the aid which he expected from the Basha
of Buda and the Belerbey, and by which place also he might have some hope to
save himself. And thus jointly with the Friar (who that day performed the acts
of an expert and valiant Captain) he provided for all things which George a
valiant Captain.
were necessary, now riding on this side, then on the other, as one that
perfectly Oliman lost no time, but animating his people, he effected that the
besieged fighting courageously, endured a very sore assault, which was for
four hours very bloody on both sides, in which the Turks did not any thing
yield to our people. Certain Captains of those who were the first that
mounted up the breach with Julian de Carleual, seeing the Turks so bravely
defended themselves, and that it was now growing late, and not minding to see
so many as they had already lost, to be cast away, advertised Castalde that
their Castalde returned them present answer, that they should firmly maintain
the fight, and that they should remember, that the assault which in former time
they had given to Dure, had in like sort continued four hours; and that by
any means howsoever, they should not fail but that the town might be taken
that night: and if they entered not that night, (besides the loss of their
reputation, which is a thing of special importance in feats of war) they
should put themselves in danger, to leave there that glory

At this time Friar George (covered then with a green cassocke, by which he
hid his habit, for fear of being known by the enemies) and Count Thomas
Nadasdy came together to the assault, and to the quarter where the Germans and
Spaniards were mingled with other nations, who animating Castalde on the other
side perceived that the Caualarie, which Oliman had ordered in a squadron by
the breach, began to recoyle and retire back, which was a likelihood they
could not any longer resist, and that they should be either forced to fly, or
presently to yield. He taking hold of this opportunity, commanded presently
that the 200. men of arms of Ourestolf a la Hungresque, should go to that
hill which commanded the town, in form of a Caualier, and that there with
some brauing show, they should make a view and front of soldiers, whereby the
Turks seeing them, they would judge them to be soldiers indeed, who came to
assail that part of the wall which was opposite to them: these people made a
show of an infinite number of men. Castalde then presently sent to the Captain
that commanded them, that instantly when he should see the assault renewed,
that then he should descend from the hill with all his people, and with Sforce
Palauicin, who at the Sforce Palauicin.
same time also behaved himself valiantly in the fight, as in all other his
former actions he had done, discharging the Artillery so effectually against
the town, that it was an incredible thing. Captain John Viglioa was the first
that mounted upon the wall, and presently he was seconded by Francis de Salcede
who bore his Colors, and who was only remaining, all the rest being taken
away at the first assault by the Turks. Carleual was also one of the Lippa
taken by assault of Castalde.
soldiers who were the first that advanced themselves at the breach, upon
which was seen more then 1200. dead Turks. All the Ianisaries, who were the
last that shronke or retired, and the other who remained alive with Oliman,
began with such fear and so tumultuously to fly to the Castle, that it was a
marvelous thing to see those men so vilely forsake and disperse themselves,
Ferdinands people being entered into the town, they found not any Turk who
durst lift up his sword against them, but suffered themselves to be beaten
down like beasts: and the noise was so great both within and without, that
nothing else was heard but grievous sighings and groans of those who gave up
the ghost, and such a confused medly of others, who not finding any to
encounter withal, and crying victoria, victoria, kill, kill, did run up and
down through all Lippa like mad men, and afterward sacked the town. The
Turks who were on horseback thinking Castalde to guard the river, and there
by these horsemen they were miserably disordered, and the greatest part of them
slain. The remainder willing to avoid this bloody peril, fell into another
the like or more great, and for one death received two; because, that venturing
into the river to save themselves by swimming to the otherside, the Hungarians,
Germans, and Bohemians setting themselves against them, pierced both them and
their horses with their Lances on every side, insomuch that he who died not by
dint of the sword, was forced pitifully to end his life in the water and to
drown Oliman (who also had forsaken the town with a good troop of horse,
with intent to save himself) seeing what was done to others, took for the
last refuge, which fortune that day allotted to him to save his life, (wherein
most of his people lost their lives) a resolution to save himself in the
Castle. Flying thither a pace, he found there a great throng of his people,
that as yet remained safe from this furious and bloody tempest, who for the
great prease to save themselves from slaughter, endeavored to enter in, many
falling from the Oliman being also arrived at that time, mixed himself with
this throng, although he often saw himself almost trodden down by this
multitude, and entered into the Castle upon the bridge, whereon there was also
some of our people mingled among them: and if then they had bin well advised to
have thoroughly charged the^ on that side, they might easily that day (which was
the 6. of November) have taken the Castle, and Oliman had never been saved. But
the desire and covetousness Castalde caused all the Castle to be environed, and
placed about it good and strong The Castle of Lippa besieged.
guards, for fear least the enemy, by the obscurity and favor of the night,
(...) occasion to be incensed against this country, only contenting
themselves with this that they had already done against him, in taking this
town by Castalde replying, said unto him, that by no means he would suffer
such a stearne enemy as Oliman was to escape, seeing they now had him in their
hands, and that none but God should free him thence: and that using such rigor
and severity in his proceedings, he should begin to abate the pride and
boldness of the Turk, and by no means Oliman, and the end at which he aimed
being manifest to all the Camp, as that also which the Slauonian had confessed
(who a little before was taken) he was in the end forced to discover his wicked
intent, and plainly to tell Castalde, that for no man's pleasure he would not
become enemy to the Turk, but that he meant to set Oliman at liberty, and
permit him freely to depart with his Castalde answered him, that since he had
determined to do so, this was his advice, that before he would conclude any
other thing, he would cause all the principal Lords and Captains of
Ferdinands army, and them of Transiluania, to be called together in a public
assembly, to the end that every one might speak his opinion thereof, and that
by this means they should have no occasion to complain, that they were
deprived of that honor and profit, which they had dearly purchased with their
own blood and with extreme pain, without giving them to understand some good
Castalde, Andrew Battor, Thomas Nadasdy (who not long before was made Palatine
of Hungary) Perein Peter, John Turkey, the Marquess of Balasse, and other
Lords and Captains, as well Hungarians and Bohemians, as Spaniards and
Germans, and with them all the Deputies of towns and provinces of the
kingdom, Friar George in the presence of them all began thus to speak in
Latin:

My loving Lords and friends, I persuade my self you are not ignorant, Friar
George his oration.
how much the force and terror of the Grand Seigniour is to be redoubted his
pleasure and in his fury he knows justly or iniustly to use against men
Oliman Bech, now straightned by you in this Castle of Lippa, to whom and to his
people giving liberty safely to depart, shall recite to the Grand Seigniour
our good and friendly intention, who, in respect of so friendly a deliverance,
will rake up in oblivion the revenge, which otherwise he would violently use
against us, for the wrongs which he has received by us in this war, and no
doubt he will let us possess this tranquiltie and peace, which is so
vehemently desired of every one. Therefore I earnestly desire you, that well
considering of my words, you would follow my counsel, and embrace this my good
intention, which is sincerely spoken for Oliman and his people to death, or
retain them prisoners: because that when you have put them all to the sword,
yet can you not clear your selves neither of hate nor further travail,
considering that the Grand Seigniour has no want of other men and forces,
having fifteen miles from hence more then 40000. men, ready to revenge their
deaths; and as I am certainly informed by a friend, (which even at this time is
come to me from their Camp) that the Belerbey and Basha of Buda, will within a
short time come to assail us: which if it proves to be so, what then shall
become of us? what hope of kindness can we expect, having not used any courtesy
toward their

At these speeches of the Friar, Gastalde (as the chief and principal man
among them) made this effectual reply: It was not needful that you (most
Castalde his reply,
reverend Sir) should have sent (not few months since) to the Emperor Charles
the 5. to promise him upon your faith, that you would always be as well
favorable to the Christians, as on the other side a cruel and mortal enemy
to the Turks: neither was it in like sort necessary, that you should desire
Ferdinand King of the Romans to send you succors, and deliver Ferdinand did
not any thing doubt of your inconstancy, having before too truly had
experience thereof: yet nevertheless not taking regard to this your sudden
alteration, he was willing to assemble this army together, and against the
opinion and counsel of many to send it to your aid. And this force has been
such, that not only it has helped this kingdom, and you your selves from the
tyranny of Infidels; but also it has recovered a great part of the country,
courage to detain them prisoners? Do you not think, you Hungarians,

Upon this declaration, all those of the Council began to look upon Friar
George, and to change their opinions, seeing it was an infamous and foul
fault, to let Oliman escape unpunished for his wickednesses and cruelties, as
the Friar earnestly importuned. And the conclusion was, that by no George
seeing that neither in private nor public he could perform that which he
greatly desired, and that his reasons were not allowed of, presently said in
great choler to Castalde; that although he would not grant it, yet
notwithstanding, in consideration of the public good and tranquillity of
Transiluania, he meant to save Oliman. Castalde would make him no answer, but
increased in himself the hatred which he bare against him, and the great
desire he had to hasten on his death, he manifestly knowing how much he
favored the Turks affairs, and held those of Ferdinands in disgrace.
Presently when the Council was risen, the Friar dispatched a messenger to
Oliman, them safe conduct to come forth and depart with their arms, horses,
Ensigns, and baggage, accommodating them of wagons to carry the wounded.
Castalde would give them some other safe conduct, whereby that Oliman should not
in any sort be disturbed by these nations which he commanded. To which
Castalde would by no means yield; and thereof excusing himself said unto him,
that he would upon no condition give him words for payment, nor satisfy that
his demand, in respect of the cruel enmity which he knew to be naturally
between the Turks and his people, who thought it not good to let Oliman so
securely depart, and that he distrusted it would be impossible to withstand
them from following him. In the end the Friar pressed him so far, that he was
forced to promise for all those who were in Ferdinands Oliman, to conduct him
to the place of safety. He at last came out of the Castle with 1000. Turks,
Oliman departs in safety from Lippa, by the means of George. Vercherez.
which remained of 1300. who were slain by the Artillery, and causing all the
baggage and wounded to be martialled in the Vauntgard, they began to march
toward the Castle of Vercherez (where that night the Belerbey was) and being
lodged twelve miles from Lippa, he privately came from thence in the night to
see the Friar, who had sent before him a 1000. horse to conduct him with more
safety, and being in conference four long hours together in the Friars Tent,
he in the end took leave, and retired himself where his people attended him,
and remaining there the rest of the night, at

At the same instant that Oliman departed forth of Lippa, the Marquess of
Balasse secretly went out of the Camp with his 200. horse, not acquainting any
person therewith. With him also joined 2000. horse more, who stole forth of the
army, for the desire which they had to massacre these Turks, because that
they did not a little complain for the agreement which the Friar had made, in
suffering them so safely to depart, and warranting them Alphonse Perez de
Saianedra, who joined himself with the Marquess. They being all in this
manner assembled, and swiftly riding on, ouertooke Oliman in a plain field,
where was neither tree nor bush which hindered them from being discovered. When
he perceived our men, he began to march more closely together, the most part of
his people being on foot, having in the midst of his squadron four or five
wagons, about which with the wounded he placed 35. Harquebuziers, that of the
rest remained alive unto him. The Marquess Olimans squardron, he by good
speech provoked his own people, placing himself in the fore rank, thinking
at this first shocke to force the Turks, who not to spend their shot in vain,
made no great haste to discharge their Harquebuzes, but so effectually they
shot, that at the first vollie the Marquess was wounded, and his horse slain,
Oliman, not being able to reunite themselves again, the one bare in upon the
Vauntgard of the Turks, and the other upon the Rereward, leaving the battle
of Oliman secure, and not any thing broken. The Turks taking courage of this
their unlooked for advantage, and seeing Oliman fought so gallantly, carefully
endeavored themselves still to march close together, and all the way they
fought so bravely, that our men never durst return to assail them, but
quietly suffered them to

After that Oliman was thus departed from Lippa, they began from the The means
that Castalde used to entrap George.
next day after to permit those who were sent from the kingdom, to return
again, and Castalde also demanded of the Friar, that those who were of
Ferdinands pay should be lodged in Transiluania. But the Friar would not that
any of these nations should enter into those countries, but that rather they
should be lodged in the County of Varadin, excusing himself by the charges
which already that kingdom had been at, and that in biliting his soldiers
within that country, (it being now peaceable and quiet) would be a beginning
to ruinate and spoil it, he thinking it far better that they should be in
garrison in places of his Bishopric, where (in his judgment) Ferdinand had
not so much to do, as in the foresaid places. Castalde seeing this speech did
greatly discover him, and being needful for him to manage these affairs with
more policy, then before he had done, said to the Friar, that he thought it
good and convenient that they should send back the Artillery into the
kingdom, from whence it was brought, and that with so good a guard, as
belonged to a matter of such moment. The Friar was well content therewith, but
with this condition, that there should be no more then one hundred Germans to
Castalde agreed unto, and presently sent word to his Captains, that they
should cause the Artillery to march, before the Friar knew thereof, and that
therewith should go five Ensigns of Germans, having charge to put one part
within Albe-iula, and the other in neighboring places by. And in the mean
time, he with his best skill declared to Friar George, that it was very
necessary to lead the soldiers into the kingdom, not so much for the
assurance thereof, as to recreate them, in recompense of their travails which
they had endured, and for their exceeding valor which they had manifested at
the assaults of Lippa, as he himself had seen: and also to the end that they
should show them some sign that they had good

Whilst the Artillery was thus on the way, the Friar and Castalde began to
give directions for the affairs of Lippa, causing the dead bodies of the
Ferdinands Camp, the Friar deprived them all of their goods, and bestowed them
in recompense upon many his Captains and soldiers. Among which was in like
sort bestowed the goods of a certain Merchant, who was slain at the taking of
Lippa, a man of good sufficient wealth, and one who had a wife, who besides A
virtuous wife.
in that country. This woman seeing she had lost, by the sack and spoil of
the town, her whole substance, and that nothing was left her, but her apparel
which she then did wear, and that also they had taken all her possessions from
her, and that the Friar had distributed them between two of his Hungarian
Captains, who unkindly had expulsed her out of her own house; seeing her
self very poor and beggarly, and not knowing what course to take, was
counseled to make her complaint to Castalde. Upon this she went, and being
come to his Tent, and pressing to go in and speak with him, was stayed and
enquired by the Guard what her business was. She answered, Castalde, she heavily
explained the cause of her coming, humbly entreating that he would not suffer
that she should seek her relief among charitable people: sorrowfully telling
him, that although her husband was found with an ill will to be at the wall of
Lippa against him, Castalde caused presently these two Captains to be called
for, to whom giving as much and more of that which belonged to Ferdinands part,
in recompense of this woman's goods, he commanded them that instantly they
should restore all that which they had of hers: which they willingly did, and
one of the two, who

In this time the Campe-master Aldene, required Castalde to bestow the
government of Lippa upon him, with such conditions as he had in charge to Lippa
committed to the custody of Aldene a Spanish Captain.
bestow it upon any other: which was presently granted him, and left there,
with his company to govern it, and he was commanded to fortify it, and
repair the Castle, he recommending that place to him, as a thing of great
importance to all the country, and especially because it was the only Bulwark
and Key of that kingdom, and therefore that for this cause he was to repair
it into such state, and as strong as it was before, and that he should give
order, Castalde on the other side to provide for Themesuar, sent thither Don
Jasper Castelluio, with his company of Spaniards, Jasper Castelluio Governor
of Themesuar.
raised of those who at the assault of Lippa had lost their Captains, (as
above is said, whereof Ferdinand not long before had provided him) and gave him
special charge to fortify this town, and to take such order

Having sufficiently provided for these two towns, he lodged his whole army
within the precinct of Varadin: and having well accommodated them, he caused
the Spanish and Germane companies to march on the one side of the river
Marosse, and on the other side (not to give the Friar any suspicion) he went
himself alone with him, only but with 25. Harquebuziers on horseback for his
guard, causing to march on the other side 2000. horse, and 500. Harquebuziers,
and in this manner they began to dislodge, they both (for the more assurance
and less distrust) like good friends riding in

Now the time approached wherein he thought to kill Friar George, and so
Ferdinand importuneth the death of Friar George.
much the rather, for that he was earnestly solicited thereto by Ferdinand: who
also at that time had sent another messenger from Vienna, that he should use
expedition in this attempt, and bereave him of life, and specially because he
understood by Castaldes letters what he had done to and with Oliman. And to the
end that the Friar should not distrust any thing upon the coming of this new
messenger, he told him that Ferdinand was very joyful for the taking of Lippa,
and that he gave him infinite thanks for the service

Whilst by such disguised maskes he covered these his stratagems, Castalde
Binse where George was slain.
in the end arrived with the Friar at Binse, a Castle which was built by him in
respect of the pleasant situation of the place. There Castalde observed, that
the occasion he waited for and so greatly desired, was now come, in a manner
Castalde seeing the Spanish Infantrie arrived not so soon as he desired,
(without which he could effect nothing to Sforce Palauicin, and to all the
other Spanish Captains, that in what place soever they were, they should
presently dislodge with their soldiers, and without staying in any place,
repair to Binse. If the diligence of the messenger was great, that of the
Captains was nothing inferior, marching as far in one day, as they could
hardly have done in two. This day Castalde behaved himself very pleasantly,
finely entertaining the Friar with soothing and familiar discourses, who
dreamed not of any thing but of his departure to go to a Diet, which he caused
Castalde and all his army (which were in Ferdinands pay) out of the kingdom,
and even to the end (as might be vehemently suspected) to defeat and cut them
in pieces, imagining that thereby he should be able to make himself absolute
Lord of all those countries. The Friar was lodged in his Castle, as he was
usually accustomed, as often as he came thither, and in like sort Castalde. And
in the town by the Castle was lodged the Friars guard. And as they were there
accomodated, the Spaniards arrived the same night, whom the Friar commanded
should be lodged in the The river Sebesse.
This river has a bridge of wood, for the commodity of the Castle, passing
from one of the towns to the other. These soldiers being thus lodged,
Castalde required the Friar that he would appoint the place where the Germans
should winter, which by no means he would resolve upon, not willing that any
great company of them should lodge in one place, but divided into houses and
villages, to wit, twenty in one place, forty in another, and so consequently
according to the proportion and receipt of the Castaldes Courtiers said, and as
afterward was understood by them) every town taking his arms, might easily at
the prefixed time kill all the soldiers they found therein; which was not
concealed from Castalde by some who were about the Friar. But with great
discretion he bore all patiently, dissembling in his countenance that which he
had inwardly purposed, he employed al his care (as being greatly desirous
thereof) Sforce Palauicin, with whom he had express command from Ferdinand,
to confer about this deed, which he until then concealed from him, and
reciting to him that which he was to do, and showing him the means that must
be observed therein, he told him in his Majesty's name, that it was necessary
that he himself should be an actor in a fact of so great importance, Ferdinand
to refuse it, it being more then necessary, that ye night following without
delay it should be effected. The Marquess readily offered his own person,
and all his power, yea and with such a desire as could be expected in such a
person, not contradicting any thing which was said to him; and answered
Castalde, that he would appoint what he should do, and as for that Castalde,
under color of aduising touching ye placing of his soldiers in some
garrisons, went to see the Friar, who^ he found ready to hear Mass, and
suffering him to go quietly to his devotions, stayed himself in another room
by, to confer with certain there. There some of them that were present came
and told him, that the Priest being at the consecration of the blessed
Sacrament, forgetting to take the Host, he took the Chalice and elevated it,
Presages of George his death.
which was a presage of the Friars death, and of the blood which he Castalde
presently sent for Captain Andrew Lopez, to whom he imparted, that this night
of necessity the Friar must be slain, and that it was the Kings pleasure it
should be instantly performed; and that for the good regard that he had of his
person, Monin, Cheualier Campegge, The actors of George his death.
and the Marquess Sforce, that with all expedition this exploite, sans fault,
should be put in practice, for that in omitting it, besides that the King
should wholly lose both that kingdom and his reputation; all they themselves
also should be in danger to be slain: and on the contrary in executing it,
there could not possible betide of it, but singular good: and although that
there might be danger by means thereof, to see some alteration among
Ferdinand would gratefully accept thereof; and instructing him how he should
carry himself therein, he commanded him that out of all the Spanish
companies, he should only make choice of 24. Harquebuziers, the most resolute
amongst them, and less known of the Friars men, and that at the opening of
the Castle gate, he should find the means, as wisely as he could, to bring
them in, and that being once entered, they should seize on four towers,
dividing six to every one, and that there they should keep themselves quiet,
until they were Peter d' Auila, and commanded him that four hours before the
baggage was ready to march, he should go to the Port of Sassebesse, to gather
without sound of Drum or any noise, the soldiers who were within, and that
afterward upon day break, they should present themselves before the Castle
gate of Binse, with their Colors displayed and ranged in battle, and that
there they should attend the charge which should be given them: which was
presently done.

Now the night being come, which was very clowdie and dark, during which the
element would demonstrate some sign of the Friars death. For Andrew Lopez
performed to the full of all that which was commanded him, causing very slily
those 24. Harquebuziers to enter in, so that as well for the coming forth of
the wagons, as also for the desire to dislodge, not any took regard to them
who entered in, they being all apparelled in Turkish habits in long and large
gowns, which they had gotten at the taking of Lippa, and with these robes they
covered their arms and harquebuzes. They being thus entered, Lopez disposed of
them in places convenient where they should keep; and presently after, he went
from thence to the place where Castalde expected him, with the Marquess
Sforce, who was the chief actor in the enterprise, and certainly knew the
determined order which he should Monin, the second Cheualier Campeggio, the
third Scaramuccia, and the fourth was called Piacentino, men of an approved
resolution, and of as great confidence: and to be short, such were these men,
as in a whole world could not be found their like to effect such an attempt.
Besides these, Lopez amongst many had culled out to be the most valiant. With
these, the Marquess Sforce about day break went toward the Friars chamber
upon the 18. of December, and the Friars Secretary who perceiving the drift of
this rumor, went to give him notice thereof, but he was turned again by these
conspirators. Before them all went Castaldes Secretary, named Marc Antonie
Ferraro of Alexandria, with certain letters and fained patents in his hand,
with intent to show them to the Friar, and to request him to peruse the one,
and seal the other, telling him that it was for the Marquess Sforce, who that
day should depart to go to Vienna, and who would not go without knowing
Ferdinands Court. This Secretary was accustomed early and late to have free
access to the Friar upon any affairs, yea, and even at untimely hours, and
the Friar bore him good affection, and always used him familiarly, affoording
him great favor and many rich gifts, and reposed a special trust in him. For
these respects he was sent with them, that the more colourably and with less
suspicion, the grooms of the Friars chamber might open his door, they knowing
the good affection that their master bore him, and that the said Secretary not
four days before, about the same hour was come to him to negotiate some
important business. Castalde had expressly sent him at such

They being all thus arrived near the Friars chamber, they presently locked in
the guard of the Aiduchs into a hall thereby, who little suspected any such
matter, for that they were all clustering about the chimney to warm them, and
to refresh themselves, by reason of that troublesome night which they had
endured. And after the Secretary knocked at the door, and being reported to
the Friar who it was, he caused him presently to come in; the Marquess Sforce
following him, whom the groom would not let enter in, George, who was in his
shirt and night-gowne, he using no other circumstances to apparel him, but
only came presently out of his bed, and leaning then on the table, upon which
he had a little Clock, a Breuiarie, and a book of his notes, with an
Inkehorne by. The Secretary told him, that the Marquess Sforce was to go to
the Court of Ferdinand, and before his departure he was come to kiss his
hands, and would know his pleasure if he would command him any service: that
being said, coming to himself again, and saying Virgo Maria, he pulled the
dagger out of his breast, and for that he was a man of great strength, and of a
bold Lopez, discharged their Harquebuzes upon him, which the Friar seeing,
said no other thing but these words in Latin: What means this my friends? The
last words of George.
and saying, Jesus Maria, he fell dead to the ground.

Behold now the end of the proudest and insolentest man in the world, and the
greatest and closest Tyrant that ever lived, God permitting that he should in
that very place end his days, which he had caused to be built upon The death
of George was foretold him.
ruin whereof, his death was foretold unto him by the Abbot of that place. And
neither could his authority, wisdom, nor great wealth protect him from the
action of so miserable an end, whereinto (his days being almost come to a
period) he suddenly fell. The brute ran, that this death inflicted on him,
was rather by the envy and malice of those who hated him, then by any act
which he was culpable in: for that the defense which he undertook for Olimans
protection and safety, tended to no other end (as was afterward perceived, and
as we shall hereafter more at large treat of) but Oliman and his people, he
might pacify the Turks fury, and cause them to abstain from further
oppression of Transiluania, and suffer every one to live peaceably. This we
are sure on, that all those which were actors of his death, in time fell into
great misfortunes. The Marquess Sforce within a while after was overthrown
and taken prisoner by the Turks, who inflicted great torments upon him.
Captain Monin was Revenge from God against the murtheres of George.
beheaded at S. Germans in Piemont. Marc Anthony Ferraro in anno 1557. was
also beheaded in Alexandria, by the Cardinal of Trent his command. Another
was quartered by the Frenchmen in Prouence. Cheualier Campeggio in anno 1562.
was in the presence of the Emperor Ferdinand mortally John: so that the death
of Friar George was more offensive and prejudicial to the Christians, then
profitable, as we will hereafter in his due place mention.

Returning then to the pursuit of our history: whilst these were busied
about their execution, Castalde was walking upon the Castle wall to give color
to their proceedings, and there to expect the issue of this bloody enterprise.
Being now assured that the Friar was dead, he presently came down amazed, that
without betaking themselves to arms, they most willingly Castalde doubting
that many of the Friars friends would depart: whereupon he presently went forth
to find Francis Chendy Francis Chendy.
Ference, who was already in his Coach to be gone, and taking him by the
hand, he desired him to stay. And surely if he had not then at that instant
stayed him, he would have fallen into a great danger, for that he was one of
the greatest friends Friar George had, and he was of that might within the
Realm, as he could stir them up against the soldiers of Ferdinand, to be
revenged of the Friars death. He having thus stayed him, brought him to the
place where the Spaniards and Germans were, among whom Paul Bancchy, who at
the siege of Lippa was the Friars Lieutenant. Paul Bancchy.
They being thus all ranged in battle in a plain, began among themselves to
deliberate what was best to be done, and being acertained of the Friars death,
made no other semblance against Castalde, doubting they could not make their
party good, in respect he had an infinite company of men with him, and that
this murder was not done without great intelligence: for The burial of George.
without light, there being not any who respected to cover or bury him, being
so stiff with cold, that he seemed as a man made out of Marble, having in the
head, breast, and arms many wounds, upon which was yet remaining the blood all
frozen: which to say truly, was an object worthy of compassion; and on the
other side, it was very execrable and enormious, to see so Castalde, at the
charges of Ferdinand, caused him to be buried in a Tomb of stone, in the
midst of the new great Church, by King John Huniades Coruin. These Aiduchs
and other of the Friars people being thus retired, Castalde seeing that in
these alterations of fortune, there would not befall unto him any great
disturbance nor tumult for the death of the Friar, came on foot before the
Spanish squadrons, having Francis Chendy by the hand, and began with him to set
forward John Alphonse The moueables of George scazed.
Castalde, and warranted from death, and how that in the Friars chamber there
was found a little Cabenet, within which was 12000. Hungarish Ducats, which
Captain Andrew Lopez, with four other soldiers, had taken and broken up,
and parted shares according to their qualities, reserving the Diego Velez to
pacify this disorder, and take the money again from them who had thus stolen
it, and to cause them to restoreal the moueables of the Friar, and establish
them in the former estate, waiting till he should send a Comissarie, who should
receive all the Friars treasure to the use of Ferdinand. By this means he
caused the pillage to cease, and recovered again much money, and other things
to the value of 80000. Ducats, which was all committed to the charge of his
Majesty's Treasurers. And marching thus along, very discontented with those who
had rifled the Friars Ferdinand, threatening them, that if they would not obey
his command, he would presently send his army and Artillery to subdue them.
Among which places there was one called Wyuar, where the Friar had his
treasure, and there he also Wyuar.
privately kept an Ambassador of the Turks, which Castalde, presently after
the Friar had yielded up the ghost, sent Captain Diego Velez to apprehend and
bring the said Ambassador to him wheresoever he should be, to see if any
matter of moment could be learned out of him touching the Friars Ferdinand, as
was vehemently suspected, and specially in respect of the Diet of Wasrael,
where they looked for the Sicilians, and in which (as the common brute and
speech amongst our people was) they should have discoursed of the means which
should be used to expulse Castalde out of Transiluania, with all the Spaniards,
Germans, Bohemians, and Hungars, who should be at that time found in it, and
were paid by Ferdinand. This Ambassador being under Castaldes command, and
diligently examined, they could neither know nor find in him any matter as
they desired, but only certain letters of credit written in the Turkish
language, Solomon, Rostan Basha, the Belerbey, and to certain other of
special credit in the Turks Court, and sealed with the seal, which the Friar
was wont to use in all the affairs concerning the kingdom, which letters he
had dispatched, without imparting any thing thereof to Castalde. He remained at
Sassebesse one whole day, that by the means of Julian de Carleual, he might
advertise Ferdinand of all that which happened, and writ to all the towns to
acquaint them with the enterprises and death of the Friar, and to pray them to
remain in a loyal devotion to the King. The day following, fearing the
Sicilians (being special friends to the Friar) would rise against him, and
that it was not in his power to avoid the tumult, which he already Sibinio.
good strength and most faithful to Ferdinand, and less affected to the
Friar, among all those which were in that quarter, in which he thought to
temporise, while he might, together with his security, see what end these
matters would have: whereupon he left good garrisons of Germans in Albe-iula,
and at Sassebesse, and he left also at Binse Captain Diego Velez with his
Spanish Castalde gave them many kind thanks, and was exceedingly pleased, for
that he found the Sibinians in so good an humor, and The Diet at Wasrael.
were assembled, expecting the Friars arrival) and also the better to
understand and know of them what their purpose might be: and whether after they
understood of the Friars death, they would continue in the friendship and
devotion of Ferdinand. The inhabitants of Sibinio would by no means permit him
that he should go out of their town without a good guard, telling him, that
to go to such a Diet, it was very necessary he should lead with him more men
then he had, and that by no means he should repose any trust in the Sicilians,
until he saw how they would take the Friars death, vrgently persuading him not
to go to that Diet with less then 15000. Castalde sent to seek the men of
arms of Charles Scerettin, and certain Spaniards and Germans to the number
of 1800. and went from thence with this troop to Seghesuar, still having in
Seghesuar.
his company Francis Chendy, whom he now had won, and by offers and kind
usage (although it might be thought it was more by compulsion then love) had
drawn to the service of Ferdinand. They being arrived in this town, they
reposed themselves there the first day: and the day following Castalde sent
Chendy to Wasrael, where already were met the principal men The Sicilians
mutiny for the death of George, and are appeased by Chendy.
of Seculia, devising together of the means which should be used to revenge
the death of the Friar. Chendy being now present, before them all, in Castaldes
Ferdinand, of whom they should receive more pay, rewards, and courtesies in one
hour, then they had received of the Friar in 20. years, whose death fell upon
him in regard of his bad demeanor, having absolutely determined to bring the
Turks into these countries, and to make himself sole Lord of Transiluania:
which would have been not only their particular ruin, but also an irreparable
damage to all Christendom. With these friendly speeches, and other plausible
reasons which he alleged to them, he won that ability over them, that he
converted them from their former malice, to swear all obeisance to his
Majesty, and to offer him to be faithful and ready Castalde should command
them. The principals among them within a while after came together to visit
Castalde at Seghesuar, to manifest unto him in his presence the assurance of
that true fidelity, which in words they had by Chendy promised unto him.
Castalde received them with infinite joys and demonstrations of kindness,
promising large pensions to those who were at the Friars pay, and Ferdinands
charges, he bestowed as well upon the poor as rich many presents; to some,
horses, robes of silk, apparel of cloth; to others, money, entertaining
every man with good love and courteous words: and assuring them with great and
ample hopes of a future and present acknowledgement of their subjection, he
made them in a manner so favorable unto him, that he verily thought he might
well trust them, and assist himself with them, in any enterprise whatsoever.
Observing herein the custom of the ancient Romans, who by means of courtesy
and liberality, made all sorts of men, how proud

The Sicilians being exceeding well satisfied by these speeches, showed
themselves so well contented with this new friendship, that it was an
incredible thing and hardly to be believed, considering how within so short a
time this barbarous and rude nation was won, and who (in all judgment) was
to be greatly mistrusted. By such managings men may easily see how forcibly
the industry and government of men are; and how greatly the prudence of
Francis Chendy served to reduce those, who for our destruction were purposely
united together, and who also had sworn to destroy all Ferdinands Castalde out
of those regions: and also how great and excellent his foresight was, in so
wisely tempering that people, that from that time forward they always showed
themselves to be Ferdinands special friends. After then that these nations
were thus appeased, Castalde began to divide all the companies into commodious
places of the kingdom, to the end that his soldiers, by the benefit of their
safegards, might in part begin to restore themselves from their travails,
which they had endured: and that after they were refreshed, they might prepare
and find themselves better disposed to the future war, which already was
discerned to come from the Turks. And although that all tumults seemed then to
be pacified Ferdinands affairs, and great pains and hatred as well to his
people, as to the particular quarters of that kingdom.

The end of the fourth Book.
THE FIFTH BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF HVNGARIE.
THE ARGUMENT OF THE FIFTH BOOK.
THE Turk prepares to make war upon Ferdinand. Castalde soliciteth for
succors, and fortifieth the frontier towns of Transiluania. The great store
of treasure of Friar George. Demands of Izabella to Ferdinand, for performance
of covenants. Zegedin surprised from the Turks, and the overthrow of our
people there. The Pope excommunicateth the authors of George his death, and the
information thereof. Mahomet Basha comes into Hungary. Castalde calls a
Diet at Torde, and the custom there concerning adultery. Duke Maurice of
Saxony raises forces against the Emperor Charles the 5. and forces him to
forsake his aboade, and in the end they are accorded. Izabella complains of
Ferdinand, and Castalde soliciteth him for succors. Themesuar besieged by
Mahomet, in the end yielded, and the Governor thereof with all his people
treacherously overthrown and slain by the Turks. Caransebesse yielded to the
Turks. The cowardlines of Aldene Governor of Lippa, the forsaking thereof, and
the burning of it by him, which was afterward possessed by the Turks. Drigall
besieged by the Palauicine, he is defeated there by Achmeth, Basha of Buda, and
in the end he is taken, and ransomed. Zaluoch besieged by Mahomet, the
cowardlines of the Germane soldiers there, and brave resolution of the
Castellan. Mahomet determines to go and besiege Agria.

IN the beginning of this year 1552. Ferdinand and his Lieutenants thought by
the death of Friar George, to have procured to Hungary and Transiluania a long
repose and perpetual peace, seeing that some of those who were vehemently
suspected, did not any thing oppose themselves, nor made any show of
insurrections: insomuch that they imagined that Fortune by that means had
brought to every one a happy life, together so much poison, and spread abroad
so many perturbations, that she gave universal notice, of how many mischiefs
she had been the Castalde returned to Sibinio, when all the Castles and
Fortresses (which in the Friars name for a time held out) they sent to him in
the name of Ferdinand, and offered unto him all obeisance, All the places of
George acknowledge Ferdinand.
and yielded up all the treasure which was found therein, that in any sort
appertained to Friar George. In the end having accepted their offers, and
reestablished the same Captains in the said places, he presently certified
Ferdinand thereof, to the end that with all expedition, he should dispatch
certain Comissaries, to receive by account, all that which was found

Whilst he expected these Comissaries, and that he was at Sibinio, certain
news came daily by Merchants of Tergonista, (a principal town of Tergonista.
the Transalpinians) concerning that which was done at Constantinople, and
touching the great preparation that the Turk made, (being exceeding The Turk
prepares to make war upon Ferdinand.
angry and enraged for the death of the Friar) and caused to be leauied two
great armies to send them against the Transiluanians, with which he determined
at one instant to assail this Province on two sides, on the one side by the
Moldauian, and on the other by the low Marshes.

Upon this news, Castalde both by letters and messengers vrgently pressed
Ferdinand for present relief, and that he would in time provide himself
Castalde soliciteth for succors.
of sufficient men, and other fit necessaries, which should be needful for
the war, and that he should draw from the Emperor Charles as many Spaniards
as he could. He also sent to his Majesty the Marquess Sforce, to the end he
should acquaint him with all the particulars, and that it would please his
Majesty to give him means to leauie some force of Italians, and that with
such expedition, as he might be able, before need should require, to return
into Transiluania: and specially to tell him, that he should send good store of
great Artillery; for the conduct of which, there should not be used such
detracting of time, as was in sending the other, to the end that by such

The Marquess being now arrived at Vienna, he presently acquainted Ferdinand
with all the occurrants of Transiluania, as also of that which was committed to
his charge. His Majesty being attentive thereunto, and duly considering of
these vnwelcomed novelties, presently dispatched him into Italy, to leauie
4000. Italians, and to bring with him as many Spaniards as he could: and
afterward writ to Castalde, that he would not fail to send him of the
passages, and of all those places, and that all these people should be
Ferdinand had done, Hungary for that time might have been in good estate. But
this good intended preparation could not sort to effect, in respect of the
adverse accidents that happened, and particularly that Duke Mauris brought to
Germany, by occasion whereof he was constrained to be careful over the
affairs of his brother Charles the 5. which were in some hard terms, and to
lend his advice to appease that discord, happened for the not delivering of the
Lantgraue, and the Duke of Saxony, being greatly busied on all sides by such
unlooked for broils, which brought so great discommoditie to him, that he
could neither send money, nor men sufficient for such an enterprise: which
default

In the mean while, Castalde with the greatest expedition he could, caused the
fortifications of Themesuar, Lippa, Colosuar, Sibinio, and many other places to
be reered, and he omitted no time, but still carefully employed his best
endeavor to that which concerned him. During which employments The treasure of
George committed into the custody of the Comissaries.
about such munitions, the Comissaries arrived, which Ferdinand at his instance
had dispatched to receive the Friars treasure, which after his death was
committed to safe keeping for his Majesty's use; Castalde not willing to defile
his hands therewith (although the brute was that he had the tenth Jacob
himself, and specially when any colorable occasion does provoke them to it:
in regard whereof, and to avoid all suspicion, he altogether abstained, and by
no means would have them in his own custody.

His Comissaries being come, he caused them to receive it by Inventory,
opening with his own hands certain places which were yet fastened, as the
Friar had left them, which until then were not opened, and which for the
greater surety he caused to be nailed up and securely preserved. There
Lysimachus, every Meddall valued at three or four Ducats; twenty stones or
pieces of gold which were found in the rivers of Transiluania, which were
valued to be more worth, then if they had bin altogether gold, and weighed 34.
marks; 934. marks of silver wedges of the mine; six very great vessels of
silver and guilt; certain chains of gold which in all weighed six marks and
a half; 32. cups of silver guilt over after the Hungarish fashion, wrought
with fair and curious works; 60. gold rings, set with many precious stones; a
fair collar of gold made in manner of a Cross, enriched with fair Rubies
skins: many other bundles of diverse skins of great value; certain Saphirs
and other Jewels inchased in gold; diverse ornaments of cloth of gold Ferdinand
to his son Maximilian King of Bohemia, and in his name delivered into the
custody of Andrew Battor: and besides all these, there was found great store
of victuals and munition, so that all things together (not counting that which
was purloyned at Binse, at Varadin, at Wyuar, at Deua, and at other places by
the Captains, which was esteemed to be worth more then 50000.

Whilst these things were thus delivered by Inventory, Queen Izabella writ
to Ferdinand, that it would please him to command Castalde, that he Izabella
demanded of Ferdinand the moueables of George, and also requested the
accomplishment of that which he had promised her.
should restore to her all the gold and silver which was King John's her
husbands, that was found amongst the Friars treasure, which he had purloyned
and usurped by force, and in like sort a portion of the Mares, and that he
would cause them presently to be delivered her. And further, that he would
observe and perform all that which was promised to her, upon the yielding up
the kingdom of Transiluania. Ferdinand answered her, that for his part there
should be no fault: whereupon he commanded Castalde, that Ferdinand also
commanded the Comissaries that they Castalde and the murderers of George,
recompensed with Georges moueables.
should give to Castalde 200. marks (to the end he should have part of the
spoil of Friar George) in such vessels of the guilt plate, the best wrought
that he would choose, and eight gilded cups of the Hungarish fashion, and
certain great dishes of those which were found at Varadin, four bundles of
Martins skins, and other moueables: and besides, 400. golden Meddals of
Lysimachus, whereof he was already possessed, besides the 1000. which were in
the hands of the Comissaries. He also caused to be given to the Andrew Lopez,
Guydo Gozio, Master of Castaldes house, and certain other soldiers, who
afterward were constrained to restore all that which they had taken, and to
submit themselves under Ferdinands mercy, who meant not, according to the
severity of justice, to chastise them, but with sweet and mild clemency did
pardon them. Now for that the soldiers were to be paid a twelve months pay
Zegedin surprised from the Turks.
which is a town of Hungary, not far from Lippa, containing about it 1000.
households, and is furnished with a strong Castle built upon the shore of
Tibiscus, near the place where it enters into Danubius. This town is rich
and of great traficke, and much frequented by occasion of these two rivers: the
manner in taking of it, was thus.

At the time that Castalde was encamped before Lippa, there came then to speak
with him, in the presence of Andrew Battor, a Hungarian, named Ottomiall, (who
at that time was Burgomaster of Debrecen, a town in Hungary, Ottomiall.
having been also Burgomaster of Zegedin, before the Turks were masters
thereof) and he told him, that if he would vouchsafe him his consent and aid,
he would find the means to surprise Zegedin, the Christian inhabitants being
at his dispose, who also had conference with him about it: and besides had at
his devotion the neighboring places, who desiring nothing but to unwind
themselves from the Turks slavery, would at no hand fail him in his
enterprise: he having already received letters from them, by which they gave
him to understand, that if he had the courage to Castalde well considering
hereof, and knowing of what great strength this place was, supposed this motion
to be but a mockery: nevertheless, not minding to repel him, but with good
and friendly speeches, seeming to embrace his advice and council, gave him
many hearty and entire thanks for his good affection in the attempting of so
weighty an enterprise, and entreated him to continue the attempt of this
practice, well hoping after the issue of Lippa, to furnish and provide him of
all whatsoever he demanded, and that then he should not want of what succors
he

After that Lippa was taken, Ottomiall returned again to Castalde, to demand
of him that which to fore he had put him in mind of. Castalde seeing he
perseuered in this resolute opinion, and with so sincere affection, in offering
his dutiful service to Ferdinand, as before he had made sufficient proof
thereof, and that he ceased not both by words and deeds, to show himself very
forward in all things, (although that at the first sight, he was not so
entertained as he persuaded himself he should have been) he told him, that he
should have as many men with him, as should be necessary to with his life, and
the lives of his soldiers, he should not lose that which painfully he had
gotten, esteeming the surprise, and the worthy managing Ottomiall obtaining
this suite, and having taken his leave, assembled the soldiers which was
appointed him at Lippa, to the number of 2000. foot, and 500. horse, and
concealing from them the cause which led him thereto, offered to every footeman
four crowns the month, and to every horseman six: and having thus paid
them, he caused their rende vous in a place commodious not far from Lippa.

The Campe-master Aldene, who (as is aforesaid) was remaining for the defense
and government of Lippa, understanding of this assembly, and not Castalde, who
returned him answer, that he should not disturb him, nor enquire any further
of the occasion, since what he did, was for the service of Ferdinand. Upon the
receipt of this answer, Aldene went presently to Ottomiall, of whom
understanding the particularitie of the enterprise, persuaded so much with him,
that if it should fortunately succeed, he would give him present notice
thereof, to the end that he himself might come in person to relieve him.
Ottomiall having set them all forward, and the one half of Zegedin being at
his dispose, gave secret notice to the inhabitants of the said town, that he
had well commenced and proceeded in this attempt, and that they should at
Ottomials men, they made such a slaughter amongst them, that of all those who
were the Castle in this manner, determined to sack all the Turks houses, and
specially Ottomiall made himself master of Zegedin, who afterward being
desirous to assail the Castle, found that the Turks within would bravely
defend themselves. For the place of it self was naturally very strong, and
besides, well furnished with Artillery, and it was in such sort defensible,
that it caused Ottomiall to come short of his conquering purpose. Therefore
seeing he could by no means win it without other forces, he writ presently
to the Camp-master Aldene Aldene relieueth Ottomiall.
command from Castalde, calling to mind the promise which he made to
Ottomiall to relieve him, determined with at speed to go to him, and taking
two hundred Spaniards out of Lippa and Themesuar, and four field pieces, he
began with all expedition to march toward Zegedin, persuading himself that
with this supply of men and Artillery which he brought with him, he might
upon reasonable terms get the possession of this Castle.

Whilst he iournied on, he acertained Castalde of this good news, and how he
marched thither, and desired him that he would not fail to send after him with
all speed men and Artillery, for that Ottomiall might not be Aldene, Castalde
had already received news thereof, by those which he sent with Ottomiall,
that they should presently advertise him of all the occurrants that should
happen, having in the mean time prepared a good number of men, and of all
other necessaries which should be fitting, if in case the Castle were taken,
that then he would presently send aid. But understanding that it was yet in
the Turks command, and that but only the town was taken, which he thought
impossible to keep without the Fortress; sent to Ottomiall that he

As he had dispatched this command, came Aldenes Courier, by whom he
understood that he was departed from Lippa, with such a number of men and
Artillery, as we have said, to relieve Ottomiall. By this Courier he
instantly Castalde by no means could be induced to credit it, having been
sufficiently informed of the quality and situation of this said Fortress, and
that within there were yet 500. Turks remaining of those who were slain at
the surprise of the town; that it was well furnished with good store of
Artillery, and that the walls were very large and thick, and rampierd behind
with as much earth as they were high, insomuch that he saw no possible means
that the pursuit thereof could rest victorious to our people. And although he
apparently knew that Aldene requested. Which he was the rather content to
perform (although he-esteemed it a frivolous thing) for that the fault should
not be imputed to him if they did not take it, and that they should not say
that this favorable occasion was lost, for not sending them in time such aid
as they demanded. And thus in the greatest speed that could be (although it
was still contrary to his liking) he writ to Thomas Varcocce, that he should
presently take two Cannons out of Varadin where he was, and two out of
Albe-iula, with certain field pieces, and with all speed send them with their
Aldene, who was at Zegedin: which presently was commodiously sent, by means of
the river Marosse. And afterward commanded Ourestolph (who then was in
garrison in the County of Varadin) that he should presently march with the men
of arms to succor Ottomiall and Aldene. In like sort he sent to Peter Vicchy
(who was Colonel of the Infantrie, and who also at that time had his garrison
at Varadin and Albe-iula) that he should march with Ourestolph. At this
command, the one having with him 2000. foot and horse, and the other 200. men
of arms, they proceeded on toward Zegedin, without permitting their troops
to repose themselves any time.

After that Castalde had given directions, according as aforesaid, he also An
offense to disfurnish a garrison.
writ to Aldene, reproving him for the fault which he had committed by leaving
Lippa and Themesuar, because he had withdrawn from thence the garrisons,
greatly marueiling at his folly, how he should be drawn to settle himself
upon so vain an enterprise, which by all likelihoods could not fortunately
succeed; and to think that with so few men he could take that Castle, which
in respect of the situation and strength thereof, would require six times as
great a power: that he had sent them those succors that he demanded, which
he would not have done, but only to the end that none should accuse him, that
because he had not sent them, this Fortress could hope, upon any occasion to
reunite so many again. This done, he departed Castalde although the
displeasure which Aldene had left both disfurnished of soldiers and of a
Commander) he sent in post to Captain Roderic Vigliandrando, commanding him
that he should go to Lippa, and that he would send him so many men Diego Velez
de Mendoza, that he should go to Themesuar with his company, leading with him
besides 300. Germans, and 300. Hungarish horse, and of that troop he should
send a good part thereof to Lippa, and that he should be very vigilant upon all
that quarter.

These now marching on with tedious iourneys, met many people of diverse
nations, who fled from about the towns of the low marches, for the fear which
they had of the cruelty, which (as they understood) the Basha of Buda had used
in massacring an infinite company of people: upon which brute they retired in
great confusion and tumult toward the mountains. The defeat of Ferdinands
people at Zegedin by the Turks.
all arrived, they understood how Aldene saved himself, with all the Spaniards
and Ourestolphs men of arms, with a true relation of all the disaster which
happened in this sort:

It was now already eight days that Aldene had been about the Castle of
Zegedin, and had environed it with a large trench, (expecting the arrival of
Peter Vicchy arrived with those 2000. soldiers (as is aforesaid) and when
also arrived from Canoth 100. Germane Harquebuziers, 30. Spaniards, and 100.
horse. The tenth day Aldene early in the morning caused all his people to be
mustered in a field, and he found his number to be 3000. horse, 230. Spaniards,
100. Germans, and 2000. Hungarian footmen, besides the 200. men of arms of
Ourestolphs, who at the same time arrived. Whilst that Aldene was Ourestolph
made another with his men of arms, right opposite to that of the Basha.
Ottomiall and Aldene made another strong body of all the Infantrie, Peter
Vicchy said to Aldene: What shall we now do? Aldene answered him, that in
respect he knew not the manner of the Hungars fight, he would commit all to
him, to do what he thought fitting. Afterward Peter Vicchy said; Since you
know not our manner of fight, let me alone. Ourestolph seeing that Aldene
(General of the army) doubted not a little of that which he had to do, being
desirous of honor, and covetous not to be the second that should Ourestolph
were so overthrown, and many horses coursing about the plain, thinking that
they had already won the victory, and not respecting the other squadron
which was yet whole with ye Coaches, they seemed careless any more to fight or
expect the issue of the battle, so that many among them dismounting from
their horses, began to rifle the Turks which were remaining on the place
either hurt or Ottomiall had brought with him, of whom he defeated and left
upon the ground there, more then 1500. dead and wounded, insomuch as for that
day, as well without fortunes in the Turks country for spoil: which they
well performed with Ottomiall had brought against them, besides his

These being thus defeated, the Basha remained entire Lord both of the field
and town: where being entered, he gave in token of victory to all his people,
as well in money as in apparel, what he himself thought good. And after
having thanked Fortune for such happy success, he addressed himself to the
repayring of the town, and to mend up that which our people had spoiled.
Whilst the Basha was employed in the defeat of these Aiduchs, Aldene retired
himself with his Spaniards and men of arms with so great haste and speed, as
if the Basha had been at their backs, or all the Turkish Caualarie had pursued
them, himself being the only cause of this overthrow, Cornoch.
Lippa.

During this said battle, there happened a strange accident to a soldier,
which I would not let pass in silence, esteeming it worthy of memory: and
this it was. When Aldene passed Tibiscus to go to Zegedin, he left a Corporal
The cowardlines of a Spanish soldier, who in the end killed himself.
of a squadron, named Higueras, with certain soldiers, who was esteemed a
man of good sufficiency, and very valiant, and he was left there to keep the
boats in which he had passed the river, to the end he should continually and
for what cause they ran so hastily. They answered him: that all our Aldene
had given him in charge, without making further inquiry how all things were
passed at Zegedin: and further considering, that if happily the Spaniards were
saved, he could never have the courage to look the^ in the face: and on the
other side, if they were lost, that those that should see him come so sound and
safe, might demand of him the occasion and manner how his companions were so
overthrown, to which he could neither satisfy nor answer the^; he began now
to turmoyle his brain upon these considerations, and being plunged into the
depth of shame for this his vile flight, so far was he grown into horror
thereof, that he resolved to kill himself: and

About this time the news of Friar George his death was brought to Rome, by
occasion whereof Pope Julius the third, and all the Cardinals, made great
Ferdinand, and those who had slain him, excommunicating The Pope
excommunicateth the authors of George his death.
them in the highest degree that could be. And although his Majesty's
Ambassadors directly informed the Pope of the cause, for which he was put to
death, his Holiness notwithstanding for all that would not be appeased,
demanding whether Friar George was of that bad disposition as they deciphered
him, and wherefore did their master write in his behalf, for him to be a
Cardinal, and being one, why did he tolerate him to be slain: and
furthermore, for that he assured all the College of Cardinals of his goodness,
fidelity, and endeavor which he had manifested against the Turks, to the
profit and commodity of Christendom: for which good and commendable The
moueables of a Cardinal dying intestate, belong to the Pope.
and dying intestate, they did of right belong to the Apostolic Sea. Moreover,
the Pope and Cardinals could not be silent concerning this, that with such
ignominy had laid hands upon the blood of a Cardinal, which by no means they
could support or digest, in respect of the reverend degree and honor due to
that calling, and to give example to others not to attempt the like enormitie.
Thus they grievously being incensed against Ferdinand, the George had been
unjustly proceeded in or no, and that they should send appointed men to Vienna,
and into those countries, to inform him of the offense; and that in the mean
time the Friars moueables should be seized in the name, and to the use of the
Apostolic Chamber. Against this last demand of the Pope, the Ambassadors
objected, that Ferdinand had already disposed of the said moueables, as well
to pay his soldiers, as for Information of George his death.
Transiluania from Christendom, and make himself absolute Lord thereof, in
paying tribute to the Infidels, and (as happily it was discovered by many of
his letters writ to diverse Lords of the Turks Court) to massacre all Castalde.
And to agrauate the matter the more, they produced many horrible facts, and the
death of certain persons.

Against such accusations, the Pope in defense of the Friar objected many
things, and among others produced certain letters of the Grand Viccar of
Albe-iula, and of certain other persons, who assured him that he was slain by
the envy and wickedness of Ferdinands Captains, who doubting John's son; and
not being able to tolerate that he was so plausible and popular; and that they
were in so little esteem with him; and that he disposed of all things as
absolute Lord of the country, without conferring with them of the
particularities; to thrust him out from among them, and to usurp his
possessions, that absolutely they might have the command, they accused him to
Ferdinand of treason, who too lightly reposing credit in them, consented that
he should be thus cruelly slain, it being afterward very apparent, that this
treason was not invented, but only to spoil him of his treasure and moueables,

Whilst upon these particularities many assemblies were in the Deanes house,
and that the Comissaries went to Vienna to inquire the manner of this said
fact, Andrew Battor was created Vayuode of Transiluania, and Stephen Andrew
Battor, Vayuode of Transiluania.
Losonze Count of Themesuar, who would not have taken the charge of that
town, except Ferdinand would grant him a sufficient company of Spanish
soldiers to remain there with him: which was presently granted. Losonze,
Count of Themesuar.
And for that they were not in the kingdom, but in the confines and frontiers
of the enemy, they were presently sent for: and they being arrived, Losonze
went from thence with them to Themesuar, to repair the fortification of that
town; and the Vayuode took regard to the affairs of the kingdom.

Now it was already diuulged in all parts, that Solomon had made Mahomet Basha
(his Lieutenant general) to come and besiege the towns of Themesuar Mahomet
Basha comes against Transiluania.
and Lippa, and that he was onward on his way at Belgrade, where he amassed
together a great army to invade that country. It was also every where
certainly bruited, that the Vayuode of Moldauia prepared the like to enter into
the kingdom about Brassouia. About the same time arrived in Transiluania the
Count of Helfestaine with 4000. old Germane soldiers, Ferdinand writ to
Castalde, that very shortly he would send him 1500. men of arms, and 7.
companies more of Germans, and that the Marquess Sforce Palauicin should also
within a short time be with him with 3000. Italians and 2000. Hungarian
soldiers, and with as many Caualarie as possible he could send him. Whilst
these preparations were directing on the one party, Castalde and the Vayuode
on the other made a decree, by which it was commanded that all the gentlemen
of the country should assemble at the town of Torde, and A Diet at Torde.
there to advise and determine for the defense of the country, understanding
that Mahomet determined to enter at the same time in diverse places with
fortification should with all expedition be presently reared, for that the
enemy might find it well defended, and that the greatest force of the
kingdom Ferdinands pay, and that of all they should make but one army, with
which they were to march directly against the Moldauian, to hinder him from
entering into that quarter, where there was not any strong place to withstand
him, but only Seghesuar, which nevertheless was not of that force that it
could resist Seghesuar.
nor hinder him, but that at the first vollic of the Cannon he must needs also
be master of Brassouia, which was a town of as great importance as any other
Brassouia.
in Transiluania; and that likewise he should not burn the Province of
Seculia, possessed by the Sicilians, and in the midst of the kingdom. This
Torde.
commodious and abounding in all manner of victuals, it was concluded that
there should be the Rende vous for the army, and that thither should come the
Vayuode to receive the soldiers according as they came thither. The gentlemen
of the country being speedily departed, with charge

Whilst they were thus assembling, there happened a memorable accident, which
I would not omit to speak of. There was at Torde an ancient custom, and which
yet continues; and that is, that if the husband finds his wife in adultery,
he may cause her there to be publicly executed, in manner as I will speak
of: and also on the contrary, if the wife find her husband in the same fault,
she may pursue that against him, which he would do against her. It happened
then at that time, that a certain Tailor who The custom between the husband
and wife touching adulteric.
was of Varadin, named Paul, found his wife in bed with one of his companions,
and pursuing the custom of the said town, he accused her of adultery: and
having proved the offense, it was permitted him to have the course of law, to
cut off her head with a Sable in the midst of the market place. She being
brought thither by her husband, and by the course of Justice, and the appointed
hour being come for this execution; she with tears and sighs kneeling down
before him, began pitifully to desire that he would pardon her notorious
fault, faithfully promising him, that from that time Forward, she would hold
his honor most dear, and that he should never Paul being surprised by these
her woeful speeches, and moved by a (natural) kindness to pity, was content to
pardon her, exhorting and persuading Paul in adultery with a young wench:
whereupon she accused him to the Justice, who causing him to be apprehended,
appointed that he should be put into his wives power, to execute him according
to the foresaid manner. She having brought him with officers to the deputed
place, he kneeled down, and there (good kind Paul) pitifully entreated her
that she would pardon him his offense; thinking that she would never be so
unkind or cruel to him, but that she would use the like counterchange of
mercy, as he before in his own behalf had done to her. But by no means she
would Save one from the gallows, and he will seek to hang thee.
forgetting all love, and the favors which she had received of him, not moved
with any love or pity, but followed the extremity of the law of the place,
lifting up her arm on high, having a Sable in her hand, wherewith she gave him
a blow upon the neck, and like an enraged Bitch she killed (kind) Paul. For
this his death all the town was greatly incensed against her monsterous
ingratitude, censuring her to be very cruel, for so requiting the former good
deed which she had received of her husband: and if she had not presently fled
from thence, she had received some sinister and condign inconvenience. And
this seemed to many so vile an act, that the inhabitants

In the mean time, Castalde sent Count John Baptistad' Archo, in place of
John Baptista of Archo commands within Brassouia.
of Count Felixd' Archo, with a company of Launsquenets to Brassouia, to take
the government of that town, in which under his charge he also commanded
Charles Scerettin to go with 200. men of arms, and another company of
Germans, commanding them that they should not bouge from thence, until he
arrived there with his Camp, expressly charging the said Count, that with
another company of Germans he should seize

While these things were in doing, Sibinio (the capital town of the Saxons)
offered to Castalde all the succors and victuals which he should need of
against the Belerbey, yea, both of soldiers and money: for which their
kindness he gave them many hearty thanks, and entertaining their offers, he

Thus as Fortune at her pleasure overthrew the decrees and enterprises of
Ferdinands Lieutenants and Captains, with extreme danger: so did she in like
manner play her part worse in Germany, where then was the Emperor Charles the
5. and Ferdinand King of the Romans in the town of Ispurch. Duke Mauris of
Saxony (an Elector of the Empire) incensed against Duke Mauris of Saxony
confederate with the King of France, raises forces against the Emperor
Charles.
the said Emperor, for that he would not deliver the Lantgraue his father in
law, who with Duke Frederick of Saxony were detained prisoners, thinking that
they had not performed their words, and finding himself to be greatly
iniuried, he was determined, in some sort whatsoever, to set them at liberty,
Ferdinand at Lintz, to entreat him that it would please his Majesty to
negotiate with the Emperor so much, that he would not derogate from his
faithful promise, but set his father in law at liberty. Ferdinand was for the
same occasion come to Ispurch, and conferring with the Emperor his brother
about the request of Mauris, he could by no means draw any other thing from
him, but only a good hope of a speedy delivery. But Mauris esteeming of this
as of a vain hope, presently practiced with William, the son of the said
Lantgraue, and with the Duke of Mechelburge, and other Princes and kinsmen, as
well of his father in laws, as of the said Duke of Saxony: with whom making a
firm and resolute confederacy, seeing by love and fair entreaties they could
not set these prisoners at liberty, but to deliver them by force of arms, he
made (by the aid and assistance of his confederates, and other secret enemies
of the Emperor) a good strong army, having first negotiated and compacted
with Henry King of France, that the said King should enter into Mauris covertly
brought his Camp to a little town, which was but a mile from Spire, from
whence with all diligence he departed toward Chiouze, and toward the Castle
of Ambergh, which belonged to Ferdinand, and by the mountains and other
difficult passages, rude and unknown in the night time, in great silence he
marched so far, that then he thought he had the means and opportunity to
come in upon the backs master thereof: whereupon leaving certain people
before it, he went with Ferdinand, who being advertised of this sudden
novelty, and greatly astonished, not knowing what to do in such an unlooked
for accident of fortune, seeing themselves disarmed of forces, determined for
his better security to retire toward Carinthia. And thus the Emperor
departing in the night in a Litter, somewhat sickly, with Ferdinand, by
Torch-light, he took the way of Villach, a town situated upon the river of
Drauus: where being arrived, they soiourned there certain days, to see what
course Duke Mauris took: who being now arrived in Ispurch, and not finding the
Emperor there (who the night before was fled from that place) would not that
any should offer violence Ferdinands retinue, to know the occasion that incited
him to take arms against the Emperor, and what his meaning was, and for what
occasion he possessed certain places of his, and entered into them as a
public enemy, and not as a friend. To these demands Mauris answered him,
that he was not come to offend the Emperor, nor to withhold any of his towns
or Lordships from him, neither had he taken arms against him, but only
against his enemies and adversaries; among whom were the Bishop of Arras, the
Duke of Albe, and certain other Counselors of the Emperor, who were said to
be in that quarter, and whom he would pursue and take, if it were possible: and
that concerning

Whilst this accord was treated of between Ferdinand and Mauris, the Mauris,
The King of France compelled to forsake Germany.
when news was brought him that Martin Rostan was entered with a great army
into Piccardie and Champagne, where he made great spoil and waste, and had
fiered three towns, and burned almost twenty Castles, putting all to fire and
sword, and that with great iourneys he marched toward Paris. By occasion of
this news, the King was constrained (maugre his liking, and for all Fortune
seemed to smile on him) to return back and defend his own. Thus he who
thought to make himself master of another, was in danger to lose his own:
and having left and retired from Germany, he forced Rostan to return and
leave his country at liberty, which was already Mauris having gotten little
of his desired intendment, departed from Ispurch, and from the County of
Tyroll, with his men: and leaving Chiouze went to the Diet, where Ferdinand
himself was incontinently after. In this Diet were treated many important
things, but especially the peace of Mauris with the Emperor, which at the
entreaty of Ferdinand, and many other Lords, it was concluded in this manner:
that the Emperor An agreement between the Emperor and Duke Mauris.
willingly and freely should deliver the Lantgraue to Mauris, and the Duke of
Saxony to his children, and that Mauris should be bound to go and serve
Ferdinand against the Turk with 12000. Lansquenets, and 3000. horse all the
whole summer. This conclusion ended, with many other articles, Mauris dismissed
his soldiers, and the Lantgraues children went from thence with their people
against a Captain named Henstain, who in the Emperors name was entered into
the land of Hesse, and who had defeated and overthrown in battle the Count
of Odemburg, who was in the field with 16. Germane Ensigns. But in regard of
that overthrow, the Lantgraues Mauris sent the rest of his army to raise the
siege from before Magdebourg in Saxony, which was besieged by the Marquess of
Brandeburg and the Duke of Brunswick. Upon the approaching of Mauris his
people, the siege was presently raised, the town remaining at liberty under
certain conditions, and then the Duke of Brunswick, and the Marquess Albert
took the Emperors part, with Count Mansfield, and came to serve his Majesty
against France with 15. Ensigns of Lansquenets, 500. men of arms, and other
light horsemen.

Behold the end of these tumults, which greatly blemished the renown

All these discords being thus appeased in Germany, there began others to
Izabella complaining her self against Ferdinand, because that the promises and
conditions to her granted in the agreement which Izabella complains of
Ferdinand.
was made upon her rendering the kingdom of Transiluania, were not in any
respect kept nor performed, did greatly solicit the King of Polonia, and the
Queen Bonna her mother, to require the performance of them, and incited the
principallest of the Province to this, that her son might be invested into
his kingdom: exclaiming of him that he had not given her free possession of
the Duchy of Oppolia, of Monsterberg, and Ratibor, with 20000. crowns of
yearly reuenew, as was promised her: and the better these said complaints she
sent Matthias Lobosky to Ferdinand, to solicit the last expedition. By him
Ferdinand gave her to understand, that his meaning John of Brandeburg, who was
under the wardship of the Electors of Saxony, and of Brandeburg, of Marquess
Albert, and of the Duke of Prussia, without whose consent there could be
nothing done, and the rather in respect of the far distance of their aboades;
and also because that the troubles which lately happened by Duke Mauris, had
slackned this business, in regard whereof it were necessary that she should a
while expect; and that if she Lobosky returned, more enriched by a future hope,
then a present effect. In the mean time, the King and Queen of Polonia ceased
not to endeavor themselves for her satisfaction, and secretly in her behalf
practiced, that she should remain a Lady and Queen as before.

It was then that the brute greatly increased of the Turks huge preparation:
Castalde soliciteth Ferdinand for succors.
for fear of which, Castalde considering the small force which was in the
country to resist this common and tyrannical enemy, gave notice to Ferdinand
of the present necessity he was in, desiring him he would not fail to send
him the 50000. men which he promised, and to cause Palauicin to hasten
himself, that he should with all speed come unto him, with the people and
Artillery which he could gather. Ferdinand returned him answer, that for that
time he could not send him the succors which he had promised, in respect of
diverse lets which of late he had in Germany: but that he would solicit
Palauicin, that he would bring his people into Transiuania, and would also
send others, as the commodity and necessity of the time would permit him, and
that he hoped that Duke Mauris would very shortly come himself in person to
this war with 12000. Launsquenets, order when and where need should require,
and that he would provide for George Veruery, who should make a role of their
values, and send the same to his Majesty to make an equal division thereof:
and further, commanding him to render to all the officers and servants of
Friar George their moueables, and specially those which were found at Zaluoch,
and that of the other he should cause to be made an Inventory: and further,
that he should pay the 400. Vssarons (who are light horsemen, a la Hungresque)
who were in the Friars service while he lived, for fear they should go and
serve the enemy, and that they should be under the command of Operstolph, who
was the principal Captain of Operstolph.
the Caualarie in Transiluania, and who not long since was entertained on his
Majesty's part: all which was presently performed.

Losonze being at Themesuar with 600. horse, and having with him Don Gasper,
and the company of Diego Velez, which was 300. men, (over whom the Losonze
commands Themesuar, and furnishes it with men.
Ensign commanded) and 300. Bohemians, and two companies of Germans, they in
all making 1600. men, besides the inhabitants, who were apt and able to bear
arms, who might amount unto nine hundred men. Castalde sent him one months
pay for all the soldiers, and two hundred other Don Gasper, that he could not
then succor him any more, in respect of the few men himself had, with whom he
could not go into the field against so puissant an army as Mahomets was, for
that he was disappoynted of the aid he expected from Ferdinand, by reason of
the late troubles happened in Germany, and that he had no other Infantric upon
Mahomet could bring unto him about Themesuar, by reason of the strong places
which were in that Mahomets, that he and Don Gasper should do their uttermost
deuoyre to defend themselves, and valiantly to resist the enemy in that
quarter, whilst he of his part should make resistance against the Moldauian,
assuring him, that if his enterprise did fortunately succeed, (as he trusted
in God it would) he would presently come to succor him with as great an army
as he could: and although he might not come near unto Themesuar, for that
the enemy was very strong, yet he would lodge near to Lippa, where, causing a
trench to be dug, going from thence to Solimos,

Whilst these directions were given on the one side, Aldene on the other
informed Castalde that he was in mean estate, and that he could not any
Aldene fainthearted.
longer remain at Lippa to take charge thereof, and that he should send
another in his place to take that charge. Castalde conceived of this with great
sorrow, for that the time was so short that hardly he could make provision
therefore, Aldene remembering himself of the fault which he had committed, and
changing his opinion sent him word, that seeing he Castalde presently departed
from Torde and went to Colosuar, there to assemble the soldiers that were in
Ferdinands pay, and which were sent him, in like sort giving advertisement to
the Count of Helfestaine, that he should speedily repair to him with his
Regiment of 4000. Germans, sending him two pays of four which they should
receive. He also sent to Zena (General of all the soldiers in that country)
that he should presently and with all speed he could come to him, because he
waited for no more but him, that so he might march into the field.

As these preparations (which we have spoken of) were in hand in Transiluania,
Mahomet in the mean time (leaving Belgrade behind him) was The army of
Mahomet Basha.
now between the two rivers, and had already erected a bridge upon Tibiscus.
He had in his Camp 100000. men, and 60. pieces of Artillery, among which were
thirtle double Cannons. With him also came the Belerbey of Greece, who the
year before was Lieutenant general in that country for the Grand Seigniour,
and he brought with him under his conduct 20000. horse. He had also another
great Captain with him named Cassombassa, who likewise conducted 15000. horse,
and 2000. Tartars, who anciently were called Scythians, which are a warlike
people, cruel, and greatly redoubted Tartars.
by these nations, and they fight on horseback with Bow and arrows,

The enemies being in this place, the soldiers of the kingdom were in a
manner assembled altogether, when Count of Helfestaine arrived with his
Germans, being half in a mutiny, and they were that night lodged in one of
the Suburbs of the town, which were very great. The day following, Castalde
minding to depart, these by no means would dislodge; but mutining, they seized
on the Artillery, (as their custom is, not willing to take one pay for two,
which was due to them, which alone should then have bin paid them) and after
they imbattailed themselves to possess and sack the town. And upon this
resolution they began to batter on the top of the Colosuar battered by the
Germane mutiners.
walls. Which Castalde seeing, and that this was not done counterfeitly, he
sent to the inhabitants that they should defend themselves. Whereupon they
betaking themselves to arms, and coming to the walls, they began to discarge
their Artillery and good Harquebuzes among the Germans, making a great
slaughter of them: who seeing themselves put into disorder, they determined to
take Castalde: whereof being advertised, he speedily retired to Torde; sending
them word, that if they would not be appeased, Castalde constrained to retire
to Torde, to avoid the danger of the Germane mutiners.
he would presently send his army (which was already at Torde) against them,
to hew them in pieces, and after commanded that the Caualarie should draw into
the field, and made a show to march toward Colosuar to suppress the Germans:
who understanding of this news, and knowing they were in a place where they
could neither help nor defend themselves, The mutiny appeased.
and that this sedition was not any thing profitable to them, but to the
contrary very pernicious, and full of certain dangers, they presently
appeased and quieted themselves, without any further motion or soliciting them,
and leading the Artillery along, with their Ensigns displayed, came to

Behold how in this year began the discord amongst us, as though the coming
of two such puissant armies against us, was not sufficient to counterchecke our
turbulent spirits, but we of our selves by another war, worse then the first,
must overthrow and make havoc of one another.

Castalde being busied at Torde, in assembling his men to march against the
Moldauian, who had already passed the mountains with 40000. men, The army of
the Moldauian.
and entered into the country of Brassouia, news was brought him how Mahomet
having passed Tibiscus, not without great difficulty, was already encamped
with all his army before Themesuar, and that from S. John's day Themesuar
besieged by Mahomet.
until that present, he did batter it in three places with 70. pieces of
Artillery, and that those within did bravely defend themselves with great
resolution, and that it was already twelve days since the battery neither
ceased day nor night, and that it still continued. This news was brought to
him by a Spanyard, consorted with a Rhatian soldier, being both apparelled
after one manner, and were in the night departed from Themesuar, being
commanded to come to Castalde, to demand a new supply of men, Castalde upon
this report presently dispatched a messenger for Ottomiall, who then was at
Iula, (a very Ottomiall. Iula, or Giula.
strong town environed with rivers) and desired him that with 400. Aiduchs he
would endeavor to enter into Themesuar, promising him that if he could find
the means to relieve it with these succors, he should so well be rewarded,
that during his life he would think himself well contented. This done,
himself set forward against the Moldauian, having no more in Castaldes army.
his Camp then 12000. men, as well horse as foot. The Moldauian was already
encamped in a passage two miles from Brassouia, where Count John Baptisted'
Archo entertained him with brave and fierce skirmishes, and bearded him so,
that he suffered not any soldier to disband himself from John Baptiste d'
Archo stays the Moldauian.
Count had so well ordered his people, and those which were left him of Count
Felixd' Archo (who in January last was gone to Vienna) that as often John
Baptiste was advertised that a troop of Moldauians (among which were 300.
Turks, and as many Tartars) would go and discover Brassouia, and that they
should go by certain passages, which of the one side had many marshes, and
of the other Castalde, who was near approached to the Moldauian, and so
boldly, that the enemy thought he had more men then was reported unto him, not
being able to persuade himself, that a man of that quality (as was Castalde)
durst appear in the field, except The retraict of the Moldauian.
passage for his Artillery through the mountains, if happily Count John
Baptiste had had more men to have followed him, seeing 500. horse which only
pursued him, had been sufficient to have put him in disorder and into such
hazard, that little would have wanted but he would have abandoned all his
Artillery to the chance and hazard of fortune. And if the Sicilians had then
done their deuoire, and showed themselves such as they should have done, most
certain that day was come wherein the Moldauian Castalde would dislodge from
Seghesuar, where he remained, understanding that the enemy had not dissolved
his Camp, but that he with his people were encamped on the other side

Being thus stayed, continually there came aduertisements to him by the way of
Caransebesse and Lippa, that the affairs of Themesuar were in bad Themesuar in
bad terms.
terms, in respect of those who were within, who had parlied with the Turks,
who told them that the succors of the 400. Aiduchs, which Castalde Ottomiall,
were defeated and cut in Ottomiall defeated by the Turks.
pieces by them. Upon this news Francis Henriquez was presently dispatched to
Lippa, that upon his return he might make recital of the verity of the fact,
and in what state Themesuar stood, and how every thing was there, and whether
it could defend it self any longer: and also to inform him of the state, and
condition of Lippa, to the end he might provide therefore, in such sort that it
might remain entire and safe from being attained of Mahomets fury. At the
same instant news was brought that the Turks had slain Captain Don Gasper,
whose company was given to Roderic Vigliandrando, with command to endeavor
himself to enter into Themesuar, considering they were in danger to perish,
and for no other cause then that there Andrew Lopez with his company, and 200.
Germane Harquebuziers, to whom Castalde said, that he well knew this enterprise
was difficult, specially considering the enemies being very vigilant to hinder
that no succors could enter into Themesuar: and that they were very glad that
those Aiduchs, which Ottomiall brought under his conduct to the relief of that
town, passed by the edge of the sword: and that nevertheless whatsoever he
should do in this behalf, was to no other purpose but that he might
faithfully discharge his duty, and not give any occasion to detracting tongues
to censure hardly of him: and that to that end to relieve this town (either
Castalde served to small purpose at that time: for upon the same day in which
they took leave of Castalde, Francis Henriquez (who a little before was sent
to see how Lippa was victualled, munitioned, and fortified) arrived with news
of the taking of Themesuar. Themesuar taken by Mahomer.
The loss whereof made every one very grievous and heavy, as well for the
love and regard they bore to those valiant and excellent soldiers Castalde
did indifferently comfort himself, understanding that Aldene showed himself
to have good courage valiantly to defend Lippa, and that the soldiers desired
nothing more, then that the Basha would come and salute them, that they might
make him understand what their valor and courage was, and the desire they had
to win honor and renown against him, and that they were all resolved to dye
within it, rather then to see themselves brought to such an end, as was
happened to those of Themesuar: the loss whereof

Losonze being Commander within this town, with such a number of The
description of the siege of Themesuar.
men, as before is said, and employing himself the best he could for the
fortifying thereof: which for the contrarieties and hatreds, proceeding from
the concurrence of qualities, and from some other precedent cause, could not be
so well munitioned as it was necessary; for that Aldene (for the foresaid
occasion) had converted all the money to the affairs of Lippa, leaving this
other Fortress under the mercy and protection of Fortune. As one day at the
rising of the Sun he walked about the town to visit it, Mahomet (the 24. of
July, which was dedicated to the feast of S. John Baptist) then presented
Cassombassa. He presently caused to take notice of the situation of the town,
wherein was built five Bulwarks of earth, some whereof were already mounted
to the height of the wall, but that which was lower was raised no higher then
the length of an Halbert and a half: and of all these there were two very
defencible, and the other were but in a mean. There was with Mahomet the
Belerbey of Greece, who was greatly practiced and perfect in that country. As
they were thus arrived within the sight of Themesuar, he said to Mahomet;
behold a part of the town, the Spaniards who are within will show you the
rest: and marching about it, Alphonse Perez de Saianedra Mahomet desisted not
to incampe, lodging his people round about the town, and they made continual
sallies upon the enemy, not without great effusion of Mahomet urged them hard,
and caused thirty great pieces of Artillery, and many other lesser, to batter
the defenses, and made three batteries, one against the Castle, another against
the towne-gate, which was not walled, and the third against the Bulwark: which
for that it was of least strength, was defended by the Spaniards. They in this
sort battered the town eight whole days, and not any of the besieged making
sign of faintnes, and so long until they appertly saw the great ruin which
the Artillery had made, and that the town in many parts was as it were all
open, and that they had lost many a brave soldier in two assaults which the
Turks had given Lonsonze knowing then they could not long hold out, and that
all the town was sorely bruised and battered by the Cannon, and that a good
part of the Bulwarks, which maintained and defended the wall, were beaten to
the ground, called to him all the Captains, imparting to them the danger
wherein they were, and how within a short time they were likely to fall under
the edge of the sword, or mercy of the enemies. And he told them, that before
Mahomet had passed Danubius, the Vayuod of the Transalpinians on his part wrote
to him, that the Camp had not come into those quarters, if Ferdinand had meant
to have paid Solomon the tribute, which Peter Vicchy was wont yearly to pay
him for the County of Castalde thereof, he believing they were devises and
brauadoes of the Basha, as he was accustomed to do, thinking with himself
that he would not come thither with so great force, to content himself with
that which another declared unto him. But seeing himself deceived in his
opinion, and considering under what a miserable condition they were like to
fall into, if the battery continued, he said to them: that he was of opinion,
they should send to the Basha to obtain truce of him for four days, during
which time they might advertise Castalde of all the accidents, and solicit him
to consent to pay the

The 3. of July the Basha on the Castle side and toward the towne-gate, caused
to be given an hot and fierce assault, which endured four long hours, with
the death of more then 1500. of the assailants, and about some Losonze with the
other Spanish and Germane Captains valiantly defended themselves, and forced
the enemies to retire to their Tents. After this retraict, and that all our
people were dressed of their wounds, and somewhat refreshed, all the Captains
were again assembled in council to determine upon the foresaid business, and
then there were more then before of Losonzes opinion. Thus he perceiving many
to be of his mind, without expecting any more, sent by a trusty messenger to
acquaint

Losonze understanding this answer, and perceiving no means of agreement, Don
Gasper Casteluio slain.
then was very open. Don Gasper at this instant was slain with a small shot,
which struck him in the forehead and pierced him quite through, and so Mahomet
distrusting himself, that he was not able to conquer this town by force of
arms, determined one day to have some speech with Losonze, and to seek him
out to parley with him, Losonze meant not to refuse: but the others not willing
to consent thereto, were the cause that of the said conference proceeded no
effect at that time. The Turks nevertheless ceased not from daily assaults,
which they always renewed with greater force then before, having no want of
able men more fresh and lusty then our people were, of whom they had few sound
amongst them, and many cruelly wounded; and specially by means of those two
mischievous engines which they had made, who also caused more to be made like
unto them, in place where our Bulwarks and walls were, by the violence of
their Artillery ruinated: and the rather they were encouraged, because that
victuals and munition greatly abounded in their Camp, whereas our men daily
wanted

The Basha weary (as I well believe) to see so great a slaughter of his
people, and that he must fight so continually, earnestly desiring that our
people would yield themselves to him, practiced this device following. The day
before, Ottomiall was defeated with his 400. Aiduchs, which he brought with
him to put into Themesuar (as is aforesaid) and they were by a strong squadron
of Turkish Caualarie also cut in pieces, that not any one man of them escaped,
the fight being perceived by the Sentinels of the town. The day following this
overthrow, the Basha for the foresaid reasons, the more The treason of two
Spaniards.
Constantinople, where he was married, after that he was taken at Castelnouo
magnanimious minds, to finish their days with the loss of their dearest
blood) they went to the Basha, and acquainted him with the whole estate of
Solomon was somewhat incensed Mahomet: which if those within had had but some
inckling thereof, and had been able to maintain it six days longer at the
most, they had never tasted of this adverse fortune, which within few days
after happened to them with so great effusion of blood, and the Basha had
retired with his army, as it was afterward certainly known. But Losonze
seeing that Mahomet obstinately perseuered to molest him day and night,
conferred with all the soldiers to yield; considering how they were all
greatly wearied and timorous, by reason of the last assault which they received
since the departure of the two Spaniards (who were fled from thence): during
which, toward the Castle side they saw themselves in very great danger, the
Turks Losonzes opinion to yield, his life, arms, and baggage saved, except the
Spaniards, who said; that according to their judgment, they ought not to seek
for any accord, but to be well advised how they might escape in the night by
the marshes adioynant to the Castle, which if they could pass, they should
presently find woods which would procure them safe passage Oliman when he
departed out of Lippa, this act being not any thing Losonze answered them, that
they should not any thing doubt, but that they should give him leave to
proceed therein; and that he would so order the matter, that his composition
should be so clear and evident, that every one should securely depart with
his honor: which was Losonze made sign again unto the Turks that he would
parley with them, and told them that Losonze capitulateth.
he was content to yield the town, and that he would send a soldier and an
Hungarian to treat with them of an agreement. Mahomet was very glad to hear
of this, for that he greatly distrusted his own power, and was already
resolved not any more to thrust his men to the imminent danger of slaughter,
but rather to trusse up his baggage and depart: and by them he returned
Losonze, that he would sincerely from point to point observe whatsoever he
would demand of him, and he sent them back again apparelled in certain long
silk robes after the Turkish manner, which was by these soldiers taken for a
good sign, with which they were sent back, so deceiving themselves, as it is
incident unto men to abuse and flatter themselves in their proper and
particular affairs, oftentimes thinking that in their businesses all things
should wishedly succeed: yea, and so much do they blind themselves, that they
cannot discern the evil which often does befall them, for want of due
consideration. These soldiers being returned into the town, they openly
recited the large promises and fair offers Losonze too lightly giving credence
thereunto, writ in a paper all the conditions which he esteemed to be either
necessary or meet for him to demand; which were these.

1 That it should be permitted him to carry away all the Artillery which was
within Themesuar, and safely to conduct it, without any impeachment, The
Articles of agreement.
to the place he thought good.

2 That all the soldiers should go forth with their arms, and Ensigns
displayed, with all their baggage, and that the Basha should give them safe
conduct to some secure place.

3 That the town should be held in some regard, and that there should

All these articles were very willingly accepted of by the Basha, and accorded
by oath to be sincerely performed, and returned them to them again signed and
sealed, without contradicting any of the demands of Losonze, esteeming (as he
that was determined to observe neither faith nor promise) these covenants of
small validity, and to promise and deceive of one consequence. Now these
negotiations being dispatched, and agreements concluded, the 24. of July, being
the vigill of S. James, two days after, about eight Losonze leaves Themesuar
to the Turks.
Losonze followed after with all the Caualarie, among which marched the remnant
of the Infantrie which was left, marching all in battle with their arms and
Ensigns displayed. In their coming forth, they perceived two great squadrons
of horse and foot, amounting to some 50000. keeping and stopping the way where
they should pass, which was a little hill on both sides. The Spaniards who
marched last, perceuing so many men Losonze that they would not forsake the
town, except the Basha would cause those squadrons to retire out of their way:
whereof the Basha being advertised, answered them, that upon pain of his head
they might securely come forth, without receiving any prejudice, and that he
sent these troops into that place to no other end, but only that his
soldiers seeing them go forth of the town, they might by them take example
upon the like and future occasion, to carry themselves valiantly, considering
that so few men had so wonderful well Mahomet had appointed. At the report
whereof one Losonze and all his people overthrown.
part of these squadrons presently environed the Artillery and those who
marched before, and the other part environed the rest, and so compassing thus
our people in the midst of them, they began to execute their barbarous Losonze
was taken and conducted to the Basha. In this massacre there happened an
accident which I will Losonze taken.

A strange accident.


recite, although it seems fabulous, and worthier to be registered in the
books of Romancers, then in a true history, being so incredible that a sole
man could make passage and escape through so many thousands of men:

As the Turks attempted to hew our men in pieces, and to perform that, they
began their accustomed high clamors. Captain Alphonse Perez de Saianedra a
strong and able man, being mounted upon a good horse, took presently his sword
in his hand, and at the first brute and clamor of the enemies he thrust in
among them, and with maine force he made himself place and way through the
midst of the throng: and as some were busied in the slaughter of the other, he
saved himself without touch of wound, running toward Lippa, being well armed
and mounted upon a horse, which ran exceedingly swift. The Turks seeing that
one man alone had thus stoutely made himself passage and was saved, passing in
despite (...) Castalde having speedy news of this loss, presently departed
with great Ferdinands power (which daily was expected) and by their own force
and virtue, exhorting them to defend the rest: he so effectually persuaded
them, that he expelled from them all fear and despair, and caused to increase
Losonzes death, and the death of his Captains and soldiers, then ever they
had done. But Fortune (which is not always permanent, but at her pleasure
cutteth off the dessignes of men in the most flourishing time of their April,
and does raise and abate humane actons as seems good to her) would that
Aldene should not persevere long in this his brave resolution, in which until
then he was resolute in the defense of Lippa, against any strong and puissant
army whatsoever, the same being unto Ferdinand of as great importance as the
loss of an army or kingdom, as we shall hereafter further speak of.

During the time that Mahomet besieged Themesuar, and that he was upon The
carlesnes of Aldene.
Losonze, Aldene perhaps thinking that this town would never be taken, was
nothing provident to use that diligence which was requisite for the due of his
charge, neither yet did he employ any spies to advertise him: and now four of
five days were already past, Spies necessary.
that he knew nothing of the enemies proceedings, neither had he any other
news then by the Rhatians or others, who by chance brought him a certain
Turk prisoner, who imparted to him as much as he desired: and when a Captain
of the Vssarons, named Demetre Vzarenky, exhorted him to use greater diligence,
and told him that he would accomodate him with such persons that should
faithfully serve him in such affairs: he made slight regard Aldene thought
that Mahomets camp The cowardlines of Aldene.
would presently visit him, and thinking that the Castle was not so strong, as
gladly he would have had it, to resist his victorious enemy, and seeing the
occasion conformable to his conceit; and persuading himself that the little
hope which he had to defend himself (both by reason of the weakness of the
town, and also of the Castle) would be a sufficient excuse to discharge
instant when he would execute his enterprise, (as he did) although he saw
Mahomet should stay, that since Themesuar was so tedious to him, (although it
was a place of no great strength) he would not now march toward Lippa,
assuring himself that he should do no good there, knowing the exceeding
diligence and care which had been used to fortify it, and the resolute
soldiers of all nations which was within it, and the quantity of Artillery
and munition that Castalde had caused it to be furnished withal, and the
great care which he had for the defense thereof: for all which reasons duly
considered, he was in despair that he should never be able to take it. This
report nevertheless could not any thing divert Aldene from his John Turkey and
Bartholmew Coruatte made not any semblance to bouge from that place where they
were, which was an Abbey of Monks, situated three miles from the enemy, where
(during the siege of Themesuar) they daily with 1000. horse annoyed and
endamaged the enemy as much as was possible for them. Which to him who had no
eyes, it must needs serve for a sufficient argument to make him discern, that
the Basha was not determined to come against him: for that also some of our
people, who were lodged four or six miles off, never once offered to remove
or retire, hourly expecting what the Basha determined to do. Notwithstanding
all that, Aldene still perseuered in his infamous and shameful fantasy. And
as puissance and rule cannot long continue where Paul of Zaraz, a Germane
Colonel, who went to see Aldene, desiring leave that he might enter into the
Castle with his soldiers, and other Spaniards, who were more desirous of
glory then Aldene answered him, that he should enter therein when time should
require. The soldiers seeing this disorder, began to murmur, and say, that
before they entered they would know what Ferdinand, as by duty they were all
bound thereunto; and never to depart from Lippa, before the Turks were gone
from thence. Which being done, and the oath taken, certain soldiers entered
into the Castle to survey the munition and victual, whereof was found good
store: by reason of which they were encouraged, and they again redoubled the
said oath, and after that, every man retired to his lodging, where they were not
long, but that they understood the command that Aldene (the Camp-master)
caused to be published: which was, that every one should be ready with his
arms, Paul of Zaraz went again to Aldene, to dissuade him from the
performance of such a dishonorable fact, telling him, that neither he, nor
none of his did ever think to commit such a mischievous treason against
Ferdinand, and that if he would needs go, he might, but as for himself he
would with his people defend the Castle against Mahomet, or else he would there
end his days. All the Hungars assured him also that they would do the like.
To whom he answered, that they understood him not, and that he well knew what
he meant to do, and that the King should receive more service by that Aldene
had commanded; and the fewer sort were of opinion to do that which he
determined, persuading the other to take part and go with them, and not
remain to cast away themselves: which the Germans and Hungars by no means
thought convenient, and gave notice thereof to Aldene, who said to them, that
he knew not what to do therein, but he would think thereon, and provide for
it. Now, there Aldene would forsake this town, and remove with his people from
thence, went presently to him, to desire him not to depart, and importuned him,
that if he were resolved to forsake the Castle, yet that he would not the
wicked and base intent of Aldene continued, said to him, that although Paul of
Zaraz reenforcing the guards, took charge of the town, through which walking
in the night season, he saw many soldiers (who by Aldenes oppointment were
with their horses sadled) ready to troop on with their arms and baggage, to
whom giving encouragement, and persuading them not to bouge, he went from
thence to Aldenes lodging, whom he found upon his bed, and conferring with
him, he desired to know why he Paul replied, that he would stay, but until he
had sent to know the certainty thereof. And he did so much, that three hours
before day he presently dispatched two horsemen toward Themesuar, to discover
whether the Vauntgard of Mahomet approached or not. These soldiers posting
with good speed, arrived at the place where were lodged John Turkey and
Bartholmew Coruatte, and seeing them to Aldene that there was not any brute or
news that the Bashaes Camp was risen from about Themesuar.

During the time that these two horsemen made this discovery, Aldene caused
all the Canoniers to come to him, commanding them to charge the Cannons even
to the mouth, with intent to break them, and that they should put the rest of
the powder into the vautes and sellers of the towers and Bulwarks, to blow
them up when need should require: and being afterward Aldene would set fire
on the Castle before they returned again: and on the contrary, the certain
news which they should bring, would expel this wicked determination out of
his cowardly mind, and this was the cause of their speed. Another Sentinel at
the same instant, being not far from the other, discovered a far off a
great dust in the air, which was raised by a number of Cowes, Base minds
suspicious of fear.
of the enemies, and that these two soldiers came posting before to give
notice thereof: they went presently to advertise Aldene, who was the Lippa
forsaken and burned by Aldene.
first that mounted upon a good horse, and sent to Captain Paul of Zaraz, that
he should open the towne-gate, and let the wagons forth that were full of his
moueables, and of certain Merchants. It being opened, the Spaniards began
softly to march, every man ranging himself under his Colors, and presently
upon it he commanded the Canoniers to give fire to the Castle, and to all the
Artillery: wherein they used such haste, that giving fire to the vaults of the
towers, two among them (blinded with fear and smoke) remained under it burnt
and consumed. By the violence of this fire, two great towers (which were at the
entrance of the Castle) were blown up into the Castalde that had placed them
there, not knowing now where to dispose or turn themselves, or what might
betide them by this lamentable inconvenience, they being with great cries and
laments dis-vnited and severed from thence, and with the greatest confusion and
discontent that could be, they began to lode their wagons Aldene leaving Lippa
behind him (which miserably burned like a second Troy) took his way with his
soldiers toward Transiluania, marching with so great speed, that not any
tarried to expect his companion; every one speedily laboring for his own
safety, and amongst them he was esteemed to be most valiant and sure, who
better then the other could nimbly use his legs, and their journey was no
less disordered, then their departure was inconsideratiue, and in such sort it
was performed,

Bortholmew Gornatte (who as we have said) was four miles from Lippa, seeing
the great fire which (as he thought) proceeded from this town, was greatly
astonished at the sight thereof, not being able to imagine what it could be,
rather suspecting some other casualtie, then that which happened to be true:
and presently mounting on horseback, spurred on to the place by means whereof
he thought Aldene with all his soldiers might have been Castalde, who
already understood of this miserable ruin, which was exceeding displeasant to
the army, and to all Transiluania, and specially to the Spaniards, whose
reputation it touched more then any other, considering Castalde, for that he
reposed all his hope upon this Fortress; thinking, that in well defending it,
all the Bashaes force would not have been sufficient to have won thereof one
thumbes breadth of ground. And although he esteemed the kingdom, together with
his army and reputation to be in a manner lost, yet was he not troubled, nor
made any semblance of fear in his heart of so great a loss: and although the
cowardice of another had thus euerted his deseignes, and that sudden and rash
attempts commonly Ferdinand of all these accidents, and present danger wherein
he was, for that the Port of the country being by the carelesnes of another
opened to the enemy, to enter into that country, he being not able to
withstand him, without another army answerable to that of Mahomets, or at the
least half as strong. In like sort he gave advertisement to Roderic
Vigliandrando, and to Andrew Lopez, that they should march no further, because
(as is above said) they were sent, who by some means or other they might enter
into Themesuar; Lopez to enter with his company into the Castle of Deua, which
next unto Lippa was the strongest Fortress in that quarter, and of the most
importance for the entrance into the kingdom; Deua.
commanding in like manner Aldene, that he should remain in that town with
the companies which he brought from Lippa, and that until he knew further of
his pleasure. The town of Deua is very fair and rich, Lysimachus, and on the
other side a victory, every one weighing Money of Lysimachus.
two or three crowns. The storm and rage of the water being past, and the
Sun shining upon these, they made a marvelous glistering: which being
Treasure found.
found a golden Serpent, which afterward Castalde sent to Ferdinand, having had
it at the death of Friar George, with a part of these ancient Meddals: this
being an ancient custom amongst those who buried their treasure, to place
Serpents there, in token of a faithful keeper. And after that these peasants A
custom of the Ancients.
had taken no man knew what, others took from thence more then twenty
thousand Ducats, and the report was, that they might have taken more then
100000. for that this place had sometimes been Lysimachus aboade: whereof
Ferdinand had (as we have said) 1000. and Castalde about Lysimachus his time.
Among other notable antiquities that was found, there were two Meddals of gold,
the one was of Ninus, and the other of Queen Semiramis: which two were Meddals
of Ninus and Semiramis.
sent to the Emperor Charles the 5. And there was not any man in all that
Province, of what authority or reputation soever, which had not some of these
Meddals: so infinite was found this sum to be.

Now, Castalde having taken order for the most important affairs of the
kingdom, he went from thence with the Vayuode of Transiluania to Seghesuar,
from whence afterward he went to Sassebessa. And being there arrived, he
lodged in the best manner he could within the town, it being seated

In this time arrived 1500. men of arms, which Ferdinand had promised to
Castalde, 1000. whereof were under the conduct of Fabian Schinach, and Sforce
Palauicin, who brought with him 3000. Germans, and as many Italians, with
certain troops of Hungarish horsemen, and some Artillery, to succor
Castalde, and marched with great iourneys, having already passed Papau, which
is a Fortress upon Papau.
the confines of Hungary, near to Vesprimia, and he marched very speedily.
Drigal.
was kept by the Turks, so that they could not conveniently pass that way,
which was far better, and the surest to conduct an army into the country.
Whereupon to find some means to win this Fort, Ferdinand commanded the
Marquess Sforce, that arriving near unto the said Castle, he should with all
his power make some stay there, and endeavor himself by all means possible to
get it. Which Castalde understanding, and knowing by many reports the strength
of that place, by reason of the few men the Marquess had with him, he writ
presently unto him, that he should not at that Ferdinand concerning the same,
desiring him that he would cause Palauicin to depart from Drigal, and that he
would command him presently to march and join with him, it being more
necessary then the taking of this Castle. This reason although in it self it
was sound and true, yet was it not so apprehended by Ferdinand, nor received by
such due obedience of the Marquess: so that, for not inclining to this
counsel, he fell into such calamity, as we shall hereafter speak of.

Mahomet (who had not the heart to go to besiege Lippa) knowing it (Aldene)
had forsaken it, and set fire on the Castle; and not believing that a Spanyard
would commit such an indignity, and so unfit for him, sent (the same day that
Bartholmew Coruatte had drawn out the Artillery) to know the certainty. The
Turks who went thither, approached so near unto it, that they perceived that
the town and The Turks seized on Lippa.
Castle had not received very great damage, and they began as well as they
could to quench the fire, and presently advertised the Basha that this fire had
procured no great detriment to that which was newly fortified, and that
although Basha upon this advertisement was so well content, as if he had
conquered the moitie of Transiluania, and presently dispatched Cassombassa with
5000. Solimos left to the Turks.
then he did, and that it might prove so ill an neighbor to him, that he should
scarcely hold Lippa in peace, because that although that Castle was very
little, yet it was inexpugnable: for that it could neither be battered by the
Cannon, nor yet assaulted: and there was within the said Castle a Corporal of
Aldenes squadron with 25. Spaniards, and about some 100. Hungars, which number
was sufficient to defend it against all the world, they having victuals
Cassombassa was within Lippa, the Corporal fearing the enemy would come
directly to the Castle, did resolve to leave it to the hazard of fortune,
thinking that the former fault of others would excuse him from the reproach of
any dishonorable act: upon which resolution, he persuaded all the soldiers
who were within to depart, who already were so discouraged for the passed
accidents, and for the faint-heart which they perceived in him who commanded
them, that they were presently induced (without any urgent persuasions) to
credit his sayings: and began to go Cassombassa had sent 200. horse to summon
them to yield: who being arrived before the Castle, and finding it open
(although The cowardlines of the Spanish soldiers.
they suspected some deceit) yet they boldly entered in, and without any
resistance made themselves masters thereof: and considering that the garrison
could not be far off, understanding that the night before they were within,
presently they set themselves forward to follow them: and they had not gone
far, but that they ouertooke, and so intrapped them with such an assault, as
wolves commonly give to amazed sheep being in flight, and put them all to the
sword, except the Corporal, whom they led prisoner to Cassombassa: and thus
was the desert of their shameful cowardice duly rewarded,

Castalde at that time always remained about Sassebessa, with that small force
which we have spoken of, daily expecting the arrival of the Marquess Sforce,
and assuredly believing that the Basha would not omit to attempt the entrance
into the kingdom (and that so much the more boldly, because he saw himself
Lord, without any impeachment of the place, which Castalde was therein with a
good number of men, and that daily he expected more, and that if he should then
enter there, he could not so easily retire himself as he Castalde, Andrew
Battor, and Thomas Nadasily had until that time used, deceiving thereby his
Spies, causing his people daily to be newly mustered, and stretching their
squadrons at length, to the end that they might seem double as great as they
were, adding thereto very great The policy of war.
Salues of the Artillery and Harquebuziers, having caused their Camp to be
largely lodged, to the end that it should seem greater then it was; further
reporting that daily they expected aid, and that Duke Mauris would shortly
arrive with 20000. men, and Ferdinand in person with a great army. By such and
other like inventions, Castalde greatly helped himself in the necessity
Mahomet supposing to be true, was in doubt what to do. But at the last
Castalde having understood, that one day he would upon a sudden enter into
Transiluania, and send the Belerbey of Greece before with 25000. horse, to give
remedy to that, leaving the Vayuode Battor, with all his souldious of the
kingdom in the same place, to the end he should maintain the reputation of a
Camp; and to the end also that that might always appear to be true which
the Spies reported to Mahomet, who until Mahomet; not to attempt any more the
entrance into the kingdom) or else gloriously there to end his happy days.
For that if it happened that unfortunately he should lose this battle, yet
for all that he would not censure himself to be utterly subverted, but as
fierce as at the first,

As these things were thus a brewing, he went to take view of a lodging between
Deua and Sassebessa, which he found very convenient for his purpose, and
commodious to fortify with great advantage for the safety of his Infantrie,
which he might well accommodate and lodge upon certain little pleasant hills,
which would be as a Caualliar against the Belerbeys horse, and afterward
appointed a garrison at Deua, wherein he placed Count Helfestin, and two
Spanish companies, with Vayuode Battors Caualarie, to the Castaldes brain,
proceeding rather by necessity then of free will, took no effect, for that
the Basha altering his determination, resolved of some other course, and went
toward Hungary, he being advised, that if he took the Castalde not being of
sufficient force to maintain the field, it was necessary for him to retire his
forces into strong holds, considering that all the gathering together of the
powers which they could make out of all the countries of the kingdom, was not
such as they might affront this barbarous tyrant: and yet though it had been
sufficient

Whilst that Mahomet was determined to enter into Hungary, and that Drigal
besieged by the Palauicin.
the Castle of Drigal was now besieged, and sorely battered by the Marquess
Sforce, and Erasmus Teifel, contratie to the liking of Castalde (as is
aforesaid) Achineth (Basha of Buda) understanding of this violent battering,
and that this siege was maintained against the advice and liking of Castalde,
he determined to relieve the assieged, and commanding that all the Caualarie
(which were upon the frontiers) should make their Rendevous in a place by him
appointed, who in the end were 15000. horse, with whom he marched toward our
people, and at the dawning of the day he arrived near to the Marquess his
Camp, sending before 500. horse to give the alarm, and he with the rest of
his troop passed toward another side of the Castle, not being perceived of
any, to give in upon the Rereward of our men, if they would offer to come out
of their Trenches to fight with The Palauicin defeated by Achmeth, the Basha of
Buda.
(after that he saw the occasion to be such as he desired) came with such great
fury and rage, that our people could not really themselves, nor resist so
violent a charge, as well for that they were in disorder, as also because they
saw themselves out and far from their Trenches, which might have warranted
them from this cruelty. The Germans of Erasmus Teifel, who made the
battalion, and were about 3000. were so at an instant overthrown, as if lions
Sforce, who was armed before the battalion of the Italians, seeing that our
Caualarie and men of arms were all fled, and that also all the Germans were
defeated, and that on that side all was lost and overthrown; like a provident
Captain would not endanger the rest of his men, but would have conducted them
into some secure place, and caused them to take a wood which was there by,
hoping by that means to save them, his enterprise was by the Basha
overthrown, who cut off his way, and forced him in spite of his teeth to
fight. Who seeing he could not remedy it, he in the best manner he could
ordered his people in battle, and encouraging the Captains, and the
Captains the soldiers, Sforce seeing himself thus alone and forsaken of his
people, although he had as good means to save himself as others had, yet
having a generous and a noble mind, did rather choose to dye there with honor
and glory, then in flying to save himself with shame and infamy. Wherefore
seeing he could not escape this certain danger, he determined to sell his
life to the Turks as dear as he could, and valiantly fighting he would never
yield, although in many places he was very sore wounded, killing and hurting
many of those who environed him: and as he was in reaching at the neck of one,
another hurt him in the right hand, so that he was forced to let his sword
fall, and so consequently The Palauicin taken.
Basha, not without the great admiration of all those who had seen him fight
so bravely, being much astonished at his valor and prowess, which most
resolutely they had seen him perform, not being until then ever known to
be General, but only for a man of some good respect and authority, and for
such an one he was held by the Basha. As soon as Erasmus was taken, and known
to be a man of no small quality, he was presently sent to Constantinople,
where at his arrival he had his head cut off. There Hyppolitus Palauicin,
Captain Albert de Castello, a Boulonian, Captain Bambino de Carpi, Captain
Maria de Tiuoli, Captain Vincent Antiuory, a Florentine: and of the rest which
fled I will not make any mention of, in regard they deserve not commendations.

After this route, the Basha at pleasure relieved those of Drigal, and having
effected this unfortunate journey, which happened the 8. day of August, anno
1552. he sent to Buda all the pray and spoil which he had gotten, and returned
Anno 1552.
another way to join with Mahomet, who had willed him to come, that he might
discourse with him upon that which he desired to do against Hungary, for that
Achmeth had the more knowledge in the discovery and passages of that country.
Castalde in the mean time hourly received news, touching some bad chance
(because he was not believed) of the succors which he expected in this great
necessity wherein he was: and during certain days, he assuredly believed
that the Marquess Sforce was slain in battle, but afterward The Palauicin
ransomed for 15000. Ducats.
from who^ certain months after he was ransomed for 15000. Ducats.

Now Achmeth being come to Mahomet, (who was determining to march into
Hungary, but yet with a cold resolution, considering with himself that this
year he had performed sufficiently in conquering of Lippa and Themesuar) he
exhorted and persuaded him earnestly to follow on his first determination, with
a resolution of conquest, promising him within few days to render the Castle
of Zaluoch and the town of Agria to him, possessing him that the greatest part
of the towns of that Province would assuredly yield to him, in respect of the
fear which was bruited in them, by the taking of the foresaid towns, and by
the overthrow of Palauicin, and Ferdinand busied in the Germane affairs, and
oppressed by many reuolutions and garboyles, and by the loss of men and
horses, which he apparently saw was happened to him, and which he could not
presently renew, being in extreme necessity and want of money: so that by
these incommodities which he knew to be most true, he had now all the means
that might be to make himself Lord of many towns, without any impeachment or
danger to him, and to lead away infinite prisoners, and get inestimable
booty. Mahomet greatly encouraged by such hopes, presently Zaluoch besieged by
Mahomet.
and built by Ferdinand from the ground, in respect of the commodity of the
place, which by cause of the natural situation, and by the shoares and banks
of Tibiscus, seemed as though it had been erected by hand. Ferdinand the rather
was incited hereunto, because he knew that Solomon meant to possess himself of
that place for the same purpose, and for the fertillitie and pleasure of the
country. And thus he preventing the determination of his enemy, first
possessed himself on this seat, and esteeming it worthy of a was filled with
water from those two rivers; and there was within it a large Ferdinand did
esteem it, and always maintained therein a strong garrison of men,
Artillery, victuals, and all sorts of munition for ten years. To answer which
with like correspondence, if it had then been as well furnished of resolute
soldiers, as it was well munitioned of other things, it should not have come
to such an unfortunate end as it received, by the cowardice of those who were
in garrison there. Besides these aforesaid preparations, Ferdinand had caused
there to be kept 50. long narrow boats, with which they might upon those
rivers fish and fight if occasion served; and within he had caused

Castalde understanding that Mahomet marched toward Hungary, certainly
persuaded himself (as afterward was seen) that if then he retired from
Themesuar, he should not have the like occasion and commodity to enter into
Transiluaniaas he had: and although he was glad to see him out of this
Province, yet was he greatly perplexed in his mind, fearing that he would
march directly toward Agria, because that that was a town of little strength,
but yet of great importance: notwithstanding he had a special hope Mahomet
would first (before he came to Agria) make some stay before Zaluoch, for that
he would not leave it behind him; and he thought that this Castle would defend
it self from his cruelty, because it was so well munitioned, and impregnable:
so that he assured himself that Mahamet should consume the greatest part of
his forces during the siege there, and that if those within it would show their
uttermost deuoire, he should be forced rather to retire with shame and loss,
then remain there with profit and honor.

Before that Mahomet approached Zaluoch, he sent 2000. horse to scour and
discover the plain, and gather what victuals they could for his army, which
stood in some distress, for that they had passed ruinated and dispeopled
Mahomet would presently come and besiege them with all his army. It happened
the same day, that the Turks Vauntgard arrived, a certain Germane brusing in
his lodging a little powder, fire took hold thereof and burnt the house, and
almost all the Castle, because that the flame being carried with the wind
(which then was very great) dispersed it self into all parts, and Achmeth
Basha was arrived, the fire was quenched, and then al those within put
themselves in battle and good order about the walls, and with the force of
Artillery and Harquebuziers, they began to salute the enemy with such
violence, that they brake that squadron, insomuch that he was forced to retire
from approaching any nearer: and Mahomet himself with all the rest of his
camp, lodging a good distance off, and in a place where the Artillery could
not offend him, and presently with a strong troop of horse he went to view the
Castle on the two sides that were not environed with water, but only with dry
Ditches, and the day following he caused all his army to approach before that
place, quartering them on these two sides, and they were so many in number,
that all the ground within that compass was covered with them: and afterward
he sent by some of his people to certify him who commanded Ferdinand erected
it in a place which was none of his: and for that cause he commanded them to
yield it unto him, offering upon that condition some reasonable rewards, and
that he would permit him, with all his soldiers, safely to depart with their
arms and baggage; further admonishing him not to be obstinate, least he should
plant the Artillery: for if he expected that, he had sworn and protested not
to make any accord with him at all, but the contrary, putting all to fire and
sword, he would without mercy murder all those who fell into his hands. The
Castellan made him this answer, that being borne Ferdinands Ferdinands servant,
the^ live Solymans friend.

The Basha understanding of this resolute answer, the day following he caused
the Trenches to be made hard by the Ditches, on those two sides of The
cowardlines of the Germane soldiers.
of the Spaniards, and to certain other soldiers, telling them, that the
most part of the Hungars were already on horseback, and that when they thought
this matter unto him who commanded the place, and was the Castellan, who for
that he was his friend would not refuse to hearken to him, and it might
Castellan, to tell him in few words that they would depart, for that they saw
the Hungars had trussed up their baggage in their wagons, and their horses were
ready sadled, of which they knew not the meaning, except it were to begone, and
leave the rest as a pray to the Turks: for that if they departed, who were the
greatest and strongest part, it was not in their power to warrant and withstand
the assaults of Mahomet, and to defend themselves against so puissant a force;
in respect where of they thought it better to depart and retire in safety,
then to remain in danger of so apparent a loss, which every man might see
ready to befall them with a cruel death. The Castellan willing to appease
them, told them that the Hungars had not loded The brave resolution of the
Castellan of Zaluoch even to the end.
behalf, promising to recompense them in the end according to their deserts:
and this he did to the end that they should be the more willing to put fire
thereto, assuring them, that before he would depart from this Castle, he was
resolved rather to die within it. The Germans seeing that by this means
Castellan made liberal promise to them thereof, and sounding the bottom of
his friends purses, he got so much money as was needful to satisfy them all
that was their due.

In the mean time the Basha ceased not from continual battering: but it was
to no great purpose, for that the Cannon did little good; in regard whereof our
people in stead of taking courage, they hourly seemed faint-hearted and more
discouraged: and this battery having dured 8. whole days, they determined one
night secretly to depart, and by the means of boats to save Castellan
thereof, who told them, that he had caused the boats to be sunck, for that
they should not have that means to fly, they being not able to go forth at
any other place, because the enemy had wholly environed them, who would hinder
their passage; which they found not true, and the Spaniards in the night time
walking the round, about the Castle, and visiting the Sentinels, saw the
Germans in arms with their Castellan that vrgently entreated them that they
would not depart, and leave this Fortress with so great shame and infamy to
their nation, and with so great a loss to K. Ferdinand: by which speeches they
in like manner saw that they prevailed not much with them, in their behalf,
for that they opening the Port by force, they all thrust themselves forth. The
Turks who were for the watch within their Trenches, hearing first the brute
which was within the Castle, and presently after hearing no more thereof, and
not perceiving any sign or token of any watch (as they Zaluoch cowardly left
to the Turks.
Port, which was opposite to that part which the Hungars and Germans went forth
at: and entering in, and not finding any person, they greatly marueiled
thereat, and looking about them, they found the Castellan alone by the Port,
who began to shut it after his people, not meaning at any hand to depart with
them, but rather to remain and die therein, or else to be made a slave, before
he would commit so shameful and disloyal a fact to his Prince. The Turks
presently took him prisoner, and having bound him, they led him to Achmeth,
Basha of Buda: who after he had understood how all things had passed, he showed
him great honor, and entreated him courteously, esteeming it to be

So soon as the Germans were out, they went toward the boats, which because
they were half on land and half in the water, they found very far engaged,
and before they had drawn them out of their Docks into the water, they so
filled them with their implements and their own persons, that they could by no
means wagge them: and thus losing the time (whilst on

Mahomet having in this sort won this Castle with less pain and travail then
he expected (not conquering it by force, but by the cowardice and treachery of
the Germans and Hungars who were there in garrison, and who rather desired to
fly and forsake their King, then remain fighting and get hohonour and glory,
being well able to make resistance without their loss or danger) reposed
himself with his army certain days in this place, and afterward upon very
good reason to be feeble and weak, forsaken of all help, and not

The loss then of Zaluoch ingendered in Ferdinands camp a great admiration,
and generally no less astonishment to all, because this was a place (as we
have said) invincible and impregnable, except by such a manner wherewith it was
lost: and Castalde bare inwardly in his heart, in finit grief and sorrow
Ferdinands part, and to assure these countries under his obeisance, who on the
contrary wrought a dangerous revolt, and secretly practiced to deprive King
Maximilian of all this province, to render it to King John's son, and to reinuest
the Queen his mother into her first and royal dignity, they being not able
any longer to support the wars, and other inconveniences which daily afflicted
the^, laboring with all their skill to effect their purposes.

In respect of these vehement suspicions, Castalde was in great vexation and
heaviness, fearing that that would shortly happen to him which he had always

The end of the fifth Book.
THE SIXTH BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF HVNGARIE.
THE ARGUMENT OF THE SIXTH BOOK.
QVeene Izabella complains of Ferdinand, and she seeks the Turks aid. The
enterprise to kill the Vayuode of Moldauia. The Transiluanians revolt from
Ferdinand. Aldenes trial upon life and death. Duke Maurice of Saxony brings
with him 15000. men into Hungary for Ferdinands aid. Mahomet besieges Agria,
the resolution of the Citizens, and courage of the women there: in the end he
is forced to raise his siege, and retire from thence with shame and loss. The
Hungars seek peace with the Turk, and pay him tribute. The Popes absolution
in favor of Ferdinand for the murder of George. Solymans insolent answer to
the Hungars upon their request of peace, and the astonishment of the
Transiluanians thereat. Castaldes present arrival at Wasrael, and his oration
there to the Hungars, by which they are reanimated against the Turks. The
pursuit against Aldene. Queen Izabella practices her return into
Transiluania, and is assisted by diverse of the nobility, who in respect of the
many wrongs and injuries offered them by Ferdinands people, incline to her.

Whilst Castalde was busied to redress these casualties of Mahomet marched
with his victorious army toward Agria: Queen Izabella seeing that nothing
Queen Izabella complains of Ferdinand.
was performed of that which was promised her in the behalf of Ferdinand, and
that she could draw nothing from them but words, being greatly offended
thereat, complained of Ferdinand to the King of Polonia her brother, and to
Queen Bonna her mother, of the wrong which she received, and how by too
credulent a belief she was cunningly lifted out of her estate, and in this
sort deceived and deprived of all humane help; Infanta Ioane, and the estates
which was offered to her, and the payment and disbursing of her ioynter and
dowry. For which respects she would not that the agreement and resignation
compacted about Transiluania, should be any further proceeded in; saying, that
she was not bound to observe any condition with him, who performed not any of
his promises to her, and that it was reasonable for Mirce (Vayuode of the
Mirce, Vayuode of the Transalpinia^s.
Transalpinians) had made her, promising to aid her both with men and money,
and besides to perform, what possibly he could, to reinuest King John into his
former dignities. And before she discovered any the least inckling of her
determination, she had caused Solomon secretly to be entreated, Izabella again
seeks the Turks aid.
that it would please him to favor her cause, insinuating to him how great and
unfeigned had been the amity and affection which King John her deceased husband
bore him, and the great confidence that after his death she always John, who
was a child and orphane, and expulsed from his own inheritance, whom she
committed into his arms, knowing that from the bounty of his princely
disposition, she could not but hope of a remedy worthy of his excellent
magnanimity, there being not any thing more commendable among Princes and
Ferdinand, from whom he could expect nothing else but continual war and
perpetual trouble.

By these speeches and other like reasons which she caused to be alleged to
him, she (by the means and favor of Achmeth Basha) crept so into the favor
of Solymans liking, that presently he writ to the Vayuode of Moldauia, Stephen,
Vayuoyde of Moldauia.
named Stephen, that at all times, and as often as he should be requested by
the Queen of Transiluania to aid her, he should not fail with the greatest
force he could make, to do her all possible favor: and the like he also
commanded to the Basha of Buda.

Castalde (during these practices) had already intelligence how Chendy Ference
Vicchy and Chendy for Izabella.
(one of the principal Peers of the country) went often to visit Peter
Vicchy, who made his aboade in one of his Castles, situated in the confines of
Polonia, and that they were accorded and united together, and that already
they had leauied forces, with intention to enter into the kingdom, and to
reduce it under the Queens command, alleging for their reasons, Ferdinand
had observed nothing of that which was promised. Which truly they published,
not so much for the interest and favor of the Queen, as to revenge the death
of Friar George, the which (and the authors thereof) Peter Vicchy thought much
of, and meant to revenge it under the favor and power of Chendy, who after the
death of the said Friar, was grown puissant Mahomets command) entertained it
in the field, concluding with him, that they would at one instant enter into
this Province: further also that they had agreed with the Vayuode, that causing
all the country to revolt against Castalde, he should with all the other
soldiers which were then with him, assail those of Ferdinands part, and cut
them in pieces in the same field where Castalde should be encamped. But
Castaldes diligent care and vigilancie, vanished these devices into smoke, so
that this

Castalde being at Seghesuar then, when he went against the Moldauian, there
came to him at that time a Moldauian gentleman, a man of good The enterprise to
kill the Vayuode of Moldauia.
countenance, well graced, and full of discretion. This man withdrew himself
from Stephen the Vayuode, misdoubting to be slain, in respect he greatly
favored him who was the rightful inheritour of this Province, which was by
the said Vayuode tyrannically usurped. This gentleman Ferdinand, whereupon he
was received into pay: and these which serve in this manner, and with such a
number of men, are called in Moldauia, Bugerons. Within a while after this
Bugeron found the means to have Bugerons.
long discourse with Castalde, concerning his affairs, to whom making an ample
recital of his estate and quality, said; that the Vayuode had not yet wholly
dissolved his Camp, and that he yet entertained the greatest part thereof,
upon opinion once again to enter into this kingdom, upon any occasion when he
should see it most encumbered and oppressed by the necessity of war; and that
if he would promise him his favor and assistance, Ferdinands pay. Upon this
offer Castalde made him liberal promise thereof, and more then he demanded,
assuring him that besides his promise, he would bestow in reward of him 1000.
crowns, if he returned having performed this enterprise. The Bugeron
nourishing himself with this hope, returned into Moldauia, where he attempted
many times to execute his enterprise: but yet could he not at that time attain
to the effect and issue thereof, for being discovered, he was constrained to
fly into Polonia, from Castalde of all what had passed, and that if he would
that this conspiracy should proceed, that then he should write to two of the
Vayuodes household servants, who were very familiar with him, without whose
means this enterprise could hardly take any effect: and that the contents of
the letters which they should write unto them, should be to request them to
hasten and perform that which they promised to him, and

This Bugeron meant that this letter should be sent jointly to them both, he
practicing by this policy to bring them in suspicion, (although indeed they
were innocent thereof, neither were they imbrewed with any spot of this
treason) and by this device to make them enemies to the Vayuode, and to incense
them against him. This counsel was presently practiced, and that in such sort,
that the Vayuode was as soon advertised thereof, as Castalde Castalde had writ
to them, he interpreted it according to his own mind; and so took them as
traitors, and caused them presently to be deprived of all their honors and
dignities which they had in his country, with resolution to behead them, and
wholly to extirpate their houses and goods; that by the horrible example of
these, it might be a just president for others hereafter to be better advised
from attempting so mischievous and vile an

As the Vayuode was inquisitiue about these practices, the Bugeron came from
Polonia; and having understood that this letter of Castaldes had produced such
effect as he desired; and that those to whom it was written were greatly
incensed against Stephen the Vayuode, because that by him (beyond all limits of
reason) they were very cruelly abused and falsely accused of treason; and that
they could not tolerate this indignity; and that they secretly conspired a
cruel revenge thereof: and so knowing that the things would succeed according
to his desire, he meant not to omit this occasion, which Fortune so favorably
offered to him, but willingly embracing it, he speedily writ to these two, that
if they would join with him to revenge the wrongs to make him away by some
device, then to look for this that he should take The Moldauian murdered.
stabs with a poynard, that they caused him presently to give up the ghost, and
afterward by the means of them that followed them, they set upon 2000. Turks
and Tartars, which he continually had for his guard, cutting and hewing them
all in pieces, electing him for Vayuode, who indeed should be he: which being
performed, they converted their fury against the Tyrants kindred, killing his
mother, children, and friends (as the manner is in that country) not leaving
alive any of the contrary faction, from whom afterward

This death seemed to all very profitable, and specially to the Transiluanians,
who by means thereof saw themselves delivered from very great dread and fear
of being at any other time assailed by him: and on the contrary, they saw this
new Vayuode to make some show to embrace the amity and friendship of
Ferdinand, which possessed them with a special hope of a long and quiet
repose. But all these vain hopes in the end proved contrary, as we shall more
commodiously in another place speak of: for that this new Vayuode of Moldauia
did not long continue in this league, which he brake within a short time after,
that he might be in the Turks grace and favor. Castalde; and also because
that at that time it came to be discovered, insomuch that every one knew all
them that were actors therein, and who had promised him to enter thereinto:
which made Peter Vicchy and Chendy to be greatly doubted, as all those likewise
who were compacted in this conspiracy; of which number Castalde would not
punish any therefore, knowing it was then no time, being on the one side
withheld in regard of the fear and suspicion of the future war: and on the
other side seeing himself more troubled then ever he was, by the vexations and
discontents which his own people hourly gave him, The Germans muitnie.
were possible, ranging and spoiling all the plain country, killing the
inhabitants of villages, and doing incredible things without any regard,
committing unworthy excesses, and such as are unfit for a Christian, who is
bound rather to yield a rule and form of an exemplarie and modest life, then
of The Transiluanians begin to revolt from Ferdinand.
to revolt, and specially the Nobility, who seeing that their first enterprise
taken in hand, under pretext of doing good, yet came to no effect, propounded
one day before Castalde, that it was expedient (seeing they were all then in
the field) to go with all their people to besiege Lippa, and use some
stratagem or force to take it, it being reported that Cassombassa had few men
within it, having sent from thence the greatest part of the garrison to Mahomet
to the siege of Agria: importuning him that he would not omit this occasion and
commodity, whilst it showed it self favorable, fearing that Ferdinands
army out of the kingdom, with an intent (they being once out) not to suffer
them to reenter again. But Castalde (who well understood these devises, which
they shadowed with a pretense of good, and which in effect had an outward
appearance of truth) would by no means consent to their persuasions: but
dissembling and possessing them with hope to grant their requests, deferred as
much as he could their demands; and that so much the rather, for that he knew
how greatly it imported him to remain in that place where Mahomets affairs
against Agria might tend.

In this time there arrived at Vienna the Popes Nuntio and Comissaries,
Information upon the death of George.
with articles drawn and propounded by Cardinals deputed thereto, touching the
information of Friar George his death, upon which they were to examine
witnesses, and to be informed by them, if it were true, that he practiced
treason against Ferdinand, in favor of the Turks: and namely, to George was
just or no. Hereupon Ferdinand and King Maximilian writ to Castalde, that he
should send them the examination of the witnesses, which he had caused to be
heard and examined, as well in Transiluania as elsewhere, to the end that
thereby they might censure of the offense, as the quality and condition of the
fact required. Castalde receiving this message, caused to be examined one
Emeric the Friars Secretary, and an other that was his Chancellor named Adam,
who deposed certain things which might give some shadow and color of
suspicion: but in their examinations they were quite different the one from the
other, and the said Emeric Castalde was greatly troubled to find any who could
verefie that which was imputed against the Friar: yet within certain months
after there were sent to Vienna certain proceedings which they had passed
touching that point, and afterward they were presented to the Comissaries, who
with speed carried them to Rome. As these persons Ferdinand being thoroughly
informed of the vile and infamous loss of Lippa, and how it happened by
Aldenes cowardlines: to the end therefore that this ignominious fact should not
remain unpunished, he commanded Castalde that Aldene should be committed to
prison, and that by the consent and advice of the Vayuode, his process should
be Aldenes trial upon life and death.
made against him; by means whereof he meant to make him understand that he
would punish him rigorously, to the end that others by his example, should
learn more valiantly to maintain their own reputation, then he had done.
According to this command Aldene was examined, and demanded upon what
occasion he fiered the munition and victuals, and why

During all these proceedings which were managed at Vienna, concerning Friar
George his death, and in Transiluania upon Aldenes fact, Mahomet seeing how all
things did even until the^ prosperously succeed with him, and how much Fortune
did favor him in his conquests, which he achieued Mauris was arrived at Duke
Mauris of Saxony arrived in Hungary with 15000. men for Ferdinand.
Iauarin, where he was lodged with 10000. Lansquenets, and 5000. horse,
according to the promise which he made to Ferdinand, to whom he had assured
that he would perform in Hungary some profitable matter for the general
good, as it was also accorded at Ispurch between the Emperor and Ferdinand,
and made him to consume and spend all that treasure which he had leauied to pay
the army which he entertained in Transiluania: and that was the cause also yt
neither on the one side nor on the other, could any good be done. In the end
the Basha of Buda presented himself before Mauris, not with intent to fight
(for his force was then but weak) but only to discern

Whilst these two expected each others attempts, in such sort as you have
Mahomet besieges the town of Agria.
heard, Mahomet encamped himself about Agria with 60000. men, and 50. pieces
of Artillery. This town was in a manner all open, with a Castle after the
ancient fortification, without any defenses or Bulwarks, but only certain
towers, and it is commanded by a hill, the descent of which comes within a
stones cast of the wall. This default of Rampires and other weak means, was
supplied by the invincible courages of those that were within, who were
Hungars, to the number of 2000. of whom there were The resolution of the
Agrians.
among themselves, that not any one upon their lives should adventure to speak
of any agreement, nor yield upon no composition, nor yet to make reply to the
enemies speeches, but only with Harquebuze and Cannon: and in case that by the
length and tediousnes of the siege, they should bravely endured thirteen most
cruel and bloody assaults, and that they

Mahomet (before he enterprised any thing against the town) sent to those of
the Castle, that if they would yield to him, he would then use them courteously,
and with fair wars suffer them to depart in all security with their
baggage, and he would yield them such recompense, that they should have good
occasion to think well of him: and if they stood out and performed the
contrary, he assured them he would put them all to death, and pitch them upon
stakes, if they fell into his hands. But those within would give no

Mahomet understanding of this their determination, and seeing in vain he
sought composition with them, sent that night to view the Castle, and

Presently after, Basha Achmeth and Mahomet caused in one day to be given three
assaults in diverse places, in which they lost 8000. Turks, who were climed up
to the top of the walls, and mounted upon the breach, with many of their
principal Commanders, for whose deaths the Turks were more enraged and
incensed then before, and yet they ceased not without intermission, to try the
assieged with new assaults and reenforcing of Cannons: and one day they gave in
four places one of the horriblest assaults that ever was heard of, to which
ran all the men and women of the town, who with no The courage of the women
of Agria.
weapon, stones, and skalding water, making so great a massacre of the enemies,
that it was a dreadful and most horrible thing, and worthy of commiseration
to behold. During these assaults they performed many notable acts, and worthy
to be registered in all volumes, of which the first was, that the mother, the
daughter, and son in law fighting upon the wall, the

It happened also in another place, that a woman carrying a great stone upon
her head, with intent to throw it down from the wall upon the Turks, a Cannon
bullet struck off her head, and falling dead at her daughters feet, who taking
that stone upon her head all bloody as it was, without omitting any time to
bewail the death of her mother, saying, that her death ought not to be
unrevenged, and that it was not fitting for her (being her daughter) to live,
without revenging her death upon another: and thus being inflamed, and as it
were enraged, she ran thence with great fury where the greatest throng and
prease of Turks were, and killed two of them, and wounded many other, imitating
a true Amazon, or woman of Lacedemonia, and bestirring her self from one place
to another, she exhorted every one to

By these heroical acts, we may easily conceive how great is the love of our
native country, and what command it has over us, since it incourageth for
the defense thereof, a thing so feeble and weak as is a woman, appertly
manifesting to every one, that there is not any thing in the world more dear
or precious, then our native country: for the good and preservation of which,
we are bound with our goods, honors, and lives to defend and preserve.

Those of Agria remained in this sort so constant in their defense, (not
willing at any time to speak or lend their ear to any Turk, notwithstanding
they were greatly importuned thereto) that in the end they put Mahomet and the
Basha of Buda in despair for ever getting them under their puissance. And thus
these two Commanders of the Turkish army, seeing the assieged would by no
means yield, and that by strength they could not subdue them nor force the
town, by reason of the loss which they had made of their people at the former
assaults, and that the time now was against them, for that the cold weather
being now well forward, and the Mahomet one night (being the Mahomet raises
his siege from before Agria.
18. of October 1552.) raised his whole Camp, and permitting Achmeth Basha to
march toward Buda, he himself took the way of Belgrade, discharging by this
means the enterprise of Agria, not without great shame and dishonor. The
assieged not satisfied to see themselves at liberty by such a departure, the
same day that the Basha dislodged, they caused to sallie out of the Castle
1000. men, that charged those in the Rereward, that kept not close together,
and killed many of them, and afterward they returned

Whilst Agria was thus battered by the Turks, Castalde advised Ferdinand, to
command Duke Mauris that he should with his army of the one Mahomet, whilst
he with his people would assail him on the other, assuredly thinking by this
means to pursue and chase him, considering the poor and weak estate wherein
he then was, by reason of the great loss of men which he had received at the
assaults of Agria, and of the sorrow and grief which was among those that
remained, by reason of the famine that was in his Camp, it being brought into
such state, that the scarcity increased more and more; insomuch that for these
considerations it would be very easy for Castalde and Mauris joined together,
with the assistance of the besieged, to obtain the famousest victory in the
world, and in such sort to have weakened the Turk, that for many years after
they should live securely from receiving any damage by him. But this counsel
Castalde was not only ready to assail the enemy, but then had he the means
to give him battle in the field, for that Ferdinand had sent him a good
troop of light horse: for want of which it hindered Mauris and Castalde to
give battle,

In stead of this counsel, it was commanded to harrie the country of
Alberegalis and Vesprimia, with intent to divert the siege from Agria, which
could not be executed for the contrariety of the times.

During the time that Mahomet was encamped before Agria, the gentlemen of the
country and all the towns, with the consent of Castalde, had sent The Hungars
seek peace with the Turk.
to Ferdinand, that by his permission they might (by means of Aly Chiauss)
treat of a peace and agreement with the Grand Seigniour. This Chiauss was then
with Mirce, Vayuode of the Transalpinians, and was come thither in Solymans
name, to pacify the people who were revolted against their Ferdinand was well
content at this request, and willingly consented to them; always provided it
should be with the accustomed conditions and articles, and with the same
tribute that he had before times made peace with K. John, and also with charge
that they should restore the towns, Castles, and places of Vesprimia, Drigal,
Lippa, Themesuar, Zaluoch, and others which were taken by the Turks. He
demanded this, to the end that the truce or peace which was treated of, should
bring more honor then infamy to his reputation. This command being come,
Castalde permitted them to negotiate whatsoever should seem behoouefull for
them, forbidding them nevertheless, to name Ferdinand or himself after any
manner in this treaty, esteeming it not convenient to the reputation of his
Majesty, nor himself being Aly having understood the sum of their demand,
answered them, that willingly he would negotiate this affayre with the Grand
Seigniour, and that at the furthest they should have answer the 25. of October,
and full resolution of the whole: and that for that occasion they should all
then assemble at Wasrael, and not depart from thence until he made return, or
until such time as he sent to them.

At the same time Cassombassa leauied as many men about Lippa as he Castalde
to withstand such an enterprise, thought of many plots: and willing to
reenforce the garrison of Deua, he commanded there should go thither three
Ensigns of Germans of Andrew Brandis Regiment. But for want of three pays
which was owing them, they did mutiny: whereupon assembling altogether, they
seized on the Artillery, and The Germans mutiny.
the most part of them came and sacked the Spaniards lodgings, and namely
Castaldes, giving them to understand that they would keep him prisoner and
detain him, until all the Germans were fully satisfied their due. Castalde
being advertised of this tumult, mounted upon a good horse and went into the
field, sending after to them Count John Baptisted Arco to appease them. He
being now come to them, sharply reproved them for that they meant to commit so
infamous an act, specially for this that all were equally Helfestaines
Regiment, who were better disciplined in obeying their Commanders. With these
were sent 400. Pistoliers, and they altogether marched to Deua, where John
Turkey and Paul Banchy attended them with 500. horse of their own, and other
companies which Castalde had already sent thither: and having made one body
of all Cassombassa, and they proceeded on even to Perias, which is a strong
Castle kept by the Turks, situated eight miles from Lippa, harrying all the
country, ruinating this new Fort which the Turks had undertaken to erect
between Lippa and Deua, killing all those they found within; and proceeding
yet further, they perceived not any enemy whatsoever: for that Cassombassa
having understood that Castalde was not any thing sleepie or careless for the
safety of this Province, durst not enter any further, fearing to be cut off at
the retraict, distrusting himself that the boldness of those who were so
forward upon his borders, was nothing else but some train to delude and entice
him to proceed on, that afterward they might circumuent and entrap

They being now all returned, the Captain general of the army of the
country would stay no longer in that kingdom: whereupon he went to demand
leave of Castalde, who by no means would permit him to depart, saying, it
should be ill done of him to forsake him in such a manner, being now alone in
the field with so few men, specially then because it was certain Solomon had
determined to make against the Sophy, to recover the countries which were taken
from him; and to warrant himself from his eldest son Mustapha (of whom he
had great mistrust) fearing that he would make himself Lord and master of his
Empire. But all these persuasions and entreaties were of no force to keep him
there: for that those reasons which Castalde used, thinking thereby to Castalde
could use, to dissuade him therefrom. Notwithstanding all this, Castaldes
determination was not to remove out of the field, neither to depart, before he
had heard certain news that Mahomet was passed Tibiscus and Danubius, because
that since the raising of his siege from before Agria, he had advertisement
that he used long and tedious Castalde endured great discommodities, and
extreme colds, for the high and deep snowes which daily fell in great
abundance, which made the soldiers passionate, and specially for that they
were not paid. Being then largely certified that Mahomet was entirely out of
that part of Hungary, he presently licensed all the soldiers of the kingdom
to depart, and lodged the Germans and Spaniards by Sibinio, and reenforced the
garrison of Deua, sending thither a certain number of Aiduchs to be mingled
amongst the Germans, and with the Caualarie that was therein, to the end that
the one for the love of the other should be more vigilant and careful for the
defense thereof, and John Turkey, and the government of the town and foot to
Paul Banchy. He also sent certain horse to Branchich, and commanded that
Deua should be wholly environed with a wall made of earth and wood mingled
together by equal distances, to the end that the Caualarie should not so
easily approach thereunto, and that the Infantrie should not offend them.

Now he seeing that all the people of Transiluania began greatly to murmur for
the taxes which they daily paid to maintain the burden and charges of the
war (and both that he might give time to his people to fortify themselves,
and to resist such tumults, and also that he might certainly know Solomon, and
to know if he would be content to accept (with the foresaid conditions) the
yearly tribute of 20000. Ducats, and so to Tribute which was paid to the
Turk by the Hungars.
make truce with them, which he did think would be more expedient and
behoouefull for Ferdinands affairs, then for the benefit of that people,
matters being full of stirs and doubtfulnes, and specially for that he saw
himself disfurnished of men and money, and out of hope to have any succors;
further considering, that though the same would not serve to any other end,
Ferdinand, as well to accommodate and negotiate his matters in Germany, as
also to demand aid both of men and money, and likewise to remedy the great
necessities which then were dispersed through all the parts of that Province,
which now tended rather to revolt, then maintain obedience and former faith
given to Ferdinand. According to these considerations, he by the means of
sundry persons solicited, that this business might take effect, yet he would
not be openly seen therein himself, for fear least whilst he should be
busied in the Persian war, which was far from this country, he would the
more willingly be inclined unto peace. After this

At this very same time there was brought to Rome the proceedings taken The
Popes absolution in favor of Ferdinand for the murder of George.
touching Friar George his death, and upon the continual soliciting of
Ferdinands Ambassadors, the Cardinals (appointed for that purpose) assembled
to give a final sentence of this fact, this cause being already very grievous
in the Court of Rome: and notwithstanding that they found many Ferdinand, with
all the conspirators, adding notwithstanding this clause in their sentence;
that if the defenses and allegations propounded by Ferdinand were true. Which
the soliciters of his Majesty liked not of, who so much importuned the Pope,
that in the end they had it absolute without limit of any condition. And
although the Pope refused to absolve the accomplices of this death, yet in the
end at the earnest entreaties of the said Ambassadors, this matter was ended,
Ferdinands great content, who until then was prohibited to hear Mass, and
all other divine service, yea and he was forbidden to enter into the Church.

During this season there happened a thing, which I will not forget to make
recital of, although it does somewhat estrange it self from the subject of
this my discourse. It happened in former time that one Raoul, a gentleman of
Transalpinia, was dispossessed from the Vayuodship of the Transalpinians, Raoul
expulsed from his Vayuodship of Transalpinia by Mirce: he recouereth it, and
discomfiteth Mirce.
which before his time was maintained and kept by his father, and which by
right of succession the office belonged to him. This man seeing himself Marc
(which in their language is called Mirce) an arrogant and proud tyrant, who had
made himself Vayuode, and who had constrained Raoul shamefully to fly away,
and to seek elsewhere how he might maintain his life, leaving his house and
possessions under the command of his mortallest enemies: and thinking in
himself many thoughts concerning this his miserable fortune, and apprehending
a thousand deliberations in his mind, that he might be able to reenter again
into his possessions, and imagining that there was not any of sufficient
strength to aid him thereto; in the end he resolved to prevail (if he could)
by the means and favor Castalde, to whom he was already retired, and had
served him during the passed wars, with five or six servants only, and some
few horses: and although he was held in good regard, and entertained as well as
might be, yet was it nothing in comparison of his passed greatness, being
respected and hohoured as a King; so that he esteemed of this small
entertainment, no otherwise then of a certain misery: which caused a great
commiseration among Stephen, Vayuode of Moldauia, took courage by this
president, and began to think how he could make away his enemy: and
entreating Castalde for a certain number of footmen Mirce, not being able any
longer to tolerate this poverty, which by hard fortune he was fallen into: and
coming one day unto him, he began in this sort to speak.

Sir, it is some years since that I have been out of my hereditarie estate,
expulsed from thence by the fraud and treason of that cruel and tyrannical
Mirce, who now by the support and favor of the Turks possesses it, daily
using therein monsterous cruelties, far unfitting all humane proceedings, and
which indeed far exceed all barbarous custom, having a while since (for
fear I should be aided to recover that which I have lost) put to death by
diverse torments, more then 3000. men, besides an infinite company of women,
Ferdinands service. And if it succeeds otherwise (which God defend) I Mirce.

Castalde comforting and exhorting him to pursue this enterprise, answered him,
that considering the just causes which he alleged, and of which he was
sufficiently informed, he need not to doubt to have good issue thereof, by
reason of the succors which he promised him, and specially by the assistance
of Jesus Christ, which was the most sure and certain help, because Mirce, he
should be more then a year settled and possessed of the Seigniorie, and should
have the means so firmly to assure and reestablish his forces there, that he
would Mahomets Camp still in larums, and many times put them to shameful
foyles. The Captain of which company was named Nicholas, a most gallant and
resolute man in fight, although very often he would be drunk, according to
the custom of those nations. Raoul having obtained his desire, Castalde, and
with his soldiers, and others his confederates that were adhering to him, he
resolved either to conquer, or dye.

As these marched on, Mirce had notice of the forces that Raoul leauied in all
parts, and how he came to seek him, and with what intention. Which being duly
considered of, he presently caused (by the means and assistance of his
friends) to leauie as many men as he could, making an army of 24000. men, with
whom, and with 36. pieces of Artillery, he went into the field, lodging about
Tergouista, with resolution there to attend his enemy, for that the place was
most commodious to dispose and range his people in battle. Raoul on the other
side, notwithstanding all his attempts and diligence, Castaldes people) then
12000. men, although he had many friends, and was generally the best liked of
among all the Transalpinians. For none durst show him any favor, seeing he was
of so weak a force, and his enemy so brave and gallant; every one fearing
that the issue of this enterprise would not succeed to his honor: and to fall
into the danger of Mirces displeasure, whose horrible and execrable cruelty
every one greatly feared. With these few men nevertheless he desisted not from
marching to encounter his enemy, who had for his Vauntgard 600. Turks on
horseback: and being resolved to give him battle, and not to be amazed at
any hand with the great preparation of his enemy, he being one morning by
dawning of the day arrived upon certain hills, was discovered by Mirce, who
then suddenly caused his people to be ranged The battle between Raoul and
Mirce.
and ordered, seeing he could by no means refuse the battle, and knowing
that his enemies were resolutely determined to fight: and although it was so
that he might have avoided it, yet would he not retire, although he had some
doubt and suspicion to fight, being advertised that Raoul brought with Castalde
had given him, assuring himself that those few soldiers which were with him
were most valiant and expert, and not easy to be overcome; yea and he did
also distrust of some other succors. While such thoughts were in hammering,
Raoul in the end made two squadrons of his army, each squadron being of 5000.
foot and 1000. horse, the most part of which were Harquebuziers; and causing
the^ to march within harquebuze shot, they made a stand upon a hill, causing
them in such sort to be stretched out, that they made show of 14. or 15000.
men. Which being perceived by Mirce, and esteeming that number to be greater
then they showed themselves before, he began to distrust himself of Raoul,
more confusedly then disciplinarily, without expecting any other command or
signal to fight, were resolved (as before they promised) either to overcome,
or die, and gave so furious a charge upon one of Mirces squadrons, as wolves
usually do amongst a thousand flock of sheep, and breaking the first ranks,
and quashing many a Turk (who as the most resolute men were in the fore
ranks, and upon whom Mirce reposed his greatest confidence) the others began
presently to recoyle, and in flying they committed such disorder, that there
was none amongst them who thought not flying to be his best safety. Raoul on
the other side at the same instant with Raouls good, that Mirces squadron
seeing these two thus quite defeated, being possessed with fear, without further
expectance of the enemy, bequeathed themselves so to flight and confusion,
that happy was he that could best Mirce overthrown.
fly, and he esteemed himself most fortunate, who supposed that he should

Thus we often see that multitudes of such who are thus rawly sent, are for
the most part overcome and subdued by a lesser number of soldiers, well
disciplined and practiced in war, who to obtain honor, refuse neither
peril of sword, fire, nor yet death it self: and by this we may judge how
dangerous and pestilent, fear and cowardice is in an army; and how much on
the contrary, virtue and valor, and the prowess of a noble and generous
courage, joined with the force and dexterity of the body, are extolled: Raoul
to the type of honor, winning so easily thereby this victory, that it seemed
it was a true miracle of Jesus Christ, who to punish this tyrant (an enemy of
his faith) justly permitted

The soldiers of Raoul seeing then that Mirces army was quite overthrown,
and that there were not now any who opposed themselves against them, forbearing
the execution and slaughter of their enemies, they began to search and ransacke
those who fell into their hands, and they performed so much for their own
profit, that every one of them became very rich thereby. All those of Mirces
faction who were alive, presently ranged themselves under the Victors Ensign:
as it is always the custom of the vulgar sort to follow new fortunes, and
daily desire new Lords. And making together a great army, they determined to
pursue Mirce, who saved himself with Mirces part, and Raoul lost about some
700. Raoul thus achieuing this notable victory, he presently got possession of
all the moueables of his enemy, which were said to be more worth then 200000.
Ducats, with which he bettered his former necessity, and recovered all his
kingdom: the principal Peers thereof, with all his kindred and friends, came
to receive and acknowledge him for their true and liege Lord, and after that
they conducted him with pomp to Tergouista, where friendly and willingly they
all swore fidelity to him, and Tergouista the capital town of the
Transalpinians.
did him all the honors as was fitting for them.

Behold here the mutations and changes of fortune, with which she exalts
Mirce, and incountring with another Bugeron, who was well apparelled and richly
armed, he killed him, verily believing it had been Mirce himself; and
reporting this news, it caused generally every one to rejoice. But presently
after it was known not to be true, and that he was saved in manner as we
have said.

Certain days after, Raoul having pacified all the troubles in his kingdom,
Castalde, to give him hearty thanks for all his former favors he had showed
him, and for the aid that he gave him, with which he won this victory,
which had yielded him his kingdom, and preserved his life: whereupon he
entirely offered himself unto him, assuring him to be always ready upon any
occasion whatsoever to accompany him: and besides, swearing to him all
fidelity, and that for his own part and his countries, he would continually
observe good peace and amity with him.

Whilst he was in this dispatch, there arrived at Wasrael the Chiauss,
Ferdinand, Solomon, and the Transiluanians, as a little before is recited. He
being returned from Constantinople, and come to this place, he found there
assembled (according to the former order) most of all the principal States of
that country, who attended him with great desire and hope of peace. This
negotiator was very honorably entertained by them, and after he had reposed
himself one day, he The answer of Solomon to the request that the Hungars made
for peace.
brought such fear and astonishment into the minds of every one, that it was
an incredible thing: for that in stead of accepting the tribute, he spoke to
them all in the name of Solomon, that his pleasure was they should receive King
John's son and Queen Izabella his mother as their true and lawful Lords, and
should expulse Castalde out of Transiluania, and cut all the soldiers in
pieces which were paid by Ferdinand, and that then he would receive the
ordinary tribute, and would esteem them worthy of his grace and favor: and
if they otherwise did, that he would then cause them to know what his
indignation would be, and that his ability and Majesty Battor, and to all
the other Lords and Peers of the kingdom, which verbatim I have truly
written, without altering or corrupting any thing therein contained. It was
written in parchment, shining like glass, in letters of gold after the Turkish
manner, in legible Latin. The superscription whereof was thus.

Letters of Solomon to Battor, Vayuode of Transiluania.
MANDATVM INVICTISSIMI IMPERATORIS Turcharum ad Dominum Battorem Andream
Capitaneum in Transiluania, ac ad alios illius Regni dominos, etc.
FIdelis in fide Christi, and inter Christianos in regno Transiluaniae prudens,
and generose domine Battor Andreas, and caeteri alij Domini nobis dilectissimi,
etc. Exmandato celsitudinis nostrae intelligitis quod vobis multoties
notificauimus; quod postquam frater Georgius Thesaurarius noster crudeliter, ac
per insidias mortuus fuit, antequam Germanos, quos propter discordias vestras
introduxeratis, expellere posset, vos, and alij domini Transiluaniae communi
consilio, and auxilio ipsos Germanos ex patria vestra secundum fidelitatem,
quam excelsae Portae nostrae debetis, eijcere debeatis. Verum cum hoc hactenus
factum non sit, vos nunc ad id exequendum adhortari placuit, quoniam vobis omne
peccatum remittendo, and delictum huc vsque commissum, omnem libertatem, quam
antea in regno Transiluaniae habuistis, iterum concedere, and conseruare
pollicemur, and vos subditi, and Domini apud nos semper in honor, and sub
nostra protectione eritis. Regnum autem Transiluaniae quemadmodum ante sub Rege
Ioanne, and filio suo, subditis, and fidelibus nostris, in liberate, and
quiet fuit, sic, and nunc esse disponemus, and ipsum Regis Ioannis filium
inter vos regnare pro certo promittemus. Cum enim ipse Rex Ioannes subditus,
and seruitor noster nobis sincere, and fideliter seruiret, non solum a nullo
molestari passi non sumus, sed post eius mortem filio suo paruulo adhuc,
paternam patriam, and Regnum ex gratia, and clementia nostra concessimus, and
Transiluania sic temporibus illis pacifica fuit. Sed post modum introductis
Germanis maxima discordia inter vos orta est, ob quam, and ad introducendum
Regis Ioannis filium, and matrem ipsius, ac ad liberandam Transiluaniam ab
inimicis suis naturalibus Dei gratia maximum, and potentissimum exercitum
ordinari, and congregari mandauimus. Necesse est ergo pro fidelitate vestra
diligentem vos curam habere vt Germanos regno vestro gladio propulsetis, and
donec filius Regis Ioannis introducatur in locum ipsius, inter vos dignum, and
honoratum hominem in generalem illius regni Capitaneum eligatis eique omnes
obediatis vt inimicum vestrum naturalem apud vos esse non permittatis, sed
illos, qui tantae discordiae in ipso regno sunt causa, communi consilio
expellite, and regnum filij Regis Domini vestri diligenter gubernare curabitis.
Quod si signum istud fidelitatis, and obedientiae a vobis acceperimus, non
solum in regno Transiluaniae libertatem vestram antiquam, sed maximam gratiam,
and honorem ab Imperiali Celsitudine nostra obtinebitis. Nos interim exercitum
nostrum innumerabilem pro regno, and filio Regis conseruabimus, and iam nunc
pro liberate ipsius a manibus inimicorum moueri ordinauimus, quia nullo modo
assentire voluimus vt inimici in ea Prouincia regnent. Et cum Ioannem Regem
subditum, and fidelem seruum suum nostrum, ac filium etiam idem esse nouerimus,
decreuimus omnino vt in Regnum reuertatur, ac in ipsum per nos restitutus
regnet, and Deo concedente inimicum suum auxilio nostro semper debellet, and
vincat. Idcirco nunc iam gratia Omnipotentis Dei magnificum, and maxim
potentem, and obedientem subditum, fidelemque seruitorem Celsitudinis nostrae
Illustrissimum Achmeten. Bassam secundum Consiliarium Maiestatis nostrae, tum
multos nostros, tum proprios aulicos, Iannisserosque Imperialis potentissimae,
ac inuictissimae Portae Celsitudinis nostrae, and cum maximo exercitu de
Grecia, and Buda, simul cum Capitaneis generalibus, and cum omnibus Sangiacchis
mouere fecimus, adeo quod cum dicto Consiliario nostro, antequam contra hostem
persona nostra moueatur, exercitum ducentorum millium hominum been instructorum
habebimus. Preterea mandauimus serenissimo Principi de Tartaria, Vaiuodisque
Valacchiae, and Moldauiae cum omnibus Sangiacchis, qui sunt in illis partibus
vltra, and citra Danubium, vt cum omni eorum peditatu, and equitatu se cum
dicto Veserio nostro coniungant, and vos etiam necesse est secundum fidelitatem
vestram dicto Bassae seruiatis, and nuncios tam ad excelsam Portam nostram,
quam ad eum decernatis. Quod si mandato nostro huic in obedientes, and cum
inimicis nostris concordes eritis, crudelitatem, and stragem, quam
Transiluaniae regnum videbit, ex demeritis vestris processisse credatis. Nam
gratia Creatoris omnipotentis Dei speramus Christianis, and regno Transiluaniae
iram, and potentiam nostram ostendere. Etsi ipsi Transiluani ad pristinam
obedientiam, and fidelitatem nobis adiuuantibus reuerti recusabunt, nusquam
tuti erunt, and per totum mundum debitas luent poenas. Iurauimus enim
Omnipotenti Deo quod in Transiluania lapis super lapidem non relinquetur,
homines omnes in ore gladij dari, pueros, and faeminas in captiuitatem,
omniaque loca solo aequari faciemus. Propter quod vti inuictissimum, and
potentissimum Imperatorem decet ne tantarum animarum exitum super nostram
animam fiat, vos omnes prius monendos esse sensuimus. Iam multoties vobis
mandata talia misimus, quae neglexistis, sed si mandato huic vltimo obedientes
non eritis, acerbitatem, and ruinam, quam videbitis non nobis, sed vobis ipsis
attribuite. Omnia igitur cum tempore been consulite, nam caetera prudentiae
vestrae examinanda relinquimus.

Datum Constantinopoli septima Lunae Octobris.

The english of which is this that follows.

THE MANDATE OF THE INVINCIBLE Emperor of the Turks, to Lord Andrew Battor,
Captain in Transiluania, and to all the other Lords and Peers of that
country.
BY the authority and express command of our greatness and highness, you shall
understand (you faithful in the faith of Christ Andrew Battor, wise and
knightly Lord amongst all the Christians inhabiting in Transiluania, and all
you the residue of our loving Lords) how that many times we have made known
to you (since that Friar George our Treasurer was cruelly and by treason
murdered, before he could chase out the Germans, which John, and of his son
our faithful subjects, it was in peace and freedom: even so we will ordain
that at this present it shall so continue: and we assuredly promise you, that
the said son of King John shall reign and govern amongst you. For so long
as King Solomon for Queen Izabella.
John (our Vassal and subject) served us faithfully and sincerely, we never
suffered that any should molest or trouble you: but further after his death,
we of our singular grace and clemency, gave to his son (being yet in
minority) his fathers country and that kingdom, and then Transiluania was
always quiet. But after that you had called in the Germans amongst you, great
dissentions were stirred up between you: in respect whereof, and to John's
son and his mother, and to deliver Transiluania from her natural enemies; we
by the grace of God, have commanded to leauie a very great and puissant army.
It behooves you therefore, in consideration of your loyalty, that your care
and diligence be, with force of arms to expulse out of your kingdom the
Germans, and whilst that King John's son be reestablished in his place and
dignity, that you elect a general Captain in that kingdom, to whom you may
all obey, and not suffer any longer your natural enemies to be amongst you,
but by a common consent to banish from thence, those, who are the cause of so
many garboyles John's son your Lord. And if we receive from you this mark and
token of fidelity and obedience, you shall not only obtain of us your
ancient liberty in this your kingdom of Transiluania, but also receive
further from our imperial Majesty, special honor and favor. In the mean
time we will entertain our mighty army for the affairs of that kingdom,
and for John's son; and we have already commanded that it should presently
march for the delivery thereof, from out of his enemies hands. For we will by
no means tolerate, that his enemies shall reign and govern in this Province.
And being sufficiently ascertained how much King John our Vassal has been to
us a faithful servant, and also his son, we have determined to reinstall
him into his kingdom, and to cause him to reign in it by our means, and
afford him such aid, that (by Gods permission) he shall be able to overcome
and surmount his enemy. To this intent (by Gods assistance) we have caused to
march the magnificall Achmeth Basha, second Councellor to our excellent
Majesty, and many other our subjects and Courtiers, with a great number of
Ianisaries of the most mighty and invincible Port of our greatness and highness,
having also commanded all our general Captains and Sangiachs to cause to
come from Greece and Buda a great army, insomuch, that with our said
Councellor, we shall have an army of 200000. men well appointed, before we
march in person against our enemy. And further, we have commanded the most
excellent Prince of Tartaria, the Vayuodes of Vallachia and Moldauia, with all
the Sangiachs which are in those countries on this

Given at Constantinople, the 7. day of the Moon of October.

This Letter did so much daunt the minds of every one, that it little wanted
The Transiluanians astonished at the letters of Solomon.
there followed not a general revolt, as well for that Vayuode Battor was not
there in person (he being absent in respect of sickness) as also by reason that
there was a speech of the return of King John's son and of his mother.
Castalde, who was yet at Albe-iula, (where he was lodged, the better to pass a
good part of the winter) having received letters, by which he was certified of
all this matter, and advised to come with all speed to take order therefore:
further intimating unto him, that the Transiluanians did no longer affect him,
and that the most part of them would adherre to the Turk, and recall John to
be their King: he presently departed from Albe-iula the 2. of December, not
respecting the rage and violence of the winter (which Ferdinand, he reproved
the pride and vanity of this said letter, causing them all to be called to the
Diet: and he spoke to them in this sort.

I know not (O you Lords and Peers of Hungary, Saxony, and Sicilia) The
oration of Castalde to those of the Diet of Wasrael.
upon what occasion you are so suddenly astonished, and so much amazed, that I
cannot but extremely marvel thereat, seeing that if for such vain boasting
words, you are so discouraged, and in a manner half dead; what I should think
of you if it happened to come to deeds: for dread of which you can do no
worse: and for fear of the mischief which the Turk denounces to you, you
should with such cowardlines, yield your necks subject under the yoke of his
tyrannical Empire, minding upon so light an occasion to defraud your selves of
this glory, which partly has been seen to be achieued by you until this
present, and which in many armies has shined every where: not considering that
some will boldly say, that your the Turk out of this kingdom, to agree now to
him, by reason of the brauado of a simple vain letter, which by force of arms
you would never most cruel. Therefore you ought to animate, defend, and
support your selves with a firm and stout assurance, worthy of your former
prowesses,

All the Lords present being reanimated by these speeches, sent to tell the The
Transiluanians reanimated against the Turks.
great Turk, Achmeth Basha, the Moldauian, and the Belerbey of Greece, that
they should come no further, because that they were resolutely determined

The Chiauss receiving this answer, and seeing he could then accomplish no
other thing, accepted of the ordinary tribute, which was yearly 20000.
crowns, and so retired to Belgrade, and from thence to Constantinople, leaving
the kingdom free of a great fear and suspicion.

Castalde having thus (though not altogether) gained the hearts of the
Transiluanians, and confirmed them in the league and devotion of Ferdinand,
retired again to his accustomed aboade at Albe-iula: where he had not been
long, but that he had news how Achmeth (Basha of Buda) writ a familiar letter
full of a thousand kind and liberal offers to Patocchy, containing Ferdinand
and Castalde should upon that occasion, justly conceive some mistrust against
him. But his former proceedings being sufficiently justified, he was always
held and reputed by them very loyal and faithful, and they committed unto him
the Castle of Iula, with the government of the town, that he might keep it
(as in former time he had done) faithfully, and therein to remain his wife
and children.

The Castles of Iula, Panchotto, Varadin, and others began to be in some
distress for want of victuals, and it was most necessary to make provision
Battor by his indisposition, or for that it so pleased him, would no longer
execute the office of Vayuodship, and requested that they would provide
themselves of another therefore, although Castalde instantly desired him to
continue in this office, which greatly troubled him.

During these troubles, letters came from Ferdinand, by which he commanded them
to begin a trial and proceed therein against Aldene the Campmaster, The
pursuice against Aldene.
who was still prisoner, and yt afterward he should be sent to him, with all
the proceedings against him. Aldene reproving (as suspected) certain of the
Judges, required his Majesty that his trial might be referred to others:
which being granted him, they began to examine many witnesses, and concluded
his trial, by which in the end he was condemned to die, and even by the
deposition of many who did prove against him the great treachery and
cowardlines which he used in abandoning Lippa, he being well able to defend it,
who also set open and declared the great loss and damage which he Ferdinand,
in causing the Castle and Artillery and all the munition to be consumed with
fire, which were the material causes that he was condemned to death for. His
trial being thus fully concluded, he was sent to Vienna with the sentence of
the Judges: which being allowed by his Majesty, declared that he should be
sent under a sure guard, who presently after, according to that command, was
surely conducted in chains to Vienna, where he remained prisoner so long,
that the continuance thereof in the end was the cause (as hereafter we shall
speak) of his liberty. Queen Izabella practices her return into
Transiluania. Peter Vicchy and Chendy for Izabella.


In the mean while, Queen Izabella was not any thing idle, but practiced
Peter Vicchy, and Chendy Ference, and other principal men, who secretly
affected her cause. And although Ferdinand writ to her, that he was ready at
all times to perform that which he John into his kingdom. By occasion of
these tumults there was a Diet assigned at Possouia, wherein the people of the
kingdom of Transiluania greatly complained Evil entreaty caused the
rebellion of the Transiluania^s against Ferdinand.
of the griefs and wrongs which they daily endured, as well by the war and
Ferdinands soldiers, importuning to have redress thereof, and not to task
them with such impositions; promising if he did so, not to fail his Majesty,
but willingly to take arms against the Turks, and valiantly to defend
themselves against them, and sincerely to maintain the duty and homage which
they had sworn to his Majesty. Upon these complaints and demands, Ferdinand
caused them to be answered, that he would not fail as much as he could, to
ease them of that burden, and that he would cause it to appear unto them,
that his pleasure was no other but always to aid and defend them against the
violence of the common enemy; against whom they should not for all that fail
to take arms, as he for his part would not be Bartholmew Coruatte (who had
the guard of Iula with two Germane Castalde was constrained to depute Paul
Banchy in that quarter for Vice Vayuode, and command Coruatte to depart out of
Iula, and sent him far off, leaving the charge of this town to Francis
Patocchy, who bore himself so familiarly amongst the inhabitants, that they
found themselves greatly rejoiced and comforted therewith.

If on this side Ferdinands soldiers did minister exceeding grief and
Castalde, they yet on the other side gave him daily more and more for want of
pay, he being greatly tormented by Duke Mauris for the payment of his
soldiers that was due to them, from the time that the siege was raised from
before Agria, he never having received any service from them, but rather great
damage and infinite ruin through the whole Realm. Duke Mauris dismissed.
meant indeed fully to content him, and to dissolve his army, which was
dismissed from Iauerin, and there was put therein another garrison. This was
the cause, that he being desirous to keep his word with this Duke, he could
not then satisfy with pay his own Camp which he had in Transiluania, of
which, for that it was composed of the vassals and subjects of his king and
that country, he had more assurance in their patience, then in the other which
were strangers and not subject to him, who at their departure, although they
were well paid, yet for all that they desisted not from committing great
inormities. And although Castalde did what possibly he could John into his
kingdom. By reason of such mischiefs, many Captains and principals of the
country, who in former time had been Ferdinands friends, became secretly his
deadly enemies, and raunged themselves on Queen Izabellaes party, not a
little increasing her forces and faction, which procured to Castalde infinite
discontent.

Now, as Fortune in this quarter managed the actions of mortal men, she (in
better manner then men could think for) disposed of them about Deua, because
that those who were in garrison in this town, having intelligence The garrison
of Deua put in route some Turkish companies.
that by the command of Cassombech, two companies of Turkish horse were
Cassombech presented themselves with a greedy desire to pill and burn some
neighbor places: and being now arrived at the passage, where they were
expected, it was suddenly charged on all sides, and they all fighting a
certain time, not knowing who should have the best, in the end the Turks
finding themselves in the midst of the other soldiers (who until then kept
themselves close) began to retire themselves, and to leave the victory to those
of Deua, who omitted not to pursue them even within sight performing such
warlike exploits, that besides the conquest of the prisoners, Ferdinands
soldiers, which daily increased, having no respect neither to General,
Colonels, Captains, nor any divine or humane thing, minding by their
disloyalty to make themselves masters of their fantasies, and to go every
where, without expecting the appointment and command of his Majesty, or the
leave of Castalde, as more

The end of the sixth Book.
THE SEVENTH BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF HVNGARIE.
THE ARGUMENT OF THE SEVENTH BOOK.
THe Transiluanians solicit Queen Izabella to return into Transiluania, and
Castalde (for the remedy thereof) appoints a Diet at Colosuar. The Spaniards
mutiny, and seek to depart Transiluania. Aldene is brought to Vienna, whither
Castalde (by Ferdinands appointment) also comes: upon whose departure out of
Transiluania, the Transiluantans rise in arms in the behalf of the Queen.
Aldene condemned, but is saved by favor. Castalde leaves the service of
Ferdinand, and returns again to the Emperor Charles. The history of the
death of Mustapha, eldest son of Solomon. Albe-iula and all Transiluania
yield to the Queen. Charles the 5. renounceth the Empire to his brother
Ferdinand; and his letter to the Cardinal of Mentz; his arrival in Spain;
and the place where he retired himself to end his days. Ferdinand crowned
Emperor. The Turk commands Izabella to expel all new sects out of her
kingdom. The death of the Emperor Charles, for whose death Philip his son
King of Spain made sumptuous funerals at Bruxels.

THe winter was now already in a manner at the extremest, and toward the end
of February in the year 1553. Anno 1553.
any longer to suffer the Germans and Spaniards amongst them, nor having now
no more means to victual them, as usually they had done; they began secretly
to send Ambassadors to Queen Izabella, to negotiate with her concerning her
return into this Province: The Transiluanians solicit Queen Izabella to
return into Transiluania.
whereunto Peter Vicchy, Chendy, and others were greatly assisting. Castalde
having notice of all this, and being thereof well assured, gave present
advertisement thereof to Ferdinand, who also presently did not forget on
Alphonse (nephew to Castalde) to the King of Polonia, and to Queen Bonna her
mother, and to Queen Ioane, to entreat them to use speedy means to divert
these clouds which were thundering in the air. Ferdinand also sent letters
from Vienna to Queen Izabella, by which he offered her to perform Francis
Chendy, and to Thomas Varcocchy, desiring them to importune the Queen so much,
that she would content her self with that which was agreed upon, since that
whatsoever was done, was not but to the profit of her and her son John, and
to the increasing of both their commodities. These two Lords made semblance as
though they allowed it, and faining to show their uttermost ability for
Ferdinand, did altogether to the contrary. And the Queen on the one side gave
good words, and on the other she hastened Cassombech to do the like, leaving
as many men as he could in the low countries, and to favor and assist the
Queens affairs, and to use their uttermost ability to reinstall King John
into his kingdom, adding to his command, that if he could not compass the
effect of this enterprise, yet at the least he should use the means to
increase in this Province his Sangiacship, promising him succors from Buda.

Castalde being advertised of all these devises, that he might the better
remedy them, and not suffer them to take further footing, appointed that the
Ferdinand had commanded them. Before the meeting of this Diet, Andrew Battor
(who again was confirmed in the estate of Vayuod, and withal was made Count
of Zalmar and Zalboc) having assembled a good troop of men among the neighbor
towns and Castles, and having understood that certain companies of Turkish
Caualarie made some incurtions, pilling and burning all the villages, and
minding to expulse them, he caused his people to go into the field, and to
march toward the enemy. But in the end coming to handie strokes, not far
from Agria, he was so hotly charged, that Castalde was forced to give to the
Basha of Buda a Chiauss, and a Mahometaine Priest, who were taken at the death
of Friar George, and detained prisoners in the Castle of Wiuar, and to exchange
them (by Ferdinands command) with the said fauourits, who by this means
recovered their liberty.

By reason of this disorder, the Vayuod entreated Ferdinand that he would give
him the means and enable him to entertain 1000. light horse, of the number of
those which he paid in Transiluania: which was wholly granted Ferdinand also
gave him charge to conclude an end of a discord among the people called Cumans,
who having been under the jurisdiction of Zaluoch, would not (seeing that this
Fortress was reduced under the Turks puissance) be under that of Agria,
Castalde and the Vayuode, they were content to be obedient to Agria.

Now whilst that the Turk was greatly busied by the Sophy, and that he
converted his forces for the defense of Amasia, into which the Persians were
entered, they began again (by the means and interposing of Haly The renewing
of the procuring of peace.
Chlauss) to negotiate the truce between Ferdinand and Solomon, there being
safe conduct granted both from the one and other, to send Ambassadors to
either party. There being for this purpose some appointed on both sides, it
was in the end perceived, that nothing else was done, but to entertain the
Transiluanians in some hope, whilst that the Turks should dispatch their
other entangled affairs, that afterward they might assail them, Cassombech
(at the instance of the Queen) had assembled about him many Sangiacchs, and
that with the troops which daily came to him, he meant to march directly to
Deua, to revenge himself of the losses which he had received of our people,
and withal to make himself master of that place, to the end that so he might
not have any impeachment that might cross his proceedings. Hereupon Castalde
caused the Diet to be solicited, and earnestly to persuade all those that
should be present thereat, to give order that every one should take arms, and
aid this town and others, and specially to march to the frontiers which
divide Polonia from Transiluania, where it Izabella.

The appointed day then for the Diet being come, Castalde was present at A Diet
at Colosuar.
Colosuar, where he found al those who were called thither, except the Vayuode,
who in respect of his sickness was excused, and there (by the express command
of Ferdinand) he demanded of the Transiluanians aid of men, to suppress all
these tumults, which covertly were dispersed in every place, and to defend Deua
and other places: he also demanded money and victuals, to make at the least a
reasonable army, and such, that with his people

Upon which demands, he was thus answered: that because the kingdom was by a
long war sorely afflicted and distressed, and every man reduced to extreme
misery, they could not succor him with money, nor victuals, because that in
the last winter they were all spent and consumed by the soldiers: and as for
the aid of men, they would assist him therewith as far as they could;
notwithstanding it being necessary that Ferdinand have a great army, infinite
heaps of money, and great store of victuals to entertain

With this resolution this Diet ended, when the Spaniards for two pays which
they should have received, were more moved and mutinous then before, The
Spaniards mutiny.
and that in so strange a manner as the like was never heard of. For refusing
the payment, and not minding to stay that they might be satisfied in that
kingdom for all that which was due to them, they took by force the Ensigns
from those who bore them, and with them took their way toward Vienna, passing
through Hungary, where they performed infinite evils, committing the greatest
riot in the world. And although that Castalde (that he

But without respect to their General they dislodged, and passed by Colosuar,
threatening to sack this town, who were greatly afeard thereof, although that
Castalde was within it. And being arrived at the river of Marque, Ferdinand was
exceedingly offended thereat, and meant to send the Marquess Sforce Palauicin
(who was already redeemed from the Turks for 15000. Ducats) with all his
people to have cut them in pieces, and severely to chastise the authors of this
so great a sedition. But he being appeased by by some, sent to tell these
Spaniards, that they should repair to Papau, where they should be satisfied
of all their pay, as within a while after they were.

A little before that Aldene was conducted to Vienna, and was imprisoned Aldene
brought to Vienna.
in a tower, Ferdinand minding that his condemnation should not be executed
until Castaldes coming, to whom he had given license to depart out of
Castalde retired out of Transiluania, and returned to Ferdinand.
he was very willing, leaving this kingdom in the month of April, and
arrived at Vienna in the end of May, where he was joyfully received by
Ferdinand and K. Maximilian, to whom afterward he made a large recital of all
what was passed, to their great content. And because virtue and glory have
always envy attending on them, some persons bruited amongst the greatest
Ferdinands Court, that Castalde had heaped together a great quantity of
Castalde wrongfully accused.
gold and silver, and that he was not a little enriched by Friar Georges
treasure, and by the presents which the Transiluanians had bestowed on him, and
that he had sent great store thereof from him. This brute did greatly grieve
him, for that it was come to Ferdinands ears; and yet further for this, that
some said that he had detained and kept back pensions and wages which his
Majesty had granted to certain that were his trusty servants, and who had
faithfully served him during this war. Upon this bad and false suggestion,
there was added many other vile and infamous things. By writing and speeches he
endeavored to expel these false suggestio^s from Ferdinands conceit,

Presently after the departure of Castalde out of Transiluania, they had news,
that one Clement Athanase had (with a good troop of men assotiated with him)
by night taken the Castle of Tocchay (which by the situation Tocchay.
thereof and art is very strong) and that he durst attempt with ladders to
surprise The Transiluanians rise in the behalf of Queen Izabella.
the town of Agria, from whence he was repulsed by the inhabitants, in such
manner that he could not enterprise any thing upon it: this being attempted by
the command of Queen Izabella, and her son John. They had also news how
Peter Vicchy was accorded with the Turks, and how he being accompanied with
all his adherents, he took the way toward Lippa, with intention (in the
Queens name) to surprise the town of Deua and Iula, and do his uttermost
endeavor in this, that it might return to her, and that she might reenter into
the kingdom. This man had great means, and under his color many great
matters were practiced, which gave sufficient Ferdinand to think deeply
thereof, who was sufficiently informed how all the Realm inclined to the
Queens part. The Saxons to have some shadow to remove their household, caused
to be demanded of his Majesty the Castle of Aluins, which, they said, did
(according to their privileges) belong to them, and they requested that it
might be confirmed to them by him. That he might not discontent them in this
their demand, but rather to hold them assured to him in some sound fidelity,
and that he might not give them occasion to mutiny, he yielded to their
demand; and presently they of Iula, Agria, and other places were commanded,
that they should be vigilant and careful, and not sleepie or slothful, for
fear of being suddenly surprised by the Queens party, who ceased not to
perform Ferdinand.

During these proceedings, it was ordained that the process of Aldene Aldene
condemned to death, and saved by favor.
should be renewed, and that the sentence should have his full and entire
effect, if the accusations were found true. This reviving being at a certain
day ended, Aldene condemned to have his head cut off. The prescribed day being
come to end his life, he was in the sight of all Vienna led chained between
two Friars (who did comfort him) to the place of justice, having the
executioner by, and was there upon a scaffold to be beheaded. Mary Queen of
Bohemia, and daughter of the Emperor Charles the 5. because he was a Spaniard
and subject to her father, prevailed so much with the King her husband, that he
requested pardon of Ferdinand for him, with this condition nevertheless, that
he should always remain prisoner. This favor being thus granted, Aldene had
his life saved, and within a while after by the same means Castaldes liking,
who (to the end he might give example to others, and to cause them learn by
the negligence and cowardlines of Aldene, how they should be hardy, resolute,
and courageous, imitating Torquatus) solicited that he should be publicly
punished.

Now whilst Castalde recreated himself with Ferdinand, sometimes being with
him in hunting, sometimes pursuing the Hearts along Danubius, (which to save
themselves from the dogs, took soil therein) letters came to him from the
Emperor Charles, by which he commanded him, that seeing the Transiluanian
wars were ended, he should presently depart from Vienna, and journey into
Flanders (where he was greatly troubled by the people of King Henry of France)
that so he might use him in this war. The Ferdinand, how he had taken Hedin
from the French Hedin taken by the Emperor Charles from the French.
King, which is a place situate upon the confines of Artois in the Low
Countries, against which he had brought a puissant army, and had environed it
with his Camp, and battered it on all sides, and that in the end he had taken
it, notwithstanding the marvelous defense of the assieged, making a great
mine, wherein was buried Horatius Farnese Duke of Castres, and that he had
caused it to be ruinated and defaced, even to the foundations, there being
prisoners with him the Duke of Bouillon Marshall of France Lieutenant in the
same for the King, the Lord of Riou Governor, the Count of Villars, the Lord
of Prye, the Baron of Culan, and many others; there being besides Castalde (to
obey the Emperor) took leave of Ferdinand, and after being greatly honored
by Castalde returned to the Emperor in Flanders.
him with many privileges, and enriched with many gifts, for the great valor
which he had shown in Transiluania against the Turks, he travailed toward
Germany, at the time that the war of Sienna began to cease, by Julius the 3.

In the Eastern parts Solomon was no less inflamed to the war, then was
Charles the 5. against France. He (as we have said) in the year 1552. The
history of the death of Mustapha, Solymans eldest son.
caused every where to be published (to get Mustapha his eldest son into his
hands) that the Persians were entered into Amasia and Syria, and had sacked
many towns, and spoiled a great circuit of the plain country, leading with
them prisoners the poor inhabitants, and ruinating al which they Rostan Basha
with a strong army into Syria, to force them to retire. But this device was to
no other end, but speedily to have the said Mustapha into his command, and to
assure himself of his Empire and life, by putting him to death. But before we
come to this narration, it is necessary that I recite some things of time
past, that I may the more orderly descent to that which comes now to be
treated of, and to cause men better to understand the cause that moved Solomon
so cruelly to hate so virtuous and magnanimious a son.

Solomon then having had this Mustapha his eldest son, by a slave of
Circassia, Mustapha the eldest son of Solomon.
he gave him the government of the Province of Amasia, the better to maintain
himself and his mother. This young Prince daily increasing with corporal
ability, and with virtues of the mind, gave of himself great expectation to
all those who saw him, assuring themselves that one day he would prove a most
valiant Captain and courageous Lord. This infant being departed from
Constantinople, and arrived in this Province, the Grand Seigniour began to be
enamoured of another of his Slaves, named Rossa, so Rossa beloved of Solomon.
hotly, that with the daily conversation he had with her, he saw by her four
children, the one named Mahomet, who had the Province of Carmania; the Bajazet,
to whom was given Mechoresia; the third Selim, who after the Mahomet, Bajazet,
Selim, Zeangir, children of Solomon by Rossa.
death of Mahomet had Carmania; and the fourth Zeangir, otherwise called
crookbacke, by reason of two knobs he had upon his shoulders and breast, and he
was of an excellent spirit. He had also a daughter named Chameria, who was
given in marriage to Rostan Basha, who after the death of Abraham Chameria
daughter of Solomon married Rostan Basha.
Basha was principal Visir. This man made himself very odious to all the
world in this office, because had cut off the pay of the Ianisaries, the wages
of the officers of the Grand Seigniours house, the charges of armies, and the
estate of Sangiachs; all these charges being very burdensome and excessive. But
in stead thereof he was very well liked of Solomon, and much in his favor,
Mustapha, of whom he did greatly distrust himself for the train which he had,
and for the love which the soldiers bore him. This distrust and fear were
the cause that he enterprised a conspiracy with Rossa his mother in law
against the life of Mustapha, by the deceit and treachery which we shall now
speak of. This Rossa seeing how dearly she was beloved of the great Turk, to
advance her children by a policy, and under a fained color and zeal of
religion, sent to Muplety (properly called by the Turks Muphty, who among the
Mahometanes Muplety an arch Presbiter of the Mahometanes.
is, as the Pope is among the Christians) to signify to him, how she had a
marvelous desire to cause a Temple to be built, and an Hospital also for the
poor pilgrims, to the honor of God and of their Prophet: but by no Gods
reward for charitable works done by Slaves, appertain to their masters.
from him, that such works should be beneficial for her souls health and
agreeable to God. Muplety answered her, that this enterprise would be well
pleasing to God, but not for her salvation, for that she was a Slave of the
Grand Seighiour, who was master and Lord of all that she had, and in regard of
which his power, all whatsoever she should do in this, should succeed to the
Rossa made free.
receiving this gift, well knowing to take fit time and occasion, gave him many
kind thanks, and presently employed workmen about her buildings, abstaining
her self from carnal copulation with him. While she thus spent To use a free
woman is sin.
commit a sin; it not being lawful for him to use a free woman, as more at
large he might know of Muplety. This answer was greatly offensive to the Grand
Seigniour. For loving her extremely, the more strict the prohibition was, the
more his desire increased to be with her, and gnawing his heart with a thousand
imaginations, sent to seek Muplety, of whom he demanded Rossa. And by that
means, not being able any long to tolerate the passion which tormented him, he
determined to satisfy, not his reason, but his appetites, and resolved to take
her for his spouse, as publicly Rossa made the spouse of Solomon.
he did, giving her by the contract of marriage 5000. Ducats of yearly reuenew
for her dowry, to the great marvel of all, who knew that to be against the
custom of the Ottomans, who because they would never have any companion The
Turkish Emperors never marry.
in the Empire, do never marry, but in place of a spouse, they use women
Slaves who are very fair, which from all parts of the world were brought to
them, and they are shut up within the Seraile (according to the custom of the
Turkish Lords) where they were bountifully used and instructed in diverse
virtuous things: and by these the Grand Seigniours have their children, and
those by whom they once have had children, are more honored and better served
then the other, and afterward are married to Grand Seigniours of their own
sect and religion, as are the Bashaes, Sangiachs, Belerbeys, and such like. Now
this Rossa from a Slave (by the favor of heaven and the benefit of Fortune)
being become the wife of so great a Solomon, should remain inheritour and
successor of the Empire.

The greatness and valor of Mustapha was much opposite to her deseignes, and to
abate this inconvenience, she thought that it was needful to assist her Rostan
Basha her son in law, as of one that would rather Rossa practices the death
of Mustapha.
desire that his brother in law might be Lord, then Mustapha, who bore him an
evil grudge, for that he had cut off the reuenew which he was wont to have out
of his Province: by reason whereof he could not but doubt, that when the Turk
dyed, and this man succeeding in his place, he would not only deprive him from
the dignity of a Visir, but also of his goods and life.

Having then drawn him to her devotion, and being accorded together, she
effected so much with the Grand Seigniour, that her son in law had Rostan
Basha conspireth with Rossa, the death of Mustapha.
the managing of all the affairs and expeditions of that Province where
Mustapha commanded, impressing afterward in the mind of Solomon, with
Mustaphaes greatness, and the good will which every one did bear him. For
confirmation of which, Rostan commanded all those who were chosen to go into
the Provinces, and specially those who went into Ionia, a neighbor Province to
Amasia, that for the contentment of the Grand Seigniour, they should write and
make known particularly the proceedings of Mustapha, and his honors, to the
end that he might take pleasure therein, and that they should highly commend
him in certifying all the good they could of him. Which they did (not knowing
the deceit) very willingly and often also: so that by their letters they
clearly discerned the Rostan after he had received such letters, gave them to
Rossa, to the end, that according to the opportunity and occasion of the time,
she might show them to the Turk. She in showing them these letters (as a
subtell and malicious woman) made great show to be exceedingly contented at the
generositie and valiantnes of Mustapha, and to be very respective of his life
and health: and then on the other side, as being careful of the preservation
and puissance of her Lord and spouse, by wily and subtell means she
propounded to him the example of Selim, who by the like craft and industry,
deprived his father both of his Empire and life, desiring him Mustapha. But for
this time her devices took no great effect in Solomon, and she seeing that
they came to nothing, thought to make him away by poison, and sending him in
his fathers name certain presents, gave charge to some to carry them to him.
But for that the hour of his death was not yet come, he would at no hand taste
thereof, until the bringer had first made an assay, who presently fell down
stone dead: for which cause he made them to be cast away, and so escaped the
death. This treachery falling out contrary to the desire of Rossa, yet for
all that she lost no courage, but invented another, desiring her Lord that he
would do her this favor, that sometimes one, and sometimes another of
Mustapha coming thither, should with better commodity be dispatched by some
manner of means whatsoever, and not coming thither he should The eldest sons
of the Turkish Emperors remain not at the Court.
to depart out of their Provinces to come to Constantinople, except they be
sent for to be made Emperors with a strong and puissant army: which they are
not wont to do, so long as the father lives. Nevertheless she obtained that
two of his children should come thither: and thus always was one or two with
Solomon, either in the town, or in the army, or in some other place where he
was. Zeangir the crookbacke, was oftener there then any of them, for that he was
pleasant and merry, and one that could fit all humors well, whereat the Grand
Seigniour took great pleasure.

Now certain years after, Fortune (envious of Mustaphaes magnanimity, and
favoring the wickedness of this woman) caused a letter to be Mustapha and of
Amasia; it being The instruction of the Turkish Emperors sons.
the custom, that when a son of the Grand Seigniour goes into any
government, to give him a Basha to instruct him in Military discipline, and a
Doctor to teach him the liberal Arts, and other good erudiments. It was
imported by this letter, that a marriage should be treated of between the said
Mustapha and the daughter of the King of Persia, whereof this Basha did
diligently advertise the Court and the Grand Seigniour, to the end that not any
thing should be imputed to him, as if he had participated in this affayre. This
letter being come into the hands of Rostan, esteeming that this was a subject
very fit for him to overthrow Mustapha withal, acquainted Rossa with all the
matter, with whom he having conferred of that which they should do, they went
both together to the Turk, showing him the ambition of Mustapha, and that he
had a purpose to inuest himself in the Empire, and by the affinity contained
in this letter, to join the Persian armies with his, that so he might the
better expulse him from Constantinople, adding at the end the little faith
which was to be hoped of the Ianisaries, because they were corrupted by his
great bounty. These so evident reasons were with words full of such great
efficacy pronounced by them, that they so moved Solomon, that to assure his
kingdom and life, he determined to put his son to death, and according to
this resolution he caused Rostan Basha Mustapha by some subtell dexterity, and
to conduct him to him. Rostan being come to the entrance of this Province, and
Mustapha having understood of his coming, presently marched toward him with
7000. of the valiantest soldiers that he had. Rostan seeing that then his
enterprise could take no good issue, bruiting it abroad that he found all
things in good tranquillity, returned without any further expecting the coming
of Mustapha, or without seeing the dust of his soldiers, and returned from
Rossa, he caused him to redouble his fear, telling him, that having found the
army which he led with him into Syria most ready and willing, and at the
devotion of Mustapha, and they desired no other thing, but only that he were
Solymans heart a most great indignation, and were the cause to bring to end
that treason thus wrought against this innocent young man.

This then being the year 1553. he commanded that all the soldiers Anno
1553.
should assemble, and that Achmeth Basha of Buda, with all the provision of
Hungary, should march toward Amasia, to bring to end the Persian war, it
being expressly every where bruited abroad, that the Persians were afresh
Solomon set himself onward on his journey with all his army: and being there
arrived, he presently caused letters to be writ to Mustapha, that he should
come to him at Aleppo; and endeavoring to conceal the hate, which through
others malignitie he bore to his son, yet could he not so well dissemble it,
but that Achmeth Basha, as of better judgment then the other Bashaes were, did
perceive it, and conceiving great displeasure that the father should be thus
incensed against his son, because he was too generous, secretly advertised
Mustapha, that he should look well to himself and his life, and not be too
secure. This did greatly astonish the poor young man, and the rather,
considering the coming The divine resolution of Mustapha.
then ending his life in rebellion, and contrary to him. And having thus
determined with himself, his Doctor being by him, after many

This answer greatly contented this young man, and within a while after, in
great diligence he arrived where his father was, who was encamped three days
journey from Aleppo, in a large field. By this so sudden arrival of Mustapha,
Solomon was the more perplexed, and had a greater distrust, not thinking that
he would have come so soon. Rostan upon this occasion failed not again, and
commanded by signs the principals of the army, and the Ianiaries to go
before Mustapha, and to do him honor. These men being (according The
Ianisaries obeying the signs of then Commanders.
to their custom) well disciplined, and obeying their Commanders, (by whose
signs only they are conducted and governed) went in troops (thinking to do
that which would be agreeable to the Turk) to salute Mustapha, and to do him
reverence, and to perform this, all the Camp removed. Rostan seeming to be
greatly astonished at this, went to Solomon, to advertise him how all the
Ianisaries, and principals of his army, Mustapha, and to receive him, with
great acclamations and excessive joys, and that there rested to him nothing
else, but to be Lord; desiring he would have care of himself. Solomon changing
his color, and becoming all pale, went out of his Pauilion, and apartly saw
that to be true, which Rostan had told him. Many say that Mustapha three days
before his death, had in his sleep this vision a little before the rising of
the Sun: He thought that a Prophet, apparelled with habits shining as the The
vision of Mustapha prognosticated his death.
Sun beams, took him by the hand, and conducted him into a most pleasant
and delightful place, where was a rich and sumptuous Palace, with a most fair
garden, and that then that Prophet said to him, that there they did Mustapha:
and he having imparted it to his Doctor, he said to him, after that he well
considered of the matter, that he greatly distrusted of his life, and that
therefore he required him to look well to himself. This young man
nevertheless assured, made him answer: Wherefore should I suffer my self to
be vanquished by a vain fear, and by the illusion of a dream, and not to go
to see my father, he having caused me to be called unto him with so great
mildnes, and having had (as it is fitting, and as my thereof, and capable to
enjoy his greatness with my brothers in perpetual

With this deliberation he arrived near the Pauilions and Tents of his father,
with his train, and caused his people to stay there; and clothing himself in a
new white habit, in token of true fidelity, and having put into his bosom
certain letters and writings, and laying apart all manner of weapons from
about him, that so he might take away all occasion to use them against Seven
Muets executors of the Grand Seigniours pleasure.
the person of the Grand Seigniour, and only understanding by signs, they
executed his secret commissions. Mustapha seeing such persons to come directly
to him, began greatly to be afraid, and turning himself toward them, he
said: Behold my apparent death. And minding to fly thence, Have you not yet
taken away the life from this Traitor, who for certain The cruel words of a
Tyrant.
years together has not suffered me to sleep in quiet? At these words the
Muets and Eunuchs taking courage, threw him on the ground, and by force drawed
and stretched the cord which strangled him, there dying in Mustapha strangled.
this manner the most liberal and magnificent Lord that ever was of the
Ottoman house, a man truly both of mind and body very noble, and who by his
virtuous qualities merited not to have given to others so horrible a spectacle
of himself, as he gave by the deceit and treachery of his enemies.

This cruel act being thus committed, the Turk caused presently to be taken
the Basha of Amasia, and a Venetian, of the house of Michely, who was taken a
child in the journey of Preuesa, and who then with great credit bore the
Colonels Ensign, and presently caused their heads to be publicly cut off,
calling afterward to him Zeangir the crookbacke (who yet knew nothing of this
enormious cruelty) to whom he commanded to go see his brother Zeangir killed
himself, seeing his brother dead.
who was in the Pauilion, and who was but lately arrived. He having understood
Mustapha lay thus euilly entreated, strangled on the ground, beholding him with
great tears, Solomon sent presently to him that he should take the Treasures,
Tents, and Pauilions, and the Province of Mustapha, bestowing them on him for a
gift. But in stead of thanking those which brought him this message, he spoke
unto them these words.

O cursed treacherous dog, not a father, but a most cruel Tiger, enjoy thou
rather the Treasures, Moueables, Pauilions, and the Province of Mustapha,
seeing this is fallen into thy enraged heart to put to death so virtuous
Ottoman house, I pray God that I poor crookbacke live not, that thou may do
the like to me. Whereupon drawing a little poynard which he had by his side, he
thrust it into his own breast, and so presently he died. The King
understanding of this unexpected news, fell into extreme sadness. And this was
the truth of the crookbacks deed, although the world might not be filled with
so vile an act, and for the reverence of the Ottoman house, the Turks say that
he thus suddenly died of a Squinancie.

The Grand Seigniour having afterward commanded that the Pauilions and
moueables of Mustapha should be carried with his, while they whom he had
commanded to do it went about to execute it, many were moved and opposed
themselves against it, thinking that they meant to sack them, A great tumult
in Solymans army.
these valiant soldiers not yet knowing what was happened to their Lord; and
seeing a great number of men to come toward them, fearing some sudden
insolency, put themselves in arms, repulsing those back who were the
foremost, not without great slaughter. Those of the Kings Camp perceiving the
rumor which hourly increased, running to succor their fellows, and the
other part doing also the like, both Camps reenforcing themselves, with a
terrible brute they put themselves in arms, and gave a great Achmeth Basha (a
grave man, and of great authority, for his renowned virtue generally known,
and greatly esteemed among the soldiers) had not caused the Ianisaries to
retire; and if turning himself toward the soldiers of Mustapha, he had not
used to them such like gentle speeches.

What (my brethren and children) will you be of so bad a disposition, and so
bold to resist the command of the Grand Seigniour, whose pleasure is, that his
sons treasure should be taken out of his Pauilions, and carried to his? I
cannot believe that you who so long have known your selves to be Ottoman
armies, without being stained or defiled of any infamy for his preservation,
as by your virtuous actions for his service you have declared through all the
world, he being

These speeches of this courageous Basha had such force over them, that they
were appeased, and as very obedient, they suffered to be carried to the Turks
Tent all whatsoever was in Mustaphaes. But his death being within a little
while after known amongst the Ianisaries, and bruited through the Camp, the
occasion thereof, and the distrust of him, and because it was imposed upon him,
they all took arms again, and making a great tumult, mingled with infinite
tears and weepings, they approached very nigh to the Grand Seigniours
Pauilion. This second commotion put him into such a maze, that losing his
senses, he would gladly have fled: but being stayed by Tell me (quoth he) what
tumults are these here? What commotion is this? What insolences do you thus
inconsideratiuely offer to me? Do you not peradventure know me? Am I not your
Lord, and he that ought to rule and govern you? Certain of them answered him,
that they well knew him to be such a Lord, who had a long time been chosen by
them, whom they had reverenced, and whose Empire they had by their virtue so
greatly enlarged; to this end notwithstanding, Mustapha, and to purge
themselves from that treason which was imputed upon them; and that they would
never lay them down, until the accusers should be brought to judgment, and
he convicted them to be culpable; and that then with all humility (if it so
fell out) they promised (as worthy of severe chastisement) to submit their
lives to the most cruel and shamefullest death that could be found, and that
for a final resolution they meant that that should be auerred in the same

These speaking so stoutly, by reason of the grief which they felt, left not
for all that to bathe their cheeks with bitter tears, and their friendly
affectionated mournings constrained the Grand Seigniour (who for the fear
Solomon in danger of his person.
which he had received, and for the horror of the deed, was almost besides
himself) to promise them with sweet and enticing speeches, that he was ready
to satisfy whatsoever they would demand, and by that means appeased a great
part of this tumult: nevertheless, all the army with weapons in their hands
omitted not to keep careful watch, for fear he should steal out of the
Camp, and that they should be deceived of his promise which

Rostan (after he had by the command of the great Turk committed the seal
into the hands of Achmeth, and that himself was deprived of the office and
state of Visir) wholly possessed with fear for these tumults, fled to the
Pauilion of Achmeth, desiring him as his inward friend, and with great Achmeth
answered him, that he should take counsel of the Grand Seigniour, and follow
his pleasure, and not of any other. This pleased Rostan, and suddenly by a
sufficient message he executed the counsel of his faithful friend: and
receiving answer from the Seigniour, who commanded that presently he should
retire himself from him; he again caused to be told him, that he could not
depart nor retire without his Pauilions, without commission, and without money.
The Turk caused to be replied, that the necessity required neither Pauilions
nor money. Upon this resolution he mounted on horseback with eight of his
faithfullest Mustapha, nor they did ever so much as think: furthermore
obstinately perseuering in this, that they would not by any means depart from
thence, except they were revenged for the innocent blood, and that they might
have justice. The Grand Seigniour seeing that after he had publikly and
secretly practiced with them all kind of experiments, yet could he not for all
that content them; and that there were already many days past; and knowing
their minds to be more kindled to revenge then before; and seeing that by his
authority he could do no more, meant yet further to Achmeth, who knew so
aptly to handle them, that he so far prevailed in paying daily 1000. Aspres
to every soldier Solomon escapes from his mutinous soldiers.
for three days to 4000. soldiers of the Port, they were agreed to
accompany their Lord to Aleppo, which was three days journey from thence; the
Turk notwithstanding having given them his inviolable promise and faith to
chastise the false accuser, and to revenge the innocent blood of Mustapha. With
these conditions he retired to Aleppo, clearing himself from the hands of his
soldiers, having before he departed from his Camp, taken order for the
bodies of his children, and commanded they Ottomans. Bursia a town where is
the sepulture of the Turkish Emperors.
Those who had the charge thereof, vncloathing this miserable Mustapha, found
the letters (which, as we have said, he had put into his bosom, when he went
from his Pauilion to go kiss his fathers hands) and presenting them to the
Grand Seigniour, he would not then open them. But after these tumults were a
little appeased, he caused them to be brought unto him, and read them, and
found that from point to point were discovered therein, the The innocence of
Mustapha discovered.
deseignes and wicked practices of Rostan and Rossa against Mustapha: whereupon
he was so stricken at the heart, that for many days he was so surprised with
grief, that he would not speak to any man; and if he had not had a respect to
the state and ordering of things, as then they stood, he would not the^ have
put Rostan to death, as he deserved, but would have given him alive to be
devoured of the dogs. But that which he did not then, he reserved until
another time: and since the fact was remediless, he altered his mind to
favor and advance Mahomet the son of Mustapha (which he had by a Lady of
Bosnia) of the age of 14. years, who (during this tumult) was Mustapha in
another country, fearing that the fury of the Grand Seigniour should also
fall upon him. And he presently recalled a certain Captain, whom he had
already dispatched to go and kill him, and he having found this child,
caused him to be brought unto him, he gave him for his entertainment the
Sangiachship of Bursia. After that he departed from thence and marched toward
Jerusalem, and being but four days journey from thence, for some other
accidents happened, he was constrained to return to Aleppo, that he might
provide for the affairs of Syria, and even then it was that he was already
freed from the marriage of Rossa.

There was there a Chiauss who with all diligence departed from the Camp,
thinking by the death of Mustapha, to bring good news to Selim, who then was
in Carmania. But Selim was so sad for this death, that he meant to leave to the
world a perpetual witness thereof, causing the head of this Selim kills him
who brought the news of his brothers death.
messenger to be cut off, in stead of the good recompense that he expected:
which truly was a famous act worthy to be recorded, and not worthy of this man
who is enemy of our faith, whom if it had pleased God to have converted him to
his holy faith, assuredly he might have been compared with any other, as well
ancient as modern.

About this time Peter Chendy was found culpable concerning the insurrection
Chendy excuses himself to Ferdinand concerning the insurrection of
Transiluania.
of the kingdom of Transiluania, as having put his hand thereto: and Ferdinand
about it, excusing himself, and assuring him that he never meant any such
matter. His excuses (according to the necessity of the time) were received.
But within a while after the Queen desirous to recover that which of her own
will she had left, effected her purposes so well, that causing a tumult among
the people of the kingdom, within a short time she saw her self Lady
thereof, and chased from thence Ferdinands people; there increasing at the same
time so horrible a plague in this Province, that it continued until the year
1555. whereof died so many men, horses, and other beasts, that it was an
incredible thing.

Upon the occasion of this loss, the Turks being encouraged, took arms
against Ferdinand, and entering into that country besieged Albe-iula, against
Albe-iula yielded to Queen Izabella, and all Transiluania.
which they built a Fort, and the assieged being at the end of their victuals,
were constrained to yield to the Queen, who in saving them, she was by that
means made Lady of that town, and within a while after (in her sons
Ferdinand, and embracing that of John's, as of their natural Lord, all never
ceased until they had cleansed Transiluania of the remainders of the
Emperials, the Queen being for this purpose favored of the King of Polonia,
and of the Queen Bonna her mother, who secretly (besides the Turk, who feared
that Ferdinand should set footing in this country, and that in time he might
greatly annoy him in that quarter) would not fail to assist her with all
counsels and succors, which they should think necessary and profitable for
her, according to the condition of the time. She recompensed those

About this time her brother Sigismond King of Polonia, having refused for wife
one of the daughters of the King of the Romans, being inamoured of a
gentlewoman his subject, who was young, and endowed with singular beauty, he
took her to wife and spouse, and married her against the will of the Queen
his mother, and of all the principals of his kingdom: for which occasion it
happened, that the mother was long time incensed against him, until the death
of this new Queen, who suddenly died, not without Sigismond the 2. King of
Polonia in disgrace with his mother and Polanders for his wife.
suspicion of being poisoned, and by her death all the dissentions of the
kingdom Bonna his mother, who having before greatly labored to have leave to
retire out of Polonia, and go and repose her self in Italy, and to finish
the remainder of her days in her Duchy of Barry, situated in the kingdom of
Naples, she was in the end (by means of the Emperor Charles, and of Ferdinand
King The Queen of Polonia retireth into Italy.
of the Romans) licensed by her son: and in iourneying into Italy, she A
rich Barge wherein the Venetian Seigniorie expatiat themselves in the Adriatike
sea, near to their city.
Bucentaure with great pomp, and honored by all the gentlewomen of the town,
who gorgiously attired, and dressed with stones and Jewels, presented
themselves to her, and conducted her to the Palace of the Duke of Ferrara,
using to her the greatest courtesies which could be imagined, she being further
continually visited by every one. And after being accompanied with certain
armed Galleys, which were given to her by the State of Venice to conduct her in
surety, for fear of Saala Rays the Pyrat, who then skoured those seas: and
with a good wind she arrived at the Port of Barry, where Pappacoda, to whom
(forgetting her son and Pappacoda entertained Bonna the Queen of Polonia.
daughter, so great is the fleshly desire of this world) she left all the good
things that she had, remaining infinitely blamed for this act, and little
commended among the living.

This happened then, when between the Emperor Charles, and Henry A truce
between the Emperor Charles and the King of France.
King of France, there was accorded (after many disputes and controversies
between the Commissioners) a truce for five years: which was published in
France, in Italy, and Flanders. And that they might the better rejoice and
congratulate upon the occasion thereof with these two great Princes, the Pope
sent to the one of them for Legate, the Cardinal Mottola, and to Caraffa.

The Emperor laying aside arms, by occasion of this truce, with hope Charles
the Emperor renounceth the Empire, to the end that Ferdinand might have it.
that it in the end would engender a good peace, was resolved wholly to
renounce all the affairs and pompes of this world, insomuch that according to
this resolution, whilst he was at Gaunt, he dispatched certain Lords to the
Electors of the Empire, and to Ferdinand his brother, by whom he declared to
them his determination, sending by them to Ferdinand the Crown, Scepter, and
the other Imperial ornaments. By these he writ to the Cardinal of Mentz an
Elector, the letter which follows.

My Lord Cardinal, seeing it has pleased God to show me so much grace at the
end of my days, as to grant me rest, by the truce which I have made with the
King of France, the fruit whereof I hope for a good peace, between the
subjects both of the one part and other, I am resolute to end the remainder of
my years with a life more sweet and fuller of tranquillity; by mean of which
I may apply my self to the contemplation of divine things, from which (to my
great sorrow) I have been more distracted then I would have bin, by the
affairs which I have had upon me even from my youth in so great abundance,
that if divine clemency had not assisted and comforted me, I know it had been
impossible for me to unfold my self therefrom. The acknowledgement which I
have thereof, besides other benefits received fro^aboue, But after so many
victories which God (notwithstanding I was unworthy I would they meant to
continue it in the election which afterward they

According to the contence of this letter, Philip the only son of the
Emperor Philip came to seek his father the Emperor.
came to his father at Scuebourg in Zeland, whither from Gaunt he was come to
imbark himself to sea. There the father instructed him how he should govern
the affairs of his States, and how he should carry himself to his subjects,
and his confederates: after he had given him his blessing, and embraced him for
the last time, and dismissed all the Princes, Ambassadors, Gentlemen, and
Captains who were there present, his Majesty the 14. of September, a little
before the sun rising, went aboard unto a vessel prepared for him, together
with the two Queens, Elinor and Mary his sisters: and being accompanied with
60. sail, directed his course toward Biscay, where, with a favorable wind,
he arrived within few days, having before passed Charles arrived in Spain.
gentlemen. Some say, that as soon as he set foot on land, he kneeled down,
thanking God for that in these last days of his life he had showed him this
favor to conduct him into this country, which above all others he held
always most dear, and by means whereof he was come to that high degree of
the Empire, attributing to it (next to God) in a manneral his victories and
honors, using these words: As naked I came out of my mothers womb, so naked
do I return to thee my second mother, and in recompense of many merits which
thou have used to me, I not being able for the present to bestow any other
thing on thee, I give thee this my sick body, and after being put into his
Litter, he was conducted to the town of Valladolid, Valladolid.
where was the Prince Charles his young son. In this town (which next to that
of Tolledo, is the principal town of Spain) his Majesty was resident The
Emperor Charles instructed his little son Charles.
a while, during the which, he exhorted this young Prince to imitate the
footsteps of his predecessors, and charily to observe and keep the Christian
and Catholic religion. After that, he went from thence into the Province of
Estremadure, to a Monestarie of S. Hieromes, called the Heremite Friars,
situated The place where the Emperor Charles retired himself to end his dates.
in a very solitary place, and commodious to lead a holy life. Having in this
place given leave to the two Queens his sisters to depart, and sent them back
to Valladolid, this great Emperor chused there his last aboade, and there
ending the rest of his days, with few domestike officers, giving himself over
to continual contemplation of divine things, and forsaking all the affairs of
this world, he passed the rest of his time in prayer, alms deeds, and other
charitable works.

In the mean time, Ferdinand King of the Romans, after he had received by the
hands of the Prince of Orange the patents of the Emperor (by which Ferdinand
crowned Emperor.
with the said Prince, with George Sigismond Sille Vice Chancellor, and Wolfang
Haller Secretary of the Empire, about the month of March. At this Diet were
all the Electors, and the ceremonies accustomed in such solemn acts being
accomplished, his Majesty with all his Princes went to Aix, where he was
crowned Emperor, notwithstanding the refusal, which Paul the 4. made to
ratify this election; alleging that it was not lawful, for that the
Heretic Electors (as he so called them) intermedled therewithal. But this no
otherwise proceeded not from his Holiness, but by an occasion of a certain
device between him, the King of France, and others, altogether against the
house of Austria: according unto which the Duke of Albe was even now come to
blows with the Captains of his Holiness: and The truce broken between King
Henry of France and Philip King of Spain.
within a while after followed the breach of the foresaid truce, upon which
occasion happened to the French this great loss which they sustained upon S.
Laurence his day, in the month of August, by the town of Saint Quintins.

About this time the Grand Seigniour declared to the Queen of Transiluania,
that he understood that certain sects were crept into the religion Command
from the Turk to Queen Izabella, to chase out of her kingdom the new sects.
which she held, which by no means he would she should tolerate, if she would
remain in his favor, knowing that such novelties would bring nothing to her
but tumult and loss of her kingdom, and to him much travail: and for this
cause he commanded her utterly to extirpite them who were authors thereof, and
in such manner to extinguish them, that there should not be any mention of
them. This command was not without cause. For the Heretics were already
nesled in this kingdom, and by their preachings had sowed their darnell, and
withdrawn many from the universal

In this same time Charles King of Spain, and not long since Emperor, The
death of the Emperor Charles.
being fallen sick in the Monestarie of the Hieronimite Friars, after he had
received all the Sacraments of the Church by the hands of the Archbishop of
Tolledo, named Bartholmew Miranda, and not without the tears of those who were
there present, the 21. of September he yielded his soul to God, putting by his
death an end to his great triumphs and victories, and leaving this perpetual
memory of him, that of long time before him there was not any Emperor more
valiant, courageous, wise, and fortunate then himself. His body was intombed
in the town of Granado, in the place where ordinarily are buried all the Kings
of Spain. His son Philip (only heir of all his kingdoms and seigniories)
after he understood of his death, he made Sumptuous funerals made at Bruxels by
Philip King of Spain, for the Emperor his father.
a sumptuous preparation for his funerals in the Church of S. Iula at Bruxels.
And among other magnificences, there was a great Ship which was made to go
through the streets by art, which was round about filled with goodly tables
showing his victories, there was upon the right side writtten these words:
Afric ruinated, Gelders taken, the sea cleared, Tremisan reestablished,
Solomon chased. Upon the left side were read these words: The new

Take thou well for thy devise
The Herculian pillar of large size.
And in the other were those which here follow:

Taming the monster in this season of thine,
As Hercules did in his time.
And after were carried all the Ensigns of his kingdoms and seiguiories,
which were followed by the gentlemen of his house in good order, of which I
will make no large discourse, to avoid the tediousnes which the reader may
take, in reading again a thing which others by special writing have already
heretofore exposed to the eyes of every one. Only I will say that in this
ceremony marched King Philip, the Duke of Sauoy, and all the other Knights of
the Golden Fleece, with the Ambassadors of all the Potentates of Europe. In
the said Church was seen both of one side and other, that which follows,
written in fair and great letters.

To the Emperor Caes. Charles the 5. Religious, Happy, Aug. of the Gauls,
great Lord of the Indies, of Tunise, of Afric, of Saxony, mighty,
victorious, and triumphant over many nations. Although that the things by him
done by sea and land, his singular humanity, his incomparable wisdom, his
most fervent zeal, are sufficiently known to the world: nevertheless the
Christian Commonweal, for the memory of his justice, piety, and virtue,
has dedicated this Ship unto him: Because he discovered to our world, a new
world; and added to the name of Christ many strange nations, and enlarged the
Empire of Spain with many kingdoms and Provinces. For that he preserved
Germany against 30000. horse, and 100000. footmen, with which Solomon the
Turkish Emperor meant to have invaded Barbarossa in battle by Carthage, who
was accompanied with 200000. footmen, and 60000. horse. Because he put to
flight 200. Galleys, and many other vessels of Pirates, and took the Fort of
Goleta, with Tunise, and Hippo the new, and Hippo the royal. For that he took
the kingdom of Tunise, and by it spoiled the Empire of Libia, and restored it
to the lawful King, and caused him to pay tribute to the Crown of Spain.
Because he brought from thence free into their country 20000. captives. For
that he yielded the kingdom of Tremisan to ye right King, after he had tamed
the Mauritanians: scouring our seas. For that he made the sea peaceable against
the continual courses of Pirates. Because he reduced the Commonwealth of
Genes to Caes. Charles the religious, happy, Aug. King of many kingdoms,
triumphant over many nations, victorious over the Indies, Libia, Maur. Turkey;
Deliverer of Germany, of Italy, of the Sea, of captives; Pacifier of
Germany, Charles, Caes. Aug. whom thou made Emperor of the Romans, and King
of many kingdoms, whose Piety, Justice, Clemency, Prudencie, Magnanimity,
and Valor, is admired throughout the world: he by thy conduct has augmented

This great Emperor did well deserve, that such and so great honors should
be done him, there not being any since Charlemaine, who in force, puissance,
and happiness surpassed him. Within a while after died his sister Mary, who was
married to Lewis King of Hungary, slain in the battle of Mohaze.

The end of the seventh Book.
THE EIGHT BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF HVNGARIE.
THE ARGUMENT OF THE EIGHT BOOK.
A Diet held at Ausbourg by the Emperor Ferdinand, wherein was granted to him
succors for the defense of Hungary, against the Turk. Tocehay taken by King
John, between whom and Ferdinand there are motions of peace, but they come to
nothing. Maximilian the son of Ferdinand is chosen King of the Romans.
Solomon seeks peace of Ferdinand, in regard of the distrust he had of the
Governor of Egypt. Maximilian created King of Hungary: the death of his
father Ferdinand, after which Maximilian is elected Emperor, who made war
upon King John, and many places of strength are by these two taken from each
other. Debatement of peace beeweene Maximilian, Solomon, John, and Sigismond
King of Polonia at Vienna. Erdeu besieged by the Turks, and relieved by the
Christians, but in the end is yielded upon composition. Many hostilities pass
between Maximilian and Solomon; and continuation of peace between them.
Count Salm attempteth to surprise Alberegalis. The State of Germany touching
the Diets there held, and of the arrival there of Princes Electors and others.
The place and office of the Electors in public assemblies. The Pope, and
Princes of the Empire send to the aid of the Emperor Maximilian. The manner
and form of the Spanish Inquisition.

THe Emperor Ferdinand, brother to the deceased Emperor, about the very time
and the death of his brother, had advertisement that the Basha of Buda and the
Moldauian, beyond all expectation, would come into the field, whilst his
Majesty held the Diet in the town of Ausbourg, in which were present all the
Electors, and almost all the Princes of the Empire, as well for his own
Ambassadors of France at the Diet of Ausbourg.
affairs, as to give audience to an Embassage sent from Marrillac, and the
Lord of Bourdillon, which was upon the 28. of March, the Emperor being in the
great hall of Ausbourg in his Imperial throne The seat of the Emperor and
Princes of the Empire in the Diets.
under the cloth of Estate, having on his right hand the Bishop of Mentz, the
Ambassador of the Bishop of Coullin, the Archduke Charles, the Bishop of
Saltzbourg, the Grand Master of Prussia, with many other great Lords. Upon

This Diet ended, the Emperor for fear of the danger which might happen in
his kingdom of Hungary, upon the said advertisement, had present recourse to
the aid of his estates, and of the Empire. Bohemia, Morauia, Succors granted
to Ferdinand against the Turk.
Stiria, and Carinthia offered upon every thousand crowns of value, twelve
crowns to succor his Majesty. And the Empire offered him men, horses, and
money, if in case the war should further proceed: and in the mean time
while they could see what way these rumors would take, they yielded to his
Majesty 600000. Dollors for three months, to be employed where his Majesty
thought good. These rumors were not in vain. For Ferdinand and King John
(otherwise called Stephen) was greatly inflamed: King John having already
taken from the Emperor the strong Castle of Tocchay, and many other, minding
continually to assay the Tocchay taken by K. John from Ferdinand.
recovery of the surplusage of his kingdom, and to revenge himself of the
wrong which he thought he had received in this, that the Emperor held not
promise with him touching the Infanta Ioane, whom he had promised unto for
spouse, with a dowry convenient to her greatness: and with such reasons, being
favored of the Hungars, who complained themselves to be sorely oppressed by
the Emperor: and having by the aid of the Turk amassed Debatement of peace
between King John and the Emperor Ferdinand.
be mediators of some good accord, for the desire which they had to quench
that fire, for fear that the Turk under this occasion should not fasten
himself further in this quarter, he caused his army to retire, as also King
John did, who by the advice and persuasion of the said mediators, was reduced
to this point, that he would send Ambassadors to the Imperial Majesty, to
effect their accord, and to demand one of his daughters in marriage, which John
King of Hungary and Transiluania had sent them unto him; the Emperor would
hear them no further, saying, that his Vayuode ought not to call himself King
of Hungary, that kingdom being his inheritance, not usurped, as it had been
by the father of him who sent them: and that if they would have audience, they
should no John King of Hungary, nor Transiluania, but only Vayuode of that
Province. The Ambassadors not minding to accept of these conditions, presently
dispatched Couriers into Poland and into Transiluania, to give the King notice
of all this. Upon this difficulty, the K. of Poland was of opinion, that the
King of Transiluania his nephew should not for that time name himself K. of
Hungary, but only of that which he possessed: seeing it was not likely that he
could justly deny him the title of K. of Transiluania, he being thereunto
called by the consent of all the people, and reinstalled by force of his arms,
after that he had not kept, nor observed the covenants and promises made as on
his behalf, between the Queen his mother Castalde was there. The
Ambassadors following this advice, alleging the reasons of the King of
Poland, and speaking of Castalde, they complained greatly of him, saying, that
the Queen had been more deceived by his persuasions and vain speeches, then
had been the dead King her husband by those who had crowned him K. of Hungary,
and those who were revolted against him. The Emperor not minding to agree to
this title of K. of Transiluania, but only of Vayuod, received notwithstanding
those Ambassadors, who, treating of their charge, were not much content. They
demanded, that the Emperor should relinquish all that which he pretended in
Transiluania, and that he Izabella, which she pretended from the time of the
death of King John her husband. To these demands the Emperor consented in
part, and in part also meant not to consent to those which most imported him,
and specially concerning the alliance, that he might not seem thereby willing
to yield up his pretended right of Transiluania, and hoping that himself or
his children one day should be able to recover it: and he prevailed so far,
that the enterprise of the Polish Ambassadors, and of other Princes came to
nothing: and by that means the Ambassadors of Transiluania returned without
any resolution. Which was a cause within a while after of great war between
him and the King of Transiluania, under the favor

A certain time after the Vayuode of Valachia was advertised, that another
Vayuode went about to dispossess him of his estate, being assured of succors
from Ferdinand; and of the favor of the nephew of that Lasky, who Albert Lasky.
labored the friendship which was between Solomon and King John. This nephew
was also named Lasky. He for sundry matters whereof he was attainted, was
before constrained to forsake the kingdom of Polonia: upon which occasion he
was retired under the protection of his uncle to the Turk, of whom he was so
well received, that he was made a Colonel of certain Turkish troops of horse
and foot. But sometimes after forgetting all these honors and favors, he
forsook that part, and took that of the Emperor Ferdinands, in whose service
he then was, when he practiced this subteltie, and enterprised without the
knowledge of Ferdinand, against the Vayuode of Valachia, for the profit and
commodity of another, in whose favor he had already amassed 2000. horse,
which he joined with the army of the other Lasky, to fly to the confines of
Polonia, and to leave the victory to the Valachians, who with little loss of
theirs, and great of their enemies, enriched themselus with the spoil and
booty of this man: Lasky afterward remaining dispossessed of many towns and
Castles which he had by Cassouia, being deprived of those by means of the said
Vayuode. And by this ill fortune so inconsideratiuely happened to him, falling
into the indignation of Ferdinand, who dismissed him from his service, he
retired into Moldauia, for that he would not fall into the hands of the King of
Polonia, the Emperor, or of the Valachian; Solomon, who nevertheless on his
side, was not to demand of them therefore any greater satisfaction, he having
then a great distrust of the Governor of Egypt, against whom he had sent a
great number of Ianisaries and other soldiers of his Port, fearing some
commotion in that Province: and from other places he had some aduertisements of
the enterprises of Bajazet his second son, who (some said) meant to invade
Syria, Solomon in trouble and doubt by Bajazet his son.
with the succors and aid of the Sophy, so that Solomon was again
constrained to send new garrisons into that quarter.

Upon the occasion of these troubles, he himself had great desire to seek
peace and truce with Ferdinand: although that his Lieutenants of Buda and of
Bossina, with the Vayuodes of Valachia, Moldauia, and of Transalpina, in favor
of King John, brought great damage to the Emperor, harrying and spoiling
Hungary, bringing into their hands many places thereof, his Majesty not being
able to draw any succors from the Lords of that country, neither for the
fortifications of the places, nor for the entertainment of his Solomon,
notwithstanding the gain which his people had in Hungary, considering the
peril whereinto he might fall, if he at one time had to do against so
puissant enemies as the Emperor and the Sophy were, resolved rather to seek
peace with the Christians, then with his subjects.

To this end (while they were at a Diet which was held at Franckfort, there
Maximillian son of Ferdinand chosen King of the Romans.
was celebrated the solemnity of the election, that the Electors had made of
the person of Maximilian King of Bohemia, the eldest son of Ferdinand,
Solomon was presented in this great assembly, who offered a present to
Ferdinand of certain Solomon seeks peace with Ferdinand.
rich habiliments, and of strange beasts: and after having ended some
differences with his Majesty, which imported Hungary, the truce was concluded
between them: and in consideration thereof, this Ambassador caused to be
released and set at liberty many prisoners taken in war, who by no means
before could be redeemed for any money, nor exchange of others who were under
the power of Ferdinand.

After this truce, Ferdinand perceiving himself to grow old and unweildy of
his body, yielded the kingdom of Hungary to his son Maximilian, Maximilian
made King of Hungary.
with consent of all the Barons and Lords of the country, in acknowledging of
which, all the Lords were gratified by Maximilian in all that which he could
do. Whereupon some little while after, Ferdinand surprised with a great
sickness, ended his days, having been a Prince of singular bounty and valor:
and had not his example and wisdom been, Germany (which The death of
Ferdinand.
was greatly estranged from the Catholic Church) had been wholly divided from
the union of the faithful, and Ecclesiastical ceremonies. This man although
he was the son of Philip Duke of Burgongne, Count of Flanders, Ioane Queen
of Spain, and of other kingdoms: of al his fathers inheritance he had no more
then the Archdukedome of Austria, with the Estates which are situated in
Germany: which was the ancient patrimony of his house, the laws of Spain
being of such quality, that the eldest have only the entire succession.
Nevertheless, by means of his virtue he increased the inheritance of his
house, adding thereto the kingdoms of Hungary and Bohemia; augmenting by the
addition of them, the greatness of it far more then it fell unto him by his
predecessors. By these actions he always made it apparent, that he was endued
with great constancy, especially toward religion, whereof he became
protector, ancient Religion; his good disposition was so great toward all the
Princes of the Empire, that with a reciprocal amity he was so well affected
of them, Charles his brother, feared not to take him to arbitrate between his
brother and them: so greatly did divine justice shine in him, which
comprehends in it self all other virtues.

Also, not without cause of his good deeds, as well in general, as toward
particular Princes the Electors of the Empire, continued their election in his
family from the father to the son, almost making by this doing this
succession, not as election, but as it were hereditarie. It is not to be
doubted, but that his decease brought great grief to the hearts of every one,
as it very evidently

His son Maximilian (who already was chosen King of the Romans) succeeded
him in the Empire. This man after he had taken the Crown, Maximilian made
Emperor.
the Mantle, and other Imperial ornaments, was confirmed Emperor by Pope
Pius: and seeing himself advanced by this goodly and great dignity, with
augmentation of goods and means, having of a long time nourished in himself a
mortal hatred against King John of Transiluania, he meant suddenly to
undertake the revenge of many wrongs and losses received from him: and to do
this, he resolved to assail him on a sudden. And for this purpose having
amassed a great number of footmen under the conduct of Maximilian made war
upon K. John.
Melchior Ballassi, and causing them speedily to march toward Transiluania, he
suddenly possessed certain Fortresses. John mightily provoked at this, that
against the compositions made with Ferdinand, he was so wronged by a new King,
caused also his people very quickly to come into the field, and without delay,
took the direct way against Sachmar, a strong place belonging Sachmar taken by
John.
to Ballassi, who had not well provided for it, mistrusting rather any other
enterprise then this. This place was taken by a stratagem: John having ranged
all his people nigh to it about night in an Ambuscado so covert, that without
being perceived, they had commodity to place themselves at the Ballassi vexed
at such a loss, went from thence and put himself into a great town (yet not
very strong) named Debrezen, in which ordinarily assembled many Merchants of
diverse countries, and thereunto having put fire, he spoiled all there about.
Debrezen burned by the Emperials.


In the mean time, the King of Transiluania having reenforced his army with
4000. Turks, that the Basha of Buda sent him by the command of Solomon, came
to force the town of Hadao, and by composition he also made himself master of
Atauiar: and leading about many prisoners, went Hadao and Atauiar taken by John.
and besieged the place of Vngar. The Emperor not ignorant of this that his
enemy was suddenly fortified, with the aid which was sent him from
Purchastaler, Captain and Governor of Vngar. A good part of these troops
were already entered into this place, when John arrived there with his army:
and this succor came thither in so happy a time, that the enemy
(notwithstanding all his endeavor) was forced to Purchastaler came and gave
him, while he was not attentive to any thing, but to the besieged: this
Captain having used this policy, that planting his Cannon upon the flank of
the enemy, and covering it with his people, because he would not have it
discovered when they came to hand-strokes: at the first signal his people (as
it were flying) retired themselves from before their Artillery, which then
being fitly discharged, made a great butcherie of his enemies, and put them
into such disorder, that the Germans had a great hand of those who were come
out of the trenches of the Camp to fight with them. All this served to no
other end, but the more to kindle the fire between these two Princes, both the
one and the other being willing to revenge John being succored by the Turks,
who liked it better to have a weak neighbor for their friend, then a
neighbor who was strong and puissant. Maximilian also thinking, that thereby
he lost much of his honor at the beginning of his Empire, did daily make new
leauies of soldiers: and seeing he had to do with a party more strong then
he thought for, made Lazare Schuendy (an ancient and very expert Captain) his
Lazare Schuendy Lieutenant general in Hungary for Maximilian.
Lieutenant in this war, and one who had attained great experience by the
passed wars under the Emperor Ferdinand, in the same country of Hungary,
as we before have written. For the rest of the year, Schuendy could not
enterprise any thing upon Transiluania, because that he was come too

Sigismond King of Polonia, uncle to John, by reason of his sister, considering
that such preparations would bring but a desolation to Christendom, and
desiring (for the avoiding of this evil) to pacify these two Princes,
enterposed himself to treat of an accord between them two: and for this
effect sending his Ambassadors both to the one and other, he labored his best
to reduce them to a peace: but they being both greatly moved, he could Schuendy
(Lieutenant general for the Emperor) drew his people out of garrison, and
came into the field with an army, drawing toward Transiluania, to the end to
assay the taking of the Castle of Tocchay, which is a Fortress very renowned,
situated upon the frontire of Hungary, between the rivers Thissa and Wodrog,
which could not be very easily besieged, except these two rivers were frozen,
as then they were. This place was before taken by Cazzianet for the Emperor
Ferdinand, who at the persuasion of some, had given it then to a Hungarian
Baron of the family of Scheredy, for recompense of certain good and great
services which he had done his Majesty. This Lord being Francis Nemethy, who
of a Tutor became a Nemethy a Tutor spoileth his pupil of Tocchay.
Tyrant; and usurping the place for himself, forsook Maximilians part, and
adhered to John. This man being well ascertained that they would come and
besiege it, before the enemy presented himself, he caused to be transported
The siege of Tocchay by the Emperials.
but one long rampire of earth flanked with certain towers, with a good and
large Ditch full of water, which then (and for the ruin of the place) was all
frozen, and with so thick an ice, that upon it they might march to the assault
as upon plain ground, and winter being not altogether passed, but having then
his course yet very vehement, by reason that this country is of cold
temperature: and when Schuendy made his approaches it was the 4. of February.
He had such store of Cannon, that therewith he so made his battery, that on
all sides the town was battered. But this fury had not any force Schuendy
would not agree unto: but caused to rear the ladders, by means whereof the
rampire was won, and the town forced: and with great celeritie the Castle
was assailed. Nemethy not forgetting any thing which might be for the defense
of Nemethy slain.
presently his soldiers to lose their courage, who yielded upon this
agreement, that every one of them should have his sword, and one suite of
apparel. The Emperials being entered into this place, enriched themselves
Tocchay yielded.
with good booty, and there they found a quantity of good and delicate wine.
Schuendy sent the body of Nemethy to his wife, who was retired to a Castle of
his, named Serentschin, which without any stroke given, became

John seeing how all succeeded to the advancement of his enemy, and that not
any profit or commodity could come to him in retaining the Castle of Sachmar
(which already had been taken and retaken twice) commanded Sachmar burned.
those within to fire it, and to retire themselves by private and secret ways,
while Schuendy passed Thissa (otherwise Tibiscus) with his army. This passage
did so much astonish those who kept the Fortress of Eiden, that being Eiden
yielded to the Emperials.
only besieged by ye space of one day, they yielded without any defense,
Ferdinand having in former time used al his force to get it, by reason of the
great revenues and profits which come thereof. This good fortune of the
Emperor, A great winter.
the ground through cold, and the peasants were taken lying upon dunghils in
great number half dead, who being brought to the fire, recovered their
natural spirits. And at the end the raines were so abundant, that the ice
melting, all the country was in a manner drowned, in such sort, that on all
sides, except the hills, one could see nothing but water, and the earth seemed
to be converted to the great Ocean sea. These marvelous accidents were greatly
incommodious for the enterprises of John, because that the succors, which

Solomon, who was determined to succor and aid John, both with men and money,
and even with his own person; nevertheless upon these discommodities willing
to entertain Maximilian, sent to him an Ambassador named Marc Libiniesa, a
Transiluanian reneged Christian, who before time had been at Vienna in the same
dignity. His charge was openly to exhort Debatement of peace between
Maximilian, Solomon, John, and Sigismond.
the Emperor, to preserve the pactions and agreements of the peace sworn by
his father. He had also there with him for the same effect George Bathor John:
and for the same occasion the King of Polonia had also sent thither his
Ambassador.

In the mean time, Schuendy upon these Ambassages, more then once, advertised
the Emperor, yt he should well advise with himself before he made any
conclusion tending to an agreement, for fear of being deceived by the Turks,
under a pretense of an accord. Maximilian himself doubted the sleights of the
Turk, knowing that it was but some policy to deceive him. Nevertheless, that
he might not seem to have a mind to disturb this treaty of peace, he
commanded that the frontier garrisons of Hungary should not molest the Turks,
although that of their part such patience were not used, as it was not. For
whilst that at Vienna they treated of pacifying the

During these treaties at Vienna, it happened that the soldiers of the
garrison of Sighet went forth upon 200. Rhatians, which they put to the sword,
and took two Agaes their Captains: and as they returned to their garrison
with their prisoners, there set upon them 200. horse, who environed and charged
them in such sort that they brake them, and pursued them so fiercely, that of
600. which they were, there was no more but 200. saved. Nicholas Esdrim Count
of Serin, Nicholas Esdrim Count of Serin.
who then was gone to the Court about some urgent affairs of his own: and it
is to be thought that his presence would have hindered such distaster. As for
Sachmar, which was half burned, and altogether abandoned by the Sachmar
reestablished.
Transiluanians, Schuendy caused it to be repaired, judging that that place
would bring him some commodity for many considerations. In the mean time,
whilst his soldiers did daily labor to make it defencible, the enemies came
toward that quarter to take a Castle thereby, and which was a very fit place
greatly to annoy those of Sachmar. Against those, the Germans of the said
place of Sachmar going forth with great silence, suddenly charged their
enemies, and they took from them 7. Ensigns, after they had

Sachmar being reestablished, and Erasmus Meiger left there within to command,
Schuendy took the way to Cassouia, having some distrust that the Turks would
come thither to besiege it, as there was some appearance thereof: and seeing
that the forces of the Turk daily increased, he importunately solicited the
Emperor to send him new succors, not finding himself furnished of that which
was needful for him to the entertainment of such a war, and against so
puissant an enemy. The Emperor sent him five Ensigns John Bernard Rothman,
with five pieces of Artillery, all the horses being marked with the letter M.
to the end A complot against the co^ductors of the Artillery.
that the waggoners and conductors thereof should not by deceit (as it is their
custom) sell the good ones, or to use them to some other purpose. In the mean
time, the Turks (who ouerranne all the country, and made there great spoil)
determined to take the Fort of Erdeu, near to Sachmar, which then was in the
command of Schuendy: and there having placed their siege Erdeu besieged by the
Turks.
in the beginning of June, they made there many a shot against it, and finally
they reared the ladders to enter by force. The assieged defended themselves
valiantly, and often repulsing their enemies, they killed more then Laubemberg,
who commanded in this place, seeing the obstinacy of the Turks, sent many
times to demand succor of Schuendy. He dispatched toward him 300.
soldiers: and considering it was not possibly that they could enter without
great danger, willing nevertheless to assay some means which he had invented
to put them in, at what price soever, he commanded them upon this rumor the
Turks failed not readily to raunge themselves under Laubemberg. A little
before there entered a valiant and very expert Captain named Weller, to second
Laubemberg, and to command in his place, if any mishap should befall him. With
Weller there was also entered Captain Gossel, Erdeu yielded to the Turks by
composition.
Constantinople. Captain Weller seeing they spoke to yield, chose rather to
dye fighting, then to come under the puissance and discretion of the Turks:
this his resolution was followed by many other soldiers. The Emperor having
had news of this loss, and seeing that the treaty of peace which was on
foot produced not any good, commanded Schuendy that he should well munition
all the places, for fear of being surprised. And for this effect his Majesty
sent him other troops, as well Caualarie as Infantrie, while in the mean time
at Vienna, he caused to be celebrated the funeral pomps in honor of Ferdinand
his father, where was the Duke Alphonse of Ferrara.

And his Majesty being now discharged from these ceremonies, his mind was
altogether attentive to the war which the Transiluanian made against him,
being furthered and succored by the forces of the Turks: and to remedy
Schuendy, whom he found at that time busied against the inhabitants of Debrezen
the Emperor subjects, being greatly moved against those, because that for
fear of the Turk they had many times given victuals to the enemies. To
chastise them from such cowardlines, without giving notice thereof unto
Debrezen burned by the Emperials.
them, he marched toward them with his army: and having surprised them, he
first caused the town to be sacked, and after that he fiered it, reducing all
into ashes. The vessels and ornaments were carried to Tocchay, from thence
John. About this place the Emperors army many times was badly entreated, the
garrison thereof boldly seazing upon the Sutlers of the army, whom they pilled,
robbed, and lead away. Schuendy to revenge himself upon them, laid an
Ambuscado, and after faining a skirmish, drew them to the fight, and by little
and little retiring thence, he caused them to fall into the place where he
desired they might be, and by this means he had some revenge of them, the most
part of them remaining dead in the field, the lesser part being saved by
flight. Schuendy victorious with the spoils of his enemies, retired to
Sachmar. In which place, by reason of diverse accidens, there happened so many
maladies among the Schuendy went and encamped by Tibiscus, fortifying himself
with many Trenches. But he was not long in this lodging, before he was
surprised with a very sore fever, which tormented him many months, not
without great disquietnes to the Emperor, who greatly loved him, having just
cause so to do, reposing himself wholly upon him, for the experience which he
knew to be in him for the affairs of war.

Notwithstanding that in Transiluania the war proceeded on in this sort, the
treaty of peace was always managed at Constanstinople. But Cornouuicchy (who
was but come from the Turks Court, that gentleman also assuring that they
should not hope for any peace, although that after his departure there was
given him some hope thereof) his Majesty commanded that his army might be
prepared, and appointed that 5. Ensigns of Germane Infantrie should muster at
Lepanto, and 300. Vallachians at Posson, and 300. Hungarish horse about
Iauerin. All these companies were newly leauied. These (after muster was taken
of them) were charged to march into the field: to which did also go Captain
Adam Iula, and Romer a Knight of Malta, with five other Ensigns Derssi with
300. other soldiers. With this supply was furnished all the principal
places. Within a while after there arrived 600. Germane horse, and other 500.
under the conduct of Hoschirher. Also there went to Vienna Count Gonther
Schuartsbourg, Count Otting, and Count Mansfert, Christopher Liechtenstain,
and many other great personages, who offered their service to his Majesty to
be employed in this war.

The sickness of Schuendy gave in the mean time commodity to the Turks more
freely to harrie the country, then before time they had done, and they Newstat
enriched with mines of diverse metals.
greatly spoiled the country about Sachmar, and that of Newstat (called the
Ladies brook) where is seen the mines of diverse metals.

During such courses, King John, and the Governor of Themesuar approaching
very near to Sachmar, were almost stricken with an Artillery bullet, even as
these two Lords rid side by side. The Turks not yet content to commit such
spoil, took courage to go in the night and assail Schuendy

The Turkish Caualarie passed further, and presented themselves before the
walls of Iauerin, and for that it was yet night, it was not permitted to those
within to go forth: but the day being come, and the garrison sallying Grassuen
(a Captain of 100. Hungarish horse) encountering 1000. Turks, and both the one
and the other betaking themselves to their hands, 200. Turks lost there their
lives, among which was the Governor of Lippa, called in their language Beg.
Those who were wounded with the shot of the Harquebuze, being conducted to the
Camp, could not avoid death, for that the bullets were besmeared Bullets
anointed with fat cause death.
with larde. In the mean while the Saxon soldiers hearing this skirmish,
were desirous to go forth: but their General would not permit them, but
hindered them with much ado. These were only arrived at the Camp, Henry
Glasenthal, who had for his companion Don Sibotendorf, both men of valor and
incomparable boldness. Between them there were 1026. horse, which were paid by
the Elector of Saxony for five months. To these were joined 350. horse, who
followed the Camp at their own charges. The two armies were encamped no
further one from another then a mile, the Emperials being lodged upon Tibiscus
by a village named Kizar, situated upon the shore of the river, in the houses
whereof were lodged the principals of the Camp, the whole being fortified with
strong Trenches. That of the Turks was planted beneath the said river, and
they

At the same time Charles the Archduke of Austria being in Stiria, had his
people in the field against the enemy, who had committed great spoil in the
country, if that Prince had not remedied it. On the other side, the Basha of
Bossina, the Governor of Boschegne, and the Berbatberg being one day assembled
to ouerrunne Slauonia, and to carry away the country people, Peter Eborce
Ban, which signifies Governor, the charge was so hot, that the Turks were
put to slight with great slaughter of them, which was said to have been 5000.
and the Berbatberg was there sore wounded.

In another place 320. Turks minding in the night to assail Thrin, the
Caualarie of Jacques Sach, with certain Hungarish footmen, being gone forth to
meet them, killed upon the place 60. of them, and took 65. others of them
prisoners.

During these rough skirmishes, on the other side they treated of peace at A
continuation of the treaty of peace.
Vienna, there being yet the foresaid Ambassadors. And the Emperor caused to
be called thither the gentlemen of Hungary, to consult with them Schuendy
could not be rid of his sickness, the Emperor sent to him Paul Veidner a Doctor
of Physic, an excellent man in his profession. This man of a Paul Veidner a
Physician, of a Jew became a Christian.
Jew became a Christian. Schuendy notwithstanding his want of health, forgot
nothing of that which appertained for the entertainment of his army, seeing
that the Turks desisted not from their courses, and to provoke ours to fight
with new injuries. The Emperials on their behalf did no less. Upon this
occasion there was between them and us a fierce encounter, wherein were many
Turks slain, and of the principal of the enemies, of whom the bodies were
favorably rendered by Schuendy to those who to demand

At another time, as certain soldiers were gone with wagons to forage to
bring straw and oats, they were taken by certain Turks who encountered them.
This robbery was then done, when a Chiauss was arrived at the Camp, who was
sent by the Turk to continue the treaty of peace begun. Schuendy requested
him that he should procure to be rendered unto him his soldiers and baggage
which the Turks had taken, telling him further, that this kind of dealing did
not manifest any signs nor effects of peace. The Chiauss answered him, that he
should presently send some troops after to recover that which was taken, it
being not the intention of Schuendy caused presently to mount on horseback
Captain Ruebert with his company of light horse, to busy and entertain the
Turks, and to do so much, that they might not retire until he were seconded
by others which should follow him. The diligence was so great both of the one
and of the other, that having overtaken the enemies, they had all their wagons
which were on this side the bridge: but those who had already passed the
bridge, ended their voyage in safety. This recovery so brave and suddenly
executed, caused the Turks to remove their Camp, which was near to the
Emperials, retired into his kingdom, where having found that some of his
subjects Maximilian, he caused them all to be hanged.

At that time was released from Vienna his Ambassador (who was retained
Ambassadors are not to be retained for and in place of prisoners taken in the
war.
there longer then he was willing) at the instance of Ballassi, who continually
importuned the Emperor not to suffer him to depart until he had his wife and
children, who were carried away at the taking of Sachmar. But this Ambassador
complaining of his detaining, his Majesty meant not that he should be any
longer detained against his liking, saying, that that would be a breach and
violence offered against the law of nations, it being not reasonable to use
such revenge for prisoners taken by the right of war. For Alexander Kendy
Secretary to King John, who iournying toward his masters Ambassador, was
taken in a skirmish made against certain Transiluanians, who conducted him and
endeavored to bring him into some place of surety, and who being thus taken,
had been led to Vienna by John Wolgazen.

In the mean time, Schuendy vigilant in his charge, did not cease to solicit
the Emperor to this, that it would please him to appoint new companies and
supplies, although the enemy labored peace, showing him by lively reasons
that the practices of the Turk were only but in appearance, and to cover his
enterprises and deseignes, knowing that he daily made new leauies of men, to
assail the army of his Majesty with the greatest force he Schuendy also
giving as little credit to their words as to their subtelties, ceased not (with
the principals of the army) to embrace all the occasions that might be
offered, for the service of his Prince.

Upon this resolution, Count Ecchia of Salm (a most renowned Captain) seeing
himself to have command over a good number of soldiers, Count Salm
enterpriseth upon Alberegalis.
named in the language of that country Stulweijssuburg, distant eight Germane
miles from the place from whence he came, being certainly advertised that in
this town there was few men for the defense thereof, thinking by this want
easily to take it. And as he was but three miles from thence, came a Courier
sent from the Emperor, bringing him express command to return with his
people to Iauerin. The Count sorry at the heart, left his voyage, with great
coffeehouse of all those who followed him, for the good opinion which they
all had to see themselves at ye top of that enterprise, and the rest choked, to
the end that the Turks should not therewith at George Hossute, Councellor of
the King in the chamber of Hungary, a man George Hossute Ambassador for
Maxilian to the Turk.
of good understanding, and conversant in the affairs of Princes. Upon
occasion whereof, it seemed not good to the Emperor to raise any trouble,
until it was seen what end these things would take, which every one looked
upon in hope of agreement: and for the same consideration, he had also
commanded that not any should molest the Turks, and that only they should
rest themselves upon their defense. This Ambassador departing Augustus the
Elector and Duke of Saxony countermaunded his Caualarie, since that upon the
firm hope which was had of the peace, he saw that it served to no purpose in
Hungary. In like sort many other Captains and Germane soldiers were
dismissed by his Majesty, thinking that they should not have any more to do.
But within a while after such companies were greatly desired again, the
necessity being Newstat taken by the Turks.
and enclosed those who were within, in such sort, that the Captain, named
Glesmuner, appointed for the guard of this place, seeing he could not defend
it, did yield it to the enemy, departing forth with his soldiers with a
white staff in his hand. By and by after this place was regained again by the
Emperials, and again lost, and finally recovered: so that at this day it is in
the Emperors command. The Turks of another part forraging even to Dersfi
(Governor of Nitria) seeing the Turks ouerrunning the country, and to
approach nigh him, went forth, and affronting the enemy, on a sudden cut many
of them in pieces, and led with him in his retraict two Agaes prisoners, which
are two of the principal Captains of the Ianisaries. A little before was also
taken a Turk by Sighet, who was come to spy this and other places of the
country. This man being brought before the Archduke Charles, among other
things assured him, that his Lord would come in person into Hungary, and that
within a little time Sighet and Iula should be by him bes(...)d, and that his
army would be of 600000. men, without counting those which rowed at the ores.
Count Salm had also taken certain other Spies, which assured him the like.
Another Turk named Scafir Vayda, chief Councellor of the Basha of Buda, and
well known among all the Hungars to be a man of singular virtue in the
managing of war, was taken, and discoursing with Francis Pesthy, had
confirmed the speech and confession of the others: so that he saw not any more
hope of peace or truce, but all appearance of war. And that which made them
the more to believe Peasants paying custom to both parts.
it, was, that the peasants (who are remaining upon the frontiers between the
Emperor and the Turk, who were wont to pay the tribute both to the one and to
the other) had express command, under grievous penalties, not to pay any
thing to the Emperials: there being also taken by the Castle of Papa 80. of our
soldiers by the Turks, who did no other thing but daily forage about
Iauerin, and other places of Hungary, doing infinite mischief: which was an
evident sign that the hate daily increased, and that all hope of peace was cut
off. Maximilian advertised by diverse ways of all these accidents, and of the
great preparatio^s which were appointed at Constantinople, gave order that
Iauerin should be fortified, as being of great importance, Solomon, in
comparison of which all these preparations of war could not long stand him in
stead, if he were not succored with the forces of the Empire (as in such cases
his predecessors

This great region is divided into three Estates, to wit, the Ecclesiastical
The Estate of Germany touching the Diets.
Lords, the Secular Lords, and the Lords of towns. These only pay to the
Emperor every year a tribute, which is of no great value: and when necessity
requires they extraordinarily contribute soldiers, weapons, and money: and
these contributions are acc(...)d in such Diets, which ordinarily the Electors
come unto, divided into tw^ orders, to wit, the Ecclesiastical Ecclesiastical
Electors.
kept in his Chancerie. After him is the Archbishop of Colon, Chauncellor of
Italy: and after this man is he of Treuers, also Chancellor of France. To
these do join certain other rich and puissant Archbishops, as he of
Salzbourg The Bishop of Salzburg rich.
very ancient, who by reason of the mines of salt, gold, and silver, The Bishop
of Magdebourg Primate of Germany.
of Bremen and of Bizonce with about 25. Bishops all rich (...)eat and anuall
revenues, who are called Princes of the Empire, by reason of the Castles,
towns, and Provinces which they hold.

As for the Seculars there is in like sort three, which have the first place of
Secular Electors.
honor and authority, who are named Electors. These have also some particular
offices in the Emperors service. The Palatin is the first of all, and carries
up meat to the table. The Duke of Saxony is the sovereign Judge The Elector
of Saxony and the Duke of Bauier the richest of them all.
then the Dukes of Brunswick and Lunenburg, very noble and of the most ancient
houses of Saxony, with many other Dukes, Marquesses, Lantgraues, Burgraues,
Countes, and Barons. Of all these the richest in reuenew is the Elector of
Saxony, having more then 500000. Dollors of yearly reuenew, and is able to
raise in his country 6000. horse, and 15000. footmen. After him, the Duke of
Bauier is noted, having a large country, furnished Charles, uncle to
Maximilian.

The free towns of the Empire are (as some do count) 72. and in former time
there was 85. These not acknowledging any other superior then the Imperial
towns.
Emperor, pay him yearly certain tribute: but so little, that all scantly
comes to 15000. Florins by the year. There be certain towns exempted
Little tribute due by the Imperial towns to the Emperor.
from all payments, but only when in general they contribute to Magdebourg
puissant.
their town by the greatest Princes of Germany, with the Imperial Camp,
having taken prisoner Duke George of Michelbourg: and in the end the Lubec
wealthy.
sea and land, that it has always in a manner at pleasure, chased and
repulsed the Kings of Denmark. There is also besides these, many other towns
very famous, as Collon, and Ausbourg. Which last has the richest citizens that
are in Germany. There is also of this number, Spire, Vormes, Ausbourg rich.
Vlm, Rostoc, Ratisbone, with many other great cities, which for brevity I
omit. There is yet of others, which for the present are dismembered from the
body of this great Province, and possessed by other Princes, or neighbor
Danzie.
the North) and the town of Eluine are reduced together with Prussia, since
the year 1525. under the Crown of Polonia. Constance is under the King of the
Romans, and many other under diverse Princes. All these Ecclesiastical and
Secular Princes, and free towns, appear at these Diets published by the
Emperors command, who, in that he cannot absolutely command them, procures
these assemblies, to the end that in them he might advise what were profitable
and beneficial for all in general. At these Diets as The policy which is
held at the Diets.
Councels. In the first come none but the six Electors: into the other both
the Ecclesiastical and Secular Princes: and into the third, among all the
Abbots of the Empire there enters no more but two, and among all the Counts
and Barons two others: and also there enter thereinto the Deligates of the free
towns. To all of them is propounded by the Emperor, or by the King of the
Romans, all that which he thinks of to be decided: and every Council divided
and retired apart, determines upon that which has been propounded. It is true
that the towns speak not their opinion, but by the voice of the Council, not
having any voice for resolution.

All these States were thus assembled by Maximilian in the town of Ausbourg,
to the end to draw from them in so great and urgent occasion, the aid and
succors which he thought necessary for general good, and as his
predecessors had obtained and gotten in time past upon like occurrances. And to
the end that by his example all the assembled should use more diligence, he was
the first that went to the Diet, well knowing that slacknes herein would bring
imminent danger, and that the Turk with great promtitude prepared his forces
to come and charge him. And although it was Solomon being so old and diseased,
would himself in person execute this enterprise: yet nevertheless the great
preparations which he made, were such, that they gave sufficient occasion to
think that there was something in hand. Therefore duty and necessity
required, that Maximilian should at least be prepared to defend himself from
the violence of his enemy. Being then arrived at Ausbourg, he solicited the
Electors War between the Kings of Sweden and Denmark.
there were brewed in the confines of the territories and countries of the one
and of the other, many practices. And it seemed that upon this occasion this
Diet should either be wholly dissolved, or at the least deferred until an
other time, without ordaining any other thing.

These tumults of war were a little before stirred up between two brothers,
Dukes of Michelbourg in Saxony for the town of Rostoch, which being possessed
with great forces by the eldest son, was besieged by the The King of Sweden
refers himself to the Emperor Maximilian.
to the peace and universal tranquillity, offered to submit himself to all
honest and reasonable conditions. And for this effect he dispatched to the
Emperor the Duke of Pomeraine, and Duke John Frederic of Saxony his uncle by
the mothers side, to whom he committed all his rights and titles to decide them
with Maximilian.

The other difficulty (which held certain Princes Electors not to come to
this Diet) was by reason of a certain contention stirred up between two other
brothers Dukes of Viuaria, sons in law to the Palatin, because of the
division of their states and lands, and specially for certain strong places,
John Frederic, and William, being accorded, now the eldest having begun to
manage the estate of him that was dead one whole year together one after
another, and governed by the space of the limited time, would not nevertheless
yield to his brother, being moved with the sweetness of command. The Elector
Palatin was greatly busied to accord them, as also was the Elector of Saxony,
who had been requested thereunto by the Palatin: and to accomplish it, they did
meet together at Lipsia, where the Philip Lantgraue of Hesse excused himself
that he could not be at this assembly, because of the nuptials of one of his
sons with the Duke of Wirtembergs daughter. This very subject hindered 13.
other Protestant Princes from being there, insomuch that for this occasion the
beginning of this Diet was proroged. They celebrated Protestant Princes in
rumor against Count Palatin, for that he had changed his religion.
the Emperor was greatly troubled to know what discourse they would use
therein, fearing least such a resort would bring some alteration in the
affairs of religion, which would hinder his proceedings against the Turk.
That which made his Majesty most of all to distrust, was, that every one knew
well enough that all these Princes had done their best endeavor to reduce the
Count Palatin (who leaving the Confession of Ausbourg, had taken the religion
of Geneua) not prevailing any thing with him thereby. These Princes were Philip
Lantgraue of Hesse, with William and Lewis his children; Philip Hernest Duke of
Brunswick; Christopher Duke of Wirtemberg, father of the married, and two of
his children, and two of the Count Palatin; Wolfang Palatin Duke of Bipont,
with his son; and John George son of the Marquess of Brandeburg, who for
the indisposition and sickness of his father returned presently to him.

These affairs held the Emperors mind in great suspense, in vain expecting
these Princes at Ausbourg, having none with him but the Empress, the Duke of
Bauier with the Duchess, and Ferdinand her son: and so much the more did it
torment him, for that he daily heard the bruites to increase of Solymans
preparation: and also he had certain notice that the Transiluanian leauied
men, in such sort that he was out of all doubt, but that

The Princes of Germany understanding this news, and seeing they could not be
at the Diet so soon as their duty required, sent their Deligates to the
Emperor, with entire authority to negotiate in their name, until they could
find the means to come themselves in person to the Diet. But the Emperor
would not begin any thing, desiring the presence of their persons in such
important affairs. For this cause he often sent to them messenger upon
messenger.

They negotiated at the same time with his Majesty an alliance with the A
negotiation for the marriage of Charles the 9. King of France.
King of France, and for the prosecuting of this, there came to the Court the

As the Emperor searched all the means to defend himself from the enemy,
Sigismond King of Polonia on the other side endeavored to make an Sigismond
King of Polonia hindered by the Duke of Muscouia from making peace between the
Emperor and King John.
accord between him and King John his nephew. But this good work was
dissuaded and drawn back, to the great damage of Christendom, this Prince
being constrained to employ all his thoughts for the defense of his country
against the Duke of Muscouia, who notwithstanding the peace made between them,
had taken away a part of Liuonia. The Bohemians and Hungars in the mean while
by their King solicited the Emperor, offering

By these practices his Majesty always dispatched something tending to the
end of his intention, expecting the execution of this Diet, which he desired to
be confirmed by the presence of all the Orders and States of the Empire: The
Princes of the Empire arrived at the Diet.
and sent thither his son George, and his nephews with 300. horse, with
commission not to stir from the Court, until some new commandment. The
Emperor went to meet the Elector of Mentz.
to his lodging. At the same time came thither Cardinal Commendon, he being
come thither in post sent from the Pope: but in the state of a private man at
the first, until such time as within a while after there came thither John
Andrew Calligny his Auditor, with the Cross, and authority of Legate. This
man was very well received and entertained by the Emperor, there being no
other in the Popes name of such quality, although two other Cardinals were
there present, to wit, he of Ausbourg, and he of Altemps, who were there as
Princes of the Empire.

In the mean time the Emperor considering the importance of this war,
besides the succors which he hoped from the Empire, meant also to have
obtained some other of the Pope: and to accomplish it, he gave commission
therefore to Rumiler his Chamberlain, whom he sent to Rome to congratulate
with the Pope, who was newly come to the Pontifical dignity, and in like
manner to require aid and succors for the war of Hungary. The Pope very
willingly promised him all favor, assigning him 50000. Succors from the Pope
to the Emperor.
crowns by year, and then sending him two pays, whereof the last was carried
by the Lord of Billy, who went toward his Majesty, in the place of a Nuncio.

During this Lent, Maximilian often going to Sermons and Mass, according to
the example of his predecessors, gave proof that he was very Catholic. Going
to these devotions, the Protestants forebore not to accompany The manner of
Protestant Princes accompanying the Emperor to ye Church.
him, but at his entry they retired apart, attending until Mass was said, to
conduct him again in his Palace: in which he often feasted them with royal
banquets, there being assembled the Ecclesiastical and Secular Princes, and
being there together, they were set every one at the table according to their
degrees and qualities.

Seeing this falls out so fitly to our purpose, it shall not be a strange,
but rather a pleasant thing for the beautifying of the history, if I write the
manner The place and office of the Electors in public acts.
of the placing of these Electors at such feasts, and especially in those
throne, the Duke of Saxony begins first to execute his office in this

After that, the Marquess of Brandebourg (great Chamberlain) comes riding,
carrying in his hand silver basins weighing twelve marks, and water, with a
fair towell: and afterward lighting from his horse, he offers the Emperor
or the King to wash.

Count Palatin of Rhein does in like sort enter on horseback, holding in his
hand four silver dishes, every one weighing three marks, wherein there is
meat, who being dismounted, he sets it upon the table before the Emperor.
the Vicechamberlaine of Falkenstein has the Marquesses horse and basins
Maximilian made to the Electors and other Princes of the Empire: but not the
foresaid ceremonies. And this order is so exactly observed, that what King
soever should happen to arrive in the Emperors Court, he shall in no sort be
permitted to go before the King of Bohemia.

Now to return to this Diet of Ausbourg: After the Archbishop of Mentz, there
came thither he of Colon, and also presently after he of Treuers. The Duke of
Cleueland came after, and the Archbishop of Saltzbourg, and certain other
Princes. After these followed the Duke of Saxony, who arrived honorably
accompanied. After came the King of Denmarkes son, the Dukes of Holstain, and
Litters, with about 900. horse. Then came thither George Frederic of Enispach,
followed with a goodly troop of horse, even then when the Emperor, at the
instance of the Elector of Saxony, caused to be imprisoned Albert Rosemberg, a
seditious man, Grompach, who was banished the Empire. Duke John William of
Venimarch, son in law of the Palatin Elector, and Count Francis Philip of
Rhein, with a great train of horse arrived there. There came afterward the
Cardinal of Ausbourg, and Count Palatin Elector, who was followed with a great
troop of horse. William Gonzague Duke of Mantua, well accompanied, came to
this Diet to see and salute the Emperor, who The Duke of Sauoy and the Duke of
Mantoa came to the aid of the Emperor.
gave him very great entertainment: as also came thither Emanuell Philibert
Duke of Sauoy, who offered himself to the war which should be in Hungary.
Also there arrived the Abbot of Kempt, a Prince of the Empire. The Emperor
gave them all great entertainment, minding to gratify them, to the end that
they should all aid him freely in this war.

They thus all appearing in this Diet conformable to his desire, his Majesty
the 26. of March caused them to assemble, and exposed to them the necessity
which constrained him to arm himself against the Turk, who making great
preparation of all sorts of soldiers, was determined to come into Hungary
with the greatest army they had yet ever seen, with intention to besiege
Vienna, for which (because it was the Imperial seat, and of very great
importance to all the Empire and Germany) it behooved him necessarily to
provide: because that besides the damage which might thereby befall, and would
prove inevitable to every one, they should receive infinite shame, when this
should be delivered unto posterity, that Germany

That they should treat of the means which they should keep to chase
Demands of the Emperor in the Diet.
out the heresies not comprised in the peace of the Religion, and which by
according to the urgent affairs of the war. That they should advise Parthin
Councellor to the Emperor. Of all the said articles, the most important and
the Offers of succors made to the Emperor by the Princes of the Empire.
would most oppose himself for certain considerations, depending upon the end
which might be concluded touching the first proposed article, which expressly
touched him very nigh, by reason of the change which he had made in his
religion. But every one found himself deceived in his opinion. For this Prince
was so ready to consent to these succors, that presently he made offer of all
his power and means. According to his example many promised to march in person
to this war: and all the Princes made answer upon this article, that they
would grant the Emperor for this expedition

After that, they spoke of the agreements of the Kings of Sweden and Denmark,
and commandment was given to them both under grievous Commandment from the
Emperor to the Kings of Sweden and Denmark.
penalty to lay aside arms, and it was also ordained that not any other
Prince of the Empire should give them succors. Upon this ordinance the King of
Sweden (who so willingly had promised to obey the Emperor) went back from the
accord, they both preparing more egerly then before for new war.

There was also four Ambassadors who came thither on the behalf of the 13.
Cantons of Switzes, and of those four 3. were Catholics, and the other The
Switzes send to the Diet of Ausbourg.
Duke of Sauoy, by reason of Casal situated within the Marquesship of
Inuestiture is given by the Emperor, and of that which is due for it.
Lantgraue of Hesse, who received them by their Deligates. The Abbot of Kempt
being there present, received them from his Majesty in his own person: as
also did the Marquess John Frederic of Enispach, and the Prince of Anhalt. The
Duke of Saxony also took his with the accustomed ceremonies, making a
magnificall and stately show, being accompanied with 1500. horse, well prepared
and richly furnished, causing to be borne 13. Ensigns. Count Palatin Elector
(with many other Lords) received the like Ordinances made in Austria to draw
succors against the Turks.
who had more then 100. florins of reuenew by the year, should keep a good
horse ready at his own costs and charges: that the peasants should be sent
by certain bands and days to Vienna to fortify it: that not any should
receive a servant without testimony of his life, and that from his last
master: that for every house, the 5. the 10. the 30. (if there were so many
therein) should be enjoined to go to the war: that throughout the whole
country of Austria, Morauia, and the confines of Hungary, all should be
prohibited to take pay of the enemy: and that all the citizens and inhabitants
of

The Archduke Charles, brother to the Emperor, for the same occasion assembled
another Diet at Poson in Hungary, in which he found all the Hungarian Barons
and Lords so disposed, that they offered him all the succors which he
demanded, and promised to march all in person to this war, when the
Emperor, or any of his brothers should there be present.

We have before written that Count Palatin the Elector was thought to be of
opinion, that very hardly he would accord to the great succors which
Maximilian demanded. The interest which he might have to this, that such
Occasion which might cause Count Palatin to distrust so great a preparation for
war.
forces should not be united together by the consent of all the States of the
Empire, was as in regard of his own particular fact, he fearing least this
assembly of Princes, and this army might be to his prejudice, under color
and false news of the Turks enterprises: or that he changing his
determination, because he saw himself hindered by the Sophy, or from some other
place, or Zwinglius and Calvin: which was an act formally contrary to that
which was before ordained and concluded on in the year 1555. in the town of
Ausbourg by the States of the Empire, in the presence of Ferdinand the last
deceased Emperor, who then was there assistant, as King of the Romans, and as
Lieutenant of the Emperor Charles his brother. Ordinance made in Germany upon
the diversity of religion.
This ordinance was made the 24. of September: and the tenor thereof

The Emperor and King Ferdinand, by reason of the doctrine, religion, and
faith, depending on the Confession of Ausbourg, and the other Princes and
Estates, shall not constrain nor force any subject of the Empire to forsake
their religion, their ceremonies, and laws, which in their territories they
have already instituted, or shall hereafter institute, being associated to
that Confession: and by any commands, or other way not to force them to do
it, and not in any thing to contemn them. But shall freely permit them this
religion, with their goods, faculties, tributes, tols, possessions, and rights,
in such sort that they may enjoy them peaceably. The controversy Ferdinand,
and other Princes and Estates (confederated together in the ancient religion)
as well Ecclesiasticals as Seculars, and toward all the other Ecclesiasticals,
and their Coleages, into what part soever they are gone to make their abode: so
that they well and duly procure the ministry thereof, as afterward it shall be
set down. To these shall they permit in all liberty their religion,
ceremonies, laws, possessions, tributes, and al other rites: and by any means
shall not hinder them, but that they may enjoy them peaceably.

All the suites, differences, and quarrels which might rise between the one and
other, should be ended, according to the use, custom, and laws of the Empire.
Those who are not either of the one or other religion, are not comprised in
this peace. This restraint was made to withstand new troubles, which easily
ensue upon the introduction of a new religion. That nevertheless of Zwinglius
being fuller of liberty, and further from the ancient faith The opinion of
Zwinglius or Calvin diuulged in Spain, and the punishment of some Sectaries
thereof.
this new doctrine of Zwinglius: and the punishment which was inflicted upon
them, being accompanied with great ceremonies that they add thereunto,

This exemplar punishment was performed in the town of Valladolid, in which
for it there is appointed a great Scaffold by the Council house, The notable
ceremony touching the execution which is done in Spain against Heretics.
and another adjoining thereto, wherein the Princes must be. About this Ioane,
Gouernesse of Spain, and the Prince Don Charles went forth of the Palace,
accompanied with the Archbishop of S. James, the great Constable and Admiral
of Castile, the Marquess of Astorgne, of Denigne, and of Sarmia Comptroller of
the Princesses house, and the Counts of Miranda, of Orsen, of Nieua, Garzia of
Toledo Governor of the Prince, and of many other great persons. Before them
marched two Vshers with their Maces, two Heralds with the arms of Spain, and
the Count of Bondie carrying the Sword in his hand: and all this company
conducted the Princes to the lodging which was prepared, adjoining to the said
great Scaffold. Upon the Scaffolds were already the Archbishop of Civil,
general Inquisitor with those who were of the Council of the Inquisition,
Roderic Bishop of Ciuidad, the royal Council, the Inquisitors, the Bishop of
Oran, and the Bishop of Palence. The Princes being present at the windows of
their lodgings, they began to carry a Cross covered Friar Melchior, who
afterward was Bishop of Canaria, being of the

It being ordained by the Apostolical decrees, and by the holy Canons, that
the Kings ought to swear to carry all favor to the Catholic faith and
Christian religion, you conforming your selves to this holy ordinance, your
Highnesses swear in the name God, in the name of S. Marie, and by the holy
Evangelists, and by the sign of the Cross, upon which you have put your
hands, to yield all favor, and give all necessary help to the holy office of
the Inquisition and ministers of the same, against Heretics and Apostataes,

Upon these speeches the two Princes made answer, that so they would swear.
And the Archbishop added these words. Because of your holy oath, our Lord
prosper your royal persons, and the Estates of your Highnesses for many and
long years. By and by after one of the Registers, who is there present,
demanded of the company whether they did not swear the like Augustine
Cazagia, his Majesty's Chaplain and Preacher, Francis d'Viuero, Dame Betrix d'
Viuero, Dame Elenor de Viuero, Alonso Perez a Priest, Antonio Herrezuolo a
bachelor, Christopher de Occampo a Licentiate, Francis de Herrera a Licentiate,
John Garzia, Christopher de Padillia, Izabella de Straba, Ioane Velasques
Gonzala Vaes a Portugal, Catherin Roman, and Dame Catherin d'Ortegua. These,
as soon as their judgment was read, were thrown into the fire. But it being
The form of the Spanish Inquisition.
not possible but that some would desire to know what manner of proceeding

This office was first invented by Ferdinand King of Aragon, who after he had
chased, or at least subdued the kingdom of Granado, which (as almost all the
rest of the kingdoms of Spain) was for many years in the hands of the Mores
or Sarazins, who had tamed Spain from the time that Count Julian called them
thither to revenge himself of the rape and forcement, whereof Roderic of Spain
(of the Gothish religion) had used against his daughter Cana. Ferdinand having
by ten years war reduced this kingdom under his puissance, and permitting
the inhabitants thereof to live in their Mahometane religion, afterward fearing
(following the advice of his wisest Council) that this permission would bring
some annoyance to the Christian religion, by the frequent fellowship that these
inhabitants should have Sixtus. After that the King himself having enquire,
was taken from them, and committed into the hands of the most sufficient
Ecclesiastical Seculars. To these if any be presented as thinking ill of the
faith, he is presently summoned by a Sergeant, whom they call a Familier: and
appearing at the day, (whereof he must not fail) if he avouches nothing of
that whereof he is accused, he is sent back again: but there is charge
secretly given to a Spy to have an eye of him, and to note his doings, and
know what talk he uses in company. If there be discovered against him any
thing of evil, presently Habeas Corpus. If the accused flies, there is sent
after him a Sergeant of the Inquisition, to whom they describe the age,
stature, face, them entreated to acknowledge his fact, to discharge his
conscience, and to confess his wickedness, promising him all favor, so that he
do repent. If amiss, he is convicted: but if he guess well, they will not
allow it: his Advocate who has conferred with him concerning the faith: yea
they cause to be

By this discourse which I have made you of this Inquisition, some loving
liberty as well in their actions, as in their speeches, find this manner
strange; others would that it were yet more rigorous, desirous that every one
should

The end of the eight Book.
THE NINTH BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF HVNGARIE.
THE ARGUMENT OF THE NINTH BOOK.
KIng John endeuoreth to stir up the Hungars against Maximilian. Solomon
marches into Hungary with a great army. Pallota well defended by Tury
against the Turks. Succors come to the Emperor from foreign Princes.
Solomon arriueth in Hungary and besieges Sighet, before which he dies, whose
death was concealed until Selim, Solymans eldest son was chosen Emperor.
The last assault given to Sighet, where County Serin governor of the town in
sallying forth, bravely ends his happy days, and then Sighet is taken. A
Diet in Austria in which was granted succors to Maximilian for the war of
Hungary. Peace between Selim and Maximilian, who after the death of John King
of Transiluania, pretends title to that kingdom: but Stephen Battor (by the
Turks favor) is chosen King thereof. The manner and coronation of a King of
Hungary, and namely of Rodulph son to Maximilian. Truce expyred between
Maximilian and Selim and the death of him, Amurath his son succeeds.
Between whom and Rodulph (who after the death of his Father Maximilian, is
chosen Emperor) a truce is concluded.

Whilst the Emperor Maximilian prepared to defend John also carefully
fortefying King John drew the Hungers to him.
himself, daily increased his army, as well by new leauies of soldiers, as
with many Hungarian Lords and Transiluanians, who came and voluntarely offered
themselves to serve him in this war with good strength. John had thus gained
many of them by particular letters sent to every one: and to draw them the more
to him, he caused letters to be published, in the name of the King of Hungary
directed to all the Nobility and people of the country, by which he
endeauored

The most puissant Emperor of the Turks our most merciful benifactour has
commanded us by his letters, and by Zeusic his Ambassador, that we should
exhort all the estates of our Realms and country to be faithful Solymon to
bring an army into the field to ruinate them; and to come himself in person
to make this waste with infinite cost, without respecting paynefull, long, and
tedious iourneyes which it behooves him to do. For this cause you ought all to
take good heed to your selves whilst the time and season is yet fit, before
you have upon your shoulders this his great army, which already is departed
from Constantinople. For when you shall see your fields harried, your houses
burnt, your children captives, and you separated by violence from your wives,
you may then in vain desire peace. To avoid this miserable ruin, we have
been very willing to cause you expressly to understand the will of the Grand
Seigniour, and thereupon to show in general to all, what

By these and many other reasons, John endeauored to stir up the Hungars to
follow his part, and to be himself at the Diet which he had appointed in the
town of Torde in the month of March, in which place should assemble all the
states of his kingdom, to advise together of that which was necessary for the
preservation of it. These letters being bruited abroad, and the knowledge
thereof being come to Schuendy, who then was at Vnghar

My Lords, there is sent me from diverse parts the coppie of a letter diuulged
under the name of John Vayuod of Transiluania, full of apparent cullers, and of
notorious and evident deceites, with which he endeauoreth to astonish the
Emperors subjects, as if Solomon were very curious of the imminent danger,
you cannot but consider whereto tends such subtilties Maximilian, it is also
a question for the entertayning of his religion, and of our liberty, which we
see to be assailed with aid from the Turk, by those who falsely would bear
the name of Christians, who reposing themselves hitherunto in their arms,
shall finally have a miserable and tragike end, according to their demerits.
With these I pray you have no communication, yea, I forbid you in the Emperors
name to have with them any intelligence,

About this time the Captain of Ainathschen being gone about his Ainathschen
taken by the Turks.
own affairs in the town of Agria, and having taken with him for guide the
best soldiers of his garrison, the neighboring Turks being advertised
thereof by their spies of the Captains departure, the day following which was
Saint George his day, by dawning of the day, they were with ladders upon the
wall, and entering by force into this Fortress, killed all those for: and being
come to handie strokes, they wear so hotly repulsed, and

In the mean time the Emperor had certain aduertisments that Solomon was
departed from Constantinople to march in person to this war, and Solomon
marches into Hungary.
that in great iourneyes with 70000. men he was come to Sophia, and by Misia
into Bulgaria, causing Portau Basha to march before with one part of

When Solomon arrived in Hungary with this equipage, Schuendy held the Forte
of Huste besieged, which he had straightly shut up, minding to prevent the
Turkish endeauours; and on the other part in the month of June, the Basha of
Buda being in field with 8000. footmen, and 25. pieces of Artillery went to
be siege Pallotta, which is situated by Alberegalis 8. miles Pallotta well
defended by Tury against the Turks.
the walls were thrown to the ground, the assieged remaining in extreme
peril. George Tury a courageous Captain, and of singular prowess, Governor
of this place, marching about it to repair the breaches, and to give such
order thereto as need required, was strooken on the side with a shiuer of a
stone broken with a Cannon bullet: and the stroke was so violent that he there
thought he should lose his life, whereof would have been a great loss, he
having many times sustained and repulsed the violence of the enemy, as a
little before this siege he had done, when pursuing the Turks of the garrison
of Alberegalis, together with the Beg, he had George of Helfenstain, who the
day after his arrival, causing 90. wagons to go forth, with 900. footmen
marched to enter into this place. The vauntcourers of the Turkish Army
discovering this troop, and judging it to be far greater then it was, by
reason of

These accidents daily arriving in Hungary, caused the Emperor in the
greatest diligence he could to hasten all the preparations of war, according
to which, he had there for that purpose 5. Regiments of Launsquenets. The first
was under the conduct of Remer: the second was led by Balderdun: Claus of
Hogast commanded the third: the fourth was led by Count George of Helfenstain:
and the fifth marched under Polbel. He also had there 20000. Reisters, and
4000. Hungars. 400. Harquebuziers on horseback were come Succors come to the
Emperor from foreign Princes.
from Sauoy to serve the Emperor in this war: as also were thither come a
great number of Lords and Knights from many places of Christendom at their
own charges, and for the love they bore to Christian religion. His Majesty
received them very courteously, and commanded all his Barons and other Lords of
his army to use the like in their places, considering how all these (for the
only affection to do him service) were come to seek so far countries,
without any respect had to the charge and travail.

Many Princes and Commonwealths of Italy sent him succors. The Succors of
Italy.
Duke of Mantua, Gennes, and Luca assisted him with money. The Duke of Florence
sent him 3000. footmen paid. The Duke of Ferrara (besides that he left unto him
the dowry and marriage of his wife the Duchess his Majesty's sister, which
was 150000. Florins) went himself to serve him with a choice company of 400.
Gentlemen, 300. Harquebuziers on horseback, 100. Murrions, and 100. armed men:
and there was not any one of these Gentlemen who brought not with him three or
four good soldiers. Alexander Bailon with four Captains came to his
Majesty. After him arrived John Alphonse Castalde with his troops. A little
before also were presented to his Majesty to do him service, and to win
renown amongst so many nations, certain Lords and English Gentlemen: amongst
whom was Englishmen
Master Smith, Richard Greinuile, Henry Champernon, Philip Budshall, Thomas
Cotton, and William George a Captain of singular prowess. From all parts men
might see this army to be increased, by the arrival of so many Lords and
Gentlemen. Albert Lasky a Polonian, by reason of many Castles which Polonians.
he possessed in Hungary, meant not to be wanting to so fit an occasion. He
brought with him twelve Coaches, and 3000. Pollacques, all apparelled a la
Hungresque, that he might not thereby prejudice the King of Poland, who was in
league with the Turk (if they were known in the habit of their own country).
The Duke of Wolfang Palatin of Nuberg, and Richard his kinsman Germans.
came thither with 600. horse. The second son of the Duke of Bauier brought
thither with him 400. Prosper Colonne, Ange Caesis, and certain other Lords of
Italy incontinently followed those who were come thither on the behalf of the
Duke of sauoy, conducted by the Duke of Camerin, as Sauonians.
also did Count Nicholas Gambara, having in his train twelve Gentlemen. On the
behalf of the kingdom of France was Henry of Loraine Duke of Guize, Count de
Brissac, the Lord of Lansac, the Lord Strozzy, and many other Frenchmen.
French gentlemen all well armed, who were departed from France and were come
to Malta in favor of the Religion, for that from many places it was assured
that the Turkish army would return thither. But these bruites being found
false, these Lords after they had seen Italy took their way toward
Hungary, that they might be in this war, and salute his Majesty, who made
them great demonstration of the pleasure which he received by their coming.

Maximilian had prepared a nauall army upon Danubius of 12. Galleys, and 30.
Nazadies, with other great boats, so well accommodated, that the A nauall
army upon Danubius.
soldiers who were within, might well warrant themselves from their enemies
arrows. In these vessels there was many pieces of great Artillery, Blach
Allemand a Kight of Malta a valiant man, and greatly experienced in sea
affairs, commanded this army. The land army marched along Danubius toward
Iauerin, in which place the body of the whole army should stay to divert the
Turk from Transiluania, and to put him in doubt to lose Strigonium and Buda.

The Emperor at the same time commanded all the Nobility of Austria to mount
on horseback, and to march to the war at their own expenses, preparing
himself in the mean time to be in person in his Camp, Solomon (although he
was old) was in his. As this great concourse of men and of all munitions made,
the Turks who were in the field toward Alberegalis and Sighet, (where they
expected the Beglerbey of Armenia, who should come to besiege this place, as
afterward he did) ouerran all the country. Against these went forth Count
Salm, who commanded Iauerin, and with as many men as he was able to bring into
the field, he went directly to Pallota: and having put thereinto victuals, and
refreshed the garrison, he marched with a good troop of Caualarie toward
Vesprimia, which Vesprimia taken by Count Salm from the Turks.
is a great town, and not very strong, two miles from Pallota, making great
spoil all about, not staying any whit at all upon any booty, until his
Infantrie passage to him, diligently prepared his people. These arrived about
night, and the battery was deferred until the day following. In the mean
time George Tury, who had so well defended the other, giving him a sufficient
company of men to keep it: and afterward he retired to Iauerin, while the
Basha of Buda departed from Alberegalis, and retired himself to Buda to advise
of his affairs. On the other side, the soldiers who were in garrison within
Leuante (situated at the foot of the mountains) going into the field to
assail the Turks, were Bartholmew Horuatte, a man of great valor.

Five miles from Iauerin, and two from Comar is the Fortress of Tata. From
thence the Imperial soldiers, which were in the neighboring places, daily
received great losses, this place being well munitioned and kept. Count Salm
desiring to raze this Fort, departed with his people from Iauerin early in the
morning the 21. of July, and arrived about evening before Tata, with a
resolution not to depart from this enterprise without conquest Tata taken by
Count Salm from the Turks.
thereof. Being there arrived, he sent for to come before him (after faith
Count caused to be removed six pieces into a commodious place to make
Villardun with his companies to go to the breach, commanding all the rest of
the army to raunge themselves in battle. A 1000. soldiers should give an
assault with ladders in passing the water even unto the girdle, and 1000 others
were appointed to go to the breach, whilst that altogether they boldly
assayling it, the Count with other 2000. assailed the Castle gate. The Turks
going to the defenses, as well at the breach, as against

The Count continuing in so fortunate success, caused his people (without
Ghestez and Vithain taken from the Turks.
the Turks perceiving the Vauntgard, they presently fled, abandoning with the
place all their munition and Artillery. For the like fear, those who were
within the Castles of Vithain, Ischolchin, and other villages, took their
flight, and retired to Strigonium, after they had set fire on their munition,
for fear the enemy should prevail thereby. The taking of these Castles, for
that they were situated upon the way which goes from Comar to Strigonia,
brought great profit to Maximilians affairs, because they might easily advance
themselves even to this town, without leaving behind any place which was in
the enemies hands: and specially because that in these high situated places
ordinarily retired a good number of Martelots, who are peasant Martelots wicked
peasants.
thieves, and without faith, who by their robberies ruinated all that country:
these people being of so strong force, that in respect of their courage they
care not for any pain, travail, or danger.

The Emperor (who yet was not gone into the field so soon as he determined)
as well by reason of the preparations to which he daily gave order, as for that
the appointed troops through all the Imperial States were not yet arrived,
and also for that he was afterward ascertained that the Turk was not passed
Belgrade, and that there he should soiourne, attending the rest of his army,
considering that the goodliest ordinances that might be are frustrate, the
public weal, in such sort that all the Lords of what degree or quality they
were of, should not fail to descend from their horses at the sound of

In the mean time the Emperials desiering to execute the enterprise of
Strigonia, and setting this matter before the Council to be considered of,
they sent to Maximilian to know of him his advise. The answer and resolution
was, that he should not prepare himself with so small an army to a town of
so great importance, and which was no less strong and also well furnished then
Buda. On the contrary, the Emperor sent to Count Salm,

The Turks thinking on nothing else ran over all the Country, and at Carpon
(where was Captain Bruschitty) they took and led away 40. peisants, who were
reaping corn, and were taken by the Castle gate as they were drinking and
taking their repast. The Captain moved to see so bold an act done before his
eyes, presently sallied forth, and took three of those Turks, and had stayed
the rest if the soldiers would have followed him. Halla Sangiach, and the
Governor of the 5. Churches were come near unto Sighet with their troops,
yet he not knowing their determination, and that there they were encamped, he
presently went into the field to encounter them: and finding them drowsy he
assailed them on the sudden, and the Turks not being able so instantly to
range themselves in battle, the greatest part of them were taken prisoners,
and the other thrown into the water, and of those who were slain, were carried
to Sighet 94. heads, with 16000. Ducats, many fair harnesses, many Camels,
Mules, silver vessel, tents, and other spoil. The Sangiach there valiantly
defending himself

In the end the Emperor having received the succors which he expected,
Ferdinand Lieutenant General in the army of the Emperor Maximilian his
brother.
published Ferdinand (Arch Duke of Austria) his brother his Lieutenant general
in this Army, to whom was Lieutenant Count of Schuartzemburge: and committed
the charge of the Artillery to Paul of Zara; and the 12. of August his
Majesty departed from Vienna with the Imperial Ensign, which was commanded
by the Lord of Arach, having under him for his Lieutenant the Marshall of
Vnghemad, and the Guidon was carried by the Duke of Pomerania. His Majesty
marched toward Attemberg distant two miles from Iauerin while all the horse of
Bohemia came Bohemians, Morauians, and Slesians in the Emperors aid.
marching at their own charges under the command of Teufel, and 1200. other
conducted by Count Gonther of Schuartzemburg. The Morauians, Slesians, and
Lusatians made besides the rest a good show of horse. Vratislauia sent 300.
horse. All these troops with others who followed Maximilian,

Upon this, news came that Solomon was passed the river of Tissa, and that
Solomon arrived in Hunagrie.
of Danubius, and that already he was on this side Sighet, having with great
diligence, caused to be made in this town a bridge upon Drauus for the passage
of his Army: for performing whereof, he sent before 25000. men. This bridge
was erected in 16. days, although it was in length 5500. fathum, and 14.
broad: and for the building whereof, they used an infinite company of boats,
bound with Iron chains in place of piles, which they could not Solomon
Solymans siege before Sighet.
had given the charge of the siege of Sighet to the Basha of Bossina, and to
him of Armenia: but having understood the loss of Tata, and of Vesprimia, he
sent them to the succors of the Basha of Buda, and gave the conduct of this
siege to the Beglerbey of Armenia. He readily marched thither, and encamped
himself within a mile of the Fortress. Solomon within a while after came
himself. This town is situated in Hungary upon the confines of Croatia, in
the midst of waters and marshes, which enuiron it on three sides for the
space of more then a mile, and on the side of the firm land it Nicholas Esdrin
Count of Serin, of whom we have often before Nicholas Esdrin Count of Se-rin
commanded at Sighet.
spoken. He was Nephew to the Lord Torguat by reason of his sister, and there
was given unto him the office of Banambt in the kingdoms of Croatia, Dalmatia,
and Sclauonia, which is as much as Bailife or Seneshall: and besides he was
Mundschencken of Hungary, that is to say, great Butler: Captain (a Hungar by
birth) had in this place 1200. soldiers to defend it. The Turk (greatly to
annoy Maximilian, besides the besieging of this

Certain days after, the Turks being returned thither, they besieged this
place very straightly, battering the town with great pieces: but they cooling
their fury, and seeming careless, those within seeing their countenance, in
the night sallied forth: and thus surprising the enemy, killed many of them,
and caused the other to retire, in such sort, that they remained masters
Schuendy, who then had not many people with him, and who for that occasion
daily importuned the Emperor to have fresh succors) having taken some
country men, and knowing of them by supposed speeches that Schuendy had with
him 20000. men: upon these words they were so daunted, that suddenly they
raised the siege: and spoiling the country all about, they fiered five
villages, using a marvelous cruelty every where, without respecting any sex
or condition, but following their barbarous custom they put all to fire and
sword.

In the mean time the Turks (after the batteries and breaches made at Sighet,
by means of high Forts which Mahomet Basha (commanding all the army) had
caused to be raised) had given eight furious assaults: and the 29. of August
they gave thereto a general assault, which continued 24. hours. But the
besieged defended themselves so courageously, that after they had killed a
great number of the enemies, and taken the Captain of the Ianisaries, they
always valiantly repulsed them. The stink of the dead bodies was so great,
that Solomon was forced to recoyle four miles off. Serin seeing he had lost in
these assaults many of his people, caused the town to be fiered, and retired
himself to two other Forts. This retraict gave occasion John, Solomon trusting
in this day, which he esteemed very fortunate for him in all his battles,
having on yt day obtained this notable and memorable victory which he had
against Lewis King of Hungary, and having on the same day won the towns of
Rhodes and Buda, and defeated in battle the army of the King of Persia. This
fortune nevertheless failed the Turks at this time, and they were yet
valiantly repulsed. The day following, which was the 30. of that month, they
yet again returned to the assault with greater fury, and with such courage,
that their Ensigns were seen upon the Rampiars: but nevertheless they were
repulsed even with great slaughter of them. Solomon considering the tediousnes
of this siege, Serin, caused to be offered to this Captain a very good offer,
if he would yield to him. But these offers could nothing move the faith which
the Count had sworn to Maximilian. Notwithstanding, if the Emperor had had
good Spies who would have informed him of the truth, or if at least he had
credited the reports which was made him, it is Solomon was dead: the which was
confirmed by other demonstrations. The Emperor notwithstanding would not
believe any thing hereof, judging that if such a thing were happened, it could
not be possible that the Turkish army should be in such quiet, nor so well
governed. But the prudence and marvelous industry of Mehemet Basha (a most
wise Lord) knew so well to manage this matter, that not only he concealed the
death of his Lord: but yet further, assured the Empire unto him to whom it
belonged: and (which is of

Solomon was come into Hungary with a puissant army of 150000. men, which he
divided into many parts, whereof one was toward Iula in the confines of
Hungary adioynant to Transiluania, and another toward Sighet upon the marches
of Croatia. In this was his greatest force, and there was himself in person,
to the end that his presence should the more encourage the soldiers to the
taking of this town. But being now of the age of 66. years, and being crazed,
in respect of the labors of so long a voyage, and perhaps having his courage
abated to see his people in so many assaults The death of Solomon.
The prognostication of the death of Solomon.
that the Emperor of Turks should dye there, if peradventure he was not
overthrown and defeated by the Christians, notwithstanding the great

Mehemet Basha seeing his Prince dead, and Sighet yet untouched as it The
marvelous prudencie of Mehemet Basha.
were, and in possession of the Christians, presently thought that it was
expedient to keep this death secret, as well for the continuance of this siege
and taking of the place, as for the preservation of the army and treasure; as
also to inuest the new Sultan Selim in the possession of the Empire, to whom of
right it belonged. Upon this resolution he readily dispatched a messenger to
the Basha of Constantinople, to advertise him of the fortune which was
happened, and he sent him word of that which was necessary for him to Mehemet
went forth of the Pauilion, and taking occasion thereupon began to encourage
the Ianisaries, exhorting them to perform their last endeavor to the assault
of Sighet. Mehemet by these speeches and many others, animating every one, a
singular desire of fight, and also presently to return to the assault,
possessed all the soldiers, and above all, the Ianisaries being all obstinate
to perform therein their last endeavors, or else to end their lives there.
Upon this resolution, after he had given order to that which appertained to
such an assault, all the soldiers running with great fury to the breach and
skaladoe the 6. of September, they were nevertheless repulsed with great loss
both of the one part and other. But the enemies Serin performing then the duty
of an advised and most valiant Captain, encouraging his people, ran here and
there, not being wanting either to himself or to his soldiers, appeared
greater then himself. He seeing that the Artillery of the enemy had set fire
in the Fortress, and being astonished thereat, caused Serin would never yield
himself, although the Turks desired him to do it, willing to have him alive
into their hands: but always fighting courageously in the midst of the
enemies, increased in himself an incredible valor: and thus managing his
hands with extreme courage, was thrust into the breast with a pike. But he
fearing to abate the courage of his people, concealed this wound as The death
of Count Serin.
a blow which killed him. And although that the soldiers desisted not, yet
could they not make such resistance as they did before: so available in
soldiers hearts is the Captains presence: from whence it happened that
Sighet was presently taken, and all those who were taken, within a few days
after Sighet taken by the Turks.
were all cruelly massacred by the Turks. The head being cut from the body of
this valiant Count, it was sent by the Basha of Buda to Count Ecchia of Salm,
wrapped in a piece of black velvet, with letters, by which he declared unto
him, that having understood that this brave warrier who had so faithfully
maintained the part of his Emperor, was his kinsman and friend, he was willing
to send him his head, to the end it should be a beginning of an obligation of
mutual friendship between them, sending him word that he had caused his body
to be honorably buried. Some believed that the Basha did this more to possess
him with grief and some astonishment, then for any office of humanity or
courtesy that was naturally in him. This head Serin, and prostrated himself at
his feet, to desire him that with his good favor he might hold his fathers
place, and of all his family. The Emperor raised him with his hands, and
promised to be to him a good Tutor, and as a father to all his house. This
son after he had taken leave of ye Emperor, being followed with a good number
of gentlemen, went to the Fortress of Iskachaturn, and causing his fathers
head to be conducted thither, made it honorably to be buried with great
pomp. The town of Sighet came in this sort into the enemies hands, it being
opened on all sides by the violence of the Artillery. Serin seeing that he had
no more hope, caused them to be charged even to the mouth, and put fire
thereto, so that they were all cleft and broken. If this Count had had
sufficient of soldiers, he had never seen it reduced to this point, having
neither want of arms nor victuals. Of 1200. soldiers which he had at the
beginning of the siege, there remained no more the 110. when he was wounded to
death. By this loss the port was opened to the Turks to molest the rest of
Hungary. For from this place they might run without any impeachment unto
Sopron, called Odembourg, and even to the walls of Poson. Amongst the most of
mark who dyed in Sopron called Odemburg.
Alipartu Basha, who for Sea affairs was held to be very expert, and for one
of the valiantest of all the Turkish Captains.

After the taking of this place, the Turks dispersed themselves by incursions
through all the country, and even in sight of the Emperor, who was greatly
discontented for this loss, and the death of Serin. By these excursions the
country was greatly endamaged, Fortune being altogether so favorable to the
enemy, that she not being content to have brought him such happy success,
added yet thereto the winning of the town and Fortress of Iula, which in the
same week was reduced under the Turks command, Ladislas Cheretsken commanded
there. He seeing himself besieged by a long and dangerous Ladislas Cheretsken
Governor of Iula.
siege, and moved by distrust from being able to sustain it any longer, or
rather (as it was said) for the great promises which Portau Basha made him, he
rendered it to him upon such composition, that he might retire himself with
his arms and baggage saved, with hostages for assurance of the capitulation,
Giusa taken by the Turks.
and that the Turkish Artillery should be displaced and turned into some
place, where it could not endamage them. Upon such conditions the Captain
being come forth, he was lead before the Basha, and in the mean time that the
others marched, being not yet 1000. paces off, two great companies of Turks
assailed them. They seeing themselves thus deceived, ranged themselves
altogether within their wagons, and for a while valiantly defended themselves,
and specially the Germans who with their harquebuze shot killed many of the
enemies. But in the end being surmounted with a great number, they were
constrained to yield to the enemy who almost cut them all to pieces, except
some who saved themselves, amongst Bernard Rotenau a Germane Captain, who
afterward being presented before the Imperial Majesty, accused Cheretsken of
treason, he having made an accord without the knowledge of his companions.
Nevertheless by the report of an Hungarian soldier, who afterward came to
the Camp, they knew that the Captain had conferred of this surrender with the
Germans, and that those for certain would not yield at the first: but that
afterward overcome by the promises and great persuasions of the Turks, they
consented thereto.

Near to Alberegalis there was 20000. Turks encamped and fortified with good
trenches, who made many attempts toward the Imperial George Tury having
known amongst them the Sangiach of Alberegalis, a great Councellor of the
Turks, (whom he might very well know, because that while he was at Pallota he
had been his neighbor, and had persued him oftentimes to take him) he boldly
thrust himself into the midst of them all, and followed him so near, that
although his horse was slain under him, yet being readily remounted upon
another, he took him a live and brought him prisoner to the Emperor, at whose
hand for

At another time 1500. horse being, gone forth of the Camp to encounter
certain Turks, they made forward as far as Iscocaky belonging to the
enemies, two miles from Alberegalis. But they did not any exployt, there
passing nothing between the two Camps but light skirmishes, in George Tury
more then once gave chase to the enemies, and brought from them good spoil. At
the same time, the Arch Duke Charles being at Bubolca, defeated a Basha with
4000. horse by the river of Sleuua, and without doubt he had taken him, if the
army that was at Sighet had not been so nigh, he retyring himself to the
Castle of Carotua, a very strong place which is situated in an Island which
Drauus and Murus makes.

All these excursions greatly increased from the time of the taking of Sighet,
and the Turks pilled, burned, and wasted all even near unto Sabar, distant
two miles from the Imperial Camp. By these excursions many Captains
experienced in the manner of the Turkish war, believed that Solomon would
retire to Constantinople, and that so much the more, because they understood
that in his army was a great dearth of victuals, and that there was some taken
from Buda and Alberegalis to send thither. Besides they heard that Solomon was
dead, and that the Basha giving this last ruin to the Country, would depart
with his accomplished victory. Nevertheless it seemed that is would be a
strange thing, if there happened not some sedition in this army, knowing that
in like cases the Turks are very easily moved to mutine. But Mahomet
entertained, and that with great care, these courses to stay his own army and
that of the enemies, he daily expecting the coming of Selim their new
Emperor, and Solymans son, to whom he had sent, that in the greatest speed
he could, he should depart from Constantinople. Selim received the news of his
fathers death, he was in Selim the son and successor of Solomon.
the plain of Saraissa, three days journey from Constantinople, in a place
called Chiefredy, which belonged to Sinan Basha. He having in this place
received the letters of Mahomet, subscribed with the Captains Aga and with the
principal Physicians hands, departed the 17. of September to go to
Constantinople with all the people which for that time he could have with him,
and being arrived at Scutari, Bostangy Basha chief Gardner, who had the
keeping of the Kings Palace, went before with a Brigandine ordained for the
person of the Grand Seigniour, it being very well and Ceremonies at the
receiving of the Grand Seigniour into Constantinople.
richly trimmed, and accompained with many goodly young men sumptuously Selim
had first sent many Ianisaries to Scander Basha, Governor and Lieutenant of
Solomon in Constantinople, to advertise him to prepare all things necessary
for his entrance. And being aborde this Brigandine, he arrived at
Constantinople, and descending into the Serrail, Bostangy took him by the
hand, and conducted him into the usual chamber aunciently deputed for all the
Kings, and there he being seated in a chair dedicated to the Ottoman
Emperors, made proclamation through the town, with the same words which they
ordinarely use in the election of new Emperors: sending within a while after
in great diligence the same proclamation Job, which is a place adjoining to the
walls, where the Kings and Grand Seigniours are accustomed to make their
sacrifices, offering sheep and other beasts, which afterward are distributed
to the Mehement he returned Mehemet desired him to attend at Belgrade.

Thus his Majesty soiourned in that place, attending the Army which was
conducted by a dead body, carried in a close covered Coach, every one
believing that he was living: because that he being in this his old age for
certain years together subject to the gout, he was accustomed to be carried
into the fields in this sort.

Upon the day that this body or corpse should enter into Belgrade, Selim
Ceremony for the funeral mourning of the Turkish Emperors.
put upon his head a very little Turbant, and being decently apparaled Selim
dismounted, and began to mourn over the body. All the Bashaes, the
Cadilischiers (who Cadilischiers.
are the principal persons for Justice) with all the chief of the Camp,
after lighting from their horses, took also little Turbants, and in token of
sadness all the Ensigns through the whole Camp were reuersed the point
downward: and there was a wounderfull silence made Selims head, and he being
clothed with stately and magnificent habits, he mounted upon another horse,
and all the others doing the like, the Coach of the dead was again covered,
and the Ensigns raised, all the soldiers making great acclamations in the
name of their new Emperor. In this manner they accompayned him to the Palace,
and there the deputies of the Empire, according to their degrees, went and
kissed his hands.

Presently Selim gave order to the government of Justice, and performed Larges
dew to the Ianisaries by the new Emperor.
thousand Aspres. At the same time it was decreed, that the body of his
deceased father should be conducted to Constantinople, to be buried in the
Sepulcher which he caused to be built in his life time, named by The
Sepulcher of Solomon.
the Turks, Marata, which is as it were an Hospital for the poor. Some say
that this Tomb is the most sumptuous that is to be found at this day, it
Hamant Basha, who had married one of his Neeces, and to Ferrat Cap Aga,
commanding that this corpse should besides be accompanied with all the
Ianisaries, who were then in the Camp, with many other persons of note,
carrying with them the Imperial Ensign.

Selim remained at Belgrade with the rest of the army to march afterward more
commodiously. The body of Solomon entered into Constantinople The entrance of
Solymans body into Constantinople.
the 22. of November, there being first gone forth to receive him Muphty,
otherwise called Muplety, who is the supreme of their Priests, and one who
(they say) was dissended of the line of Mahomet, he being followed of all
Scander Basha Governor, with all the Treasurers, and other Lords of quality
who were remaining at Constantinople, with an infinite number of other sorts of
people came also before him. They were all clad in black, with little Turbants
of wool on their heads in sign of sorrow. These having drawn the body out
of the Coach, the principals of them took it and lifted it up upon the palms
of their hands, carrying it thus raised on high through the town, in changing
it from hand to hand, and bearing it by turns; the Doctors of the law marching
before, and reading with a high voice even unto the Sepulcher, wherein he was
put, with all the ceremonies and accustomed solemnities

But now to return to our discourse: the Emperor Maximilian knowing for
certain the death of Solomon, and coronation of Selim, (which was seven weeks
after) it being sent to him from Venice by Guy of Noremberg his Ambassador,
resident in the Seigniorie of Venice for his Majesty. All the Captains were
greatly astonished thereat, considering how and with what prudence these
barbarous people were able to keep so secret such a Mehemet in his own
judgment foreseeing all the disorder, and knowing that of his Lords life
depended the good of all the army, meant to provide for it in time: and for
this cause he concealed the death of Solomon, to the end that the army should
not perceive it self deprived of their Lord, and that in dividing it self it
should not by that means open the way of a notable victory to the enemy.

After then that the Turkish army was departed out of Hungary, there happened
a new disaster at Iauerin, (where was the force of the Imperial Iauerin burned
by chance.
Camp) there being the last of September fire set on the lodging of a
Hungarian Lord, by negligence of his Cook. This fire by little and little
increased so far, by means of a great wind which blew from the West, that
all the houses being made of wood (after the manner of that country) not any
Maximilian dismisseth his army.
he dismissed his army, and most affectionatly he thanked all the Lords, who
so willingly were come to succor him: and this done, he retired to Vienna,
leaving at Iauerin a good and strong garrison of the brauest and valiantest
soldiers of the army, as well foot as horse under the charge of They, with
1000. horse, and as many footmen.

In the mean time the Emperor called the Estates of Austria into the town of
Vienna, to advise of new preparations for the year following, as well in
Hungary as in Transiluania, where always continued the war between him and
King John, for whose aid remained Portau Basha with many Tartars, who
surpassing ours in multitude and cruelty, massacred all those that they
encountered, not pardoning any sex, and without any distinction The
barbarousnes of the Tartars.
of age, cutting the infants in the midst, whom they afterward roasted and
eat.

The Transiluanian having in the former year lost Tocchay, which Tocchay taken
by Schuendy from the Transiluania^s, and besieged by King John.
Schuendy had taken from him with 30. pieces of Artillery, and great store of
munition which he found there, and willing to get it again, came with his
Tartars to besiege it, making a battery with nine Cannons. The assieged
valiantly behauing themselves, did not any thing fail in their defense.
Schuendy (although then he was very ill) willing nevertheless not to be slack
in the office of a prudent and discreet Captain, sent for succors to the
Emperor, Henry Stampir, with six Ensigns of foot, and with them he sent his
chiefest Physician to cure Schuendy. He also sent 50. wagons laden with
victual, and coin to pay the soldiers.

John being with his army before Tocchay, where already he had been John upon
this news raised his siege: and having sent to these mutiners, that they
should A mutiny between the Tartars and King John.
quietly retire themselves, he used all the means not to meddle with them by
fight. In the end, seeing that entreaties and all persuasions served him to no
purpose, and that continuing their cruelty, they would by no means desist,
moved by a just choler he assailed them on the sudden, and cut in pieces more
then 6000. of them. Those who remained, and the Turks joined John at Varadin,
which is a place of small strength, and where they might have taken him alive,
if they had had any pieces of Artillery. Nevertheless John fearing the worst,
and not willing to have the reproach to be besieged by such raskalitie,
secretly avoided the town, and retired to an other place of more strength.
There having gathered a greater army he again assailed them, and having made
a great butcherie of them to the number of 20000. besides the wounded who were
in great number, he saved Tartars defeated by King John.
from their hands many thousands of souls, who they led into miserable
servitude. Among these were many gentlewomen, which they had taken from the
Castle of Beregras, to which they were retired for the greater surety,

During such mutinies, 400. Ianisaries passed very near to Filech, a place
neighboring to Sepusa, committing where they passed infinite outrages, and
using acts altogether barbarous and cruel: and having taken out of the
mountains more then 8000. souls, they gave a great amazement to all the
neighbor people of Danubius, of Vagne, and of Arabon. The Turks a little
before had taken two Forts (such as they were) named Comar and Calambach,
Comar, Calambach, Ghestez, and Vitan taken by the Turks.
as also those of the garrison of Alberegalis had done the like, seazing
Tartars defeated in Polonia.
Castle, he making many sallies upon them, with a good number of soldiers

The Emperor being at the assembly of his Estates of Austria, whom he A Diet
in Austria, in which was granted succors to Maximilian.
caused to be called thither (as we above have written) proposed to all the
Prelates and principal of the Nobility, what need he had of succors to
withstand the violence of the enemies. And for this effect he demanded

To these demands, as very excessive, the Austrians not willing to condescend,
were wilful in their opinions, deferring for many days to make an answer,
giving others openly to understand, that first they should permit them the
exercise of the Confession of Ausbourg. The Emperor not being able to contain
himself from anger, caused to be declared unto them that he had not proposed
any article concerning the faith and religion, and that therefore they should
answer to his demands, if they would not incur his indignation. In the end
they again assembling together, yielded The exercise of the Confession of
Ausbourg denied to the Austrians.
to understand, that those who would not live nor believe as himself did,
might sell their goods and depart the country: and by this conclusion he made
them silent.

In the mean time, endeavoring himself to assure his countries against the
incursions of the Turks, who remained with the Transiluanian from the death of
Solomon, he labored nothing else but to make peace with the Turks, knowing
that Selim (after being come to the Empire) had confirmed peace with the
Venecians, who among so great wars which his father had, would never take
arms against him, although they were often required

The Princes of Italy endeavoring themselves to be well liked of with The
Pope, and Turks of Florence, Ferrara and Mantua, sent succors to the Emp.
Maximilian, sent him new succors, among others Cosine de Medicis establishing
the more by this means his own Estate. The Pope, the Duke of Sauoy, and he of
Ferrara did also succor him with good store of men. His George Hossute,
thinking by him to negotiate some peace with Solomon, whom George Hossute.
he thought to be yet living. But this Ambassador understanding for certain
upon the way the decease of the Turk, returned toward the new Emperor
Ambassador of the Emperor saw Selim.
Selim, at the same time that he went to Constantinople, after the body of his
father, as we have said before. At this meeting it was permitted him to see
his Majesty, but not to entertain any talk of peace with him: Mehemet Basha
showing to him that he had been sent toward the Majesty of the deceased
Solomon, and that seeing that he was dead, he was not to treat with his
successor; and that therefore if his King would any thing Selim, he should
send another, or else himself. This Basha did particularly counsel him to
demand peace of Selim, and that otherwise there could not but evil happen to
Maximilian.

When that Hossute arrived at Belgrade, Cheretsken (in times past Captain and
Governor of Iula) was there with bolts on his heels. This man made great
promises to the Turk who conducted Hossute, to be permitted to speak to him:
but he could never obtain it. And not being able to attain Excuses by writing
of Cheretsken for the yielding and loss of Iula.
this favor, he writ a long letter, by which he sent him word of all that
which he endured at Iula, and how he had been deceived by a vain hope of
succors; alleging among other things, that he had maintained the siege for
70. days, that one day he had seen 14. Turkish Ensigns upon the wall: and
Cheretsken writ to Hossute concerning all these things, to the end he should
report them to the Emperor.

In the mean time it was held for certain in the Court, that the Lord of
Arrach might set at liberty the Sangiach of Alberegalis, whom he held prisoner
in one of his Fortresses named Zetipont, to redeem Cheretsken, there having
been made (before this bad fortune) a treaty of marriage between them, this
Lord having promised to Cheretsken one of his daughters. But a while after
fortune being no way favorable to this poor prisoner, there was heard of him
a miserable end. For many complaining to Selim, for having received by this
Captain many cruel injuries, some having by his Selim moved with such a
report, gave him unto them that accused him, permitting them to take what
revenge of him they would. These taking a Tun nailed within full of great
nails, whereof the points were inward, and carrying it to the top of a high
hill, enclosed Cheretsken within, and after they cast him headlong The cruel
death of Cheretsken.
from the top thereof to the foot, and by this cruel and horrible pain they
John Suizen a Councellor of Hungary: and being arrived on the frontier, Suizen
at his return reported marvelous things of joy and mirth that the Turks made
for the return of this Lord. Besides the money by him disbursed, they gave
liberty to Captain Gorger, who was taken at Iula, and

Schuendy being now grown to good health from so long a sickness, and receiving
good strong troops, went into the field with his people, and besieged the
Castle of Zatmar, well furnished with all things, except men. This belonged to
Bec the Emperors capital enemy, and the principal author Zarmar taken by
Schuendy.
of the enmity and discord which was nourished between his Majesty and King
John. He seeing they came to besiege him, he secretly departed from this
Fortress, which being out of hand straightly besieged, in the end the
soldiers within yielded, their lives and baggage saved. This taking was upon
the 14. of January, and in that place was gotten great store of booty:
Schuendy freely setting at liberty the Becs wife, with all his moueables,
retained only for himself all the Artillery.

Maximilian was in the mean time to continue the Diets of his Estates, and
having been already at Bruna, and after at Troppa, to go from thence to Prage
in Bohemia, in which places he made his demands: and at Bruna it was
concluded, that in stead of the Nobility they should give him 1200. horse,
which his Majesty should send whither it pleased him: and besides that, the
Nobility should be bound to keep the limits of the country, when there should
be need thereof. He being arrived at Prage, he made his entry thereinto very
solemnly, being received by the Citizens under a Canapie, with great pomp and
magnificence. From thence he sent the Duke of Inuch his Councellor, with
certain other, to the Diet of Ratisbon. The Bohemians at the Diet held at
Prage, accorded that the succors before granted for three years should be
reduced into one only The Bohemians, Slesians, and Morauians do grant
succors to the Emperor.
payment, seeing that the appointed money for this effect should be committed
to custody into a certain place, and that these should not come into his
Majesty's coffers, except they were employed against the Turk. Besides, all
the Estates granted during the space of two years the succors which
follows: to wit, that all the houses being under the precinct of fees
belonging to Princes, Barons, and Gentlemen, as well Spirituals as fenditaries,
should pay for one year half a Dollor, except the public Bathes, the houses
and mercinaries a white groshe: those who put money to interest as well 15.
Dukedomes in Bohemia.
well armed for every reuenew of 6000. dollers, and 10. footmen for a 100.
subjects which should be under his fee. By this means the Emperor was
succored from all parts with men and money, to prevent any more a sudden

On the other side Schuendy after one siege, had yielded unto him by
composition Mourach taken by Schuendy.
their lives and baggage saved, the Castle of Mourach situated in Transiluania.
All these preparations, and this loss gave the Transiluanian sufficient matter
to think of: for that this Fortres was of great importance to him, being on
the way betwixt Polonia and Russia, from whence by this occasion he could not
draw any more succors, except with a long compass by Moldauia, which was a
very teadious and dangerous journey. After this taking, Schuendy went to
besige Hust a place of no less importance then the other.

These enterprises and executions gave vehement suspicion, that between the
Emperor and the Turk would never be any accord, although afterward both the
one part and other treated thereof: considering that in precedent years, by
reason of the same place of Mourach, all the negotiation of peace was broken
between Ferdinand and John: it being very likely that the Transiluanian for
the loss of these two places, would declare to the Grand Seigniour the
absolute loss of all Transiluania, and with all excite him to give him aid,
as it appeared incontinent. For the Basha of Buda failed not to send to the
Emperor that he should cause Schuendy to retire from Hust, and in the mean
time took council with his people to advise John, giving order to the
affairs of the war.

In this time Edward being in return from Constantinople, who the Emperor had
sent thither to treat of a peace, brought news that the Turk had given
charge to Portau Basha, and to the Belerbie of Greece to prepare themselves to
march into Hungary: but the same Turk having understood for certain, that
the Emperor would send his Ambassadors to negotiate with him, and to
determine the peace, he had hope that these would not hasten their voyage.
These Ambassadors were Antonie Verance Ambassadors of the Emperor to Selim
for peace.
Solymans Court in the quallitie and condition of an ordinary Ambassador, and
Tijffempach Counselor to the Emperor, both of them men endewed with good
understanding, and having the knowledge of diverse languages. These with a great
company departed from the Court to go to Constantinople, the Emperor not
omitting for all that to continue his Diets, to the end that

Then was celebrated that of Poson, in which after many complaints made by the
Hungarian Barons against certain Captains of garrisons, in the end it was
determined by common consent, that for this year they should pay the Emperor
150000. Crowns, which sum should not be Succors granted by the Hungars to
the Emperor.
drawn from any others, but of the families of peasants, in paying for every
one two Dollors: and besides every family should be bound to labor 12. days
in the frontier places: but in the year when any Diet should not be held, the
tax should at least be reduced to the half: that the Emperor Schuendy,
as well of wine as of beasts: that the Hungars not being received into the
Country of Austria, nor into the other provinces, might redeem the Castles
and towns engaged before by the King of Hungary: that the Solymans Court.

These Ambassadors arrived at Constantinople the 22. of August, and within few
days after visited the Bashaes of the Port (which we above said Mehemet,
Portau, Pialy, Achmat, and Mahomet: and the fourth of september, (being again
gone to see Mahomet Basha superintendant of all the Empire) they went with him
unto Andrionopoly, where then was the new Emperor. In this place the
conditions of peace were propounded, and after sundry disputations thereof, in
the Peace between Maximilian and Selim.
Ferdinand and Solomon.

The Ambassadors being returned to Vienna, they released and quitted many
things both of the one part and other, and new borders were limited between
the country of both parts. And upon this deed the Emperor sent Schuendy with
many other deputed to see the differences which might be upon those limits;
besides giving him charge to find the means to hinder the incursions and
insolences which the Turks made without any respect of the truce lately
decreed. George Tury Captain for the Emperor provoked with such courses,
after he had made complaint to the Basha of

In the mean time the Emperor for some suspicions conceived against some of
the principal of Hungary, caused the Hungars to be required (to divert the
practices, which John used in their behalf to draw them to him) to this, that
they would contribute to the pay of 5000. horse for the preservation of the
country: but they expressly denied this contribution, being moved at this,
that the vacant goods were no more sold amongst them, The Arch Bishop of
Strigonia Primate of Hungary.
The Emperor then for that time dissolved this Diet, and retired until
another time. On the other side the Transiluanian sought to the Basha of Buda,
thinking to demand aid of him, and to have of him means to recover that
which was taken from him by his enemies, of whom he then thought to have better
commodity, for that they were busied in the wars of Germany, and divided
amongst themselves. The Basha answered him that he could not do it without
the express command of his Lord, exhorting John continuing his determination
recovered certain Fortresses: and having drawn to him Guilassa a Hungarian
Baron, who was malecontent with the Emperor, he had of him Hust, a very
strong Castle, situated amongst the mountains of Salem, not being able to
induce the Turk to break truce with the Emperor.

His Majesty (having understood that Selim had sent an army toward Muscouia,
by Podolia, and Kiania (Provinces of the kingdom of Polonia) against the Duke
of Muscouia, who hindered the cutting which the Turk Hust yielded to King John.
This cutting was of this river Volga, within it of Don, called Tanais, the
better to bring the commodities which come by that river by the said river of
Don, even unto Constantinople by the great Sea.
Volga) fearing that under false intelligence it might turn against himself,
sent an Ambassador of his to Constantinople, by him to give Selim to
understand, how the Transiluanian, against the articles of truce, was in arms,
and caused it to be bruited abroad that he would assail Hungary: and upon
this he desired his greatness not to censure hardly of him, if he defended
himself, assuring him that though he had not given any consentment to such new
enterprises, yet he had given John: but if this enterprise was done with his
consent, he not knowing of his Maximilian complains to Selim of King John.
part any occasion thereof, he desired him that he would at one word tell him,
to the end he might justify his cause, or else freely to accept of war.
Selim answered him, that he had neither advised nor consented thereto, neither
for the one nor other; and promised him if the Transiluanian or Moldauian were
in arms to offend or disturb him, that both the one and other should be by
him punished.

The Emperor satisfied by this answer, afterward labored to do so Selim
threatens K. John.
to deprive him of his estate, if in that time he enterprised any thing against
the Emperor. The Hungars being thus remoderated and pacified

In this time the Emperor would never condescend to the persuasions of
Maximilian solicited by the Pope and Venecians to make war upon ye Turk.
the Venecians or Pope to make war upon the Turk, saying, he well knew that
in time matters would be pacified, and he alone should remain charged with
the burden of the war. The cause which moved the Venecians to stir up as
well the Emperor as other Christian Monarchs, was, that they might prevail
against the Turk, who had sent to them a Chiauss to demand the kingdom of
Cypress, as depending on the East Empire: and well knowing that they had not
forces sufficient to withstand so great a Lord, they did solicit the Pope that
he would give them aid, and in like Iacques Soranze a Venecian, a man greatly
esteemed, with charge to go further to the King of Polonia. But the goodly and
apparent reasons of this man could effect nothing with Maximilian, for the
only consideration which we have said: and faining himself ill at ease,
dismissed Soranze, breaking all hope to join Germany in this league. Selim on
the other part having some doubt that the Transiluanian would accord with the
Emperor, (although he was well assured of Maximilian, by reason of the truce
and many other businesses dispatched together) caused the town of Buda to be
fortified, and other his places of Hungary. The Pope not minding to be
directed with the first word, by the Maximilian had made, to the discourses and
persuasions which his Nonce had used to his Majesty: the Emperor to please
his Holiness, caused a Diet to be called at Spire, where having caused very
largely to be laid out the demands of the Pope and Venecians, with many
offers made to his Majesty by the Leaguers: after many aduices, it was
resolved

With this resolution the Diet was dissolved, in which no other thing was
Maximilian resigneth the kingdoms of Hungary and Bohemia to his son Rodolph.
done, but the voluntary yielding that the Emperor made to his son Rodolph
of the kingdoms of Hungary and Bohemia, with the consent of the Lords of both
the kingdoms: in regard of which, they made at Vienna and

Within a while after Sigismond King of Polonia sent his Ambassadors to the
said Rodolph, to congratulate with him for the honors which he had received of
his father: and within a very little while after this King (who was of the
ancient house of Iagellons) departed this world. This man was the The death of
Sigismond King of Polonia.
son of Sigismond the first of that name, and of Bonna the daughter of the
Duke of Millan, and had no other brothers, but only four sisters. He married
one of the daughters of the Emperor Ferdinand, who being dead, he married for
his second wife one of his subjects, a gentlewoman endued with exquisit beauty
and incomparable grace, by whom he had not any children. Iagellons but one
sister of the last deceased, not yet married. The succession of this kingdom
does not ordinarily fall to the kindred of the dead, but comes sometimes by
election, for which is made a great assembly, termed amongst them and the
Germans a Diet. In this there are present The manner of the election of a King
of Polonia.
fifteen Prelates of the kingdom: to wit, the Archbishop of Gnesna chief of
all, and Legate natus for the Pope in Poland, the Archbishop of Leopolde,
kingdom, and he of the Court have in this assembly places in the first rank.

This Diet whereof we now write, for the election of a new King, was appointed
at Varsouia. To it were come many Ambassadors from the greatest Princes of
Europe, some requesting and suing for their Masters, and others soliciting in
the behalf of those whom they would recommend. From Charles the King of France
there was first come thither the Lord of Lansac, Ambassadors from the King of
France pursuing in Polonia the election of Henry D. of Aniou.
well understanding the Slauonian tongue, and greatly experienced in these
Northerly countries; and after there came thither the Bishop of Valence, of the
house of Monluc, a good Orator, as also the Lord of Rambouillet. These men by
reason of their goodly speech and fair promises, setting out also the great
reputation that the Duke of Aniou (brother to Charles) had already gotten
through all the world, by the great armies which already he had conducted in
those young years wherein he was, did so well, that he for whom they spoke was
chosen King of Poland: and the election published, presently there was
dispatched a Lord of Poland to the said Duke of Aniou, Charles) held the town
of Rochell besieged. This Prince having received this gracious news, (which
The siege of Rochell.
tended nothing else but to the increase of his glory, because he saw that it
was extended to the uttermost parts of the world, as well by the proper nature
thereof, which is to fly with renown from one Region to another by passing
the seas, as also by reason of so many Northerly Princes, against whom
contrary to all men's opinions he carried away the credit and honor, to be
reputed the most valiant and warlike Prince of all) considering that this
siege, by reason of the strength of the town, and valiantnes of the soldiers
who were within, was to continue so long a time, that it might bring some Henry
trauaileth into Poland.
observe the conditions with which he had been chosen, and the laws of the
kingdom, without preiudicing nevertheless his successiue right to the Crown
of France, if it should so fall out; after he had amassed great store of money,
to the sum of two millions, as well to content those who had chosen him, as
to make his voyage, he departed from the Court, accompanied with the Queen his
mother, and with many other Princes and Lords The indiscretion of Count Palatin
of Rhein.
some discourtesie by this Lord, in showing him the picture of the deceased
Admiral of France, called Coligny, otherwise Chastillon, slain with many
other Lords of the pretended reformed religion in the town of Paris the 24. of
August the last precedent year, the which Admiral was always assisted by men
of war and counsel, sent by the said Lord to the wars, which for the space
of ten or twelve years were maintained in France for Religion.

As this man thought to brave this Prince, on the other side the Duke of Henry
at Henry received King of Polonia.
the beginning of the year entered into his kingdom, he being received
thereinto with great applause: and after having again sworn the observance of
the country laws, he received the tokens and royal Ensigns, according to
the ancient custom.

Almost about the same time, yet a little before Stephen, otherwise called
John, son of John the Vayuode, and King of Transiluania, departed this world,
without any lawful issue. By reason of this decease there began to The death
of John King of Transiluania.
break forth new troubles in Transiluania, because that the Turk procured
that this Province (which was commodious to him for the passage into John. On
the other side, Maximilian aspired to this kingdom, as well by the right and
inheritance of his Pretenses of Maximilian to the kingdom of Transiluania.
deceased mother, who had succeeded King Lewis her brother, as also by reason
of Stephens will and testament, who at his death had named him his heir, and
ordained that this kingdom should be yielded to him, pricked thereto perhaps
by remorse of conscience, or else fearing that it should fall into the Turks
hands, who made to him great suite therefore: which could not happen but to the
great damage of all Christendom. But the Barons of the country did not so
presently resolve upon that which they should have John) they banded against
his Imperial Majesty in manner of hostility, firmly resisted those who
favored Maximilians part, and who demanded that the testament of the dead
should be put in execution. These fears engendered amongst them great
diversity, which was an occasion long to delay their last resolution. But
chosen King should maintain himself in peace with the Emperor, they Stephen
Battor, the Stephen Battor chosen King of Transiluania.
principal Baron amongst them.

About this time the Emperor published the resignation which he made of the
kingdom of Hungary to the profit of his eldest son Rodolph, who the year
before he caused to come out of Spain, where he had soiourned a certain time
with the Catholic King his uncle. The crowning of him with many magnificent
and sumptuous ceremonies was made in the town of Poson. And for that such
things are notable and worthy to be known The crowning of a King of Hungary.
strange to them, I purpose to recite and write them in this history.

The place of Poson (which anciently was called Pisonium, because it was built
by Piso a Roman) being appointed for this pomp, all the States of Poson
called Pisonium.
the country were called thither. These being assembled, the day before their
enterie into the town, the Emperor and Empress entered by night into the
town in their Coaches with many lights and torches, accompanied with the
Prince Mathias and Maximilian their younger sons the 20. of September, not
minding no more then did the other Lords of their Court, to enter therein
publicly in the day time. The day following departed from Ambourg (otherwise
called Sopron) Rodolph, accompanied with his Ernestus, and many other Princes
and Lords. Before him departed Ambourg called Sopron.
out of the town (a league off) his two other brothers Mathias and Maximilian,
in whose company was the Archbishop of Strigonium Primate of the kingdom, who
had with him six Bishops followed of other Lords, of the Nobility and
Caualarie of Hungary. At the meeting, the Archbishop (to whom belonged this
charge) with a brief and elegant oration in Latin, after he had prayed to God
that it would please him to make this his entrance and coming prosperous and
fortunate for the peace, and comfort of his subjects, he promised to him in the
name of all the kingdom obedience and fidelity. The Prince answered him with
a modesty mixed with a sweet kind plumes made of white Peacocks feathers, that
covered all the body which Maximilian marched after these, having on his left
hand the Prince of Cleueland. After him marched Prince Ernestus, who had his
brother Mathias on his left hand, and Prince Ferdinand of Bauier on his right.
Behind came Rodolph in the midst of the Archduke of Austria his uncle, and
of Prince William of Bauier. After these Princes was to be seen the aforesaid
Archbishop with his Prelates in the midst of the Emperors guard. This new
King with this pomp was received without the bridge by the Germane Infantrie,
which was ranged in battle to the number of 5000. and of others 500.
soldiers who were for the guard of the Port, and in like sort of all the
people, who of all sorts of age and condition were gathered together to see and
receive this new King with great applause, and to conduct him to the
Archiepiscopall palace which was prepared for him. He went about evening to
kiss the hands of the Emperor and Empress, who embraced Charles, Prince
William of Bauier, Prince Ernestus, Ferdinand of Bauier, Maximilian, Mathias,
and the Prince of Cleue. On the left hand was placed John Dolfin the Popes
took their places appointed for them. But Rodolph entered into the Vestarie,
Stephen the first King of Hungary, and before him went ten Hungarian Barons
sumptuously apparelled, each one carrying a Standard in his hand, wherein were
represented the ten Provinces subject to this kingdom, although the most
part of them are possessed at this day by the Turk. These are they, Hungary,
Dalmatia, Croatia, Sclauonia, Seruia, Galisia, Rascia, Bulgaria, Bosnia, and
Lodomiria. After these ten followed five other Barons, the one of which
carried a Relic in token of peace, set in a round form of gold. The second
carried a Sword vndrawne in a crimosin velvet scabbard Stephen, and are among
the Hungars held in such regard, that they esteem him not for lawful King who
enjoys them not. These five Barons were followed by the new King, who had
upon his right hand the Marshall of the kingdom, who held in his hand the
naked Sword. With this train and company the King coming to the quire, two
Bishops came before him into the midst of the Church, to wit, he of Agria,
and Zagrabia, who after a few words conducted him (being in the midst of
these two) before the Archbishop, who was solemnly apparelled. At the feet of
him Rodolph kneeling, the Archbishop gave him his blessing, Te Deum: which
ended, the Archbishop returns to the Altar to end the Mass. That done, the
King in the same habit goes out of the Church, causing pieces of gold and
silver to be thrown to the people, and newly coined under his name: things. In
the mean time the Emperor after he had most affectionatly Maximilian and
Mathias behaved themselves valiantly; the one of them fought against a Spaniard
the son of the Spanish Ambassador, and the other against a Duke of Poland.
At night the Emperor made a most rich and sumptuous supper for all the
Princes, who all for reverence of the Emperor were bare headed, except the
King and Archduke Charles, who went before the King being placed by the
Emperesse.

This same year ended the truce between Selim and Maximilian. The The truce
between Selim and Maximilian expired.
Emperor perceiving no more strength to be in him, such as before it was, and
knowing his small forces, or else for some other consideration, Selim sought to
obtain of him a prolonging of the truce. But Selim not so readily
condiscending as Maximilian desired, the truce in that time expired: and
presently the Turks of the next garrisons failed not to put themselves into
the field, and to harrie and assail the frontiers, carrying away with Rodolph,
with Maximilian his Father, determined to erect a Fort between Poson and
Alberegalis, to restrain such incursions. The Turks well foreseeing that
which might happen by such a building, resolved not to suffer to be finished
before their eyes, a place which should be to them of too great importance, and
by the same means to hinder the deseignes of Rodolph. For this end having
amassed together their forces, which might amount unto 20000. men, they
suddenly assailed this Fort in a manner finished: and entering in by force, they
killed the garrison and all the laborers who worked there: and after they had
reuersed all that edifice, they lead with them from thence store of artillery
and other munition of war. Rodolph sent to Constantinople to complain to
Selim for Rodolph of the Crown of Hungary) having no less care of this
kingdom then he had before, and considering how greatly the losses which the
people received by these incursions were damageable, and that by this occasion,
arms with him for the defense of the whole nation. The Princes moved by his
persuasions, concluded to undertake this war with him, they all Succors
granted to the Emperor by the Germans.
judging that it was more expedient to make open war, then to remain always
in suspense and doubt. And upon this conclusion they gave order for necessaries
thereto.

In the mean time Charles King of France a long time vexed with such
continual troubles in his kingdom, or else because he had used too much The
death of Charles King of France.
excess in his ordinary exercises, in which too violently he passed the time,
or else by reason of some poison, as some said, dyed within a few days, even
then when his life was most necesarie for France, not leaving after him but one
legitimate daughter of him and his wife, named Elizabeth, daughter of
Maximilian. Henry his brother King of Polonia being advertised Henry King of
Polonia steals away, and comes into France.
of his death, made present instance to the Lords of Poland to permit him to
go into France to take possession of so great a kingdom, and to set things in
order there, promising them to return again within few months. The
Pollacques would not willingly grant to him that which he demanded:
nevertheless they answered him that they would consent thereunto, if so be
that for that effect a Diet should be assembled, without which they could
grant him nothing. In the mean time his Majesty gave order to lock up his
best implements and Jewels, and to depart secretly with all speed: and after he
had sent away before the Ambassador of remain without the presence of a King.
His Majesty desired him to stay Stephen Battor, a man of great experience, of
whom they had some fear, and not without cause. Upon such distrusts and with
such preparations they began both of the one part and other greatly to be
indamaged. But during such fears as the Hungars had, by reason of the Turk,
he already preparing to destroy The death of Selim.
of his time greatly periurious, barbarous, and wholly fraughted with
treachery, he being not come to this Empire but by deceits and falsehoods,
having induced his father to cause all his brethren to be massacred, as it was
afterward auerred: and having thus filled his house with homicides and
murders, he observed not any law or religion, but was drowned in all filthy
and vilanous vices whatsoever. This death happened then when the Polonians
Henry was peaceably possessed of the Crown of France, and that the time by him
prefixed, was expired many months already past) began to treat of the
election of another King. Henry being advertised of their intention, desired
the Electors and Barons of the kingdom that they would attend until a
certain time, in which space he promised to return to them, or else that he
would send them full commission to choose another, such as they would think to
be more commodious for them. To this request (being joined the threats of
Amurath the Turk) the Polonians contented themselves to stay until the
prefixed time. This passed, and at the last expired, the Diet was appointed at
Cracouia.

The Emperor Maximilian after that he was advertised that the intention of the
Polonians was not to remain without the presence of a King, began to negotiate
with them to cause himself to be chosen King amongst them. On the other side,
Amurath (who succeeded Selim) having understood Amurath the son of Selim
soliciteth the Polonians to choose Battor for their King.
the suites which the Emperor made, sent to the Pollacques, and advised them
to do nothing in that affayre which was disliking to him, and that he would
they should choose for their King one amongst them, or else Stephen Battor King
of Transiluania. And the more to astonish this negotiation of Maximilian, he
writ unto him by a Chiauss, that he and his brothers the Archdukes should pay
him tribute of all whatsoever they possessed, otherwise Maximilian chosen King
of Polonia.
Transiluania and Duke of Muscouia, which two perceiving themselves Maximilian
being advertised thereof, and foreseeing that he should draw upon himself so
many and so puissant enemies, and considering that he had not sufficient forces
to oppose himself against them, and especially against the Turk (who prepared
to thrust himself into Poland, being offended with this, that the Polonians
had so slightly regarded his aduertisements and messengers) fearing to trouble
himself in a war too dangerous for him and his, from whence very hardly he
could vntangle himself, made no great show of rejoicing at this election: but
laying aside the care which he ought to have had of it, fained as though he
knew nothing thereof, prolonging Maximilian made. Thus the Bishop of Cracouia,
many Polish and Lituanian Lords fearing the Turk, and other Princes their
neighbors, made choice of Stephen Battor for their King, hoping by this
election to appease the Turk, the Muscouite, and other Princes, who hated the
greatness of the Austrian house: Battor chosen King of Polonia.
and on the other side this Battor was a Prince of great valor. To this new
Albert Lasky Palatin would never consent, nor perform the homage which he
ought to this new King, and choosing rather to abandon his country and goods,
he retired out of the kingdom, with all those who favored the Imperial
party.

Now Battor knowing that he was chosen, went from thence presently into Battor
received into Poland.
to Polonia, and after he was crowned, he sent into diverse Provinces to notify
his election, and namely to the Emperor Maximilian, sending him word that if
in former time he had been to him a friend, and favored his actions, that for
the time to come he would yet honor him more, and that he would respect him
both as a friend and Emperor, and that he should not take displeasure

Maximilian (for all these goodly reasons and kind offers) would not be
appeased: but entering into choler, made sufficient appearance that this
election The King of Denmark and the Mulcouit make war in Polonia.
together, with certain of the Emperors forces, greatly endamaged by sea the
rivers of Liuonia, and having set foot on land at Plescouia, ran very far
into the country. Battor notwithstanding being received and crowned

In this time of the election of Battor, the Emperor appointed a Diet at
Ratisbone, to advise of means by which they might hinder that his people
should not be thus daily exposed to the mercy of the common enemy, who
continually molested Hungary. Afterward his Majesty demonstrated to
Maximilian demands aid of the Germans to make war upon the Polonians.
Succors granted to Maximilian.
was transferred to Ausbourg, in which he did so much, that the ordinary
succors for war was continued to him. The Bohemians offered him besides the
ordinary, 1500. horse; and the Hungars 300. Pistoliers, and 400. Harquebuziers
on horseback: and the Slesians 600. horse, 100. Pistoliers, and 800.
Harquebuziers on horseback. To these succors, offered themselves the King of
Denmark, the Duke of Saxony, Pomerania, and of Brandeburg. And in the end
there was concluded a league between the Emperor, the Kings of Denmark and
Swethland, the Duke of Saxony, A league against the Polonians.
the Duke of Muscouia, and the Dukes of Brandebourg and Pomerania, for defense
of the Empire, and inuading of Polonia, all these complaining for Battor, who,
that he might aspire to the Crown of Poland against them all, had presumed so
much under the protection of the Turk. Besides, they feared that he in regard
of the bond which he had to Amurath, would take arms against the Emperor: who
not content with this Maximilian sent to solicit the Sophy against Amurath.
league, sent as well in his name, as in the name of the King of Spain, his
Ambassadors into Persia, to excite the Sophy King of Persia, to make war upon
the Turk. This word King is called in the Persian language Scach, and the
Turks surname it Sophy, which we commonly think to proceed of this Greek
word Sophia, which signifies wisdom, which in the Ismael heretofore King of
Persia, for that he following his opinion or heresy, would teach that he must
cover his head with wool, because it was more vile and base then linen,
whereof the Turks make their Turbans. Battor having discovered the voyage of
these Ambassadors, caused them to be surprised in their journey, and to be
massacred: and sent to Amurath their Battor to be arested, and many other
Pollacques who then were in Germany and at Vienna: and sent to all the
christian Princes to require aid of them, seeing the Protestants of Germany
denied him such aid as the imminent peril required, for that his Majesty
would not condescend to the demands which they made to him for the affairs of
Religion.

In this Diet notwithstanding the reclamation and hinderance of some Electors
of the Empire, his Majesty caused to be declared his son Rodolph Rodolph the
son of Maximilian declared King of the Romans.
Emperor after him, and caused to be imposed upon him the title of King of the
Romans. This was then when the Muscouite Ambassadors arrived at the Court to
confirm the league made with his Imperial Majesty, their master being
greatly incensed against the Polonians, for that he was by them thus disdained.
These having presented to the Emperor many goodly presents, offered in their
masters name to his Majesty, all his ability to subdue Polonia. Maximilian
accepting these offers, thanked the Ambassadors for the good affection of
their Prince, reserving power to use his aid until time should require it.

Whilst he was in providing for all that which concerned the estate of the
next war, (his Majesty being suddenly taken with a vehement trembling The
death of Maximilian.
of his members, and with a great panting of his heart) he ended his days. He
was a Prince who well knew to preserve his Imperial dignity and the greatness
of his house. Having received the administration of the Empire, his father
living, the care which he always had in his mind, was to keep Germany in
peace, and in such sort to effect it, that it should not any more feel the
former calamities whereinto it was fallen. For this cause some seeing Germany
in so great repose, had a sinister opinion of him, as though he had too much
favored the Protestants. But these men did not consider that amongst so many
divisions and hazards as were already in France, Flaunders, and other
countries, it was not profitable for the Catholic party to add Germany
thereto, for fear least the rest of the Catholics might not be in

To this man succeeded in the Imperial dignity, Rodolph second of that name
his son, King of Bohemia and Hungary, a most Catholic and religious Rodolph
received Emperor.
Presently his Majesty commanded (the better to take away all hopes of change
from all his subjects in his hereditarie estates) that they should live
Catholikely: and caused to be made severe executions against those who Amurath
to demand truce, which without any great difficulty was accorded Truce
between Amurath and Rodolph.
to him; because that the Turk having had advertisement of the war which the
King of Persia prepared against him, and of the resolution of the Germans, who
had made a great leauie of soldiers and money upon every estate of the Empire,
to maintain war against him, could not any whit assure himself to be able
to make resistance in so many places, his Empire elsewhere Rodolph. At the same
time all the Christian Princes sent to his Majesty to congratulate with him
his new promotion in the Imperial dignity: and amongst others, Battor not
long before chosen King of Poland also sent his Ambassadors thither for the
same effect, knowing the release that Rodolph had made of his Ambassadors
while he besieged the rich town of Danzit, situated at the mouth of Vistula
upon the sea of Prusia, being of the demains Danzit besieged by Battor.
of Polonia, which then held of Maximilians part, the inhabitants then knowing
nothing of his death: but as soon as they were assured thereof, they
capitulated with their new King and yielded to him under condition, that the
Battor presently caused his Army to make head against the Muscouit, to recover
the places that the Duke had taken toward Liuonia.

During this business he omitted not to send to the Pope to acknowledge him as
sovereign Prelat of the catholic Church: and by the same means Battor sent
to acknowledge the Pope, and to seek for learned men in Italy.
sought through Italy for many Captains of valor, and other men of
knowledge, offering them great pensions and rich recompenses, as he manifested
Battor brings the Muscouits and Tartars to require peace.
so many times beaten them, that he constrained them in the end to seek peace
of him, even as Demetrius Duke of Muscouia for this effect solicited thereto
Pope Gregory the 13. of that name, using him as a mean to this Prince, to the
end that he might obtain it.

The Hungars for all this were never a whit the more at rest. For
notwithstanding the truce, Amurath (as these Princes are barberous, proud, and
covetous) caused to be stayed at Constantinople the Emperors Ambassador, who
at his new arrival brought not to him the accustomed Present. Rodolph willing
to revenge himself of this injury, commanded his people who were Ernestus his
brother, Amurath was greatly combered, ceased not nevertheless greatly to
molest them, and procured them much trouble) granted to the Emperor the
greatest part of his demands, and they all taking courage opposed themselves
so valiantly against the Turks, that many times they constrained them to
retire from them, and even to forsake a great part of the Country which they
Rodolph notwithstanding so happy success of his people, ceased not to send to
Amurath to complain of the great timeritie of the Turks, who had not any
respect to the truce concluded between them two. Amurath seeing himself to be
greatly combered with the Persian, accorded with Rodolph, that of the one and
other party Truce confirmed between the Emperor and Amurath.
should be deputed sundry persons to take counsel how they might pacify
those differences which might arise between them upon their frontiers,
touching the extention of their bounds.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE NOTABLEST THINGS AND MATTERS CONTAINED IN THIS PRESENT HISTORY
OF HVNGARIE.
A
ABraham Basha and his deseignes. 56. strangled. 57 Absolution of the Pope for
Ferdinand, and the murderers of George. 240 Accanges, adventurers. 45 Accord
between the Emperor Charles and Duke Mauris of Saxony. 192 Accord between
Ferdinand and John King of Hungary. 57 Accord between Izabella and
Ferdidinand. 109. 112 Achmeth Basha sent 3000. horse from Buda to take Queen
Izabella. 122. succoureth Drigall, besieged by the Palauicin. 218. joins with
Mahomet 220. flies before Duke Mauris. 233. aduertiseth Mustapha of the
treason which was prepared against him. 266. appeaseth the Turks mutiny for
the death of Mustapha. 269. confederate with Izabella. 273 A valerous act of
George Tury. 330 memorable acts of the women of Agria during their siege. 234.
235. siege of Agria raised. 236 Advice of Leonard Gnomsky for ordering of the
battle. 26 Advice of Radich Bosich for the ordering of the battle. 27
diverse Aduices for the preservation of the King in the battle. 26 Aga,
Captains of Ianisaries, taken by Dersfy. 296 Agria fortified by Castalde. 96.
assieged by Mahomet. 225. 232 Agrians resolved to sustain the siege. 233. 235
Aiduchs, Hungarian foot. 96. 120 Aiduchs defeated by the Turk. 183. 199
Aiduchs being druken assail Lippa, and there they are slain in great number.
143 Ainachschen taken by the Turks. 318 An Abbot prognosticating the death of
George. 168 Albe-grecque a Fortress, anciently called Taurinum. 14 Albe-iula a
capital town of Ortel. 13 Albe-iula the seat of Queen Izabella, invested by
Friar George. 83 Albe-iula fortified by Izabella. 99. assieged by George. 100.
rendered to him. 103 Albe-iula yielded to Izabella. 272 Alberegalis, the place
of Coronation and burial of the Kings of Hungary. 12 forty Burgesses of
Albe-regalis spitted by the Turks. 296 Albert Lasky wherefore he fled out of
Polonia. 284. and also chased by Ferdinand. ibid. Albert Lasky Palatin chose
rather to abandon his country, then to consent to the election of Battor King
of Polonia. 352 Albert Rosemberg, a seditious man. 305 Aldene master of the
Camp succoureth Ottomiall at Zegedin. 179. is therefore reproved by Castalde.
180. saves himself by great flight. 184. not careful, and of great
cowardlines. 195. 196. he determines to forsake Lippa, and to burn it with
the Castle. 208.could not be diuerted from his enterprise by any persuasion.
209. 210. 211. forsakes Lippa, and burns it with the Castle and munition.
212. flying into Transiluania, the most part of his people are defeated by the
peasants. 212 his process made against him. 232. 252. lead to Vienna. 259.
condemned to death, and after by favor saved. 260 Alexis Thurzon Treasurer. 9
A marvelous act of Alphonse Perez. 206 Alteburg taken by the Turks. 45 Aly
Chiauss sent by Solomon to pacify the Transalpinians. 237. he trauaileth the
peace of the Hung. with the Turk. 245 Ambassadors of France continuing in
Polonia the election of Henry Duke of Aniou. 344 Ambassador of Maximilian,
wherefore he was stayed at Constantinople. 355 Ambassador of Polonia to Henry
the 3. returning into France. 350 Ambassadors of Maximilian to Selim. 339
Ambassadors of Maximilian to the Sophy, massacred by Battor. 353 Ambassadors
of Ferdinand to Solomon for peace. 72. excluded from their demand. 73
Ambassadors of France at the Diet at Ausbourg. 281 Ambassadors of Lewis to
Christian Princes. 10 Ambassador of Maximilian to the Turk. 296 Ambassador
of the Turks kept secretly at Wyuar by George, taken by Castalde. 170
Ambassadors of Sigismond to Maximilian and John. 287 Ambassador of Solomon
sent to the Diet at Franckfort. 294 Ambassadors ought not to be detained in
place of prisoners taken in war. 295 Ambassadors to Maximilian in favor of
John. 287 Ambust Otting a Colonel slain at the assault of Vienna. 49 Amity
contains in it all virtues. 6 Amurath, son and successor of Selim. 351.
soliciteth the Polonians to choose Stephen Battor for their King. 351. caused
to be stayed at Constantinople Maximilians Ambassador: and wherefore. 255.
confirms the truce with Rodolph. 356 Andrew Battor leads forces to Lewis.
16. joins with Castalde against Izabella. 98 Andrew Battor and Peter Vichy
parley together. 112 Andrew Battor enters into possession of the low
countries of Transiluania for Ferdinand. 120. forsakes Lippa in great
confusion. 130. is created Vayuode of Transiluania. 187. demands to be
discharged of the estate of Vayuodship. 252. is defeated by the Turk. 257
Andrew Branday sent by Ferdinand to Castalde with succors. 128 Andrew Orbancz
Captain of the Castle of Strigonium, and his cowardlines. 32 Andrionopolis the
Rende-vous of the Turkish army going into Hungary. 44 Anthony Baron of Bourg
Nuncio from the Pope to Lewis. 11 Army of Ferdinands in Hungary. 62. defeated
by Solomon. 59 Army of Mahomet Basha in Hungary. 196 Army of Mustapha in
Transiluania. 65 Army of Pollacques for Izabella. 258 Army of Hungars ranged
in battle. 26 Army of the Turks in Hungary for the succor of Q. Izabella.
44. 62. 125. Army of King John defeated. 42 An Nauall army of the Turks
defeated upon Danubius. 47 An Nauall army upon Danubius for the Emperor. 321
Armies of Lewis and Solomon. 26 Artillery arrived at the Hungarian Camp. 25
Artillery of Roccandolph lost. 65 Artillery of the Turks choked by the
Agrians. 235 Artillery of the Turks sunk in Danubius. 47 Artillery of the
Hungars taken by the Turks. 33 Artillery carried from Buda to Constantinople.
38 Artillery of the army and the carriage thereof. 92 Artillery lost at
Sighet, in number 100. pieces. 329 Asapes, Turkish archers. 46 A general
assault given to Vienna. 49 Assaults of the Germans at Buda valiantly
withstood. 60 Assaults given to Vienna by the Turk. 48 Assiria changed the
Estate by the great Conjunction of the stars. 4 Atauiar taken by John. 286
Ausbourg a rich town. 369 Austrians demanded the exercise of the Confession
of Ausbourg. 336. which is denied them. ibid.
B
BAchie, the Metropolitan town of Hungary. 14 Bajazet son of Solomon and
Rossa. 262 Bajazet suspected of Solomon his father. 284 Balator a Lake. 12
Bullets anointed with fat cause death. 293 Balthazar Taish a Germane Lord, put
in chains with other slaves by the Turk. 74 Ban, what dignity it is in
Hungary. 8 Ban of Croatia brought succors to King Lewis. 25 Banmonostia, the
Episcopal seat of Sirmia. 14 Barons of Hungary, and their privilege. 18
Barons dead in the battle against the Turk. 33 Bartholmew Coruatte dismissed
by Castalde from his government. 253 Basha of Buda in succor of Izabella. 83.
retireth from George. 86. he succoureth Zegedin. 181. 182 Bashaes practiced by
Lasky in favor of King John. 43 Battle resolved, and reasons persuading
thereto. 24 Battle begun. 29 Battle lost by the Hungars. 33 Battle of the
Hungars against Ferdinand. 243 Battle between Raoul and Mirce, Vayuodes. 43
Batha the rende-vous of the Hungars. 29 Becche and Becherech Castles taken by
the Belerbey. 129 The Belerbey of Greece. The Belerbey of Greece came into
Hungary with an army for Solomon against Ferdinand. 125. summoneth Themesuar.
128. takes Becch and Becherech. 129. receives the wives and children of the
Rhatians for hostages, and takes Senath by composition. 130. also Lippa. 131.
besieges Solymos, and forsakes saketh it. 131. after that Themesuar. 132.
raises the siege. 137. arriueth at Vercherez to succor Olyman assieged at
Lippa: but too late. 160. returns with Mahomet Basha. 196 Belgrade a capital
town of Rascia. 12. the situation and renown thereof. 14 Bernard Aldene, see
Aldene. Bigihon a capital town of Croatia. 12 Binse, where Friar George was
killed. 163 Bonna, Queen of Polonia, retireth into Italy, and dies in bad
reputation. 274 Bornemisse a traitor to the Budians, executed. 60 Bossina
separated from Hungary by the river Sauus. 11 Burgomasters of the towns of
Hungary practiced by George to break the deseignes of Castalde. 154
Brassouia, a town of great importance in Transiluania. 188 Breme, a puissant
town. 299 Broderic Chancellor of Hungary. 7. 8 Bucentaure of Venice. 274 Buda
taken and burned by the Turk. 32. abandoned by K. John, taken by Ferdinand.
39.retaken by Solomon. 45. assieged by Ferdinand. 59. taken by the Turk with
deceit. 69 Bugeron, a Moldauian word, what is signifies. 244 Bugeron, pursuing
Mirce Vayuode of Transalpinia defeated by Raoul. 244 Bugeron, conspiring the
death of the Moldauian, is discovered, and flies into Polonia. 228. returns
and murthereth him. 130 Bursia, the sepulcher of the Turkish Emperors. 271
Bishops rich in Germany. 298 Bones in the forest and Wirtesies, witnesses of
the cruel massacre upon the Hungars. 35 a Bridge built by Traian at Seuerin.
13
C
CAdilischiers, intendants of the justice in Turkey. 332 Calamities of
Christians subject to the Turk. 118. 119 Cannoniers of what quality they ought
to be. 92 Captain of baggage in an army, and his charge. 94 Captains of
Pyoners, Spies, and Guides necessary in an army. 93 Captains dead in the
battle against the Turk. 33 Captains taken by the Turk before Drigall. 219
Carabogdania, otherwise Moldauia. 8 Caransebesse does yield to Mahomet. 207
Carinthian soldiers of Ferdinand disorder those of King John's. 41 Carpathes
hills. 12 Casson Basha pursues the rest of Ferdinands army. 65 Cassombassa
takes Lippa being abandoned. 216 Cassombassa prepares to enter into
Transiluania. 237 Cassombech defeated by the garrison of Deua. 254 Cassouia
accorded to Izabella for her being, and surety of her money. 109 Castellan of
Zaluoch worthy of note. 223 Ceculians, or Sicilians. 100 a Coffin covered with
black, showed by the assieged to the enemy, what it signifies. 234 Ceremony
for the funeral lamentation of the Emperor of Turkey. 332 Ceremonies for the
receiving of the grand Seigniour into Constantinople. 331 Ceremonies observed
in Spain upon them that are executed for their religion. 310 Chameria daughter
of Solomon and Rossa. 262 Charity makes us different from brute beasts. 6
Charles the 5. sent a Commander of an army to Ferd. to join with George
against Izabella. 90. is called back again. 261 Charles the Emperor and
Ferdinand save themselves from Ispurch. 191 Charles the Emperor renounceth the
Empire in favor of Ferdinand. 274. arriueth in Spain, and is there welcomed.
277. dies. 278 Charles the young son of Charles is instructed by him. 277
Charles the Archduke defeateth a Basha. 331 Charles Scheretin sent by Ferdinand
to Castalde with succors. 128 three Chariots full of Moldauian and Turks heads
sent to Castalde. 198 Chastisements of God how they may be stayed. 5 Chendy
Ference favors Izabella. 252. 227 Chep an Island taken by Mahomet. 63 Cheres
a river. 101 a Chiauss from Solomon in favor of the Queen threatens the
Transiluanians. 82 a Chiauss given to the Turk in exchange of Battors people.
257 a Chiauss sent from the Turk to treat of a peace with the Emperor. 294 a
Chiauss bringing news to Selim of the death of Mustapha, is executed. 272 a
Chiauss sent back into Transiluania in favor of George. 87 Count Christopher
Francapain malecontent, forsakes Hungary. 8 Christopher Francapain chief of
the Hungarish Army. 10. died in battle. 33 Clement Athanase raises arms
for Izabella. 260 Coach, from whence the name is come. 9 a Roman Colonie in
Hungary. 13. 16 Colombes of brass carried from Buda to Constantinople. 38
Colombes drawn by Trytons at the funeral of Charles the 5. 279 Colosuar
battered by the Germane mutiners. 296 Comar, an Island. 12 a Comissarie general
over victuals in an army, and his charge. 91.another Comissarie. 92 Comissarie
over the munition of Artillery, and his charge. ibid. Comissaries sent by
Ferdinand to receive the treasure of George. 175 Compassion of Solomon upon the
fortune of Lewis. 37 Count of Helfestain arriueth in Transiluania with an army
for Ferd. 187 Count Palatine his worthiness. 7 Count Palatine his affection for
the preservation of the kingdom. 15. 18 Count Palatine, and of his duty in
the battle. 27 Count Palatine showing the Kings person incourageth the
Hungars. 28 Count Salm enterpriseth upon Alberegalis. 295. takes many places
from the Turk. 322 Concauitie between the heaven and us. 1 Conditions of peace
propounded to Ferdinand by Solomon. 73 Council of the Inquisition of Spain.
310 Conservation of another and his own necessary for an Estate. 6
Considerations inducing Castalde to demand truce with the Turks. 239 a Cup of
gold of price and marvelous workmanship sent to Solomon by Ferdinand. 68 the
Crown of the kingdom saved. 32 a strange Custom at Torde between the
husband and wife touching adultery. 188 Custom of the ancients burying their
treasure. 214 Custom of the ancient Romans. 172 the Custom of such as are
assieged and be resolute therein. 234 Custom of Turkish Emperors. 37 Custom
of the Transiluanians in memory of revenge. 56 Custom of Transiluania to
gather soldiers of the country together. 127 Custom to present an
Ambassador to the Turk. 72 inhumane Cruelty of Mirce Vayuode of
Transalpinia. 241 inhumane Cruelty of the Turks after battle won. 33. 34.
35 Cowardlines of the Germane soldiers. 222. defeated. 224 Cowardlines of
Spanish soldiers. 216 defeated by the Turk. ibid. Cowardlines of a Spanish
soldier, who in the end killed himself. 184
D
DAlmas besieged by Ferdinands people. 102. is yielded. 104 Dalmatia. 12 Danes
and Muscouits war in Poland. 352 the river Danubius, and his beginning. 11
Danzic, a very rich town. 299 Danzic besieged by Battor. 355 Debrezen burned
by the Emperials, and for what. 292 the Defeat of Ferdinands army in Hungary.
64 Defeat of the Hungars by the Turks. 355 Defeat of the Moldauians and
Turks. 196 Defeat of 24000. on the Turk side by 12000. Christians. 243
Defeat of Turks at the siege of Agria. 234. 236 Defeat of Turks. 238 Defeat
of Turks by the garrison of Deua. 254 Defeat of Turks. 293. 294. 318. 322.
324. 326. 330 Defeat of Ferdinands people at Zegedin 181. 184 Defeat in
Valachia by the Vayuode. 284 Demetrius Duke of Muscouia requires peace of
Battor. 355 Discomfiture of Hungars. 31 Deua, a Castle of great importance. 213
Diet at Alberegalis for the election of a King. 38 Diet at Alberegalis by
Ferdinand. 42 Diet at Ausbourg. 281 Diet in Austria by Maximilian. 335 Diet
held at Colosuar, where the Queen yields the royal ornaments into Castaldes
hands. 113 Diet held at Colosuar by Castalde. 265. 266 Diet at Cracouia to
proceed to the election of a King of Poland. 351 Diet held at Egneth by Queen
Izabella. 99. broken by George. ibid. Diet at Franckfort for the election of a
King of the Romans. 285 Diet at Ispurch by Maximilian. 349 Diet at Possouia by
the Transiluanians. 253 Diet at Ratisbon by Maximilian transferred to Ausbourg.
ibid. Diet at Sibinio by Castalde. 128 Diet at Sibinio by Izabella. 273 Diet at
Spire by Maximilian. 342 Diet at Torde by Castalde and Battor. 187 Diet at
Wasrael by Castalde. 239 Diet at Vienna by the Emperor at Posson by the
Archduke Charles. 307 Diet of Transiluanians against Gritty. 54 the river
Drauns. 11 Drauns passed by the Turkish Army. 21 Drigall, a strong place. 215.
assieged by the Marquess Palauicin. 218 Dukedomes in Bohemia fifteen. 339 S.
Laurence Day. 278 Deceits of war. 217
E
EGneth, one of the principal towns of Transiluania. 99 Eiden yielded to the
Emperials. 288 Electors of Germany Ecclesiastical and Secular. 297 The seat
and place of the Imperial Electors in public acts: and their office. 302
Emeric Cibacchy Bishop of Varadin, and Vayuode of Transiluania. 39 Emeric,
Vayuode of Transiluania, and Lewis Gritty in dislike. 52. went to receive and
visit Gritty. ibid. slain by John Doce. 54 Emanuel Philibert D. of Sauoy
offered himself to go into Hungary against the Turk. 305 Emperors of Turkey
marry not. 263 Ensign Royal by whom it was borne. 28 Ensigns won by the
Turks from Castalde. 148 Epitaph of the Emperor Charles. 279 Erasme Teifle
defeated before Drigall. 219. taken and sent to Constantinople. ibid. beheaded.
ibid. Erdeu besieged by the Turk. 290. yielded by composition. 291 an Estate
come to his complete perfection, presently declineth. 4 Estremadure, a
Province whither the the Emperor Charles retired himself to end his days.
277 Executioners of George his death. 135. rewarded by Ferdinand. 176 Evil hap
never comes alone. 128
F
FAbian Schinach lead 1000. horse for Ferdinand to Castalde. 214 Field of
battle against the Turk. 26 Ferdinand. Ferdinand of Austria aspireth to the
Crown of Hungary. 39. enters into Hungary with an army. ibid. pursues
the Vayuode. 40. crowned King of Hungary. 42. demands truce and amity of
Solomon. 44. succoureth Vienna with men. 46 Ferdinand and John do accord. 57.
calls upon Queen Izabella for the passed agreements between him and the
deceased K. John. 59. besieges Buda. ibid. demands peace of Solomon. 72.
demands the inuestiture of the King of Hungary from Solomon. 73. accepts
the offers of George, and sends him succors. 89. writ to Charles the 5. to
have a General of an army with George against Izabella. ibid. desires the
Pope to make George Cardinal. 110. is made K. of Hungary. 116. ratifieth the
accords made with Izabella. 120. sends succors to Castalde. 128. soliciteth
the murder of George. 163. causes to be rendered to Queen Izabella that
which belonged unto her of the moueables of George. 176. answers to the
complaints which Izabella made by Lobosky. 192. fails in his promise to
Castalde touching the promised succors. 193. 194. is absolved by the Pope for
the death of George. 240. sends toward the K. and Q. of Poland to satisfy
Izabella their daughter. 256. is crowned Emp. 277. obtains succors of the
Imperial States against the Turk. 282. refuses audience to the Ambassadors
of K. John, because they called him King. ibid. dies. 295 Ference Bode
Lieutenant general for K. John, his valor, and speech delivered to the said
K. before the battle against Ferd. 40. taken prisoner. 41. dies. 42 duke of
Ferrara in succor of the Emp. 336 Fretor, a Lake. 12 Fires of joy at Vienna for
the taking of Hedin and Terouanna. 291 it is Flattery to sing out our praises.
4 Fogar assieged by Mustapha. 66. yielded. 67 Form of the election of a King
of Poland. 343 Fortune favors those who fight for the defense of their
country. 41 Fortune never begins her sports for a little. 225 Francis the
first King of France remembered of his promise. 10 Francis Bathian, Ban of
Slauonia. 8 Francis Chendy Ference, one of the greatest friends of George,
retained by Castalde. 169 Francis Chendy won by Castalde, appeaseth the
mutinous Sicilians for the death of George. 171 Francis Patocchy Governor of
Iula. 253 Francis Peren Bishop of Varadin, foretold the evil success of the
battle. 24dyed in battle. 33 Francis Nemethy a traitor and perfidious to
his pupil. 287. is slain at Tocchy. 288 Fumium, a town. 12 sumptuous
Funerals made for Charles the 5.by Philip his son. 278
G
GAla a Castle taken by the Hungars disguised in Turks apparel. 144 Guards of
Artillery for foot and horse in an army, and their charge. 92 Garrison of
Ezeck negligent. 15 Gaspar Casteluio governor of Themesuar. 163. slain. 202
Gaspar Raskay, one of them that the King was committed unto to be kept in the
battle. 26 General of the Artillery in an army, and his charge. 92 Friar
George. George the Friar, is chosen tutor of Stephen the son of the deceased K.
John: with a strange discourse of the life of the said Friar. 58. from a
coale-carrier became a Councellor of K. John, Treasurer, and Bishop of Varadin.
58. hinders the execution of the accord between Ferdinand and John, and
demands succors of the Turk. 59.does an act of a diligent Captain. 60
hinders the rendering of Buda. 61. fiereth the stables of King John, where
were retired a great number of enemies. 65. lead young Stephen to Solomon who
desired to see him. 69. is retained prisoner with the other Hungarish Lords.
70. is sent back again and confirmed in his estates by Solomon. 71. caused
Queen Izabella to be received into Transiluania, and there confirmed her in
her estates. 74. managing the treasure he began to forget himself, and to show
his covetousness, ambition, and ingratitude toward Izabella. 75. after the
complaints of Izabella to Solomon, and letters of the said Solomon, to George,
he for saketh Izabellaes part, and seeks to Ferdinand his enemy. 77. his
deceits and calumniations. 78. practices with the Transiluanian Lords, and
incampeth before Albe-iula, Izabellaes seat. 83. agrees with her. 84. his
arrogancy. ibid. armeth himself against the Turks called thither by Izabella
before their agreement. ibid. defeated (by Chendy his Lieutenant) the Vayuode
of Transalpinia. 85. marches against the Basha of Buda. 86. turns his Camp
against the Mold. Vayuod. ibid. confirms the peace between him and Izabella,
and constrains her to write to Solomon in his favor. 87. is by Solyma^
(dissembling the injuries offered to Izabella by him) confirmed in his estates.
87. nothing regards the aforesaid agreement, but accords with Ferdinand
against Izabella. 88. was almost drowned. 99. breaks the Diet at Egneth held
by the Q. ibid. besieges Albe-iula, and would the third time make an agreement
with Izabella. 100. accords again with Izabella. 103. takes Albe-iula by
composition. ibid. went to confer with Castalde (Ferdinands Lieutenant) against
Izabella. 104. his had disposition. 105. went to seek the Q. ibid. sent to
Castalde that he should come to him at Albe-iula to confer together. ibid.
made show that he thought the offers of Ferdinand to Izabella to be good. 107.
his means to break the agreements of the Queen and Castalde. 109. he causes
to be given to him the estate of Vayuode of Transiluania and Treasurership, and
other excessive demands. 109. 110. would be Cardinal. ibid. is made
Archbishop of Strigonium, after disswadeth the Queen from the accords made
with Castalde. 111. they agree again, and seals. 112 shamefully demands of
the Queen that she would commit the royal Crown into his government. 113.
acknowledges Ferd. for true Lord. 119 obtains the third part of the toll of
salt. 121. seeks again the favor of the Turk. 122. negotiateth with the
Bashaes. 125. amasseth an army against the Turk. 127. is suspected by
Castalde, and again consirmed in his estates. ibid. went to the Diet of
Sibinio, and showed his inconstancy. 128. receives a promise from the Pope
that he should be made Cardinal. ibid. joined his army with that of
Castaldes. 134. would lead the Vauntgard thereof. 135. showed the instabilitie
of his mind. 136. his subteltie. ibid. resolved to besiege Lippa held by the
Turk, and is made Cardinal. 137. by his ambition and other vices he became
odious to Castalde. 138. counsels Castalde to make truce with the Turk.
141. went through great importunity unto Lippa. ibid. showed himself at the
assault a brave and valiant Captain. 151. endeavors to save Olyman besieged
in the Castle. 154. 155. practices with the Burgomasters of the towns of
Hungary to break the deseignes of Castalde. 154. discovers his wicked
meaning. 156. assembled the principal Lords and Captains of the army, and
speaks to them, tending to save Olyman. 156. 157. 160. gave him means to
save himself, and speaks secretly in the night to him. ibid. practices
wickedness against Castalde. 161. gave to his people the goods of those of Lippa
who were found at the defense of it. 162. comes in a Coach with Castalde, and
arrived at Binse. 163. would go and hold a Diet at Wasrael to chase out
Castalde and his army. 164. his death practiced by Castalde. 165. is slain,
and by what manner. 168. his death revenged upon the executioners thereof.
ibid. his burial. 169 his moueables spoiled by his murderers, after restored
and committed to the custody of Ferdinands Treasurers. 174. all his treasures
are committed to the hands of Comissaries sent by Ferdinand. 175. the news of
his death is carried to Rome. 185. the authors of his death excommunicated by
the Pope. 186. who made information of his death. 231 George Basi sent to Lewis
by the Vayuode to understand his pleasure. 16 George of Paline Bishop of
Bosnia, sent to Paul Tomoree. 29. died in battle. 33 George of Scepusa
Colleague of Paul Tomoree in the army. 19. died in battle. 33 George of
Scepusa blamed by Solomon. 37 George Hossute Ambassador for Maximilian to the
Turk. 296 George Hossute Ambassador for the Emperor to Selim. 337 George
Pogghy-bragghy caused Ladislas to be poisoned. 39 George Tury valiantly
defended Pallota against the Turk. 319 a valerous act of George Tury. 330. for
which he is made Knight by the Emperor. ibid. Ghestez taken by Count Salm upon
the Turks. 323 Gottart and Maillat Commanders of the army against Gritty. 54
Gran a Castle where was rifled and stayed the moueables of Queen Mary. 32.
forsaken by the Captain. ibid. Griech-suueisneburg a Fortress. 14 Germans
defeated before Drigall. 219 Germans in garrison in the Citadell of Buda,
capitulate with the Turk. 45. are cut in pieces. ibid. Germans mutiny, would
seize upon Castalde. 196. are appeased, and 50. of them overthrown. 197. they
mutiny again. 230. 237 Germans cowardly soldiers. 222. defeated. 224 God
does chasten those whom he loves. 3
H
HAdao taken by John. 286 Haly Chiauss interposeth himself touching the peace
between Ferdinand and the Turk. 258 Haniball Cyprian only left of the
Captains of foot in the battle against the Turk. 33 Hedin taken by Charles
the 5. from the Frenchmen. 261 Henry the 2. joins with the Protestants 190.
retireth himself. 191 Henry D. of Aniou chosen King of Poland, goes thither.
344. is received King. 345. steals away and returns into France. 350.
promises the Polonians to return. 351 Henry Stampir Colonel sent to Schuendy
by the Emperor. 334 Hermenstat, a principal town of Transiluania. 102
Hierome Lasky receives King John flying. 42. goes to Constantinople in an
embassage for him. 43. aspireth unto Transiluania. 53 the History of the death
of Mustapha the eldest son of Solomon. 261 a memorable History of an
apparition that appeared in the Castle of King Lewis. 32 a History serves for
learning. 7 Hungars defeated by the Turks. 355 Hungars swear fealty to
Ferdinand. 116 Hungars to the number of 200000. lost, as well in the battle as
afterward. 33 Hungars seek peace with the Turks. 237 Hungars endeavor to
inuest John and Izabella in the kingdom. 225 a general description and
division of Hungary. 11 a particular description of Hungary. 13 Hungary and
France compared for their miseries. 4 Hungary filled with vices before the
wars happened therein. 3 an Hospital in an army under the charge of Priests.
94 Hune, a river. 12 Hust taken by Schuendy yielded to John. 341 the Heaven
proportioned of a Sphericall form. 1 the Heaven governs the world. 2
courageous Horses of Transiluania. 13 Horses appointed to save the King in case
of necessity. 26 Heads of Bishops dead in battle, presented to Solomon. 37
I
IAnisaries obedient at the signs of their Commanders. 267 Iauarin, a town.
12 Iauarin burned by chance. 333. repaired by Count Salm. 334 Iaycza, a
capital town in Bosnia. 12 John K. of Hungary. John King of Hungary
distributeth the honors and estates of the kingdom. 38. forsakes Buda, and
retireth into Transiluania. 39. flies into Polonia. 42. is received of Hierome
Lasky. ibid. offers tribute and homage to Solomon. 43. sent Lasky a Polonian
Lord to Solomon for succors. ibid. kisseth Solymans hands. 44. confirmed King
of Hungary by Solomon. 51. enters into suspicion against Lewis Gritty. 52
John and Ferdinand accord together. 57 the death of K. John of Hungary. ibid.
John son of the said John. John sorroweth, seeing his mother to give the
Crown to Castalde. 113. manifests not to consent to the Queen his mother.
114. betrothed to the Infanta Ioane the daughter of Ferdinand. 120. restored
into his kingdom. 273. warreth upon Ferdinand. 282. sent Ambassadors to
Ferdinand to accord their differences, and to demand the Insanta Ioane. ibid.
would not forsake the friendship of the Turk. 283. takes many places from
Ferdinand by the Turks aid. 284. 286. takes others. 288. is hindered in his
deseignes by a great inundation. 289. sent Ambassadors with the Turk to
Maximilian to treat of a peace. ibid. he was in danger to be stricken with an
Artillery bullet. 203. he caused many to be taken who favored Maximilian.
295. drew to him to the Hungars. 326. publishes a Diet at Tord. 317. went
before Solomon with rich presents. 319. besieges Tocchay, taken by Schuendy:
after that raises the siege by reason that the Tartars mutined. 334. over
throws them: after it is besieged by them together with the Turks. 335. his
death. 357 John Baptiste Castalde. John Baptiste Castalde is chosen by Char.
the 5. to go into Hungary with Friar George against Izabella. 90. is
instructed by Ferdinand how he should carry himself to the said Friar. 91.
gave instruction for the conduct of an army. ibid. marches into Hungary. 95.
causes Agria to be fortified. 96. enters into Transiluania. 98. 102.
industriously deceives the Marquess of Balasse. ibid. besieges by his
Lieutenants Dalmas a Castle of the Queens ibid. takes Dalmas by surrender.
104 conferreth with George. ibid. went to seek him at Albe-iula, meanly
accompanied. 105. from thence went to seek the Queen, and declared to her his
charge. 106. speaks to her without Georges priuitie. 107. writ to Ferdinand
to make George a Cardinal. 110 receives of Izabella the Crown and other
royal ornaments in Ferdinands name. 115. sent them to Ferdinand. 116.
receives oath of the Hungars fidelity. 116. 117. causes places to be
fortified. 121. and to pay the tribute due to the Turk. 122. leauieth
soldiers to oppose himself against the Turk. 125. his diligence, and
suspicion toward George. 127. holds a Diet at Sibinio. 128. suppresseth and
punishes the tumult happened at Brassouia. 133.he speaks unto the Lords and
Captains of his army. 134. shows himself wise and patient in the behalf of
George. 136. conceiueth a mortal hate against him. 138. receives
advertisement from Ferdinand to put him to death. 139. went in the night to
seek George in his tent. 140. besieges Lippa. 141. makes a breach. 145. gave
an assault. 147 is repulsed with great loss. 148. redoubleth the assault. 150.
carries the town. 152. besieges the Castle. 153. he was obstinate at this
siege against the liking of George. 154. would not receive Olyman but to his
discretion. 155 contradicted and opposes himself against George minding to
save Olyman. ibid. determines to put Friar George to death. 159. uses
courtesy and liberality to an honest woman spoiled by George. 162. arrived at
Binse. 163. sent with all speed Sforce Palauicin, and other Spanish Captains.
164. communicates to him his enterprise touching the death of George. 165.
causes him to be slain. 167. after buried. 169. caused the moueables of
George which were taken away by his murderers to be restored. ibid. caused
the Turks Ambassador to be taken, who was kept secretly by George at Wyuar.
170. went to Seghesuar to sound the liking of the Sicilians for the death of
George. 171. receives of them the oath of fidelity. ibid. receives into the
obedience of Ferdinand all the places which held for George. 170. soliciteth
Ferdinand to have succors against the Turk, who prepared himself. ibid.
caused to fortify his places. 175. commits the treasures of George into the
hands of Comissaries. 175. is very well recompensed for the murder of George.
176. furnishes Lips and Themesuar of new garrisons. 181. sent Count John
Baptiste of Archo to command at Brassouia, and to defendit. 189. soliciteth
Ferd. to have succors against the Turk. 193. makes preparations to resist
him. 196. retireth from Colosuar to Torde to avoid the fury of the mutinous
Germans. 197. sent succors to Themesuar which was besieged, and marches
against the Moldauian. 197. causes him to retire in disorder. 198. sent new
succors to Themesuar, the first being defeated. 199. incourageth the Hungars
amazed for the loss of Themesuar. 208. is advertised of Lippa burned and
forsaken by Aldene, which he gave Ferdinand notice of. 213. retired himself to
Sassebesse, and fortifieth it. 214. ransometh the Palauicin for 15000. Ducats.
220. receives great displeasure for the loss of Zaluoch. 225. foreseeth a
revolt of the Hungars and Transiluanians. ibid. for which he provides remedy.
228. consents to the death of the Moldauian. ibid. discovers a conspiracy
against himself. 230. his counsel not being believed, he loses a brave
occasion to defeat the Turk. 236. consents to the peace with the Turk.
237. minding to oppose himself against the deseignes of Cassombassa, the
Germans mutiny against him. ibid. is forsaken by the Colonel of the men of
war of the country. 238. gives means and succors to Mirce of Transalpinia
to recover his kingdom 241. arriueth at the Diet of Wasrael, and confirms
them against the Turk. 251. follows the pursuit of Aldene. 252. dismisseth
Duke Mauris. 254. aduertiseth Ferdinand of the diligence of the Transiluanians
to cause Izabella to return again. 256. held a Diet at Colosuar. 257.
recouereth out of the Turks hands Battors people. ibid. returns toward
Ferdinand. 259. is calumniated, after recompensed for his services by
Ferdinand. 260. is recalled into Flanders by Charles the 5. and went thither to
him. 269 John Alphonse Pescaire carried the Crown of Hungary to Ferdinand. 116
John Ardech sallied forth of Vienna to skirmish, lost his Cornet. 47 Count John
Baptiste of Archo commands in Brassouia. 189. stays the Moldauian by
skirmishes. 197. overthrows troops of Moldauians and Turks. 198 John
Bornemisse governor of K. Lewis. 9 John Chendy Lieutenant of George, defeateth
the Transalpinian. 85 John Doce enemy of the Vayuod of Transiluania, and the
reason. 52. provoke Gritty against Emerick. 53. wickedly kills the Vayuode
of Transiluania. 54. is torn in pieces. 56 John Dragfy Preuost of the Kings
house, bore the Ensign royal. 28. dyed in battle. 33 John Hedek Comissarie
of the Artillery. ibid. John Kalay one of those to whom the King was committed
unto to preserve him in battle. 26 John Oberdansch Ambassador for Ferdinand
to Solomon. 44 John Salanze Izabellaes Ambassador to Solomon against the
practices of George. 79 John Statile sent to the Vayuode with George Basi. 17
John Tahy, and John Banfy, principal Lords of Slauonia, in succor of Lewis.
25 John Zapoly Count of Scepusa, and after King of Hungary. 7. aspireth to the
Crown. 38. chosen King. ibid. John Zerechen in succor of Lewis. 26
Indignities of Turks toward Christian Provinces which he subdueth. 119
Information upon the death of Friar George. 231 Inquisition of Spain by whom
invented, and the manner thereof. 310 Instruction of a Turkish Emperors son.
265 Instruction for the conduct of an army, and entertainment of it. 91
Inuestitures of Fees given by the Emperor to the Princes of Germany: and
touching that which is due therefore. 307 Izabella. Izabella daughter of
Sigismond King of Polonia, mother of Stephen, Tutresse and Gouernesse of
Hungary, after the death of King John her husband. 58 is put in mind by
Ferdinand of the accords passed between him and the deceased King John. 59.
which she refusing is besieged by the said Ferdinand within Buda. ibid. she
determines to yield Buda. 61. is succored. ibid. receives, and offers
presents to the Turk. 62. sent to him her son Stephen. 69. writ to him in
favor of the Hungarish Lords which he held prisoners. 70. is sent by Solomon
into Transiluania, and forced to forsake Hungary. 71. her constancy. ibid. is
with much ado received into Transiluania. 74. after long patience she
complains of George to Solomon. 76. being advertised of the conference of
George with Nicholas Salm, she sent back to Solomon against their practices.
79. gathers forces against George. 80. is forsaken of the Transiluanians, and
for what. 83. accords with George. 84. confirms him, and against her liking
writ to Solomon in favor of George. 87. provoke the Transiluanians against
George. ibid. causes a Diet to be held at Egneth. 99. it being broken by
George, she retireth with her son to Albe-iula, after that to Sassebesse. 99.
sent the Marquess of Balasse to hinder the passage of Castaldes coming to
join with George. 102. she accords again with George. 103. sent to visit
Castalde. 105 spoke secretly to him, and complains of George. 107. submits
her self to Ferdinand. 108. accords with him. 109.speaks again to
Castalde, and accuses George to him. 111. dismisseth her self from the
kingdom and royal ornaments, and commits them into the hands of Castalde.
113. departs the kingdom. 120. her misery. 122. arriueth at Cassouia. 123.
after the death of George requires of Ferdinand the moueables of George which
he had taken from King John her husband, and demanded the accomplishment of
that whic he had promised her. 176. she complains of Ferdinand to the King
and Queen of Polonia. 192. 226. accepts the offer of the Vayuode of
Transalpinia, and seeks again the Turk. 227. is succored by him, and the
principal of the country. ibid. practices her return into Transiluania.
252. is solicited by the Transiluanians to return. 256. causes certain
places to be surprised. 260. she reestablisheth her self in her kingdom, and
chaseth out Ferdinands people. 272. recompenceth those who had not forsaken her
part. 273. banisheth by the commandment of the Turk the new sects. 278 Iula
besieged by Solomon. 325. taken. 330 Julius the 3. excommunicateth the
murderers of George. 186 Iule Salazar sent by Ferdinand to Castalde to cause
George to be killed. 139 Julian de Carleual planted himself the first at the
assault of Lippa, and carried away the guerdon by Castalde. 148 Justice saleable
in Hungary. 3
K
KEretsken excuses himself by writing, for the yielding of Iula. 337. is
cruelly put to death by those whom he had badly used. 338 Koteze, wherefore so
called. 9 Krasso, a poole or marrish. 20
L
LAdislas Cheretsken yields Albeiula by composition to the Turk. 329 Ladislas
Endef induces the Saxons and Sicilians to acknowledge Ferd. 119 Ladislas a
Macedonian Bishop of the five Churches. 11 Ladislas Salcane Archbishop of
Strigogonium, Primate of Hungary, and great Chancellor, yields up the royal
Seal. 9. died in battle. 33. blamed by Solomon for his covetousness. 37
Ladislas poisoned the day of his marriage. 39 Largess due to the Ianisaries by
the new Emperor. 332 Largess done at the consecration of Rodolph K. of
Hungary. 348 Lazare Schuendy. Lazare Schuendy Lieutenant general in Hungary
for Maximilian. 287. put his army in the field. ibid. besieges and takes
Tocchay and other places. 288. 334. receives new succors from the Emperor.
291. burns Debrezen for delivering victuals to the Turk. 292. defeateth the
garrison of Moncat. ibid. is taken with an agew. ibid. kills 4000. Turks.
293. writ to the Lords of Hungary against the letters of King John. 317.
assiegeth and takes Zathnar. 338. after that Mourach, and besieges Hurst. 339
Legates from the Pope to Charles the 5. and the King of France. 274 Leonard
Gnomsky a Polonian, Marshall of the Camp. 18 Leonard Gnomsky delivers his
mind touching the ordering of the battle. 26 Letters of Solomon to Andrew
Battor. 254. 255 Letters of Charles the Emperor to the Cardinal of Mentz. 274
Letters of Solomon to George the Friar upon the complaints of Izabella. 77
Letters from King John to the Hungarish and Transiluanian Lords. 317 Letters of
Schendy to the contrary effect. ibid. a League against the Polonians. 353
Lippa and Themesuar towns of importance. 121 Lippa yielded to the Turk. 131
Lippa, and his situation. 141. besieged by Castalde. 142. bravely maintained
the assault. 147. 148. taken by assault of Castalde. 152. committed to Aldenes
custody. 163. cowardly forsaken, and burned by Aldene. 212. taken again by
the Turk. 215 Lords dead in the field in battle against the Turk. 33 Lewis
the 2. Lewis the 2. King of Hungary and Bohemia, and his birth. 7. the
qualities of Lewis. ibid. Lewis assembleth the Estates to advise for the
defense of the kingdom against the Turk. 10. demands aid of Christian
Princes. ibid. goes into the field. 15. sent back George Basi to the Vayuode
after instructions. 17. sent letters and posts into diverse places to hasten the
succors. ibid. arriueth at Tholne. 18. Lewis in choler amongst his Council,
and his brave resolution. 19. distressed touching the resolution of the
battle. 21. commands all the Counselors to resolve upon battle, or else
to discampe. 23. his forces against Solomon. 26. he was committed to three
notable men during the battle. ibid. the loss of him. 30. he was found dead.
31. he was borne without skin. 32. buried. 38 Lewis Gritty Duke of Venice
with Solomon aydeth King John with his favor. 45. remains at Buda with K.
John. 51. is recalled by Solomon to Constantinople, after sent back into
Hungary. ibid. makes friendship with the Vayuode of Moldauia. 52.
enterpriseth upon Transiluania. ibid. laugheth beholding the head of Emeric.
54. his conscience reproving him, he confesses the innocent death of Emeric.
ibid. retireth himself to Megest. ibid. is besieged by the Transiluanians. 55.
forsaken of his friends, thinking to save himself is taken, and committed to
Francis Chendy to cause him to be put to death. 56. his children beheaded.
ibid. Lubec, a rich town. 299 money of Lysimachus found by peasants. 214 the
Love of our country is of great efficacy. 235 germane Lords enter into Vienna
to defend it. 46 hungarish Lords conducting Stephen to Solomon, are retained by
him. 70. set at liberty. 72 hungarish Lords stir up Ferdinand to make war
against King John. 39
M
MAgdebourg, a puissant town. 298 Mahomet Basha sent to the succors of Queen
Izabella against Ferdinand. 61. incampeth by Roccandolph. 62. takes the I Will of
Chep. 63 Mahomet Basha Lieutenant general for Solomon against Transiluania.
187 arriueth with a puissant army. 196 besieges Themes. 197. capitulateth
with Losonze. 205. he uses him with great perfidiousnes, after he had yielded
Themesuar. 206. takes Caransebesse into his protection. 207. is advertised
that Lippa is abandoned, and sent to take possession thereof. 215. takes his
journey toward Hungary. 218. besieges Zaluoch. 220. 221. takes it, being
forsaken by the garrison. 224. besieges Agria. ibid. 232. summoneth the
Castle. 234. after thirteen assaults raises the siege. 236. retireth himself
out of the kingdom. 239 Mahomet the son of Mustapha advanced in recompense
of the innocent death of his father. 272 Lieutenant general of an Army, what
assistance he ought to have with him. 91 Master of the post necessary in an
army. 94 duke of Mantua in succor of the Emperor. 336 Marata, the sepulcher
of Solomon. 332 Marc Anthony of Ferrara Castaldes Secretary, killed George.
167 Marie sister of the Emperor Char. the 5. Queen of Hungary. 7 Marie gave
sums of money out of her Exchequer to leauie people. 17 Marie the Queen
retireth her self. 32 Marie daughter of Charles the Emperor married to
Maximilian King of Bohemia. 128 Marie Queen of Bohemia obtained pardon for
Aldene. 260 Maromarusia, a Province. 12 Marosse, a river. ibid. Maroth, and the
great murder of Hungars happened in it. 35 Marquess of Balasse in service of
Izabella. 102. pursues Olyman saving himself from Lippa. 160. is wounded with
a harquebuze shot. 161 Martelots, wicked peasants. 323 Martiane, a forest. 11
Martin Rostan in France with an army for the Emperor Charles. 191 Mathias
Lobosky sent by Queen Izabella to Ferdinand. 193 Matthew Nagh, of mean
condition, defended the Castle of Strigonium against the Turk. 32 Mauris Duke
of Saxony rises against the Emperor Charles. 190 Mauris came to Ispurch to
surprise the Emperor and Ferdinand. 191. they do accord. 192 Mauris Duke of
Saxony arriueth in Hungary with an army for Ferdinand. 232 D. Mauris
dismissed. 254 Maximilian. Maximilian son of Ferdinand chosen King of the
Romans. 285. is made King of Hungary. ibid. prepares himself to make war
upon K. John. 286. treats of peace with the Turk. 289. sent succors to
Schuendy. 290. 291. celebrateth the funerals of his father. ibid. prepares a
new army against the Turk. 292. sent Ambassadors to the great Turk to
continue the treaty of peace. 296. publishes a Diet at Ausbourg, to request
succors against the Turk. 297. came himself before the Elector of Mentz
coming to the Diet. 302. his demands in the Diet. 305. the offers which are
made him for succor. 306. commands the Kings of Swethen and Denmark to lay
aside arms. 306. gave to Princes the inuestiture of their fees. 307.
dismisseth the Diet, and trauaileth to another Diet at Vienna. ibid. the
ordinances which he made. ibid. commands prayers at certain hours at the
sound of a bell, and forbids all manner of sports. 323. declares in his
army Ferdinand his brother to be his Lieutenant general. 334. receives
certain news of the death of Solomon, and the coronation of Selim. 333
dismisseth his army, and retireth himself to Vienna. ibid. calls the
Estates. ibid. made his entry into Prage, and obtains succors against the
Turk. 350. 351. sent Ambassadors to Selim for peace. ibid. obtains it. 352.
complains himself to Selim of King John. 353. is solicited by the Venecians
and Pope to make war upon the Turk. 354. yields the kingdoms of Hungary
and Bohemia to his son Rodolph. 355. pretends succession of the kingdom of
Transiluania after the death of King John. 357. seeks again Selim to obtain
a prolonging of truce: which he could not. 361. obtains succors of the
Germans against the Turk. 362. sueth for the Crown of Polonia. 364. is
chosen K. by his partakers. ibid. takes not possession of the kingdom for
certain considerations. 365. is angry hearing the election of Battor. ibid.
demands succors of the Germans against the Polonians. 366. sent to
solicit the Sophy against Amurath. ibid. his Ambassadors massacred by Battor,
he causes those to be staid of Battors, and many Pollacques. 367. dies. ibid.
Medals of gold of Lysimachus found by peasants. 214 Medals of gold of Ninus and
Semiramus. ibid. Megest shut the Ports against Lewis Gritty, and for what. 55
Mehemet Basha very advised and faithful to the successor of Solomon. 327
concealeth the death of Solomon. ibid. Melchior Ballassy for Maximilian against
John. 286 Moueables of Mirce of great price, won by Raoul. 244 Moueables of a
Cardinal dying without will belong to the Pope. 186 Murderers of George
excommunicated. ibid. absolved by the Pope. 240 Mines discovered. 47 Mines of
the Germans at Buda blown up. 60 Mines of gold, silver, and copper in
Hungary. 14. in Transiluania. 13 Mines of gold, silver, and iron in
Transiluania. 101 Mines of salt, gold, and silver in the Bishopric of
Saltsbourg. 298 Ministers of the Church, men of war in Hungary. 3 Mirce
(Vayuode of the Transalpinians) offers himself to Izabella to place her
again in her kingdom. 227. defeated and chased by Raoul. 240 description of
Mohacz, and place of battle. 13 Mohacz the place where the Hungars were
defeated. 36 Moldauia and Transalpinia, parts of Valachia. 13 Moldauia named by
the Turks Carabogdania. 8 Moldauia, a Roman Colonie. 100 Monastarie of Hermits
whither retired the Emp. Charles to end his days. 277 Muscouits and Denmarks
make war in Polonia. 365 Mourach taken by Schuendy. 351 Means to encourage
soldiers to an assault. 147 Means to discover a mine. 47 seven Muets
executioners of the Grand Seigniours will. 238 Mufty, or Muplety, chief of the
Turks Priests. 271. 333 Mustapha makes war in Transiluania. 65 Mustapha the
eldest son of Solomon banished into Amasia. 69. the history of his death.
261 Mustapha at the commandment of his father went to seek him. 266. is
strangled. 268. known to be innocent. 272 Mustapha Basha sent into
Transiluania in succor of Queen Izabella. 62 Musulmans very superstitious.
267
N
NAndor-Albe, a Fortress, anciently Taurinum. 14 Nazadiez, vessels. 18 Newstat
taken and retaken many times. 296 Nicholas, Captain of Aiduchs, a valiant man.
242 Nicholas Esdrin Count of Serin. 290. governor of Sighet for the Emp. 325.
slain at the 13. assault of Sighet. 328 Nicholas Gerendy Commissioner for the
money leauied of the one half of the Ecclesiastical treasure. 11 Nicholas
Count Salm chief of the Hungarish army. 10 Nicholas Salm Ambassador for
Ferdinand to Solomon. 72 Nicholas Salm, Lieutenant for Ferdinand in Hungary,
parlieth with Friar George. 77 Nicholas Serpietre joined with Peter Vicchy
against George. 80. is defeated by Varcocce. 81. sharply checked by his wife.
82 Nicholas Tharczay, bold and faithful to his King. 27 Nobility
insupportable in Hungary. 3 Noremberg, an Imperial town, governed by the
Nobility. 398
O
OFen a new name of Buda. 15 necessary Officers in an army. 91 Offers of
Ferd. to Q. Izabella. 59. 107 Oliman a Persian in succor of Queen Izabella.
62 Oliman commands at Lippa, maintains the assault, and repulseth Castalde.
147. 148. begins to recoyle. 152 saves himself within the Castle. 153
indureth extreme famine within the said castle of Lippa. 155. he would yield
by composition. ibid. he saves himself by means of George. 160. pursued by
the Marquess of Balasse. ibid. joins with the Belerbey. 161 Operstolph
principal Captain of the Transiluanian Caualarie. 294 the common Opinion in
Hungary touching the Royal Crown. 116 a reproachful Orator. 31 Ordinance
made in Germany touching the diversity of Religion. 308 Ordinances made in
Austria to draw succors against the Turk. 307 Ornaments of the Kings of Hung.
103 imperial Ornaments sent to Ferdinand by Charles. 274 Ortell, a Province.
13 Ottomiall a Hungarian takes Zegedin from the Turk. 177. succored by
Aldene. 179. defeated by the Turks. 199 Ourestolph succoureth Ottomial at
Zegedin. 180
P
PAllotta well defended against the Turk. 319 Pannonia, a part of Hungary. 11
Pannodacia, anciently so named Transiluania. 13 Papau, a Fortress. 214 the
Pope soliciteth the Emperor to make war upon the Turk. 342 Paul the 4.
refused to ratify the election of Ferdinand. 278 Pappacoda entertaineth Bonna
Q. of Polonia, and enjoys all she has. 274 Patocche, a Hungarian Lord
reenforceth at his proper charges the army of Ferdinand with horse and foot.
143 Patocche governor of Iula. 152 Paul Banchy, and his advice upon the
ordinance of the battle. 27 Paul Banchy Captain of George his guards. 169
Paul Banchy Viceuayuode. 253 Paul Tomoree Archbishop of Colocense, a gray
Friar, governor of Sirmia, and his valor. 8. drawn by force out of his
Covent. ibid. is made chief of the Hungarian army. 19. counsels the fight.
24. is slain in battle. 32 Paul Tomoree blamed by Solomon for his
imprudencie and rashness. 37 Paul Veidner a Physician, of a Jew became a
Christian. 294 Paul of Zaras undertakes to keep Lippa against the Turk. 209.
218 Perias, a strong Castle. 238 Persons appointed to preserve the King in
battle. 26. sent to discover the enemy, return not. 31 a great Plague in
Transiluania. 272 Pesthe taken by the Turks. 65 Petrouar, otherwise Varadin
Peter, taken by the Turk. 17 Philip Count Palatin enters into Vienna against
the Turk. 46 Philip More Bishop of the five Churches, dyed in battle. 33
Philip went to seek the Emperor Charles his father. 277 Philip made a
sumptuous funeral for the Emperor Charles his father. 278 Peter Chendy
excuses himself to Ferdinand, upon the insurrection of Transiluania. 272
Peter Peren Governor of Themesuar. 8 Peter Peren highly esteemed of Solomon.
37 Peter, Vayuode of Moldauia, friend of Solomon and Lewis Gritty. 52. goes
into the field in favor of Q. Izabella. 62 Valor of Peter Vicchy, repulseth
the Germans entering into Buda by a posterne gate. 61 Peter Vicchy Governor
of Transiluania. 71. his ingratitude and pride toward Izabella. 74. takes
arms against George. 80. is defeated. 81. conferreth with Andrew Battor. 112.
yields to him the low countries. 120. succoureth Ottomiall and Zegedin. 180.
is cut in pieces by the Turk. 181. succoureth Izabella. 227. 252. accords
with the Turk, and rises for Izabella. 260 Pyoners in an Army, and their
charge. 93 Places forsaken by the Captains, and saved by the country men. 32
Podolia spoiled by the Tartars. 335 Policy held in the Diets of Germany. 299
Portau Basha in aid of John. 334 Posegan divides Hungary from Sclauonia. 11
Poson, a town of the coronation of the Kings of Hungary. 346 Poson, a noted
Fortress for the defeat of the Turkish Nauall army. 47 Poson, whither Queen
Mary retired unto. 32 Polonians in succor of Lewis. 18. for Izabella. 258
Parlience of peace between K. John and Ferdinand. 282. comes to nothing 283.
between Maximilian and the Turk. 289. turns to nothing. ibid. wicked
Practices never succeed. 57 Presages of the pitiful end of Lewis. 29.
Presburg, a Fortress whither Q. Mary retireth. 32 a Preacher of Agria is the
means of sustaining thirteen assaults. 233 a rich Present given to Solomon by
Ferdinand. 72 Presents of Solomon to Stephen and the Hungarish Lords. 68
reciprocal Presents of Mahomet and Q. Izabella. 62. 63 Pressouia, called
Cronenstat. 102 Princes of Germany more rich and puissant some then others.
298 the Princes of the Empire arrive at the Diet of Ausbourg. 312. 313. offer
their succors to the Emperor. 306 Protestant Princes in rumor against the
Palatin: and for what. 301 Princes ought rather to trust to the forces of their
army, then be enclosed within a wall. 37 Prisoners of war of Roccoandolphs
troops put to death. 68 Prisoners lead away by Solomon at his departure from
Vienna. 50 Prisoners in the custody of the Turks. 32 Prisoners taken at Hedin
by Charles the fifth. 261 Prisoners taken by the Turk before Drigall. 219
Privilege of the Barons of Hungary. 18 Prognostication of the death of
Mustapha. 267 a bad Prognostication of K. Lewis. 29. 32 Prognostications
foretelling the death of George. 165 Prognostication of the death of Solomon.
327 Provinces called Shiers in Hungary. 18 Punishments of three sorts. 3
Purchastaler, Colonel for Maximilian, defeated 4000. Transiluanians. 286 Pride
and riches causes of all vices. 3
R
RAdich Bosich opinionated upon the ordinance of the battle. 27 Reasons
persuading the Hungars to the battle. 25. 40. 41 Raoul governor of
Transalpinia. 8. chased from his Vayuodship of the Transalpinians by Mirce, he
recouereth it, and defeateth Mirce. 240. 241. reestablished in his kingdom,
thanketh Castalde, and swears to him friendship. 244 Rascians, or Rhatians.
100. 102. defeated. 289 Rhatians take the Turks part against the faith given to
Ferdinand. 130 Rascia separated from Hungary by the river Sauus. 11 the Roman
Commonweal changed the the Estate by the great conjunction of stars. 4 the
notable Resolution of the Agrians. 233. 235 the memorable Resolution of
Mustapha. 266 the notable Resolution of the Castellan of Zaluoch unto the end.
223 Revenues of Bishoprics of Transiluania employed to the fortification of
the country. 122 Rhakos, what it signifies. 38 Riches and pride causes of all
vices. 3 Rodolph crowned K. of Hungary. 346. declared King of the Romans.
354. received Emperor. ibid. confirms truce with Amurath. 355 Rossa, second
wife of Solomon, causes him to banish his eldest son. 69 Rossa a slave,
beloved of Solomon, conspireth the death of the said eldest son. 262. 264
Rossa made free. 263. is made the spouse of Solomon. ibid. Rossia spoiled by
the Tartars. 335 Rostan Basha son in law of Solomon conspired the death of
Mustapha. 260. 264. is chased by Solomon. 270 a sudde^ Rout astonisheth the
enemies. 150 Ruin of an Estate. 4 Rumiler, men of war. 61 Rivers of note in
Hungary. 12. 13 Rivers of Transiluania. 101 Raines staying the speed of
Solomon. 46 Revenge of God against the murderers of George. 168
S
SAbaria a town, the birth place of S. Martin. 12 the King Showed by the Count
Palatin to the Hungarian army. 28 Saala Rays the Pyrat. 274 Sachmar taken by
John. 286. burned. 288. reestablished. 290 Sacrifice made by Solomon in the
great Church of Buda. 71 Sangiach, or Sanzac, what it signifies. 62 Sangiach
of Bosnia and Belgrade confer with Izabella. 273 Sangiach of Alberegalis taken
and lead to Vienna. 330. set at liberty by ransom. 338 Sassebesse fortified.
127 Sauus, a river passed by the Turkish Army. 11. 14 Saxons dwelling in the
towns of Ortel, a Province of Hungary. 13 Saxons and Sicilians natural
enemies. 85 Saxons dwelling in Transiluania. 100 the Saxons and Sicilians of
Transiluania swear fidelity to Ferdinand. 119 Scach, a Persian word, what it
signifies. 353 Sclauonia, part of high Pannonia. 12 Sclauonia divided from
Hungary by Drauus. ibid. Seat and office of the Electors of the Empire in
public acts. 302 Sebessa, a river. 164 Succors came to Lewis upon the
resolution of battle. 25. 26 Succors of Solomon to Queen Izabella. 62
Succors from the Pope to Lewis. 18 Succors granted to Ferdinand against the
Turk. 282 Succors come to the Emperor from foreign Princes. 320 Secretary
in an Army, and his charge. 92 Segnia, a capital town of Dalmatia subject to
the Hungars. 12 Selim by subteltie and industry deprived his father of his
Empire and life. 264 Selim put to death the messenger of Mustaphaes death. 272.
succeeds Solomon. 331. enters into Constantinople ibid. made his sacrifices
and offerings. 331. is saluted Emperor. 332. leaves Cheretsken to the revenge
of those whom he had used ill. 337. makes peace with Maximilian. 341. sent an
Army against the Muscouite. ibid. threatens King John. 342. begins war
again with the Hungars. 350. dies. 351. his vices described. ibid. Senath
besieged by Vicchy. 80. is succored. 81. yielded to the Turk. 130 Sepulture of
Solomon, sumptuous. 332 Sepulture of Job, place of sacrifices in
Constantinople. 331 Sforce Palauicin, Marquess, Comissarie general of
Ferdinands army. 128. 152. besieges Drigall against the counsel of Castalde.
218. is defeated by Achmet. ibid. taken valiantly fighting 219 ransomed for
15000. Ducats. 220 Sibinium, a principal town of Transiluania. 102 Sibinio
fortified. 121 Sibinio a town which was friend to Ferdinand and enemy of
George. 170 Sicilians, and their manner of life. 13 Sicilians in pay of George.
83. do mutiny. ibid. are appeased. ibid. Sicilians, or Ceculians, what
nation. 100 Sicilians mutiny for the death of George, and are appeased by
Chendy. 171 the Sicilians would restore John into his kingdom. 253 Sighet
besieged by Solomon. 325. taken at the 13. assault. 328 Sigismond King of
Polonia confederate with the Turk. 10. is in disgrace with his mother and
Polonians for his wife. 273. enterposeth himself between the accord of
Maximilian and John. 287. hindered by the Duke of Muscouia to make this peace.
301 death of Sigismond King of Polonia. 343 Sigismond Lichtstain Ambassador
for Ferdinand to Solomon. 72 Signs of great hap and repose. 4. and of a great
decaying and ruin. ibid. Simon Erdeund Bishop of Zagrabia in succor of John.
26 Sirmia, a large country ruined. 9 Sirmia divides Hungary from Slauonia.
12 firtilitie of Sirmia. 14 Soldiers murmr upon the message of Lewis. 21.
demand battle. 24 Soldiers of Ferdinand retired into a Church are cut in
pieces to the number of 3000. 65 Solomon. Solomon in Hungary with a puissant
army. 7.9 Solymans forces against Lewis. 26 Solomon defeateth the Hungars. 35.
gave his censure upon the heads of the dead Bishops. 37. sorroweth for the
fortune of King Lewis and of the Queen. 37. returns to Constantinople. 38.
takes the defense of John. 43. denounces war to Ferdinand. 44. arriueth in
Hungary with an army. ibid. before Vienna. 46. reproves with choler his
Captains. 49. raises the siege of Vienna. 50. sent succors to Queen
Izabella against Ferdinand. 61. comes to Andrionoplis in favor of Q.
Izabella. 61. marches into Hungary. 64. arriueth by Buda. 68. sent presents to
Stephen, and to the Hungarian Lords, demanding they would send to him the said
Stephen. ibid. sent back Stephen to his mother, and retains the Hungarian
Lords. 70. holds a Council upon the prisoners. ibid. releaseth them. 72.
causes the great Church of Buda to be consecrated, and made sacrifice there.
71. returns to Constantinople. 74. writ to Friar George in favor of
Izabella. 75 Solomon incensed against George, declares him an enemy and
traitor. 79 Solomon in favor of the Queen threatens the Transiluanians. 82
Solomon deceitfully answers to the letters of Q. Izabella writ in favor of
George. 91. sent to the Transiluanians to obey George. ibid. Solomon prepares
an Army against Hungary, by the Belerbey of Greece. 125 Solomon sent to the
Moldauian and Basha of Buda, that they should succor Izabella. 27 Solomon
resolves to put to death Mustapha his eldest son. 266. is in great danger
after he had caused his eldest son to be strangled. 270. hardly besieged by
his army. 271. saves himself amongst the mutinous soldiers ibid. aduanceth
Mahomet the son of Mustapha, in recompense of the innocent death of his
father. 272 Solomon in trouble and doubt by Bajazet his son. 284. seeks
again peace with Ferdinand. 285. marches into Hungary with a puissant army
in favor of K. John. 319. arriueth there. 325. besieges Sighet and Iula.
ibid. dies. 327. is carried to Constantinople. 333 Soliman a Hungarian, turned
Turk, is Governor of Buda. 74 Solimos defended against the Turk. 131 Solimos,
a Fortress, munitioned for two years, cowardly forsaken by the Spaniards.
216. who are defeated by the Turk. 216 Sophy, the surname of the King of Persia
by scoff. 353 Sopronia, a town. 12 Statues of Brass carried from Buda to
Constantinople. 38 Stirian soldiers of Ferdinand put in route by K. John. 42
Stratagems of the Turks in Hungary. 17 18. 31. 33. 34. 35. 37. 45. 46. 62. 63.
64. ibid. 65. 66. 67. 68. ibid. 69. 70. 71. 125. 127. 128. 131. 132. 137. 160.
181. 183. 184. 199. ibid. 181. 183. 184 299. ibid. 206. 207. ibid. 214. 216.
218. 219. 220. 224. 225. 233. 234. 289 290. 293. 295. 296. 318. 326. 327. ibid.
328. 329. 330. 334. 335. 249. Stridon the place where S. Hierome was borne. 12
Strigonium, the Metropolitan city in Hungary. ibid. Strigonium, a rich
Archbishopric. 111 the Swisses sent to the Diet of Ausbourg. 306 the Stars
have their return more soon or late the one then the other. 2 the great
conjunction of Stars happened in these times. 3 Subteltie against the
conductors of Artillery. 290 Spoil made in Hungary by the Turk. 34 45. 46 a
merry and earnest Speech of Francis Peren. 25 Skirmishes before the battle.
26 a Slave sent by George to Oliman besieged at Lippa, taken by Castalde. 155
Spaniards mutiny, spoil Hungary. 255 two Spaniards reneged, are cause of the
taking of Themesuar. 203 Spies taken, discover the Turks deseignes. 296 a
French Spy in Ferdinands army aduertiseth the Turk of the Transiluanian
affairs. 112. saves himself by means of Vicchy. 113 the immortal Spirit
not subject to stars. 4 the State of Germany touching the Diets. 397. 398 the
three States of Hungary corrupted. 3 a State come to his full perfection,
presently declineth. 4 Stephen the son of John King of Hungary, named John
by the Turks command. 57. 102 Stephen by the counsel of Friar George is sent
to Solomon. 69. sent back to his mother. 70 Stephen Azel in succor of Lewis.
26. died in battle. 33 Stephen governor of Valachia. 7 Stephen Battor Count
Palatin. ibid. Stephen Battor sent to the Vayuode. 16 Stephen Battor sent by
Lewis into the army, to sound the Commanders. 22 Stephen Battor the chief of
the Princes of Hungary. 38 Stephen Battor. Stephen Battor chosen King of
Transiluania. 352. declared King. 351. chosen King of Polonia, and received.
352. writ to Maximilian. ibid. sent to congratulate Rodolph for his promotion
to the Empire. 355. besieges Danzic, which is yielded to him. ibid. made war
upon the Muscouite, and Tartar. ibid. sent to acknowledge the Pope, and to
seek in Italy people of valor and knowledge. ibid. Stephen Lozonse
Lieutenant for Ferdinand at Themesuar. 126. is summoned by the Belerbey. 128
Stephen Lozonse created Count of Themesuar. 187. provides himself of men.
194. is besieged. 197. capitulateth. 205. leaves Themesuar to the Turks. ibid.
is defeated with all his people, and lead to the Basha contrary to the
agreement. 206. his death. 207 Stephen Maillat and Gottart Chiefes of the army
against Gritty. 54. 66. retireth to Fogar. 66. goes out of Fogar to capitulate
with Mustapha, and that which happened to him. 66. 67. dyed in prison at
Constantinople. 67. 72. Stephen, Vayuode of Moldauia, willing to succor
Izabella, is slain, with all his race, and guards. 228. 230. Stephen Verbets
left by Solomon at Buda for the managing of Justice there. 74 Speech of
Castalde to his soldiers in passing Tibiscus. 96 Speech of Castalde to his
soldiers going to the assault at Lippa. 146 another speech of the said
Castalde, tending to redouble the assault 149 Speech of Castalde to the
Hungars, receiving of them an oath of allegiance in the name of Ferdinand. 117
Speech of George to the principal Lords and Captains of Ferdinands army to
save Oliman. 156 a Ship going by art in the streets of Bruxels at the funerals
of Charles the 5. 278
T
TArtars barbarous and cruel. 334. they mutiny against John, who overthrows
them. 335 Tartars defeated in Polonia. ibid. Tartars redoubted of the Hungars.
296 Tata taken by Count Salm upon the Turks. 322 Taurinum, a Fortress. 14
Tergouista, a principal town of the Transalpinians, gave advertisement to
Castalde of that which passed at Constantinople. 174 Tergouista, a principal
town of the Transalpinians. 244 Terouanne taken by Charles the 5. upon the
Frenchmen. 291 Themes, a river gave the name to Themesuar. 132 Themesuar, a
Fortress. 8 Themesuar and Lippa, towns of importance. 121 Themesuar, and the
description thereof. 132. besieged. ibid. delivered from the siege. 137. given
to keep to Gaspar Casteluio. 163. besieged by Mahomet. 197 parlying. 199.
taken. ibid. Thitetie, a Provost. 14 Thomas Nadasdy sent to Ferdinand. 17
Thomas Varcocce for George, defeateth the army of Vicchy. 81 Thomas Varcocce
succoureth Ottomiall at Zegedin. 180. is cut in pieces by the Turks. 161 Thomas
Zalahazy recommended for his excellent writing. 24 ecclesiastical Treasure
taken for the war. 10 Treasure found by the peasants after a great raging of
water. 214 Treasures of George found after his death 175 a general Treasurer
in an army, and his charge. 92 Thyssa, a river, anciently named Tibiscus. 40
Tibiscus a river full of fish, and his spring. 12 Tissa, or Tibiscus, a river.
96 Tocchay a Castle taken in the favor of Izabella. 268 Tocchay a strong
Castle. 273. taken by John upon Ferdinand. 282 Tocchay besieged by the
Emperials. 288 yielded. ibid. Tocchay taken by Schuendy. 334. besieged by John.
ibid. Tholne, the rende-vous of the Hungarish soldiers to march against the
Turk. 10 Torde, the rende-vous of the Hungarish army. 188 Tourney made at the
coronation of Rodolph K. of Hungary. 349 the Transalpinian sent to the Turk
his only son in hostage. 16 Transalpinia, otherwise Valacchia the less. 8
Transalpinia and Moldauia, parts of Valachia. 13 Transalpinians and Seruians.
100 Transiluania, her situation and riches. 13. 14 Transiluania reduced into
the puissance of Ferdinand. 42 Transiluania in piteous estate. 89 a description
of Transiluania. 100. her riches. 101 Transiluania yielded to Izabella. 272.
273 Transiluanians in arms for the death of Vayuode Emeric. 54 the
determination of the Transiluanians, not to admit for King, either John, or
Ferdinand. 57 Transiluanians swear fidelity to Stephen K. John's son. 67.
threatened by Solomon, forsake their Queen. 82. 83. conspire to chase out
George. 87 Transiluanians, people of small effect for the most part. 134
Transiluanians revolt against Ferd. 231 Transiluanians astonished at the
letters of Solomon to Battor. 249. reassured by Castalde. 250. revolt again
against Ferd. 253. 254. they solicit Izabella to return into Transiluania.
256. they rise in her favor. 260.refuse to relieve Castalde with money and
victuals. 259 Truce between the Emp. Charles and the K. of France. 274.
broken. 278 Truce between Ferd. and Solomon. 285 Tribute paid to the Turk for
Transiluania. 122 Tribute paid to the Turks by the Hungars. 14. 239 Tribute
paid to the Emperor by the Imperial towns. 298 a great Tumult in the army of
Solomon after the death of Mustapha. 269. 270 Turchy John sent by George
against the Basha of Buda, he defeated three hundred horse. 86 Turks more
accustomed to charge upon the backs of those who retire, then at fight. 25
Turks at the assault of Vienna repulsed. 48. 49. 50 Turks in field to take Q.
Izabella. 122 Turks dead upon the breach of Lippa, to the number of more then
1200. 152 Turks defeated. 293. 294. 318. 322. 325. 330. 331 Turks very
superstitious. 267 description of a Tyrant. 225
W
WIlliam, son of the Lantgraue rises against the Emp. Charles. 190 William
Roccandolph besieges Buda for Ferd. 59. remoueth his Camp. 62. is assailed on
all sides by Mahomet. 63. raises the siege. 64. is overthrown. 65. dies in
the I Will of Comar. ibid. an extreme Winter. 289 Wheel of Fortune. 4 Vage, a
river. 12 Vessels fraughted with Cannons and munition of war, arrive at the
camp. 25 Valentine Toronk, one of the guardians to preserve the King in
battle. 26 Valentine and Maillat, principal persons amongst the Hungars,
dyed at Constantinople. 67. 72 Varadin Peter now called Belgrade. 14 cruel
Words of a Tyrant. 268 Varadin Peter taken by the Turk. 17 the Vayuode of
Moldauia spoyleth Transiluania. 86. retired. ibid. the new Vayuode of Moldauia
forsakes Ferdinand, and seeks the Turk. 230 the Vayuode of Transiluania in
trouble for the Kings pleasure, because of the diversity of messages. 16
Vayuod of Valachia defeateth his enemy. 284 the Vayuodes of Moldauia and
Transalpinia in succor of Izabella against George. 84 the Vayuode of
Transalpinia defeated. 85 Vayuodes of Moldauia and Valachia confederate with
Izabella. 273 the entertainment of the Venecians to the Queen of Polonia. 274
Venecians solicit the Emperor to make war upon the Turk. 342 a Vision
appearing foretold the pitiful end of Lewis. 32 Vesprimia taken by Count Salm
upon the Turks. 321 the World is immovable in the midst of the air. 1 a
memorable Victory of Raoul against Mirce. 243 Victories of Charles the 5. 279
Vienna besieged. 46 the assurance of the Viennians. 47 Vienna delivered from
the siege. 50 Wine of Hungary, Transiluania, and Slauonia. 13 Vision of
Mustapha, foretold his death. 267 Vithain taken by Count of Salm upon the
Turks. 323 Vladislas More in succor of Lewis. 26 Volfang Order defeated the
Nauall Turkish army upon Danubius. 47 Valor of Vrbain Batian to repulse the
Germans entering into Buda by a posterne. 61 Vrumiler, men of war. ibid. to
Use a free woman is sin amongst the Ottomans. 262 Vssarons, light horsemen.
37. 96 Valachia divided in two. 13 Walachia, a Roman Colonie, and from whence
it was so named. 100 Walko divides Hungary from Sclauonia. 12 Wiertesies,
Forests. 35 Wilak, and his magnificent Fortress. 14 Vissegard, a Fortress
saved by the Peasants and Friars. 34 Wiuar, a Castle built by George. 122 the
Vulgar people always follow new fortune. 244 Vylak taken by the Turks. 18 a
Woman of Torde taking her husband in adultery, cut off his head, according to
the custom of the place, notwithstanding the pardon that she had received of
him for the like offense. 189 a virtuous Woman of Lippa after she had been
spoiled by George. 162 Women of Agria courageous. 234. 235 William of Gonsague
D. of Mantua in succor of the Emperor. 305
Z
ZAgrabia, a capital town of Slauonia. 12 Zaluoch, a Fortress. 99. 258
Zaluoch, a strong Castle, besieged by Mahomet. 220. part burned by casual
fortune. 221. cowardly forsaken by the garrison. 222 Zamosse, a river. 12
Zathnar taken by Schuendy. 338 Zeangir son of Solomon and Rossa. 262 Zeghedin
taken upon the Turk. 177 Zeghedin succored by the Turk with a great overthrow.
181 Zeangir son of Solomon and Rossa, kills himself seeing his brother
Mustapha strangled. 269 See Selim. Zena, General of the men of war of
Transiluania. 196
The end of the Table.

