THE WOMAN OF CANAAN. A comfortable Sermon of faith in temptations and
afflictions. Preached at Saint Buttolphes without Aldersgate in London, the 15.
of February. 1573.

By Master William Fulke Doctor of Divinity and Master of Pembrooke Hall in
Cambridge.

Now newly revived, corrected, and amended: and published at the request of
certain well affected persons.

John. 5 4. All that is borne of God overcomes the world: and this is the
victory that overcomes the world, even our faith.

AT LONDON Imprinted for Thomas Adams. 1611.

THE EPISTLE to the Reader.
CHristian reader: out of my desire, to the multiplication of thy profit in
faith, and thy comfort by faith in Christ Jesus: I have at length obtained the
republishing of this excellent Sermon of the force of faith in temptations and
afflictions: preached, some years since in this city of London, by that
learned and Godly man M. Doctor Fulke, who was well seen in the holy scriptures
and the fathers: and was of such dexterity in maintayning the truth against
errors, that some of the adversaries themselves did term him the hammer:
thanks be to Christ who enabled him with such facility to break in fitters
their strong arguments that they brought to fortefie their errors.

But to speak of the Sermon it self, this I will assure thee, it has bin
found so profitable, and comfortable to the readers, that diverse of mine own
knowledge, have written it out: and no marvel, for whosoever shall read it
with attention, and ponder it, shall through Gods mercy, besides other fruits
of his labor, easily learn this short and sweet lesson: that we ought to
assure our selves that howsoever it shall please Christ to handle us, yet he
loves us still, and has an eye to that which is good for us: which how
profitable and comfortable it is I leave to thine own consideration,
especially seeing it cannot be unknown with how many calamities, greifes, and
varieties of afflictions, it pleases our Heavenly Father to exercise us, in
this vale of tears, during our pilgrimage here upon earth: it being so, is it
not a great quietness to our heart when we have so profited in faith as we can
take Gods will as our sovereign welfare and perfect happiness? for then though
all our senses should tell us that he is against us, yet our faith will prompt
us to trust in him, and to call upon him, as our most loving father, who
ceasseth not to procure our welfare continualy. Such is the calmnes of mind
which God gives to the faithful, yea, even in the midest of storms and
extremities: Is not faith then a most precious jewel which brings such happiness
to such as have it? But if thou desire to hold this faith, look well to thine
heart, strive to purge it from guilt, labor for soundness and sincerity: for
the property of faith is to purify the heart, Act. 15.9. The cause then, why
so many as seem to have faith do fall, and their virtues, which they seem to
have, vanish to nothing, is because they want this soundness of heart: which
unsoundness of heart does plainly show them, if they would see, that their
faith is not right.

Wherefore for the help of true and right faith in thee, I commend this
Sermon: but why do I commend it? read it, and it will commend it self;
therefore I leave thee to Christ, the author and finisher of our faith: heartily
beseeching him so to come unto thee by his holy Spirit, as that thou may be
able to come unto him by thy Spirit, and so by his Spirit to embrace thee, as
that he may stir up lively faith in thee to embrace him, and so to join and
unite himself unto thee, as thou may cleave unto him in that most happy
union and most holy wedlock between thee and Christ, which is brought to pass
by his spirit, and thy faith, and is so full of so sweet, holy, and heavenly
consolation.

Thy well willer.

MATTHEW. 15.21.
ANd Jesus departing from thence, went aside into the parts of Tire and Sidon.

22. And behold a certain woman which was a Cananite coming out of those
quarters, cried out unto him saying: Have mercy upon me Lord, thou son of
David, my daughter is pitiously tormented with a devil.

23. But he answered her not a word. And his disciples came unto him, and be
sought him saying, send her away for she cries after us.

24. But he answered and said, I was not sent but to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel.

25. Then she came and worshipped him saying: Lord help me.

26. But he answered it is not good to take the childrens bread, and to cast it
to dogs.

27. But she said: true Lord, but yet the dogs eat of the croomes that fall
from their Lords table: then Jesus answered and said unto her: O woman great is
thy faith, be it unto the as thou will, and her daughter was healed from the
same hour.

Doctor Fulkes Sermon of the Woman of Canaan.
THIS part of Scripture, beloved in our Savior Christ, declares how our
Savior Christ began to show some bright beams of his grace unto the Gentiles*
For although the full time were not yet come, that he should show himself
openly, unto the whole world, yet by this and such like examples, he would give
some fore-taste of his goodness, which afterward should be offered universally.
Even as the Sun before it ascend, in the morning, above the upper face of the
earth where we dwell, yet casts up some beams of his light, whereby we
know that he shall shortly arise: so our Savior Christ, by stretching forth
some fruit of his grace unto the Heathen, would give good hope of that common
mercy, which, shortly after, was exhibited, both to the Jews and the Gentiles
indifferently. Which thing is both profitable and comfortable for us that are
of the Gentills to consider, that we may know by what means, and degrees, the
Gospel, which is the power of God to salvation, was brought unto us.

There is also set forth in this Gospel a wonderful commendation of a most
strong and invincible faith in a woman that was a Cananite, to set forth the
great infidelity and ingratitude of the Jews, that were the chosen people of
God; that by comparing them together, we might understand, how justly the
Jews were deprived of the promised redemption, which so disdainfully they
rejected, it being offered, that the Heathen so willingly embraced when they
heard of it. Which thing also we may note in the occasion of his departure out
of the land of Iewrie, into the parts of Tire and Sidon, which the Evangelist
describes to be this, in the beginning of this chapter. The Scribes and
Pharisees that came from Jerusalem, picked a quarrel against him, because his
disciples did eat with unwashed hands, whereby they transgressed the tradition
of the Elders: our Savior Christ in defense of his Disciples, charge the
Scribes and Pharisees, which were so zealous to maintain their own ceremonies,
that they were careless to break the commandment of God. And so it comes
to pass always, that they which are most earnest in upholding and defending
traditions, and ceremonies, invented by man, are most forgetful in keeping the
commandments of God. But this is the just judgment of God* against those that
invent a new worship of their own brain. That first they leese their labor,
that so seek to please God: and secondly, that they are deprived of all right
understanding, because they have presumed to be wiser then God. And therefore
our Savior Christ confuteth them by the testimony of Esaias, Isay. 29.
where God complains, that the hypocritical people came near unto him with
their mouth, and honored him with their lips, but their heart was far from
him: and in vain do they worship me (says God) while they teach doctrine
that are the precepts of men. Therefore I will again do a marvelous work in
this people, even a marvelous work and a wonder: for the wisdom of their
wisemen shall perish, and the understanding of the prudent men shall be hid.
And as the same Prophet threatens in another place. Isay. 6.
Their eyes shall be blinded that they shall not see; their ears stopped that
they shall not hear, their hearts made gross that they shall not understand,
least they see with their eyes and understand with their hearts, and be
converted, and God should heal them. This got the high Priests, Scribes and
Pharisiee, by multiplying their ceremonies, Leuit. 15. Number. 17.
and namely ablutions and washings. It is true, that God in the law commanded
diverse ablutions, and washings, which did rather testify their uncleanness,
then purge away their filthiness: but they had added many others, as washing
of cups and cruises, dishes and platters, brazen vessels and tables, and often
washing of their hands before they did eat, and especially if they had come
from the market, Mark. 7.
they might not eat before they had washed their hands, which things they
observed, not as civil customs, pertaining to bodily cleanliness, but as
religious ceremonies belonging to inward holiness, and therefore our Savior
Christ does so sharply reprove them. And least the simple minds of his
Disciples and other the good tractable people, should have any more scruple of
conscience in such vain outward observations, he declares, that true
holiness consists in no such matter: for that which enters into the mouth
defiles not the man, but those things that come out of the mouth, are they
which defile a man. For such meats as are received into the mouth, they are
carried into the stomach, and from thence are cast into the draught, so that
they come not near the soul and spirit of a man: but those things that come
out of the mouth (as evil devises, whordoms, adulteries, murders, thefts,
sla^ders, false-witnesse bearing, blasphemies, and such other) they come from
the heart and soul of man, and therefore they polute a man indeed. Wherefore
when the proud and disdainful Scribes and Pharisees were offended with his
words, he willed his Disciples to let them alone, as blind guides of the
blind, and he himself departed from them into the coasts of Tire and Sydon.
His purpose was, according to the will of his manhood, as Saint Mark
declares, Mark. 7.
to have been secret, and not openly known. For although he was appointed of
God to be the light of the Gentiles, Luke 2.
and the glory of his people Israel: yet for as much as the due time was not
yet come in which he should be showed to the Gentiles, before the resurrection,
he was content in the person of the Mediator, to keep himself within the
bounds of his calling: But he could not be hid altogether, because God had
appointed this woman of Canaan to find him out, which thing from Christ; by
his divine knowledge, could not be hidden. And here the wonderful secret of
Gods Judgment is to be considered: while he walked openly in the land of Iewry,
amongst the chosen people, to whom he was promised, and allured all men to come
unto him, he finds but a few (in comparison of the multitude that with-stood
him) which regarded to be pertakers of his grace which he offered: But so
soon as he steppeth out of Iewry, among the Gentiles, desiring not to be
known, he is found out by a woman, which in a manner compels him to bestow
his grace upon her when he denies it. The circumstances being weighed, and
compared, with them from whom he came, does set forth their blockish
blindness, and also marueilously commend her invincible faith. They were wise
men, she was a simple woman: they were learned, she was ignorant: they were
Jews, she was a Gentile: they were of the blessed seed of Abraham, she was of
the cursed race of Canaan: they were of the chosen people of Israel, she was
of the excommunicate and cast-out people of the Cananits: they were brought up
in the knowledge of God, and his laws, even from their infancy, she was
brought up in the superstitions of Idolatry: they were Doctors, and teachers of
Gods people, she had but small knowledge, as one that was an Heathen woman,
and therefore might not come into the congregation where Gods people were
taught. Yet they rejected Christ, when he was offered, she followed Christ
when he departed from her: They were Infidels, she was faithful, and endued
with such faith as might be a shame to all the Israelites, that began so long
before her, and yet were left so far behind her. For of her it might be said,
which our Savior Christ speaks of the faith of the Centurion: Verily I have
not found such faith in Israel. Math. 8.
The Centurion was an Heathen man, a Roman, a man of war, that came to
subdue the slavish nation of the Jews, yet God gave him so great faith, that
he excelled even the Isralites themselves. And surely if the circumstances of
this poor woman's faith be considered, it shall appear far more excellent
then his. And especially if we behold with what bitter temptations her faith
was examined and tried, we shall plainly confess how far it passed, for her
faith was tried unto the uttermost: And first with great and extreme
adversity: for her daughter was miserably tormented with a Devil.

Good Lord! what a temptation was this to her that was of the cursed stock of
the Cananites, which Gods people were commanded utterly to destroy, and to make
no league or covenant with them? then having newly forsaken the religion of her
forefathers, and people where she lived, and lately received the religion of
the Jews. What a great temptation (I say) was it to her, that her daughter
should be possessed with the devil? she might either have thought that she
had made an evil change of her old religion, to be thus welcomed by the
devil into a new religon: or else that God the author of this religion, would
not accept her to be one of his worshippers, being a cursed Cananite, and
therefore suffered the devil to have such power over her daughter, as that he
did wholly possess her, and miserably torment her. For of all adversities that
can be laid upon a man, or woman, this goes nearest, to make them think they
are out of the favor of God, to behold that they are given over as it were a
prey into the devils possession. The loss of children is one of the greatest
griefs that can befall to loving Parents; but the death of children may be
counted an exceeding great benefit, in comparison of this to see them possessed
and torn in pieces with Devils. They that are dead are out of pain, but they
that are thus possessed seem to be in pains of hell, even while they live.
What might this poor woman think otherwise in this case, but that she had
hell in her own house, when she had the Devil tormenting her daughter at
home, whom she loved best in the world? We see therefore how she was tried,
first by this temptation: and experience teaches us, how many are offended and
driven back with much less temptation then this, for if adversity, or
affliction follow their new conversion, they wax weary of their profession,
and wish again for the merry world which they enjoyed, and the pleasant life
which they passed in Idolatry, superstition, and ignorance of GOD: or else
through infirmity and weakness of faith, they think that they are out of the
favor of God, that sends them such troubles, which were wont to live in
quiet. But this poor woman, neither misliketh her profession, nor mistrusteth
Gods mercy, for this most grievous Temptation: But contrari-wise by force of
faith ouercometh all difficulties: For whereas she was a Gentile, or as S.
Mark calls her a Greek, Mark. 7.
which in the phrase, of the scripture is all one, and that which is more a
Cananite, whose auncesters being driven out of the land of promise, fled into
Syrophenicia, which country next adioyneth unto Iewry: yet all this did not let
her but that she was persuaded that the Messiah of the Jews pertained also
unto her. And therefore upon assurance of this faith she is bold to come unto
Christ, and to make humble request unto him for the relief of her misery.

But for as much as Christ had not yet preached amongst the Gentills, and
moreover had expressly commanded his Apostles that they should not go into the
way of the Gentills, Mat. 10.
no not so much as into the Cities of the Samaritans, which partly professed
the religion of the Jews: it may be marueiled upon what confidence she came so
bouldly to our Savior Christ, and so importunatly desired grace of him, that
she would have no nay, until she obtained her request. We must needs
acknowledge, Luke 24.
that as she was instructed in the law of God, so she took hold of the
general promises of God, set forth in the law and the Prophets, and in the
Psalms, on which her faith was so lively grounded, that nothing in the world
was able to remove her from it. For as the hope of the promised redemption, was
openly talked of among the Jews, so the promises of God, concerning Christ
their redeemer, were commonly known among them, as: Genesis 12. and 13.
That all nations of the world should be blessed in him: That whosoever
calls on the name of the Lord shall be saved. That he shall deliver the
poor, when he cries, the needy also, Joel. 2.
and him that has no help. He shall be merciful to the poor and needy, and
shall preserve the souls of the poor, he shall redeem their souls from
deceit and violence, Psalm. 72.
and dear shall their blood be in his sight: That he that puts his trust
in him, shall not be confounded. Esaias. 28.
Upon these and such like general promises of God, contained in the old
Testament, her faith was builded, and founded, so steadfastly, that no storm of
temptation was able to overthrow it. Which thing is very necessary for us to
consider, that when our faith shall be tried and examined, as this woman was,
we may know how to withstand all the assaults of most grievous temptations, as
she did. That the trial of our faith which is much more precious then gold
that perishes, 1. Pet. 1.
(though it be tried by fire) might be found unto our praise, honor, and
glory, at the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. Let us therefore make much of
the general promises of God, let us willingly embrace them, diligently weigh
them, and daily remember them: for in them our faith being grounded, it shall
stand like a most sure bulwark, and invincible fortress, against any thing
that shall assault our everlasting salvation.

Upon this boldness, and confidence, this wretched woman comes unto Christ.
For thus her faith concludes: seeing all nations of the world shall be
blessed in him, the very Cananits are not excluded. For although the Cananits
were once cursed of God, above all other nations, yet by this blessed seed all
curses should be taken away, seeing he is not restrained to one nation, more
then another, but is the common blessing unto all nations. And seeing he shall
hear the poor that cry unto him, and succor the needy that has none other
helper, he must hear me also, being so poor a creature and helpless that
cries unto him. And for-asmuch as whosoever puts his trust in him, shall
not be confounded, he cannot refuse, my humble request, that repose my whole
trust and confidence in him. Therefore she is bold, with open mouth, to cry
out unto him. O Lord thou son of David, have mercy upon me.

These words are diligently to be considered: First that through confidence of
faith, although he do not call unto her, yet she cries after him. And the
vehemency of her request is expressed by the word of crying, that she does not
speak unto him, but with open mouth she cries unto him. For a strong faith
sends forth earnest requests, as a feeble faith utters cold and formal
prayers. And concerning the form of her petition, it declares that her faith
was not a conceived fantasy of her own brain, but an assured persuasion out
of the word of God. For seeing the Messiah was promised to be the son of
David, and that all felicity was promised in the kingdom of David, according
to the holy Oracle of God, she calls Christ the son of David. For she had
learned that God said of Messiah, 2. Sam. 17
figured in the person of Solomon, which was the son of David, 1. Cor. 22
I will be his Father, and he shall be my son. She had heard the
Prophecy of Esaias, Esaias. 11.
that God promised, that out of the old withered stumpe of Isay the father of
David, a rod should come forth, and a graffe should grow out of his root: the
spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of knowledge and
understanding, etc. And that which Jeremy writes of the righteous branche,
Ier. 2^. and 33.
that God would raise up unto David, which King should reign and execute
judgment, whose name should be, The Lord our righteousness: Upon these or
such like places of Scripture her faith was grounded, by which she had learned
to call him the son of David, whereby she declared that she acknowledged
him to be the same which was described and set forth in the Scriptures, and
that she looked to obtain at his hands those things which were promised of
him in the Scriptures. In which it was promised, that he should hear the cry
of the poor, when they made their humble supplication to him: that he should
succor the afflicted, who had none to help them: Isay. 22.
that he should take upon him all our infirmities, and bear all our diseases:
that he should preach sight to the blind, Math. 8. Luke 4. Math. 11.
limbs to the lame, life to the dead, and deliverance to all that are
afflicted.

This request of hers therefore being in the compass of those things which
were promised to be granted by him; she is bold to call and cry unto him
saying: O Lord, thou son of David, have mercy upon me, my daughter is
miserably tormented with a Devil. And note that she desires him to be
merciful unto her, whereas her suit chiefly concerned her daughter. For not
only the natural love of her daughter made her to account the miseries of her
child to be her own grief, but also she acknowledges that God in plauging
of her daughter, plagueth the mother also, and therefore she desires Christ
to have mercy, pity, and compassion, of her self, as well as of her daughter.

And further note, that she challenges nothing by lesert, merit, or
worthiness, but only of mercy, pity, and compassion, saying: Have mercy upon
me Lord, thou son of David.

Hitherto ye have heard how her faith was firmly fastened upon the promises
of God, and that she endured the trial of a mighty and strong temptation, her
daughter being possessed with the Devil, which was so far off, that it
could ouer-throw her faith, that rather it was an occasion whereby her faith
was showed to be most invincible, and set forth for one of the chiefest
examples of the greatest faith that ever was in the world. But there remain
yet more grievous temptations, whereby her faith was ten times more
vehemently assaulted then ever it was before. For it follows in the text: And
he answered her not a word. This was a marvelous sore temptation, that he, in
whom her whole trust was reposed, is so far of from granting her petition,
that he seems to disdain to make answer to her request. That he which
calls and allureth unto him all other, refuses so much as to speak to her.
That he which calls and allureth unto him all other, refuses so much as to
speak her. That he which offers his help to them that seek it not, will
not hear her humble suit that does so earnestly crave it. What might she
think, but that all her labor was lost, all her hope was in vain, and all
that ever she heard of him was untrue? Is this he that is so courteous, and
gentle to all them that require his help? Is this he that made a general
proclamation, saying; Come unto me all ye that labor, and are laden, Math*
28.
and I will refresh you? Is this he that never denied his gracious favor to
any that desired the same? The other temptation, by the misery of her daughter,
was very great, but this trial by the silence of Christ, in whom only she
hoped for help, was much greater.

And by this temptation also God tries his servants, that he does not only
send them affliction and misery to molest them, but often times also when they
pray for help and deliverance, he seems both deaf and dumb, for as though
he heard not their prayers, he makes no answer, but suffers them to
continue still in misery: notwithstanding that he has promised to hear their
prayers when they call unto him out of their troubles. And not this only, but
as he deals here with this woman whom he disdaineth to answer, so he
seems, not only to refuse their prayers, but also instead of help which
they pray for, he sends them greater troubles, against which they pray. We
see how often the Prophet in the Psalms complains, Psalm. 22.10. and 13. Job.
30. Exodus 5.
that God is deaf, or dumb, and he hears not his servants which pray unto
him. So he increased the calamities of the Isralites under Pharao, from that
time that Moses and Aaron had put them to some comfort of deliverance. So this
poor woman no doubt rejoiced not a little, when she heard that Christ was
come into those quarters: but when she comes unto him, whom she was glad
that she had found, she finds no comfort at all in him, but great
discouragement and discomfort, if any thing could discourage a strong and
lively faith. We see therefore what a strong temptation her faith endured.

But it is marvel how she could retain such constancy of faith, when he
that is the only author and finisher of our faith, Heb. 12.
even Jesus Christ, disdaineth to speak to her, in whose word all our hope and
trust consists. But here we must understand, that Christ by this his
silence did not reject her suit, but rather inflamed her with greater feruency
to continue the same. For although he suppressed his audible voice for a time,
yet in time of this silence he spoke unto her by two most effectual kinds of
speaking: First by his general promises, contained in the Scriptures, which
sounded so loud continually in the ears of her heart, that by them she was
assured that Christ called her unto him, although by his temporal and
particular silence he seemed to reject her from him. Secondly, although he
spoke no word with his tongue, yet by his spirit he spoke continually to her
soul, settling and sealing the truth of Gods promises so steadfastly in her
heart, that she knew it was impossible for her to miss of his grace at the
length, although for the time she seemed to be refused of him. And so
undoubtedly Almighty God deals oftentimes, even with his best beloved
children, when he deferreth the answer of their request for a time, so that he
seems to hold his peace, notwithstanding that he has promised to answer
them when they pray. In which perplexity they must remember, that howsoever he
seems to keep silence, by not granting their request, yet he speaks to
them continually in his promises contained in his holy word, by which they must
be assured that God will be merciful unto them, albeit that he withold
his promised help for a season. So Christ at one time speaks and holds his
peace not to extinguish the faith of this Cananite, but rather to inflame her
earnest affection in prayer, which thing we see took effect in her.

Then if so small light of knowledge, as was possible to be in her, according
to the state of the time, and her own condition, wrought such constancy of
faith: if so little seed of doctrine, brought forth such abundant fruit: what
shame is it for us in so clear light of the Gospel, not to see with the eyes
of our faith, the immovable and unchangeable truth and certainty of Gods
promises, 1. Pet. 1.
and having received such abundance of the immortal seed, to bring forth so
small fruit, that we are discouraged to continue our prayers, if we find not
present help as soon as we begin to pray: And that we doubt in our hearts
of the truth of Gods promises, because we feel not the execution and
fulfilling of them, even at such time as we would appoint our selves. Not
remembering, that he which has promised to hear us when we pray, has
commanded us to be importunate in prayer. And has set before us the example
of the poor widow to be followed, which having a matter to be heard before a
wicked Judge, Luke 18.
that feared neither God nor man, yet at the length obtained justice at his
hands through her importunity. And shall not God much rather deliver his Elect
that cry unto him day and night, whom he has promised to hear and help? If
therefore we be not heard at the first, we must not therefore give over
praying, but rather increase in study and zeal of prayer, knowing that it is
Gods pleasure in such a case to be overcome by importunate suit. For if the
thing we pray for be within the compass of those things which he has
promised to grant, he can no more deny our request, then he can deny
himself, if we continue in prayer.

But flesh and blood will here object to weaken our faith: What comfort have I
to pray, when I shall be heard I cannot tell when? For I have prayed long, and
find no release of my troubles, but rather increase, and while he deferrth his
help (I know not for what cause) so long, in the mean time I shall perish. I
were better therefore to see if I can find any comfort else where, for none I
find in him. For answer, we must consider thus much, that if we look to
obtain any help at Gods hands by our prayers, we must give God this honor,
that he knows better then we our selves, both what is meet for us, and
also at what time it is best to bestow it upon us. For he which knows all
things, knows when it is most convenient, both for his glory, and for our
profit, to grant us that which we pray for. And there is no loving child of
God (if these two might be separated) but would prefer the glory of God,
before his own profit. And there is no wise man that will take upon him to
know better when his profit is to be procured, then God, who is the only
wisdom himself. But seeing these two things are always linked together,
namely the glory of God, and our salvation, we need no more to doubt, that God
will be less careful for our salvation, then he is zealous for his own
glory. Therefore it is a vain objection, and supposes a mere impossibillity,
that we should perish before he send his deliverance. For God can no more
forget our deliverance in due time, then he can deface his own glory.

And touching the mean time, in which he suffers us to be afflicted, that
all shall turn to our everlasting comfort, for thereby he tries our faith,
patience, obedience, and other virtues. And the trial of our faith as S. Peter
says, 1. Pet. 1.
being much more precious then gold, which is tried in the fire and yet
perishes, shall be found to our praise, honor and glory, at the appearing of
our Lord Jesus Christ. And least we should doubt to faint in trouble, we are
taught that God is faithful, 2. Cor. 10.
and will not suffer us to be tempted above our strength, but in all
perplexities and most desperate cases, will open a way how we shall avoid
them. For as he sends us affliction, and temptation, with the one hand, so
he will send us strength and comfort with the other hand. And this was lively
figured in the wrestling of God with Jacob: Genesis 23.
where the Lord by wrestling and striving with him, seemed to fight with him
with one hand, and by giving him strength, not only to abide temptations and
afflictions, but also to prevail and overcome them, he declared that he did
sustain him with the other hand.

Let us not therefore be discomforted, if God himself seem to wrestle with
us, and to fight against us, by sending us great troubles and temptations, for
his purpose is in this most noble combat, both to give us strength to
overcome, and also the praise of the victory, as Saint Peter testifies in the
place even now alleged. Such a noble champion was this simple woman, that by
faith contended even with Christ himself, and in the end obtained the victory.
Declaring thereby that although she were a cursed Cananite, according to the
flesh, yet she was a true Israelite by faith, which prevailed even with God
himself. Such and so wonderful are the works of God, that when all the glory
of our salvation is properly his own, yet he vouchsafes to give us such
strength of faith, that thereby we are received into part of that praise which
is due unto him, but yet so that all the glory redoundeth again from us, unto
him only, to whom properly it belongs.

Well, hitherto we have heard that our Savior Christ refused to speak one
word with his mouth, and yet inwardly he spoke by his spirit to her mind: It
follows now in the text, That his Disciples came unto him, and besought him,
saying: Send her away, for she cries after us. Here his Disciples do not
entreat him to show her any favor, but only to dispatch her either one way
or other, because she made such a bawling and crying after them, that they
were ashamed to hear her. And herein, as in many other things reueiled in the
history of the Gospel, they take upon them to be wiser then their master. For
if he had thought it convenient, he would have dispatched her sooner, for he
heard her importunate outcries, as well as they, but he respected an other
matter which they could not conceive. It were best therefore for men to let God
alone with his own affairs, and not to presume to give him counsel what he
has to do, but rather to look what he commands them to do, and therein to
occupy their heads and their hands. But such curiosity reigns in many men's
minds, that they had rather take upon them to teach God how he should govern
the world, then submit themselves quietly to obey his commandments.

But the Papists are here to be pitied, that for lack of better arguments, to
prove the invocation of Saints, are feign to abuse this place of the Apostles
request to have this woman dispatched: But alas! with what coulor or likelihood
of reason? for first this woman desires none of them all to be her spoaksman,
but cries unto the master himself. O Lord thou Son of David, have mercy
upon me. Secondly, they make no intercession for her, but only desire that she
might be sent away, because she troubled them. But whether she obtained her
request or no, all was one to them, so they might be rid of the exclamation and
outcry that she made after them, to cause all the world to wonder at them.
Thirdly Christ granted nothing at their request, but rather flatly denies
that he will have any thing to do with her. Fourthly if she had prayed to
them, and they made intercession for her and obtained their desire: yet there
is great difference between praying to them that are dead, and praying to them
that are alive. And therefore it is marvel what they mean to gather an
argument for the invocation of dead Saints out of this place, where neither the
woman prays to the Apostles, nor the Apostles pray for her, nor Christ
grants any thing at their request, and besides all this the Apostles were
not dead but alive, they should have small comfort I trow in this example: yet
such, for all the world, be the rest of their arguments; The Virgin Mary prayed
for the Bridgrome when she said, John. 2
They have no wine: If this was a request, what was her answer, woman what
have I to do with thee? Luke 11.
But above the rest they have one notable example of the rich man, that being
in the torments of hell, prayed unto Abraham. No doubt a worthy example for us
to follow, that of a damned spirit in Hell we must learn to make our prayers
unto Saints in Heaven. By such authority the doctrine of Devils may well be
established: but the children of God are taught an other form of prayer by
their Heauenly-Schoole Master. But what remedy found the rich man by praying
to Abraham, that we might be encouraged by his example to Pray to Saints? He
made two requests, and neither of them both was granted. Alas! what comfort
should any man take by these examples to pray to dead Saints? and yet these be
the best reasons they have out of the Scripture: sure it is a pitiful case,
that men will leave God, who has commanded us to call upon him, and promised to
hear us: to call upon dead men, to whom we have no commandment, nor example
of any godly person, to pray, neither have they made any promise: neither if
they had made any promise, were they able to perform it. But let us leave the
Papists with their woeful arguments, and return to the Apostles in their
request made unto Christ, Dismiss her (say they) for she cries after us. By
these words we may easily perceive, how importunatly she continued her suit,
although he held his peace, and answered her not one word: for still she cried
and was nothing discouraged, whereby we see that this first repulse did so
little diminish her desire, that it kindled it more and more. And so does God
oftentimes in suspending and deferring the answer and effect of our prayers,
provoke us most earnestly to pray: both that we may know of whom we have
received a benefit, and that we may the more esteem it when we have it, and
so render worthy thanks to him that is the author of it. For such is our
malignity, that if we be prevented with Gods benifits (as oftentimes we are)
or else obtain them immediately upon our request, we forget that we received
them of God, and so become unthankful for them. Also we do not greatly
esteem those things which we have not long wanted, nor much desired, whereby,
as for small benefits and not great gifts we render slender thanks to God.
Therefore God in great wisdom prolongeth sometimes the performance of his
promised benifits, that men might acknowledge of whom they obtain the^,
worthily esteem them, thankfully receive them, and profitably employ them.

But now let us see what answer our Savior Christ makes to the request of his
disciples: I am not sent (says he) but unto the lost sheep of the house of
Israel. An uncomfortable answer doubtless to the poor woman, whereby he
pronounces, that he has no commission of God, to do any thing for her, in as
much as his vocation extended only to the Israelites, and she was one of the
Gentiles, and a Cananite. It was a great temptation unto her before, that he in
whom all health is promised, and which willingly offered himself to all other,
and by his comfortable voice, did call all that are oppressed unto him, kept
silence to her alone, and being so earnestly entreated to extend his favor
toward her, yet answers her not one word: but it is ten times greater, that
now when he is urged by his Disciples to speak, he seems to put her out of
all hope and comfort, because he was not sent but unto the lost sheep of the
house of Israel, of which number she was none, and therefore might not look
for any favor at his hands. And this answer which he makes, was not a
pretended answer to serve for the time, but it was most true indeed. For
although he was not sent only to the Jews, yet was he sent first unto the
Jews: And that wall of separation, which divided the Jews from the Gentiles,
Ephe. 2.
was not broken down before the resurrection of Christ. And therefore in the
tenth of this Gospel, he forbad his Disciples to go into the way of the
Gentiles, nor the cities of the Samaritans, but go rather (says he) unto the
lost sheep of the house of Israel: Even so he says now truly, I am not sent
but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Math. 10.


First therefore let us consider the sense of these words, and afterward the
weight of the temptation. Therefore, that he says he was not sent, he means
not that he was not sent at all, but that as yet it pertained not to his
vocation to call the Gentiles, but the Jews only. For that he was also sent
unto the Gentiles appears plainly by the word of God in the Prophet Esaias,
where the Lord speaks unto our Savior Christ in the person of a Mediator. It
is a small thing that thou should be my servant, Isay. 45.
to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and the desolations of Israel: I will also
give thee for a light unto the Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation unto
the ends of the world. Whereunto the Prophet Simeon agrees in his Canticle,
saying: Luke 2.
Mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou have prepared before the face
of all people, to be a light to lighten the Gentiles, and to be the glory of
thy people Israel. These words of his therefore must be understood of that
present time in which he spoke them. For as then he was not sent unto the
Gentiles, but unto the lost sheep only of the house of Israel.

By the lost sheep of the house of Israel, he means not the Elect only,
but all the whole nation of the Jews, with whom God made the Covenant, and
unto whom the redemption was promised, for unto them all it was first offered:
which because it was of them refused, it was afterward made common unto the
Gentiles. For our Savior Christ acknowledges, a little before his passion,
that he has other sheep which were not of the Jewish fold, whom he must
bring home, that there may be one fould, as there is but one Pastor. Ioh. 10.
And in that most earnest, and hearty Prayer, which he made immediately before
his death, wherein he commends to GOD the preservation of his Disciples,
whom he sent to convert the whole world, he prays generally for his whole
Church, collected both of the Jews and the Gentiles, saying. I pray not only
for these, but for all them that shall believe in me through their preaching,
that they all may be one, Ioh, 17
even as thou father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in
us, that the world may know that thou have sent me. So that the Israelites
have now no privilege nor prerogative above the Gentiles. For in Christ Jesus
there is neither Jew nor Gentile, Gal. 3.
for Christ is now as common unto the Gentiles, as before he was proper to the
Jews. Then seeing we be grafted into the body of Israel, this saying is as
comfortable to us, as it was uncomfortable to this poor woman. For Christ can
now make no more excuse by his vocation, for we are all the Israel of God,
though sometimes we were Gentiles, now we are Citizens with the Saints, and of
the household of God, though some-time we were strangers from the common wealth
of Israel, and forreners from the covenants of promise. But this especially is
worthy to be considered, that Christ calls them the lost sheep unto whom he
was sent: In which saying we have two things to be observed: First, that we
must acknowledge that we are all lost, or else Christ has nothing to do with
us, we must every one confess with the Psalmist, That I have wandered like a
lost sheep, Psalm. 119.
O seek thou thy servant. They therefore that are proud in opinion of their
own good works, and think to be saved by their deserts, are not for Christ
to meddle withal, for he is sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of
Israel, or as he said unto the Pharisees, The whole have no need of the
Physician, Math. 9.
but the sick. First therefore we must acknowledge that we are altogether
cast away, and that we have no more wit nor power to return or save our
selves, then has a sheep that is wandering in the wilderness among the
Wolves, Bears, and Lions. Secondly, if we confess and find our selves to
be such, then are we here comforted, that Christ is properly appointed of
God to save the lost sheep of the house of Israel: like as he says in an other
place; The son of man is come to save that which was lost. And in S. Lukes
Gospel, concerning the conversion of Zacheus: The son of man is come to
seek and save that which was lost. Math. 18.
Therefore it ought to be no discomfort to us, to confess that we are
utterly lost, seeing thereby we are assured that we appertain unto Christ,
who came of purpose to seek and to save that which was lost. O the wonderful
wisdom, power, and mercy of God, showed us in Christ, that even then when we
feel our selves lost, we are found: when we see our selves destroyed, we
are saved: when we hear our selves condemned, we are justified only in
believing these words: The Son of man is come to save that which was lost!

Let us therefore with invincible courage of faith, take hold of these general
promises of GOD, and apply them unto our selves, as this poor woman did, and
we shall find it to be true, which our Savior Christ says unto us: Math.
17. Mar. 9, and 11
There is nothing impossible unto him that believes.

Let us now consider the weight of this temptation, how heavy it was for the
woman to bear this answer: that where as she did repose her whole confidence
in him, he affirmed that he has nothing to do with her, because he was not
sent, but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Of all other
temptations it is the forest, when the word of God seems to be contrary to
our hope. As when God commanded Abraham to kill his son Isaac, in whom his
hope was that the promise should be fulfilled, as God himself had said. In
Isaac shall thy seed be called, Genesis 22
and my covenant will I establish with Isaac. Genesis 21 12


After the same manner it is here with this poor Cananite, for even by the
word of Christ, in whom she trusted for grace according to the promises of
God, concerning him, she is excluded from grace, because she is a Gentile, and
none of the lost sheep of the house of Israel, to whom only, and not to the
Gentiles, at that time, he was sent to offer grace. What could be said more to
discourage her, then to tell her that the promised redemption pertayned not to
her? Again who could have been chose^ out of all the world to put her so much
out of comfort as Christ himself? For if an Angel or Arch-angell had come
from Heaven, and told her that Christ would not accept her petition, and
bestow his grace upon her, she might easily have rejected him, because her
faith was grounded upon the word of God; against which, if any Angel should
speak, we may hold him accursed. But when the son of God himself, even
the promised Messiah, in his own person, and by his own word, which is the
same truth in which the Oracles of the Prophets were delivered, when himself
refuses her request, and denies his grace to her, how can she retain any
hope, but that her faith is quite overcome and all comfort taken away from
her: And yet so mighty, and strong, was the fortress of her faith, that this
most bitter assault prevailed not to overthrow it. For as though she had felt
no discomfort at all by this his answer, she approaches near unto him, and
falling down before him, she continues her humble suit saying, Lord help me.

And here we may see how much true faith differs from proud presumption: yea
we may plainly perceive that true faith is always joined with great humility.
The Papists call the assured confidence in Gods mercy, by the odious name of
Presumption, but rather we may justly call the proud persuasion that they have
of their own merits and deserts by the right name of Presumption. For who so
trusts most in God, has least opinion of his own worthiness; as we may
plainly see in this example of the Cananitish woman, who as she had most
certain persuasion and assurance of help in the mercy of God, so had she no
presumption at all in her own worthiness, and that she declares plainly, by
her humble submissio^: therefore she falls down at his feet, most lowly
beseeching him to be good unto her, and to succor her. Whereby she testifies,
that she requires nothing of duty, in respect of her own worthiness, but
only of favor and mercy, in respect of Gods promises. Woe be therefore unto
the Papists, that call true humility, presumption, and contrariwise, pride they
term humility.

But here we may well doubt how the faith of this woman should be so highly
commended, when it seems to presume against the word of God, whereas true
faith is always grounded upon the word of God. And secondly, seeing all the
promises of God, are Yea and Amen in Christ, and be steadfast and established in
Christ only: when she hears by Christ's own mouth, Ephe, 2,
that the promised redemption pertains not to her, how can she continue her
confidence in him? I answer, that first her faith was grounded upon the word of
God, which because she knew most certainly to be an undoubted truth, she will
not be brought from that by any thing that may seem contrary unto it. And
whatsoever she hears of Christ, although she do acknowledge it to be
true, yet she is persuaded, that it is so true, that it takes not away the
truth of Gods former promises And seeing Gods general promises did appertain
to her that did believe them, she retains hope against al hope. And as
Abraham believed that God would raise up Isaac from death to life, to fulfill
his promise, and therefore doubted not to obey the commandment of God in
sacrificing him: so this woman doubted not but God must needs find a means
whereby his promises might be verified to her howsoever Christ was not sent but
to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. And therefore as she does not
reason nor dispute against the word of God, so she does still simply continue
her suit and faith Lord help me. All which imports as much as if she had
said: Although thou art not sent to offer thy grace unto the Gentiles, but unto
the Jews only, yet in as much as God has promised that whosoever puts his
trust in thee shall not be confounded, Isay. 28.
and I am one of those that put my trust in thee, thou can not send me away
confounded, and therefore help me, for Gods promise must needs be true.

Let us learn here so firmly to hold the general principles of our
salvation that we admit nothing that may seem contrary unto them, for of this
we may be assured, that howsoever any thing may seem contrary unto them, yet
from God proceeds nothing, either in word or deed that is contrary. And as
for all the creatures of the world beside, if they should oppose and set
themselves against them, they are not able to prevail. Therefore Saint Paul
says with great confidence. I am persuaded that neither death nor life, Romans 8.
neither Angels, nor principallities, nor powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nether height, nor depth, nor any creature can separate us from
the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. For if God be on our side
who can be against us? or if any be against us, how can they be able to hurt
us? But if God himself seem to be against us, whom have we then to comfort
us? For the Justice of God pronounces Damnation to all that transgres his law.
But for as much as God of his infinite mercy has promised salvation to all
penitent sinners, he has found a mean, by which both his Justice is
satisfied, and yet no penitent sinner that believes his promise shall be
damned.

This only mean is Christ our Savior, who by his obedience has thoroughly
satisfied for all our disobedience and transgression, as many as believe to
have remission of our sins by him Seeing therefore we have not only the
general promises of God contained in the old Testament, but also the full
execution, performance and establishment of them in Christ: what shame is it
for us to be found inferior in faith to this Cananitish woman which had no
more but the first: whereunto nevertheless she cleaued so fast, that by no
means she would be drawn from them. And surely even the very general
promises of God are sufficient, that our faith being builded upon them should
never be removed, for by them God has so bound himself unto us, that by no
means he can revoke his promised salvation. And yet for more confirmation, and
to take a way all scruple of doubt and wavering as the Apostle says to the
Hebrews, he has established them with an oath, that by two things immutable
(in which it is imposible that God should lie) we might have consolation and
comfort, as many as flee for refuge to take hold of the hope that is propounded
and set forth unto us. Therefore the anchor of our faith has two most
unchangeable holds, namely the promise of God, and the oath of God: in both
which it is impossible that God should lie. For as it is impossible that God
should lie when he simply affirms, so is it more impossible (if there may be
degrees in impossibilities) that God should lie when he swears. And as it is
impossible that God should lie, or be forsworn: so is it impossible that any
man or woman, which takes hold of Gods promises by faith, should miss the
performance of them, whatsoever seems to be lets or impediments unto them.
For there can be no let or impediment so great, as should be able to
compel God to lying or perjury, which be as great impossibilities as can be
thought of. For if the general, or universal promises of God should not be
granted to any one person, that embraces them by faith God should be no more
true of his word and his oath: which is as impossible, as that God should be no
more God. For example, seeing God has said: Whosoever calls upon the name of
the Lord, shall be saved: Joel. 2.
If I poor wretch, embracing this promise of God by faith, do call upon the
name of the Lord, whatsoever lets or impediments be in the way, it is
impossible but that I shall be saved. Therefore if all the Angels in heaven
should tell me on their own credit, or as it were by Gods commandment, that I
should be damned, I must hold them all accursed, rather then to grant that God
should be a liar, or perjured person. And forasmuch as Christ has said:
Whosoever believes, and is baptized, shall be saved: if I being Baptized into
the name of Christ, repose my whole trust and confidence in him: whatsoever can
be objected against me, I must of necessity be saved. For neither the justice
of the law, nor the guiltines of my sin, nor the accusation of the Devil, nor
witness of mine own conscience shall be able to condemn me, so long as I depend
upon the promise of God For there is now no condemnation to them that are in
Chrst Jesus, Romans 8.
For whatsoever can be objected out of the word of God howsoever contrary at
the first sight it may seem to be, yet it is not indeed directly contrary to
these and such like general promises. As these saying: They that are in
Christ, walk not after the flesh but after the spirit: Romans 8,
If Christ be in you the body is dead unto sin: they that are Christ's have
crusified the flesh, with the lusts and Concupiscences thereof. Gal. 5.
It is manifest that these and such like places are not to be understood of
perfect innocence free from all sin, but only of such innocence, as is but
inchoated and begun in this life, and made perfect in the life to come.
Therefore if thou feel in thy self, with thy faith in God, an hatred of
sin, and a desire of righteousness, which refraineth thee from much
wickedness, and stirs thee up to some works of virtue, although there
remain in thee the relics of sin, yea a lust unto sin, contrary to the
spirit of God, which also breaks out sometimes into actual sin: yet by
the spirit of Christ that dwells in thee, thy body is dead unto sin; thou
have crucified the flesh with the lusts and concupiscences thereof, thou
walk in the spirit and not in the flesh, and therefore according to Gods
promise, thou shall be saved through thy faith: For thy sins and infirmities
shall not be imputed unto thee, Romans 4.
but the righteousness of Christ shall be imputed to thee by faith.

Let us threfore admit nothing that may seem contrary to our assured
confidece which is grounded upon the word of God: for in the word of God there
is nothing contrary to it, and whatsoever else does withstand it is of no force
to overcome it. For Heaven and Earth shall pass, Math. 34.
but the word of God shall not pass. But let us follow the faith of this
woman, which though she had never so many repulses, yet would she never be
driven away until she had obtained her request; still crying Lord help me, as
though she would say: Thou may well defer thy help, but thou can not deny
it me, yet see what answer Christ makes unto her: It is not good says he, to
take the childrens bread and cast it to the whelps, what an hard and discourteous
answer is this, not only to deny her humble request, but also to account her no
better then a dog, and to tell her that it is no more reason that she should
obtain her suit, then that bread should be taken from childrens mouths, and
given to a dog.

What a great temptation was this? that he which only has the bread of life,
to bestow upon all that he will, does count her no more worthy to have part of
it, then a Dog to eat that which is provided for the Sons of God, for
seeing that God made a covenant with Abraham, and his seed, they only were the
sons of God and therefore those special graces and gifts of God that were
appointed for them, were so proper unto them, as whosoever should make them
common to the Gentiles should abollish the covenant of God. Christ therefore
with all his benifits, was the bread appointed to feed the holy children of
God, which at that time were the Jews only. All other Nations of the world
were but profane dogs, and therefore not worthy to be fed with that holy
bread, which was ordained for Gods own children. Therefore this Heathen woman
presuming to leap upon the table of Gods children, like an unmannerly cur,
deserved even like a cur-dogge to be beaten down and whipped out of the
house, rather then that the childrens bread should be taken from them and cast
unto her: for so much is employed in the words of Christ, for at it were not
meet for him to take the childrens bread, and cast it to dogs, so she like an
importunate dog, ready to pull it out of their mouths deserved great
punishment. Alas poor woman! how should she avoid this temptation? And yet
by force of faith she found means how to withstand this most eger assault, and
in the end to obtain the victory. But here to beat down the pride of the
flesh, we are taught what we are all by nature, and without Christ even no
better then cur-dogges: For this which Christ says of dogs, is meant of all the
Gentiles and heathen people, as we are all, Emperors, Kings Noblemen,
Gentlemen, Wisemen, Valiant-men, Rich-men, Poore-men, all dogs without Christ,
for although man by his first creation was the most excellent of all creatures
in the world, and indeed the son of God, yet by his fall and transgression,
he is become the basest and the vilest and no better then a dog, except he
be raised up and restored by the benifit of our only Savior Jesus Christ. By
this we see what merit or worthiness we have to plead before God, and likewise
what cause we have to be proud among men, which thing if all men would
consider, that by kind without Christ, they are no better then dogs, they would
learn to make less of their painted sheathes, and more to esteem the benifit
of Christ, by which they excel, if they find themselves to be better by
grace, then they are by nature.

But to return to this poor woman, although she be called and accounted of
Christ no better then a dog, and that she willingly confesses: yet she will
not therefore give over her suit, because her faith could not be overthrown
by this assault, for of faith proceeds inuocatiand earnest calling for Gods
help and salvation. For although the answer of Christ seems to take away
all hope from the Gentiles, Romans 10*
yet because she knew that he was promised also to the Gentiles, she is
certainly persuaded that this promise must take effect, and that does Christ
himself partly signify by these words, which are rehearsed by S. Mark.
Mark. 7.
Let the Children be first satisfied. Whereby he shows that the first place
was for the Jews, which then were the children of God; but this helps not
her, because the time was not yet come in which the Gentiles also should be
made the children of God. And therefore she flees to another refuge; and thus
she answers: Ye Lord, but yet the whelps eat of the Crumbs that fall from
their Lords table.

First by this answer it appears how much the certainty of faith does
differ from vain foolish importunity of ignorant persons, which will be
answered by no reason, and yet have no reason to continue their suit, for this
woman does not here directly contrary the words of Christ, but shows how the
word of Christ may be true, and yet she obtained her request also. Therefore
whereas he had first said she was a dog, she willingly confesses it, that she
was no better then a dog, it is true Lord says she I am no better. Secondly
whereas he had said. It is not good to take the Childrens bread, and cast it
to dogs, she confesses that also, saying, yea Lord it is true, neither will I
presume further then the place of a dog, and that is under the table. For
although it is not convenient that dogs should be equal with their Master at
the table yet they are allowed to wait under the table, and to lick up some
few crummes that fall from their masters. I know Gods children are so
liberally and plentifully feasted at Gods table, that some little crumbs may fall
from them, and they have enough to satisfy them. No man in the world could
devise a more proper answer to avoid the objection of Christ: for although the
grace of God was peculiar unto the nation of the Jews, yet it was never so
scantly and pinchingly powered upon them, but that some drops might ouerflow
unto the Gentiles. And although the bread was prepared according to Gods
dispensation only for the children, yet it could not so sparingly be parted
among them, but some crumbs might fall from their table unto the dogs that lay
under and waited for them. For Naaman the Syrian, the woman of Samaria, the
Centurion, and some such other, were refreshed with some crumbs, that fell from
the table of the children of God the Israelites, even at such time when God was
known only in Jury, and Christ was proper unto the Jews. She grants
therefore, that Christ may fulfill the office whereunto he was called of God,
namely, to satisfy the Jews, with the bread ordained for them, and yet let
some crumbs or chippings of the same fall down to refresh her a poor whelpe,
that lay under the table. Here also we may note the true humility, that
follows this certain persuasion, of Gods mercy. This woman confesses her
self to be no better then a dog, and yet she trusts in the mercy of God. By
this place also we may perceive what horrible punishment the Jews deserved at
Gods hand, which either negligently or disdainfully loathed those dainties of
Gods table offered unto them, which other poor wretches so greedily desired,
and could be content even with the crumbs that fell from their table.

And we our selves also have two matters here to consider: first the
unspeakable goodness of God, which of cur-dogs has made us his own children
by adoption: and of such as had no place in the house of God, but of greatest
favor to lie under the table of his children, having converted us from dogs
into his children, has advanced us to sit at his own high table with his
children, even with Abraham, Isaak and Jacob, as he says in the Gospel: Many
shall come from all parts of the world and sit down with Abraham, Mat. 8
Isaak and Jacob in the Kingdom of heaven, when the children of the Kingdom
shall be cast out into utter darkness where shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth. The second thing that we have here to consider is, that we being
turned from dogs into Gods children, do not retain still the nature of
dogs, 2. Pet. 2
that is to return again to their filthy vomit, which they have once cast
out: that being extolled to such dignity that we are made pertakers of Gods
heavenly table, we do not behave our selves irreverently, unthankfully,
vnholily, but as it becomes the children of God, the table of God, the
presence of God, with all reverence, obedience, and thankfulness, to express
the nature of Gods children, Mat: 22
unto which honor we are all called. Yea know the punishment of him which
presumed to sit down at the marriage feast without his wedding garment, he was
pulled out by the ears, and thrust into utter darkness, where shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth. And the same penalty remains to al hipocrits, which
intruding themselves into the church of God never care for repentance, newness
of life, holiness and righteousness, whereunto we are called of God, and not
to uncleanness and filthiness. Remember 1. These: 4
that which was read in the first lesson this day at morning prayer concerning
Esau, Genesis 25.
who because he was a profane fellow, that made no more account of his
birthright (in which was included all the hope of the Church) but that he sold
it for one mess of pottage, as the Apostle says to the Hebrews, he was
afterward deprived of the blessing, and could not be restored unto it, Genesis 27.
^eb. 12.
although he sought it with tears. Remember also the Jews, who being
counted the children of God, for the Covenants that God made with their
Fathers, because they did obstinately refuse the grace, when it was offered,
and would not believe the promise, when it was exhibited, they are broken off
from the stock of Israel, and we that were strangers and branches of the wild
Olive by kind, are grafted into the tree by faith: But so, that if we fall
from faith, Romans 11.
(as Saint Paul says) God shall no more spare us then he did spare them: yea,
we shall be broken off, and they graffed in again: for God is able to graffe
them in again. Let us therefore continue in faith, and show forth the fruits
of faith; for by the fruits the tree shall be known.

Hitherto we have heard how the faith of this woman has bin tried to the
uttermost, which having three repulses even of Christ himself, yet cease not
to put her trust in him: now let us see what success she had in the end.
Although she had never so many repulses and discouragements, yet because she
continued still constant and immovable in faith, she departed not away
confounded. She obtained her request, she inioyed the promise, that whosoever
puts their trust in him, should not be confounded. Let us therefore with
invincible courage of faith hold fast upon Gods promises, and it is impossible
that we shall miss of eternal salvation.

But some will peradventure object, she sued here but for a temporal benefit,
namely, the recovery of her daughter, what pertains this to eternal
salvation? I answer: This temporal benefit was to her a confirmation and
assurance of everlasting salvation, which she had conceived by faith. Which
thing the answer of Christ plainly declares, who does not only grant unto
this her faith, the deliverance of her daughter from the Devil, but generally
whatsoever she would: O woman (says he) great is thy faith, be it unto thee,
even as thou will. First, he commends the greatness of her faith, by which
he is overcome, that he can no longer withold his grace from her. Secondly,
he says, Be it unto thee whatsoever thou will: who doubts but that she would
as well have remission of her sins, and assurance of eternal life, as the health
of her daughter and rather too? Therefore he says, Be it unto thee even as
thou will: as though he would say, with this faith thou may obtain
whatsoever thou will. Let us therefore bring such a faith to God, and we shall
obtain whatsoever we will. Mark. 9
If it were true would some man say that I might have whatsoever I would, I
would wish to have this Church full of gold, or some such like matter. But ye
must remember that Christ here speaks of faith, which is grounded only upon
Gods promises, and therefore whatsoever ye will ask by faith, that God has
promised you shall obtain. Moreover they that be endued with true faith will
wish nothing that is contrary to Gods glory, and therefore there is no such
vain wishing nor woulding with them. And therefore whatsoever God has
promised unto them they make their full account to obtain it: that which he
has not promised, they require but under condition if it may stand with his
will and the setting forth of his glory. Wherefore as we are taught by this
example, let us in all temptations and afflictions flee unto the general
promises of God, with invincible courage of faith. For thereof we shall be sure
to prevail in the end, howsoever it please God to try our faith in the mean
time: for faith does not only overcome the whole world, as Saint John says, 1.
Ioh. 5
which is indeed a noble victory, but faith prevails even with God himself,
when he tries us by most great temptations. Let us therefore follow the faith
of Jacob, when he wrestled with God: for by faith we wrestle with God, when
he proves our faith by temptation. Therefore as Jacob answered, when the
Angel which represented God that wrestled with him, required him to let him
depart, because it waxed day: I will not let thee go (quoth he) before thou
bless me. So let us boldly answer God when he wrestleth with us, Gen: 22
asayling our faith by sundry temptations, we will not let thee go before thou
bless us. For this example God has left in writing for our comfort, and by
this example he has commanded us, by the Prophet Hosea, Hos: 12
to trust in God: for Jacob by faith had power with God, and had power over the
Angel, and prevailed, whereby he was called Israel, that is one that prevails
with God And we, if we be true Israelits, by faith must prevail with God.
Therefore let us not faint in any temptations, but rather as St. James says,
Iam: 1
let us rejoice when we fall into sundry temptations, knowing that the trial of
our faith works patience, which if she have her perfect work, we shall be
perfect and sound. Wherefore as temptations increase, let us increase our
confidence and prayers: let us say with the Prophet David Even as the eyes of
servants, Psalm. 123
look unto the hand of their masters, and as the eyes of a maide^ unto the
hand of her mistress, so our eyes wait upon the Lord our God, until he have
mercy upon us.

Finally, let us follow this woman of Canaan, whose faith could not be overcome
by three repulses, even of Christ himself, but in the end obtained even that
she would: for God by temptation seeks not our overthrow, but our greater
victory, that the trial of our faith, which is much more precious then gold,
(which though it be purged with fire, yet perishes not) might be at the last
to our praise, honor, and glory at the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. To
whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, be al honor, glory, power, and
dominion both now and for ever. Amen.


