A Watch-worde for War. Not so new as necessary: Published by reason of the
disperced rumors amongst us, and the suspected coming of the Spanyard against
us. Wherein we may learn how to prepare our selves to repel the Enemy, and
to behave our selves all the time of that trouble.

Compendious for the memory, comfortable for the matter, profitable for the
time.

Ezekiell, 21, 12. The terrors of the sword shall be upon my people: smite
therefore upon thy thigh. Printed by John Legate, Printer to the University of
Cambridge. 1596.

Royal English blazon, or coat of arms.

Eternal, good, and gracious God, stretch forth thy saving hand,
Let not our sins provoke thy wrath, but look upon this Land,
In thee we do repose our trust, as one that never fail,
Subvert both far and fawning foes, they never may prevail:
Alas what are we of our selves, and want thee on our side,
But even as chafe against the wind, not able to abide.
Extend therefore thy heavenly help, and though we were but ten,
They shall repel ten thousand foes, if thou do say Amen.
He that does rule the hearts of all, their bodies can subject,
An arm of flesh is of no force where he does not direct.
Remember Lord our sovereign Prince, thine own anointed dear,
Expel her foes, increase her friends, no hurt may happen here:
Give to her subjects faithful hearts, to love her as they ought,
Infold all secret trecheries, and bring them unto naught.
Now for thy mercies sake good Lord, unto our suit incline,
And so direct her highness days, she may at last be thine.
To the right Worshipful, the Mayor of the borrough of Kings Lynne, and to his
Associats or Brethren the Aldermen of the same Town, C: G: wishes much
health with prosperity, and all happiness with eternity.
PLato that divine Philosopher (right Worshipful) did cast out of the
commonwealth of wisemen which he made, Homer and Hesiode two Poets, because
he perceived some vanity in their Poems. Ovid never more justly deserved
exilement, then for his lascivious verse, because they incline to the
nourishment of vice.

If we punish such by penal laws, which use false waights and measures, those
are not to be permitted, which diuulgate corrupt dyscourses: for these are
means to vitiat the mind, the other can but defraud us of money.

That which is infectious to publish, must needs be infamous to patronize; it
is a credit to give countenance to a good work; for that cause I have made
choice of such a matter, as shall neither offend your W. for vanity in the
invention, or for indignity in the protection.

The Subject handled is war, the rumor of it is fearful, and therefore the
discourse of it may be fruitful; which having finished, I have presented to
your W. not to that end many aim at, in giving whereof Gratian speaks, Do
vt des vel do vt facias. Decret cause. 14. To give to have given again, but as
a gift proceeding of mere good will; and I am the rather induced hereunto, for
these causes.

First in respect of promise; the Ciuilians say, Vir iustus est vota et
promissa praestare, I promised long since to gratify your W. with some grauer
attempt. The Philosopher says, that the bird of Egypt being old, purges all
the humors of her body, by eating spyces of Arabia, and sends forth of her
mouth a sweet breath; so I having expelled the vanities of youth, by the
experience of more years, may have a more ripe and seasoned judgment: for as
Euripides says, the second actions are more singular; we see that Aritificers
be more excellent, in their second works, then much more are the studies of
the mind, always amended by future meditation, as Cicero says, Posteriores
cogitationes sapientiores esse solent, the latter cogitations are wont to be
wiser.

Secondly, in regard of your kindness; which not only deserves to be
cannonized for a virtue by the Schoolmen, T. Aqui. Art, 1, but to be spoken of
to the reproach of many ungrateful persons in this age: for there be some that
respect not a gift when it is given; others, that will sooner crucify then
gratify a well-willer; but there is in your W. both a civil kind of courtesy
to accept, and also, more then a common course of kindness to requite; now it
is true that Tully says, Omnes immemorem benificii oderunt, all men hate him
who is not mindful of a benefit, and therefore if Heathen men would punish
unthankful persons, with servitude, as Claudius Caesar did: Sueton, cap. 25,
and with death, as the Persians did, Melanct. lib. 1, what were I worthy to
have, if I should not remember your kindness and some-way remunerate again.

These things considered (having neither store of Indian treasure to bestow,
or costly Iuels of Egypt to offer) I could do no less then dedicate my
labors to your W. Vltra posse non est esse, there is no defect in affection
but in action; but Kings in former times would not refuse gyfts of good will,
though they brought but a handful of water; Christ him self did accept the
widows offer, though she gave but a myte, and therefore I hope you will not
reject my simple present, though it be but a piece of paper. So presuming of
your accustomed kindness, I commit the protection hereof to your W. and the
preservation of your selves, to the Almighty, who make you glorious Citizens
in heaven, as he has made you grave Senators upon earth.

Your Worships always in the Lord, C. G.

To the Reader.
THE mutabilitie of reports had almost dismaide me in proceeding: for one
while there run nothing but rumors of war, an otherwhile there pass many
speeches of peace; the same mouth that says at one time, the Spanyard will
come, another time affirms, we need not expect his coming. There be many
that wish wars because they cannot thrive with peace, and others that speak of
peace, because they love not to hear of war; but (good Reader) as there is no
smoke without fire, so there arises no rumor without some original, for rumors
are commonly forerunners of war. When tidings of war were voyced in
Judah, the enemies tarried not long after; and therefore the speeches which are
given out of the Spanyard, may put us in expectation of his coming; he which
has made so great preparation for war, may be suspected to weight
opportunity to effect his will.

There were many false Prophets amongst the Jews, which persuaded them of
peace for some lewd pretense, when they knew the Assyrians were ready to
assault them, Ierem, 6, 14. I pray GOD there be not some false-harted subjects
amongst us, that give out reports of peace for some ill purpose, when they are
persuaded the Spanyard is approaching.

Howsoever it be, dubia timenda, things doubtful are to be dreadful; It is
better to live in fear then security: for fear makes us to fly to God, as
Iehoshaphat did when he feared the Moabites to come upon him, 2, Chro, 20, 3,
but security makes us forget God, as David did when he remained secure in
Jerusalem. 2, Sam, 11. The fear of war is to be doubted even in the fruition
of peace, for as the wiseman says, There is a time of war as well as a time
of peace, Eccles, 3, 8. Such ever taste the less troubles in the tempest of
war, which sail with a martial foresight in the calm of peace.

But admit the Spanyarde has disperced some part of his Navy, or has some
other cross occasions to hinder his coming hither this year, yet let us
persuade our selves, that as God made the Amorites and others to be as pricks
and thorns to the Israelits, Joshua, 23, 13, so he has made the Spaniard to be
as a prick and thorn to Englishmen, insomuch as we shall never be so assured
of peace, but we may always live in suspicion of war: and therefore this
treatise of war cannot be frivolous.

I remember Cicero says, it is one point of policy in peace to prepare for
war; now if outward furniture to defend the body, is expedient to be in
preparation, though there be no war; the inward Armor to asist the soul,
cannot be impertinent though there be peace.

These and some other respects have moved me to set forth this Treatise,
considering what Seneca says, Non viuit qui nemini viuit, he lives not, that
lives to none but himself; therefore I thought it to be a sin by
concealing, which might turn to a more profit by publishing.

Thus being loath to put any in fear of war, although it be good policy to
suspect it, or in hope of peace when the Enemy is so busy about warlike
preparation, I leave the censuring hereof, to such as know best under God, and
the success of both to him that sees more then any man, which is the
almighty Jehovah, whom Augustine says to be Totus oculus, all Eye, because
he best sees all things, whose purpose will take place whatsoever we hear,
either by flying reports, or by fabulous prophecies.

C. G.

War.
THE Latin word Bellum, is so called (says Cicero) of Belluis, cruel,
beast-like or savage; some suppose it comes of Bellona, whom the Poets feigned
to be the Goddess of War, whose felicity was in the effusion of blood. The
Etymology of the word does not much differ from the nature of the subject.

There be two kinds of war, 1. Bellum internum. 2. Bellum externum.

1. Bellum internum, inward war, is that we commonly call the spiritual
war, therefore this life is very fitly by one of the Fathers called a
warfare. August. 45. Ser. de tem. For the Spirit has many egregious enemies,
which continually combat and encounter with it.

The flesh is called Caro a corrupto, because it does corrupt, or as the
Schooleman says, it is called Caro quia corruit, because it does overthrow.
This is one enemy that impugneth against the Spirit; From whence are wars
(says the Apostle) even of your lusts that fight in your members: Iam. 4.
Hereupon Paul well alludeth when he says, Though we walk in the flesh, we
do not war after it. 2. Cor. 10. 3.

The world, as one says well, is called Mundus ab immundo, for it shroudeth
much filthiness under a fair show, therefore Austen said not without cause, Si
te delectat hic mundus, semper vis esse immundus: if we take pleasure in it,
we shall always be impure. This world is another enemy that warreth against
the spirit. As war commonly preceedeth before victory, so the Apostle
approves the world after a sort, to war, by showing the means how to get
the victory, in these words, This is our victory that overcomes the world,
even our faith. 2. John. 5.

The devil, he is called Dlabolus, quia est aduersus, because he is against us,
and therefore Peter calls him adversary, 1. Pet, 5, 8. This devil is
another enemy that warreth against the Spirit, for it is written of him, that
he being wroth with the Woman, went and made war with the remnant of her
seed. Apoc, 12, 17. S. Gregory says, that the manifold wars of our
forefathers, are shadows of those wars we must have with the devil. Greg:
23, quest. capit. 1. nisi bellum.

This War is dangerous in two respects, 1. of the number of the enemies 2.
of the nature of the enemies

1. Of the Number: for there are three to one. The Philosopher says, Ne
Hercules contra duos, he must be a strong man that is able to resist two,
therefore three to one is greater odds. When Joshua sent but three thousand men
against the City of Ai, the Citizens were able to shift with them. Joshua, 7,
4, but when he sent thirty thousand strong men against it, the^ the City
was soon sacked. Iosu. 8, 3. If the body be not able to withstand outward
violence where there is inequality of enemies, how should the Spirit, where
there is such advantage of the inward adversaries?

2 Of the Nature: for they practice all policies to prevail with the spirit:
insomuch as many times they make a battery and breach in the very best, as in
David, Peter, and diverse other. This short period of the melli-fluous father,
does pretely describe the nature of these enemies, Mundus clamat decipiam, Caro
inficiam, diabolus interficiam, Christus dicit reficiam: quem sequereris? the
world cries I will deceive, The flesh cries I will infect, the devil cries
I will kill, but Christ says I will refresh, which of these will thou follow?
But as there be many mighty and undermining enemies against the Spirit, so God
has not left it destitute of assistance to animate it.

There is no King will send forth his subjects without weapons in outward
wars: even so the king of al kings, has dealt by the Spirit in this inward
warfare; for he has not left it naked and open to the enemies, but has given
it Armor for the defense, as the Breast Plate of righteousness, the Shield of
faith, the Helmet of salvation, the Sword of the Spirit. etc. Ephe, 6.

This spiritual Armor is of greater force to subdue the inward enemies, then
politic weapons are to repel the outward adversaries: therefore Paul says,
the weapons of our warfare are not carnal but mighty through God to cast
down holds. 2, Cor, 10, 4.

In other wars, the Soldiers never go to fight without a Captain to
conduct them, even so has God dealt by the Spirit, it has Christ to be the
Captain, and therefore we are called Soldiers, because we fight under his
banner. Now if Saul had good success in his battles, because David being a
godly General directed his bands, the Spirit shall speed well in this
conflict, because Christ is the Captain, who is far better then David.

Human Captains will sometime recoyle and shrink from their Soldiers in
extreamities, this heavenly Captain will persist with his Soldiers in all
perils: for (as one of the ancient writers says) he will ouer-looke us
fighting, succor us fainting, and crown us ouercomming.

This spiritual War of all other wars is most Fearful. Famous.

It is most fearful in many respects, for first, if we faint in this fight,
it is commonly the cause of all other wars, for outward wars are sent to
intimate Gods indignation for our security, to the end we might be excited and
fortified in this spiritual fight. God would never send outward enemies to
afflict the body, but that he perceiues the inward enemies do prevail with
the Spirit.

2 In other wars, though we be taken captives, yet we may be ransommed for
money, but if we be subdued by the spiritual enemies, there is no hope of
ransom, as the Psalmist says. He cannot give his ransom to God, Psalm, 49,
7.

3 In other wars, we can but loose our goods, lyms, or (at the uttermost) our
lives, though the enemies work their wills on us: but in this spiritual
battle we loose both bodies and souls if the enemies get the upper hand.
Therefore S. Ierom says well, Septies stultior est, ego qui nudo corpore
poneret se in medio hostium armatorum: that such an one is seven times more
foolish, or in worse plight, then he which does hazard his naked body in the
midst of an armed host.

It is most famous if the Spirit prevails: for in other wars, such as
get the conquest, may perhaps purchase some momentanie riches or renown
amongst men: but in this inward war, if we be victorious, we shall obtain a
Crown, not of gold, but of glory, not earthly, but eternal. Revel. 3.

Men in outward battles, will venture far to get the victory, in regard of
peace or praise, then how courageous ought we to be in this spiritual
combat, to get the conquest, that we may attain the celestial paradise,
where the pleasures are inexplicable, 1, Cor, 2, 9: and indeterminable, Psalm,
16, 11. These reasons were sufficient to enforce us to be vigilant and valiant
in this inward war.

2 Bellum externum, outward war is of three sorts 1 Innaturale. 2 Civil. 3
Commune.

1 Bellum innaturale, unnatural war, is such as carries with it a kind of
abhorrencie in nature,

Whereof there be two sorts, War of ignorance. War of knowledge.

War of ignorance, is that which the Heathens used when they did sacrifice
their children to the fire, or sley them to some cerimoniall end. Therefore the
Wise Man says, they lived in Immagno inscitiae bello, great wars of
ignorance, Wisdom, 14, 21.

Such was the war which Paul made in persecuting the Saints, which he
confesses himself he did of ignorance.

War of knowledge, was the war of some of the people of Jerusalem, of whom
it is said, that they filled that place with the blood of innocents. Ierem, 19.

Such was also the war of bloody Boner in Queen Mary's days, in the
destruction of so many Martyrs.

1 The Heathen men had no illumination but by the light of nature, and
therefore their ignorance is the more to be excused. Acts 17, 30. But as for
those of Jerusalem, and that bloody Boner, their wars cannot be justly said
to be of ignorance: for the Prophets reproved the one often times for the fact,
and the Martirs alleged Scriptures to the other, always to disprove his
proceedings.

2 Bellum civil, civil war is that which arises within a Nation it self.

This war is either Of Division Of Rebellion.

Of Division, when a land is divided within it self, as when two strive for
government, such division was in the land of Judah, between Rehoboam and
Jeroboam, as you may read in the 1. Kings 12, and the like division is, or was
in France between the lawful King and Duke de Main.

Of Rebellion, when subjects do repugne or rebel against their King, as we
read of Absalom, how he rebelled against King David to dirept the diadem from
him, and hereunto may be added these (not much different in nature but in
name) which we call, Conspiracy, Insurrection, Commotion, Mutiny, etc.
Whereof we have examples. We read of Zimri how he conspired against King
Elah, 1. King 16. we may speak more properly of all these practices within
this land, of the sinister and sundry conspiracies against the person of our
Prince, of the unnatural insurrection in the North, of the unkind commotion of
Ket and his confederates, but as their actions be odious, so their ends were
ignominious.

3 Bellum commune, common War, some call it National, the war of
Countries, of this war our Savior Christ speaks when he says, Nation
shall rise against Nation, and Realm against Realm, Math. 24. 7. Of this
war because occasion and opportunity is offered (by reason the Spanyard is
suspected to rise against England) I will entreat of for our comfort.

This kind of War brings a fear vvithall two vvayes. 1. Auditione. 2.
Action.

1 The very rumor or hearsay of this war is dreadful. Josephus reports
that when it was voyced that Tryphon had gathered a great Host to come into the
land of Judah, the people were in great trembling and fear, Antiq. 13. cap.
When the children of Israel heard that the Philistims would come against them,
the text says they were afraid, 1. Sam. 7. 7. When tidings was brought to
Iehoshaphat how the Amonites intended to battle against him, the Scripture
says that Iehoshaphat feared, 2. Chro. 20. We see by experience in our
selves, that when it is given out, the Spanyard prepares to come against us,
how many of us be smitten with a kind of fear, when we do but hear of it.

2 If the rumor and report of war be so fearful, what is the very action
it self. I remember a pretty instance to this purpose, when David was to
encounter with his enemies, some of his men said unto him: See we be afraid
here in Judah, how much more if we come to Kelah against the host of the
Philistims. 1, Sam. 23, 3. Let us apply this to our selves, if we be afraid to
hear of wars at home in our houses, how fearful would we be if we came in
the face of the enemy? Saul was a notable and worthy warrior: for he had sore
wars all his days, 2, Sam. 3, 1. Yet is it written of him, that when he
savve the host of the Philistims, he was afraid and his heart was sore
astonished, 1, Sam. 28, 5. Then no marvel though England (having dwelt without
fear under our gracious Queen, as Israel did under Solomon, 1, Kings 4, 25)
should be somewhat fearful of vvarres, because it has been accustomed to
peace, when Saul was so fearful that was never without war.

Many men are feared for many respects, some man is feared for his godliness
as David was, an other is feared for his wisdom as Solomon was, but the
Spanyard he is feared for his cruelty as Pharaoh was, and therefore who
fears not to be afflicted of such as have no fear of God?

We must consider there is a twofold fear, 1 Timor laudabilis. 2 Timor
detestabilis.

1 Timor laudabilis, It is a laudable fear, when men by that means are
exscited to look unto the Lord, this fear was in Iehoshaphat a godly King, it
is said that he feared and set him self to seek the Lord, 2, Chro. 20, 3.
Flesh and blood is frail, and therefore soon affrighted, but happy are those
which in their fear, can follow so good a course as this King did.

There be others that are terrified by remembrance of their misdeeds, and fear
that God will afflict them, and so by this means they are moved to
amendment; This fear is laudable. When judgments were pronounced, and
impendant upon Sion, it is said the Sinners were afraid, and a fear came
upon the hypocrites: Esaias, 33, 14, and therefore, if this fear upon us, arise
by reason of our sins, and for fear of Gods wrath we depart from them, we
need not fear the Spaniard, though he put us in fear of war.

2 Timor detestabilis, detestable fear proceeds two ways, Of Cowardice, Of
Despair.

Of Cowardice, some are afraid of their own shadow, as Gaal was, who took the
shadow of the Mountains for men: Judge, 9, 36. Now, as a coward can do little
good in the vvarres with his weapon, so he may do much hurt with his words by
discouraging others: and therefore this martial exhortation was made in Deuteronomy,
20, 8, Whosoever is afraid and faynt-harted, let him go and return unto his
house, least his bretherens heart faynte like his heart. There be many such
faint-harted men, which does argue no humanity but effemenacie. When open
proclamation was made in the wars of Gedeon that such should return home
which were timorous or fearful, of 32. thousand, there departed 22. thousand
men away, Judge, 7, 3. If the Spaniards come against us, let us not be
fearful, considering our cause is so good, that we ought to show our selves
courageous, and not covvards.

3 Of Despair; If God casts fear upon a man, and in his fear he despair
of Gods protection, this is to be taken for a great punishment, because it is
inflicted upon the wicked, as appears in Deuteronomy, 28, 66, Thy life shall hang
before thee, and thou shall fear both night and day. And in Leuit, 26, 36, I
will send a faintnes into their hearts. It was the judgment God imposed upon
the impious Babilonians, that their hands shall be weakened, and their hearts
melt, and they shall be afraid: anguish and sorrovve shall take them, Esaias, 13,
8, and therefore, howsoever it fall out, God defend us from this fear, yea
though we should take a little foil of the enemy, as the Israelits did of
the men of Ai, far be it from us we should be so fearful that our hearts
should melt away like water, as theyrs did, Joshua 7, 5, in seioyning faith
from fear.

We must consider for our benefit generally three things, 1 What War is.
2 Who is the Author of it 3 Wherefore it is sent.

1. What War is.
THE Poets feigned War to be a River running with blood, by reason of the
manifold and miserable massacres and slaughters. We read in Esaias, how the
Lord threatened so great a slaughter among the Moabites, that the waters of
Dimon shall be full of blood, Esaias 15, 9: so merciles are men in war that it
may well be true which Homer says, There is some sacietie of all things, except
it be of war.

Some other of the Ethnic writers, have deemed war to be a fire always
flaming, because they commonly use to consume Cities and Towns when they are
besieged, with fire, as Jericho was by Joshua, and Jerusalem by the king of
Babel.

These be rather descriptions of the fruits and effects of war, then a true
definition.

The Philosophers define war to be the pride of Princes; We read of
Alexander, that he was so aspyring minded, that he thought the whole world too
little to satisfy his lust;

This is no perfect definition; for by this reason we may define war to be a
matter of ingratitude, because David took occasion by the unkindness of Hanun
to attempt war, 2, Sam, 10, 7.

Some of the vvryters define war to be a forceable and hostile discention,
undertaken by lawful Edict for the repressing of injuries; This is the
inferior and active definition, but not the effectual: for war is nothing
else but a divine scourge for sin; Esaias 10, 26, Deuteronomy, 28.

IF War be a scourge, we must not laugh and set light by it: for as we
deem that child graceles which will not shed tears when he is scourged of
his Master, so we are to be thought godles, if we will not sorrow and implore
under the scourge of God.

This meets with two contrary motions, which proceed of sinister Grief.
Joy.

1 Sinister grief is that, which is conceived upon carnal occasions; as for
example, it may be there are many when they hear of wars, it is grievous
to them in two respects.

1 Of their expense. 2 Of their service.
1 Of their Expense, because they are to be at some charges in providing of
Armor, and other martial contributions: what a contemptible and griple
grief is this.

There is no Prince in Christendom ever possessed peace so long as our
gracious Sovereign; It is written of Judah and Israel, they dwelt without
fear, every man under his own Vine, 1, Kin. 4, 25, the like has been verified
by us in England; Read throughout all Chronicles, and see how many of her
predecessors had the like Alcion days. Search the Scriptures, and you shall
find how that beloved Land of Israel never had the like fruition of peace as
England had, unless it were in Salomons days; Descend into other Countries,
and you shall see how the Low Countries have been afflicted with war 23.
years together; how France has never been free from intermissiue wars;
as for Spain, I need not speak of it.

These things considered, what ungrateful and disloyal persons are these,
which having by continuance of peace gathered plenty, and with their plenty
are so vncheerefull to part with a little to defend their Queen and their
Country? Tully has a pretty saying, He that desires peace, let him prepare
for war. How can a man be sure to possess any thing in his own Country,
unless he provides to repel the enemy that comes against it; Therefore
that is a very mellifluous saying of one of the Fathers, Sumptus pro militia
honorabilis est, the cost for warfare is very honorable, for it is a mean to
defend our lives, lyberties and lyuings, and to preserve our wives and
children. Miserable are those men that will not strain themselves at a pynch
to defend these, when of covetousness by sparing cost, they may be
constrained to forsake all.

2 Of their Service, others are grieved at VVarres, because they must then
leave their wives, children and goods, or rather because they must hazard their
lives? Far better it is for one to venture his life like a man, then to be
killed in his house like a beast; Is it not better to hazard the life of one in
an house, then in forbearing to fight, to bring in danger the whole family?
The divine Philosopher says, Nascimur pro Patria, we are borne for our
Country, and therefore we must regard our Prince and commonweal more then
our own private lives. 2, Sam. 10, 12. We have example in Judith, who for
the good of her Country, put her life in great hazard in the host of Olofernes,
let not the courage of a woman condemn the humanity of a man; for that is a
reproach. Ierem. 51, 30. Who can dye a more honorable death then for his
Country, therefore we shall read that amongst the Romans there were the
Decians, Codrians, and the brethren called Phileni, and amongst the Grecians,
there were Marathonia, Salanina, and diverse others, who of their own accord
gave their lives for their Countries. D. P. Martyr in Com. Romans Brutus for the
preservation of his Country, did slay his own children. Virgil thus writes
of him; Vicit amor patriae, etc. Let not us which be Christians have less love
and aleageance then Heathens.

From hence there is a good note to be observed of such, who by unequal
oppressing and ill entreating, may be the cause of this kind of grief,
therefore they are to consider how they may for their own private displeasures
oppress and abuse men under color of some lawful business.

Injury and anger may be offered and effected under. 1 Office. 2 Art.

1 Under office by these two, A Magistrate. A Captain.

By a Magistrate, amongst the Romans, the Senators were called Patres
conscripti, appointed Fathers: for a Magistrate is nothing but a father of the
Country, yet such an one as has derived authority for these causes, as no man
doubts but he may show much favor where he affects, so all men may know
if he bears a grudge to one, he may meet with him under color of his
Commision many ways; He may raise him in the Subsedie without equality: he
may pack him forth for a common Soldier, though he be unfit, he may
ouer-charge him with Supplies, etc. He may in other matters remember him, as in
extreme taxations for the poor, in unreasonable ratements, for a Town, etc:
Albeit I know not (and I pray God there be not) such, yet it may fall out to
be true which Alexander said to Mammea, there is nothing sometime more
pernicious to a common wealth, then to have things done by Deputies. D. Mar. in
com. Romans cap. 12, fol. 418.

We have examples in the Scriptures, of such as have colored their own
malice and dyspleasures, under pretense of some lawful business.

Haman had a private malice against Mordecai, because he would not move his
cap or do him reverence, he would not for shame seem to revenge it himself,
though he were in great office, but he thought he would be even with him under
color of the Kings business by some devise or other, as you may read in Ester,
3, 8, etc.

The Rulers and Governors had a secret spite to Daniell, because he was far in
favor with the King, yet they would not offer him an immediate bad measure, but
they consulted among them selves, to move the King to make a Law, that by
color thereof, they might have their minds of good Daniell. Dan. 6, 8, etc.

If any of our Magistrates should color their own pryuate malice under the
Queens business, although their secret pretense be no more known to her
Majesty, then the intendment of these practices were to the Kings, yet by
these examples let them fear, least their doings come to light, as the other
did (albeit they deserve not so fearful a punishment as befell those) that
they purchase displeasure of their Prince, who cannot abide to bolster such
abuses.

By a Captain, who knows not how such as be experimented professors of Arms
being in office and action, are a kind of protection for the time to certain
persons; for this cause when David was a Captain in war, there gathered to
him all men that were in trouble, and all men that were in debt, and all those
that were vexed in mind, and he was their Prince or Captain, 1, Sa. 22, 2.
Besides, it is not to be spoken how many ways they may pleasure a man in
war, if they be vvilling; yet on the contrary if a Captain be offended at
his Soldier and bear him in the spleen, he may quyte it under color of his
office: he may make martage of him, he may vvearie him with wants and
discurtesies, he may cause him to end his days in every light skirmishe; He
was a Warrior that said so himself, and no marvel, for we have an example
of it in the Scriptures, Ioab did of purpose place Vriah in the forefront of
the battle, that he might be slain by the Philistims: Vriah and all the Host
were ignorant of the murderous intent, but Ioab did it under color of his
office, because he was a Captain. That God which sees the secrets of the
heart did behold this homicide, and he left not him unpunished which procured
it; The act was done in secret to avoid shame amongst men, but the
punishment was public, that it might be example to others. Which example
may be a warning to all VVarriors, to teach them to take heed how they revenge
their own private displeasures, under the color of their lawful callings. 2,
Sam, 12, 12.

2 Under Art, by such as these Chirurgians, Physicians and diverse other

These men, if they be angry with a man (especially if he be their patient)
they may effect it under color of their Art or practice: but because it is
impertinent in this place to speak of, I will pretermit it.

Joy, as we have heard of some which are sorry, so there be others which
rejoice to hear of vvarres.

This sinister Joy is commonly incident to these 1 Martial attendants. 2
Desperate persons. 3 Unskillful persons.

1 Martial attendants be such as these Decayed soldiers. Under officers.
Warlike workme^.

Decayed Soldiers, such as depend upon wars, they are welcome to them, for
they perceive the world is come to this pass, that as the Physician is but
little regarded but in time of sickness, so Soldiers are but little set by but
when there is need of their service; Certes it is pity that any approved
Soldier should be put to shifts. Valorous Caesar would never suffer it in his
time; misery may constrain a man too much; but yet for any to rejoice when
there is common cause of sorrow, and for his own private commodity, to desire
a general calamity, the one argues his dissolute mind to God, and the other
bewrays him to be a bad member to his Country. I would have such men as these
consider, that the use of many things may be good though the things themselves
be naught. M. Calvin to that effect says, Purus est multarum rerum vsus,
quarum vitiosa est origo. Call. in Math. cap. 5, verse 37. The use of many
things is pure, whose original is impure. From hence I infer, that although
the use of a Soldiers is necessary, yet to profess a soldier (as Erasmus
says) is of it self the puddle and sincke of all mischief; For to live by
spoils and spilling of blood what life more miserable; Besides, it is nothing
delectable to God, but rather makes any less acceptable in some good action,
as we read of David, who was not only a valiant, but a virtuous warrior, but
when he went about to build the Temple, the Lord said he should not, because
he had been a man of war, and had shed blood. 1, Chro, 28, 3.

Under officers, such as may reap any profit in their places, as Clarks of
Bands, which may get some benefit by the Book, by entering, altering, or
quitting of Soldiers: these are glad of wars for gain sake. Notable is that
example of Gehasi for this purpose; Elisha was a good man, he did a notable
cure in the Syrian Captain for mere good will without any gyfts, but his
servant Gehasi without his knowledge, would needs take a brybe. We have many
godly Lieuetenants and Captains in Europe, who although they themselves
respect rewards no more then Elisha did, yet such as be under them (without
their priuities) perhaps like Gehasi do look to get some-vvhat that way, to
be gratified one way or other. But as Gehasi for his covetous act was afterward
turned away by his Master, with a grievous punishment, 2, Kings 5, so let
these take heed least their doings be discerned by their Masters, and they
be put out of office with displeasure, as Gehasi was.

Warlike workmen, such as live by making, mending, or selling of Armor,
wars are welcome to them, for as the Lawyers thrive best when men are most
litigious, so are they in time of war most set to work, for in time of peace
they profit not; Therefore, as some bad Lawyer does secretly wish that men
would be contentious, that he might have Clyents, so it fares with these
kind of men, they vvish wars, that they may have work: they care not
whose house be on fire, so theyrs be safe, they grieve not at war, because
it is sent for a punishment, but they rejoice at it, because it is occasion of
their profit.

2 Desperate persons, such as have nothing to loose, nor wife or children to
look to, they are glad of wars, all Countries are a like to them, hab, nab,
fall back, fall edge, all is one to them, whether they be friendly foes to
the enemy, or deadly enemies to their Country; so they may shift, they care not
what shift they make; they laugh when they see others lament, it does them good
to see other men waste their goods, because they have nothing: they will rail,
and do hope to reign over rich me one day; they will not let to say they
look to be owners of their lyuings, and to have their possessions when they
shall live in poverty; As we read of the besieging of Jerusalem, how the rich
were killed or made captives, but as for the poor, they were left still
living, and the enemy gave them the Vineyards and Fields of the rich men.
Iere. 39, 6, 10.

3 Unskillful persons, they rejoice at war because they know not what it is, as
the Philosopher says, Dulce bellum inexpertis, war is sweet to such as
never taste it, because in ordinary traynings, they use to skirmish for their
learning: or in their May-games for delight; They think war to be a matter
of merriment. Alas, it is an easy matter to play Hercules in our houses, or
Alexander upon the stages: but it is somewhat to follow the^ in the field,
where every bullet does threaten death.

2 Who is the Author of War.
We must consider that there is 1 A special Author. 2 A manual Author.

1 THE special Author is GOD, as appears by his own speech, when he says:
I will send plagues upon them, the sword shall kill them without, and in the
Chambers fear. Deuteronomy, 32, 22, 25. It is said in the Parable, that the King sent
forth his VVarriors. Math, 22, 7.

The Israelits confessed all their afflictions to come of God: for (say they)
he has spoiled us, and he will heal us, he has wounded us, and he will
bind us up. Hos. 6, 1. He is therefore called the Lord of Hosts, because he
rules and reigns our all hosts.

2 The manual Author, to our apprehension is the Enemy, because we perceive
the Spanyarde makes great preparation, and purposes to come against us; Many
of us take him to be the Author, in that he appears to be the Actor.
Augustine says well, they which make war, are not so much th Authors as the
Ministers of God, Aug. 10. quest. super John: for he is both the Passive,
Missiue, and motive Author, as appears by pregnant examples in the Scriptures.

He is the Motive Author, for he mouth and stirs up the Enemy, or else he
could not come. The Philistims and Arabians came against Judah, to destroy it,
yet they came not of their own accord, for it is written, the Lord styrred up
against Iehoram (the King of Judah) the spirit of the Philistims: 2, Chro, 21,
16. The Medes and Persians made war against Babylon, this was not their own
voluntary act, for the Lord had said before, I will styr up the Medes against
it. Esaias, 13, 17. Therefore we may gather from these examples, that if the
Spaniard with his confederates bend their forces to us, it is not altogether
his own seeking, but God which exciteth him to it; For as P. Martyr says, It
is God that stirs up cruel Princes and Tyrants, which may be called the
host of God. In com. Romans

He is the Missiue Author: for after he has excited the Enemy, he sends him,
or else he could not approach. The Chaldees, Aramites, Ammonites, and Moabites
besieged Judah, their coming consisted not in their own election, for it is
written the Lord sent against him (that is the King of Judah,) bands of the
Chaldees, bands of the Aramits, etc. 2, Kings, 24, 2. Nabuchadnezar with his
power came against Jerusalem to destroy it, the choice was not in him to tarry
or retire, for the Lord had said before, I will send them. Ierem, 25, 9. Now, if
the Spaniard has a purpose to come against us, it is in God to dispose: his
coming lies not in his own liberty, but the Lords.

He is the Passive Author: for albeit he first stirs, and afterward sends
the Enemy, yet he can do nothing when he is come, without Gods sufferance. The
Israelits had grievously transgressed, for which cause they fell into the hands
of their enemy: the enemy could not have prevailed without Gods permission; for
it is written that God delivered them into the hands of spoylers that spoiled
them. Judge. 2, 14.

Since it is God that stirs, sends and suffers the Enemy to do his good
pleasure, they are but his servants, as the Lord termed Nabuchadnezer his
servant, Ierem, 27, 6. Or his instruments, as Esaias calls them, the weapons of
his wrath, chap, 13, 5. And they are so fitly called, because the Lord does
make them serve him by constraint, and that which they do of malice, he
directs and turns it to his honor and glory; so that from hence we may
conclude that God is the special Author of War.

In that God is the Author, we may observe three things, 1 His power by the
effects. 2 His displeasure by the action. 3 His love by the end.

1 His power by the effects, though Kings and Princes are as Gods upon earth,
yet there is a God above them, who can bridle their wills as he will: this
should teach us to rely upon God: for admit the Spanyard has a purpose to
come against us, yet this is our comfort, his heart is in the hands of God,
whose power is such, that if it be his good pleasure, he can alter the
determination of the Spanyard, before he sets forth to fight, as he did by
Rehoboam, when he was bent to war against the Isralites. 1, Kings 12, 24:
He can intercept his coming when he is upon the Seas, and drown him, as he
did Pharaoh and his host. When he is about our Coasts, he can put a hook
into his nostrils, as he did by Senacherib, and make him return that way he
came, 2, Chro. 32, or he can dispierce and scatter them into unknown Coasts,
as he did by the Spanyard his last viage. Such is the power of God, as one of
the ancient Fathers says, that there is not any thing done, but that he would
have to be done, either suffering it to be done, or he him self doing it.
August. lib. voc. Enchiredion ad Laurentium.

2 His displeasure by the action; for it is an argument of his anger, and
therefore you shall read in the Scriptures, that God never sends war but
in his wrath, the Lord him self speaking of Jerusalem which was besieged by
the enemy, says: In my wrath I smote thee. Esaias 60, 10. In the 2, and 3,
Chapters of the Judges, the Lord sent and set the Enemy against the Isralites,
many times: It appears in those places that he never did it, but when his
wrath or anger was kindled against them: Now the anger of God is grievous, for
the Prophet says of him, that he smote the people in anger with a continual
plague. Isaiah 14, 6. Solomon says that the Kings wrath is like the roaring of
a Lion, Pro. 19, then what is his wrath, who is King of Kings, this should
move us to take this course, we see when the Prince is displeased with his
vassaile, he will use all means to pacify him, for fear he shall be cast
clean out of favor, so should we when we perceive the anger of God is
kinled against us, seek all possible ways to appease him, for fear he give
us over to the lust of our Enemies, and therefore let every one of us pray
with Daniell, and say as he did in the like case; O Lord according to all thy
righterusnesse, I beseech thee let thine anger and thy wrath be turned away,
Dan. 9, 16.

3 His love by the end, that father which does chastise his child for his
faults does love him, even so our heavenly father which does correct his
children for their offenses does affect them, and as the rod is a ready means
to bridle and reclayme children from untowardness, so is war a good scourge
to make us remember our misdeeds, and seek to God. The Lord (speaking of the
Isralites) says, in their affliction they will seek me diligently, Hos. 5,
15, and the Prophet David says: it is good for me that I have been afflicted
for this reason, that I may learn thy statutes, Psa. 119, 71. We see by
experience that the child unless he be sometime beaten, he falls to all
unbridled looseness, so it fares with us, if we should not sometime feel
Gods afflictions, we should run into all filthynesse, even as the Psalmist
says, before I was afflicted I went astray. Psalm. 119, 67: Therefore let us
bear Gods punishment with patience, for as gold is purified by the fire, so
are we refined by afflictions, and as the Be conuerteth into honey, that
which the spyder does to poison, so that which the enemy does of evil, God
turns it to our good.

In that the Enemies are Gods servants we may note two things. 1 A
Lymitation. 2 A Reprehension.

1 A Lymitation, we commonly see that Servants are worse many times then their
Masters; the Steward in Matthew dealt well with his Servant, but he dealt
extremely with others. Math. 18, 28: the Lord uses the Spaniard as a spur to
provoke us to amendment, but it may be said of him, as of Ashur, but he
thinks not so, neither does his heart esteem it so, but he imagines to
destroy. Isaiah, 10, 7. for he comes with a resolute purpose, to execute his
own cruelty, and not to the end to please God. Yet this is our comfort, he
is but Gods Servant, and therefore he can do no more then God will permit and
appoint him, no, though he were as bad as the devil: for you see how satan
could do no more to Job then GOD suffered him to do. Job, 1.

2 A reprehension, this concerns us, we are ready to rail and curse the
Spanyard that molesteth us, but in the mean time, we do not remember he is
Gods servant, which if we did, we would not so much respect the enemy, as he
that sends him; The Spanyard no doubt banneth and curses us to the pit of
hell, as we term it, what then, let us forbear him by the example of David,
who being cursed of Shimei, a wicked man, he put it up patiently, because,
(says he) the Lord did bid him curse, 2, Sa. 16, 10. If a Noble man's man abuse
us in words, we will bear with him the more for his Lord and Masters sake:
much more ought we to bear with the servants of God; We must not imitate
evil by the example of the wicked, though they be incited and suffered to
curse, we have greater cause to thank GOD if he has given us grace to
refrain. Besides, it is but a vvindie conquest is got with words, therefore
you shall read when David was to deal with Goliath, this Giant did curse and
scorn him in derision; David digested his words with silence, but he prayed
and prepared himself to encounter with him to some purpose. Let us follow his
course, what though the Spaniard does curse us and scorn us as Goliath did
David, let us forbear him, (for we can speed never the better for our
speeches,) but let us like David prepare our selves to repel him.

3 Wherefore War is sent.
THere are many think war to be a thing of course, because it has been
common in all ages, whereas it is most certain, that God never sends any
cross without cause.

The cause of war is double, 1 Secondary. 2 Efficient.

1 The Secondary cause is that we ascribe to outward means, and instant
occasions: as for example in other things, if we have any loss of goods, we
use to say it came by casualtie of fire, shypwracke upon the Seas, etc. Or if
we get a sickness, we took it by such a journey, or of such a cold etc. And so
in this sense we commonly say when we have wars, it is the malice, pride or
impiety of the Enemy that causes it. When in the mean time we do not
consider who it is that exciteth, sends, offers or suffers such motions
or means to effect, and for what cause he does it.

2 The efficient cause of war is of two sorts, 1 For Correction. 2 For
Reformation.

1 For Correction, as a scourge or punishment for sin, which the God of hosts
himself affirms, when he says, If he sin I will chasten him with the rod
of men, 2, Sam, 7, 14. And the Psalmist to that effect says: If they break my
statuts, then will I (speaking in the person of GOD) visit their
transgressions with the rod: Psalm, 89, 32. It is written in the Chronicles,
that the King of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, because they had transgressed
against the Lord: 2, Chro, 12, 2, and so if the Spaniard comes against us, we
must persuade our selves that our sins are the chief cause of it.

But whether God sends war to us for our ingratitude, for our last delivery
from the Spaniard, as he did to Hezekiah for his unthankfulness when he was
delivered from Senacherib, 2, Chron, 32, 25, or whether it be for our
oppression and cruelty, as he did to the Israelites for the like sins,
Ierem, 6, 6, or whether it be for any gross sins amongst us, as he did to the
Babilonians for their barbarous beastlines, Esaias 13, or whether it be for our
murmuring at this Scarcity, or for the hardness of our hearts to the poor in
this extreme time, God knows; some grievous sins there be that provoke the
Lord, for else he would not visit us, two years together with Scarcity, and
the third year threaten us with war.

2 For Reformation, that war is sent to reform and amend us is manifest;
Behold, famine, plague, anguish and trouble, are sent as scourges for
amendment: 2, Esd, 16, 15. The father does chastise his son, not because he
takes pleasure in punishing of him, but that he may by it bridle and amend
him; Even so GOD the Father corrects us which be his children, not because
he delights in punishment, but to the end he may thereby reclaym us from our
iniquities. As the rod of wood is a mean to make the untoward child gracious,
so is the rod of war an instigation to move us to good: as it is said of
Judah, Lord in trouble have they visited thee, they poured out a prayer when
thy chastening was open them; Esaias, 26, 16. And therefore God deals with us
as a Physician: A good Physician will cease from ministering physic to his
patient when he is recovered; or as a Master, who will stay from stryking his
servant when he is grown better by his beating. So God, he desisteth his
punishments so soon as we are profited by them. I will recite one example in
steed of many, the Lord raised up Shisshake to scourge Rehoboam for his sin,
but the text says, Because he humbled himself the wrath of the Lord turned
from him; 2, Chro, 12, 12.

From the matter precedent we may observe two things, 1 A grievous cominatio^.
2 A notable consolation.

1 A grievous comination, by the correction if we repent not: for if we
persevere in our sins, what follows?

Punishments Temporal. Eternal.

Temporal punishments: for the Lord says to such, I will set my face against
you, and ye shall fall before your enemies, and they that hate you shall
reign over you. Leu. 26, 17. Let us make this case our own: what a heavy
judgment were this, if the Lord (for our committing and continuing in sin)
should frown upon us when the Spaniard comes with his force against us, and
should suffer him to prevail as the Medes and Persians did in Babylon, would
he not deal as they did, of whom it is said: their children shall be broken in
pieces before their eyes, their houses shall be spoiled, and their wives
ravished, Esaias, 13, 16.

Were not this a lamentable sight to behold, and to have him to reign over
us that hates us what a miserable bondage were it? who would not think but
that this punishment were grievous and sufficient: but if we still persevere,
the Lord will still pursue us, for he says; If ye will not for these things
obey me, then will I punish you seven times more, according to your sins;
Leuit, 26. As we see he dealt by Pharaoh, he never left of his plagues so long
as he lived impenitent; This may teach us how grievous a thing sin is with
perseverance.

Eternal punishments, the temporal plagues are but an entrance to these. Hoc
suspicari etc. says Gregory, a man cannot suspect how extreme those pains
are. Such as persevere in wickedness, let them remember what Paul says, They
do but heap up wrath against the day of judgment, Rom, 2, 5. As D. Martyr
says well upon that place, a hard heart is that which will not be mollified with
Gods benefits, won with his mercyes, broke with his threatenings, nor reclaymed
with his punishments.

The Heathen men had this natural foresight for the restraint of sin; The
Lidians would have in their houses the picture of a devil in form of an
Ethiopian, that by the horrible sight, they might abhor that which brought him
to it, which was sin. The Persians would paynt an Epicure disguised with
excess, that their children might avoid the like fault, by seeing that
deformity. The Lacedaemonians would show their youths drunken and desperate men,
that they might be deterred from sin, by the lothsomnes of that sight; If
Christian men, would set before them the horror of hell, it would make them
fearful to practice evil, much more to persevere in it. For this cause
Chrysostom wills us to talk often of hell, that we may take heed of it.

2 A notable Consolation, by the Reformation, if we take profit by this
punishment, in reforming our lives and living in the fear of God. The
Spaniarde may perhaps feare-blast us with his Army, but he shall never
prevail in his attempt; for the Lord says of such: the Sword shall not go
through your Land, ye shall chase your enemies, and they shall fall before you
upon the sword. Leuit, 26. Although the Lord has prepared the Spaniard to come
against us, and had pronounced to punish us, yet his penal promises are but
conditional, for if we repent, he repents; (If (says he) this Nation
against whom I have pronounced, turn from their wickedness, I will repent of
the plague that I thought to bring upon them, Ierem, 18, 8, therefore let us
all pray for the grace of repentance, and labor to show forth the fruits of
it.

Such as have oppressed and bitten their brethren with extreme bargains
these hard years, let them make some amends; The Ethnicks required double
restitution, Zaccheus made fourfold restitution, Luke, 19. Salamon tells us
of a seauen-fold restitution, Prou, 6, and therefore they may do little if they
make not some restitution. Such as have carried their heads as hie as Lucifer,
let them now hold down their heads like Bulrushes. Such as have ground the
faces of the poor, let them do good to them this time of Scarcetie, not only
for commandment sake, as Sirach says, Ecclus, 37, but even for policy sake:
for you know what Solomon says: In the multitude of the people is the honor
of a King, but for the want of people comes the destruction of the Prince,
Prou, 14, 28. If God should send the enemy against us, the most defencible
strength of the Land consists in the poor, for they are subject to most
service and greatest dangers; We see this hard season that the poor begin to
pine already, because they want the stay and staff of their strength, which
is bread; Now, if we would have them to fight for us, let us not see them
famish; if we would have them forcibly to use their weapons, let us not
infeeble them for want of victuals; If we would have them strong, let us not
starve them. How can a soldier be hardy against the enemy, when his heart is
killed for want of succor? therefore if we love our Prince, let us labor to
preserve the honor of our Prince, let us not suffer the multitude of her people
to perrish for want of sustenance, least if the Spaniarde happen to come, we
have miss of those men to defend us, which for want of our food did famish.

Generally, seeing all sin is odious, and the naming of it tedious, let every
one of us amend one: so by our true contrition, we shall pacify the Lord, and
cause him to appease the fury of our foes.

1 How to debilitate and repel the Enemy.
The means which we must use, are two 1 Divine, 2 Human.

The divine means be these Invocation, Abstinence.

Invocation, as a learned vvryter says, is that whereby we fly unto God in
all perils and adversities, with an assured confidence that he is able to
succor and defend us, D. Martyr in Com. To. cap. 1. This invocation or prayer
we ought to practice as a thing most precious. First, because it is the form
to frame al our requests by: let your requests be showed unto God by prayer,
Phil. 4, 6. Secondly, because we are willed to use it in our distress for
ease. Call upon me in the time of trouble, and I will hear thee. Psalm. 50, 15.
Thirdly, because it effects many things. Moses did more good in lifting up
his hands, then the Israelites did with their weapons, for when he did let
down his hands, the Amalekites prevailed. Exodus 17, 11. Fourthly, because he
we call upon is the God of Hosts, and therefore we have many reasons to move
us to pray to him: for first, he must prepare our hearts thereunto, or else we
cannot pray. We cannot think a good thought, 2, Cor. 3: neither say that
Jesus is the Lord, 1, Cor. 12, 3. Then much less can we pray without him.
Secondly, his power is infallible, and therefore he is such an one as we may
stay upon. Abiah got the victory of Iehoram, not with worldly power, but the
text says, Judah prevailed, because they staid upon the Lord God, of their
fathers, 2, Chro. 13, 18. Heerof David says, blessed is the man that makes
the Lord his trust. Psalm. 40, 4, 3. His prouydence is vigilant, and therefore
is alvvayes ready at hand to help, the Lord is near unto all that call upon
him, says the Psalmist, Ps. 145, 18. He makes us pertakers of his essential
presence. When Iehoshaphat was to fight against his enemies, what a comfort
was this to him, when he heard, the Lord will be with you, 2, Chro. 20, 17,
and fight for you, as he did for Israel. Josh. 10, 14. Fourthly, without him
we can do nothing, and therefore we have need to pray to him. The Horse is
prepared against the day of battle, but salvation is of the Lord. Pro. 21, 31.
There is no hope of prosperous success, if the Lord says the Enemy shall
gather him self but without me, Esaias 54, 15: whereas if he be with us, we
are assured none can be against us or hurt us, 2, Chro. 18, 31.

This prayer or invocation is so heavenly a medecin for human malydies, that
our forefathers did fly unto it, as a refuge, when their enemies afflicted
them. Now because we may have the like occasion of trouble as they had, it
shall not be impertinent to express some of their zealous prayers, for us to
practice in the like extreamitie.

Examples and forms of godly prayers, used in vvarres.
WHen the Ethiopians came to war against Asa, that godly King, the text
says that he cried unto the Lord his God and said:

Lord it is nothing with thee to help with many, or with no power, help us o
Lord our God: for we rest on thee, and in thy name are we come against this
multitude, o Lord thou art our God, let not man prevail against thee, 2, Chro.
14, 11.

The Lord heard his prayer, for it follows in these words. So the Lord smote
the Ethiopians before Asa.

When the Assirians came to assault Israel, the Scripture says that Hezekiah
prayed before the Lord and said:

O Lord God of Israel, which dwell between the Cherubins, thou art very
God alone, over all the kingdoms of the earth, thou have made the heaven and
the earth, now therefore o Lord our God, I beseech thee save thou us out of
his hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth may know, that thou o Lord art
only God, 2, Kings 19.

His prayer prevailed with the Lord: for it is there written, I have heard that
which thou prayedst me, verse 20. When the Moabites and Ammonites did war
against Iehoshaphat, that virtuous King, he prayed unto the Lord and said:

O our God, vvilt thou not judge them: for there is no strength in us, to stand
before this great multitude that comes against us, neither do we know what
to do: but our eyes are toward thee, 2, Chro. 20, 12.

His prayer had good success: for he ouer-threw all his Enemies.

When Lysias came with a multitude of men against Judas, when he saw that
mighty Army, he prayed and said.

O Lord shut up this Army, in the hand of thy people, and let them be
confounded, with their power, make them afraid and consume their boldness and
strength, that they may be astonished at their destruction. Cast them down by
the sword of them that love thee, then shall all they that know thy name praise
thee, 1, Macch. 4, 31.

His prayer was not neglected of the Lord: for he slew many of the host of his
Enemy.

Let us follow this course, when the Spaniards come against us, and we shall
receive the like comfort, their prayers were pithie and short, without vain
babbling, like the Heathen, or ambition like the Pharisees, but the profit
which came of their peticions were unspeakable.

In the time of the old law, it was not only a trouble but a charge, to
offer sacrifice to God; for there was killing and offering of Bullockes,
Calves, Sheep, etc. But now the Lord requires nothing of us, but the calves
of our lips, as Hosea speaks on, Hos. 14, 3, or the fruit of the lips, as
the Author of the Hebrews says, Cap. 13, 15. Therefore we may do little if we
will not afford our lips to pray unto God, so it proceeds from the heart,
otherwise as Augustine says, Oration sine deuotione est quasi mugitus bouis.
Prayer without devotion is as the lowing of an Ox. But if it be sincere, then
as Calvin says, it is an honorable sacrifice to God. Call. cap. 4, 1. Epist.
ad Timotheum.

Abstinance is the second divine mean to use, I do not note this, as a
distinct action by it self, but as a necessary appendant to accompany
prayer: for although prayer is bettered by fasting, yet fasting is of no force
without prayer, therefore in the Scriptures they commonly concur together, Luke
2, 36.

Our forefathers would unite fasting and prayer together in all their
afflictions, either priuatlie with their families, as Daniell did, Cap. 9, 3.
and David did, 2, Sam. 1, 12, when it specially concerned them selves; or else
publicly, when it generally touched a whole land: as we read of
Iehoshaphat, how he proclaimed a fast through all his dominions, when the
Enemies did threaten the sword, 2, Chro. 20. whose example we ought to
immitate, because he was a godly Prince.

This Fasting serves for a double use 1 To fortify the Spyrit. 2 To mortify
the flesh.

1 To fortify the Spirit, for by fasting the Spirit has a more free passage
unto prayer: the reason is, because the senses being filled, are inclined to
sluggishnes, according to the old saying: Impletus venture quarit dormire
libentur. Therefore we shall read how David in many of his psalms says; Early
or betimes in the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee o Lord: because his
prayer was most fervent when he was fasting; whereby we may see that corporal
emptines is a furtherance to spiritual exercises.

2 To mortify the flesh from sinning; the ground the more it is manured, it
brings forth more weeds, so the flesh, the more it is pampered, it is the
more pron^ to wickedness: and therefore as the strongest Castle is soon taken if
the soldiers want sustenaunce, so the raging lusts are soon subdued if the
flesh be not fostered. For this cause the Psalmist says: I humbled my soul
with fasting, Psalm. 35, 13, which is the only fruit of fasting. Therefore as
Bernard says: Si oculus offendit, ieiunat oculus: if the eye offend, let it
fast: that is if it has been before inclined to wanton looks, (as David's was
when he beheld Bersaba) let it now refrain; and so in the rest of the
members, as they have done amiss to let them amend; For true fasting (as Basil
says) requires a suppressing of anger, and cutting of carnal concupiscence;
And then as Jerome says, is fasting most excellent to GOD, Cum aliquis ieiunat
a vitiis, when any does fast or refrain from sin.

The Hypocrite, he will fast for vainglory, the Covetous man to spare
expense; the Glutton to get him a stomach: but let us fast to crucify the
lusts of the flesh, to mitigate sin. If Eve had fasted from the tree, we
need not this fast, says Basil. We have many reasons to restrain us from
sin, but by the imminent occasion, if the Spaniard happen to approach, we have
2. special reasons to refrain from evil at that instant. First, our
principal strength consists in God, and therefore we must sue and seek
unto him by prayer. Now, if we will gladly obtain that we ask, we must
willingly abstain from that he abhors. Let every one that call upon GOD,
depart from iniquity says Paul, 2, Tim, 2, 19. so that there is nothing can
hinder our suit but sin. Secondly, if we desire good success against the
Enemy, if it happen otherwise, we may impute it to our sin. When Joshua sent
men to besiege Ai, some of them were slain by the enemy, and the rest that
returned were discomforted, only for the sin of one man. Iosu, 7, 12. The Lord
never suffered the enemies to prevail against the Isralites in time of war,
but when they had committed some notable sins: Judge, 3, 12. And if any thing
falls out otherwise then well amongst us by the Spaniard, we must think we
have some grievous sins that cause it, or else you shall read in the
scriptures, that the godly (which served the true God as we do) had seldom or
never any bad success in their battles when they were beset with their
enemies, but by occasion of some heinous actions: and therefore it was not
without cause that Moses made this law or exhortation for soldiers; When
thou go out with the Host against thine enemies, keep thee then from all
wickedness. Deuteronomy, 23, 9.

2 The Human means be these Political, Isntrumental, Patheticall.

The political means belong specially to the Prince and high powers, for good
consideration and consultation to be taken in so weighty an attempt. When
Hezekiah saw that Senacherib purposed to fight against his country, the^ (says
the text) he took counsel with his Princes and his Nobles, 2, Chro, 32, 3. For
as Solomon says, Where no counsel is, the people fall, but where many
Counselors are, there is health, Prou. 11, 14. The Parable in Luke fitly
aludeth to this purpose, where it is said, what King going to make war
against an other King, sits not down first and takes counsel, whether he
be able with ten thousand to meet him that comes against him with twenty
thousand, Luke 14, 31. Joshua at the first took a foil of the men of Ai,
because he sent not above 3000. men: but afterward, well consulting of the
matter, and seeing the enemy so strong, he sent above thirty thousand men, and
then he vanquished them, Iosu, 7, and 8. It was not amiss spoken by a wicked
King, that counsel and strength are for the war, 2, Kings 18, 20, for power
little prevails without counsel, or prowess without policy; for what
weighty exployts have been atchiued abroad, but by good advise at home? the
overthrow of Carthage was wrought by the advice of Cato a Counselor; Jericho
was besieged of the Jews by the wholesome counsel of Joshua, Ios, 6. Diverse
other examples there be in the Scriptures to this purpose, but I will omit
them; all that I will add is this, seeing God stands in the congregation of
the Gods, as the Psalmist says, I beseech him so to sanctify their counsels,
as it may turn to our good, and his glory.

The isntrumental mean, as men and munition, must not be neglected, although
God can destroy the enemy immediately, as he did the host of Senacherib, or
miraculouslie, as he did Jericho by the means of Rams horns: and the Moabites
by dazeling their sight with the sunshine upon the water, 2, Reg, 3, 22, and
Pharaoh and his host by the red Sea; yet we must use the lawful and ordinary
course of defense; for God does not now strike immediately, or so miraculously,
but by means, to the end we should not contemn the means, or altogether
depend upon the means, Esaias, 31, 1, but to use and commend the means to Gods
blessing, who can give good success, be the means never so simple.

The patheticall means are to be used by such as have the regiment or conduct
of soldiers, to encourage and comfort them, for flesh and blood is fearful.
The best VVarriors of al will sometime be abashed, and therefore no marvel
though the common sort be somewhat timorous. For this cause we find diverse
instances in the scriptures, of Generals, Captains, and worthy warriors, who
have used very pathetical and moving speeches, to comfort and encourage their
companies in war.

It is said of Hezekiah, that he spoke comfortablie to his people, when the
Assirians intended to assault him, his words are these: Be strong and
courageous, fear not, neither be afraid, for the King of Ashur, neither for
all the multitude that is with him: for there be more with us then with him;
with him is an arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our God for to help us,
and to fight our battayles, 2, Chro. 32, 7, 8. The people hearing these
comfortable speeches (although before they were somewhat afrighted) the next
says, then the people were confirmed, by the words of Hezekiah. Ioab was a
valiant Captain under David, and he comforted his Soldiers in this sort: Be
strong, and let us be valiant for our people, and for the Cities of our God,
and let the Lord do that which is good in his eyes, 2, Sam. 10, 12. Albeit
Ioab was otherwise in his life, a bloody man, not only in war, but in time
of peace, 1, Kings 2, 5, yet who could use a more com-mouing kind of speech, to
comfort and encourage his Soldiers then this? insomuch as they all joined
together joyfully, and put the enemy to flight. The like course did Simon and
Maccabeus, two notable vvarriors use with their Soldiers, who being terrified
with the view of mighty Armies, and other martial accidents, by their apt
persuasions, they proved valorous, where before they were timorous, and in the
end discomfited their Enemies, as you may read at large in 1, Macch. 3, and 2,
Match. 8.

The most renowned and valiantest vvarriors amongst the Heathen, as Caesar,
Alexander, etc, would never go into the field without Philosophers (who in
their times were deemed the only wise men) to the end they might instruct
and comfort their Soldiers. It is none of the least points of martial
discipline, to practice all possible and perswasiue means, to encourage,
comfort, and corroborat the hearts of the Soldiers; for most men desire to
serve under such a Captain. When the Jews heard the comfortable words of
Simon, they were so inclined and affected to him, that they forthwith burst
out of these words in a clamorous manner. Thou shall be our Captain in steed
of Judas, 1, Match. 13, 8, and we read of David, how he did so win the hearts
of his Soldiers, that the people more affected and famozed him then Saul; and
yet Judas and Saul were two valiant vvarriors. There is nothing more
delights and draws lyking in war, then lenity, and loving persuasions,
whereas rash and rigorous dealing, does more hurt in the hearts of the
Soldiers, then in the host of the Enemy.

2 How to corroborate and comfort our selves against the Spanyard.
In all wars we must consider three things. 1 The cause, 2 The persons, 3
The end.

1 The cause that moves the Enemy, whether it be Just, Injurious.

Just war is that which is taken in hand at the commandment of the
Magistrate, for the demanding of things again, or to repulse injuries, or to
revenge them. Augustine, and Isidorus, define it much after this manner. No man
doubts, but that the Magistrate is to command: for he bears not the sword
for naught, therefore Possidonius in the life of Augustine, says, that he in
his writings would never commend those, which went to war in any place, of
their own accord, Poss. cap. 27. The demanding of things again, moved
Abraham to attempt war, because the enemies had taken away his brother, and
other men's substance, Genesis 14, 14. To repulse injuries, was the chief cause,
that moved all godly Kings in the Scriptures to undertake war, for the
desence of their dominions, lives, and religion. The revenging of injury was
David's case, whose men being abused by Hanun, to whom he offered kindness,
this injury caused him to make war against him, to requite his inhumanitie,
2, Sam. 10, 7. Now let us come to apply this to the Spanyard, we deteine
nothing of his, that he can justly demand, or proffer him injury, that he may
rightly seek revenge, therefore his cause is not just. Injurious war is
that which is attempted of malice, as Saul did against David, 2, Sam, 18, 9. Or
of pride or such like impious occasions, it is this that does provoke the
Spaniard in spyte to come against us; therefore his cause is injurious, for as
Hostiensis says, He does ill that takes war in hand of will, and not of
necessity.

Where there is injury, we must observe, whether it be Offered, Defended.

If it be offered, his offense is grievous that does it: for the scripture
says, woe be to him that gives the offense.

If it be defended, he does not sin that suffers the injury; besides, as D.
Martyr says, a Christian is not forbid but that he may repel violence by
violence, in com. To. 12.

The Spanyard he offers injury, we defend it, he assaulteth us, we
withstand him, he urges war voluntarily, we are provoked of necessity; he
sins in offering injury, and not we in defending it, so our minds incline
to peace, though our bodies are constrained to war, therefore this is our
comfort, if the Spaniard comes, his cause is not just but injurious, which
may make us the more bold to buckle with him, and hope to have the better
success, because his violence is voluntary, ours, impulsatory.

2 The persons that make war are to be regarded, whether they be Profane,
Godly.

The Spaniard is a profane person two ways, In Life. In Religion.

In his life I will note but two things, first his pride, secondly, his
cruelty. His insolence is well known to the world, insomuch as that report of
Moab may be applied to him, which is written in Esaias 15. We have heard of the
pride of Moab, he is very proud: and therefore unless God be merciful to him,
he may in the somtome of his pride come to as miserable an end as Moab. His
cruelty is intolerable where he does tyrannize, for he is far worse then
Nero. Nero for all his cruelty, when he was to subscribe to a sentence of
death, would wish he could not write, but the Spaniard, he cares no more to
shed blood then the Butcher, and therefore in his enterprise he may be
fearful by the example of Pharaoh, who carrying so murderous a mind, by
destroying children in the water, that in the war where he thought to work
his will, he was drowned himself by water; let him take heed, least the Lord
does make him shed tears without mercy, as he has shed blood without measure.

In religion, the Spaniard is like the Leopard, full of spots; A spottish and
sottish profession is that which derogateth the glory of God, for the whole
action of idolatry, and the substance of superstition is common in his Country;
such crouching to crosses in the streets, such adoration of Images in the
Churches, such mumbling of Masses, Diriges, Trentals, and such like trumperies,
which would make a good Christian lament to look upon, which they delight to
practice and depend upon. He is worse then Pharaoh, for he made much of
Joseph, because he was a good man, but he can neither abide the person or
profession of a godly man. He is worse then the Turk, for he will not refuse to
receive the Bible, much less persecute such as present it to him; but the
Spaniard is so great an enemy to God, that he does imprison the bodies,
confiscate the goods, and inflict other punishments upon such as bring but a
godly book into his Country; insomuch as there appears to be no spark of
godliness in him: because he rejects the means that might effect some good in
him.

Sithence the Spaniard is but a profane person, let us descend to examples for
our comfort, and we shall see from time to time, how the wicked in their wars
against the godly, have always got repulse and overthrow in the end. That
wicked Pharaoh which long troubled and tyrannized over the good Israelites, in
his last assault of war against them, he was so far from effecting his fury,
that the Lord drowned him and all his host upon the red Sea. Well worthy was
he to be drowned in the water, who had caused many children to be cast into
the River, Exo, 1, 22. That blasphemous Senacherib, who disturbed Hezekiah a
godly king, in the end the Lord did punish him, not mediatly, but immediately,
by sending his Angel into his Camp, who smote many thousands of his men; and
as for Senacharib himself, as he had dealt unnaturally against God, so he was
not long after unnaturally put to death of his own children.

That perverse generation of the Moabites and Amonits, made war against that
virtuous King Iehoshaphat, they were so far from prevailing, that GOD made one
enemy to be executioner to another; 2, Chro, 17.

That irreligious Ethiopian which molested Asa, that tovvard plant and Prince,
at the last he did not only put the Ethiopian to flight with a fevve, but
also got him by pursuit, and had his will of him. 2, Chro, 14.

Similitude and example, does much move says Cicero, for who cannot be
comforted by so godly examples. Quitilian says, that histories and examples be
judgments and testimonies; for who cannot behold the judgments of GOD by
these examples? Augustine says, that examples ought to be as Sermons to us:
for as godly Sermons do minister matter for our edification, and consolation,
so do these examples in this sort.

First, we may learn from hence, how the godly are subject to many sorrows,
as David says: The troubles of the righteous are many, Psa, 34, 19, for there
are ever some ambitious and rebellious kind of people that stir up strife and
sedition against them, therefore we must not think much though the Spaniard
set himself against us.

Secondly, we may see from hence, although God does suffer the wicked to
assault and disturb the godly, yet he will not suffer the enemy to prevail:
therefore this is our comfort, so long as we fear God and live in some measure
answerable to it, the Spaniard may well come, but he shall never accomplish his
will.

Thirdly, we may behold by these examples, that albeit God does use the wicked
as his instruments or servant, yet he does not affect any evil, or
favors their malicious intents. He affects no ill, because in the end he
afflicts such as commit it: Prou, 24, 20. He does not favor their malicious
intents, because he gives the^ bad success in their attempts.

3 The End, which ought to be aimed at in War, is not victory but peace: for
as Christians would never war if they might possess peace, so when they be
constrained to war, they desire peace; as David says of his enemies, I seek
peace, and when I speak thereof, they are bent to war, Psalm, 120, 7. This
contradicts Aristotle, who concludes, that as the end of physic is health,
so the end of war is victory.

But let us descend to the Spaniard, to see what end he aymeth at; he comes
not hither to enrich us with his Indian treasure, or to supply us with his
Spanish wars, or to make amends for his proffered injuries, or to offer
conditions of peace, but the end of his coming is especially,

for these three causes, 1 To attempt War. 2 To invade the Land. 3 To
destroy us.

1 To attempt war: for it may be said of him, as of Asshur, upon whom has
not his malice past continually. Nah. 3, 19. For he warreth and disquieteth
many Nations, as he loves, so he labors to shed blood: Yet in this action,
he shows a base mind, for all he is so ambitious a man, we commonly say he
is no man that will fight with a woman: for if he does vanquish, he can have
no great glory, if he be ouerthrown, he takes great shame; There is a pretty
instance for this purpose in Abimelech, who being about to set a Tower on fire,
a woman cast a piece of millstone upon his head, and broke his brayne-pan;
Abimelech called hastily for his Page, and bad him draw his sword to slay
him, that men might not say of him, a woman slew him, Judge, 9, 54. If the
Spanyard did bear the mind of a man, he would never molest a woman, a
Virgin, a Queen, whose life and religion is a light to all the world, whose
disposition and days requier quiet, but as God brought Sysera that wicked
person to death, by the hand of Iael a woman, Judge. 4, 22, and Olifernes to
destruction, by the hand of Judith a woman, and Abimelech, to his end, as you
have heard by a woman, so his mercy, can make her Majesty powerful, by some
means or other, to spoil the Spanyard; he which has delivered her from so
many secret villainies at home, will protect her from the open violence of her
Enemies abroad.

2 To Invade the land: his meaning is not to view it, but to invade it, he
carries a resolute intent to enter, before he knows the issue: for in his
last vyage he made hither, he presumed of a conceited conquest, and bewrayed
his sinister pretense, before he was assured of his purpose. The Jews did not
cast lots for Christ's garments, till he was crucified, but the Spanyard and
his company did cast dyce for our lyuings, before they had tried the event.

3 To destroy us, this was one commendation Cicero gave Caesar, that when he
had vanquished, he would be merciful and forget injuries, Alexander that
magnanimious minded vvarrior, when he might have his will of his Enemies, would
say it suffized him to triumph, though he did not tyrannize. If heathen men
were so inclyned to mercy, much more ought Christians, the very law of arms
affords mercy to such as be submissiue, but what favor is to be expected of
him, whose affections be not seasoned with the fear of God? The Spaniard
pretends to England, as Pharaoh did to Israel, when he said, I will divide
the spoil, my lust shall be satisfied upon them, I will draw my sword, mine
hand shall destroy them. Exodus 15, 9. God deliver us from his malice, we may
not trust to his mercy: for as the ground did fare the worse for Abimelech,
because it was fruitful, so shall we by the Spanyard, because of our
profession: He made the ground barren by sowing of salt, Judge. 9, 45, this,
hopes to hinder the growth of the word by shedding of blood, the truth is, he
would take away our lives, to root out our religion; but as Solomon says: He
that despises the word, he shall be destroyed, Pro. 13, 13. So this is our
comfort, God will take our cause in hand: for as Iehoshaphat said, so may we.
It is Gods battle and not our, 2, Chro. 20. He will not permit such to
prevail, which have any pretense to impair his glory.

3 The most fearful objections confuted, which make against us.
There be two things which make us doubt the vvorst, 1 The power of the enemy,
2 Some sinister civil practice

1 THE power of the Enemy, without question is great, it may be he shall have
the aid of the Indians, the asistance of the Pope, and perhaps the help of
such as have greater cause to gratify us, then be against us. Alas good
England, thou art enclosed in a corner of the world, many are thy Enemies,
because God is thy friend; thou have not many Nations to combyne with thee, yet
this is thy comfort, if thou do rely upon God, he is able to deliver thee
from all. There were five Kings set against Abraham, Genesis 14, and as many
against Joshua. Josh. 10, 16: yet Abraham and Joshua got the victory. Some
aledge that the spanish Navy is mighty, both in regard of his long time of
preparation, as of his last euersion, which will make him come the more
forceable, for fear of a double foil. To this I answer, though his Navy
were innumerable, and he should arrogate this title, as he did last time, that
it is an invincible Navy, yet for all his great power and pride, God can deal
with him now as he did then, not only to dispierce and scatter them in
unknown Coasts, but also make the Spanyard like Senacherib, return with
shame to his own Land, 2, Chro. 32, 21. Admit he comes with many millyons of
men; yet we must consider that he intrudeth into his Ships all sorts of
people, some that came never at Sea, others that cannot away with the Sea; now
who knows not that such as be weather-beaten and cannot brook the Seas, are
so infeebled, that when they come to the pynch, they had more need of
Physicians to look to them, then furniture to defend them. A more morrall
reason is this, be he never so mighty, it is but an arm of flesh, they can do
no more then men; If God be with us he can do more then men. If we be penitent
for our sins, and depend upon him, it is not the Navy or number of men of
the Enemy can iniure us: for as it is written in Leuiticus, we shall be able
with one thousand men, to chase away twenty thousand, Leuit. 26. We have
examples of it for our comfort.

The Madianites, and Amalakites, and many of the East, of whom it is written,
lay in valleis like Grasshoppers in multitude, and their Cammels were without
number, as the Sand is by the Seaside, Judges 7, 12. All these came against
the Captain of the Isralites, who had but three hundred men, and yet he
discomfited them.

Zerah came with ten hundred thousand men, and three hundred Charrets, against
Asa, who had but five hundred foure-score thousand men, yet he incountred with
him and ouer-came them, 2, Chro, 14.

Augustine upon the 13, psalm con: 2. says, He is truly valiant who is not
strong in himself but in the Lord. Our chief valor consists in God, but
the confidence of the wicked in their power, Esaias, 31, 1, 2. GOD in judgment
does punish such as stand upon their own strength, but in mercy he protecteth
those which have a trust in him in their troubles.

2 Some sinister civil practice. This is the common saying: if we be true
within our selves, we need not care or fear the enemy. Many suspect the
Papists. The wicked many times will suspect the godly, and therefore it is not
amiss for Conformolists to suspect Recusants. Pharaoh that wicked tyrant,
feared and suspected the Isralits, for (says he,) Come let us work wisely
with them, least they multiply, and it come to pass that if there be war,
they join themselves also unto our enemies, and fight against us: Exodus, 1, 10.
Therefore it is good policy where there be suspicious persons, to prevent the
occasions that may effect their ill pretense, by restrayning their liberty,
deteyning their armor, not admitting them to any office in Arms, etc.

If two dogs be stryuing for a bone, when they see the Bear, they will both
forsake the bone to fly upon the Bear: and certes (though the comparison be
somewhat gross) I take it, albeit the Papists jar about matters of
Religion, yet when they see the Spanyard, they will join with us against him,
if it were but to save their lives. Pilate and Herod were at great ods about
private matters between them, but when they had to deal with Christ, they
could then become friends, and conioyne together for his destruction, Luke, 23,
12, then much more ought the Papists for all their opinions, reconcile
themselves and join with us against the Spaniard, who deserves death more
then Christ. The dog will fawn of his Master, but bark at strangers, far
worse were they then dogs, if they do not affect their Prince, and fight
against her enemies.

In Jerusalem there were some irreligious persons, as bad as Nabuchadnezer
himself, yet when he besieged it, he killed and captiuated all saving a few
poor, which were left to look to the grounds, 2, Reg. 24, even so let the
Papists think, if the worst should fall (as God defend,) the Spaniard will
deal as Nabuchadnezer did, he will not spare a Papist though he be a Papist:
(but he will rather suppose it is done of policy to possess life) and
therefore in this regard they should arm themselves against the enemy,
because they are like to speed no better the^ we, if he prevail.

Themistocles had rather die then bear Arms against his Country; What more
near to any then his native country? For this cause I read of Zeno, who being
taken by a Tyrant, and enjoined to tortures, he bit out his tongue and spit it
in the Tyrants face, for fear the extreamitie of the pain should make him
confess any thing against his Country. Let these Heathen men excite us to
carry true hearts to our Country, for as Paedanius says, he that betraies his
Country, is worse then he that besieges it.

Treason has been odious in all ages, To Man, To God.

To Man it is odious. Antigonus the King, would always say, I love Traitors
so long as they are in betraying, but when they have betrayed I hate the^.
Jerome to Pammachius says: that Princes do indeed admit treason, but they
condemn the Traitors. Hier. de optimo genere interpretandi.

Many betray their country in hope of Preferment Reward Love of the Enemy.


Yet commonly they fail in their purpose, and receive in steed of preferment
reproach, in steed of reward, punishment, and in steed of love, hatred.

As for preferment, we read of Lasthenes, who when he had betrayed his
Country to King Phillip of Macedonia, he expected to have had some preferment
and dignity for his deed, but the common Soldiers in derysion, called him
ever after by no other name but TRAITOR: insomuch as he complained to King
Phillip for redress, the King made him this answer, the Macedonians are rude
and plain people, and know not how to call things, but by their own proper
name, noting hereby that as he had committed treason, so he justly deserved no
other name but Traitor.

As for Reward, we read of certain Phaliscian Scholemen, who hoping of
reward, went about to betray their Country to Camillus: who rewarded them as
they deserved, for he commanded that they should be brought home again, into
their own Country, with the strypes of their own Scholars, because they
would have betrayed them. Menelaus presumed of some reward, when he sought to
betray his Country to Eupator, so he had, for he commanded he should be put
to death for his desert, 2, Match. 13.

As for Love, we read of the King of the Thraciaris, who in hope of favor,
fell from Anthony, to Augustus, which afterward he boasted on, in the presence
of Augustus and others; but Augustus turned him to his friend, and said, I love
the Treason but the Traitor I commend not. Plutarch, King Pyrhus Physician
promised to the Romans, that he would for their sakes, work treason against
his King and Country, they were so far from favoring his ill pretense, that
they did detect him to his King, that he might take heed of him; that example
of Judas, may be pretelie hereunto applied, the Jews made of Judas, whilst
he was a working the Treason, but when he had done, they made no force of him;
for when he told them, he was touched and disturbed for the treachery, what
is that to us (say they) see thou to it, Math. 27, 4. A Traitor may have some
kind intertaynement for the time, but he shall never have any matter of trust
committed to him, for he that will betray his native Country, shall live ever
suspected of falsehood in a forrayne Nation.

To GOD. Treason is an odious thing to God, and so odious, that although it
should pass unpunished amongst men, yet he will pursue a traitor himself with
his judgments, whereof we have many examples in the scriptures. Absalom
committed treason against David his father, and Zimri against Elah his Master,
yet for all that, David did not punish his Son, nor Elah his Servant, the
Lord showed his judgments upon them, for one was hanged by his own hair, 2,
Sam. 28, and the other burnt himself, 1, King, 16, 18.

Jason was a notable Traitor to his Country, and raunged like a roge or
vagobond afterward from Country to Country, he did escape the punishment of
men, but God still pursued him, till at last coming to Lacedemonia, where he
had thought to have had relief, he dyed most miserably, vvanting the last
office of humanity, which is burial, 2, Match. 5, 7, 8, etc.

There be many, yet I will but note one other worthy example. Iehoiakim
betrayed and rebelled against Nabuchadnezzer, a wicked King, this action so
much displeased the Lord, that he raised up many bands of men against
Iehoiakim, to aflict him for his treachery, 2, King 24, 1. If the Lord will
punish such as work treason against their King, though he be a tyrant, what
will he do to those that betray a good Prince, which mayntaynes the Gospel.

Sithence treason is so odious to God and man, as Barnherd says, Aliorum
perditio tua sit cautio, let other men's destruction be our permonition, and let
every one of us carry true hearts to our Queen and Country; If it be a
punishment to have a Tyrant to reign, and a double punishment to have him
taken away, Hosea 13, 11, (for better is a Tyrant, then no governor, Judge. 17,
6,) what a blessing is it to have a godly Prince, as we have, and a double
blessing to enjoy her days as we do, but how vnspeakeis our punishment, if we
loose her; therefore let us unite our heads, hearts, and hands, and venture our
own livings and lives for the preservation, and defense of such a Prince; Then
we may be fully resolved, (if we have had unfeigned repentance for onr sins,
and make defensible preparation for our selves, and use fervent prayers for our
success) that God will so bless us with the means, as we shall not need to
fear the injurious assault of that proud Senacharib of Spain. Let Ahab call
upon Baal; the Turk upon Mahumet, in their troubles, and the Spanyard upon
Idols in his attempts, we will pray and depend upon the God of Israel; And if
Symachus boasted that in his wars his wooden gods did deliver him from the
Senons, D. Mar. co. To. we may be assured that our immortal and living God,
can and will deliver us from the Spaniard.

Chrysostom.
Incepisse multorum est, sed perfecisse paucorum.
FINIS.

