AN APOLOGY FOR VVOMENKINDE.

Odi prophanum vulgus et arceo
Fauetc linguis, Catmina non prius
Audita Musarum Sacerdos,
Virginibus Faemimsque canto.
LONDON Printed by Ed. Allde for William Ferebrand, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Pope's Head Alley near the Royal Exchange. 1605.

TO THE QVEENES MOST SACRED MAJESTY.
GReat Queen, at first this task I took in hand,
Thinking Eliza and your self to sing,
And for examples your sole names to bring,
As mighty Princes of the Women's band,
As two choice rulers of our Britissh Land:
As splendent mirrours of dame Natures wealth,
The poores, afflicteds, and th'oppresleds health.
But when my strength a space I tried had,
Str^^in^ in deep conceits to pen my mind:
My wit stark dull I found my sight mere blind,
My hands did tremble and my words were bad,
Not one rich sentence gal^^ntly was clad.
Nor wonder was it: form books I find,
Some Birds, the Suns bright beams do fear by kind.
Wherefore, soon as I came to see my fall
From Sky-built hopes which had borne up my heart,
I straight resolved on another part,
Brief^ly to writ in sense more general
An Elegle, in The me vnmisticall;
And h^^g it by your Princely Altars light:
Where Lamps of grace might keep it still in spite.
Your Maties. humble and obedient servant: I. G.

AN APOLOGY for VVoman-kinde.
Muses divine which on Pernassus dwell,
Bathing your selves in Pegasaean well;
Infuse high thoughts into my dullard sprite.
And guide my trembling hands, whilst I indite
The sacred honors of your fellow Sex,
Which men's unlawful tirannye does vex.
And you three Sisters whom we Graces name,
Fair spotless Virgins without fault or blame,
Bestow some beautyes on my rugged rimes
That they may please our more then carping times,
And in full health preserve themselves (at least)
From sharp-tongue darts of many headed beast.
Immortal Nectar in my mind distill,
That I may write (with favorable quill)
Women's admired gloryes and then praise.
That may be read in our next Nephews days.
And you bright Lamps which to the world give Light,
(Mighty Commanders of the greatest might)
Brave Ladies, sage Matrones, comely Damoselles,
Whose armed thoughts resist all wicked spelles,
Be you my Load-starres, guide me without sail,
Direct this little Barque (wherein I sail)
That it may escape the sands of high disdain,
And to the Port of favors safely game.
Full well I wot, this subject was more fit
For peerlesse Homers or for Virgils wit,
The Florence-Petrarkes, Tassoes, or Ronsardes,
Sidnyes or Spencers; unto whom, rewards,
Garlands of Bays by Poets granted are.
Yet sithence one whose temples still are bare,
Whose fruitless brain is like a barren rock,
A stonye ground, or ouer-dryed stock,
Could thus much sing: what might some others say!
Swannes notes excelling on their dying day.
Nor is it pride that makes me thus presume
A great Atlanticke burden to assume.
A labor which might Hercules beseem,
Or one whose same the world should more esteem.
It Is just duty, to a cause neglected,
By all abler persons unrespected,
That makes me take this Pencill in mine hand
(The most unskillful Paynter in our Land)
And on this playned table undertake,
Of your high worth some portraiture to make.
Would God I had renoum'd Apelles skill,
Then might my work well answer to my will.
But why do I the arts of men desire
Who Chymons are, unless first set on fire,
By kindly heat, whence all their science flows,
Which afterward so bright resplendent shows?
Within this Laberinth I hope to tread
With fearlesse foot led by your beauties thread,
So as no vglye Minotaur, of spite
Shall dare with hellish mouth at me to bite.
Nor against me snarling dog toothed Momus bark,
But say I chaum like to the morning Lark,
In music strains a measured harmonye
For women-kinde, Natures Epitomye.
And as for me: one loving kind regard,
Or freindly look, shall be my sole reward.
Now muse no longer stay, thy race begin,
Declare dame Euahs state before her sin
Was by the Thunder-darter punished,
By pains enioyn'd unto all women-head.
Show what in Edens garden she has been,
Let at the least her gloryes past be seen.
When other creatures God created had,
And saw that all were good and none were bad,
All Is careless man, whom he as best did prize
Seated to dwell in earthly Paradize:
Then, there he framed passing fair the rest
With knowledge and with wisdom chiefly blessed.
Woman replenished with excellence,
Conceit, and gloden streaming eloquence.
Her splendent hayres were Amber colored.
And like fresh flowers in April sauoured.
Her smooth forhead that no art did borrowe
Was like the sea which no wind does furrowe,
Her vaulted eyebrowes made of Ebeny,
The horned Moon resembled in the Sky.
Her sparkling eyes as two clear stars did shine,
Full of sweet grace and majesty divine.
Her cares, whose shape my thoughts do far surpass,
Were like two Roses in a Crystal glass,
Her white pretty Eagle-nose descended,
As a mount amidst a plain it hanged.
Envy herself beholding it had shame,
Because therein she-nothing found to blame.
Two red flowers set in milk, her cheeks did seem,
Where his strong hold the Shooting-Boy did deem,
Her mouth which did embalme the air about,
At Corrall lips did send hersweete breath out,
Showing two ranckes of pearls well polished,
Which hedged her tongue by Suada furnished.
But what mean I, in short words to comprise,
That which in ample theme I might devise?
Her body beauties storehouse, God did make
And not from mudde, but Adames side did take,
The matter whence he did the work compose,
(Dirt was ore base a subject to be chose.)
So as her essence, though not different,
(As two times flood) was more excellent
Then Adams was, my speech I will confirm,
Least that I seem it vainly to affirm.
Being the first things God did only give,
The second plancals life the third did live,
Endu'd with sense: reason the fourth obtaind,
And so the last more worthiness still gaind.
This certainly well understood the man,
When at the first sight boasting he began
To say, out of his flesh she had been took:
(So soon as from his brazen sleep he wooke.)
This perfectly the subull Serpent knew,
When her he tempted, with his: Is it true?
To win the man he thought it was no doubt,
That was his fear the woman would stand out.
Wherefore to her he did address his wiles,
Wherewith mankind he daily still beguiles.
Who though at first she did well shun his sleights,
Yet (ah) at length he caught her by his baits.
Well what did Adam? he did not deny,
But cat the fruit forbidden readily,
And after deemed his case could not be bad,
Telling by Euahs means he sinned had
To high lehouah punisher of vice,
Which called them forth hidden in Paradise,
And took the rule out of the woman's hands,
Making her thrall unto subiections bands.
That was before man's powerful gouernesse.
His mistress, love, his wife, his Empress.
Yet did he not her cast in slavery,
Nor any baser foul seruilitye.
But lest her guidance to her husbands will,
Only for order yiedling to him still
So Abell was subjected unto Cain,
Yet Cadets Judge the authority is vain.
And it is a point that every one can tell,
The younger borne, most what do far excel.
Now let some Tyger-bred clown speak his mind,
Railing his fill against all women kind,
Terming them wanton, lustful, letcherous,
Mincing decemblers, slye, fine, vicious.
Let some grimme Sire his Dame in furye strike,
Which is his pleasures mate, his half his like,
In whose fair face Roses and Lillyes meet,
Whose look is smiling and whose speech is sweet.
Since against all laws and justice such do deal,
From malefactors well may one appeal.
Yet would I feign their proper vice once learn,
Which makes men's talk to be of them so stern.
Are they accustomed to that filthy sin,
Which is extolled by beastly Aretin?
The shame of Greece, Spain, Italy and France,
Where men against kind do spend their cheuisance.
Ah, ah noe. Nor is it Venerie,
Men brag of that in greatest bravery:
But faults in diverse subjects alter not,
A blame in one in each one is a blot.
Besides, the men are causers of those crimes.
That women weakly do commit some times.
Witness their careful suites, their instruments,
Their Sirens Songs, their silent allurements.
Bribed speakers, inventions curious,
Iustes, daunces, presences, letters amourous,
their fained frenzies, harder hearts tomoue,
Their oaths, their vows, their sickness grown from love
Does one deny all these and lend none care?
With some base Peasant she does make good cheer.
Plasso reports, which sought to make her sin,
It Is must keep out, there is a key within.
So as to hinder sinister bad talk,
Many do choose full secretly to walk.
In wickedness: thinking faults hidden small,
Though eyes there are which plainly see them all.
Well; sundry times of women I have read,
Which for their honors, now long since are dead.
As Lucia and chaste Lucretia,
The Damesels Hyppe and Orythia*
But of one man as yet I never heard,
Who for his chastity took such reward.
Then fondlings cease the female sex to blame,
None truth can speak that turns to their shame.
Their very pains by God to them enioyn'd,
Show how their minds to goodness are inclined.
For it is a rule; God sends his troubles such
As be his creatures able, less or much.
Atlas alone has chargd the heavens to bear,
Rich Carbuncles in gold men only wear,
And virtues unto women proper are.
Are you affected unto pietye,
Deuouter godliness or charity?
Example take the Virgin blessed Mary,
Whose womb conceived our healthful mystery.
Here might I say women did honor more,
Christ low abas'd, in all appearance poor,
Then his Disciples or Apostles durst,
It Is manly wisdom still to sear the wurst.
And here to tell, the labor were not spilt
How many Schools and Hospitalles are built
By women's wondrous liberality,
The true perfect patterns of high bounty.
Als' might I well from Pagan writers show
Who only rules of blinded reason knew
The famous zeal which they in women deemed,
And therefore judged them by their Gods esteemed.
Hence in large sort to honor them they reigned,
Many the place of Goddesses had gained.
As Juno, Cibell, and Minerua,
Venus, Themis, Ceres and Diana.
Hence some alive to heaven they have up borne,
Whose blessed minds this earthly mudde did scorn.
Hence all the virtues female have they named,
As, Peace, and Justice, Truth, with Faith vnblam'd,
And honestye which never makes ashamed
But I an hundredth other points do see
That in my judgment far more needful be.
And now me thinks my self am like unto
Some one who does into a Garden go,
Of green herbs a Posie for to gather,
Yet there knows not which to take most rather.
So I the best things strive for to propound,
Yet which are they my wisdom cannot sound'
Wherefore me pardon dear Mineruaes brood,
If that my choice or order be not good:
Of women's love to men first will I tell
Reasons apparent why to prize them well.
For by these two Gods law is full defined,
Love unto him and unto humane kind.
And of this love our Country claims chief part,
The next our Parents look for in our heart.
Yoke mates and Children do a third require,
The fourth our neighbors at our hands desire.
Now in all sorts women more loyal are
Then any men. Long circumstance I spare:
Eke many Histories I will omit,
Which to declare this argument are fit.
To aid her Country, fair Macaras
Her life did spend also Protogeus,
Pandora, Pleria and Theopa,
Pasithea with brave hair'd Eubula
Did less respect their own prospertie.
Then their dear Countries sweet felicity.
The beautiful Dame Cratissiclea,
(King Cleominos mother of Sparta
Her self an hostage dared to present,
And undergo a willing banishment
From servitude her City for to save.
Such acts as these, some lostye strains do crave.
Where were the men which voluntary died
When these occurrents fearful did betide?
Where were become their big Thrasonicke words,
Their glistring armours, and their thrilling swords?
It Is true I see, as I have seen most often:
The hart's most hardy dwell with tongues most soste.
Solynus says, there was a Roman wife
Who with her dugges preserved her mothers life,
Into the prison having leave to enter,
Daily to view her poor staruing mother.
So Nicon old Xantippe nourished
Her Father, whom the Iaylor famished.
Show me more love, show me more constantnes
In any men: show me more faithfulness.
I silently pass by Hypsipila,
With hundreths more like young A^igena,
That have excelled in trusty loyaltye,
The very band of all societye.
Chelon^ is by Plutarch honored,
For perfect freindship to her spousall bed.
Who more esteemed her husband then a Crown,
Wa'st ever seen men's pride did so come down?
The Spartane Dames their Theseaus did conserve,
And from deaths present danger them preserve:
Changing their garments with them secretly,
And so restoring them to liberty,
Remained themselves fell, feirce rage to endure,
(For nothing else to look for were they sure)
Alcestis did to save her husband dye,
Admetus King of wealthy Thessaly,
Canna no longer cared for lives breath
Then that she might revenge Sinatus death.
Saxo the Dane, Gunilda does extol,
Porcia the Roman, Liuy does enroll,
Pliny does praise the fickely fishers wife,
Who for to ease his pains despisde her life.
So Alexander ab Alexandra,
And Aelian, commend full many more,
Which for to work their husbands case and joy;
Their own grief naught regarded, or annoy.
But understand, it is not mine account
The Suns bright beams in number just to count.
Likewise a Fountain that is never dry,
Does need many buckets it to emptye.
Further how Children deerly they affect,
Or else their neighbors friendly do respect;
For me to show were mere simplicity,
Since all confess thereof the verity.
To prove that fire has heat, or water cold,
Is in no dout or danger to be bold.
Wherefore I Will turn me to another theme,
Long while enough I sowed have this seame.
In Prudence, Justice, Liberalitye
(Whereof Kings boast) and Magnanimitye:
Hereby some short examples i will declare
That in no point women ought wanting are.
Those that can govern well, no virtues want,
But of brave Queens the number is not scant
That in times past with glory and renown,
Many a Kingdom rules have and town.
The warlike Almaignes this do testify,
So does the Carthaginian History.
The Black Moors brag of hardy Meroe,
The Bohemians of their Valasque,
Large Siria commends Zenebia,
The grim stern Goths their Amalasuntha.
Sage Theodora did the Empire sway,
And men unworthy, thence did chase away.
Semiramis dry Egypt did possess,
Whom Nilus ouce-flowings still do bless.
And does not England sing Eliza's praise,
Who far excelled all before her days?
Was never Prince which ruled with more peace,
Or did more gently subjects pains release,
And terrors unto proud high minds increase.
Out Zoylus and all thy hellish train,
It Is not foul spite that can pure virtue stain.
Whiles Sun and Moon their courses keep in ure.
Women's heroicke praises shall endure:
Well have their worthy spirits this merited,
In whom all fine inventions first were bred.
The seven Arts that men call liberal,
Were by the Sisters nine first found out all.
Gesture seemly and demeanours comely,
We attribute to the Graces only.
Cumea wrote the Roman policye.
Sapho never like for Poesy.
In Rome a Statue dedicated was
To Gracchus mistresle that well speaking Less.
Pithagoras learned of Theocia,
Wi^e Socrates of fair Diotina,
Plato none indged like Archenassa.
With thousands more, which men themselves do note
And I it needless judge them all to quote,
Whose famous science was by men admit'd,
As if that God their knowledge had inspired.
Yea at this day how many may we see,
That here in England now still living be,
Whose pens and tongues (when as it is their will)
Far do excel each other humane skill?
I silently of purpose pass their names,
Since naught my speech can add unto their fames.
Ah but men blame all women's secrecye,
Their fearful minds, changing and cowardly,
It Is true that malice never wants a mark,
And huge great fires arise often from a spark.
For if by reason we this matter try,
We nothing find therein save forgerye;
Not that I mean all women to excuse,
All Is for some few I would not all abuse.
We say in sin he sildome ought to move,
who fitly can another well reprove.
What thing more common then disloyalty
Among greatest friends professing amity?
Ours is the golden world: the love of gold
Is more this day then it has been of old.
A sum of Coin buys honors, love and friends,
Men are no longer wolves to men, but fiends,
that which you tell to him is to a stone,
Yet all he babbles so soon as you are gone.
But in times past, that hardy female band,
Which in one night, of Danes did free our land;
She who from kind Pisistratus conceald,
That which her torments might have well reueald,
The banquet Cryassau, and Brutus wife,
Show in what silence they can spend their life,
As for to fall together by the ears,
With Gunnes, and Swords, with Halberds or with spears
For some small toys not worth the speaking off,
A icast in mirth, or merry nipping scoff,
It is not women's custom I profess,
Ill should I do a truth not to confess,
It Is true they judge the fight of arms is least,
Man by his reason differs from a beast;
Likewise Sage nature has not wrought so strong,
Their Corpse, nor arms, ne yet their legs so long,
As men's she has: but framed them most fit,
To entertain each combatte with their wit,
And mids' a thousand merry pretty sweetes,
Repel an onset twixt a pair of sheets,
Their hands are made for music instruments,
Not for to brandish warlike complements,
Further I deem such hommasse fortitude,
In woman kind small virtue does include,
Better does Venus kerchiefe to them sit,
Or lunoes state, with wise Minerues wit,
Then brutish, rude, and cruel killing arms,
Of bloody Mars, from whom comes naught but harms
And truth to say, without all spite or hate,
Those mannish queen sare most degenerate:
Yet if some others ask for hardiness,
With stout courage, and undaunted boldness,
Well can I show, so as each one will grant
Women at need can be full valiant.
Call me to mind brave lasses of old days,
Who gained pryses in Olimpicque plays,
Remember we their green bank Tritonida,
For fencing, for ryding Themerinda,
Where also 'twas their ordinary guise,
To wrestle, run, and leap for exercise.
Forget not we how Archidamia
With her great crew, beat Pyrrhus from Sparta.
Nor yet the same of one-dugd Amazons,
Who in large compass planted their Cantons.
who has not heard of lewish Deborah?
Judith, and Iael that slew Sisara?
I blush to name the maid of Orleance
(Ah shame) which dressed our armies out of France.
The fixed King Henryes daughtet of our land,
Preserved her father from a murdering hand.
But what mean I to sail thus far from shore?
Storms often arise, which none did doubt before.
If that a thousand tongues possess I might,
And eke ten thousand hands well skild to write,
A breast of strong brass with some Steutors voice,
Yet would I rather if I had my choice,
The Startes and sands to number undertake;
Then of all women true rehearfall make,
Which for admired virtues mertit praise,
A subject large to task an hundroth days.
Better I think it here to stay the course
Of my weak pen, vntyr'd in this discourse,
Men's hardines I pleased am to sed,
Their knowledge, strength, and wisdom likes me,
Their massye corpse I mean not to dispraise,
Nor ought besides whence praises just they raise.
Yet when they needs comparisons will make,
And women's gloryes violently take.
I say that valor with magnificence,
honored virtue and all excellence,
In that sweet kind do principally shine,
Ca^sing it seem to be the most divine.
Therefore wise men that choose in verite
Wives, amore, n^^e, ore, et re
Ought them as equals in each point to esteem,
And but for order them inferiors deem,
Wherefore fine Ladies, grave Mattons, Damesels,
Let your pure minds withstand al wicked ipels,
Yield you your selves to ordinance divine,
That your high worth may still more brightly shine,
And thou Dame-Fortune never do them bless,
Which by injustice do thy sex oppress.
FINIS.

