A REIOYNDER to Bristows Reply in defense of Allens scroll of Articles and
Book of Purgatory. Also the cauils of Nicholas Sander D. in Divinity about
the Supper of our Lord, and the Apology of the Church of England, touching the
doctrine thereof, CONFVTED BY WILLIAM FVLKE, DOCTOR IN DIVINITY, AND Master of
Pembroke Hall in Cambridge.

Seen and allowed.

AT LONDON, Printed by H. Middleton for George Bishop. ANNO. 1581.

To the Christian Reader.
ALlen the Author of the Popish challenge (as it is now confessed) and of the
Book of Purgatory, as he always acknowledged, finding mine answer to both
these treatises, so well grounded upon the authority of the holy Scriptures,
and testimonies of the most ancient writers, that albeit he might quarrel at
many bie matters, yet he was not able to avoid the substance of mine arguments,
and answers: determined not to adventure his credit, in publishing any reply
under his own name, and therefore turned over the business to one Bristowe,
whose impudence being approved in his Motives, and demaundes, was thought more
meet to take so desperate a cause in hand. Bristowe himself on the otherside,
perceiving that it was impossible for him to make any show of reply, that
might satisfy any mean wit, if he should follow me orderly and directly,
from point to point, as I have followed Allen, durst not once undertake that
lawful course of replying, which I have always observed in answering, but by
confounding of many diverse matters together, has sought to bring a great mist
upon the cause, under which he might rather hide then defend his master
Allen, and he himself like a pretty man, now and then start out and give a
perilous blow, and so retire into his cloud again. For this purpose it was
not sufficient for him, leaving all order of replying, to take upon him the
confutation of two books of mine, of most diverse matters, in one of his, but
that the confusion might be greater, and the light of truth appear much
lesser, he must defend two more of his own. So that having now iumbled
together no less then six treatises in one, two of Allens, two of mine, and
two of his own, he thinks himself so well armed with darkness and
confusion, that if he cannot have a conquest, yet he may be sure to have a
starting hole to hide himself in. And first he finds great fault that his
motives and demands (which most men for the great folly showed in the^
despised) were not first answered: dreming that my books should never have
been put in print, but to make a show of answer to his motives and demands.
But how vainly he gesseth, mine answer printed, to those wodden works of
his, does plainly discover. Of like vanity and more impudence it is, that he
affirms constantly, that I was faigne to set forth those books without
privilege (albeit I say the one was authorized) distinguishing between
privilege and authority, wherein I know not what the peevish quareller
means. For this I am sure, that both those books, had such approbation and
license to be printed, as al books concerning religion ought to have, by the
Queens injunctions, which I call and count a sufficient authorizing.
Concerning priuileging, I suppose Bristowe cauelleth, because he knows not
what the name of a privilege signifies, for which I will remit him to some
lawyer to learn. But where I affirmed, that my book was authorized two years
before it was imprinted, he douteth whether he may believe my bare word,
because I write in the same, We believe that the Catholic Church has no chief
governor upon earth, but Christ, unto whom all power is given in heaven and in
earth. But I pray thee Bristow, what does this hinder thee to believe me upon
my bare word? Thou demandest a question in the margent, What if the Church were
in England only, or one were King of all Countries, sometime where it is? I
might, according to Salomons advise, answer thee according to thy folly, and
defer my resolution until either the Church be in England only: or that one
were King of all Countries where it is. But lest thou should think thy
selfwise in thy folish question, I answer, that if either of both those cases
should come to pass, which are both impossible: Christ should still retain his
office and power that he has in heaven and earth, and that one King of
England, or of many countries, should have no more authority over the Church,
then the Queen of England now has over that portion of the Church, that is in
England, or over all those portions that are in other her several dominions.

But whereas Bristow says, my former book comes forth only by permissio^ to
make a show of somewhat for a time, and if after it chance of some Papist to
be dashed out of countenance, then the shame to be no man's but only Fulkes: I
wish the gentle reader to consider two things. First, that he will charge no
man with the shame of mine errors, if any he can prove, but me only, as in
deed there is no reason that any man should bear the blame of my folly, but
my self, and least of all the church of God. Secondly that by quarelling at the
want of privilege and authorizing of my writings, he acknowledges this his
own book of reply, to lack neither privilege nor authority, so that if I
not only dash it out of countenance, but also show it to be void of
wisdom, learning and truth, the shame shall not be private to Bristow alone,
but common to all the popish faction beyond the sea, and on this side the same,
by whose common consent it seems to be penned and set forth. Bristows reply
is contained in 13. Chapters, to every of which, and to every part of them, as
they are entitled by himself, I will answer in order, that they which list
to confer my Reioynder with his Reply, may see I seek not by confusion to
cover any falsehood, but by orderly proceeding to bring the truth to light.

Faults escaped. The first number signifies the page, the last the number of
the lines.
Page 14 line 9 for aid, lege, end 15 36 Haeie l. How 16 28 ap l. cap 24 l.
27 28 etc, read Apotactites Encratites etc. 33 23 mortuis l. mortuos 35 31 con
30 l. con 3 37 1 birth l. death 38 24 Constantine l. Constans 41 3 l. Papias 43
17 the l. their 9 suit l. state 45 l. 21 read, so I 46 14 ledging l. begging 55
31 err, but: l. err both, 65 10 and 16 l. Peter and Peter 71 30 ever l. even
76 2 l. 2 Timothy 3 80 8 l. consent in the truth 101 17 disputing l. disprouing 109
24 restored l. restrained 137 35 read sufficiently satisfied 138 33 course l.
cause 148 31 l in the bliss 151 16 if l. of 152 29 true l. tree 156 2. vvhot
l. vvhotter 25 l. infarced 158 10 l. in which he 20 applied l. replied 174 26
l. pieces 175 Iam 3 l. John 3 194 25 l. Hierom ad Euagrium 196 14 l. rashness
203 36 authority l. austeritie 205 10 l. he has and li. 35 instinct l anstant
209 10 savor l. labor 229 29 function l. faction 230 3 l. not oppress 242 23
as l. is. and li. 29 gra l. gent 263 38 impuration l. impanation 265 35 lake l.
book 281 28 inioyning l. enjoying 282 1 l. Consta^tinus line 3 l. Melciades
li. 5. l. de vita 285 19 sanctifies l. says 287 3 l. seeing 298 19
computatio^ l. translation 299 2 now l. not 301 25 teaches l. touches 302
20 l. Midrash 309 6 l. conueniencie 311 2 harp l. hard 321 3 there l. three
332 30 priests l. praises 338 35 l. which in such sense 350 5 but l. by 353 35
like by l. by and by 356 13 l. look it by 357 29 l. Jupiter Corinthius, and
li. 31 Xanthicus 358 9 chap l. point 361 38 accept l. excepting 352 24 l. but
seeing 361 12 held l. geld 387 26 Sacraments l. Sacramentaries 388 7 that l.
the 388 31 l. Mat Hom 11 402 15 l. priests and li. 29 as long 408 10 l.
Seraphicall. li. 14 l. (...) 413 12 l. determinasset 431 13 l. (...) 437 21
protest l. protect 442 31 work l. want 446 13 stranger l. strong 449 31 l.
work? In 32 l. mysteries: yet 450 34 l. Gennadius 456 3 nor l. or 460 36 l.
of Terah 461 17 l. not to be 464 8 l. benedectione 472 25 l. put out as 473 11
l. a pledge 33 partly l. but Sander says 477 16 yea l. we 498 12 flesh l.
fish 500 22 l. faithfully 506 4 l. may be 512 32 l. chapter being moved by 33
l. his spiritual 518 32 his l. this 528 put out, often 536 9 we l. ye 556 18
l. 1500 years ago 557 29 l. sufficiently 558 8 l. should not 563 16 l
figurative 568 19 l. tokens 572 9 l. as Angels 610 1 l. our 611 7 specially l.
figuratively 634 20 l but in 639 23 put out which 651 6 l. Sedulius 2. and 12
corrupt l. count and 18 holy l. unholy 667 24 l. times 669 24 they l. that 676
27 offenses l. oftennes 678 9 l. Gennadius 682 13 to the earth l. on earth 678
17 eating l. entering 695 13 Ephesians 3 l. Constantinople 698 3 after the body,
put in these words, Members of Christ your mystery is set on the table, you.
li. 5 after subscribe put in these words, Thou hear therefore the body of
Christ and do est answer amen 699 6 l. of a 708 1 once l. ours 713 17 or l.
of and 21 die l. by 717 26 apposeth l. opposes 726 7 for Sander l. Ievvel and 8
after eaten, put in Sander 737 22 promised l. performed 741 27 alteri l. atteri
and 30 halteri l atteri and 37 washing l. vvasting 754 34 l. at Wittenberg 16
death l. deity 766 37 l. of bread 776 29 this l. these.

A REIOYNDER TO BRISTOWES REPLY IN DEFENSE OF ALLENS SCROLL OF ARTICLES AND
BOOK OF PVRGATORIE.
By W. F. D. in divinity.
The first Chapter.
I will show briefly that Fulke confesses, out of the true Church Bristowe.
to be no salvation.

FVlke has always believed Fulke.
since god gave him knowledge of his truth, and therefore freely confessed,
that out of the true Church of Christ, there can be no salvation. But whereas
Bristowe infers that it is openly practiced in the Popish Church, to take in
men by Baptism first, and then by reconciliation to receive them if any went
out, or were cast out: thereby to insinuate, that the Popish Church is the true
Church, it is an argument void of al consequens. For if the ceremonial
outward practice of baptism and reconciliation, were able to prove the
practizers to be the true Church, not only the papists, but all other sects
of heretics practizing the same, should be ye true Church. This is the first
argument, and as good as the best he makes, to prove the heresy of Popery to
be the true Church of Christ.

CAP. II.
That he confesses the known Church of the first 600 years Bristowe.
after Christ and the known members thereof.

I believe that the Church of Christ, has continued from the Apostles unto
this day, and shall do from Fulke.
henceforth to the end of the world. And I do confess that for 600. years
and more, after Christ, the doctrine of salvation in all necessary articles
was taught in the known and visible Church, although with all, in the later
times, was received much corruption. I acknowledge also the ancient writers,
Bishops, Emperors and Monks of those times, to have been members of the same
visible Church. But whereas Bristowe says, to that I add of the late
Emperors, I signify that I mean the Emperors Constantine, Iouian,
Valentinian, etc. to have been such as I would wish for: I answer, he is no
good interpreter of my meaning. For although in comparison of the later
Emperors, they were much more excellent, yet I never meant to acknowledge them
to be such, as I would wish for: For both in the religion and in their
manners, diverse things are found, which I would wish had been more
agreeable to the word of God, and yet were they in their time, very godly and
Christian Princes, holding the foundation of Christ. I hope, to their eternal
salvation.

Other bymatters there be in this Chapter, in which I am carped of Bristowe.
First, that ignorantly I affirm, somewhere, namely Purg. 371. that the
controversy between the Britains and Saxons about the celebration of Easter,
was the same, that was between Victor Bishop of Rome, and the Christians of
Asia: whereas I said, they defended a ceremony received of the East Church,
even as the East church did long before against Victor (...). of Rome: for they
defend it by example and authority of S John the Evangelist, Bed. hist. lib.
3. cap. 25. and so did the Asians, Eusebius. lib. 5. Cap. 24.

Secondly where I say, that Athanasius and a few other, that were banished
and persecuted, were the true Catholic Church: he notes in the margent, such
is his skill in the story of that time: Belike he is offended, that I say they
were but a few, that took part with Athanasius. How small or great my skill
is in ye story of that time, Bristows practice of logike is but little, which
remembers not yt many and few are relatiues, and spoken in comparison: I say
again they were but few in comparison of ye Arrians, yt took part with
Athanasius against his adversaries, when he was banished. How many councels
held the Arrians in the East against the truth? The Emperor himself infected
with the heresy: let the world judge where the greater show of multitude
was, with the Emperor, and with the councels; or with Athanasius and his
fautors. Yea when Liberius Bishop of Rome in the West, had subscribed to the
same heresy of the Arrians, and Constantius after both his brethren were
dead, ruled both in the East, and the West: what think you was the vaunting
multitude of the Arrian faction, insulting against the true Christians, calling
them heretics, Homousians, Athanasians, etc? Vincentius Lyrinensis says:
Arrianorum vene^^^ non iam portiunculam quandam, sed pene totum orbem
contaminauerat, ade^ut prope cunctis latini sermonis episcopis, partim vi,
partim fraud deceptis, caligo quaedam mentibus offunderetur: The poison of the
Arrians had defiled not now a little portion, but almost all the world,
insomuch that almost all the Bishops of the Latin speech, partly by force,
partly by fraud being deceived, a certain mist covered their minds. You see
what skill this proud censor has of the history of that time.

Last of all, he says I make a proper distribution, the Popes of all ages, to
be theirs, and yet the Apostles and doctors to be mine. But he makes an
improper application of the name of Popes to ye Bishops of Rome of al ages,
where as a great number of the most ancient were godly men, and of true
religion, members of the same Church whereof the Apostles and Doctors were, and
not antichristian tyrants, as the later sort of degenerated bishops have showed
themselves to be.

I do not mean to prosecute every trifling matter after this manner, but to
let the reader see by these few what great pyth is in his marginall notes and
frivolous quarrels.

CAP. III.
That he confesses the foresaid true Church to have made so plainly with us,
in very many of the same controversies of Bristowe.
this time, that he is feign to hold, that the true Church may err, and also
has erred, but not his Caluinicall Church.

I confess indeed, that the Popish Church holds some errors, that were
held within the compass of Fulke.
600. years, but them not very many, nor the greatest controversies, nor
universally held in all that time, but in the later part of it only, nor with
such poison of pernicious errors, as they are now holde^ by the Papists.

Also I confess, that the true Church may err, and has erred, yea even that
Church whereof Calvin was a teacher, and that Calvin himself in some things
both might err and did err, although Bristow like a scoffing parasite, does
except the same. But where he charge me to confess, sometime, also the long
continuing of the Church in incorruption, thereby to convince me of
contradiction: I answer, if he charge me with confessing the continuing of the
Church in incorruption, for 600. years next after Christ, he lies in his
throat, I never confessed any such continuance: If I had affirmed that it
continned after the first planting in incorruption for a long season, I might
say without contradiction, that afterward it was corrupted with diverse errors,
which I have so proved, that Bristowe himself cannot deny them. But I must
follow his sectio^s of this Chapter.

The first part that the true Church may err. Bristowe.


I confess the true Church may err. Fulke.


The second part that the true Church did also err: and in the Bristowe.
same points as we do now err in. 1. Where he charge them with many
points together.

I confess the true Church did also err, and in some Fulke.
of those points, that you now err in, although they nothing so grossly as
you. Those many abuses and corruptions which I confessed to have entered into ye
Church, immediately after ye Apostles time, which the devil planted as a
preparatiue for Antichrist, I did not mean to be many points of Popery, and
therefore are here fraudulently foysted in, to urge my confession, further
then it stretches by my meaning. By Antichrist in deed I mean the Pope, as
the chief head of that misshapen body, to whom I confess, that the Arrian,
Sabellian, Nestorian and al other old heresies, were a preparatiue, although, he
directly acknowledge the^ not, but has his heresy, or rather apostasy,
compacte of all errors, in that he is an adversary both to the person and
office of our savior Christ.

Particular errors, that I confess to have been taken of the Gentiles, or
heretics, he numbreth 8. The sign of the cross, from the Valentinians:
Oblations for the days of birth and death, from the Gentiles: prescripte times
of fasting, and immoderate extolling of sole life in the ministers of the
Church, from the Montanistes, Manichees, Tacianistes: Prayer for the dead, of
the Montanistes: purgatory fire, from the Origenistes: Hierom almost
condemning of second marriages, from Tertullian: The name of sacrifice, from
the Gentiles: Also in the later writers, invocation of saints, prayers for
the dead, and diverse superstitious and superfluous ceremonies, confessed by me
to be maintained.

2 As touching Vigilantius and invocation of Saints by it Bristowe.
self.

I confess that Ambrose, Augustine and Hierom Fulke.
held invocation of Saints to be lawful, which is an error.

3 As touching Iouinian of fasting, of Virginities merit, of Bristowe.
Votaries Marriage.

If Iouinian contemned Christian fastes, he erred, neither Fulke.
do we take his part therein, nor yet in making marriage equal with
virginity, in all respects. For the marriage of Votaries, Bristowe urges me
with no confession: but I charge him with a shameless falsification of my
words, which he pretends to rehearse, as a great absurdity. Purg. 402. We
neither boast upon Augustine nor Ambrose, when they dissent from our doctrine:
Neither are ashamed of Vigilantius nor Berengarius, when they agree therewith:
But my words are these: Seeing God himself is the father of that doctrine,
which we have received by his holy word, we neither boast upon Augustine nor
Ambrose, when they dissent therefro: neither are ashamed of Vigilantius nor
Berengarius, when they agree therewith.

4 As touching Ceremonies. Bristowe.


I confess they had many superfluous Ceremonies, yea such as the Papists them
selves have not, for the Fulke.
most part.

5 As touching Purgatory and prayer for the dead. Bristowe.


I acknowledge, that prayer for the dead is an ancient Fulke.
error, the opinion of purgatory in ye Latin church, is not so old, by many
hundred years: in the Greek Church, it was never received.

What he says of particular Doctors, and their particular Bristowe.
times for it.

I say, that most of the particular Doctors, from the Fuke.
time of Montanus, have been infected with the error of praying for the dead,
but none to be showed before him. The time of the first Nicen Council
(Bristow says) is enough for any Christian man. Who ever heard such a
blockish reason? If the Nicen Council had decreed prayers for the dead to be
used without the authority of the holy scriptures, it had not been enough for
any Christian man to believe. The Nicen Council made the Bishop of Alexandria
equal with the Bishop of Rome, which the Papists will not allow. cap. 6. The
same council decreed, that men should stand and not kneel in public prayers,
yet is no man bound to this decree, neither do the Papists themselves observe
it. Cap. 20. But my ignorance is noted of Bristow, for saying that superstition
was riper in the Latin Church, where the seat of Antichrist was appointed to
be set up, not knowing that all the old heresies, have spronge of the Greeks:
against whom were held the first four general Councels. A pithie reason,
showing no less Logike then knowledge of the Church story. Four heresies
were condemned by four councels, therefore all old heresies sprung of the
Grecians. But I will ask of Bristowe, whether Nouatus or Nouatianus captain
of the Nouatians, was of the Latin or Greek Church? Iouinian and Vigilantius
are counted of him to be as great heretics, as Arrius and Macedonius, but
whence did they spring, out of Greece or from the Latins? What shall I name
the Donatistes, Pelagians, Celestians, Priscillianistes, al which sprange out
of the Latin Church? And yet it is true, that Vincentius affirms, that
until the days of Stephanus, ye Bishops of the Roman Church, had always
earnestly defended the integrity of religion, once received, which he speaks
not as a singular praise of that Church only, for he says of the same matter
immediately before, Exemplis talibus plena sunt omnia, All places are full of
such examples. And that which Bristow cites out of Ruffinus in exp. Symb, that
no heresy did spring at Rome, is to be understood only of such heresies as he
speaks of before, against the danger of which, some clauses were added to the
creed: For otherwise, Ruffinus could not forget what he him self had
translated out of Eusebius lib. 6. cap. 33. of Nouatus, which being a Priest of
the Church of Rome, was author of the heresy of the Nouatians.

2 What he says of the whole Church in some of those Bristowe.
times.

I say the practice of prayer for the dead is not general, ^Fulke.
because it is not to be found in the most ancient times. Bristow asks, if
nothing be general, but that I find: as though he could find any thing, for
200* years, but in Tertullian the Montanist. But the later practice for places
he says is general: if I should urge him to prove it, he could not do it. I
confess it was common, but for all the later time, it was not general. The
Waldenses, for 500. of the last years, practiced it not, and almost in every
age, some are noted, which regarded it not, or denied it.

3. To what Origin he confesses the doctors to refer it, to wit, unto
scripture and tradition of the fathers. Bristowe.


I confess, that some of the fathers refer the custom Fulke.
of praying for the dead, to the Scriptures, and some to the tradition of the
Apostles, but neither of both truly. Bristowe compares the case with fasting,
whereof Augustine says, that it is evidently commanded in scripture, but the
days not prescribed: So is prayer for the dead, but the days, times, and
particular prayers, are referred to the tradition. I answer, when we see as
good scripture for prayer for the dead, as we see for fasting, we will say the
cases are like.

How Tertullian denied, prayer and oblation for the dead to be taken out of the
scriptures, is referred to the ninth Chapter, where it shall be answered.

But he is feign to deny (says Bristowe) the most certain works of the
Apostles scholars, Clemens Romanus, and Dionysius Areopagita, saying that we
have them of some counterfaiting knave, etc. (quoting for my saying) Pur. 268.
which I desire the reader to peruse, and tell me how honest a man he is, that
charge a man to say of ye works of Clemens and Dionyse, that which I speak
only and expressly of the counterfeit epistles of Clemens. Concerning the
change of the old Liturgies: we shall hear more in the sixth Chapter.

4 He contraiewise fears not, nor basheth not to say, they Bristowe.
had it from the devil and his lymmes.

I see no cause, why I should fear or bash to affirm, Fulke.
that all errors came from the devil, who is a liar and the father of lies:
Neither is it any absurdity to say, that the yearly oblations of thanksgiving
for the dead, are heathenish, as well as the oblations for the birthes. But it
is an impudent slander, that he charge mine own mouth to confess, that the
whore of Babylon is the church, at the farthest by S. Augustines time, which
has patched up her purgatory, and sacrifices for the dead: for purgatory and
sacrifice for the dead, was scarce hatched in S. Augustines time, when
Augustine him self confessed it might be doubted, whether there be any such
purging fire or no.

5. As touching the Popes supremacy. Bristowe.


Concerning the Popes primacy, he charge me to teach, that the Church
vanished quite away, upon a souden, Fulke.
when Phocas sold the primacie to Bonifacius, and yet no man then in the
world, that went out from the Pope. The first point is a shameless slander,
for I never taught that the church vanished quite away: the second is true, if
it be rightly understood: no man went from the Pope, as from a true member of
the church, but the Pope rather went out of the church, into an antichristian
tyranny. But understanding his saying to be, that no man departed from the
Popes authority, it is utterly false: for notwithstanding the sale of Phocas,
the Greek church never yielded to his supremacy. The church of Rauenna in
Italy, long time after withstoode his tyranny, and was separated from him, in
causa autocephalias, that she would have no head over her, but he^ own
bishop, as the histories affirm. Bristowe, to excuse the Pope for doing
contrary to Gregory's reproof of the bishop of Constantinople, says, that
he never uses the style of universal bishop, but of s(...) seruorum, the
servant of servants, as though it was for the bare style, and usurpation of the
title, that Gregory was so earnest, and not for the universal authoririe,
which was claimed by yt style, in which respect Gregory of humility, the rest
of his successors of hypocrisy, called them selves, servants of the servants
of God.

Now at length Bristowe alleges three causes of this his tedious rehearsal
of my sayings: first, that the reader may see, in how many points we disse^t
from them, whom we confess to have been of the true church. I answer, so long
as we agree in the foundation, we are all of one church. The second cause, that
the reader may see, I confess the Papists to agree with them of the true
church, in the same. A great glory, that you agree with them in a few errors,
and dissent in the most weighty matters of salvation. Thirdly, that I have
not, for these points, or any depe^ding of these, just cause to deny the
Papists the true church etc. If you erred only in these points, as they did,
holding all other truth, which those ancient fathers held, we would no
more deny you to be members of the true church, than we do them: but seeing
beside these errors, you hold many blasphemous heresies, which they never
held, and utterly deny the office of Christ, the foundation of our salvation,
therefore we justly deny you to be of the true church of Christ. Neither is
your excuse to be admitted, that you err by authority of them, who if the
truth had been as plainly revealed unto them, out of the scriptures, as it is
to you, would never have so obstinatly defended their errors, but as they
always professed, yielded to the truth, against custom, prescription of time,
authority of councels, or any practice whatsoever.

CAP. IIII.
That he charge the said primitive true church, with sundry Bristowe.
errors wherewith he neither does, nor will, nor can charge us.

I affirm that diverse godly fathers of the primitive Fulke.
church, held sundry errors, which the Papists hold not at this day. Also
that the ancient church erred in some points and practice, wherewith I will not
charge the popish church, except they charge them selves. But that I should
confess (as Bristowe says) That there may be a company which erreth, not
only some principal members, but also the whole body of it, and which erreth
obstinatly, and moreover, which erreth the grossest errors that can be, and
them (...) no small number, and yet the same company may be the tru^ church.
This is utterly false, I never made such confession, neither can Bristow bring
any words of mine, that sound to the same effect: and therefore I here charge
him before God and the world, for a shameless liar, and an ungodly
slaunderer. As for the errors wherewith I charge either the ancient writers,
or the ancient church of Rome, do follow afterward discussed in the sixth
Chapter.

CAP. V.
What reason he renders, why they in those ancient time^, Bristowe.
had the true church notwithstanding these their errors.

First repeating my confessions: That the true church Fulke.
may err, that it has erred in some articles wherein we err, and in many
other wherein we do not err, whereof it follows plainly (quoth Bristowe) that
neither our erring, nor these our errors, no nor any other our errors, are
alone sufficient for him to deprive us of the true church. Mark this
consequens of Bristowe, some errors which the Papists, hold common with the
old church, cannot deprive them of the true church, ergo none other errors
that they hold, contrary to the ancient church, are alone sufficient to
deprive them. This is popish logike. And yet I will in this argument, charge
his conscience rather then his science: for common sense abhors such
reasoning, from the particular to the universal.

But let us see, if such reason as allows the fathers to have had the true
church, notwithstanding their errors, may serve the Papists to prove them the
true church, their errors notwithstanding. The reason I allege, that the
fathers had the true church, is because they held the only foundation Jesus
Christ, and the article of justification by the only mercy of God. Now (says
Bristowe) who knows not, that we believe in the only son of God, and in
the only mercy of God, and that therefore we look not to be saved by our
own works, that is, which we did without him, in Paganism, Iudaisme, or
Caluinisme, in heresy or deadly sin, etc. but only by his works, that is,
by his sacraments and the good deeds that of his great mercy, he has created
in us in Christ Jesus? etc. therefore the same reason serves us,
notwithstanding our errors.

I answer, your minor is false: you believe not in the only begotten son of
God, because you believe not in God. Cyprian de duplici Martyrio, says: Non
credit in Deum, qui non in eo solo collocat totius foelicitatis suae fiduciam:
He believes not in God, which places not in him alone the trust of all his
felicity. You place not your trust in God alone, for you trust in your
merits, yea, in the merits of others, both living and dead, and in an
hundredth things beside God alone. Secondly, where you say, you believe in the
only mercy of God, it is false: for you believe no justification by the only
mercy and grace of God, which excludes all works and merits, as the Apostle
says, Romans 11. Thirdly, you says you believe to be saved by his sacraments,
which in deed after a sort, are said to save us, namely, not as principal
^fficient causes, but as instruments and means that god ^seth to confirm his
promises, which proceed of his only grace and mercy. Fourthly you say, you
believe to be saved by those good deeds, that God of his mercy has created in
us: which plainly declares that you look not to be saved, by the only grace
and mercy of God, purchased by the redemption of Christ: but by such good
works as proceed from your selves, although you ascribe unto the grace of
God, that you be able to do them, as both the Pharisee did, which justified him
self by his own works, and yet acknowledged God to be the author of them, in
him, Luke 18. And the Pelagians also affirmed generally, that by Gods grace we
are saved, because God of his grace has given such a law, by keeping whereof,
we might attain to salvation.

But you cite S. Paul, Tit. 3. to show, that his mercy and sacrament may
stand together, which no man denies: yet can you not show, that his mercy
is so tied to his sacrament, that he saves not without it. For Abraham was
justified by faith, before he was circumcised, and received circumcision as a
seal of the faith he had, being uncircumcised: Romans 4.

And where the Apostle speaks of works generally, excluding them from being
cause of our salvation, you restreine the^ only to works done before baptism:
for this cursed gloss you make upon ye text, Not for any works of *
righteousness which we did (before baptism say you) but for his mercy, he
has saved us by baptism. But that S. Paul excludes al manner of works, done
by us, from justification, the sentence following declares: That being
justified by his grace, we might be made heirs according to the hope of
eternal life. For grace and works can never stand as a joint efficient
cause, Romans 11. but the one of necessity, excludes the other. As for the
receiving of the Sacraments is no work of ours, as you truly say, but an
accepting of the grace, which God gives. The place Ephesians. 2. which you ^ite to
prove, that we are saved by good works, done after baptism, is clean against
you, if you had rehetsed the whole text. You are saved (says S. Paul) by
grace, through faith, (and this not of your selves, it is the gift of God) not
of works, least any man should boast. For we are his workmanship, created in
Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has prepared, that we should walk in
them.

The argument of S. Paul is taken out of the effect, Good works are the effect
and aid of our justification, ergo not the efficient cause thereof. And mark
again, that he says we are saved by grace and not of works. Mark also the
reason why we are not saved by any works done by man: namely least any should
boast. For boasting of man, is not excluded, so long as any works that he
does, may be the cause of his salvation. For if Abraham be justified by works,
he has whereof to boast, but not with God: Romans 4. where is then boasting? It
is excluded. By what law? of works? No, but by the law of faith. Wherefore
not only the works done before baptism, but all other are excluded from
justification, that no man should boast as the Pharisee, but that all glory of
our salvation, might be ascribed wholly to God by Jesus Christ. You therefore
building salvation upon good works, done after baptism, do manifestly build
upon another foundation, then the only true foundation Jesus Christ: and
therefore, your errors notwithstanding, you cannot (as the old fathers erring
in small matters) be yet the church of God. What Flaccius Illyricus an
intemperate man judged of S. Hierom, I have not to answer for him.

CAP. VI.
An answer first to all the foresaid errors, wherewith he Bristowe
has charged the Church of the first 600. years: and afterward like^ise to
all errors, that he lays to the Church of these late^ years.

Hitherto we had nothing in a manner, but a rehersall Fulke.
of such matters as he affirms to be confessed by me, now he promises to
prove, that notwithstanding any thing I obiecte, the Church has never erred,
and moreover, that it can never err. How well he performs his promise, we
shall see by considering his aunsweres and arguments.

Fulkes zeal in aunswering for Calvin, and others being in Bristowe.
deed of his Church.

First he charge me to hold, that our Church at Fulke.
this present, does not err, and that I never say so much, as plainly, that
it may err. In deed I am thoroughly persuaded, that our Church in matters
necessary to salvation, does not err. But when I say plainly, that not only
every particular Church, but even the whole Catholic Church on earth of every
age, may err in matters not necessary to salvation, what an impudent creature
is this, to affirm, that I never say plainly, that our Church may err? He
that says plainly, every man ^^ a liar, does he not say plainly that both
Fulke and Bristowe are liars? But my zeal for Calvin is wonderful great, in
his opinion, for I say he erreth not, but the fathers, and the whole Church
have erred. A man were as good to reason with a post, as with such a sensles
Papist: I say Calvin erreth not in such points, as he is slaundered of by
Allen, therefore I say he erreth not at al. I say and cry out as loud as I
can, every man erreth: and yet in Bristowes ears I say Calvin erreth not. The
like zeal I show for Master Jewel, whose learned labors I commend to the
judgment of the world. And yet he has quit himself so well (says Bristowe)
that the very reading of his answer, has turned many earnest Protestants,
into earnest Catholics, as both by the numbers, and by the nobleness of the
persons is notoriously known. I think the number and the nobility of the
conuerts is all alike. There runs such a tale of Copley, the great barron of
Haie, created by the Spanish, I wot not how, Lord of the Maze, an ancient
rotten house in Southwarke, that he should be so converted, if some popish
treason discovered caused him not to feign such a souden and strange
conversion. But yet Bristowe cannot abide, that I should exhort English
papists, to read that book, and pray to God for direction in the truth. No
sir (says he) that is not the way to truth, no more then to swallowe poison
and pray, is the way to get or keep health of body. Alas poor Bristowe, have
thou so soon forgot, yt which thou said immediately before, that Jewels book
is such a sovereign antidote, that has expelled the poison of Protestants
from so many and so noble personages, and made them so earnest Catholics, that
thou now would have them fly from it, as from a poison? We see thy witty
policy, it is not the way to truth (thou say) to read our aunsweres: but
it is the way to continue me^ in error, to suffer them to see nothing but that
you say your selves. A sure way to win credit, but yet with fools only: For
he that dare not let his adversaries answer be seen, shows plainly that
he dare not abide the trial, but requires all men to believe him upon his
bare word. Where you say, I should rather exhort men to read ye ancient
writers, I answer, that is needelesse, for such whom I exhort to read
master Jewels reply, namely such as cannot wade well out of these
controversies without such conference, as they may see between master
Harding, and master Jewel.

The first part concerning the errors that he laid (ap. 3. par. 2.) both to the
fathers, and to us, and first of the cross and images. Bristowe.

First, where I charge them, that the estimation of the sign or figure of the
cross was taken of the Valentinians, Fulke.
that the reader may wonder at my audacitie, he says, Irenaeus nor Epiphanius
speak not a word of the figure, nor sign, nor use of the cross, but tell
that those heretics invented 30. gods called Aeones, and in them two or 3.
Christ's, and one of the Christ's, they called Crux, etc. what say you Bristowe,
speak they not a word, either of the figure, sign, or use of the cross? I
could refer you to the 14. Chapter of Irenaeus, where he tells that they
call the Zodiak (whose moving is overthwart the first moving of heaven) an
image of the cross. And when they both tell you, that the cross among the
Valentinians, had a double use of confirmation and separation, speak they not
a word of the use of the cross? No (say you) they invented 30 gods called
Aeones, and among them diverse Christ's, whereof the cross was one. It is a
shame to lie on the devil. The Valentinians did not call their Aeones gods,
but emissions of the first great invisible and infinite Acone. Neither was the
cross, any of those 30. Aeones, ages, or worlds. For they are all thirty
named in Irenaeus, before he comes to the cross: videlicet 8. of the first
emission, ten of the second; and twelve of the third. Neither did they call
the cross Christ, but the virtue of Christ, confirmatiue and separatiue, such
as healed ye woman of the bloody issue. Unto which they gave diverse names,
calling it in a manner as you papists do, the redeemer, the savior, the
sanctifier, the apoynter of the bounds, the bringer unto further matters, the
most perfect end or termination, etc. But all this while, you will say there is
no mention of the figure of the cross, but of a fained mystery or
imagination. Then you must understand, that of these imagined mysteries, they
affirmed there were sensible and material things in the world, made to be
similitudes and images: Irenaeus. lib. 2. cap. 6. Such was the cross yt Christ
suffered upon, and all other crosses made to the similitude of it, of which S.
Paul by their fantasy should say, God forbid that I should rejoice but in
the cross of Christ, etc. whose figures that they used in their consecration
and baptizing, it may appear in Iren. lib. 1. cap. 18. where although the
figure of the cross be not named, yet their terms of redemption, confirmation
and division which they used, in pouring on of water, annoynting them, do
infinyate, that they used some signs of the cross to whom they gave those
titles, as before is showed. Finally when it is certain by Iren. lib. 2. cap.
6. that they affirmed those similitudes and images in material things, were
made unto the honor of their invisible and spiritual fantasies, there is no
doubt but they had in great price the material image or sign of the cross,
for reverence of that high mystery whereof they dreamed the same to be an
image or similitude.

Concerning the images of Jesus, which the Carpocratians and other like
heretics made, and worshipped, Bristow says, it touches not the papists,
because they also made and worshipped the images of heathen Philosophers, like
as the Samaritans joined the worshipping of false Gods, with the worshipping of
our Lord. If I should object unto you, the worshipping of the images of saint
Sunday, saint Hardhuffe, saint Vncomber, yea saint Christopher, and saint
George on horseback, which al were mere Idols after your own diffinition of
Idols, I wot not how you could quite your self, from the case of the
Samaritanes. But Irenaeus and Epiphanius charge the heretics, not only for
joining the images of Philosophers and Poets with the Image of Jesus, but also
for fayning the Image of Jesus, and worshipping it. Irenaeus against Basilides
lib. 1. cap. 23. says absolutely, Viuntur autem and imaginibus and
inca^tationibus, and invocationibus etc. They use images, and inchauntmentes,
and inuocations and all the rest of superstitions. Here he places the use of
images with inchauntementes, invocation of spirits, and other superstitions of
magike, and chapter 24. against the Gnostikes and Carpocratians he says, Etiam
imagines quasdam etc. Also they have certain images painted, and some made of
other matter, saying that the form of Christ was made by Pilate, in yt time
which Jesus was with men. If it had not been a fault to have had these
counterfete images, Irenaeus would not have joined it among other heretical
practices of the Carpocratians. The like says Epiphanius against Basilides and
the Gnostikes, Haere. 24 Habent imagines etc. They have images painted in
colors, some also have them of gold and silver and other matter, which they
say, are the images of Jesus, and that these images of Jesus were made under
Pontius Pilate, when he was conversant amongst men. And these images they have
closely. Moreover they have the images of certain Philosophers etc. Who sees
not by this context, that Epiphanius accounted it heretical, to have such
images in any use of religion, although they had not made any other images of
philosophers besides? Also against the Collyridians, which with certain cakes
offering as the Papists do candles, worshipped the image of the virgin Marie:
he asks, what this desire of making images can be, else, but a deuilish
enterprise? yet the Collyridians worshipped no heathen Philosophers with the
virgin Marie. Neither does he simply charge them that they worshipped her, as
a God, but sieve velut ipsam, etc. Whether these foolish women offer this cake
to her, as worshipping Marie her self: or whether they go about to offer the
said stinking offering for her, the whole matter is folishe and strange, and
a fraud and deceit of the motion of diuelles. Therefore that I extend my
speech no longer, let that which has been said, suffice. Let Marie be in
honor, let the Lord be worshipped. And what think you, would he have judged
of the pilgrimage and offering of men and women, to the images of the virgin
Marie, which could not abide to see a veil in which was painted the image of
Christ, or some saint, hanging in a Church of Christians, but rent it in
pieces, at Anablatha? Epiph. Epist. ad Joan, Hieron. But for the defense of
Images: Bristowe refers the reader to Sanders book of Images: and I
likewise to my confutation of the same. In the mean time, it is a small
matter, that Bristowe urges my confession, that crossing at every step, (which
is, says he, a making and great religion of Images) is referred by Tertullian
unto tradition of the Apostles, seeing that is showed to have a later and
corrupter beginning, and other fables beside by Tertullian referred to
Apostolic tradition.

2 Of invocation of saints, and worshipping of their relics. Bristowe.

You remember since the 3. chapter (says Bristow) by your own report that the
true Church counted Vigilantius Fulke.
an heretic for denying the invocation of Saints, and the worshipping of
their relics. I answer, yt I remember no such matter, neither do I find
any where, that Vigilantius was publicly condemned for an heretic, in his
time, but only in the private judgment of Hierome, although Bernardus long
after account him little better. But of worshipping the relics of Saints,
and of their images, the case (say you) is all one: then by Hieromes judgment,
neither of both is to be worshipped. For we worship not, says he, the
relics of Martyrs, no nor the sun and Moon, no not Angels and
Archangels, Cherubim and Seraphim etc: But we honor the relics of the
martyrs, that we may worship him whose witnesses the martyrs are. By which
saying, and other to the same effect, it is manifest, that although Hierome
defended some honoring, or moderat reverence of relics, yet he abhorred
idolatrous worshipping of them, and much more of their images. Where I say, the
superstition of relics is received of the Ossenes: Bristowe says it
perteyneth not to them, because the Ossenes worshipped them for Gods, whose
relics they had in such, estimation. But that is false: for they held
Marthys and Marthana for Saints, proceeding out of the holy seed of Elxai
whom they never worshipped, but as a great Prophet and teacher, although
Epiphanius says pro diis adorabantur, they were worshipped as Gods: meaning
that worship which is proper unto God only, was given to them, as it is of
Papists unto saints, whom they worship as God, giving that worshipp unto
them, which is proper only unto God, as faith and invocation. But Bristow
would have the snottie cloutes of Thomas Becket, that were worshipped after his
death, to be all one with the napkins and partletts, that were carried from the
body of S. Paul the Apostle to cast out unclean spirits, when he lived:
which napkins and partletts, yet he cannot prove either, that they were ever
worshipped, or that they were reserved for relics, after the work of
miracles was wrought by them. As for the argument that Chrysostom takes,
against the Pagans, of the relics of Babylas the Martyr, which he would have
me to apply to my disease, was to the confusion of Idolatry and sorcerie, not
to the setting up or mainteyning thereof. And what worship I pray you, was
given to the relics of Babylas? If God showed miracles by the presence of his
body in Daphne, as by the bones of Elizeus, yet it follows not, that his
body or ashes, were worshipped more then the bones of Elizeus were.

Concerning invocation of Angels, which they have common with the Caianes,
Bristowe shows, that the Caianes had other greater heresies, which the
papists hold not, as though those greater errors could excuse this lesser.

The superstition of Angels, that Saint Paul warns the Ephesians, and
Collossians to beware of, he says, they be clear of it, because in all their
prayers, they conclude per Christum etc. Through Christ our Lord: as though
they that taught the superstition of Angels, did clean exclude Christ, or that
it was to be doubted, lest the Ephesians and Collosians, would forsake Christ,
and cleave to Angels, but rather lest with the religion of Christ, as the
chief, they would also admit the superstition of the Angels, whereof were
named the sect Angelici in Angelorum cultu inclinati, bowed down in ye worship
of Angels as S. Augustine says, which therefore held not the head, because
they worshipped not him alone, but joined Angels in part of his glory. That
Angels are ministering spirits, it proves not, that therefore they must be
prayed unto, but the contrary, for invocation is due only to him on whom we
believe, which is God only. So much the more blasphemous is Bristowe, that
charge Saint John, Apoc. 1. to have prayed to the Angels, where he says,
Grace and peace be to you from him, that is, and was, and is to come: and from
the 7. spirits, that are before his throne, and from Jesus Christ. Whereas the
consent of all ancient writers is, that the seven spirits are taken for the
holy Ghost, which is seven fold in his graces, according to the prophecy of
Isay 11. The spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom
and understanding, the spirit of counsel and power, etc. And it is also
evident, that S. John speaks of the spirit of God as he was showed to him in
the vision, according to the dispensation of his manifold gifts in the figure
of the seven lamps which are the 7. spirits of God according to the number of
seven Churches of Asia, to whom he sends the copy of his revelation, for
the instruction of all Churches in the world. Apoc. 4. And albeit we should
expound these seven spirits for seven Angels, as some late writers do, yet it
follows not, that S. John should pray unto them, in those words, but rather
to God for their ministry to the preservation of the Churches: No more then
if he should wish grace unto them from heaven, it follows that he prays
unto heaven. That phrase is often in the Psalms, wherein salvation or help is
prayed to be sent from Sion, from the holy Hill, from the Temple, from heaven:
and yet no man was so mad to say, that prayers was made to Sion, to the Hill,
to the Temple, to heaven. And yet it is more monstrous, that he charge me to
forget, that in the same book of the Apocalips, God does promise to make the
obstinate Jews to come, and to adore before the feet of one Angel. And they
shall know that I have loved thee etc. I speak unto thee Th. Stapleton which
profesiest that thou have perused this book of Bristowes and allowed it. Wast
thou awake when thou did p^ruse this argument, and allowed it? Tell me by
thy credit, is this the Angel of the Church of Philadelphia, of whom this is
written to be understood, for one of those heavenly spirits concerning whose
worship and invocation we now speak in this controversy? Are epistles then
written from the Apostle on earth to Angels in heaven? is any of those Angels
neither whote nor cold in the service of God? has any of them a name that he
lives and is dead? has any of them left his first love? does any of them
suffer the woman Iesabell to preach etc? Out upon thine impudence, if thou
affirm all this, and fie upon thy negligence, if thou did peruse it and
allow this argument, if thou be ashamed to affirm all the rest. As for thee
Bristowe, it shall be sufficient to hear thy Master reproved for thy fault at
this time, to make the blushe if any spark of honest shame be left in thy
breast, that dare set abroad such an intolerable corruption of ye holy
scripture, against all wit and reason that ever was heard of.

3 Of abstinence from fleshmeate, and from marriage. Bristowe.

Bristow would have the question of prescript fasting Fulke.
days and abstinence from flesh to be all one, as they are accounted among the
Papists. But there is great difference. For Aerius which denied fasting days
appointed by the church to be observed, did nevertheless as Augustine shows
out of Philaster, teach abstinence from flesh. Wherefore Bristowe falsely
charge me to confess, that the Papists have the error of abstinence from
flesh on fasting days, common with the ancient fathers of the primitive
church. For on their prescript fasting days (except for necessity) they did
eat neither fish nor flesh, nor any thing until the evening. As for the
abstinence from meats, against which Iouinian did teach, was but such
particular abstinence as some men prescribed to them selves, not only from
flesh, but also from fish and wine also, as appears by Hieronyme, con.
Iouin. lib. 2. Nec hoc dicinius quod negemus pisces, etc. Neither say we this
(says Hieronyme) that we deny fishes and the rest of meats, if a man's will
may be taken in meat, but as we prefer virginity before marriage, so
fasting and the spirit, before fullness and flesh. Likewise, in diverse places,
he speaks of the abstinence from wine. Furthermore, he charge me to bring
no proof of that I say, the fathers took prescript times of fasting and
unmeasurable extolling of sole life in the clergy, from the Tatianistes,
Manichees; and Montanistes. If I brought no proof in that place, it was
because I presupposed that Allen knew, what Eusebius reports out of
Apollonius, lib. 5. Cap. 18. That Montanus was the first that prescribed laws
of fasting. And that the Manichees in their electes, and the Tatianistes in
their perfectes, allowed not marriage, out of Epiphanius and Augustine. But
where I charge the Papists which Aerianisme for abstinence from flesh,
Bristowe says, I take Richard for Robert, because the Aerians abstained from
flesh, as the Manichees, Tatianistes, and Montanistes, as perteining to the
ill god, according to the heresy of the Valentinians. Admit it were so, yet
how ca^ either Richard or Robert dischardg them selves of the doctrine of
devils and spirit of error, whose fruit is forbidding of marrying and eating
of meats, 1. Tim. 4. which is heretical and abominable, for what cause of
religion so ever it be? And seeing the Apostle charge them with hypocrisy,
it is more probable that he speaks against ye Papists, than against those
open blasphemers. But how proves Bristowe, that the Aerians were of the
opinion of the Eucratites or Apotastites? Forsooth, because Augustine says:
Quidam perhibent istos sicut Eucratitas vel Apotastitas, non admittere ad
communionem suam nisi continentes, and eos qui seculo ita renuntiaverint, vt
propria nulla possideant, ab es^a tamen carnium non eos abstinere dicit
Epiphanius: Philaster vero and hanc eis tribuit abstinentiam: Some say, that
these men as the Eucratites or Apotastites do not admit into their society,
but only such as contain from marriage, and have so renounced the world, that
they possess no proper goods, yet Epiphanius says not, that they abstain
from eating of flesh: but Philaster lays to them also this abstinence.

The similitude (which Bristowe by falsifying S. Augustine and displacing his
words) would have to be in the whole sect of the Eucratites, is only in the
abstinence from marriage and meats, and possessions, not in the opinion or
cause for which they abstained. For seeing Aerius was an Arrian, he could not
hold the plurality of Gods. For the Arrians so held the unity of the godhead,
that they denied the Trinity of the persons in equal substance. And although
he were the scholar of Eustachius, yet it follows not yt he held all points
as his master did. Augustine charge him to have added these matters of his
own. Beside that, diverse of Eustachius articles differ little from the
opinion of the Papists, concerning the marriage of priests, and the abstinence
from meats, howsoever the papists will not seem to be so boisterous as
Eustachius in denying the kingdom of heaven to them that marry, and hope to
them that eat flesh: yet Pope Syricius is affirmed to write, that they which
be married be in the flesh, and cannot please God: Ep. ad Him. Tarrat. And what
a dangerous matter the Papists count it, to eat flesh in times by them
prohibited, all the world does know.

4 Of Ceremonies, and Liturgies. Bristowe.

The church is S. Augustines times approved unprofitable Fulke.
and hurtful vsages, because Augustine complains of them Ep. ad Ianuar. 118.
and wishes, that they might be abrogated so soon as occasion served. Bristowe
quarreling, that my quotation is missing which was but the printers omission:
answers that Augustine in the same epistle says, Tamen ecclesia, etc. Yet
the church of God approves not any thing that is against the faith, or against
good life. And I reply notwithstanding, yt they may be unprofitable and
hurtful vsages. For so the same Augustine writes in the same Epistle. Quamuis
enim, etc. For although neither this can be found, how they are against the
faith, yet they oppress the religion it self with servile burdens, which the
mercy of God would have to be free with most few and manifest sacraments of
celebrations, so that the condition of the Jews is more tolerable, which
although they have not known the time of liberty, yet they are subject to
lawful burdens, and not to human presumptions. But Bristowe proceeds and
urges an other saying of Augustine, that if the whole church use any thing, it
is a point of most insolent madness to call in question, whether that should
be so used. I answer, we speak of approving of vsages, not of any thing that
is generally used. The church is S. Augustines time, approved diverse
unprofitable vsages by secret consent, without open abrogation, which yet were
diverse in diverse places.

Where I prove they were unprofitable by this reason, that many of them are
abrogated, he answers, that is no good argument, for there might be good
cause to abrogate them, although they came of the tradition of the Apostles: as
ye decree of not eating blood nor strangled, Act. 15. and the custom of the
Apostles and of the churches of God for men to pray and prophecy bareheaded.
To the former decree I reply, that it was temporal, and not meant by the
makers to be eternal, but to bear with the infirmity of the Jews for a
time. To the other custom of praying or preaching bareheaded, whatsoever the
pompous doctors of the popish church observe, I say it is perpetually to be
observed for the distinction of the man and woman in covering and uncovering of
the head, and the observing of natural comeliness in both, although for
necessity of health a nightcap, kercheffe or such like covering, according to
the custom of the country, be not absolutely prohibited. As for ye forbidding
of solemn fastes and genuflections on sundays, which Bristowe says was
ordained by the Apostles to plant the article of the resurrection, and more
straightly observed of the church against the Manichees, which might be
abrogated, now that article is received and the heresy extinct is but a
dream of his own head without proof, and so (...)et it pass, although I
know not what he means to say, that forbidding of solemn kneeling is still
observed: for the papists kneel as solemnly on sundays as on other days.
As for the liberty the church has in altering of ceremonies, is never denied
of me: but fondly alleged of him, which pretends that traditions of the
Apostles are as necessarily to be observed, as commandments of the scripture,
referring every blind ceremony, whereof he knows none author, to tradition
of the Apostles.

Now concerning the Liturgies, he says, Proclus answers why Basil and
Chrysostom changed the ancient Liturgies that were before them: he says,
forsooth they did but abridge and make shorter the Liturgy of S. James, which
was too long for the peoples cold devotion. But his reason will soon prove all
the three Liturgies that now are called by the names of S. James, Basil, and
Chrysostom, to be counterfeits, for there is small difference in the length of
them, and in a manner none at all. As for the Council of Constantinople in
Trullo, does in deed name the Lyturgies of S. James, Basil, and Chrysostom,
but that proves not these which we have at this day, to be the same, seeing
there are manifest arguments to the contrary, as of the Monasteries spoken of
in that which goes under the name of James and of Alexius the Emperor, and
Nicholas the bishop, in Chrysostom, which were not borne many hundredth years
after his death. But that prayers for the dead, were used in ye ancient
Liturgies, that were before Chrysostomes time, Bristowe says he has proved
by plain demonstration, Cap. 3. where there is nothing but a saying of
Chrysostom cited by me, in Epist. ad Philip. Hom. 3 Non frustra, etc. It has
not been in vain decreed by the Apostles, that in the celebration of the holy
mysteries, memory should be made of them that are hence departed, etc. This
saying proves a remembrance, but not a prayer, nevertheless of this
remembrance used in the elder times, they gathered prayers to be profitable.
But more clearly, that it was a remembrance without prayers, it appears by
Epiphanius, which interprets the same remembrance to be as a prayer for the
sinners, and for the righteous of all sorts to be a distinction of them from
our savior Christ, cont. Aer. ser. 75.

5 Of sacrifice: and for the dead. Bristowe.

The name of sacrifice, which the fathers used commonly for the celebration of
the Lords supper, they took of Fulke.
the Gentiles, you might add and of the Jews also, for that somewhere I do
affirm. But how prove you, they had it of the scriptures? Because Christ
said not this is I, that was borne of the virgin, but this is my body, this is
my blood. The Apostle says not of him that eats unworthily, that he is
guilty of Christ, but he is guilty of the body and blood of Christ. Why
Bristowe, do thou dream? we speak of the name of sacrifice, whether it be
used in scripture for the celebration of the Lords supper. But if I knew
(says he) what is the sacrifice of a live thing, I should see that Christ is
here as properly sacrificed in a mystical manner, as he was properly
sacrificed on the cross in an open manner. Sir I know what S. Paul means,
when he exhorts us to offer up our bodies a living sacrifice, Rom 12. and
yet I am never the near to understand, your mystical sacrifice of a very
body, under the mystery of shape and color of bread.

Also as blind as you make me, I see the Altar, Heb. 13. of which it is not
lawful for the Jews to eat, so long as they remain in Iudaisme, but that
sacrifice is the death of Christ, whereof none that continue in observation of
the Leuiticall Law can be partakers. As for the table of the Lord, and the
table of devils, in one form of speech, 1. Cor. 10. proves no sacrifice of
the Lords table, opposite to the sacrifice of the Gentiles, but the feast of
the Lords table, contrary to the feast of the idol offerings, whereof the
controversy was, and not of communicating with the sacrifices of the Gentiles.
For if he had meant of the sacrifices of both, he would have na(...)ed the
altar of the Lord and the altar of devils. For (...) alter is proper for a
sacrifice, as a table for a feast or ^past. So that yet I stand to mine old
assertion, I cannot find one word or one syllable in the scripture, of any
sacrifice instituted by Christ at his last supper, But ^ontrariwise I find in
the scripture, that he offered on^y one sacrifice propitiatory, and that but
once upon the ^rosse: Heb. 9. and 10.

Purgatory.
Where I show out of Tertullian de anima, cap. de recep^u, that the opinion of
Purgatory after this life came first from the hethen philosophers as most
notable heresies did, seeing all philosophers that granted the immortality of
the soul, as Pythagoras, Empedocles, and Plato, assigned three places for the
souls departed, Heaven, hell, and a third place of purifying. This argument
(says Bristowe) proves as well, that heaven, hell, and ^he immortality of the
soul, had their original of the ^hilosophers. He is a perilous Logician that
can so co^^ude. For heaven, hell, and the immortality of the soul, ^re found
in the scriptures, which are before all philosophers, but of the third place
of purifying, we may say as Augustine does, contra Pelag. hypognost. lib. 5.
Tertium pe^itus ignoramus. The third place we know not at al, neither do we
find it in the holy scriptures. But if I would report the truth (Bristowe
says) there is no word of any third place of purifying, but that those
philosophers, made only two sorts of receptacles. But if I find three and the
third a place of purifying, what shall we think of Bristowes truth? First he
grants supernas mansiones, the high mansions for the souls of the
Philosophers and wise men only: secondly Inferos, hell, or the low places,
whereof Tertulian says Reliquas animas ad inferos deijciunt, the rest of the
souls they cast down into hell: 3. What say you Bristowe, all the souls
except Philosophers souls? Could you not see between them, imprudentes
animas, the foolish souls, remaining (according to the Stoikes) about the
earth, which should be instructed of the wise souls. What was this, but a
third place, and a place of purifying? But if you would have your purgatory
more plainly described, you may resort to Virgil, Aeneid. 6. where Anchises
out of the opinion of Pythagoras, rehearses how the souls of good men are
purged: Quin and supremo cum lumine vita reliquit, etc. After this life has
left them (says he) yet is not all evil, nor all the infections of the body
departed from them, and it is necessary that such things as have been long
gathered together, should by marvelous means be done away. Therefore they
are exercised with pains, and suffer the punishment of their ancient evils:
some souls, are hanged up against the void winds, to some their sin
remaining, is washed away under great raging waters, or burned up with fire.
Every one of us suffer our punishments, and then being but few we are sent
into the joyful Elysian fields etc.

Now concerning the three kinds of Purgatory, which I said that Carpocrates
the heretic invented, and proved by the payment of the uttermost farthing, as
the papists do theirs: Bristow says, by this argument, I will win much
honesty, because the purgatory that Carpocrates invented, was a wallowing in
all sinful operation etc. What is that to mine honesty? I said he invented a
kind of purgatory, and Bristowe says it was an absurd kind of purgatory.
I said he proved his purgatory as the papists do theirs, but to that Bristowe
answers never a word. But this is small honesty, for Bristow, that such
things as are joined together by me, to show by what degrees popish
purgatory came to perfection, they are severed by him, as though I meant to
charge the Papists by such arguments, to confute their purgatory.

Purgatory fire.
I said that purgatory fire was taken of the Originists. For Origin brought in
the purging fire by better reason out of 1. Cor. 3. for all souls, then the
papists do (...)r some souls: and the name of purgatory fire, began
(...)bout Augustines time by some Mediators that would (...)ccorde Origens
error, which was of purging all souls, (...)ith the erronius practice of
praying for the dead, out ^f which, they gathered the purging of some souls.
That I say of Origin, although Bristowe confess it to (...)e true in effect,
yet he says I speak it without proof. My proof is in Psalm. 36. Ho. 3. Si
vero in hac vita contem^imus etc. But if in this life we contemn ye words of
the divine scripture admonishing us, and will not be healed or reformed by the
reprehensions thereof, it is certain that fire abides us which is prepared
for sinners, and we shall come unto yt fire, in which of what sort every man's
work is, ye fire shall try. And (as I think) it is of necessity that we
must all come unto that fire. Although one be Paul or Peter, yet he comes to
yt fire. But they that are such do hear. Although thou pass through fire, ye
flame ^hal not burn thee. But if any be a sinner like me, he shall ^ome in deed
unto yt fire as Peter and Paul, but he shall ^ot so pass through it as Peter
and Paul. More of his ge^eral purgation of al men, and not ye damned only, you
^ay read in Number. Hom. 25. Vides quomodo, etc. Thou se^st how every man that
departs out of the battle of this life, has need of purification, etc. yet
says Bristow, that of the purgation of such as die in gods favor, there is no
word, which although he speak of Augustine whose words he cites Ad quod vult.
Hae. 43. yet he says untruly, for thus he writes in the same place: Sunt and
alia, etc. There be other opinions of this Origin which the Catholic Church
does not receive at all, in which it does not falsely accuse him, neither can
be so excused by his defenders especially: concerning purgation and
deliverance: and again after long time the revolution unto ye same evils of
every reasonable creature. I suppose he yt speaks of the purgation of every
reasonable creature, speaks of the purgation of such as die in Gods favor
also, wherefore it is manifest, that Origin erred not only about hell and
heaven, and the purgation of the damned, but also about the purgation of such
as dye in Gods favor. Therefore Bristowe need not gather mine argument, as he
does in scorn. There is no such Purgatory as Origin and Carpocrates would
have, therefore there is no purgatory at all. But what should Carpocrates come
in this title? but for a sorry sophisme, when we speak of Origin only.
Wherefore if you will give me leave to frame mine argument (although I meant
not an argument out of Origens purging fire only) it should be thus: There is
no such purging fire as Origin would for them that dye in Gods favor: such as
Origens fire, is the fire that the papists would have: therefore there is no
such purging fire as the Papists would have.

Releeuing of the dead by prayer.
If the dead be not relieved, we say (quod Bristowe as S. Paul says) they must
endure a fiery and therefore a most painful purgation. And for this saying,
he quoteth most impudently 1. Cor. 3. But I pray you Bristowe, where says S.
Paul the dead must endure a fiery purgation, or where makes he any exception
of their releeuing? He says the fire shall try every man's work. Is every
man only some kind of dead men? or is every man's work the man him self?
or is the trial of every man's work of what sort it is, a purgation either of
the man or of the work? Art thou not ashamed to charge S. Paul to say that,
whereof he says nothing at all? even by the judgment of S. Augustine. But
that Aerius was not the first that denied prayers for the dead to be
profitable, I showed by that of the most ancient writers. The Heracleonits
among other their heresies were charged to burye their dead with inuocations, and
to redeem them with oil, balm and water, and inuocations said over their
heads, as Augustine and Epiphanius show out of Irenaeus. Now comes
Bristowe, and in many needelesse words, rehearses other parts of their
heresy, with their manner of seasoning or receiving those that believe in
them, by a counterfeit marriage and baptism, and by anointing with balm, etc.
concluding that this practice of theirs, makes as much against true baptism
and solemnizing of matrimony as against prayer for the dead, anealing, or
anointing, etc. Likewise might they conclude, that all their ceremonies are as
good as baptism and marriage. But whatsoever we read of the practice of
heretics, we must learn to distinguish that which is their own invention,
from that which is the ordinance of God. And how shall we know Gods ordinance
from heretics invention, but by the holy scriptures? Separating therefore
baptism and marrying, which are the ordinance of God contained in the
scriptures, from the rest that have no ground in the same, prayers for the dead
which they used with such like matters, were the invention of heretics.
Howbeit (says Bristowe) of prayer for the dead in all this was never a word.
No was? How read you Irenaeus lib. Cap. 18. out of which you cite so much and
could not see, that after he has spoken of their seasoning of their disciples
alive, he tells how they redeem them when they are dead: Alij sunt qui
mortuis redimunt, etc. Other there be, that redeem the dead at the end of
their departing, pouring on their heads oil and water, or the foresaid
ointment, with water, and with the foresaid inuocations etc? Do you not hear
the same prayers said by the heretics for the dead, which they uttered before
for the living?

But if the Heracleonites should fail me, I affirm that Montanus had in all
points the opinion of ye Papists, because Tertullian a Montanist utters al
those points in such books as he made being a Montanist, and especially in
his book de anima. That Terrullian utters the opinion of the Papists in all
points, Bristow will not deny: But he asks, whether all be Montanisme that
Tertullian has in that his book de anima, and in so many other books as he
wrote being a Montanist? No forsooth sir. But Montanus the heretic held
whatsoever he wrote in those books. How then shall we discern that which is
proper to Montanus, from that which he has common with the catholic church? I
delivered a rule even now, concerning the practice of the Heracleonites.
Prayer for the dead and Purgatory are not found in the holy Scriptures, but
they are found in a disciple of Montanus, therefore they stink of Montanisme.
Add hereunto that in so many books as Tertullian did write being a catholic,
there is no mention of prayer for the dead, or suffering after this life of the
faithful. Last of all, Tertullian him self tells you plainly, that
Paracletus, the comforter (by which he meant the spirit of Montanus) had
revealed very often, that every small offense must be punished after this life,
in that the soul of any except martyrs, shall not go immediately into Paradise,
but tarry in prison until it have paid the uttermost farthing. What needed he
to cite the authority of his Paracletus, if he had spoken nothing but that
which was commonly received in the catholic Church? Which saying, since I have
set down in Tertullians words in the page of Purg. 417. by you quoted, you
needed not to have made a question, whether this opinion were Montanisme or no.
But when you can say nothing against this assertion your self, you would make
me uncertain of it, and say that it is but a light suspicion of mine, because
in one place, before I come to the found proof of it, I say it is a probable
conjecture. And does it follow therefore, that I doubt of it, because I offer
a probable conjecture to other men's understanding, before by order of the
discourse, I am brought to the manifest probation of it? The other phrases by
which you gather a doubtfulnesse, show your ordinary manner of collections.
And therefore it is not otherwise to be thought, but that the Montanistes added
prayers for the spirits of them that were dead, etc. Purg. 417. What
uncertainty is of that matter, whereof it is not otherwise to be thought?
Again: Finally, it appears, that the faithful in Tertullians time allowed
no prayers for the dead. Pur. 419. Call you that doubtful which appears by
plain demonstration before, page 417?

But for all your fine frumpe in the margent (all in Tertulian is Montanisme
that Cyprian does not mention) it is a probable conjecture, that prayer for ye
dead, whereof Tertullian speaks, was used only in the conuenticles of
Montanistes, because Cyprian which long after lived in Carthage, in all his
works, makes no mention of prayers for the dead. But I ween Cyprian makes
express mention of prayers for the dead, by my confession, as Bristowe would
have men think, because I say, of one place alleged by Allen, that it has
some color for Purgatory, which by flow of arguments I easily wash of, that
I need not stick in the lyme, as Bristowe says I do: but how I am
fastened therein, he says never a word.

Oblations for the dead.
I said that oblations for the dead, although at the first they were but of
thanksgiving, were taken of the Gentiles, as appears by Tertullia^, who
counts them of one original or beginning with oblations for the birth days,
falsely fathering them upon tradition of ye Apostles, as he does other vanities
in the same place, whereas those oblations pro natalitijs were taken from the
Gentiles, as witnesses Beatus Rhenanus, a Papist, affirming, that by the
Canons of the Nicen council and other councels which he had seen in
librarijs, they were abrogated and taken away. Bristowe says, he is but a
poor antiquarie, which knows not, that Natalitia in old time, were as they
now are the days of Martyrs sufferings: And yet he can name never an old
writer justly, that calls them natalitia. He names in deed Augustine in
Psalm. 118. Con. 30. Res. Insignita sunt tempora natalitijs martyrum: the times
are notably marked with the byrthdayes of Martyrs. What print he follows I
know not, but my book has natalibus and not natalitijs: between which
words there is some difference. As for Martyrologies whether he sends us, I
know none of such antiquity, that they may be judges in this case.

Tullie is a better witness what natalitia, being a substantive, in old time
did signify, namely, the feasts that were kept for the joy of men's birthdaye
in Ant. Hodie non descendit Antonius. Cur? Dat natalitia in hortis. Antonie
comes not down to day. Why so? He keeps the feast of his birthdaye in his
garden. Wherefore Pamelius, as great an antiquarie as you make him, unjustly
reproves Rhenanus, for understanding natalitia in Tertullian, to be feasts of
the birthdayes used after the example of the Gentiles. The places you cite out
of Cyprian, speak neither of natales nor natalitia, but of celebrating
oblations and sacrifices for the commemoration or remembrance of ye Martyrs
sufferings, which could be none other but sacrifices of thanksgiving,
according to your own doctrine. Wherefore you show nothing to the contrary,
but that Tertullian using the word natalitia, understands it for feasts of
the birthdaye, and not of the death of Martyrs. And beside the authority of
Rhenanus and Tully, for the signification of the word natalitia, I oppose
against you these reasons. First, that he adds not the name of Martyrs, as
all they that use natalitia or natales for the day of their departure, but
says generally, pro natalitijs. Secondly, that he spoke immediately before of
oblations pro defunctis, for the dead, which you understand for all faithful
departed out of the world: therefore pro natalitijs, signifies the oblation
for the birth of all Christians come into the world. Thirdly, seeing he had
before named oblations for the dead, it were absurd to understand pro
natalitijs for the dead also, without any more explication. Fourthly, if
natalitia should signify the feasts of the death of Martyrs (as you say,) it
will follow also, which I do urge of the place, that oblations pro defunctis
for the dead, were but oblations of thanksgiving as those for the death of
Martyrs, which are contained in one word or phrase. As for that you add out
of Origin, in Job. lib 3. We celebrate not the day of birth, etc. But the
day of death, shows the custom of the Greek Church, and not of the Latin,
and their celebrating of their day of birth with joy and thanksgiving, as
the day of the beginning of felicity, and end of all sorrows unto the
dead, clean overthrows your opinion of Purgatory, and prayer for the dead,
as in his time, not yet entered into the Greek Church. Beside that, he speaks
of the death of all men, and not of Martyrs only, as you violently would wrest
him.

Beeres to carry home the corpses.
He makes a foolish quarrel upon my saying, that George of Alexandria
invented beeres for lucres sake, as the Papists their bearing clothes, and
other toys, for funeral pomp. And first he says, that George did not
invent beeres. For Epiphanius says, he devised to make the number of them
certain, and without those that he ordained, no corpse to be buried, and all
for lucres sake. Ep. H. 76. I never thought, that they carried dead men on
their necks like beasts to the grave before Georges days, and therefore they
had some kind of comely carriage for them. But I said truly, that George
invented peculiar beeres, for lucres sake, as the Papists use their bearing
clothes and like stuff. Secondly he says, I commend such ceremonies as are
convenient for laying up of the corpse. I do so: But superstitious beereclothes,
and other ceremonies of popery, so dearly paid for, are neither needful nor
convenient.

Again he asks, whether I think it much, that the Church should reap their
carnalia, to whom she sows spiritualia? No verily: but I could never learn
out of the scriptures, that bearing clothes, crosses, candels, torches, etc.
were such spiritualia, as the ministers of the Church ought to sow. Last of
all, where he asks, whether I would provide a beer and bearing clothes
against I be buried, rather then to pay my duties to my parish Church, he
declares, that he does wilfully mistake my saying of beeres and bearing
clothes, as though I denied any thing that is comelye, when I speak against
superstition and couetuousnesse.

The second part concerning the errors that he laid (cap. 4.) to the
fathers and not to us. 1. Touching the heresies that Bristowe.
were in their times.

He demands what a thing it is that I charge the Church in the Apostles time
with heresies, that were in Fulke.
the Apostles times, and the same Church in three Arrian Emperors times, with
the heresy of Arrius? I answer that I never charged either the Apostles, or
the faithful members of the Church, or the true Church it self, with any
heresies that were in their times. But aunswering the demand Ar. 15. what
Church it was that has always stood still and steadfast, while all
congregations of heretics have decayed: I say, The true Church of Christ has
always stood steadfast and inseparable from Christ her head, when all
heretics have been and shall be consounded, although she have not always
flourished in worldly peace. For until the time of Constantine the great, the
Church had small rest: And soon after under the Emperors Constantius,
Constano, and Valens, it was greatly infected with the heresy of Arrius.

Where Bristowe falsifieth my words, reporting that I say, The true Church
was infected etc. the name of the Church is oftentimes generally taken for the
whole number of them that profess Christianity, as when I say, the Church
was persecuted by the heathen Emperors, I mean all that would profess
Christianity, among which were many heretics that suffered persecution
also. Likewise when I say, the Church was infected, I mean the visible Church,
in which are always many hypocrites, according to the parable of the net
and of the tares, etc. yea I doubt not but many of GODS elect, were infected
with that heresy in those times, which afterward repented and returned to the
knowledge of the truth: wherefore my meaning was nothing less, then to charge
the true Church of Orthodoxie and true profession with the heresy of Arrius,
or any other which it did openly detest and abhor.

An other quarrel he has against me, where I said, Ar. 35. That the true
Church decayed immediately after ye Apostles times. In which place, after I had
showed what corruption of doctrine had been received of yt greatest lights and
pillars of the Church, from which it was not like, that most of ye inferior
members could be free: I conclude according to ye demand (which was to declare
by good history or reasonable likelihood, when the true church did decaie?)
that it decayed immediately after ye Apostles times, meaning as ye demand
serves also, to understand the word of decaying, when it began to decay, and
not as Bristow cauilleth, when it was utterly decayed and came to nothing, for
such decaying I utterly deny, yt ever it was, or ever shall be. If we see some
principal posts of an house, begin to putrify, may we not say, this
building does decay? Or being asked when it decayed, after it is come to a
more ruinous state, and yet stands, may we not answer, it decayed first,
when such a beam or post began to put rifie? I doubt not but every man of
reasonable understanding, will acknowledge how folish these cauils are, which
are taken of ambiguitie of words, and misconstruing of phrases clean contrary
to my meaning, expressed in plain evident terms, and hundredth times at
least, in these my books, namely that the Church, although it be persecuted by
tyrants, assaulted by heretics, undermined by hypocrites, enuyed and maligned
by the devil himself, yet the gates of hell shall never prevail against it,
to root it out of the world, or to hinder the salvation of any one true
member thereof.

Touching the errors of S. Cyprian, S. Irenee, and S. Justinius. Bristowe.


If these doctors have erred (says Bristow) in any thing, yet this thing is
notable, that not so much as in any one Fulke.
of their errors, they are of your side. A notable matter in deed, that we
hold not so much as any one error, which they did hold. But you will not say ye
contrary, for shame, but that we hold many truths which they held. We resist
(you say) their full and whole consent. That is utterly false, you have not
their full and whole consent, for any point of popery: prayer for the dead is
ye oldest error you have, except the superstition of Angels and ye pharisaicall
doctrine of justification. Show me the full and whole consent of all the fathers
for it, whose writings are extant, show me Justinius, Irenaeus, Origenes,
Cyprianus, Clemens Alexandrinus, or any within 200. years after Christ (except
Tertullian a Montanist) that in his writings maintains prayer for the dead.

But you will tell us, whereto you papists ascribe infallible truth: First to
the canonical scriptures and tradition of the Apostles, to ye decrees of Peter
and his chair, to the whole church, to ye consent of fathers and councels,
both general and prouincial, confirmed by Peter's successor. We know this well
enough, but I do rehearse it in your own terms, yt it may appear you are
not ashamed to match diverse autorities equal in truth infallible, with the
holy scriptures inspired of God, yt alone are able to instruct a man to
salvation, and prepare him to every good work. For these autorities, you urge
not only where they agree with the scriptures, but also where you blasphemously
suppose the scriptures to be imperfect, as that they have omitted any thing
needeful to salvation, or the advancement of Gods glory in true religion.

The errors of ye fathers, we do not reveal to their dishonor, but to ye
honor of God. Let God only be true and every man a liar, yea Peter and Peter's
successor a thousand times. Whereas you take upon you, to mitigate ye errors of
the fathers, named in the title, you labor in (...)e: we know they erred not
of malice, but being de(...)ued with similitude of truth. But where you say,
it (...)s no great matter for Irenaeus, Papius, and other to (...)ue erred in
the opinion of the Chiliasts, until the Church had condemned peradventure yt
opinion in the heretics called Mellenaries: you show what certeintie of truth
you have out of ye scriptures, and yet you make it but a peradventure, that the
Church has condemned that error. Last of all, where you say in excuse of ye
error of Justinius, concerning angels, that express mention is made Genesis 6. of
the sin of ye Angels, calling the translation of the septuaginta
authentical, which translateth the Angels of God insteede of the sons of
God, you give great cause of suspicion that you are not clear of that error
your self.

3 Touching second marriages, and S. Hierom. Bristowe.


Where I say Act. 35. it seems that the Church in the Fulke.
(...)me of Justinius, was in some error about second marri^ges and diuorcement:
Bristowe is angry, that I have no more to say: but it seems as though he
would have me ^harge the man or the time with more tha^ I can manifestly prove.
But seeing I quote no place for it, he dare say I have it not in the works of
Justinius himself, and counsels me not to trust the Magdeburgian Centuries. As
for the Centuries I dare say, I never read five leaves of them together, or in
parts. But I dare show to any man that doubts of my reading of the most
ancient writers, my book of notes written with mine own hand, more then 15.
years past.

The place of Justinius out of which such a matter seems is Apologia secunda
ad Antoninum Pium, etc. where he has these words: (...)(...), As they that by
man's law enter into second marriages, are sinners by our masters judgment.
I know the words are otherwise interpreted by some, and the sin not
referred to second marriages, but to wanton beholding of women: And therefore
I do not precisely charge Justinius. And yet again I say it seems, that the
Church in his time was in some error, because Athenagoras a Christian
philosopher, that lived in a manner in the same time, does expressly call the
second marriage speciosum adulterium, a fair kind of adultery. Qui namque
repudiauerit, inquit etc. For he that shall forsake his wife (says Christ)
and marry another, does commit adultery: suffering a man neither by
diuorcement to put her away, whose flower of virginity he has defiled, nor to
go unto second marriages. For he that depriueth him self of his former wife
(although after she is dead a diuorcement is made) is a secret and covered
adulterer, transgressing the hand that is the creature or workemanshippe of
God. Because in the beginning he made one man and one woman, and dissoluing
flesh from flesh, ye union of commixtion instituted for ye participation of
kind and sex, etc. And this seems to be the common error of his time,
because he writes this in that Apology, which he made in defense of all
Christians, which it is not like he would present to the Emperor, in the name
of them all, except he had written that, which was the common received opinion
of the Christians doctrine in his time.

Concerning Hieronyme, Bristowe is angry also that I say he was almost fallen
into Tertullians error, when it is manifest he was feign to purge himself,
not only against malicious enuiers, but also toward Godly Bishops, and
Christians. Apol. ad Pammachium.

Where as I lay unto Hierom, two other perilous Assertions, whereof the one
tends to destroy the humanity of Christ, the other to give divinity to the
martyrs, where he says, The souls of the martyrs, follow the Lamb whether
so ever he goes: and thereof concludes, If the Lamb be every where, those
also that are with the Lamb, must be believed to be every where.

Bristowe answers, that the saints are not every ^here in personal
presence. How then? But of such power (...)ey be, that they hear their suitors
in all places at once, and (...)n be personally present to heal and help whom
they will. Even (...)s the lamb that is Christ according to his humanity
hea(...)eth his suitors in all places, and in personal presence assi(...)ed
Saint Stephen, and whomsoever else he will: I say according also to his
humanity etc. But what say you according to his humanity, is he every
where? that is the question, and not of his power in hearing suitors, or helping
them. If you will defend the vbiquitie of Christ according to his humanity,
speak plainly, and join with Hieronyme if you dare. If you interpret every
where for all power, how can you give all power to the souls of Martyrs, which
they ascribe only to GOD and the Lamb? Apoc. 7. And whereas you attribute
unto the souls of Saints, such power, that they hear the suitors in all
places at once etc: Let the reader see how much you ascribe to Christ, that
make the suit of every saint equal with him in infinite power of hearing,
understanding and helping. For to hear understand and help all suitors at
once, is a divine privilege not communicable to any creature, that is not GOD.
The argument therefore of invocation of saints, which you acompte to be so
strong, without horrible blasphemy, against the divine nature, can never be
defended. The Saints follow the Lamb, not to be of divine nature, or
equal power with him, but to be partakers of his glory, according to his
grace, and the measure and capacity of nature created.

Touching praying to the Son, and to the holy Bristowe.
Ghost.

Being urged by the Popish Articles to show the Fulke.
error of the Church in any thing, I show Page 89. of that answer, That the
Council of Carthage the 3. cap. 23. confirmed by a general council, which is
with the Papists the Church representative, decreed, that the prayers at the
altar should be directed always to the father, which is no small error,
seeing that hereof it follows, that none ought to be directed either to the
son or to the holy Ghost, or to the blessed Trinity. What moved those
fathers thus to decree, I know not: but certain it is, the decree is erronius
and offensive. Bristowe cauelleth at my collections, as unnecessary, that no
prayers may be directed but to the father, whereas my words have relation to
such prayers as the council speaks off. Also that the very prayers at the
altar, may not be directed to the Son or to the holy Ghost, because for
orders sake, they are appointed to be directed to the father: I say, saving the
authority of the council, which appoints them to be directed to ye father
always, they may not, otherwise I doubt not but they may. And therefore
Bristowe laboreth in vain, to prove out of Fulgentius Ad Monimum, and Petrum
diaconum, that the prayers, although they be directed to the father, yet are
made to the holy Trinity, especially because of the conclusion, which has in
it the name of the son and the holy Ghost. And whereas he sends me to the
Canon of his Mass for proof of the same, I must put him in remembrance, that
in Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccata mundi, O lamb of GOD which take away the
sins of the world etc: which is also said in his Mass, both the prayers is
directed to God the son, and yet no conclusion there is, naming the father
and the holy Ghost. Let Bristow therefore choose, whether he will defend the
error of the council of Carthage, or else acknowledge that ye Romish Church
does err, in directing the prayer at the altar to the Son, without any
conclusion including the father and the holy Ghost.

5 Of minisiring the blessed Sacraments to infantes. Bristowe.


I charge all the Churches in S. Augustines time and In^ocentius Fulke.
him self Bishop of Rome, with this error, (...)at they did not only
minister the communion to in(...)ntes, contrary to the doctrine of the Apostle,
Let a man ^xamine himself etc: but also, that they thought it ne(...)ssarie
for them in pain of damnation, to receive the ^ommunion, which error I
supposed the papists them ^^lues would not defend. Here first Bristowe
accu^eth my boldness, in that I affirm the Papists will not ^efende this
error: and secondly my wilful ignorance, that I never read the council of
Trent, wherein it is ^eclared that they do defend it, with an admonition to
his country men what blind guids they have of me and such as I am etc.
Concerning the boldness, I desire ^ardon of the Papists, if I thought not so
evil of the^ ^s they deserve: And touching my wilful ignorance and
blindness, I must needs use the proverb; Who ^s so bold as blind Bayarde?
Bristowe, which so con^tantly affirms, that it was not possible for him to
^nowe: Fulke never read the council of Trent, and that i^ ^tterly false, for
as I know I have read it, so suppose (...) have redd it before Bristowe. But
admit I had never seen, the report of that 5. session under Pius the 4.
which was held the 16. day of July 1562, are all blind guides that never saw
that session? O weighty censure of a proud papist, which by a fault called
of the Greeks (...), thinks that to be the highest point of learning, which
he has learned latest! But what if the council of Trent do not only
acknowledge it to be an error, but also do anathematise all them that hold
the contrary? Then have I not slaundered the Papists, but Bristowe has
slaundered me. The very words cited by Bristowe out of the 4. Cap. show
that the Papists held it for an error, that it is necessary for infantes to
receive the communion: That infantes lacking the use of reason, are by no
necessity bound to the sacramental receiving of the Eucharist. Also the
fourth Canon of the same session, thundereth out anathema, against them, that
say otherwise. Si quis dixerit parvulis antequam ad annos discretionis
pervenerint necessariam esse Eucharistiae communionem, Anathema sit: If any man
shall say, that the communion of the Eucharist, is necessary for infants,
before they come to the years of discretion, let him be accursed. But the same
council in the Chapter by Bristow cited, affirms, that Antiquity is not to
be condemned, if it practiced that manner, sometime, in some places, and that
without controversy it must be believed, that they did it not, for any
necessity of salvation. And this declaration (says Bristow) may suffice not
only all Catholics, to who^ it is the declaration of the holy Ghost himself,
but also any other reasonable man. Indeed if any reasonable man, will be
satisfied with such a gross ledging of ye whole matter in controversy, it is
a good satisfaction. The council of Trent says so, therefore although
Augustine, Pope Innocentius, and other witnesses of antiquity say the
contrary, of themselves, yet we must not believe them. That Kemnitius a Lutheran
touches not this error of ye counsel of Trent, it is a great argument, and
such as Bristowe often uses, that it is no error. Kemnitius if he had been as
quick eyed as Bernard, yet saw not all things, neither was he bound to confute
all errors that he saw. But for further satisfaction of all men, Bristow will
open ye case particularly, which is this in effect: The Pelagians affirmed,
that children without baptism, should have everlasting life, although not in
the kingdom of God. Whereunto the Catholics replied, they could not have
eternal life, except they did eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his blood
in the communion: but the communion they could not receive, before they were
baptized, therefore without baptism, they could not have eternal life. Now
Bristowe putting the case, that a child were baptized, and then immediately
dyed before he received sacramentally the Eucharist, demands, whether the
father granting to such a child by force of baptism remission of sins, do
not also allow him eternal life and the kingdom of God. And let any man
(says he) bring me one place of those Doctors speaking to this case and
holding the contrary. I answer, seeing they used immediately after ^aptisme,
to communicate the infant, ye case that Bristow ^utteth, is too rare, to happen
in 500 years that any que^^ion might grow upon it. But what their opinion was,
^f the necessity of the one sacrament, as much as the other, it is easy to
prove both by their argument, which Bristow confesses they used, and also by
their own words, whatsoever the blind guides of the Tridentine council ^ay in
their defense. They brought in ye Eucharist (says Bristow) only to prove that
baptism is necessary to the everlasting life of children. Very well: but what
force ^n the world has that argument of the Euchariste, for the necessity of
baptism, if the Eucharist also be not necessary for children? For the
Pelagians might reply, that if the Euchariste be not necessary, no more is
baptism for the atteyning of eternal life. But those fathers labored to prove
the necessity of baptism for infants, by the necessity of the Euchariste for
infantes: And this appears by many places of S. Augustine. As cont. Iul. ^ib.
1. cap. 2. Where he speaks of Innocentius Bishosh of Rome, Qui parvulos etc.
which has defined that infantes except, they eat the flesh of the son of man
can have no life at all in the^. And there he means of eating sacrame^tally:
as his own words cited by Augustine declare, Cont. duas Epist. Pelag lib. 2.
cap. 4. speaking of the rescript of Innocentius to the Bishops of Numidia:
Nonne apertissime de parvulis loquitur? Haec enim ejus verba sunt etc. Does he
not most manifestly speak of infantes? For these are his own words: Illud
vero quod eos vestra fraternitas asserit, praedicare etc. But concerning that
your brotherhood affirms them to preach, that infants, may be rewarded with
the rewards of eternal life, even without the grace of baptism, it is a very
foolish thing. For except they shall eat the flesh of the son of man and
drink his blood, they shall have no life in themselves. But they which defend
the^ to have this life without regeneration, seem to me that they would make
frustrate baptism it self, when they preach them to have that which we believe
is not to be conferred upon them but by baptism etc. And within few lines
after Augustine says: Ecce beatae memoriae etc. Behold Pope Innocentius of
blessed memory says: that infantes have not life, without the baptism of
Christ and without participation of the body and blood of Christ. Again, lib.
1. Cap. 2. he speaks against the Pelagians, which granted that baptism was
necessary for infantes, to attain to the kingdom of heaven, but not for
remission of sins. Nec illud cogitatis etc. Neither do you consider this,
that they cannot have life, which are expertes without part of the body and
blood of Christ, seeing he says himself: Except you shall eat my flesh
and drink my blood, you shall have no life in you.

Again, Contra Pelagianos Hypognost lib. 5. Si enim intelligeretis, crederetis
quare dixerit Dominus: Non opus est san^ medicus etc. If you did understand,
you would believe wherefore our Lord said, The whole need not the
Physician, but they that are sick: you would believe truly, that they are not
whole, but wounded, which are offered to be healed to our savior ye Physician,
at the station of Baptism: and that they should not have life, except they
eat the flesh and drink the blood of him which is life. For he him self
has said, Except ye shall eat the flesh of the son of man and drink his
blood, you shall not have eternal life in you, and he which eats my flesh
and drinks my blood, has eternal life. How therefore do you promise the
life of the kingdom of heaven to infantes, not borne again of water and the
holy Ghost, Non cibatis carne atque non potatis, not fedd with the flesh of
Christ and which have not drunk the blood of Christ, which is shed for the
remission of sins? For it is his decree: If any man be not borne again of
water and of the holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. For
to enter into the kingdom of heaven is none other thing, but to live in a
blessed life which remains for ever and ever. Behold he which is not
baptized and he also which is deprived of the vital meat and cup, is divided
from the kingdom of heaven etc. To the like effect he writes, Contra duas
Epist. Pelag. ad Bon. lib. 4. cap. 4. Si omnibus etc. If reconciliation by
Christ be necessary, for all men, sin has passed oouer all men, by which
we were enemies, that we have need of reconciliation. This reconciliation is
in the lauer of regeneration, and in the body and blood of Christ, without the
which, no not infantes can have life in themselves.

Also Contra Julian, lib. 3. cap. 11. deriding his piety, that infantes
should be damned for not doing that which they could not do, he adds, Vbi
etiam ponis etc. where also will thou place them, because they shall lack
life, seeing they have not eaten the flesh of the Son of man, nor drunk his
blood?

Also de peccatoru^ meritis and remissione lib. 1. cap. 20. a place cited by
Bristowe but mingled with many intersections of his own, as his manner is.
After Augustine has rehearsed the text, Joan. 6. Except ye eat etc: he
adds Quid vltra querimus? etc. What seek we further? What can they answer
to this, except stubbornes do stretch their striving sinowes against the
constancy of the manifest truth? Or dare any man say this also, that this
sentence pertayneth not to infantes, and that they may without the
participation of this body and blood, have life in them etc? Likewise cap. 24.
he says, Optime Punici etc. Best of all, ye Christians of Africa, do call
baptism it self nothing else but health, and the sacrament of the body of
Christ, nothing else but life: Whence, but of an ancient (as I think) and
apostolic tradition by which they hold it ingrafted unto the Church of
Christ, that without baptism and participation of the Lords table, no man at
all can come, not only, not to the kingdom of God, but neither to health and
life everlasting? For this also the scripture testifies according to those
things which we have said before. For what other thing do they hold, which
call baptism by the name of health, but that which is said, he has saved us
by ye lauer of regeneration, and that which Peter says, so also does baptism
in like manner save you? What other thing also do they hold which call the
sacrament of our Lords table, life, but that which is said, I am the bread
of life, which came down from heaven: and the bread which I will give, is my
flesh, for the life of the world: And except ye shall eat the flesh of the
son of man and drink his blood, ye shall have no life in you? If therefore
as so many and so great testimonies of GOD do consent, that neither health
nor life eternal without baptism, and the body and blood of our Lord is to be
hoped to any body, in vain without these is it promised to Infantes.
Furthermore, if from health and life eternal, nothing but sins do separate,
by these sacraments, nothing but the guilt of sin is loosed in infantes.

These places of Augustine I have rehearsed the more at large, that the
impudency of the council of Trent and of their poor patron Bristowe, might
appear, which would excuse the error of the ancient Church, and of the
Bishop of Rome in those times, in saying that albeit they used to minister
the communion to infantes, yet they did it not for any necessity to salvation:
whereas the contrary by so many places, and more then I have rehearsed, does
most manifestly appear.

As for the practice which he confesses of giving that sacrament to infantes,
he says is not against Probet seipsum, etc. Let a man examine himself, etc.
Because that infantes may examine them selves by others, (which is a monstrous
kind of speech) as well as believe and repent by others. Here is one error
of Augustine defended by an other of his: for infantes are not baptized for the
faith of other men, but because they are comprehended within the covenant of
GOD, to whom baptism is no more to be denied, then circumcision was to the
infantes of the Jews. The Prophet says, Iustus etc. The righteous man shall
live by his own faith.

It is not the faith of other men that can procure life unto us. Neither is
faith required of infantes, before they can hear the word of God, which is
the only ordinary means by which faith comes. But infantes (says
Bristowe) be in no mortal sins, being newely baptized, and therefore they
need no examination for fear least they should come unworthily. Saint
Augustine confesses that he was in mortal sin, even in his infancy:
Imbecillitas membrorum infantium innocens est, non animus infantium: The
weakness of the members of infantes is innocent, not the mind of infantes.
Afterward he brings examples of envy even in an infant, and at last
concludes: Quod si, etc. And if it be so that I was conceived in iniquity,
and that in sins my mother in her womb nourished me; where I beseech thee my
GOD, when LORD was I thy servant, where or when was I innocent? By this you
see, there is no short time of man's life free from sin. Neither may you
cavil, that Augustine was not baptized in his infancy, seeing he speaks
generally of the condition of all infantes, which is not changed by baptism,
although sin be not imputed unto them.

Wherefore to speak after your Popish supposition of Baptism, that by the
work wrought all sin committed before baptism, is abolished in baptism;
what if the infant not knowing the mystery of baptism, be angry with them
that have taken him out of his warm clothes and plunged him in baptism? is
this no sin? But what infant can examine himself of this sin? And what can
the examination of other men profit him whom the holy Ghost will have to
examine himself? As for the distinction of Votum explicitum and implicitum, he
sends us to Allens book de Euch. lib. 1. Cap. 31. etc.

For how can we be assured, that children have a close desire to baptism more
then to the communion? Or how can it be proved, That they have any desire
explicit or implicit to either of both the sacraments? If (...) be lawful to
imagine of infantes, against all reason, and without all scriptures, we may
fill books with distinctions and devises innumerable. Last of all, he
charge me, with falsification by adding, because the council of Trent
says, that manner was aliquando in quibusdam locis, some times and in some
places. But I pray thee Bristowe, what have I falsified? the council of Trent,
which thou affirmest that I did never read? Thou say they that did
communicate infantes, were not so many, as Fulke does make them. Why, how
many do I make them? I said that the Pope of Rome and all they that took his
part in S. Augustines time, were in this error, that the sacrament of the body
and blood of Christ, was to be ministered to infantes. And have I not
plainly, and now also plentifully proved it out of Saint Augustine? where is
then this falsification? If I had not proved that which I said, yet there is
difference betwixt falsification, and a false affirmation. And because the
Tridentine council says, it was Aliquando as though that error had not long
continued, it is manifest that it began to be ministered to infantes before
Cyprians time, and continued five or six hundredth years after. Witness
Beatus Rhenanus in Tertulli. de Coron. mil. where he shows that this manner
was continued until the times of Ludouicus Pius, and Lotharius and after:
citing these words out of the books of ceremonies called Agendae of infantes
newely baptized. Si Episcopus etc. If the Bishop be present, it must be
immediately confirmed and then communicated. If the Bishop be not present,
before the infant do suck or taste any thing, let the Priest give him the
communion of the body and blood of CHRIST, yea before the Mass, if necessity
require. By this Testimony it appears not only that this custom was long
observed, but also that it was joined with opinion of necessity, so that mass
should not be tarried for, if the infant were in any danger.

Concerning the errors that he lays to the Church of later times, and not of
old, and 1. touching the bodies of Angels. Bristowe.


According to the demand of the challenger, Fulke.
which requires any one error or false interpretations of the scripture made
by the Popish Church, to be showed him, I bring certain examples of diverse
kinds of errors, which are not the matters in controversy between us, but
such as if the Papists be not impudent, they them selves will acknowledge to
be errors. Now comes Bristowe in this his balde and confusd reply, and as
though I were able to note none errors of the Popish Church, but those which I
note upon such occasion, wills all them that would know the true Church, to
consider that these errors (if they be any) are so few and so light, that
they may be a sure confirmation to Papists, and a just motive to all other to
embrace the Church of this time, no less then of old time, considering it is
no less, but much more unreprovable of ye adversary. Nevertheless as few and
as light as these errors seem, they are sufficient if they were but one, to
prove yt which I intend: namely that the Popish Church has erred, which being
proved the surest pillar of Popery is broken, and all the rest of their
opinions which they hold against the scriptures, and the true Church of God,
when it is showed that the popish Church has erred, will show themselves to
be errors, which had nothing else to gain them credit, but this one false
principle That the Popish Church can not err.

And touching the bodies of Angels, where I say, Ar. 60. the second council
of Nice determined that Angels and souls of men had bodies, were visible and
circumscriptible, and therefore must be painted, affirming this to be ye
judgment of the Catholic Church: Bristowe answers, that I misreport the
matter, for it is not the counsels determination, nor saying, but the saying
only of Ioannes Bishop of Thessalonica, rehearsed in the council, with an
admonition given by Tharasius B. of Constable against the madness of them that
overthrew the images of our Lord and his undefiled mother, seeing this holy
father does show, that Angels also may be painted. But the truth is (as may
apeare to every man that will read the Council, act. 5) that this is a vain
gloss of Bristow to elude the matter. After ye saying of Ioannes is rehearsed,
in which this gross error is contained, Tharasius the archb. of Constable.
thereupon concludes: Ostendit autem pater, quod and angelos pingore oporteat
quando circumscribi possunt, and vt homines apparuerunt. This father shows,
that we ought to paint the angels also, seeing they may be circumscribed, and
have appeared as men: by which it is manifest, that Tharasius approves the
opinion of Ioannes. Would you now have the determination of ye Council? It
follows immediately, Sacra synodus dixit etiam domine: The holy synod said
yea forsooth my lord. By this it is manifest, that not I, but Bristow has
misreported the matter. Where I said (If this be not to induce an error to
make men believe that angels and spirits have bodies visible and
circumscriptible, there was never any error since the world began:) Bristowe
pulls me back and says, Soft man, other manner of errors have been
defended since the world began. I wot well, and greater, but if any of them be
a manifest error, this is as manifest as any of them all. Yet is Bristowe so
zealous in excusing this error, that he shameth not with that ignorant bishop
of Thessalonica to slander many of the most catholic and ancient fathers
with it, Basilius. Athanasius, Methodius, yea, Augustine (he says) make a
question of it. In which point he shows great ignorance or wilful malice.
For whatsoever is found in any of those ancient writers, sounding to such a
purpose, it only by mistaking the word (...) or corpus, which they used
generally, for that which now in the schools (according to Aristotle) is
called (...) or substantia, substance comprehending both bodies and spirits,
not that ever they thought that angels, spirits and souls of men had visible
and circumscriptible bodies, such as may be set forth by painting, or such as
the bodies of men and beasts are, or that they consisted either of ayery of
fyery matter, as that blind Bishopp so imagined out of that verse of the
Psalm. 104. He makes his Angels spirits, and his ministers a burning fire.
Last of all he says there is no determination of the Church to condemn the
assertion as heretical, though there be sufficient to count it temerarious and
erroneous: whither it be heretical, I will not now dispute, seeing by
Bristowe it is granted to be an error, and I have sufficiently proved, that it
was maintained by the whole Council, which was as much as I required for that
point.

2 Touching the Popes superiority over the Council.

The determinations of the Pope and of the general Bristowe. Fulke.
Council, being accounted among the Papists, as the rules of truth, I said
are 63. and 85. for so much as it is not agreed of among them, which of them is
superior to other, the Pope over the Council, or the Council over the Pope,
and that one of these has controlled the other there can be no certeintie of
truth in either of them. To this Bristow answers, that he thinks him self
able to satisfy me or any other reasonable man, if he says, that then we are
in a right belief, when we hold those determinations that are the
determinatio^s jointly both of the Pope and of the Council, as those of Trent.
But he is greatly deceived, for while it is in doubt, whether may err, and each
part charge other with erring, it may be, and there is none other likelyhod
to the contrary but yt they do both err, so yt neither I, nor any other
reasonable man may safely tie our faith to any of their determinatio^s. For
they whereof either part may err, being severed, may also err, but when they
are joined together, you will say the Councels determination is uncertain,
except it be confirmed by ye Pope. But if ye Pope also may err, how is it made
certain by his confirmation? Another will say, the Popes determination is
uncertain, except the general council give consent and approbation thereto. But
if ye general council may err, what certeintie is in ye approbatio^ thereof? So
ye doubt is as great as it was before, where Brist. affirms yt no man will bind
us to beliue ye determinatio^s of any Council yt are not certainly confirmed by
ye Pope: he says more then he is able to warrant: for beside that D. Cole in
his answer to the Bishop of Sarum manifestly defends the authority of the
councels against the Pope, many popish divines were and are of that opinion,
that the Pope may err, and is under the authority of the council.

But where I show a manifest error in the popish church by the
interchangeable condemning and approving one of another, of the Pope and the
council: Bristowe says, the matter is not so uncertain amongst them, as I
make it. For first he grants, that the council of Ferrara and Florence,
determined that the Pope was above the council, and that the council might
err, and that Pope Eugenius 4. was of the same judgment. He grants also
that the councels of Constance and Basil determined the contradictorie, namely
that the council was above the Pope, and that the Pope may err. But where I
said, that Martinus quintus, chosen Pope by the council of Constance, was of
the same judgment, there he cries, hoe, you prove not that, nor never shall
prove. No shall, Master Bristow? why sir, is it like, that the council which
had deposed three Popes, would choose a fourth man Pope, that was of a contrary
judgment unto them? Yea, how could he accept the Papacy, being not void,
if the council had not authority to depose the Pope, whosoever he was of the
three, that was the right Pope. But seeing John the 23. was of the Emperor and
the council accounted the right Pope, who also before his deposition, affirmed
that the council of Constance was a most holy council and could not err: it
is manifest, that this Martyn being a Cardinal, consented to the deposition
of John the 23. session. 12. therefore he was of the same judgment that the
council was. But if you would say, that as soon as he was made Pope, the
spirit of Peter coming upon him, he was soudenly changed into a contrary
judgment: his Epistle written to the inquisitors is plainly against you, where
you say, that at the petition of the Polonian Ambassador, he confirmed
(...)ose determinations alone of the council of Consta^ce which were (...)ainst
the errors of Wickeliefe, Hus, and Hierom of Prage. (...)or he did so
generally confirm all decrees of that (...)uncell, that he commanded it to be
enquired of persons suspected, in articles as follows: Item vtrum credat,
teneat and asserat, quod quodlibet concilium generale, and (...)am
Constantiense vniuersalem Ecclesiam repraesentet. Item, whether he believe,
hold and affirm, that every general council, and namely the council of
Constance does represent the universal church. If Martyn the 5. would have
every man to believe that the council of Constance represents the universal
church, he would also have them believe that the council of Constance cannot
err, which council condemned the Pope of heresy, and deposed him of his
Papacye. Again, another Article: Item vtrum credat quod illud quod sacrum
concilium Constantiense vniuersalem Ecclesiam repraesentans, (...)probauit and
approbat, in favor em fidei and ad salutem anima(...)m quod hoc est ab
vniuersis Christi fidelibus approbandum and (...)endum. Et quid condemnauit and
condemnat, esse fidei vel (...)nis moribus contrarium, hoc ab iisdem esse
tenendum pro condemnato, credendum and asserendum. Also, whether he believes,
that that which the holy council of Constance, representing the universal
Church, has approved and does approve in favor of the faith, to the health of
men's souls, that the same is of all faithful Christians to be approved and
holden. And that which it has condemned and does condemn, to be contrary to
faith or good manners, that the same is of them to be holden believed and
affirmed as a thing condemned. But the council of Constance approved this
assertion, that the council cannot err, and that the council is above the
Pope to condemn him of error, which is a matter greatly pertaining to the
faith, and the health of men's souls, therefore Pope Martyn the 5. was of the
judgment of the council of Constance. Finally in the end of the council of
Constance the approbation of Pope Martyn is recorded of all things decreede and
determined in matters of faith: Among which we must needs account this
question of the Popes erring, and the councels not erring, which is accounted
so necessary an article of faith, that the Papists strive for nothing so much
at this day, as for that which was there condemned by the Council. Quibus sic
factis sanctissimus dominus noster Papa respondendo ad praedicta, quod omnia
and singula, determinata, conclusa and decreta in materiis fidci per praesent
concilium conciliariter tenere and inuiolabiliter seru^^ volebat, and nunquam
contraire quoquo modo. Ipsaque sic conciliariter facta approbat and ratificat,
and non aliter nec alio modo. Constable. Sess. 45. which things being so done, our
mo^te holy lord the Pope said, answering to the foresaid things, that he
would hold and keep inviolable all and singular things, determined,
concluded, and decreede in matters of faith, by the present Council in form
of Council: and that he would never go against them by any means. And the
same things so done in form of Council, he approves and ratifyeth, and not
otherwise nor after any other manner. Now it is certain that nothing was done
or decreede more Councellike, then that solemn canon, That the Council is
above the Pope, and has authority to depose the Pope, which Pope John 23.
confirmed and confessed, that the Council could not err, etc. And therefore
it is utterly false, that Pope Martin confirmed those determinations alone,
which were against the errors of Wicliff. Hus, and Hieronym, at the petition
of the Polonian Am^ assadour, as Bristowe says. For the request was made unto
the Pope, not by one Ambassador, but by diverse, and them not from the king of
Polonia only, but also from the duke of Lituania, that a certain book of one
friar John Falkenberge, containing notable heresies (as they said) and
condemned by the deputies of the Council, etc. might be condemned in an open
session of the Council, and so pronounced before the Council were dissolved:
otherwise they protested in yt name of their princes, that they sustained
grieuance, and would appeal unto the next Council, unto whom the Pope
answered as before generally, that whatsoever was decreed by the Council in
form of a Council, concerning matter of faith, he did (...)owe and would
observe, and according to a decre of (...)e same council, calls another
council to follow a ^apia etc. showing therein not only his judgment, but
^lso his obedience to the decree of the Council. Concer^ing Nicolaus 5.
(Bristow says) he did but only ratify ^^e collations of benefices and such
like things done in ^^e Council of Basil. Hereunto I answer the words ^re
so general in that Bull of approbation of things c^acted and done in the
council of Basil by Pope Nico^as, as they may contain all manner of decrees
of the same Council. Omnia and singula tam iustitiam etc. all and every thing
concerning as well justice as grace, in persons or places, which in time of the
grauntes and other the premises obeyed our foresaid reverend and well-beloved
brother Amadeus Cardinal, Bishop, Legate, and Vicar aforesaid, then called
Felix the fifth and the congregated aforesaid or either of them, as well by the
Council of Basil which then was, and Amadeus in his obedience called Felix the
fifte, as also them which in the cities of Basil and Lausanna, remained
congregated under the name of a general council; or any other or others by
his or either of their authority yea legates de latere, delegates or any other
whomsoever, from the^ or either of them, having power jointly or severally,)
how soever done, performed, granted, given, indulted, disposed and ordained,
although they be greter and weightier matters, or of any other nature
whatsoever from ye premises, and such as require to be specially expressed,
which we will and decree to be accounted as if they were specially expressed with
all things thereof following And also al and every thing don by ye ordinaries in
ye same places, for ye benefit of peace and unity of ye church of our own
motion, of our certain knoledg and of ye fulness of ye apostolic power, by ye
council and assent of our reverend brethren the Cardinals of ye holy church
of R. by tenor of these present; we approve ratify and also confirm, and will
have to be taken for ratified and confirmed. Here you se al and every thing
done and ordained in the Council of Basil whatsoever they be, expressed, or
not expressed, confirmed and ratified by the Bull of Pope Nicholas the 5. And
in the Council of Basil, the council of Constance, and especially that decree
of the superiority of the council above the Pope, was decreed, and pope
Eugenius, for his contumacie was deposed and another elected, all whose acts
also pope Nicolas confirms and ratifieth.

Likewise where as Bristowe says that Pope Eugenius ^he 4. did no more but
declare that the council of Basil from the beginning to a certain time was a
lawful council and lawfully continuated: The truth is, he did both by his
own Bulls and by his own deputies a great deal more then Bristow confesses:
and even by this that he confesses, it is easy to prove that Eugenius
granted the council to be above the pope. For Eugenius had done what he could
to dissolve the council of Basil, and sent out three bulls for the same
purpose, notwithstanding the council was continued by authority of the
council against his decrees: wherefore seeing he declared, (as Bristowe
confesses) that the council was lawfully continued, contrary to his decrees
(which he was compelled to revoke) he declared that the council was above the
pope, and had authority to control him and his decrees. And that he did more
then Bristowe says he did: It is manifest in the record of the council,
session 16. That Eugenius declared the council of Basil to be lawful and
lawfully continued until Anno dom. 1433. 18. Call. Ian. reuoking three bulls
by which he had taken upon him before to dissolve the same council, in which
bulls he complained that the council usurped authority above the pope.
Afterward sess. 17. Anno. 1434. 24. of April. being Saturday, the Popes
legates were incorporated into the council of Basil, being sworn to defend
the council, and by special words, the decree of the council of Constance
Sessi. 4. by which the council is decreed to be above the Pope, and the Pope
bound to obey the council and the decrees thereof. And 6. Call. Maij. The
praesidents of pope Eugenius were admitted with these conditions under written:
Videlicet sine omni jurisdiction coactiuo, saluo etiam modo procedendi in hoc
sacro concilio hactenus obseruato, That is to say, without all jurisdiction of
compelling, also having the manner of proceeding he^herto observed in this holy
council. By this you see, that pope Eugenius did not only declare the
council (...) be lawfully continued, but also he declared his own ^rror in
reuoking of his bulls of dissolution. Also by ^is legates he swear to defend
the council and to keep ^he decree of the council of Constance, sessi. 4.
which was ^ade against the Popes superiority over the council. And thirdly
that by his presidents he accepted such pre^idency as the council would
grant, without all iu^isdiction of compulsion, being himself compelled to
^^taine yt order of proceeding which the council before ^is presidencie was
admitted, had observed. What Leo ^he tenth in his Laterane council decreed
against the ^ouncell of Basil, I have nothing to do with it, except (...) be
to prove that one pope going against the decrees of another pope, and one
council against another, that neither of both is to be credited. How childish
my in^ultation is, how void of victory my triumph, how ^nsoluble forsooth
mine arguments are, as Bristow scof^eth, I leave to all reasonable men to
consider.

3. Touching the Constance councels presumption. Bristowe


I said it was horrible praesumption, that the council Fulke.
of Constance decreede contrary to the word of God in plain words: That
notwithstanding Christ instituted the sacrament to be received in both kinds,
and that the faithful in the primitive Church did so receive it: yet the
custom of the Church of Rome shall prevail, and whosoever says contrary it
^an heretic. These words he says I print (as though I were a printer which
was 70. miles off at least from the place where they were printed) in a
distinct letter as the plain words of the council, whereas these are not
the words of the council. Here is the quarrel. No sir, I never meant to print
these words as the words of the council, but as the sum and content of
them, which because they were large I would not set down at large in a
bymatter. But now being urged with falsification or at least false collectio^.
I will set the^ down as they a(...) Co^. Constable sess^. 13. without any such
interruptions as is vs^al with you to make, yt you might carry away ye simple
readen mind from ye true sense of the^. Cum in nonnullis etc. whereas in
certain parts of the world, certain parsons presume rashly to affirm. yt
Christian people ought to receive ye sacrament of yt Euchariste, under both
kinds o^ bread and wine, and do communicate the lay people every where, not
only under ye kind of bread, but also under (...) kind of wine, yea after
supper, or otherwise not fasting, and stubbernely affirm yt they ought so to
be communicated against the laudable custom of ye church resonably approved,
which as sacrilegious damnably they go about to reprove: hereof it is that
this present holy general council of Constance, lawfully gathered together in
ye holyghost, entending to provide for the salvation of ye faithful against
this error, having had before ripe deliberation of many Doctors both of the
law of god and of man, declares, decrees, and defines, that although Christ
after supper did institute, and minister unto his disciples this holy sacrament
under both kinds of bread and wine, yet this notwithstanding, the laudable
authority of holy Canons and the approved custom of the Church has observed
and does observe, yt this sacrament ought not to be made after supper, neither
to be received of ye faithful not fasting, but in case of sickness or other
necessity of right or of ye Church granted or admitted. And as this custom
to avoid certain dangers and offenses is reasonably brought in, that
although in ye primitive church, this sacrament was received of ye faithful
under both kinds, and afterward of the^ which make it, it is received under
both kinds, and of ye lay people only under ye kind of bread; seeing it ought
most steadfastly to be believed and by no means to be doubted, but yt the whole
body and blood of Christ is truly contained as well under ye kind of bread, as
under ye kind of wine. Whereupon seeing such a custom by ye church and holy
fathers is reasonably brought in, and has been very long observed, it must be
taken for a law which it is not lawful to reprove, or with out ye authority of
ye church to change at men's pleasure. ^herfore to say, yt to keep this custom
or law is sacrilege (...) unlawful, it ought to be judged erroneous: and they
which stubbernly affirm the contrary of ye premises, are (...) be driven away
as heretics, and to be greuosly punished ^y yt dyocessanes of ye places or
their officials, or by the in^uisitor of heretical prauity, in those kingdoms
or pro^inces, in which any thing perhaps shall be attempted or ^resumed against
this decree, according to ye Canonical and lawful functions which have been
solemnly inve^ted (...) favor of the Catholic faith against heretics and
their fautors. Here you see ye prelates of the council take upon the^ as great
authority in altering ye matter of ye sa^rament, which is a necessary part of
ye institution thereof, ^s in ordering ye time in which it shall be ministered,
which ^s no part of ye institution thereof. Also yt they confess that ^n ye
primitive church ye sacrament was received in both ^inds, therefore they are
presu^ptuous to say hoc no^ obsta^te, ^his notwtsta^ding, ye custom of later
years brought in ^s reasonable and shall be observed as a law, the gainsayers
^herof being condemned and punished as heretics. Brist. ca^illeth, yt they say
not ye custom of ye church of Rome, as I said: As though, when they speak of
the custom of the church, they mean any other church but ye church of R. Such
bables B. has to cover their blasphemous and sacri^legious presumption.

Touching certain false interpretations of scripture. Bristowe. Fulke.


To color ye false interpretatio^s following, he co^me^deth ye sayings of
August. de doct. Christ. li. 1. ca. 36. and lib. 3. ca. 27. in which first he
requires every man principally to shoot at yt sense of ye writer in
exposition of ye scripture, but if he miss yt sense and hit any other which is
not repugnant to right faith, or is profitable to build charity toward god and
our neighbor, he is not perniciously deceived etc. Upon this Allen in his offer
to yt protestant says, Ar. 86. and 87. Let any man prove unto me, that the
true and only church of god may falsely interpret any sentence of holy
scripture, and I recant. This general offer without any qualification of not
erring perniciouslye, or wilfully lying, as is contained in Saint Augustines
sayings, unto which Bristowe would now seem to make relation, I did
accept. And first I proved that pope Innocent with S. Augustine and all the
Western Church did falsely interpret this scripture Joan. 6. Except ye eat
etc. and that to maintain a false opinion of the necessity of the communion
for all persons, and even infantes, that should have life everlasting, and
therefore repugnant to right faith, as is more declared in the 2. part of this
chapter.

Secondly I noted diverse places of scripture, not only falsely but also
ridiculously expounded, in the second council of Nice, to maintain idolatry
against the express commandment of God, and therefore contrary to the right
faith and the love of God. Concerning these interpretations Bristow says, that
they are not the interpretations of the council (whose interpretation they are
not bound to defend, but only their definitions) but they are the
interpretations of particular persons. To this I answer, they are contained in
ye synodal book sent into the Western Churches, to stir them up to idolatry
(which book was answered by Carolus Magnus or by Alcuinus at his
commandment, and in his name) therefore they are approved by the council,
yea some of them are contained also in that report of the council, which is
set down in the books of councels. The text of lighting a candell, and
putting it under a bushel, is affirmed of Bristowe to be well applied in the
Epistle of Constantinus, and his mother to the synod. But he is deceived. For
there is no argument of setting of images upon the altar drawn out of that
text which is so abused in the Synodal above rehearsed, confirmed by Carolus or
Alcuinus.

The second text, God made man according to his image: therefore we must have
images in the Church: Bristowe confesses to be contained in the Epistle of
pope Adrian to the Emperor. But the same is approved in the council, and is
the popes Epistle, whose credit is greater with you than the councels. But he
does not conclude (you say) that therefore we must have images in the Church.
What then? forsooth that a^ Adam being the image of God is to be honored, so
every image is holy that i^ made in the name of God, be it an image of Angels,
prophets, Apostles, martyrs or just persons. This conclusion contains more
the^ I urged, namely ye worshipping of images, and not the making of the^ only.
And because you are so impudent to say, it is not the counsel, but pope
Adrianus that so says etc: I will let the reader understand, that in the
second action, there were two Epistles of Pope Adrian, read in the synod,
one to the Emperors, the other to Tharasius the patriarche of Constantinople.
Afterward Peter and Peter's liuetenants of the Pope, required Tharasius to
declare, whether he consented to ye Popes letters or no. Tharasius answered,
that concerning the worshipping of images, he did allow the Popes letters. The^
said the Synod, Vniuersa sancta Synodus etc. The whole holy synod does so
believe and teach. Peter and Peter's Legates of the sea Aposto like said: Let
the holy synod tell us, whether it receive ye letters of ye most holy Pope of
the elder Rome or no. The holy synod answered: we follow them, we receive
them, and allow them.

The 3. text (As we have heard, so we have seen in ye city of our God. ps.
48. to prove yt God must not be known by only hearing of his word, but also
by sight of images:) Bristowe affirms that it is not the council that cites
it, but a Deacon called Epiphanius, which reads it to the council out of a
book of his own: I answer he reads it with approbation and good liking of
the council, which in effect is al one. But he cites it not (says Bristowe)
to show how God must be known, but about the story of Christ's manhood, nor
to prove immediately, yt the said story must be painted etc. as though God can
be known but by Christ, for knowledge of whom, by imagery, he cyteth this text
of the Canticle also, Can. 2. show me thy face, and let me hear thy voice. And
whether it be immediately, or mediately, certain it is, yt he cites this text,
Pal. 48. to prove, yt the pictures of saints are rightly delivered in the
Church, none otherwise, then the reading of the holy gospel.

The 4. text falsely interpreted in sense, and falsified in words is Joan. 10.
ver. 29. My father which gave them unto me (speaking of his sheep) is greater
then al. Which text in the Council of Lateran, holden under Pope Innocent the
third, is falsified in words after this manner. Pater quod dedit mihi maius
est omnibus. That which the father has given me is greater then all: and
interpreted to prove the eternal begetting of Christ of the substance of his
father. To this Bristow answers her^ is no false interpretation in D. Allens
sense. What sense Allen has of false interpretation, I know not, sure I am,
that a text cannot be truly interpreted in sense, when it is corrupted in
words, which make the sense. Secondly he says yt of my two crimes, I must
strike out one: for supposing the text to be as the council alleges it, the
interpretation is not unapt. But I reply, supposing the text to be as it is in
deed: Such falsifying or corrupting of the words must needs draw with it not
only an unapt but also a wrong interpretation. But what color of reason have
you (says he) that the council has falsified the words of that text? Is it
not in the vulgar Latin translation verbatim, as the council alleges it?
yes verily. And so is the council cleared of that crime also. Not so soon as
you ween: for if any falsifying or corrupting of the words of the scripture,
have crept into your translation, it had been the councels duty, not to have
winked at it, if it could have seen it, much less to have confirmed it, so
far forth, as of so many texts which clearly prove Christ to be
consubstantiall with his father, it could find none, but take this corrupted
and falsified text. But the most ancient Latin writers, saint Augustine,
saint Ambrose, and saint Hilarie do read iumpe as we do, says Bristowe.

That does not amend the matter one whit, but shows ye error of the Latin
Church to have the longer continued, which in the council of Lateran (if it
could have espied it) ought rather to have been reformed then confirmed. But
will you change your copy (says Bristowe) and frame your accusation anewe
against the translation as differing from the Original, that is from the
Greek? Sir I need not change my copy, for my accusation is already framed
that this text is falsified and corrupted contrary to the original truth:
yet Bristowe goes on. But before you do so, take my counsel with you, and
be sure first that the Greek is so as you say. For some Greek copies, of
ancient also had even as we have: as namely, the copy which saint Cyrill,
being a Greek Doctor, expounds Cyr. lib. 7. in Joan. cap. 10.

In deed it were not amiss, to take the council of such a learned Grecian as
Bristowe is, that I might be sure how the Greek text is. For he can tell me
of ancient Greek copies, yea namely of that which saint Cyrill a Greek
doctor did follow, and expound, which agrees with the vulgar translation in
this text.

Verily the sight of such a copy would do me great pleasure. But until I
may see it, I will suspende my judgment, and in the mean time, I would
borrowe a word or two with Thomas Stapleton the peruser and allower of this
book of Bristowe. I pray you sir, Have you perused and allowed thi^ book?
What else? do you not see it printed in the first leaf, Perused and allowed by
me Thomas Stapleton? And are you so good a peruser and allower of books,
Master Stapleton, that you cannot epsy in them Chalk taken for Cheese? Do
you not see your scholar Bristowe allege saint Cyrill a Greek doctor to prove
the truth of the greek text lib. 7. in Joan cap. 10. and when all comes to
all, there is no such book of Cyrill the ancient Greek doctor extant, but it
is poor Iodocus Clicthouius a late Latin writer, that has supplied those 4.
books of Cyrill that are lost. Wherefore to return to you M. Bristow except
your council be better and savor more of good learning and knowledge, you may
keep it for your friends. As for your assertion, without doubt that the copy
which your authentical translator followed, had even as he translated,
helps you little or nothing: which if it were granted, how can you prove
that he translated it as you now read it?

Seeing it is certainly known to them that have conferred his translation with
the original, that beside that in diverse places he gives not the true sense
of the Greek, in many texts also he is corrupted, where he had translated
right. Wherefore how fully I am answered on every side concerning this text as
you boast in the end, let the readers judge.

In ye last place you set down my words Ar. 7. in which I accuse the Church of
Rome for thrusting upon us that corrupt Latin translation, which all learned
men do know to be corrupt, in such texts as are the most coulerable places for
the defense of popish doctrine, of which I give one example for all. They
allege the text (1. Cor. 10. Qui stat, videat ne cadat: he that stands, let
him take heed^ he fall not) against the certainty of faith, where as the
Greek has not, he that stands, but, he that thinks he stands, etc.

Bristowe bids me look better in the text, their translation is not as I
charge it, but even as I say the Greek to be: Qui se existimat stare etc: And
therefore in the margent he bids, stand out of his light that the child may
see. Might not I say shore up your eyes sir. Richard, and see that I do not
say, the text is so translated, but so alleged. They allege the text, Qui
stat, videat ne cadat. And if you require mine author who allegeth it so: look
in Haymo upon the very place, and you shall find these very words. Qui stat
in fide and operibus, videat ne cadat: He that stands in faith and works,
let him see yt he fall not. And if you would have a later writer that so
alleges it, look in Gregory Martin one of your brood, who in his book of
schism alleges it in so many words: Qui stat, videat ne cadat, in the first
chapter of his book.

And what has brought them to this understanding, but your corrupt
translation? Qui se existimat star^, he that judges or is persuaded that he
stands. For existimare signifies properly to judge or esteem upon good
grounds, to think certeinely, and not like putare, which word Ambrose uses
in the interpretation of this text, and signifies to think vainly. And so is
existimare used by your translator in other places. Romans 6. Ita and vos
existimate, etc. So you esteem or judge your selves to be dead unto sin
etc. And again 1. Cor. 6 Sic nos existimet homo vt ministros, Christi etc. Let
a man thus esteem or judge of us, as of the ministers of Christ. Again Iac.
1. Omne gaudium existimate etc. My brethren count it all joy when you fall into
diverse temptations. In all which places existimare signifies to think
certeinely and not vainly, as in this text, 1. Cor. 10. It should be qui se
putat stare, he that vainly thinks that he stands, let him take heed that
he falls not. I confess I might have brought an hundredth places of scripture
in which the corruption is more clear unto every simple man's understanding,
but this I took to be sufficient, seeing to prove the corruption of the
translation, was not the principal matter of the demand which I answered,
but to yield a reason why the popish Church did not as well corrupt the text
of the Testament as the true doctrine contained in the same.

CAP. VII.
That he has no other shift against our manifold Evidences Bristowe.
(so clear they be) but the name of only Scripture, as well about each
controversy, as also about the meaning of the scripture it self: And how
timorous he makes us, and how bold he bears him self hereupon.

First he charge me with shameful confessions, that I have been feign to
make against mine own side, and Fulke.
for their side: which what they are, you have heard already, and what shame I
have gotten by them, and what advantage their side has of them. Next he
promises to show the same more clearly by running over those common evidences
of Christian truth, out of which he framed his Motives and demands, which I
confess to be al against me, because I take exception against them, and say
that only scripture is good evidence in such suits etc. But what I confess or
deny of those evidences may best be seen in my Retentiue against his motives
and demaundes.

The first part.
How he excepteth by only scripture, against all other evidences Bristowe
in the controversies that are between us, and first against the rule to know
heresy etc.

He rehearses many sentences of mine mangled and Fulke.
interrupted with his own glosses in which I profess, that No opinion is
heresy which is not contrary to the holy scriptures, although it be accounted
heresy of the world: where he slaundereth me to term them the world, which
before I confessed to be the true Church. The places Art. 44. where I speak of
them which preaching in these later times against popery, have been of the
Romish Church condemned for heretics, as Waldo, Wickelief, Hus, etc. In the
process following where I said (yt if Aerius had not been an Arrian, the
opinion he held against prayer for the dead, could not have made him an
heretic) Bristow compting my saying to be blasphemy, (belike against the
Popes kitche^) adds yt it seems I knew not the purpose of Augustine in his
book de Haer. which he says was the purpose of Epiphanius also, not to confute
but only to report of heresies yt had benbefore his time: Seeing it is enough
to know yt the catholic Churches judgment is against the^: And that it helps
much the faithful heart only to know what must not be believed, although he
be not able to confute it by disputing. And why seem I ignorant of this
purpose? except it be because I said, yt neither Epiphanus nor Augustine,
reproved by scripture, that which in Aerius they co^pted to be an error. But
the case is so clear (says Bristow) that the very adversary confesses, that
it was the Catholic Church that judged Aerius to be an heretic. Yea sir for
his Arrianisme, but I never confessed, neither can you ever prove yt any
judgment of the Catholic Church in general council passed against Aerius for
denying prayer for the dead, before the days of Epiphanius or Augustine,
although the error of prayer for the ^ead in that age was commonly received,
not upon any good ground of Canonical scripture, but upon a corrupt custom
first brought in by heretics. Afterward where I following an allegory of
dogs used by Allen, tell him yt he must not teach his scholars to bark and
baule against us, nothing but The Church, the Church, like ^inkers curres etc.
he cries out in the margent, O worthy estimation that he has of the Church,
as though, I think less worthily of the Church, because I deride the vain
boasting of the name of ye Church in the^ which are nothing less then the true
church. Neither do I appoint mine enemy not to invade me with a gunne (as he
says) when I make the scripture only to be my weapon both inuasiue and
defensive. But it is a great absurdity as he ^weeneth, that I say an heretic
is he which in ye Church, obstinately mainteyneth an opinion contrary to the
scriptures: seeing S. John says, exierunt a nobis, they are gone out from us.
And if an heretikee be a man in the Church we are cockesure, with all
heretics, and the Papists only in danger. Why Bristow, make ye no
difference between him that is in the Church, and him ye is of the Church?
They be not al members of ye Church, that be in ye Church, and therefore S. John
says of them yt are gone from us, If they had been of us they would have
tarried with us. And do you account him an heretic that holds an error
clean out of the Church? then may you count all Paganes, Turks, and Jews, to
be heretics. What say you of Antichrist that sits ever in the Temple of
God? it helps not heretics, that they rise up in the visible Church, from
whence also they are often times cast out, so long as they be not members of
the body of Christ, which is the invisible Church, and heavenly Jerusalem,
which is the mother of us all.

Where I said, that whosoever holds an opinion obstinately, which he is not
able to prove by ye word of God, although he have many authors before him,
yet he is nevertheless an heretic. Bristowe adds in the margent, though it
be S. Augustine himself, and though he hold the foundation here. cap. 5.
Touching the former part, I say not only though it were Saint Augustine, but
although it were Saint Peter himself or an Angel from heaven, Gal. 1.
Touching the later part, I answer, my meaning is of such opinions, as are
against the foundation, and so is my whole discourse, purg 412. whence this
saying is borrowed. Again, where he concludes that I confess Aerius,
Iouinian, and Vigilantius to have been condemned by the true Church of Christ,
in such points of doctrine, as we agree with him: I answer as before of
Aerius alone, I never made such confession.

In that I refuse to find the first authors of all their errors, he says, I
am feign to flee to my cold exception of only scripture, as though to
justify our doctrine, by the Apostles, and that so sensibly, were not enough.
O sensible justification, by which all errors, whose first authors cannot be
found must be laid upon the Apostles. But most ridiculous of all is Fulke,
where he comes in with this exception upon Tertullians rule. Id esse verum
etc. That is true what soever is first, yt is false and forged which is later.
But how shall the first doctrine be known, but by the word of God, wherein
all the doctrine of God is taught? What is here I pray you to be laughed at?
Forsooth, Bristowe says, T^^^ullian has there an other rule against such
heresies, as presumed to say, their founders lived in the Apostles time. But
this rule he gives against all such, as rise any time after as Aerius, Luther
Calvin, etc. bidding us consider what was taught and belecued immediately
before they arose: for that vnd^ub^^dly is the truth, and their later doctrine
is falsehood. But what if Bristow take Richard for Robert, is not he then
ridiculous? The rule of Tertullian whereof I speak, Purg. 410. and Ar. 42. is
written in his book aduersus Praxeam. although Allen do falsely quote it de
praescriptionibus. But what if Tertullian even in this rule given against
heretics in his book de praescriptionibus do expressly affirm the word of
God to be the trial of that which (...) former and true to convince that
which is latter and ^lse, is not Bristowe most ridiculous of all? His words ^e
these: Sed ab, excessu reuertar ad principalitate^ veritatis and ^osteritatem
mendaci^atis deputandam ex illius quoque parabo(...) patrocinio, quae bonum
semen frumenti a Domino seminatum ^rimo constituit auenarum aut sterilis foeni
adulterium, ab ini^ico diabolo postea superducit. Proprie enim doctrinarum
di^tinctionem figurat, quia and alibi verbum Dei seminis simili^do est. Ita ex
ipso ordine manifestatur, id esse dominicum and ^erum, quod sit prius tradi^^m:
id autem extraneum and sal^um, quod sie posterius immissum. Ea sententia
manebit aduer^s posteriores quasque haereses, quibus nulla constantia de
con^ciencia compettt ad defendendam sibi veritatem. But from this ^xcesse, I
will return to show ye priority of truth and po^terioritie of falsehood even
out of ye defense of ye parable which first of al sets forth ye good seed of
wheat sown ^y our Lord, and afterward brings on the coun^erfeiting of Otes
or baren grass by the enemy the ^iuel. For it figureth properly ye difference
of doctrines, because elsewhere also the word of GOD is the si^ilitude of
seed: So by the very order, it is made ma^ifest that to be the Lords and
true which was foremost ^eliuered, that to be strange and false which is cast
in ^fterward. This decree shall remain against later heresies whatsoever, which
have no consta^cie of conscience to de^end ye truth to be on the irside. Where
is there here any word of Bristows gloss of Tertullian bidding us consider
etc? I think he had not read ye place in Tertullian himself, but followed
some papists collection upon it, and because he could not avoid that which
I said, he thought it best by calling it so much and so often ridiculous, to
laugh it out, as they say, when he was not able otherwise to answer it.

Likewise I said, that we refuse not the rule of Vincentius Lyrinensis
concerning antiquity, so you can prove God to be the author, the Prophets
and Apostles for witnesses: under this antiquity that which had an erroneus
beginning shall have a shameful ending, Purg. 399. Here Bristowe takes
advantage of the Printers error, although he be admonished (...) of in the
Corrections, and not content with that, (...)fieth my words making me to say,
as for witness (...) this antiquity we pass not for them. Yes (...) we
esteem all good witnesses of that ancient (...) whereof God is the author.
But you say ye rule w(...) receive, proves the Apostles to be authors of
sole(...) payer for the dead in ye Mass, and such like articles (...) taught
and believed, before Luther began such (...)uations etc. But I reply, that
Vincentius rule, is (...) such fools fable, but requires antiquity to be
(...)tinued always even from Christ, which seeing you (...) not show, no^
other conditions which he requi(...) for your articles, his rule helps you
nothing at a^ (...) rule which he handles at large throughout his b(...) is
briefly set down in this sentence. In ipsa (...) Ecclesia mag(...) (...) est,
(...) id (...) q^^d (...), q^^d (...)er, (...) ab (...)us (...) est (...)
propri^que C(...)n (q^^d i^sa (...)) q(...)d (...). A(...) the Catholic Church
it self we must greatly (...) that we hold that thing which has been
every(...), which has been always, which has been of all (...) believed,
for that is truly and properly Ca(...) (which the very force and reason of
the name d(...)reth) that comprehends al things truly (...)ly. Examine your
articles by this rule and you (...) find not one of them catholic. So that my
excep(...) of ye sovereign authority of only scripture (...)death (...) well
with the rules both of Tertulli^^ and Vince(...) Lyri(...). For to the truth,
as Aristotle says, all (...)ges agree that are true, but f^lshoode soon
bewrays itself.

2 Aga(...) the A(...) (...). Bristowe. F(...).


Aga(...) (...) (...)ed traditions of the Apo(...), I make exception* of the
writings of the Apostles to b^^ the only c(...)yne (...)esse of the^^ true
tradition. And I say All^^ bl^^ph^mously f^thereth ^ppon the Apo(...), the
institution of popish prayer and sacrifice for ye (...). (...)we charge me
nevertheless to affirm, yt (...), Cyprian, Augustine, Jerome, and a great
ma(...) are witnesses hereof, Pur. 362. wherein he shame(...)y belyeth me, for
that I do only rehearse part of (...)s words which affirms them to be
witnesses. (...)ch thing Bristowe might easily see by the diuersi(...) of
print, if he had not been disposed to ^^^under me. (...)er this by the example
of Allen, which is a great po(...), I pose the Papists with this question: Why
God (...)uld have none of the Apostles to put this matter or (...)e word
thereof in writing, which afterward should (...) disclosed by Tertullian,
Cyprian, Augustine, etc. (...) (...) Bristow after much bibling out of S.
Augustine, (...)e Apostles have not left in writing the whole order
(...)celebration of ye sacraments: answers, yt one piece of (...) that it was
omitted by the apostles, was for bre(...)s sake. But I (Bristow) do not speak
of any order or (...)me of ceremonies, which because they are variable,
(...)cording to times, places and persons, the apostles have (...) prescribed:
but of ye doctrine of praying and sacrifising (...)r the dead, which in much
less b^^uitie then the (...)stles used, might have been without any
tedi(...)nes let down, at the least in one word mentioned. (...)herfore
brevity could be no piece of the cause, but a (...)ore and miserable refuge of
a papist driven to the wall (...)r want of a better answer. But if this be a
piece, what is then (...) suppleme^t of ye whole cause? Bristow answers in
these words: (...) to (...) in (...)g. Which (...) so many ^f (...) one of
^wspan^ w^^ld (...). Do I imagine (Bristowe* and am so greatly (...)ceiued* I
follow not mine own imagination but their (...)ne writing. S. John testifies
that those things which (...) had written, were su(...) to obtain everlasting
life (...)y believing them. Io(...). S. Luke ^^eweth his purpose (...) (...)th
in a (...) sum, the truth of all things, (...) the (...)les delivered,
concerning the doc^^ine and (...)ngs of Christ L(...). Ac(...). S. Paul
(...)eth yt the holy scriptures were able to make the man of God perfe(...)
prepared to all good works, 2 Timothy 2. But you have great reason to prove that
they purposed not to put all in writing: because neither so many of them, nor
o(...) of them so often, would have mentioned one thing: wh(...) as
contrariwise it is manifest thereby, that they study not so much for brevity
but that they might have expressed in a word or two prayers and sacrifice for
yt dea^ seeing so many of them, and some one so often, does mention one thing.
Again it were against reason, that they should mention one thing so often,
which though it be profitable, yet it is not necessary to be often mentioned:
and to omit altogether such matten as are necessary to be known, and not
in one word mention them. The purpose of the holy ghost, that Bristowe does
imagine, were in writing the scriptures to a bare effect: that the gospels were
written only to show Christ to say Consummatum est and al things to be
fulfilled of him which were written of him: the Acts of the Apostles to show,
but as it were the first birth of the Church: the Apocalipse to show the whole
course of the Church, to the end of the world, The other books were written
(says he) specially against the perfidious Jews and other false masters of
that time: As likewise in every age afterward we have the Ecclesiastical (I
say not the Canonical) writers and councels. See you not how the blasphemous
dog* restrains the use of ye Apostles epistles specially to the time in which
they were written, and co^pareth Ecclesiastical writers and councels, with the
canonical scriptures? If this that he says were true, the scriptures were not
sufficient to make a man wise to salvation as S. Paul says without traditions
and Ecclesiastical writers. 2. Tim. 3.

Those things which S. Paul promises to set in order when he comes, 1 Cor.
11. I said must be understood not of doctrine but of ceremonies, as the word
(...), does signify. Bristowe answers, that the solemn prayer for the
dead in the celebration of the sacrifice, is one of Saint Paul's ordinances. I
reply, if the doctrine of praying for the dead were contained Saint Paul's
writing, yea, or in any part of the cano(...)all Scriptures, we would not
strive for the form (...) prayer. But if we may add new doctrines upon
(...)ler of the Apostles tradition, neither is the Scrip(...)e so perfect as
the holy Ghost affirms it to be, (...)there can the gappe be shutt from any
heresy, to (...)ast it self of the tradition of the Apostles, as the
Va(...)tinians, and other heretics have done, and all he(...)ikes may do.

But tradition of the Apostles is as good as their wri(...)gs. To this
objection I answer, that their writings (...) the only true testimony of
their tradition to us. (...)stowe replyeth: So were they not to the
Thessalonians, (...) they had of S. Paul traditions partly by word of mouth,
(...)tly by writing. I reioyne, that we have no traditions (...) the Apostes,
but by their writing we never heard (...) deliver any thing by word of mouth,
but we know (...)ir writings contein the sum of their preachings. Concerning
the doubtfulnesse and contradiction yt (...)yde was in the fathers them selves,
about those mat(...)s that are not contained in the Scriptures: Bristowe
(...)nswereth first, their doubts are not of the traditions, (...)t of
circumstances of persons, and other matters con(...)ning the traditions, which
is as much as I showed by (...)amples and testimonies out of their writings,
Purg. (...)7. Ar. 39. Pur. 317.

The contradiction supposed to be in Chrysostom (where he says, first that
small help can be procured for the dead, afterward he says, the Apostles
knew that much commodity came to the dead by praying ^or them) Bristowe
answers is none at all. For in (...)e first place, he speaks of rich men
which did not pro(...)e any comfort to their souls by their riches, that their
friends (...)n procure but little in respect of that they might have procured
(...)em selves: because a man's own works are also meritorious (...)
everlasting reward so are not his friends works meritori(...) unto him at
all, no nor so satisfactorious of temporal pain, (...) his own nothing like.
But how a man's own works (...) his friends works, may be either meritorious
or satisfactorious any thing at all, he brings no proof (...) all. And that
he says of Chrysostom is utterly false for if istos be referred in the
former sentence defleam(...) istos, unto those rich men so dying only, what
reason is there, why orantes pro istis, should not be referred unto them also?
But seeing the memory which he sai^^ was decreede of the Apostles, was general
for all the^ that departed in faith, why should not that, much profit coming
thereby, pertain to them, of who^^ he said before, that small help they
could have? Likewise, that I added further of the Cathecumeni wh^^ Chrysostom
judged of helping them, Bristowe pas(...) over and says never a word unto it.

3 Against the Churches authority. Bristowe.


I say plainly, the practice and authority of ye church, without the word of
God, revealed in the scripture^, Fulke.
is no rule of truth. Where I commend Tertull(...) for confessing that
prayers and oblations for the dead, are not taken out of the Scriptures,
Bristowe says I am hasty to take that which Tertullian does not give, as he
has showed in the third chapter: but seeing in the third Chapter, he
refers me to the 9. Chapter, thither also will I refer him for answer.

Where Allen alleges a rule of S. Augustine, Quod legem credendi lex statuit
supplicandi: that the order of the ch^^ches prayer (says Bristowe) is even a
plain prescription to all the faithful what to believe, because Fulke could
not make his flourish with that end, forward, he turns the staff, as though
S. Augustine and D. Allen had said, that the law of believing should make a
law of praying. And here he cries out of falsification by changing. So says
S. Augustine (says Bristowe:) in that sense speaks S. Augustine often
against the Pelagians (says Allen) but in what book or chapter neither of
both does show among so many treatises as Augustine has written against the
Pelagians. Wherefore if I have altered the form of words yet without
falsification, especially seeing it is a more probable sense and agreeable to
the scriptures, (...)t faith should teach us to pray, rather then prayer
(...)che (...) to believe. For how shall they call upon (...), says the
Apostle, in whom they have not belee(...)d? Romans 10. But seeing there is a
mutual relation (...)ween the cause and the effects, the one argues and
(...)oueth the other. For as faith teaches men first to (...)ye, so the prayer
is an argument of the faith, accor(...)g to which it is conceived. But true
faith com(...)th only by hearing the word of God, therefore (...)e prayer
comes only by hearing the word of (...)d, and is not acceptable to God
except it be framed (...)ording to the word of God. After this, he says, I
(...) as bold to except against the practice commen(...)d even in the
canonical scripture, because I allow (...)t the practice of Judas Machabaeus
contained in the (...)phane and lying book of the Machabees.

I said Ar. 86. There is never heresy but there is as (...)at doubt of the
church as of the matter in question: (...)erefore only the Scripture is the
stay of a man's con(...)nce. Hereof Bristowe gathers this great absurdi(...):
Because heretics make doubt of the Church, this heretic (...) that no
Christian lean unto it. Yes verily, I will have (...) men that know the
Church, lean to the Church, de(...)ding truth against heresies: but for them
that doubt (...) the truth, and of the Church, I say only scripture i^ (...)
stay of their conscience, to try the truth and the Church both: seeing both
heretics and Catholics make as great challenge to the Church as to the truth.

But some heretics make doubt of the Scriptures (says he) either all, or
some piece, as you do of the ^achabees. I answer, if any deny all
Scriptures, (...)ey are more like Paganes and Atheists then heretics, (...)th
whom we are not to reason by authority of (...)riptures, but by other
inducements, such as were (...)d to the Paganes. Against those heretics that
re(...)iue some part of the Scriptures, we are to dispute (...)t of those
Scriptures which they receive, as our saui(...)r Christ confuted the Saducees
out of the books of (...)oses, because they received none other Scripture. For
the book of Macha bees we doubt not, but are certain, it is a profane book,
as I have showed by many arguments, never received in the primitive Church f^^
400. years after Christ.

Where I say we submitted our selves to al Churche^, but so that they allow no
consent or submission, but (...) the truth which must be tried only by gods
word^ Bristow says with that, but so we will consent the true^^ to Jack
straw. Verily to consent unto Jack stra^^ in truth, I take it to be none
absurdity: but I speak not only of consent, but also of submission which we
are not ready to yield to any but such whose authority (...) reverence.

As for the 4. rules enacted by Parliament, for condemning heresy, if Bristow
would understand them like a quiet subject, and not deride them like a
scornful traitor, he might understand, yt the three later are not contrary
to the first, which determines heresy by contrariety to the canonical
scripture, which is declared either in ye 4. first general councels, or in any
other general council agreeing with the scripture, or may upon occasion be
declared by Parliament hereafter: Not that the Parliament ever did imagine that
it had authority to make truth heresy, or to make any thing heresy, which is
not contrary to the canonical scriptures.

After this he charge me that I will not believe the Apostles nor the Angels
without scriptures. What if I would not? were I worse then the Thessalonians,
or Bereans, which daily searched the scriptures, to see if those things that
were taught by the Apostles were even so? Act. 17. But I abuse the scripture
(says Bristowe) and turn the curse that saint Paul pronounces, Gal. 1. which
was of preaching, as if it were of only scripture. I answer, my words are
these, if any man teach otherwise then the word of God allows, he is to be
accursed: but seeing we have no certeinty of the word of God, since the
Apostles departure, but the canonical scriptures, which do contain all that
they preached, the same curse is rightly applied to them that teach any other
way of salvation, then that which is taught in ye holy Scriptures. The rest of
this division is spent in showing that I hold (...)ill my exception of only
Scriptures against councels, (...)he see apostolic and succession of bishops,
with a note (...) the end, what a franklin I am to renounce such goodly
evidence, whereof if I had any color my self, (...)o mountybanke peddler, is
so facing and boasting, as I and my fellows. As frank as I seem in
renouncing that goodly evidence, I trust to be careful enough; to ^olde fast
the evidence of eternal life, which is the ho(...)y Scriptures of God: and if
I and my fellows boast in them, because our boasting is in God, I doubt not
but ^ee shall be better accepted of him, then they that count that boasting a
stale exception, and boast in vanity, (...)ust in lying, and at least make
flesh for their arm, and their heart departs from the living God.

4 Against the fathers. Bristowe.


Although I challenge the Papists to prove their do(...)rine Fulke.
of Purgatory and prayers for the dead, out of the (...)uncient catholic
fathers that lived within 200. years (...)ter Christ: because I know they
cannot, yet in that (...)allenge, I say nothing contradictorie to my former
(...)ssertion, that only the word of God contained in the (...)oly
Scriptures, is the judge of all doctrine, and trial of truth, and stay of a
Christian man's conscience against any thing yt is taught to be believed unto
salvation, or concerning the worship of God, either contrary to it, or beside
it. But Fulkes two onelyes (says Bristowe) namely only the most ancient
Church, and only Scripture, are utterly without all ground, and but (...)eere
voluntary. If it be without ground, to make the word of God the only judge
of godliness, and the most ancient Church the best witness thereof, let every
Christian conscience consider. As for the voluntarinesse, ^f you understand the
challenges to be voluntary, because you will not accept them, let your will
stand in (...)eede of reason: but if you call them voluntary, because you
need not accept them, and yet approve your selves good Christians: remember
who it is, that says, my sheep hear my voice and not a strangers, and let
every man see whereto the brag of antiquity is come, when you will not be
tied to the most ancient Churches testimony, and the eldest writers of the
same.

Now, concerning other by quarrels, and cauils, whereas I said: Whatsoever we
find in the fathers agreeable to the Scriptures, we receive it, with their
praise: and whatsoever is disagreeable to the scriptures, we refuse with their
leave. Bristowe notes within a parenthesis: He means expressed in the
Scriptures. But who made him so privy of my meaning? my words import no such
thing: for many things are agreeable to the scriptures that are not expressed
in them. I borrowed my phrase out of S. Augustine Contra Crescon homil. lib. 2.
Cap. 32. which speaks of Cyprian, that which I spoke of all the fathers in
general. Ego huius epistolae authoritate non teneor, q(...) literas Cypriani,
non vt canonicas habeo, sed ea^ ex canonic^^ considero, and quod in eis
diuinarum scripturarum authori(...) congruit, cum laud eius accipio, quod
autem non congruit, cu^ pace eius respuo. I am not holden by the authority of
this Epistle, because I do not account the writings of Cyprian as canonical,
but I consider them by the canonical, and that which in them agrees with the
authority of the holy Scriptures, I receive it with his praise, but that which
agrees not, I refuse it with his leave. I think Bristowe will teach S.
Augustine shortly, by that which agrees with the Scripture, to mean only
that which is expressed in so many words.

Where I said, that when the fathers are opposed against the manifest word of
God, and the credit of the Apostles, there is no cause that we should be
carried away with them. Bristowe says, in the margent, a^ though we opposed
the doctors to the Apostles. And what call you this but an opposition of the
doctors to the Apostles, when we say, The Apostles have not taught prayers
for the dead in any of their writings: you answer, but the doctors have
taught prayers for the dead in their writings.

Where I say the authority of mortal men, is not to be received, he notes
our absurdity, because not only Melancton and such like (as Allen has told
^s) were mortal men: but also in the same term of mortal men, are the
Apostles them selves comprehended. And what of this? Do we build upon the
authority of Melancton, or of Peter and Paul, as they were mortal men? No
verily: We buyld upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus
Christ being the corner stone, and the only author of the doctrine, whereof
the Prophets and Apostles are witnesses, who spoke and writ as they were
moved by the holy ghost, and therefore their writings we receive as the word
of God, which the spirit of God has endyted by the pen of the Apostles.

Where I said: We dare not depend upon any one man^ judgment, for we must
depend only upon Gods word. Bristowe answers: Even so dealt the
unbelievers, and the doubtful and weak with the Apostles in their life time,
yea, and ^ith Christ him self: and yet to win such persons, both the
Apostles and Christ him self, condescended to them accordingly. And why do not
you follow the example of Christ, and of his Apostles, to win so many
thousands, as do refuse your doctrine, because you do not justify it by the
authority of the holy Scriptures? But the faithful, (you think) for all that
were not so strait laced, but believed them upon their own word, both
Christ and his Apostles, because of the spirit of truth, that he sent to
them. And God be thanked, we as faithful men, acknowledge without
controversy, the spirit of truth in Christ, and his Apostles. But he has
not sent his spirit to them only (says Bristow) but also to his Church
after them for ever. We doubt not, but he has given his spirit to his Church,
but not in such full measure, as to his Apostles. And if he had, how should we
know that Church that has the same spirit, but by trial of the scriptures,
which were undoubtedly written by the same spirit. Bristow says, the
faithful will no less believe the Church, at all times, for the same spirit,
then the Apostles. He must first prove, the spirit so given to the Church,
that she can no more err in her decrees, then the Apostles could in their
writings. Secondly, if that were proved, the trial of the Scriptures is
necessary to discern the true Church from all false congregations, which all
boast of the spirit of truth, as much as the true Church. And seeing the holy
ghost by his instrument S. John, bids us not believe every spirit, but try
the spirits, whether they be of God, we know none so sure a trial, as the
consent of their doctrine with the holy scriptures, whether it be a multitude
of men, or several persons, of one age, or another, of one degree or other,
that offreth to teach any doctrine, which he or they pretend to have of the
spirit of God.

Last of all, where I said: Age can never make falshod to be truth, and
therefore I w^y not your proud bragges worth a straw. Bristowe notes in the
margent, It is pride to follow the fathers, and humility to condemn them.
Whereto I answer, to boast of the fathers to maintain an old error, is
stinking pride, and it is not against true humility to make fathers and
mothers, and all things else subject to the truth of Gods word, revealed in
the holy scriptures.

The second part.
Being told that the question between us is not (as he maeketh Bristowe.
it) of the Scriptures authority, but of the meaning: how there likewise
against all the expositors, he makes the same exception of only scripture,
requiring also scripture to be expounded by scripture.

When in all this Chapter, you deny, only scripture Fulke.
to be of sovereign authority, sufficiency, and credit, to teach us all the
will of God, are you not impudent, to say, the question is not of the
authority of the Scriptures? But I supposing the controversies to be of the
meaning, and not of the authority, Pur. 363. do answer nothing whether the
likelihood b^ on our side, or on the ancient doctors side, for the meaning of
the scripture. What then? I answer, the question of the meaning of the
scriptures is needelesse in that controversy: where some of ye doctors
confess prayer for the dead not to be grounded on the Scriptures, other wrest
the Scriptures so manifestly, that the Papists them selves are ashamed to use
those textes for such purposes. This answer I trust, will satisfy reasonable
men for that controversy. After this, he says, I count my self and my
companions happy, for such blind presumption, to search the meaning of the
Scriptures, only out of the Scriptures, without the commentaries of doctors,
but as he troweth, not without the commentaries of Calvin. But herein, as in
all things almost, he belyeth me: for I never spoke word against the reading
of the commentaries of doctors in search of the Scriptures meaning, but only
against absolute credit to be given to their exposition, without weying how it
agrees with the holy Scriptures in other places.

Likewise, where I compare the whole heap of superstition and error, out of
which Allen raises a mist of men's devises to a dunghill: Bristowe notes, that
I make the doctors writings a dunghill. Surely what superstition or error so
ever be in the doctors, as the sweeping of a fair house, is meet to be cast
on a dunghill. Let Bristowe or Allen, if he list, say there is no superstition
or error in any of the doctors. And yet it follows not, that the doctors
writings are a dunghill, more then that a kings palace is a dunghill, because
the sweepings thereof are meet for the dunghill.

To pass over his railing terms of drunkenness, and blindness, etc. Let us
come to the meaning of the scriptures, where I said, we shall be never the more
certain of the truth, whether we challenge, or leave the likelihod of
understanding ye scriptures to the doctors.

Bristowe answers, whosoever expounds the scripture unto that wherein the
doctors do agree, shall be ever most certain of truth (which is inoughe)
though not always certain of that same very places meaning. We are then much
the near, when the question is of the scriptures meaning, if by the consent of
the doctors, we cannot be certain of the scriptures* meaning. And if that
truth (as we believe that all truth) is in the scriptures, how can we be
certain of the truth by the agreement of the doctors, where we cannot be
certain of the meaning of the scriptures?

Where I answer, that we have our measure of Gods spirit, as the doctors
had, although we agree not with them in all interpretations, even as Cyprian
and Cornelius, were both endued with Gods spirit, although they agreede not in
exposition and judgment of the scriptures: Bristowe replyeth, that Cyprian was
of Cornelius his judgment implicit, though explicit, he were of an
erroneous judgment. And so is every Catholic erring of ignorance, in effect
of the truth with other Catholics not erring, because he q^e^ly. continues
in unity with them, and does not obstinately hold his error against them. But
so is not the case between the old Doctors and us: for neither will we be
reformed by them, neither would they be reformed by A^rius, Iouinianus etc.
whom he calls our forefathers.

If you have no greater diversity then this, the case will be all one, for
neither would Cyprian be reformed by Cornelius, neither would Cornelius be
re-Formed by Cyprian. But if the old Doctors had heard as good reasons against
prayer for the dead, of Catholics in their time, as we can make in this
time, although they would not be reformed by Aerius an heretic, yet charity
moves us to think, they would have yielded to the truth revealed by a
Catholic.

Where I conclude, that the hard places of scripture* are best understood by
conference of the easier, adding the ordinary means of wit, learning, etc.
adding that whosoever is negligent in this search may ea^ie be deceived:
Bristowe notes, a comfortable do(...)rine for the ignorant forsooth: As though
any Christi(...) man or woman, ought to be ignorant in the (...)riptures, so
far forth as they teach the way of sal(...)ation: otherwise it is no
discomfort unto them, al^^ough they understand not every hard place of the
^criptures.

After this he gathers, that I place all in a man's own (...)iligence to
trust no man nor men, but to read the scriptures, (...)onferre the places, and
so gather the meaning by him self. So that with him, it is nothing that saint
Augustine says (...) Doct. Christ. libr. Chapter 6. where I received my
(...)ule, Magnifice igitur and salubriter, etc. Magnificallye therefore and
wholesomely, the holy Ghost has so (...)empered the holy scriptures, that with
open places, he ^ight satisfy hunger, with dark places he might wype ^ff
lothsomnesse: for nothing in a manner is brought ^ut of those obscurities,
which may not be found in ^ome other place most plainly spoken. It is
nothing that I require the holy ghost the author of the scrip^ures, by earnest
prayer to be obtained of the interpretors. But if diligence may do so much,
he tel^^th us of the great diligence used in the Popes semi^arie, for
England, under the government of Doctor Allen (which proves it self to be
a semi^arie of treason) in much reading and conferring of the scriptures, with
all other helps and means, whereby they must be more certain of truth then
we, by mine own rule. No, Bristowe, not they that read the scriptures with
such mind as you do (without the extraordinary grace of God) shall never
come to the knowledge of the truth, which they seek not in them, but the
confirmation of their preiudicated, erroneous, and heretical opinions.

There is a fragment of Clemens cited in the decrees. Did. 37. Chapter
Relatum, which shows the let of your understanding, and in the end
concludes, Non enim sensi(...), etc. you ought not to seek a foreign and
strange sense, without the scriptures, that you may by any means confirm the
same by the authority of the scriptures, but you ought to take the sense of
truth out of the scriptures themselves. Concerning the brag of Hebrewe and
Greek texts, to be proved against us, when we see the book, we will show
you our judgment. In the mean time if the author show not more wit in
suppressing his labor, then you in vaunting of it before it come forth, I
assure you he will show himself to the world to have neither learning wisdom,
nor honestic.

The 3. part.
What he means by his only scripture: and that thereby he excepteth also
against scripture. Bristowe.


I mean by only scripture, what soever is taught in plain words, or may be
gathered by necessary conclusion, Fulke.
which is as good as express words. For all truth needful for us to know
(say I) may be proved by scripture, either in plain words or by necessary
conclusion, which is all one. Where I urge Allen to show some sentence of
scripture to maintain prayer and sacrifice for the dead, Bristow says, I
confessed that I have heard of him diverse sentences in the third chapter of
his reply page 19. but read that page who will, and they shall find never a
word of such confession. The scripture it self, that I except against by
calling for Canonical scripture, is the book of Machabees, which he promises
to prove to be canonical in the 11. Chapter where his arguments shall receive
aunsweres.

The 4. part.
What great promises he makes to bring most evident scriptures against us, and
also by scripture to prove his sense of the Bristowe.
scripture: Triumphing also before the victory, and saying that (...)dare not
be tried by scripture, but reject the Scriptures, where(...)n a fourefold offer
is made unto him.

Before he rehearse my words of promise, he repeteth Fulke.
(...)w precise he has showed me: first to admit no eui(...)nce that they
allege, but scripture only, both in all (...)ntrouersies and also in the
exposition of scripture: (...)at evidence I admit, and how far, has been
show(...) before, and more at large in my answer to his motives (...)d
demands. Secondly he says, I admit no scripture, (...)ich makes so plainly
with them, that I cannot avoid but by denying it to be canonical, though I
grant (...)o have the confirmation of ye same true Church, which (...)oueth
me, as the holy ghost, to receive the other scrip(...)res for canonical. This
he speaks for the Machabees (...)oak, which although I deny to be
canonical, yet I (...)uer granted to have the confirmation of the true
(...)urch, neither yet ever had it: again where he says, (...)e true Church
moves me, as the holy ghost, to re(...)ue the other scriptures for canonical,
he does me (...)onge for the Church moves not me as ye holy ghost, (...)t in
a much inferior degree of moving: ye holy Ghost (...) the author moves me,
the true Church as a wit(...)sse.

Thirdly he says, I admit no scripture which I con(...)sse to be canonical,
unless it make so expressly, so plainly, so manifestly, and so necessarily
with them, that it cannot by any subtlety be avoided. This proposition being
in the copulative is false, for I admit arguments, taken either out of ye
express and plain words of scripture, or of collection necessarily
concluding. Let him make a new logike, if he will have me admit arguments
that do not conclude necessarily.

How I observe that law that I so rigorously exact, (...)e will examine in the
next Chapter. Then fol^oweth a large rehersall of sentences wherein I affirm,
that by the grace of God, I am able to prove every arti(...)e of faith that we
hold against the papists, by ne(...)essarie argu(...)ents out of the
scriptures. Bristowe says in the next chapter, I shall have ynowe, yet if
(...) will, one article shall be this. That Antichrist is not one certain
person: That I shall easily prove thus: One certain person is not many
Antichrists, there ha^^ been many: therefore Antichriste is not one certain
person. The minor is saint John. Epist. 1. Cap. 2. verse. 18. Again, Antichrist
is he, whosoever denies that Jesus is Christ: One certain person only
denies not that Jesus is Christ: Therefore Antich rist is not one certain
person only, 1. Johan. 2. verse. 22. Again, Every spirit that confesses not
Jesus Christ to be come in the flesh, is the spirit of Antichrist: but this
is not the spirit of one certain person: ergo Antichrist is not one certain
person. The beast described Apocalips 13. and expounded Apocalips 17. is
Antichrist, but many kings are the parts of that beast, therefore
Antichrist is no one certain person. The whore of Babylon which is expounded
Apoc. 17. to be the city of Rome, is borne by the beast beforesaide which is
Antichrist, but the city of Rome is not borne by one certain person,
therefore Antichrist is no one certain person.

An other article that he requires me to prove is: That the Churches flying
into the wilderness, at the coming of Antichrist, is to become invisible to
the world: Although this article be not a matter of faith, in controversy
between us, neither yet so affirmed of me, as though to be in the
wilderness, were nothing else, but to be invisible to the world: yet I will
prove so much as I affirmed, that the Church being in the wilderness, is
invisible to the world. The Church being where the multitude of wicked men are
not, is to them invisible: But the multitude of wicked men are not in the
wilderness: Therefore the Church being in the wilderness is to the multitude
of wicked men which is the world, invisible.

Thirdly he requires me to prove that the beginning of that coming and
flying should be so soon after Christ's passion. Before I prove this, it
were reason you should tell how sone you mean, or I said, such (...)mming and
fleeing should be. And the like I say (...)the continuance of so many ages
and the end so (...)g before Christ's second coming. The holy (...)ost
declares Apoc. 12. ver. 5. that immediately after (...)rist was taken up to
God and his throne, the woman (...)hich is the Church, being persecuted by the
dragon (...)d into the wilderness. The time of continuance is (...)uratiuely
and obscurely described by days, months, (...)d years, and generally by a
time, times, and half a (...)e, which I never took upon me to define how
(...)ng they should be, in account of our years, nor when (...) coming of
Christ should be.

After this he says, I triumph in lying, when I af(...)me the Papists dare
not abide the trial of only (...)ipture, whereas he laboreth nothing so much
in all (...)is Chapter, as to prove, that the trial of true do(...)ine ought
not to be only by scripture. And (...)terwarde he says plainly, they
refuse the trial (...) only scriptures, but not by scriptures, no more
(...)eu they refuse faith, because they refuse only faith. (...)here he
notes me for foysting in the word one(...), in the minor of this argument.
The spouse of (...)hrist hears the voice of Christ and is ruled there(...)y:
But the Romish Church will in no wise be (...)led only by the voice of
Christ: therefore she is (...)ot of the spouse of Christ. I thought every
reasona(...)le man would have understood, only, in the mayor (...)so, seeing
she is no honest spouse that will be ruled (...)y the voice of an other man
then her husband, or (...)hat will be ruled by her self, or take upon
(...)er to ouerrule her husband, I added also in the (...)inor, which Bristow
omitteth, that the Romish church (...)goes a whoring after her own
inventions, and com(...)mitteth gross idolatry. Ar. 99.

Where I charge the Popish Church with blas(...)mie, for submitting Gods word
to her own judgment: (...)he answers it is al one as if I should say, ye
Apostles did blasphemously submit the scripture to the own will, b^ cause they
took upon them to judge of the true s(...) and because S. Peter said the
unlearned, being hi^ self a fisherman, and unstable, did misconster S. Pau^
epistles etc. to their own damnation: which is all (...) as if Bristowe could
make us believe, that the Ap^ stles took upon them without the spirit of God,
(...) contrary to the scriptures in other places, to judge (...) sense of any
scripture, as the Popish Church does: (...) that Saint Peter, being an Apostle
endued with so m^ ny graces, was unlearned, because he had been a (...)
sherman.

Again where I said, the Popish Church ma(...) festly rejects the whole
authority of all the Cano(...) call scriptures, when she affirms that no
book (...) holy scripture is Canonical, but so far forth as sh(...) will
allow it: This says Bristowe, is as though (...) Apostles and the Church
after them, manifestly rei^cted the whole etc: because they made a Canon or
C^nons, whereof the said scriptures were and are call(...) Canonical,
whereupon him self also counts th(...) as confirmed by the holy Ghost. That
the scriptu(...) are called Canonical of such a Canon it is not yet proved,
for they may be called the Canon and Canonical, because they are the certain
rule to direct (...) matters of religion. But admit the Apostles or (...)
Church immediately after them, in having the spir(...) of discretion, made such
a Canon to discern true and divine books from false and conterfeite books or
written by the spirit of man, what is this like to that bl(...) phemous
authority which the Popish Church chalengeth? that she gave authority to
the scriptures and might as well have received the Gospel of Bartholomewe as
of Matthew, of Thomas as of John etc: whereby it follows, that by the like
power she may now reject the Gospells of Mathewe and John, and receive the
Gospels of Bartholomew and Thomas.

Where I said, the popish Bishops durst not abide the conference at
Westminster, first he quarelleth (...)my phrase, because I said it was before
the whole (...)rlde, as one that care not what I say. In deed I (...)de
account of the judgment of reasonable rea(...)s which would not take my
words as though I (...)nt that all the whole world was gathered into
(...)estminster Church: but that the conference and dis(...)tation was so open
and so notorious that all ye world (...)ght have knowledge of it.

Secondly he calls it a mock conference, in com(...)rison of the council
of Trent, yet was there no or(...)r taken, but such as was well liked of by the
Papists (...)m selves, until they saw their cause could carry no (...)dite.

He charge us for refusing to come to the council (...) Trent, being so
solemnly and honorably invited, with (...)h safeconductes etc. To your
safeconductes I aun(...)ere briefly the council of Constance has discredited
(...)m for ever on your behalfes. And to your disputati(...) there offered, I
say it was to no purpose, in such a (...)cke council, where the Pope which is
the princi(...)ll party that is accused of heresy, shall be the only
(...)dge and disposer of all things passed therein against (...) good
examples, laws, equity and reason.

Where you make Allen such a great exhibitioner (...) our whole country, I
will not quarrel at your phrase, (...)t I marvel what great revenues he has
in Flaun(...)rs that he receives no exhibition as you say from any body.

But now to the fourefolde offer: wherein first you say, that the council of
Trent compted us subjects (...) much as we compte you the subjects of
England. ^e count you as you show your selves to be, errant ^aytors to
England and the most godly prince of the (...)me, our sovereign Lady Queen
Elizabeth: as for (...)e conuenticle of Trent, we owe no more subjection
(...)to it, them to the city of Louaine.

The first offer is, that we must proeure a safecon(...)uct for you from the
Court in such form as the coun(...)ll gave us, and some of you will come over
and join with us in any conference that shall be prescribed, according to the
common laws of a conference, (...) there you refer me to your 19. and 1.
demand, wheret^ I have made answer already. But as concerning yo(...)
request, that we should procure safeconduct for yo(...) it is altogether
unreasonable, because you are not on(...) heretics, but also rebels,
conspirators and traitors, to whom no wise state will grant safeco^ducte.

Your second offer, is that I should join wi(...) you upon Collatio
Carthaginensis, touching whic(...) you have mine answer in my Retentiue
against yo(...) moriues.

Your slanderous and shameless complaynt, of o(...) Bishops and
commissioners oppressing papists with heavy y^ons, and butchers axes, ye
whole world (if you w(...) give me leave to speak so) may know to be false.
Their gretest severity is lenity, if it be compared with popish tyrannic,
practiced by your Bishops and bu^ning butchers in Queen Mary's time.

Your third offer is, that I should send you so^^ of my fellows or scholars
(it is well you require n(...) me to come my self) which shall need no other
sa^^conduct, but their quiet and modest behavior: as the example of some
^ugitiues has proved, all satisfied by your conference, and seeing and
hearing your daily reading and examination of the scirptures: I answer, if
you could procure as good a safecondicte (...) Sygismond the Emperor gave to
John Hus and Hiero^ of Prage, I durst not adventure to send them (if h(...)
any fellows or scholars whom I might send) into the hands of Papists and
traitors: much less dare I send or exhort any, to go upon your credit
without safeconduct.

Your fourth offer is, to answer such scriptures as I have alleged in both
my books, in the next chapter, whereto you shall by the grace of God receive a
reply without any long delay.

Your translation of the bible that you make some (...)omise of, when it
comes forth, we shall con(...)er of it. But where you say, We have served
our (...)ntrie with the old Testament of the late obstinate Jews
(...)welling, dividing, and reading, it being it self but one verse (...) the
whole Psalter, and each other particular book, and only (...)sonantes, and to
be rcade according to the tradition of the (...)thfull, which tradition you
know by your authentical tran(...)tions, and not of the incredulous and
per^idious etc. you (...)rite both like an ignorant ass, and like an impudent
(...)asphemer. For first where you say, ye vowelling, diui(...)ng, and reading
is of ye late obstinate Jews: you declare (...)neither you have seen nor
read the ancient common(...)ries of the Jews that are extant, in which this
vowel(...)ng, dividing, and reading is contained, nor once have (...)ard of the
most ancient travel of the Mazorites (...)hich sone after the dispertion of
the Jews, with won(...)rful care and diligence, almost unto superstition have
(...)gistred the vowelling, dividing, and reading, as it (...)as then received,
even from the Patriarchs and Pro(...)etes, of every verse and word in the
old Testa(...)ent: in so much that if any letter or point by the (...)ult of
the writer in the copies which they used were (...)ch as might easily be
corrected by the Grammar, yet (...)ey durst not amend it, but have even so
commended (...) unto us, as if there be any learned in that tongue, of which
you make some bragges, they are able to make report unto you. Again, what a
monstuous thing is this, yt there should be but one verse or sentence in the
whole Psalter, and in each book without my distinction or division: you might
as well say there is but one word in every book. Again where you say there
be only (...)onsonantes, although they that be exercised in the He^rewe
tongue, and in the grammar thereof, can read without the vowelling points,
yet they cannot always ^aue certainty, seeing some words with diverse points,
(...)oe not only signify diverse things, but some (...)imes also contrary
things. How then could eve(...)ie godly man, exercise him self day and
night in the (...)tudie of Gods law, according to his commandment, when it
were not possible for one among an hundredth, to read it without points and
distinctions of sentences. Our savior Christ in affirming that not so much
(...) one jot or point of the law shall perish, does sufficiently declare, that
the law of God had vowelling and dividing points as well as letters
consonants. As for your authentical translations you prate of, we know that
in many places, they err not only by missing the vowell(...), but also by
perverting the consonantes. And if it b(...) so as you threaten in the second
part of this Chapter, that one of your side shall shortly set forth a book,
to show to the world, that the Hebrew and Greek^ textes, in nothing make for
us, against you, and in very many things make for you against us, much mo^e
plainly then your vulgar latin text, we have not served our country amiss
in translation of the old Testament according to the Hebrewe which makes more
for you then your own vulgar latin, and so much as you say against us.

But now to all your four offers, I will oppose one more reasonable, more
easy, more indifferent, which without danger, without suite, without fraud,
me thinks in equity, you may not refuse. And that is such as I made
concerning mine aunswers unto your popish treatises, prefixed before my
Retentiue against your motives, that if you will conclude any controversy of
religion that is between us, in the stricte form of Logical arguments
(which is the best trial of truth in matters of doubt) I will answer you as
breefely, and either show plainly the inconsequens of your argument, or else
by sufficient authority or conclusion of syllogism, aduouch ye contradiction
of your mayor or minor, or both, if they both happen to be false. In the mean
time if you had rather be respondent then opponent, there is a littell treatise
called Syllogisticon that has been set forth by Master Fox almost twenty
years ago against transubstantiation and the carnal presence of Christ's
body in the sacrament of his supper, if your stomak serve you, you may endeavor
(...)our self to answer that challenge.

CAP. VIII.
To show his vanity in his foresaid rigorous exacting of Bristowe.
(...)ayne scripture, and great promises to bring plain scripture,
(...)nferring place with place so evidently. All the scriptures that he
(...)ledgeth are examined and answered. And first concerning the (...)estion
of only scripture.

First Bristowe (as his common manner is) slandereth Fulke.
(...)e to affirm, that in all matters only evident scripture (...)ust be
brought and heard: which I never affirmed, but (...)at only scripture is
sufficient and of sovereign au(...)oritie to teach us all doctrine perteyning
to religion (...)d manners, to faith and good works. Whatsoever (...)erefore
is brought and heard, must be examined by (...)at touchstone, if it be
received of Christians. Secondly (...)e slaundereth me to confess, that all
other evidences (...)e evident for them, which is an impudent lie, for I
ne(...)r made any such confession. Thus having altered the (...)ate of the
controversy, from that I affirm, to yt which (...) falsely says me^ to
affirm, he takes upon him to an(...)ere all such scriptures as I have
alleged to prove, yt (...) al matters, only scripture must be brought and
heard. (...)nd first he quarelleth, yt in all mine answer to ye arti(...)es, I
have cited but one text of scripture, for that pur(...)se. Where he might more
truly say. I had cited none: (...)r this question of only scriptures authority
and sufficiency, was none of the demands whereunto I made answer. Only in ye
4. article and 1. demand, which dema^deth what church has vanquished all
heresies in times past, etc. I answer, the true catholic Church, has always
resisted al (...)lse opinions contrary to the word of god, and fought against
the^ with (...)e sword of the spirit, which is the word of God, and by the aid
(...) God obtained the victory and triumphed ever the^ So did Paul (...)ercome
the Jews, Act. 18. So did the fathers of the primitive (...)urch from time to
time confute heresies by the scriptures, and in (...)eir writing declare that
by the^ they are to be confuted etc. To (...)is Bristow answers, yt he
finds not yt his arguments (...)against the Jews were none but scriptures,
wherein he is (...) be patdoned, because ye quotation is a miss, and has Act.
18. for 28. in which chapter and 23. ver. S. Luke declares how he proved the
whole doctrine of the gospel out of the law of Moses and the Prophets. Wherefore
if Bristow had remembered this, he might have found yt S. Paul's arguments, were
the same against the Jews of Corinth, which he used against ye Jews of Rome.
For what other authority should be used against the^, that denied Christ, and
believe not his Epistles, but the authority of ye scripture, which they
received? Wherefore he used none other arguments, but taken from the authority
of ye scriptures. Also he might find in the same chapter, and last verse, yt
Apollo^ (who used the same arguments yt S. Paul did) proved by the scripturs,
that Jesus was Christ. If he will cavil, that it is not said, only by
scriptures, let him accuse S. Luke, which has omitted other arguments,
necessary to prove Jesus to be Christ. But read you Act. 13. (says Brist.)
and you shall find yt he used against the Jews, ye testimony of certain men,
namely of John the Baptist and of his own disciples. This is as good an
argument, to prove yt he confuted them not by the only authority of Gods word
contained in the scriptures, as if a man would deny, yt a traitor was
apprehended by the only authority of the Prince, because ye constable arested
him and the Justice made his warrant to ye Iayler to receive him. John ye
Baptist testified nothing of Christ, but yt which was written of him before in
the scripture, no more did ye disciples or Apostles of Christ. Besid yt the
testimony of the Apostles is not alleged for proof of any doctrine concerning
Christ, but only for witness of a fact, namely yt Jesus was risen again from the
dead, according to the scriptures. Furthermore Bristow wills ^e to read Act.
4. for ye argument of miracles, where it is said, seeing the man also stand with
Peter and John, which was healed: The governors had nothing to gainsay. A man
having such daily exercise of conferring of scripture, as Bristow boasts
himself to have, might have alleged twenty places more proper for ye argument
of miracles. But even in the same place by him cited, the argument of miracles
serves not to prove any article of doctrine, not contained in the scriptures,
but to (...)onfirme the doctrine of the scriptures which was alleged by the
Apostles, to prove Jesus to be Christ.

The second text of scripture is, in the book of Pur. 6. where I say, that
other persuasion then such as is grounded upon hearing of Gods word, will never
of Christians be counted for true belief, so long as the 10. cap. to the R^m.
remains in the Canon of the Bible. To this Bristow answers, yt the word of
God is not only in writing, but in preaching, of such as be sent. And therefore
we account it the word of God, which we hear of the Church of God, either in
her councils, or in her doctors, or any other. For so said God to the, he that
hears you, hears me. I answer yt I spoke not of the word of God only in
writing, but in preaching, in councels or doctors, or howsocuer it be the word
of God, but I say, the only scriptures are a sufficient warant for me and every
Christian to try what is the word of God, and what is the word of man. For he
yt commanded us to hear ye Apostles and ministers, wills us not to believe
any doctrine which they teach, if they have not the warrant of holy scripture to
prove unto us, yt it is the doctrine of God. For since god gave his word in
writing, al spirits and prophets, signs and miracles were to be tried thereby.
Deuteronomy. 13.

The third text Gal. 1. which S. Paul speaks of preaching, Bristow says I
allege it of writing, and of only writing. In these words: Pur. 449. It
vexes you at the very heart, that we require the authority of holy scriptures
to confirm your doctrine, having a plain commandment out of the word of God,
that if any man teach otherwise the^ the word of God allows, he is accursed?
First he charge me with falsification by changing. But what change I have made,
let the Lord God judge. Indeed I have drawn mine argument from the word of
God, to the holy scriptures, because they are ye only certain assurance of ye
word of God. For how can I know certainly what S. Paul preached to ye
Romans, and other Churches, but by the scriptures, both of the old testament
and the new, which he affirms to be able to make a man wise unto salvation 2.
Tim. 3? yea wherefore was the new Testament written, but to assure us, what is
the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles?

Therefore accursed be he, that says the new Testiment is imperfect, and
does not contain in writing al points of the Gospel, that Christians are
bound to believe to their salvation. But the scripture says not, that the
Apostles did write all that they taught, says Bristow: yes verily, and that I
prove by this argument. The scripture testifies, that all which the Apostles
taught, was first taught of Christ himself before the^, Heb. 2. but whatsoever
Christ taught, is written in the Gospel, Luke 1. Act. 5. John. 20. etc.
therefore whatsoever the Ap^stles taught, is written. And therefore the Church
pretending the Apostles tradition, received by preaching, i^ bound to bring
forth ye Apostles writing or other holy scriptures, given by the same spirit.
The fourth text i^ 2. Tim. 3. which I allege in these words (says Bristow)
Purg. 410. All goodworkes are taught by the scriptures: which are able to make
the man of God perfect and prepared to all good works. First he takes
exception, that these are not the words of S. Paul. Indeed my words are an
argument against prayers for the dead grounded upon the scripture which
Bristowe suppresseth: But supposing that Saint Paul had said so, what a fond
reasoning is this (says Bristo^) because one evidence proves all, therefore I
can not have any other evidence, but that only? Sir, if one evidence prove
all, that which is not proved by that evidence, is not proved at all. But if
to prove that which is proved already, by that one evidence, you have other
good evidence, no man lets you to use them. Wherefore this is no fond kind
of resoning (Master Br^stow) but such as the best Logicians do teach. All good
works are taught by the scriptures: therefore that which is not taught by the
scriptures, is no good work. But now S. Paul says not, that all good works
are taught by the scripture, says Bristowe. He says the scriptures are
profitable, he says not, are able or sufficient to teach all good works.
Again he speaks only of the work of an Evangelist, and not of all good
works. To this I answer that immediately before Paul said, The scriptures
are able to make Timothy wise unto salvation, through faith in Christ Jesus:
but no man can be wise unto salvation, but he yt knows all good works meet
for a Christian man to do: therefore all good works meet for a Christian man
to do, may be learned by the scripture. And even in this very text, where he
says, All the scripture inspired of God is profitable to teaching of truth, to
disprouing of falshoode, to correcting of vices, to instructing in
righteousness, that the man of God that is the Evangelist, be perfect, furnished
to every good work* although you restrain every work to the only work of
an Evangelist, yet that I said, is necessarily concluded thereof. For it is
some part of an Evangelists work to give example in all good works, that are
meet to be done by other men: but by the scripture he may be perfectly
furnished etc. therefore all good works are taught by the scripture. Again,
when all the office of an Evangelist, which consists in teaching, disputing,
correcting, instructing in righteousness, may be perfectly furnished at the
scriptures: what can be more plain to prove, that nothing ought to be taught
for truth, disprooued for error, corrected for vice, instructed for
righteousness, but that which is taught, disproued, corrected, instructed out
of ye holy scriptures? Seeing therefore, that prayers and oblations are to be
made for the dead, is not taught by the scripture, it is no truth. To deny
prayer to be profitable for the dead, is not disproued by the scripture,
therefore it is no error. To omit prayer for ye dead is not corrected in ye
scripture, therefore it is no vice. Me^ are not instructed in ye scripture to
pray for the dead, therefore it is no work of righteousness.

The 5. and 6. texts, I allege together Pur. 434. Search the Scriptures, and
try the spirits, to prove that the certeintie of truth in understanding the
Scriptures, is not to be had but by the spirit, and the spirits are not tried
but by the Scriptures. Against this conference Bristow says, Who ever
alleged Scripture more blindly? And why so I pray you? because Christ says
in the same place, that John did bear witness to the truth. My works do
bear witness of me: Also, My father who has sent me, he has given
witness of me. In deed, (...) Bristowe could prove, that John Baptist,
Christ's miracles, or God his father, did testify any thing of him, which was
not before contained in ye Scriptures, neither had Christ given a perfect rule
to find him in the scriptures, neither is that sentence able to prove that
Christ may be sufficiently learned out of the holy Scripture. But if the
testimony of John, of the works of God the father, do all confirm the
Scriptures, who ever alleged scripture more blindly then Bristow, to prove
that Christ may not be learned sufficiently out of the new Testament, and the
old, when Christ sends the Jews to the old Testament, as a sufficient
witness of him?

Concerning the trial of spirits, Bristow bids me look in the text: by
this we know a spirit of truth and a spirit of error namely by hearing or
not hearing of the Apostles. I like it very well. For where shall we hear the
Apostles speaking, but in their writings and in the other holy writings,
according to which they spoke all, that they taught. Wherefore here is no trial
of the spirits, but by the scriptures. And where he says the Romans do
most manifestly continue in that they heard of the Apostles, because no man
can name yt time, the novelty, the seducer, that they went after, although it
were true, that no man could in any point show (as he says) yet the argument
is naught, seeing it is proved by the Apostles writings, that they hold many
things, not only beside, but also contrary to the doctrine of the Apostles.

The 7. text i^, Pur. 285. The word of the Lord is a light unto our steps,
and a lantern unto our feere, therefore we will not walk in the darkness of
man^ traditions. The faithful testimony of Gods word, only gives true light
unto the eyes. But the Prophet (says Bristow) neither has the word only,
nor says that Gods word, is not but in writing, for S. Paul refers that
text to the preaching of the Apostles. To the first quarrel, I answer, that
I allege not the words of the Prophet, but his meaning, which Bristowe cannot
deny to be the only word of God that gives (...)ue light to the eyes. That
Gods word is not but in (...)riting, I never said or thought: but that there
is no (...)erteintie of Gods word, but in the Scripture, I affirm: (...)nd
that the Apostles preached nothing but that which (...)as before contained
(though not so clearly) in ye law (...)nd the Prophets.

Last of all, you allege and say against Judas Ma(...)abaeus, says Bristowe,
Pur. 210. In the law not so much ^s one pin of the tabernacle was omitted,
lest any thing might be left to the will of man to devise in the worship of
God. You shall not do, says the Lord, what seems good in your own eyes,
but that which I command you, that only shall you do without adding any
thing to it, or taking any thing away from it. After a fond quarrel of the
quotation omitted by the printer, and his conjecture thereupon: Moses says
not (says Bristowe) That only which I do write, but that only which I
command. And so our savior Christ commands the Jews accordingly. The
Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses chair: and therefore whatsoever they
command you, observe it. I ask no better, we must observe that only which
God commands, whether Moses or any other of ye Prophets, apostles, or
Evangelists have written it, whether ye Scribes or Pharisees, pastors or
teachers do preach it. But where shall we find yt which God has commanded?
but in ye law and ye prophets, in ye writings of ye apostles and evangelists,
which are able to make us wise to salvation, which are profitable to make yt
man of god perfect, prepared to al good works.

As for ye pinnes says Bristow, you may see in the doctors, they were not for
that cause you imagine, of leaving nothing to man's devise in yt worship of God.
For how say you then by David and Solomon, who changed not only a pin, but
all the pinnes and the whole tabernacle into the temple, and ordained musical
instruments, and many other things for the worship of God, that the law did
not mention. I answer, whatsoever David and Solomon changed and ordained,
they did not by the devise of man, but by revelation from God, who had ordained
them to do it. But mine error is (says Bristow) because I do not distinguish
between men that have only their own human spirits, and men that have the
spirit of God, as Moses, the Prophe^^ and Apostles, and the catholic Church.
I were in deed^ in a gross error, if I could not distinguish the spirit of
God from the spirit of man. But Bristowe erreth because he confounds men
that were specially chosen, to receive the word of God by revelation, and the
same to preach and write, as the Prophets and Apostles: with the Church, which
consists of men having the spirit of adoption: but for the certeintie of
truth, builded upon ye foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, or else erring
if they depart from that foundation.

The digression he makes to the unlearned brother, because I know not the
treatise against which he writes, I omit. But where he returns to admonish
me, his fellow Fulke, as he calls me, to look better to my Logike,
concerning mine argument ab authoritate n^ga^iu^, I do him to wit, that, God I
thank, I am not to learn Logike, nor the force of an argument of authority
negatiuely, of him. The argument that angreth him, is this: All true doctrine
is taught in the Scriptures: Purgatory is not taught in the scriptures:
therefore Purgatory is no true doctrine. Here are two faults says Bristowe,
one because the mayor is false, the other supposing the mayor were true, yet
cannot the argument be opposed to our arguments of traditions, councels,
fathers. I will first prove the mayor. That whereby the man of God may be made
perfect, furnished to all good works, is taught in the Scriptures. 2. Tim. 3.
All true doctrine is that whereby the man of God may be made perfect, prepared
to all good works: Therefore all true doctrine^s taught by the scriptures.

Again: That which is able to make a man wise to salvation, teaches all true
doctrine needful to salvation (for of other truethes we speak not) but the
scriptures are able to make a man wise unto salvation: ergo (...) Scripture
teaches all true doctrine. And concer(...)g the second fault, which supposes
the mayor and mi(...) were true, yet denies the argument. I would (...)sh you
fellow Bristowe to look better to your (...)gike, how an argument that is
true in matter and (...)rme, may not be opposed against you. But you (...)ing a
witty example, if you prove a doctrine unto (...)c^ out of the old
testament, and I oppose thereunto (...)y negative argument, and say: All true
doctrine (...)aught in the new Testament, that doctrine is not (...)ght in the
new testament, therefore that doctrine (...)o true doctrine. You ask me,
whether this be well (...)posed of me. I answer, no: neither would I ever
(...)pose such an argument against you, which though it (...) true in form,
yet it is manifestly false in matter.

(...)r if you suppose the mayor to be true (as you say that (...)old it, and
must hold it especially if you say so) then (...)he minor utterly false: for
then no doctrine is taught (...) the old testament, but the same is taught
also in (...) new Testament. Wherefore this example proves (...)t, but that
mine argument ab authoritate negative is (...)ghtly opposed against traditions,
councels, fathers, and (...)ch like, as avouch any doctrine for true, which is
not (...)ght in the Scriptures, in which all truth is taught.

The second part.
Of Scriptures alleged concerning the question of the Church, ^^d first, what
he alleges indefinitely, that the Church may Bristowe
(...)re.

The first text cited Ar. 86. Every man is a liar, ^herfore the whole Chuch
militant consisting of men, Fulke.
which are al liars, may err altogether.

Against this, Bristowe asks: Why I do not say (...)e Church triumphant:
And demands whether (...)at also do not consist of men: I answer, the
scrip(...)re Psalm. 116. speaks of men living in this world, (...)d such as
are mere men, lest he should cavil at our (...)uiour Christ, which is a man,
and yet not contained in this general rule. As for the members of the
triumphant Church, whether they may properly be c^lled men, I will not dispute,
but we speak as the scripture speaks of men on earth, and the Church o(...)
^arth. And therefore although it be true, that some men by the gift of God are
veraces, true: yet nere which may not err. And therefore the absurdi(...)
which I gather, Purg. 451. God only is not true, if (...) Pope cannot err, is
not avoided by saying the Apostles cannot err. For undoubtedly the Apostles
did err. That their preachings and writings were not erroneous, it was because
they were not theirs, but the enditing of the holy ghost by them. But that the
holy ghost speaks not so by the Pope, it is manifest by this, that he has
spoken contrary to the spirit of God in the Scriptures, not only in matters
of controversy between him and us, but also in heresies condemned by both
parts.

The 2. text is Ar. 88. where I say: The true and only Church of God, has no
such privilege granted, but that she may be deceived in some things: for her
knowledge is imperfect, and her prophesying is imperfect. Bristowe replyeth,
that S. Paul in that speech includes him self: Our knowledge and our
prophesying etc. is imperfect, whether we speak or write. And says, that he
troweth I will not say, that S. Paul might be deceived in his writings and
epistles: and no more may the Church be, I answer if S. Paul had proceeded
further in prophesying, then according to such knowledge as he had by
revelation, and argumentation out of ye scriptures, he might have erred. That
he did not err in his writings, it was not because it was impossible for him
to err, but because he did write nothing but that he had, either by revelation
of Jesus Christ's spirit, or by argumentation out of the holy scriptures. And
therefore, except ye church have such warrant, as the Apostles and elders had by
revelation and the Scriptures Act. 15. she cannot truly say, It has been
thought good to ye holy ghost and us.

The 3. text is Ar. 88. where I say. It is true that S. (...)gustine says,
even the whole Church is taught to say (...)ry day, Forgive us our trespasses.
But why so (says (...)stow) because the whole Church does err in her
de(...)minations every day? It were ridiculous so to say. (...)t Augustine
speak for us both. Propter quasdam igno(...)tias and infirmitates membrorum
suorum, for certain ig(...)rances and infirmities of her members. The whole
(...)urch for the ignorance of her members must say, for(...)ue us our debts:
but the whole Church need not say (...), except she may be deceived through
the ignorance of (...)r members: therefore the whole church may be decei(...)d,
Apostles and al: which did not err in their writings (...)d determinations,
because it was impossible for them (...) to do, whatsoever they had written or
determined, (...)t because in their writings and determinations, they (...)ere
directed by such revelation, as they had according (...) the holy scriptures.

The 4 text is, that the whole synagogue did err, but (...)ot the Church of
Christ, and that but in a fact, not in (...)octrine, nor the whole synagogue,
but a piece only. (...)hich was the example of David carrying the Arc of
(...)od upon a new Chariot, which should have been carry(...)d upon men's
shoulders. 1. Chron. 13. So that there be no (...)sse, then three walls says
Bristow between ye Church (...)nd your shot. But by the grace of God, I will
show (...)hat they are al but paper walls, that are erected against the
truth of ^od, to bind it to the persons or places of men. First (says
Bristowe) it was the synagogue, and not the Church of Christ. Why Bristow, was
not the Church of Christ, before Christ came into the flesh? at least remember
that S. Paul writes 1. Cor. 10. Al our fathers were baptized and communicated
with the body and blood of Christ, or else find us some other way of
salvation, then in the body of Christ, whose member whosoever is not, is sure
of damnation: or say that the Jews being the members of the body of Christ,
were not the Church of Christ.

The second wall, that this was a fact, and no doctrine, is soon blown down
if we do consider, that the fact had never been attempted, but that it was
tho(...) lawful and Godly, which was an error in doctrine. The third wall is,
That the whole synagogue erred no^ For he did not consult with the priest,
says Bristow, w(...) with his Tribunes, Centurions and nobles, but only
w(...) the Lords temporal, and hereupon he notes my be(...) ly blindness:
but much rather may I note his m(...) strous and more then beastly impudence,
where the (...) according to his own vulgar translation adds to th(...) whom
he names, Et ait ad omnem coe^um Israel. and (...) the whole congregation of
Israel. If it please you (quo^ he) and if the motion be of God, let us send
unto (...) rest of our brethren in all the coasts of Israel, and (...) the
priests and Leuits which dwell in the suburbs of the ci^ies. yt they may be
gathered unto us, etc. These (says Bristowe) were as you would say the hedge
priests. Very well, ergo all the head priests were present. For otherwise
how could it be a perfect congregation of Israel, where there wanted the
principal members of the priests, and Levites, for their tribe and degree? And
when he says, let us send to the rest of our brethren, and those which he
sent to of that degree were none, but (...) it were hedge Priests, as Bristowe
affirms, who will doubt but the chief Priests were present, except he
think they were not brethren unto the rest? But three months after, says
Bristowe, having found out his error, he gathered not only all Israel ^^d
Jerusalem, but also the sons of Aaron, Sadoc and Abiathar, etc. (...) though
they were no part of Israel. But these (says Bristowe) he gathered as two
Bishops, and six other, as it were Archdeacons, and said unto them: You that
are the heads of the Leuiticall families, prepare your selves with your
brethren, and bring the Arc of our Lord God of Israel, to the place which is
dressed for it: least that as before, because you were not present, our Lord
did sm^te us, so now also it happen for our unlawful doing. The words that
Bristowe takes hold off in his vulgar translation, are that these principal
priests and Leu^tes were not present, which as before it is proved (...)e, so
are they not in ye Hebrew text LO ATT^M, No^ (...)the verb is understood,
which is in ye sentence before: (...)t omitted, which now they were commanded
to do, (...)t is, to carry the Arc: So the sense is, because you did (...)
carry it, and not, because you were absent. For beside (...)t has been said
before, of all the chief Priests in (...)nerall, how could it be said,
that Aminadab one of (...) six was absent, when the Arc was first brought
(...)t of his house, who if he had not ben deceived, should (...)ue told the
king of his error before?

The 5. text is Ar. 86. where I say, the true and only (...)rch of Christ can
never be void of Gods spirit, and ye^ she^ (...)y err from the truth, and
be deceived in some thinge^: ^uen (...)there is no true Christian man that is
void of Gods spirit, ye^ (...)y every true Christian err, etc. This my
sophisme (says (...)istowe) consists in speaking confusely of Gods
spi(...)e, as though the gift of it were one, in ye whole church, (...)d in
every particular true Christian man. But I say, (...)t, clean contrary to
that he charge me, I distin(...)ish of the gift of the spirit of God
concerning adop(...)n, that is in every one of the faithful, by which he
(...) privileged from erring unto damnation: and the (...)rite of truth which
is not given in such measure ei(...)r to the whole Church, or to every member,
but that (...)ey may err in some things, though not finally in (...)atters
necessary unto salvation. As for the promise, (...)ohn 14. ver. 16. of the
comforter even the spirit of truth, to remain with us for ever, and to lead
us into al truth: If the later be not restored to the Apostles, how can
Bristowe prove, that it must needs be understood of (...)e whole Church
only, and not of every member s(...)g our savior Christ, John 17. prays not
only for (...)is Apostles, but for all and every one that should be(...)eeue
in him, through their preaching, that they might (...)e sanctified in the
truth, which is the word of God. and eue^ in ye very place cited, John 14.
ver. 15. promises (...)he comforter the spirit of truth, to every one
(...)hat believes in him. And as he sent his spirit to lead (...)he Apostles
into all truth, so his Apostles failed not to deliver that truth as well in
writing as in preaching considering that the one is more subject to
forgetful(...) and corruption then the other. Wherefore the Church (...) called
the pillar of truth. 1. Tim. 3. because it is buil(...) upon the foundation of
the prophets and Apostles. Ep(...) 2. which had the whole truth of the gospel
revealed (...) to them, not because the Church should have the spirit of
truth, to reveal any truth unto her, which w(...) not revealed to the
Apostles, and by them as well i^ their writings, as in their preachings. So
that the sa(...) gift of the spirit being in the whole Church, that is i^
every member, and distinct from the gift of the spirit in such measure as the
Apostles had it in their preaching and writing, the argument by me set down,
is sound and no sophisme at all.

2 That the Church may be divorced.

I never said that ye true and Catholic church of Christ Bristowe.
may be divorced from him, but the visible and particular ^ulk^.
Church of some place, and time, as the prophet Esaias complains that the
church of Jerusalem, by idolatry and superstition, had separated her self
from Christ, and was refused of him, Esa. 1. How is ye faithful city become
an ha^lot? etc. And so may ye prophet say to ye church of Rome. Brist. asks,
whether ye prophet do say so to Rome? yea ^erely. For ye idolatry of Rome is
nothing less, in this time then it was in his time of Jerusalem. But I am too
too ignorant (Bristow says) in the scriptures, if I know not herein the
difference between the synagogue of the Jews and the Church of Christ, to wit
that the synagogue with her Jerusalem might and should be divorced, but the
Church of Christ with her Jerusalem (which is Rome says Bristow) if you have
any sight in the Acts of the Apostles should never, nor never might be
divorced, etc. If mine ignorance be so great, why do you not with one text at
the least help to teach me, yt the visible Church of Christ since his
incarnation, consisting of the Gentiles, may not as well be separated from him,
as the Church of Christ before his incarnation, consisting of the Jews? As for
(...) diuorcement you imagine of all the whole on the (...)th, it never was ne
shall be. Again, that Rome is the (...)usalem of the Church of Christ, where
find you in (...)c Acts of the Apostles, which have so good sight in (...)em?
I guess this is your argument: S. Luke begins (...)s stor^e at Jerusalem,
and ends at Rome: ergo Rome the Jerusalem of the Church of Christ. But when
you (...)n prove the consequens of this argument, I will say as (...)ou say. In
the mean time, I say there is small likely(...)od that Rome should be the
Jerusalem of the Church (...)f Christ, seeing Peter being at Rome, is not once
me^ti(...)ed in all the Acts of the Apostles, nor in any other (...)ooke of
holy scripture. But if you had as great sight (...) the Epistle to the
Galathians, as you imagine your (...)lfe to have in the Acts of the Apostles,
there might (...)ou learn Cap. 4. that the Jerusalem of the Church of christ,
is not Rome on earth, but Jerusalem which is a(...)o^e, which is the mother of
us all. As for the rejecting (...)f the Jews, and calling of the Gentiles even
until the (...)lnesse and the restoring of ye Jews, of which you pro(...)hecy
without the book, yt they shall be al Christened in (...)e end of the world, are
matters impertine^t, to this que(...)tion of the visible Churches diuorcement.

3 That even the Church of Christ should prepare the way Bristowe.
(...)o Antichrist.

This, says Bristow, is a strange imagination of him Fulk^.
and his fellows, It is the total sum of all their new divinity, yet no
warrant at all they have for it out of the scripture.

But I pray you Bristowe, who ever said, that the Church of Christ prepared
the way to Antichrist? I said Ar. 35. Many abuses entered into ye Church of
Christ immediately after ye Apostles time: which ye devil planted as a
preparatiue for antichrist. Do I not here plainly say ye devil planted them
as a preparatiue? Again Ar. 38. I said, The scripture tells us that the
mystery of iniquity preparing for the general defection, and revelation of
Antichrist wrought even in S. Paul's tim(...) 2. Thessa. 2. First he
quarreleth, that, general, is my wor^ and not saint Paul's: I confess, but it
is S. Paul's m(...) ning, which speaks not of a small or particular, but
(...) that great and general defection, which in other pa(...) of scripture is
foreshewed to be from Christ unto Antichrist. Apoc. 13. and 17. and yet not so
general, but th(...) Christ shall have his Church still upon earth. Secondl^
he demands whether the scripture tell me, that it wr^ug^ in the Church of
Christ: and answers himself, no word^ so. (...) wrought in the persecuters
etc. of the Church of Christ. And what scripture tells you so? Is open
persecution a myste^i^ of iniquity? You say better in the seducers, and where
began the seducers, but in the visible Church, although they be no members of
the true and Catholic Church^ That our heresy is the last, or next the last
before the revelation, before you go about to show, as you promise, you must
prove it to be an heresy, otherwise then the religion of Christ, was or the
Infidels, Jews, and Gentile^, called an heresy. That the Church of Christ is
always a con^emp^ible company. Bristowe.




I never said so, but after diverse authorities and re^sons ^^lke.
brought to show, how the world accounts of the Church: I conclude Ar. 81.
That as the Church in the sight of God and his sancts, is most glorious and
honorable, so in the sight of the world it has always been most base and
contemptible. To the scriptures I allege 1. Cor. (...). Gal. 6. To. 1. that
the cross, and Christ crucified thereon, which are all the glory of the
Church, are condemned of the world, Bristowe says, that may be, and yet the
Church not be in their sight a contemptible company, no more then the old
Romans and Turks are to us, though we contemn their religion. I answer, I
speak of the contempt of the Church, and not of the persons of men, which
often times are great Emperors and princes of the world.

To the place Matthew. 10. You shall be hated of all men (...)r my names sake.
Bristowe infers the company that (...) hated is not always contemptible. I
confess, neither ^id I bring that text, but to show the perpetual hatred ^f
the world against the Church. But Cyprian writes, that Decius was more patient
to hear that an Emperor (...)as set up against him, then that an other priest
should ^e ordained at Rome in the place of Fabianus. This says ^ristowe, was
not contempt, but of fear. Although I ^eny not, but tyrants fear the church
of God, more then ^hey have cause in respect of their earthly kingdom: (...)t
it follows not, but they do also contemn it, and (...)ink their power
greater and their glory superior vnt^ it. And in the example of Decius, his
indignation was ^he greater, because the base and contemptible compa^y of the
Church, as he esteemed them, durst choose an ^ther Bishop, after he had slain
Fabianus, purposing to ^estroy the Church utterly.

That I allege, 1. Cor. 1. Not many wise men, etc. He ^^yeth it was so in the
beginning of the Church, but not ^lwayes. And so I do blindly allege the text
against ^y self: Because afterward the text says, the wise them^^lues and
the strong were confounded, that is to say converted. (...) deed, if
confusion and conversion be all one, it is ^^mewhat that you say: but how
will the text bear, ^^at (beside ye improprietie of the speech) that God has
(...)osen the foolish things of the world, that he might ^onuert the wisemen;
and the weak, that he might con^ert the strong? Last of all God has chosen
the inno(...)e and contemptible things of the world, and those things which
are not, that he might destroy those things ^at are. As you say, to confound,
is to convert, so you here best say, to destroy is to save, or else you cannot
^^rooue the multitude of wise, noble, and honorable ^ersons, that God has
chosen to be greater, then those that are rejected. As for the textes of Esaias
60. and 10. ^ited by you and me, speak of the spiritual glory of the
Church, not delivering her from the contemptof the world, where and among
whom she is a stranger. That the church was, and also should become inuisibl^.



Concerning the inuisiblenes of the church, Bristowe Bristowe
says, I allege so as no sober man would: so that ^elike Fulke.
he will drive me to purge my self of drunkenness, as the Apostles were fain^
to do^. Act 2. But what say (...) not sounding of sobr^^tie? One while, that
the universal church of Christ, is not seen at all of men, because it is in
heaven, Gal. 4. And here he asks, if every member be not in heaven, as the
Apostle faith, Our conversation is in heaven: Phil. 3. and Peter the Apostle
w^^ seen of all men. I answer, although men be seen i^ earth, yet their
conversation which is in heaven, is not seen; nor they them selves as they are
in heaven with Christ which is our life, Col. 3. ver. 3. etc. So much mo^^ the
universal church, being a spiritual conjunction o^ all the members unto
Christ their head in heaven, is no^ to be seen with bodily eyes upon earth.

But another while I say, Ar. 80. it suffices, that the church be known to
Christ the head; as he says, My sheep hear my voice, and I know them; and
to them y^ be the members of the same body. Here Bristowe quarelleth with me: if
your text import, that it suffices to be known to the head, why do you
iumble in the members afterward? whether he be sober that vnderstande^^ not a
copulative proposition, let wise men judge. And yet the text proves as well the
sheep to know one another by hearing Christ's voice, as Christ knowi^g them
by his divine election and providence. But B^^stowe so great a crafts man of
good conclusions, d(...)death this consequence: Christ knows his sheep, (...)
the church (forsooth) may be invisible: and so he may, for it is of his own
making, and not of mine. I had no more to prove, but that Christ should not be
head of an unknown body, because he knows his own body and the members
know one another, although neither he nor they be known unto the world.

Yet another while I allege, that though not alway^, (...)et at one certain
time, it should become invisible, at (...)he coming of Antichrist, or rather
when Antichrist (...)ath prevailed, I speak of the church in this world, and
of the inuisiblenes unto the wicked world, what scrip^ures have you for that?
says Bristowe, Ar. 27. and 77. It ^as propheci^d, that the church should fly
into the Wilderness. The defection which saint Paul speaks of, concerning
the churches inuisiblenesse, I have pro^ed, how substantial the argument is
before, Cap. 7. Par. 4. But now Bristowe opposes scriptures to prove, that
the church in ye time of Antichrist should be both ^isible and universal; For
there shall be preaching all the time of persecution by the true witnesses, Apoc.
11. even 1260. days, or 42. months, which comes to three years and an
half. But after they be slain and ^lye unburied 3. days and an half; which
is also the time of Antichrists tyranny, and the greatest ruff of ^is
cruelty, who shall preach then openly against Antichrist? for of such
preaching we speak. But lest you should imagine these days to be common days
of 24. hours long, as you seem to do of the 1260. days etc. you may see,
that the inhabitants of the earth, could not have time to publish their death
and send gifts, etc. in so short a season as three days and an half of
natural days account. But you say the preaching shall be as general as the
persecution. That cannot be of so small 2 number of witnesses. For that you
quote Apoc. 14. pertains to the time of Antichrists consumption toward the
end, and his final destruction, for immediately follows the Angel, showing
the fall of Babylon.

Last of all, you object Apoc. 20. that the persecutors being in number as the
sand of the Sea, shall over the wide world compass the camp of the
faithful, and the city of God: therefore the church shall be at the same time
universal, and super latitudinem terrae. I doubt not but the church shall be
universal in her greatest straits, and dispersed over all the earth, when she
is fled into the wilderness, which signifies her desolate condition, and not
her place wout the world but neither of both is proved by ye text before
alleged. For it follows not, although the enemies with their multitude shall
come up, and as it were cover the face of the earth, and so compass the camp
of the faithful, and the beloved city: that therefore the camp of the
faithful and the beloved city is as large and as many in number, as their
enemies: when experience proves the contrary, at this day, if all that be
baptized were true Christians, and the Church of Christ, yet are they nothing
in multitude, in comparison of the Turks and Infidels: wherefore for any thing
that is here showed, the Church should be invisible to the world, when
Antichrist should be in his greatest tyranny.

Namely of their church and of ours: by conference of places Bristowe.
that are about Antichrist. That neither Antichrist nor the apostasy agrees
to Bon^face the third.

Being demanded, Ar. 35. what year the religion of Papists came in and
prevailed: I answer, that although Fu^ke.
many abuses and corruptions entered into the Church of Christ, immediately after
the Apostles time, which the devil planted, as a preparatiue for his eldest
son Antichrist: yet we may well say, that the religion of Papists came in
and prevailed, that year in which the Pope first obtained his antichristian
exaltation, which was 607. when Boniface the third, for a great sum of money,
obtained of Phocas the murdering Emperor, that the Bishop of Rome should be
called and counted* the head of all the church: which devilish heresy
increased until the year of our Lord 1414. when the council of Constance
decreede that ^acrilege of the communion in one kind.

Likewise, Ar. 16. After I had showed the persecution of the true Church until
Constantine, and soon after by the Arrians, then the overthrow of the Empire
by the barbarous, heretical and idolatrous nations: I conclude, But when
Mahomet in the East, and Antichrist the Pope in the West, seduced the world
with most detestable heresi^, then was fulfilled that which was revealed to S.
John, Apo^. 12. The woman clothed with the Sun, which is the Church, was so
persecuted by the dragon, that she fled into the Wilderness, there t^ remain
a long season.

These sayings of mine, Bristowe rehearses, cut off in the wast, as though I
referred the dragons persecution, only to the Pope: which I say plainly began
before, but was most perfect concerning the apostasy, in the reign of the
popish Antichrist. Again, he says, I do apply this prophecy only, because
of the Popes primacy^ which is false, but because of his false doctrine and
heresy also. For that he says the Popes primacie is a truth of the Gospel,
and practiced before Bonifacius, ^he refers us for proof to Saunders tray
terous book of Monarchy, and I for answer, will send the reader ^o my
overthrow of his Romish Rock. The suppo^ed contradictions I refer always
to the proper place, Cap. 11.

But, O sir, where is the Scripture that you promised ^o bring so clear? etc.
says Bristowe. Sir my promise was, for articles of doctrine in controversy
between us, and not for the fulfilling of every prophecy, which the ^ffect
must better expound oftentimes, then the words.

But furthermore (says Bristow) you make show of a ^ext which is against you,
and use most detestable fal^ification, saying the Church should remain in the
wilderness a long season, but the text is clean contra^y, a very short
season. Say you so, Bristowe? where have you these words in the text, a very
short season? But you have 1260. days, and a time, two times, and ^alfe a
time. And can you tell us the length of these ^imes or of the days either? In
the weeks of Daniell, unto whom you refer the exposition of the two times
(for you have not two times, but times indefinitely in the revelation) the
prophetical days are as long as common years. As for the time, two times, and
half a ^ime, who is able to define the length of them?

But by Scripture you will prove a very short season, and first you iumble
together, two diverse prophecies, of Apoc. 12. and 20. of the loosing of Satan
for a short season. Why man? short and long be Relatiues. The time of Satan's
loosing is short, in comparison, either of the long time that he was bound, or
of the long and eternal time in which he shall remain in perpetual bondage.
For though Antichrist reigned in open revelation, and not in mystery of
iniquity only, by the space of 807. years, more or less, and yet be not
utterly consumed, but yet in his consumption: Nevertheless, for a whole 1000.
years after Christ, the gospel of salvation continued in the church, though
much defiled with superstition, yet sound in the only foundation, Christ,
openly testified by sundry public teachers, until Syluester the second, Anno
Domini 1000. by the devil him self (as even the Popish stories confess) was
put in possession of the Sea of Rome, and then was the church driven into
greater straightes then ever before; the doctrine of salvation being turned
into idolatry and blasphemy.

But it is monstrous, that Bristow expounds the consummation of the 1000.
years, by the gospel, speaking of the consummation of the world, Matt. 24.
Mark 13. and confounds those things that are spoken of the destruction of
the temple and Jerusalem, with the end of the world. And where he cites
Matthew. 42. sta^i^^ post, straight after the persecution of those short days,
considering that from the destruction of Jerusalem unto the end of the world,
so many hundredth years are passed, he might learn at the lest, not to measure
the length and shortness of times, by men's reckonings, but to remember, that
with the Lord a thousand years are as a day, and a day as a thousand years,
2. Pet. 3.

His other patching of Centones, like Valentinians, in steed of conserence of
scripture, because they consist of his only assertion, without reason or
authority, I need not to confute. As that the daily sacrifice, which Daniel
prophecieth, should be taken away by the death of Christ, Daniel the 9. and.
12. he expounds it of the sacrifice of the Mass; By the which ^aint Paul
prophesied, that we should announce our ^ordes death: as though Saint Paul
spoke that of a sa^rifice, and not express of eating that bread and drin^ing
that cup of the Lord.

Like wise, speaking of the abomination of desolati^n, he says: Daniel
agrees with the gospel and the ^pocalips, where he says: Daniel 12. From
the time ^hen the daily sacrifice shall be taken away, and the ab^omination set
up for desolation, days 1290. Blessed is (...)e that expects and comes to
days 1335. What agreement is between 1260. days and these two num^ers? beside
that Daniel 9. the Angel shows, that ^he abhominatian of desolation in the
temple, and the ^esolation shall continue even to the consummation and end.

Last of all, he will prove, that the season is short, ^ut of the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2. where he charge the Thessalonians, that they be not troubled as
though the ^ay of the Lord were then instant, for Antichrist must first be
revealed. And then in deed (says Bristowe) ^he day of our Lord is instant.
And how know you that? For our Lord Jesus Christ (says he) will kill ^im
with the breath of his mouth. What immediately, Bristowe? so soon as he is
showed openly, will you ^llowe him no time, to exercise the power of Satan in
all lying signs and wonders? shall he be killed before he have practiced all
deceit of unrighteousness in them that perish, to whom God shall ^ende the
efficacy of error, that they may believe lying, that all they which have not
believed the truth, but had pleasure in vnrighteo^snesse may be condemned?
This will ask a longer time, then three years and an half of the Suns
revolution, or 42. months of the Moons circuit. It is not one man's person
or age that can suffice to deceive all them that have not believed the truth.

His last conceit, in distinguishing the apostasy from the revealing of
Antichrist, by the token given of ye abolishing of the Roman Empire, which
should come to pass before the revealing, but not before the apostasy,
because it is his own drousie imagination, without ground, I will not
vouchsafe to confute, especially, seeing the Apostle ver. 3. joins the
Apostasy and the revelation immediately together.

Whether Antichrist or the Apostasy agree to the Protestants. Bristowe.


In this title is nothing but surmises, whereof he him Fulke.
self is uncertain: but for one place in the Apocalipse he would say, under
the churches leave, that our heresy is the apostasy, the place is in the
first V^ of the Locustes, and their king Abaddon Apoc. 9. where somethings
agree, and other things agree not, etc. But let him look on the commentary of
Bullinger, Alphonsus, Chytraeus, John Bale, and other, and he shall find a
nearer agreement of that kingdom to the Pope and his lecherous Locusts, the
Monks and Friars, then he can imagine unto us. I pass over the abomination of
desolation, which one while he makes Luthers and Caluins inventions; another
while, the kings arms set in place of the most sweet and glorious roode;
yea, the image of a vile grassehopper in a church that is well known, which is
an vmbraticall desolation, as the images of Jupiter and the Emperors were in
the temple etc. matters to be laughed at, although perhaps he lie, because he
dare not name the church, or else is afraid it should be reformed, if any
vain painter has set up such images. And yet what more common in Poperye,
then not only to paint, but also to carue the images of kings, and noble men's
arms, even upon the roodeloft of the Churches, where they were patrones? At
last he challenges me to join with him upon his last demand, which is
apostasy, unto which I have answered long since. Finally, he will discharge
the Pope from being antichrist, by the commentary which the scripture it self
makes. The seven heads are seven hills, upon which the woman sits: And
they are seven kings: whereof five are fallen, which are the persecu^ing kings,
before the time when this was spoken. What then? One is presently, who
therefore is meant of the Roman Emperors, and all other kings persecuting with
them. The other is not yet come, and when he comes, he must remain a short
season, who evidently is Antichrist in proper person.

This exposition hitherto may agree with the Pope: Nay (says Bristowe) for he
must remain not a long season, as the five, and as the one, but a short
season, only three years and an half. But where have you the length of his
continuance compared with the five and one? All the time of the Churches
persecution is but short, in comparison of the infinite comfort, that she shall
have everlastingly, though it be long in the judgment of flesh and blood,
measuring the time by the brevity of man's life, and the seasons of this
world, as Bristowe does the three years and an half. But this is worthy to
be noted, that he expounds the sixth king for the whole state of Roman
Emperors, and other persecuting kings, as he does the five kings that were
past, and yet against all reason and analogy, would have the seventh (which is
antichrist) to be one singular man, so to avoid, that the whole rabble of
Popes cannot be antichrist. Now follows the exposition of the ten horns,
which are ten kings, which have not yet taken kingdom, but they shall take
power as kings even in one hour with the beast, that is, together with
Antichrist (says he) to serve him as his feed knights. I marvel whether he
will not expound the hour in this place for the 24. part of a natural day.
For otherwise we see by histories, that the advancement of the Pope, was the
decay of the Empire in the West, and with him arose a multitude of kings in
every province, which before were subject to one Emperor.

And so you see evidently (says Bristowe) by these seven hills, thus
expounded, that the woman which sits upon them, is not so little a one, as
you do make her, but that she is Mundus impiorum: the whole world of wicked
men. But where do we see this evident exposition of the seven hills? we have
seen the exposition of the seven heads, to be seven kings, and also seven
hills: but we see no exposition of the hills, who must needs be taken in their
proper sense, because they are the exposition of another figurative speech,
namely seven heads. But the woman (you say,) is no little one, which sits
on the seven hills, but the world of wicked men. Let the holy ghost I pray
you expound the woman, as well as the heads of her beast. And the woman which
thou saw is that great city which has the kingdom over the kings of the
earth. This is a clear exposition of the whore of Babylon, the woman; and as
clear a description of the city of Rome, which in that time, had the kingdom
over the kings of the earth, and is the city builded upon seven hills,
before expounded to be one of the significations of the seven heads, a
persecuter of the saints under the Emperors, and a poisone^ and persecutor of
the Church under the Popes. And therefore Mundus impiorum is a false
exposition, which I will prove by this reason. The whore of Babylon is a great
city, having dominion over ye kings of the earth: but the whole world of
wicked men is not a great city, having dominion over the kings of the earth:
therefore the whore of Babylon is not the whole world of wicked men. Again,
The whore of Babylon is a city situated upon seven hills: The whole world of
wicked men is not a city situate upon seven hills: therefore the whore of
Babylon is not the whole world of wicked men.

The third part.
Concerning the question of purgatory, and first ab authoritate Bristowe.
scripturae negative.

I said. Purg. 44^. It is no good logike, to conclude Fulke.
negatiuely of any one place or book of scripture: yet ^ontrarie to mine own
rule, (Bristow says) I conclude ^egatiuely out of the place 1. These. 4. S.
Paul finds ^one other comfort, to moderate the mourning of the faithful, but
only the quiet rest of them that are asleep in the Lord, and ye hope of their
glorious resurrec^ion: ergo there is no comfort in praying for their souls.
(...) answer, mine argument is apt and good to confute Allen, which cites
that place to prove, that as immoderate mourning, is against the hope of the
resurrection, so being joined with prayers and alms, it has the lively hope
of life in those that sleep in peace. This advantage Bristowe has, by rending
and tearing mine arguments from the body of my book, that it cannot be
perceived, upon what ground I use them. Nevertheless having often before in
that answer to Allen, protested that he could bring nothing out of the
scriptures for allowing prayer for the dead, this argument is to be referred
to the same conclusion, after this manner. If in most convenient place, the
holy ghost ^oyne not prayer and alms to moderate mourning for the departed,
then does he join them in no place: but in most convenient place he ioineth
not: ergo in no place. The mayor is proved by the wisdom of Gods spirit,
which always choseth that which is most convenient: the minor is manifest and
granted: ergo the conclusion is true. But Bristowe asks me if I preaching to
moderate the mourning of the faithful, use none other comfort then these two?
I answer him concerning the state of the departed, I use none other proper
places of comfort but these two, the hope of their glorious resurrection, and
their quiet rest in the mean time. But S. Paul, says Bristowe, speaks
nothing of their quiet rest after death, although he name them that are asleep
in the Lord. If they sleep in the Lord, they are not only at rest, but in
happiness. Can you interpret to sleep in the Lord, to be in hellish
torments, such as you feign your purgatory pains to be? Are they not blessed
which die in ye Lord? The Prophet Esaias says, cap. 57. of ye righteous after
their death, yt there shall be peace, they shall rest in their beds: Ergo, they
that sleep in the Lord, enjoy a quiet rest.

The 2. argument is out of 1. Cor. 11. Saint Paul reherseth what he received
and delivered concerning the sacrament, but oblation for the dead, he
rehearses no^ ergo he neither received nor delivered it. So you make (says
Bristowe) as though the Apostle there prescribes the whole order of
ministration contrary to that he says afterward, of setting other things in
order. I answer, that objection is avoided in the same place immediately after,
Pur. 362. and therefore I will not here repete the answer. And that it is not
of one place negatiuely, you your self here confess, that I deny it to be
written by any of the Evangelists which entreat of the sacrament. But you are
not ashamed to affirm, that the Apostle intended no more in that place, but to
correct the sin of unworthy receiving, upon coulot of a place of Augustine,
Ep. ad Ian. 118. Cap. 3. Inde enim. For that respect, the Apostle also says,
that they receive it unworthily, who do not by a reverence singularly dew,
discern it from other meats, as sufficiently appears through that same
whole place in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, if it be diligently
considered. Does Augustine say, or can any man prove out of his saying, that he
meant, that S. Paul intended no more, but to correct the sin of the unworthy
receiving? But admit it were so, how could he better correct that sin, then
by showing the whole institution, substantial matter and form, end and use
of that sacrament, and so he does, although ceremonies and external
observations about it, he does not express.

The third argument is out of Leu. 21. and Numer. 19. which prescribe what law
was appointed for lamenting the dead and diverse other ordinances concerning
the dead, in which was no sacrifice, or prayer for the dead was offered, but
that they were so separated from the living, that the priests might have
nothing to do with them but in special cases. Bristowe says, I might as well
conclude that the dead should not be buried. In ^eede so to conclude, were to
conclude of one place ^egatiuely, but I presuppose my former assertion, that ^n
no place of Scripture there is mentioned prayer or offering for the dead, no
not in those which contain ^peciall order for the dead. I add further, that
the ^riest to who^ specially offering of sacrifice pertains, ^s so separated
from the dead, that he is forbidden to ^ourne for them, much more to offer
sacrifice for the^, ^r to pray for them, which can not be without lamen^ation
for their miserable estate etc.

From these particular places, I come to the whole ^awe, and conclude
negatiuely thus: All lawful sacri^ices were prescribed by the law: Sacrifice
for the dead ^as not prescribed by the law: therefore it was no law^ull
sacrifice. The answer he says is by returning it ^ppon my self, but in deed
he makes it by denying ^he minor: affirming that sacrifice for the dead was
pre^cribed under the name of sacrifice for sin. I might ^ere reply, out of
your own doctrine, that not the ^uiltinesse, but the pain of sin is in many
to be pur^ed, which have obtained remission of all their sins, ^ither by
Popes pardon, or priests absolution, or by ^ods forgiveness unto the
penitent. But I will fol^owe the argument I showed that the form of sacrifice
^as such, as could not be offered but of the living or ^or the living, because
they are commanded in all sa^rifice for sin generally to lay their hand
upon the head of the beast to be sacrificed. Hereunto Bristowe replyeth, that
this gross absurdity would follow, that ^acrifice for sin could not be
offered, but of the^ that were present: therefore not for the children, the
sick, ^or captives, for kings and cities of the world vncircum^ised, and
diverse other sorts. I reioygne, that no sacri^ices for sin, but sacrifices
of thanksgiving or prospe^ities, could be offered for the absent: and
especially for the uncircumcised which could not have remission of sins,
before they were ingraffed into the people of God, but temporal benefits at
the prayers of Gods people they might obtain. As for children, sick,
captives, etc. they might have remission of sins without sacrifice, which was
but the Sacrament thereof, as well in their childhoode, sickness, captivity,
when they could not offer according to the law, as in time of desolation and
destruction of the Temple, when no sacrifice for sin could be offered by any
or for any, but only in the place where the tabernacle or temple was.
Wherefore the sacrifice of Judas Machabaeus wheresoever he learned it, has no
warrant i^ the law.

The fourth argument, of the whole scripture negatiuely to conclude, I said it
is good logike, after this manner. All true doctrine is taught in the
scripture: Purgatory is not taught in the scripture: therefore purgatory is
no true doctrine. Bristowe denies both the mayor and minor. The mayor I have
proved in this chapter, part 1. after the examination of the 8. text of
scripture. The minor he would prove to be false by these reasons. First
purgatory is taught in the scripture in the Machabees, Which he says is in
the canon of the true Church, which I also confess, to be the true Church in
the third counce(...) of Carthage, and therefore it is canonical, if any
other scripture be Canonical. Supposing that which is false, that the Macabees
were canonical, yet is not Purgatory proved by them: prayer for the dead
does not necessarily draw purgatory after it. The Grecians of long time
have used prayer for the dead, yet they do not receive the doctrine of
purgatory. But to prove the Machabees to be Canonical, he cites the third
council of Carthage, wherein the two books of Machabees are accounted amongst
the rest. But there are also five books of Solomon, whereas we know there
are only three, namely the Proverbs, the Canticles and the Preacher.
Therefore that canon proves a manifest error of the council to allow five
books of Solomon in steed of three. Let Bristowe now bring out the fourth and
fifth book of Solomon, and say they be Canonical, if any other scripture be
Cano nicall.

The Council of Laodicea more ancient, names not the Machabees. Hierome a
Priest of Rome expressly denies them to be Canonical, Praefatione ^n
Prouerbia. Ruffinus also, in his exposition of the Creed, affirms the Church
not to receive them as Canonical: beside so many arguments as the books them
selves, do minister which agree, that they were written by the spirit of man,
and not by the spirit of God.

To proceed, Bristow says that purgatory is taught so plainly 1. John 5.
that I could not avoid the place but by falling into this horrible absurdity,
that we may not pray for all men living. I said in deed we ought not to
pray for them that sin unto death, of which John says: I say not that you
should pray for it, or that any man should pray for it, as your vulgar
translation has it: But how it is proved out of that place, he says never a
word.

Last of all purgatory is taught (says Bristowe) Specially against you sir.
John 11. For you say after your manner passing confidently, that Martha and
Marie (as the scripture is manifest) did not hope for any restitution of their
brother Lazarus to his body, before the general resurrection. If that be so
manifest, what else was it then but the rest of his soul that Martha would
have Christ to pray for, when she said thus, unto him: But also now I know
that what soever things, thou shalt ask of God, God will grant thee? To
which purpose also some ancient writers expound the place. Thus far
Bristowe. But I pray you sir, why do you not tell us the names at least of
those ancient writers that so expound the place; Peradventure they were not
worth the naming. But are you such a cunning disputer ex concessis, to wrest
that I say of Martha and Marie before the coming of Christ, to all times
after? as though I said, that they never hoped for their brothers restitution,
because they hoped not before Christ came to Bethanie, as Allen impudently
coniectureth, that Lazatus was restored to his body at their prayers made at
his tomb: where there is no mention of any prayers, but of lamentation only. I
can not tell whether I should here require in you more wit or honesty, or else
less impudence, and malice. But this was your purpose of cauilling and
quarilling, when you durst not attempt the confutation of my bookein such
plain order as I answered Allen, but in this confuse manner, to bring all my
arguments first out of joint, and then to play with them at your pleasure.

2 Ab authoritate scripturae, affirmative First about certain Bristowe.
foundations of purgatory, and prayer for the dead.

I said, the word of God overthrows the popish distinction of sins
mortal and Venial, showing that Fulke.
all sins of their own nature deserve eternal death: and yet all by the
mercy of God are pardonable or venial, except the sin against the holy
ghost. Bristowe says, that I here grant the doctrine, and yet deny the
distinction: which is utterly false: for, that all sins deserve eternal
death, and yet be pardonable, it overthrows the doctrine and distinction
both. For the Papists hold, yt there are some sins so small, as they
deserve not in their own nature eternal damnation, as Bristow immediately
hereafter confesses, where he denies that the curse of God pronounced Deuteronomy.
27. and Gal. 3. against all them that abide not in all things written in the
law, extends not unto eternal death, saying that hanging on tree, or
crucifying is not eternal death, and yet is accursed of God Deuteronomy. 21.

Again, every one, in the saying of the Apostle, is not meant of Christians,
but of them, which trust in the law it self etc. Do you not hear plainly
the old serpents voice, Nequaquam moriemini: Tush you shall not die, the
curse of God does not bring eternal death, you need not be so greatly
affraide of it, etc? But where learned you Bristowe, that the curse of God,
which is upon him that hangs on tree, is not a visible token, that he
deserves eternal death? Is ^ot the text plain against you, Deuteronomy. 21. When a
man ^ath sinned worthy of death, and is judged to death, and ^anged on the
tree, his carcass shall not remain upon (...)e tree, but shall be buried the
same day, for he is accur(...)d of God that is hanged on the tree: therefore
thou (...)alt not defile the land which the Lord thy God has ^iuen thee to
possess. He is not therefore accursed, because he is hanged on the tree, if he
were innocent; but because he has sinned worthy of death, and so is hanged:
(...) which respect our savior Christ, being hanged on (...)e tree, though
most innocent in his own person, (...)et bearing the guiltiness of all our
sins, became ^ccursed for us, not to discharge us of such a curse (...) did
not bring eternal death (but by your imagi(...)tion might fall upon an
innocent person) but (...) redeem us from the curse of the law, which we
^aue incurred more then ten thousand times through (...)r manifold sins
and transgressions. And that (...)e curse pronounced Deuteronom. 27. brings
with it (...)e pain of eternal death, I wish every man (...)at will not be
deceived, with the flattering voice (...)f the Serpent, to give ear to the
word of GOD, ^here he shall see, that this is a conclusion of the (...)rses,
solemnly to be pronounced by the Levites, (...) which Amen was to be
answered of all the people: against idolaters, cursers of parents, murderers,
ince(...)uous persons, remouers of their neighbors marks, oppressors of the
fatherless and strangers, etc. and generally against all transgressors of
the Law, unto whom the curse of eternal damnation is threatened ^n the same
wordes', that it is to the rest. Mark also, where the Apostle to the Galath 3.
by this curse, pro^eth all them that be under the law, to be subiect^ unto
this curse, how the serpent denying this curse to be the assurance of
eternal death, makes the case of them to be nothing so dangerous, but
continuing under the Law, they may avoid eternal death. And where he says
every one in the Epistle, is not meant of Christians, I would know of him
whether the Galathians, to whom saint Paul writes, were not Christians, but
yet seduced by false Apostles, to take upon them the observation of the law,
which as it was impossible, so it would bring them from ye blessing of Christ,
unto the curse of God. That true Christians are discharged of this curse, it is
by the only merit of Christ's satisfaction, and not that the sins
themselves deserve not everlasting death, though they b^^ never so small of
their own nature, by the sentence of Gods curse, which is a just reward for
transgression. Heb. 2.

The two other places that I cite for this purpose: The soul that sins
shall dye: Ezech. 18. and, the reward of sin is death: Romans 6. he will
expound by the saying of saint James Chapt. 1. sin when it is consummate,
gendreth death: as though this place of S. James denied sin, not brought into
act, to deserve death, because showing that the cause of men's destruction i^
in themselves, from the first concupisence to the last and grosest Act, he
concludes that those gross acts bring a man into eternal death. Our savior
Christ says, this is condemnation, that light is come into the world, and
men have loved darkness rather then light. Were it not good Logike and Divinity
also, of this place to conclude, that condemnation pertains not to men, but
where the light offered is refused; or that if Christ had not come, none had been condemned? John. 3. and likewise, yea much rather, where Christ says: If I
had not come and spoken unto them, they should not have had sin? John. 15.
Were the obstinate Jews clear of sin by Bristowes judgment, before Christ
came? But let us examine his reason. It is sin (says he) as soon as it is
gendred, but it gendreth not death so so one as it is gendred: Therefore some
sin there is, that gendreth notd eath. The minor is false, for Saint James,
saying that sin consummat gendreth death, does not say that sin gendreth
not death, so soon as it is gendred. But behold yet his impudent wresting of
the scripture, he adds also an exception, unto sin consummat, that not
every sin consummat gendreth death, except the matter be of weight
accordingly. For else that the lightness of the matter, as an idle word
brings not death, he sufficiently signifies in saying, that in a weighty
matter, the lightness or imperfection of consent does it not. These are his
words, by which you may see, that without all shame, he imputes such sayings
to Saint James, as he can find never a word in hi^, sound like such (...)
saying. But this is the manner of heretics, which learn not all truth out of
the Scriptures to bring their opinion to the scripture, and to enforce the
words thereof, against all equity, to signify and say, whatsoever it
pleases them. Now that saint James holds that every sin deserves death,
I will prove out of his own saying, by this argument: Whosoever is guilty of
all the law and commandments, deserves eternal death: Whosoever offends
in one, is guilty of all: therefore whosoever offends in one, deserves
eternal death. The mayor I trust you will grant: The minor is Saint James
cap. 2. Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and offend but in one point,
he is guilty of all: Then seeing every sin is a breach of Gods Law, as
Saint John affirms, John 3. not only great sins, but also small sins,
wherein soever men offend against the law of GOD deserve eternal death,
which cannot be avoided but by remission for Christ's sake: for be the sin
never so small, it is committed against GOD the author of the Law, who
thereby has forbidden all sins, which reason the Apostle uses, to prove
that he which offends in one, is guilty of all.

And therefore the textes by me alleged do sufficiently prove, that all
sins of their own nature are mortal. Whether after sin remitted, pain
Bristowe.
may remain.



That God remitteth the punishment, with the fault, in respect whereof the
punishment is due, I prove by Fulke.
Ezekiel. 18. and 33. where the Lord promises to put away the remembrance of a
sinners offenses, that truly turns unto him, bringing forth the fruits of
repentance. Bristow says, this takes not place before the day of judgment,
whereby it would ensue, that to man could have comfort of his sins forgiven
in this life. But he opposes the sayings of the Prophet, Psalm, 24. and 78.
Lord remember not the sins of my youth: and, Lord remember not our old
sins: which are the prayers of the penitent, to obtain forgiveness of their
sins: which once obtained, they say, The Lord has removed our sins from
us, as far as the East is from the West. Psalm 102. That may be, says
Bristowe, in respect that they be removed from eternal damnation, although
they have yet to abide never so much temporal punishment. I will prove that to
be false. To be removed as far as the East is from the West, is as far as
may be: but not to be removed from temporal punishment, is not to be
removed as far as may be: therefore it is not to be removed as far as the
East is from the West. But the whole Psalm, says Bristowe, is spoken not of
the time of our receiving into Gods favor by absolution: but of our final
restitution, which shall be at the later day. What can be said more
absurdly? Thanks are there given to GOD, not only for spiritual benefits,
but also for temporal.

The fatherly pytie of GOD toward us as his children which keep his covenant
and are mindful of his commandments to do them, is there set forth, which
every man that is not blind with heretical malice, will acknowledge to be
extended toward us in this life, and therefore also the forgiveness of our
sins, and removing of them as far as Heaven from earth, and East from West.
As for the argument of singing that Psalm in the popish Church, upon the
feast of Christ's ascension, to prove, that it pertayneth altogether to the
later day, is as good, as it is true, that the words there spoken, are only
of our final ^estitution at the later day.

To the example of the publican, he answers that there is no more said,
but that he went home ^ustified more then the Pharisee. yes, there is said,
that ^ee was justified by forgiveness of sins, which he ^onfessed, not
trusting in him self that he was ^ighteous, although he ascribed all his
virtues to the grace of GOD as the Pharisee did: O GOD I thank thee etc. Iumpe
with the Papists, Luke 18. But Bristowe asks me, how I prove that he which
is iu^tified may not be in some debt? seeing all the iu^tified children of
GOD, are taught to pray, forgive ^s our debtes. I prove it thus. He that is by
GOD ^ustified, is accounted for just: But he that is just, is ^n no debte for
sin: therefore he that is justified, is in ^o debte for sin. That the
faithful are taught to ^raye daily, forgive us our debtes, it is because they
^inne daily, and by sin enter into debte, and therefor have need of daily
remission to continue iusti^ied.

The Prodigal child Luke 15. he says, is the Gentile received by baptism,
who if after baptism he became prodigal, he says, I have not proved, that
being received by penance, we must enjoin him no more punishment, then at
his other receiving. Beside that he restrayning this parable only to Gentiles,
coming first to Baptism, depriueth the faithful of inestimable comfort, he
neither has any word in the scripture so to restrain it, and the whole
contexte is against him. For Saint Luke shows the occasion of the three
parables of the lost sheep, of the lost Groate, and of the prodigal Child,
to have been, because the Scribes and Pharisees murmured, that he received the
Publicanes, and sinners, which all were Jews and circumcised, yet fallen from
the covenant of God by infinite and notorious sins: therefore according to
right analogy, the lost Child, even as the lost sheep, and lost Groate, is
every penitent sinner; the elder brother, as the 99. sheep, and 9. groates
are the Scribes and Pharisees, which through hypocrisy in their own judgment,
are righteous and need no repentance.

To the 2. debtors Luke 7. he answers, that although Christ forgave them
both, yet they both had to be forgiven after, according to the proportion of
their love. This imports manifest contradiction, he forgave all, yet
something was not forgiven. Yea says Bristowe, Marie had much sins forgiven
her, because she loved much, and therefore long after her hearts conversion,
and therefore after her first forgiveness, Christ says: Thy sins are
forgiven thee.

This is a strange kind of reasoning. Christ showing the cause of Mary's
great love, to have been for that great sins were forgiven her, expresses in
voice, that which she before conceived by faith, that her sins were forgiven
her, Ergo after her first forgiveness, she had need of a second, which she
procured by love. And yet it is more fond, that in saying to Simon and of
Simon the Pharisee: To whom less is forgiven, he loves less, he gives him
to understand, that he owed more then he was aware, and therefore he should
increase as Marie did in penitential love. First how proves he that Simon
was this other detter, to whom less was forgiven? Secondly, admit that he was,
how proves he, that he should show as great penitential love as Marie,
seeing his debt was not so great as Mary's, and therefore needed not so great a
proportion of his love, according to his own heresy of merit? Thirdly, when
Christ says, To whom less is forgiven he loves less, he speaks not so
much of the quantity of sins, but the acknowledging of them greater or
lesser. For he that confesses great sins to be pardoned, acknowledges that
he is bound to great love, as Marie did: the Pharisee, who, though his sins
were as great as Mary's, and in GODS sight, by means of hypocrisy more
abominable, yet was so blinded in opinion of his own righteousness, that he
saw them not, and therefore this love was as cold, as he imagined his sins
forgiven to be few and small.

Thus the history of the sinful woman's great love, proves nothing that
punishment remains due to be paid after the debt is forgiven. Whether this
woman were Marie Magdalen, as Bristowe calls her, I will not here dispute.
Saint Luke gives her no name. Whether Purgatory follow upon this last
foundation. Bristowe.




The foundation is overthrown, for all sins are Fulke.
proved to deserve eternal death, and when God pardons them, he pardons
them clearly, as well the punishment as the guiltiness, for what should he
punish in them that are guilty of no sin by his pardon. Therefore where I
cited Psalm. 103. That God has not dealt with us according to our sins, etc.
Bristow is driven to his former shift, that these words are spoken of the
Prophet only, for the time of the final reward which I have confuted before.

Concerning those that repent at the hour of death, I said they have reward
of eternal life, as well as they that repent sooner, by authority of the
parable Matthew 20. of them that came the last hour, to work in the vineyarde.

Bristow says, I am deceived, because I cannot see any justice in mercy. Yes
verily, I see the justice of God fully answered in Christ, not in the person
that needs mercy, who is pardoned and justified gratis freely, Romans 3. and
11. But the spirit of God says, Apoc. 2. that he will give to every one of
you according to his works: wherevpo^ Bristowe infers, ye God is not alike
good to al, that he has once showed mercy unto, for Christ, to all the
baptized. I answer that text is a threatening to Iesabel, and them that
commit fornication with her, if they do not repent from their works. For it
follows immediately. But to you I say and the rest in Thyatei^^, yt have not
this doctrine, and which have not known ye deapth of Satan, as they say, I will
not lay upon you any other burden, etc. although it be true, that God
rewards every man according to his works, which is in quality good or
evil, not in quantity as much or as little as they deserve. What shall I say
that Bristowe brings in a variety of pence, contrary to the scope of the
parable, and affirms the pence to be wages for the working and that also by
bargain? So that eternal life is not the gift of God, neither are men saved
by grace and not of works, in his judgment, contrary to the Apostles plain
doctrine. Ephesians. 2.

In the conclusion he says, If you can prove that God will show as full
mercy also where he finds not that fullness of Christ's grace, then call us
hardly enemies, for not suffering God to show mercy to whom he will. But
where wants that fullness of Christ's grace, in any of Gods elect? Is it
where greatest sins be? The Apostle answers, where sin has abounded,
grace has more then abounded. Romans 5. Wherefore the fullness of the grace of
Christ being extended to the greatest sins, what should we doubt that the
lesser should not be swallowed up of it? Whether in Christ the works of one
may help another. Bristowe.




I said Purg. 198. I have learned in the scripture, that Fulke.
there is no name given under heaven, by which they may be helped, which are
not helped by Christ's death, Act. 4. Bristowe asks whether I have learned,
that they which are helped by the death of Christ, can not through his grace
help and be helped one of an other.

To whom I answer as I said before, to Allen: I learn in scripture, that
the blood of Christ purges us from all sin, John. 1. But if there be any
which are not purged of all their sins, by the blood of Christ, (as the
Papists affirm them to be which have need of other purgation) I have not
learned that they can have any help elsewhere. Or if you say, the blood of
Christ h^th purged them from all sin, why do you invent another purgatory to
purge them, which is not ye blood of Christ? for fiery torments according to
Gods justice are not the blood of Christ shed for our redemption, by which men
are justified freely, Romans 3. through which we have remission of our sins
through the riches of his grace. Ephesians. 1.

Another reason of mine is grounded upon Allens words, which says: that they
which are in purgatory, ca^ not by any motion of mind, attain more mercy,
then their life past deserved. Whereof I infer, that their faith being a
notable motion of the mind, cannot profit them, except the merits of other
men should profit them without faith, the Scripture saying, that without
faith, it is not possible to please God. Bristowe icsting at these iron
conclusions, lets the argument stand, and denies the latter conclusion,
affirming that by their faith, they are in case to be profited by other men's
works: which if it be true, then is Allens conclusion false, that they can not
profit them selves, by any motion of mind, whereon it will follow that they
cannot profit them selves by believing, that other men's works may help them,
being destitute of their own. They cannot atteine mercy by any motion of
mind, Ergo not by faith. Fulkes common argument of the Omnisufficiencie of
Christ's Bristowe.
passion.



As though I defended the only omnipotency of Fulke.
Christ's passion able to purge al sins, and not the omnisufficiencie having
satisfied for our sins, first he replyeth, that an Origenist might likewise
say, The omnisufficiencie of Christ's passion cannot stand with hell.

No sir, for against him, is not only the will of Christ, but his Act also
past, having sufficiently only for his elect: which satisfaction he
communicates unto them, not in respect of their works, but according to his
grace, which can abide no works to join with it in merit, but only faith
in receiving confirmed by the sacraments in the persons of all them, that
hear his word, and in them that cannot hear, only his grace working either in
the sacrament or without it: so that no degrees, proportions, means or
instruments, whereof Bristow babbleth, can make any merit to detract from
Christ's death, ye most plentiful and free grace of satisfaction, for all our
sins committed either before baptism, or after.

For this purpose, I cited 1. John. 2. Pur. 42. to prove that if any man sin
after baptism, Jesus Christ is our Advocate with the father, and the
propitiation for our sins. Bristow answers, That is true, But that in
playing the Advocate for our sins after baptism, he request^th the like and
equal grace, as he did in baptism for sins before baptism, where have you
that? If you make Christ's advocation a playing matter, I will take no charge
of you. But to let pass your vnreuerent phrase, what do you ascribe unto him
in his office of advocate, but only to be a requester, as every common Saint
is counted with you? But you must understand, that the office of an Advocate
or patron is, to plead for his clientes, and not to require only, and what
has he to plead for us against ye debte of our sins, either before or after
baptism but his own satisfaction in his death and suffering? And therefore
even that which you ask, where I have i^ I have even in the very same words,
yt he requesteth as an advocate, for our sins after baptism the like and
equal grace, as he did in Baptism for sins before baptism. For there I find
him a propitiation for our sins committed after baptism, which word I marvel
your blind heresy could not see, whereof I reason thus. The same propitiation,
as course of grace working after baptism, that was in or before baptism, must
have equal effects of grace: But Christ is ye same propitiation after
Baptism that he was in it, or before: Ergo he must have the same effects of
grace, working the satisfaction of our sins even at the full. Where I allege
Purg. 9^. that the blood of Christ purges us from all our sins: 1. Ioh. 1.
Bristowe answers, It is taken out of the same place, and ha^h the same
answer, to wit, that his blood does work more graciously in the sacrament of
baptism, then in the sacrament of penance. Of pe^ance being a sacrament, I will
not here dispute, but fol^owe the principal matter in controversy, whether
all ^innes of the repentant, after baptism, be as clearly purged, as they were
in baptism by the blood of Christ. Although the propitiation in the former
argument, does ^ufficiently prove it, yet even this very place is manifest^y to
be understood of the blood of Christ purging all our sins committed after
baptism, as well as before. The blood of Christ, says S. John purges us,
that is, me and you (baptized Christians, I doubt not) of al sin, which if we
say we have not, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. The word
is (...) does make pure and clean, and so is the vulgar latin emundat. Again
he says in the same place: if we confess our sins, ^e is faithful and just
that he may forgive us our sins, and make us pure from all iniquity. If the
blood of Christ, in which we have forgiveness, does purge us from all our
sins, and make us pure from all iniqui^ie, whenever we acknowledge them
with hearty repentance; what place is left for any other purging or clensing of
that, which the blood of Christ and the mercy of God has made pure and clean?

That I cite out of S. John, being washed by Christ, we are thoroughly clean.
John 13. and out of Esaias: Although our sins were as red as scarlet, they are
made as white as snow: He answers these places are evident of baptism. And
therefore he admits that I said of them so cleansed, that they are made
capable immediately of the heavenly inheritance. But why, I pray you, are they
evident of baptism? because there is mention of washing in both places? Is
there no washing but in baptism? At least wise, will you say, that the
Prophet Esaias preaching to the people of his age, when he called them to
washing, called them to baptism, so many hundredth years before baptism was
instituted? Is it not therefore evident, that he calls them to repentance?
Or else, having first so grievously accused them of their present sins, does
he show no comfort, but in the sacrament of baptism, which no man living
could then possibly obtain in such manner as you mean, no not the Prophet him
self. I might well say to you, as you say to me in another place, In good
sooth Dauus, these things are not aptly divided according to their times. And
that Christ John. 13. speaks not of the ceremony of baptism, it i^ manifest
by diverse reasons, but of his grace by which he washes us from all our
sins. And therefore be says to Peter, except he were washed of him, he
could have no part with him. But neither Peter, nor any other was or is
baptized of him with water: John 4. therefore he speaks not of the sacrament
of baptism. And where you add, that he which is so washed, must nevertheless
wash his feet, that is, say you, his venial sins, which he commits
afterward, although he continue withal in the cleanness of baptism, before
he be all clean, and ask me, what if he dye before he wash his feet?
Admitting that the feet should signify none but venial sins. I ask you
again, who shall wash his feet, but he which washed Peter's feet? for the true
text is (...), he has no need but that his feet be washed. Peter could not
wash his own feet in this figurative signification, but except Christ did
wash him he could have no part with him. But if we should take the feet only
for venial sins, and the general washing for baptism, this inconvenience
would follow of Christ's words: that he which is baptized and purged from
venial sins, need no purgation to cleanse him from mortal sins, but is
perfectly clear. The words of our savior are general, and cannot admit
your exception, of continuing in the cleanness of baptism: therefore the
feet signify all sins to be pardoned, after the first grace purging us,
which is in deed represented and ratified in baptism, but yet is perfectly
distinct from the sacrament, and often times divided. For Judas of whom you
speak, if he had dyed immediately after he was baptized, should not have gone
to heaven, as one thoroughly washed or cleansed by ^aptisme.

Where the Papists urge the saying of David, Psalm. ^1. Amplius laua me, etc.
Wash me more from mine in^quitie: Bristow says, I have nothing to answer,
but that it was at Gods hand, and by the means of Christ's blood, that he
prayed to be cleansed. Purg. 97. and 78. Whether I have nothing else to say, let
the readers of those places judge. But that which I here say, takes a^ay
Purgatory and all satisfaction of man's merit, al^hough David, as all the
faithful do pray, that they may ^aily more and more feel the mercy of God and
grace ^f Christ's redemption, to the full satisfying of their ^onscience, and
perfect assurance of faith and hope of e^ernall life, which though it receive
daily increases, yet ^he virtue of Christ's death, in which God is reconciled
unto us, is always one and the same.

Where I charge Allen, that the sufficiency of Christ's ^assion, is counted a
light argument unto him: Bristow ^aith, it is too light in deed, to bear
down any doctrine ^f Christ. But when, or out of what scripture shall we ^eare
the doctrine of Christ for men's merits, satisfa^tions, propitiatory, or
purgatory it self?

Where I deny, that our works are any part of sa^isfaction for our sins,
of which the price is through^y paid in the passion of Christ: Bristow
obiecteth the ^aying of the Apostle, Phil. 2. Work your own salvation: and
yet it is God that works in you. As though there were no working of our
salvation, but by satisfaction for our sins. We work our salvation, when we
walk in the way that God has called us to pass through, unto the free gift
of eternal life, namely in faith, obedience, thankfulness, etc. which are so
far from merit, that it is God which works in us, both to will and to
perform any good thing, according to his good pleasure. Phil. 2. And
therefore we need not the school distinction of causes, for the satisfaction
of our sins by our works, which is only the effect of Christ's death and
passion, needing no help of our works, which word (Bristowe says) mine
ignorance so much abhors, and yet the scripture often says, that God
helps both Christ, Ps. 17. and us. 2. Cor. 2. Heb. 13. and also that Christ's
helps us, Heb. 2. But where says the Scripture, that our works help the
passion of Christ? I abhor not the word of helping, when it is used in that
sense, that God and Christ should help us; or God help Christ in respect of
his humanity: but that man by merit should help God and Christ, in the work
of our redemption, satisfaction for our sins, or purging of them, I abho^^e
with all my heart: yea, I spit at it, and tread it under my feet. But if the
mercy of God (says Bristowe) although i^ be singularly omnisufficient does
not exclude neither Christ's passion, nor the working of it, or merits of that
man: how does the omnisufficiencie of Christ's passion, enforte you to exclude
either his baptism and his good works in his members, or also the working of
his baptism, and the working or efficacy of those good works* especially
seeing the scripture is plain for all. Bristow understands not, how the
mercy of God is omnisufficient, which is not as every one will imagine, but as
it may stand with his justice, which is not otherwise satisfied, but in the
passion of Christ: which being thereby fully satisfied, we exclude nothing that
the scripture admits, but that which not only the scripture denies, but
nature it self abhors, that contradictories should be both true: Namely,
the justice of God is fully satisfied by the only suffering of Christ: And the
justice of god is not satisfied by the only sufferings of Christ, but by other
means also, as by our own works, or sufferings, or other men's for us. Neither
does any text of scripture that Bristowe cites, prove this later part of the
contradiction to be true. First, where he cites Tit. 3. He has saved us by
the lauer of regeneration: The text is, when the loving kindness and gentleness
of God our savior appeared, not of the works of righteousness, which we
wrought, but according to his own mercy, he has saved us, by the lauer of
regeneration and the receiving of the holy ghost, which he has powered forth
plentifully upon us by Jesus Christ our savior, that being justified by his
grace, we might be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life. Here it
is manifest, we are so ^aued by baptism, that we are justified by his grace,
there ^ore not by the merit of baptism or satisfaction of our (...)nnes in
baptism: but we are saved by baptism, as we ^re in^eo^fed by a deed, that is
sealed, that is, assured of ^aluation: as Abraham received circumcision, the
seal ^f the righteousness, which he had by faith, before he was ^ircumcised.
To. 4. and even so he cleanses his church by ^he lauer of water, not by the
merit of ye work of bap^isme, but in that he gave him self for it, that he
might sanctify it, Ephesians. 5. After the same manner does baptism save us. 1. Pet.
3. not the putting off of ye filth of the flesh, ^ut ye interrogatio^ of a good
conscience before god, tho^ough the resurrection of Jesus Christ, which
presuppo^eth his death, for satisfaction of our sins, as his resur^ection is
the special cause of our justification. Last of ^ll, says Bristowe: he has
made us kings and priests to God, Apo. 1. If spiritual priests, ergo, to offer
up spiritual sacrifices, as of (...)ur mortification. Romans 12. our alms
deeds, Heb. 13. both for our ^wne sins, and for the sins of other. Here in
the last point, ^he quotation of scripture so plentiful before fails: but we
shall have reason confirmed by scripture: because the ^xternall priest is
ordained to offer external sacrifices for sins, ^oth for him self and for
the people. Heb. 5. But this cause is many ways avoided: for we are priests to
offer up ye on^y sacrifices of thanksgiving, and not of propitiation for sin,
which cannot be without shedding of blood Heb. 9. Secondly, although we be all
made priests, yet we are not made high priests, of which the text speaks.
Heb. 5. which office one only can enjoy at one time, which is our savior
Christ, for term of his life, which is without end. Thirdly, those sacrifices
which the external priest offered for sins, could never take away sins,
Heb. 10. much less our spiritual sacrifices of thanksgiving for Gods
benefits bestowed on us, and his whole church. I cited further. Apoc. 7. These
are they yt came out of yt great affliction, and have washed their stoles, and
made them white in ye blood of the lamb: therefore they are in ye presence of ye
throne of god. Brist. says, this word therefore, is referred to their coming
out of affliction, and so whited their stoles: And yet this gloser (says he of
me) takes it away from the affliction, whereas that whiting was nothing else
but that affliction. O impudent and blasphemous heretic: when the holy ghost
expressly says, they made their stoles white in the blood of the lamb,
dare thou open thy mouth and say, not only, that that whiting was somewhat
else then the blood of Christ, but also that it was nothing but that
affliction, so utterly excluding the blood of Christ? But I forgot to confer
other places of scripture, as he charge me. Is there any scripture that
ascribes purification of our sins, to any other thing, than to the blood of
Christ? Let us hear what, whosoever overcomes, shall be clothed with white
garments. Apoc. 3. But the Martyrs overcame the devil, not only by the blood
of the lamb, but also by their own patient confession, or affliction unto
death. Apoc. 12. The text is: and they overcame him by the blood of the lamb,
and by the word of their testimony, and they loved not their lives unto death.
Here is no cause of victory, but the blood of the lamb, and the word of
their testimony, which was the confession of their faith, the only
isntrumental cause of their justification and victory: who is he which
overcomes the world, says S. John, but he that believes? 1. John 5. Faith
therefore the only shilde to have victory against the world and the devil,
has no power in it self to cleanse our sins, but leans altogether to the
blood of Christ. But it is a proper thing to see Bristow forsake his vulgar
latin authentical translation, and to turn (...) by their own martyrdom,
which is in deed by the word of their testimony, or which they did testify:
whereas by his translation (...)(...) should signify no more then (...): and
(...) should be taken for suffering of death, as I think it is in no Greek
author, sure I am it is never so taken in the new testament.

But Bristow adds: that S. Paul also accordingly calls it the mortification
of Jesus, when the Apostles were mortifyed for Jesus, and says they carried
the same about continually in their bodies, that also the life of Jesus might
also be manifected in their bodies, 2. Cor. 4. I wot well, we must be
conformable to Christ in sufferings, that we may be partakers of his kingdom
and glory: but does it therefore follow, that our sufferings merit this
glory by his blood? or that his blood without all respect of our merits,
does not alone purge and cleanse us from all our sins? After he had finished
the cleansing of our sins by his own self, says the Apostle, he is set
down at the right hand of magnificence in the highest. Heb. 1.

Last of all, Bristowe opposes that Saint Paul says: This our affliction
although it be but short and light, works us everlasting weight of glory
exceeding measure above measure. 2. Cor. 4. I answer, it works not by
meriting, not by purging our sins, or by satisfying for our iniquities, but
by making us conformable unto our head, in passing by the same way of
tribulatio^s unto glory, that he did, even as the way or steps which leads
unto an high place of dignity, makes not them worthy of the dignity that
must ascend by those steps unto it, and yet it is necessary for them that
will come to that dignity, to sit in such places, to take that ordinary way.
Therefore as the passage of such way works their dignity, so does
affliction work our glory. Not to abridge any part of the glory or merit of
Christ's suffering, by which only we are made worthy of glory when all our
sins being cleansed by his blood, we appear righteous before God, not in
the merit of our own works, nor having our own righteousness, which is by
the law, but the righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ,
that we may know him of the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of
his sufferings being made conformable unto his death, Phil. 3. Wherefore it
remains, that seeing the blood of Christ purges us of all our sins, and
Jesus Christ is ye propitiation for our sins, committed either after baptism
or before, that all other purgings and satisfactio^s are overthrown, and so
popish purgatory remains without any foundation: the purging of Christ's
blood making us most pure: and Christ our propitiation being thoroughly and only
sufficient to reconcile us.

Secondly: directly of Purgatory it self and prayer for the Bristowe.
dead, whether all the elect go straight to heaven. Before Christ's coming
Limbus patrum.

His childish railing on mine arguments, with that Fulke.
impudent slander of all the church of God, which he affirms was ignorant
that any souls went to heaven before their church had defined it, within these
300. years, I pass over, and come to the matter in question. I said Purg. 57.
against Allen, mainteining that all the just before Christ were punished for
their sins forgiven ma ny hundredth years after their departure in hell. That
the fathers of the old testament before Christ were not in hell, it is to be
proved with manifest arguments and autorities out of holy scriptures. Although
they were not, nor yet are in perfect blessedness, God providing a better thing
for us, that they without us, should not be made perfect. Heb. 11. But by this
text (says Brist.) S. Paul does mean, yt their souls were not yet admitted
into heaven. How proves he that? forsooth, the old testament did consummate
nothing, etc. but their sins remaining not perfectly remitted, Christ died,
etc. A sore bolt, as though any man had his sins forgiven, but by the new
testament, or could be heir of the kingdom of heaven, but by ye death of
Christ. But the same apostle says. Heb 9. That the way of the saints, was not
yet opened, while the first tabernacle stood. Bristow adds to the text of his
own, into soncta or heaven: where the apostle means of the work of Christ's
redemption in his death, resurrection and ascension, the effect whereof,
nevertheless was extended no less to the fathers of yt old testament, then to
us. Thirdly, the apostle says, Heb. 10. that we have confidence to enter in to
the holy place, by the blood of Jesus, which has dedicated yt new and living
way for us, through the veil that is his flesh. All which proves nothing, but
that there is no entrance into heaven, but by Christ, which way is common to all
ye saints of God, of all ages. But Bristow bids me confer the end of my
text. Heb. 11. with the beginning: where he says, they received not ye promise
which is the exposition of their not consummating: I admit it: for no Christian
receives the promise consummate before the resurrection of their bodies. The
consummation of which promise, and perfection of the saints, God reserueth unto
one time, when we shall all receive the promise and consummation together: that
they without us (says he) should not be consummate, the same reason is of the
apostles and fathers of the primitive church, and us of the later church, and
them yt shall be to ye end of the world. Now to mine arguments and autorities of
scripture. I reason, that seeing they all believed in Christ, they had
everlasting life, and entered not into condemnation, but passed from death to
life. Ioh. 5. To what life (says Bristow) but the life or resurrection of
their bodies? for until the last day, all the dead are in death. O prodigious
heretic, call you that a passage from death to life, to continue in death 5.
or 6. thousand years? Is God then to this new Saducee, the god of the dead and
not of the living? yea, he says, yt life after corporal death in ye new
testament, lightly every where, signifies ye resurrection of the bodies. What
is it then to take hold of eternal life in this world, which shall be
interrupted with so long abiding in death? 1. Tim. 6. And how can it be true
which our savior says: he that believes in me, has already eternal life, if
they yt are passed out of this world are all in death? wherefore then is this
eternal life interupted with any Purgatory, Limbus patrum, or death.

The second argument is, of that Christ is called the lamb that was slain from
the beginning of the world; because the benefit of his passion extends unto
the godly of all ages alike. Apoc. 13. To this, the beast has nothing to
answer, but yt it is not said, that the lamb was slain from the beginning of
the world: but that all the reprobates shall adore antichrist when he comes.
And because Apoc. 17. the words be: whose names were not written in the book
of life from the beginning of the world: he would have those words from the
beginning of the world, by a monstrous construction, contrary to the manifest
composition and pointing, both in the Greek and vulgar Latin, to be referred
not to the lamb slain, but to the book of life. As though both those textes
in their several sense might not be true, except such manifest violence were
offered to the construction composition and pointing in this text of ye Apoc.
Yet he confesses it to be true, that ye lamb was slain from the beginning of
the world, which is no where else written in the scripture, but here: the
cause of the truth, he will not have to be my fond sense, but because his
death was preordeined of God, and prefigured so long before. A substantial
cause by which we may say, that Bristowe was dead from the beginning of the
world, because his death was so long before ordained of God, and prefigured in
the death of Adam.

The third argument is, that Esaias speaking of yt righteous that are departed
out of this life, says that there is peace, and that they shall rest in their
beds, Esa. 57. like as he affirms that Topheth which is Gehinnon, or hell,
is prepared of old for the wicked. To this he answers, that Esaias speaks
not of his own time, but as a Prophet, of the time now since the coming of
Christ, who is our peace, as though Christ were not their peace as well as
ours. And what a shameless answer is this, to deny the doctrine of the
Prophet concerning the comfort of the faithful after death, to perteine to the
faithful of his own time, to whom then it was in vain preached and
published by the Prophet? After a little quarreling against my translation, the
sense whereof he cannot deny: he asks, if the rest of the souls must needs
be the bliss of heaven? and tells us that their Limbus was not a place of
sensible pain: But sir, Salom whereinto the Prophet says the righteous do
go, will not only give them rest, without sense of pain: but peace with
happiness and prosperity. Finally, he says, Topheth or Gehenna, was not the
only hell, because our Creed and the Scripture says, that Christ's soul
was in hell: I answer, that hell signifies either the place, or state of
torments for sins: in the former, Calvin (whom you slander) says not that
Christ was in, but in the later, when he complained that he was forsaken of
God: there is not therefore proved, by Christ's discending into hell, any other
place or receptacle of souls in hell, but Topheth and Gehenna ye place of the
damned.

The fourth argument against Limbus, is, that Lazarus was carried by Angels,
not down to hell, but up to Abraham's bosom. But the rich man being in hell,
looked up and sees Abraham afar of. Bristowe asks whether (...) signify
to be carried up? sir, it signifies to be carried away, and seeing the rich
man looking up, sees Lazarus afar of, it follows that Lazarus was carried
up and not down. But you reply, it follows not that he was carried into
heaven. Then you may say he was carried up to hell. But the places you say
might be nigh together in respect of the distance of heaven, although one were
upward, and also far off both in state and situation (purgatory
peradventure betwixt them.) This is a goodly faith, that stands upon
peradventure, and this may be, etc. The Scripture says, there was a great Chaos
which is an infinite distance between them, which cannot agree to Limbus,
which must be hard adjoining to hell, or else it is not Limbus. But if they
were no way nigh together (says he) it will not follow that Abraham's bosom
was heaven. I answer, if they were no way nigh together, it could not be hell,
nor Limbus of hell, which is the thing I was to prove. Also the text is plain,
that Abraham's bosom was a place of comfort. And other place of comfort then
heaven or Paradise, which is all one, for the souls departed, I find none in
Scripture.

The last argument is this: If righteousness belong to Abraham's children, the
reward of righteousness also pertains to them. Therefore Abraham's bosom
was open to receive all the childrem of Abraham, even as the bosom of God was
ready to receive Abraham, because he was his son through faith.

Here Bristowe notes no small blasphemy, proceeding of gross ignorance,
saying, That which is proper to vnigenitus, the only begotten son of God,
he makes common to Abraham. Why Bristowe? because vnigenitus is eternally,
and after his proper manner, in the bosom of the father, does it thereof
follow, that none can be in the bosom of GOD, but the proper place of Christ
is made common to them? You threaten in the 12. Chapter oftentimes to bewray my
gross ignorance in the scriptures, and have you such fine knowledge in them,
that you could not see what Esaias writes Chap. 40. according to your own
translation, Ecce dominus Deus, etc. Behold the Lord God shall come in
strength, and his arm shall have the dominion: behold his reward is with
him, and his work before him: As a shepherd he will feed his flock, he
will gather the Lambs together on his arm and bear them in his bosom: in
sin^ suo leuabit? Behold you great and mighty doctors in the scriptures,
the bosom of GOD as of a shephearde, is open to receive all his Lambs; how
much more as a father to receive his children? But to the argument you
answer: The reward of righteousness may belong to one, and yet not paid
him, as soon as he dies. Saint Paul saying expressly of Abraham and many
of his children, that they departed not receiving the promises, but beholding
them a far off: and all these renouned by faith, received not the promise.
That is (says Bristowe) the inheritance, the reward of righteousness: I
replye, the reward of righteousness cannot belong to one, but it must be
paid him as soon as it is paid unto others, to whom the same reward, upon
the same cause belongs: therefore seeing it is paid to some immediately
after their death, it is likewise to all. That many dyed not receiving the
promises, is partly understood of the promises of the land of Canaan,
partelye of the full fruition and perfection of reward, which to all men is
denied before the last judgment, and so no inequality or injustice unto any.
Whether since Christ all go straight Bristowe.
to heaven.



They that live unto Christ, dye unto him, and being Fulke.
disolued are with him. The souls of the faithful and the repentant are where
Christ is, as he prays ^oan 17. so he says to the thief, no perfect
just ^an, but a sinner repentaunt, This day thou shall ^ee with me in
Paradise, Luke 23. And Saint P^ule desires to be dissolved and to be with
Christ.

To leave his iugling of seeing Christ's godheades glory, and manhoodes
glory, whereof I speak no word, he confesses the example of Saint Paul
declares, that a per^ect just man goes straight to Christ: Likewise the
example if the thief declares, that a penitent sinner, goes straight to
Christ, if either his penance be full and perfect, or his pardon, which is a
remission of his penance be plenarie. By this you perceive that penance with
him is taken for punishment satisfactory, and not for repentance of the heart
and true conversion unto GOD: But there is a plenarie pardon and satisfaction
for all sins given to every penitent sinner: therefore every penitent sinner
goes straight to Christ whom we know and believe to be in heaven. The minor
is proved, by saint John, 1. John 2. Jesus Christ is our advocate and
propitiation for our sins. The blood of Jesus Christ does purge us from all
sins.

Secondly he says, I allude to a place, Romans 14. we live to our Lord, and
we die to our Lord: whereby nothing else is meant, but that he is our judge in
life and death. A bare exposition, if we have no more comfort by living to
the Lord, then that he shall be our judge at our death. How be it I ground
not mine argument only, of that phrase, to control Augustines exposition of
them that die in the Lord, Apoca. 14. for martyrs only, as you slander me,
but compare other places of the faithful, that are asleep in Christ, 1.
Corin. 15. And they that are dead in Christ, 1. Thessalonians 4. where the
phrases being all one, with that of Apoca. 14. blessed are the dead that dye
in the Lord, that text cannot be restrained only to the blessedness of
martyrs, but extends to the happiness of all that are dead in the Lord,
which are all the faithful. But the circumstance of the place (says Bristowe)
gives it to be meant of martyrs. I answer, there is no circumstance that
can prove it to be spoken only of Martyrs) seeing the argument of their
blessedness, is dying in the Lord, which is common to all the faithful,
therefore blessedness also, and that is the judgment of S. Augustine de ciu.
dei lib. 20 Cap. 9. whatsoever Allen or you prate to the contrary. For after
the text rehearsed he writes thus upon it. Reg. not itaque: The Church
therefore now first reineth with Christ in the living, and in the dead. For
therefore (as the Apostle says) Christ dyed, that he should be Lord over the
living and over the dead. But therefore he named only the souls of the
Martyrs, because they as the chief, reign being dead, which unto death
striued for the truth. But by a part we understand the whole, even the rest
that are dead pertaining to the Church which is the kingdom of Christ.

Whether that judgment may stand with Purgatory. Bristowe.


My first argument he makes of the true falling to the North or South and so
resting, which in deed is Fulke.
no argument of mine, neither do I think the text Eccle 11. to be
understood of the state of men after this life: only I show that Allen by his
glosses, has not satisfied them that so expound it, of whom one is S. Hierom.
Purg, 436. 439. 441. Indeed Purg 281. I said, immediately after death (as M.
Allen confesses) follows judgment, but prayers either need not or boot
not, where the party is either acquitted or condemned, by (...)e sentence of
the judge, which, as Augustine says, cannot be indifferent between reward and
punishment. De (...)b. arb. lib. 3. Cap. 23. To this he answers first that
saint ^ugustine there says the contrary, as I shall see if I read (...)e
place. Why sir, I read it thus: Superfluo quaeri de meri(...)s, etc. In vain
do men move a question of his merits, which has deserved nothing, speaking of
the death of (...)n infant) neque enim: for it is not to be feared, least his
(...)fe could have been media, mean or indifferent, be^weene well doing and
sin: Et sententia iudicis media es(...) non possit inter praemium atque
supplicium, and the sentence (...)f the judge cannot be mean or indifferent,
between (...)ewarde and punishment. This I trust shall suffice of my
(...)eading, until we see what you read to the contrary. (...)ut to mine
argument, Bristowe answers for them (...)at are condemned to hell, prayers
boot not: of them (...)at are acquitted, some straight rewarded in their
souls, (...)o^ which they need no prayers, but yet not rewarded (...) their
bodies for which they pray, Apoc. 6. until they (...)e heard, Apoc. 11. other
not straight rewarded in their (...)ules, of which some be without sense of
punishment, as (...) Limbo other be punished temporally, etc. If it be
(...)wfull to make such divisions and subdiuisions, without the authority of
the scriptures, we may imagine what we will. But sir, for them that be acquitted
of sin, and can have no mean sentence between reward and punishment, how can
their reward be deferred or how can they be punished for sin, which are
acquitted thereof? As for them that lack the reward of their body, it ^s that
they may receive it in time most convenient, both for the glory of God and for
the commodities of ^ll the saints of God together. As for the martyrs, Apoc.
6, I find they complained for justice against their murderers, I find not
that they prayed for the reward of their body: which complaint is to be
understood rather of the desert of the wicked persecuters then of the
affection of the holy martyrs. The blood of Abel cried vengaunce, yet Abel
patiently suffered death. The differences of punishment for being angry saying
^ac^, and fatue, prove difference of damnation greater for greater offenses,
but not of punishment less then damnation due for the least, seeing our savior
Christ appoints the same guiltiness for unadvised anger, which the Pharisees
did for murder: who never were so far past all show of honesty, to make
murder a venial sin, not deserving damnation, as you do.

Another argument is out of Matthew. 7. of the two ways, if there be but two
ways in this life, there are but two abiding places after this life. To this
Bristowe answers, although the argument be not mine, but an objection that
Allen takes on him to answer: First that in the wide way some go wider then
some, with infinite variety, but all to damnation presently: Secondly in the
narrow way, some go narrower then some with infinite variety, yet all in the
narrow way: Ergo say I, all straight to salvation. Although in a way so
narrow, that it is called (...) (...) thrusting way, or a way, whose sides are
thrust together, that there should be such infinite variety of narrowness,
which must also import an infinite widenes, it is against all reason, and the
word of the text. Wherefore it cannot be the way of merits but of faith.

Another argument is of the text 2. Cor. 5. We shall all stand before the
judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive in his body according
to such things as he has done either good or evil. Therefore the prayers or
deeds of other men help not. To this he answers out of Augustine, that the
dead in our Lord, has in his life deserved, that these works after his
death might be profitable to him. Against which authority, he says, I have no
reply, to maintain that scripture against such prayer, but only oppose a
saying of Hierom. I think the scripture it self is a sufficient reply against
all authority of man. Every man shall receive according to his own works,
and not according to the works of other men, as for the deserte of man, it is
nothing but unto damnation. And yet that argument is (...)ected by Allen, not
framed by me.

An other argument I have of the judgment of God, (...)r. 85. If Purgatory be
so necessary to satisfy Gods iu(...)e by temporal pains of sinners
according to the (...)e, etc. and Purgatory shall cease, as you affirm out
(...) Augustine: How shall the same be satisfied in them (...)t dye immediately
before the day of judgment, so (...)t they have not had time enough there to
be suffici(...)tly purged? The like may be demanded of all them (...)ich in a
moment shall be changed from mortality (...) immortality at the very coming
of Jesus Christ (...) to judgment? These are two doughtie questions (...)yeth
Bristowe, for answer of which he asks me, (...)here I find that principle
in Allen? That Purgato(...) is necessary to satisfy according to the time.
For(...)oath sir, Where he says, if any debt remain to be dischar(...)d it
must needs rise by proportion, weight, continuance, number (...)d quantity of
the faults, whereby it must of necessity be indu(...)d, that because every
man cannot have time to repay all in his (...)e, that there is all, or some
part aunswerable in the world to (...)e. Here sir of faults we have
proportion, weight, (...)ntinuance, number, quantity, therefore we must
(...)aue satisfaction in purgatory according to propor(...)on, weight,
continuance, number, quantity of them, (...)xcept you will as well deny the
proportion, weight, number, and quantity of faults to be regarded in
Purgatory, as the time. Wherefore if a great proportion of faults deserve a
great proportion of punishment, heavy faults, heavy punishment, many
faults, many strypes, great faults, great pains: what reason have you, why
long continuance in faults should not deserve long continuance in Purgatory?
You answer a short time in great pain, will satisfy for long penance in
this life.

But where is the continuance of sins by Allens necessity to be paid in
proportion of long time in Purgatory? So that in effect, you answer, but
without book yt the furnace of Purgatory toward yt (...) of ye world must be
heated whot, because ye souls (...) tarry there the shorter time. With such
inventions (...) may answer any question. But I seek a resolution (...) of
the word of God, or good reason agreeable thereto.

To the 2. question, you answer, it is not (...) to Gods mercy, to remit such
punishment at (...) (...) quest of his glorious Saints, as he now does ^or
(...) Churches prayers. But seeing the Saints know not (...) sodennes of that
moment, how shall they pray for (...) discharge of them that deserve to go to
purgatory. (...) they pray for it continually, why pray they not, as (...) to
discharge all other men from purgatory, as those th(...) shall remain alive at
the coming of Christ? And where you say it is not repugnant to his mercy, it
is not the matter in question, but how it may stand with (...) justice, which
as you hold, requires satisfaction by temporal punishment. For otherwise we
know it stands both with his justice, and his mercy, yt they which obtain
forgiveness of their sins by Christ, should immediately after their death be
received into the fellowshippe of them that are likewise made righteous by him.
Augustine is quoted De Ciu. Dei. lib. 21. Cap. 24. where the question is moved,
but not answered, and yet the place is corrupted and enforced, as Ludovicus
Vives confesses. In that Chapter Augustine reasons, against them which held
that God after the judgment, would release all the damned at the prayers of
his saints. In the 27. Chapter, which he also quoteth, there is nothing to the
question. Whether faith, hope, and Gods will, may stand with Purgatory.
Bristowe.




This argument is gathered Pur. 381. If it be against the hope of Christians,
to mourn for the dead, much Fulke.
more it is against the hope and faith of Christians, to pray for them. For by
our prayer, we suppose them (...)e in misery, whom the word of God does
testify (...)e in happiness, to be at rest, to be with Christ. Ioh. Apoc. 14.
Bristow answers: those Scriptures prove that they be straightway in
happiness, etc. as he (...) showed, and I have showed the contrary, that they
^roue it, notwithstanding all his impudent cauilati(...). Secondly, he says,
it is not against hope to mourn, (...) to mourn as the Gentiles, which know
not the (...)rrection. Neither do I say that all mourning is a(...)st hope, but
such mourning as supposes them to (...)n misery, or to be lost, as the
Papists, and Paganes (...)? Our mourning for the delay of the kingdom God, as
he understands it, for the general resurre(...)n, is for our present
misery, and therefore lawful (...)e joined with hope. But mourning for the
dead, whose happiness the Scripture assures us, is a(...)nst faith, therefore
contrary to hope.

(...)another argument in the same place is: All places (...)cripture that
forbid prayers without faith, for(...)de prayers for the dead. For faith is
an assurance (...) of the word of God, etc.

This argument (says Bristow) supposes, that the (...)de of God is only
Scripture. Yea verily it suppo(...), that only Scripture is the warrant of Gods
word, we have before maintained and also answered, to (...) Apocryphal Book
of the Machabees.

A third argument is, Pur. 281. We learn out of Gods (...)rde, that whatsoever
we pray for according to his (...)ll, we shall obtain. 1. John. 5. Prayers for
the dead (...) not according to the will of God, and therefore they (...) not
heard at al. Bristow denies the minor, which he (...)th, I have not proved.
Yes verily, I prove it because ye (...)dgement follows immediately after
death: and in (...)dgement, God will hear no prayers. And therefore
(...)istowes exposition for him that sins a sin not (...)to death, and
shameful addition, Let him after his death (...)quest of Christ, and life
shall be given unto him, is false, and (...)surde, although he says, he has
given the plain and smoth (...)se of the whole place, which is to be
understood of men living and not of the dead. A smooth expos(...) If one see
his brother sin, he must pray for him a(...) his death. Again, he urges the
present temps, who (...) knows his brother to sin a sin not to death,
(...) one (says Bristowe) that lived in schism, but yet (...) reconciled
before he died. O monstrous and more th(...) palpable blindness! be these
verbes, lived, reconc(...) dyed, of the present or preterperfect temps, which
t(...) deniest the Apostle to have used. But omit the te(...) which he calls
him, a brother which lives in schis(...) How much more soundly may I reason
upon the present temps? Saint John bids us pray for a brother (...)ning: but
a brother sinning, is only living: therefore S. John bids us pray only for
a brother living. For they yt are in Purgarorie, neither deserve nor sin, by
your own confession. As for the sin against the holy Ghost, which we say is
not to be prayed for at all, he threateneth often, to consute in the 12.
Chapter. In the mean time it is evident that Purgatory for any thing that is
hitherto applied by Bristow, remains confuted by sufficient arguments and
authority of the Scriptures. The fourth part concerning all other questions,
that he mentions Bristowe.
and first of good works in general, Justification, and Free will.



Remitting the questions of the witnesses of Gods Fulke.
word, unto five motives in the 10. Chapter: where I allege that good works
do not justify two places, one of Saint Paul, another of Esaie, he holds the
contrary, that works do justify. And first calling me a falsary, because I
recite not the very words of the Apostle, which was not my purpose, but to
show what we do affirm out of that text of the Apostle, he says,
justification by works, is not denied by that text of Saint Paul, Romans 3. We
hold that a man is justified by faith without the works of the law, for it
is to be understood of works going before Baptism, and not of works
following (...)aptisme, because Saint James says a man is justified of ^orkes
and not of faith only. To this I answer (...)aint Paul speaks of
justification before God: Saint (...)ames of justification before men. Saint
Paul of a faith which works by love: Saint James of a bare know(...)edge, a
barren and dead faith, a faith that is void of good works.

And that Saint Paul speaks generally of all good works, it is manifest by
this reason, that he says, boa(...)ting is excluded, not by the law of
works, but by the (...)awe of faith: what manner of exclusion were it, to shut
^ut boasting for a moment, while one is baptized, and ^mmediately after receive
it again, by defending justification by works. Again he says immediately
after, ^t is one God which shall justify circumcision which is of faith, and
uncircumcision through faith, yt is the circum(...)ised, and the uncircumcised
are al justified by faith, as A^raham in both the states was justified by
faith, without the works of the law, although, (as James says) he was
^ustified before men, by his oblation, which was but a (...)riall of his faith,
and obedience. Where the Apostle (...)ayeth, Tit. 3. not by the works of
righteousness which we have done, but according to his own great mercy, (...)e
saved us by baptism: Bristowe asks, if I mark the temps. Yea, very well, he
speaks of works before faith. And does it therefore follow, that works done
after faith, do justify? Saint Paul extends the salvation (which is sealed
unto us by the lauer of new birth, and renewing of the holy Ghost, which he
has poured richly upon us by Jesus Christ our savior, unto eternal life:
therefore it follows, that being justified by his grace, we might be made
heirs according to the hope of eternal life. Upon the 2. text Es. 64. I
said: the Popish Church is not content to be clothed in the white shining
silk, which is the justification of Saints, made white in the blood of the
lamb, but with the filthy rags of man's righteousness. Bristowe asks
where I learned, to call the good works done in the Church, the filthy rags
of man's righteousness? Verily, even of Esaie who speaks in the person of the
Church: All we are as an unclean person, and all our righteousness, as filthy
rags. For although God accept our works, that are done in faith, and pardon
their imperfection, yet when they are obtruded unto him, to justify us, he
abhors them, as in the Pharisee Luke 18. That the iustifications of the
Saints. Apoc. 19. are good works, Bristowe would have it appear by
conference of 1. John. 3. He that works justice is just, where he reasons
of the effects of a just man, and not of the cause. No flesh is just by works
of the law, but by faith, by which God makes just, even the ungodly man. But
how much better conference is it, to know, what the white (...) means, which
is the justification of Saints, to compare it with other places of the same
prophecy, as Apoc. 7. where it is showed, how the stoles of the faithful are
made white, with the blood of the lamb, and with the place of Saint Paul
showing how the Church is made white, and without spotte and wrinckle by the
death of Christ? Ephe. 5.

Touching freewill, I said, we believe, that man after his fall, has not free
will, no not aptness of will to think any thing that is good. 2. Cor. 3.
Bristow translateth the word, we are not sufficient, but the text is (...) We
are not apt, to think any thing of our selves as of our selves, but our (...)
aptnes, is of God. To this Bristowe replyeth, that natural free will is not
taken from us, nor natural aptnes of will. I hope he speaks like a
Philosopher, and not like a flat Pelagian. But I speak as a Christian of the
fredome of man's will unto good, which is none but bondage unto evil, except he
be regenerate, and then is his will framed of God in part, to good, but not
perfectly in this life, as regeneration is not perfectly finished before the
redemption of our bodies: as for freedom opposite to coaction, if Bristowe
mean that, by reteyning of free will, I grant every man's will to be free from
constreint, but not from seruilitie unto sin. Whereof Saint complains, Rom
7.

Moreover I said Pur. 35. how should your free will (...)e maintained, if Gods
spirit have any place, that di(...)ributeth to every one according to the
good pleasure (...)f his own will? 1. Cor. 12. Bristowes answer is, that God
can work his own will upon our wills, which is (...)ery true, but without
working of Gods spirit, our will (...)ath no aptness unto any good thing.
Again he says, (...)hat Saint Paul speaks of the gifts, that are freely
gi(...)en, and not of them, that make a man acceptable, as (...)hough there
were any gifts, which are not freely given. And it is evident that he speaks
generally of all working of Gods spirit, even of confessing Jesus to be
Christ, and not of special graces only. So that Bristowes answer is nothing
to the purpose, or matter (...)n question. For I hold, that we have no
aptenesse unto (...)ny good, of our own freewill, but only of the grace of
God. Bristow says, I imagine that God is not omni(...)otent, if we have wills
of our own, which I never (...)enied: but that we have wills of out own unto
good, before they be framed thereto by Gods spirit, is the thing (...) deny.

About good works in special, namely prayer to Saints, Bristowe.
(...)astinge, merits.

Concerning invocation of Saints, I said Purg. 451. Fulke.
we call not upon Saints, because we believe not in the^: for how should we
call upon them in whom we believe not? Romans 10. To this (reserving a pretended
contradiction to the proper place) he says: first that Saint Paul, did often
invoke and call upon the faithful, beseching them to pray for him, which is
a toye to mock with an Ape, for Saint Paul did not invoke or pray to them
as unto them that knew his heart, and could help his grief, but only of
charity desires their prayers. Secondly he asks, where is any Scripture,
that we must believe in God only? Forsooth, amongst many, this shall suffice,
which is written in Jeremy Cap. 17. Cursed is the man that trusts in man,
and makes flesh his arm, and his heart departs from the Lord. But that it
is lawful to believe in Saints also, Bristowe quoteth Exodus 14. where it is
said, the people believed God, and Moses his servant, as though there were no
difference between giving credit to Gods Prophets, and believing in them,
which is to put our trust in them. The like I say to the second place, quoted
2. Par. 20. where Iosaphat promises all things prosperous to the people, if
they give credit to Gods Prophets, Credit Prophetis eius. But forlaking his
vulgar authentical translation, he provoke us to the Hebrew, belyke because
of the preposition, beth, which is a miserable shift: Seeing the Hebrew phrase
is well known, to differ from the Latin, and English phrase, and especially
from the sense of believing, that is trusting in God, which is peculiar to him
and ought not to be in any creature, which is not God.

He quoteth also Philemon, whose love and faith the Apostle commends toward
the Lord Jesus, and toward all his Saints, where every wise man sees that
faith is referred to Christ, and love to the Saints. But the scripture reaches
him to believe (he says) in Christ according to his humanity and namely in his
blood. John. 14. Romans 3. He will prove an Arian or a Nestorian shortly. The
place of John proves the divinity of Christ, because he is to be believed on,
even as God. And where the Apostle says, that God has made Christ a
propitiation through faith in his blood, he means not that we must believe in
the blood of Christ, as it is a creature, but that the death and bloodshedding
of Christ, is the mean of our reconciliation unto God. But the Nicene Creed
and Hieronyme, contra Lucif. use the phrase of Credere in Ecclesiam, to believe
in the Church. I answer, they mean no more thereby, then they which use the
distinction Credere in Deum, Credere Deo, and Credere Deum, which Bristowe
says has deceived me. Augustine (as Bristowe confesses) makes it proper to
God, that we believe in him

We believe not in Peter, we believe not in Paul. In John. 129. Neither says
the Nicene Creed, or Hieronyme contrary thereto, that we should put our whole
trust and confidence in the Church, but in God only. Therefore although they
speak otherwise then Augustine, they mean not otherwise then he. Ruffinus also
in his exposition of the Creed, writes both plainly and effectually: Sequitur
namque post, etc. For it follows after this saying: The holy Catholic
Church, the remission of sins, the resurrection of the body: he says not in
the holy Catholic Church, in the remission of sins, in the resurrection of
the flesh. For if he had added, the preposition, In, the sense should have
been made one, and the same with the former articles. But even in those terms
truly, where faith is ordered of the divinity, it is said, in God the father,
and in Christ his son, and in the holy Ghost. But in the rest, where the
speech is not of the Godhead, but of creatures and the mysteries, the
preposition, In, is not added, that it should be said we must believe in the
holy Church, but the holy Church: not as God, but as the Church gathered into
God. And that men should believe, that there is remission of sins, not in the
remission of sins, that they should believe the resurrection of the body, not
in the resurrection of the body. Therefore by this syllable of the Preposition,
the Creator is distinguished from the creatures, and things divine, are
separated from things humane.

Nevertheless, Bristowe says, they believe both in God, in Christ and in his
Saints, and invoke them all, though not all alyke, but then let him hear,
what Cyprian says, De duplici Martyrio. Non credit in Deum, qui non in eo solo
collocat totius faelicitatis suae fiduciam. He believes not in God, which
places not in him alone, the hope of his whole felicity. Whereupon it
follows, yt they which believe in saints, and place some part of their hope
of felicite in the^, and not in God alone, by his judgment, and by ye judgment
of ye Apostle also believe not in God. Where I said, if Saints also are to be
inuocated, then God alone knows not the hearts of all men, and God only is
not to be worshipped and served, and Christ is not our only Mediator and
Advocate: Bristowe calls it iangling, without allegations. I supposed these
principles had been sufficiently known to every learned Papist, without
allegations, but seeing Bristowe will not take knowledge of them, because he
knows not how to shift his hands of them. For the first, my allegation shall
be 1. Reg. 8. Solomon in his prayer says unto God: What prayers or
supplications shall be made of any man, or of all thy people Israel, when every
one shall know the plague in his own heart, and stretche forth his hands in
this house, Hear thou then in heaven in thy dwelling place, and be merciful,
and do and give every man according to all his ways as thou know his
heart, for thou only know the hearts of all the children of men. For the
second, that God only is to be worshipped and served, it is the saying of our
savior Christ, Math. 4. and Luk 4. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and
him only shall thou serve.

That Christ only is our Mediator and Advocate, Saint Paul testifies 1.
Timoth. 2. there is but one God and one mediator of God and men, the man Jesus
Christ, in which place he speaks of Prayer, supplications, intercessions,
etc. to be made for all men. And Saint John 1. Ioh. 2. If any man sin, we
have an advocate with the father Jesus Christ the righteous and he is the
propitiation for our sins. But, says Brist, as I say to Ambrose, and others
whom I confess to be of the true Church, so must I say it to Saint John Apoc.
1. for inuocating the holy Angels. But I find not that John did invoke the
holy Angels, in that place, although the seven spirits from whom he wishes
grace, should not be the holy Ghost, but Angels the ministers of the holy
Ghost. For he that prays that God will send rain from heaven, does not
invoke heaven. But I must say the same to God him self, for making an Angel
to be worshipped as Apoc. 3. as he has told me in the. 6. Chapter, where I
have told him mine answer. likewise to the Angel Apoc. 8. Which made a
perfume with the prayers of Saints, and to the 24. Seniors which had sweet
odours, that is, prayers in bowls, etc. But there is no such need, the Angel
Apoc. 8. represents Christ, the only high priest that has authority to
stand at the altar in heaven, and offer incense, and to present the prayers of
the Church, that they may be acceptable to God. Heb. 13. The Elders are the
Church of God, in the whole world, whose prayers and supplications, only our
savior Christ makes acceptable. But it makes nothing against our Mediator
to God, says Bristowe, though we are and have never so many Mediators, so yt
all make suite to God by him. Then it makes no matter how many petie Gods we
have, so one be principal, as Plato taught. Again he says: it is nothing
against God alone, to be worshipped, so that we worship none but for him. If
this were true, it were lawful to worship the Devil, because he is Gods
minister, and has great power under him: yea our Savior Christ had not
answered his temptation, when he required to be worshipped, as one that had
all the glory of the world committed by God to him to bestow at his pleasure,
in saying it is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only
shall thou serve. Last of all, he says it is nothing against God above, to
know our hearts, so yt all others know them by him. But Solomon reasons that
God only is to be called upon, because he only knows the hearts of all
men. And where finds Bristowe, that all others, or any one by God, knows
the hearts of all men? To conclude, the word only, excludes no more with
Bristowe, then he list to admit by his blind distinctions, which if they may
be permitted against the plain sense and words of the Scriptures, nothing
shall be left proper to God, nothing proper to our Savior Christ, nothing
proper to any thing, that the Scripture makes peculiar unto it.

The next title is fasting, about which Bristowe reports, that I say: Purg.
391. You are they that attend to spirits of errors, and doctrine of devils,
forbidding to marry, and abstaining, or commanding to abstain from meats,
which God has created to be received with thanksgiving. 1. Tim. 4. There is
the brandmarke of Romish religion, that all the water in Tiberis, nor in the
Ocean sea, shall not be able to wash out. Against this: Soft alitle (says
Bristowe) and you shall see me draw enough and enough again, even out of
your own puddle, to wash all sufficiently. But what draws he? I confess
that Aerius and Iouinian condemned fasting or fasting days? what then?
Abstinence from certain meats is a question distinct from fasting, which is
abstinence from all meats. But Iouinian (says he) taught abstinence from
certain meats to profit nothing. Well: Aerius contrariwise taught abstinence
from flesh to be a religious matter, as you Papists do. For to abstain from
wine, flesh, fish, spices, fruits, or any thing which perteyneth to
sobriety, is not to think it unlawful to eat or drink any of these, at
this time, or that time, as it is thought of you Papists, and a matter of more
holiness, to fill your belly with fish, then with flesh, although the fish,
wine, fruits, spices, and such like confections as you eat, be ten times
more dangerous unto sobriety and chastity, then a piece of beef^ or bacon,
which a poor man eats on a friday to satisfy his hunger, and gives God
thanks for it. Your public admitting of all incentiue meats and drinks,
except flesh or white meat on your fasting days, sufficiently declares, that
neither fasting nor chastisement of men's bodies is your intent: but as the
Apostle says, false speaking in hypocrisy. But whom and what does Saint
Paul mean (says Bristowe?) He answers, the Manichees, the Tacianistes,
and other heretics, which said, that certain meats were the creatures of
the devil. Nay Bristowe, not them only, nor principally; but all other
heretics that said, flesh was unclean, although they confessed it to be the
creature of God, as the Aeriaus and Priscillianistes, and specially the
Papists, which under pretense of holiness, as fasting and chastity,
command to abstain from meats and marriage. For they that abstain from
these things, saying they are the creatures of the devil, speak not a lie in
hypocrisy, but an open blasphemy. As for the example of them, whose
voluntary abstinence from meats or marriage, Saint Augustine defends,
contra Faust. lib. 30. Cap. 6. cannot excuse you, which forbid meats and
marriage, more imperiously to some men at all times, and to all men at some
times, then ever the Manichees did to their clergy, or priests, which they
called perfect ones.

Another saying of mine, Art. 46. Bristowe repeateth: If Iouinian taught that
fasting, abstinence from certain meats, and other bodily exercises, of them
selves profit little, his doctrine agrees with the doctrine of Saint Paul, 1.
Timothy. 4. But if he taught, as he is charged, that such things profit
nothing at all, we agree not with him in that opinion.

To this (Bristowe says) I would feign wype mine hands of Iouinians
heresy, but it will not be: For his heresy was, that fasting and abstinence
is not more meritorious then eating with thanksgiving. If you call this
heresy, I am nothing ashamed of it: there is no more merit in the one than in
the other. But how prove you that was his heresy? Forsooth Augustine De
dogm. Eccles. Cap. 68. so says. But who shall grant unto him, that bastard
collection to be of Saint Augustines penning? Well then the undoubted
Augustine, ad Quodvult enim says: meritis adaequabat, he made equal to the
merits, of chaste and faithful matrimonies, the virginity, etc.

But he that is acquainted with Saint Augustines writings, shall perceive
that by merits, often times he means not as the Papists do, the desert of
good works, but ye dignity, excellency, commendation. For merits in that
signification as the Papists use, he always condemns them in the Pelagians,
and all other, saying that God crowns or rewards in us his gifts, not our
merits. For our merits are nothing but sins in Psalm. 70. Con. 2. in Psa.
101. in Psa. 144.

Now have we to see, what Saint Paul calls bodily exercise. Bristowe says:
walking, ryding, hunting, hawking, and such like exercises, used for
preservation of men's bodies. And think you Timothy, which to chastise his
body, used to abstain from wine, was doubted of S. Paul, lest he should give
him self overmuch to walking, riding, hawking, hunting? At least wise, hear
what S. Ambrose writes upon the text, Exercitium aute^ corporale, etc. He
says, that bodily exercise is profitable to little. For to fast and abstain
from meats, the authority of the creator remaining, does not profit much,
except godliness be added unto these things, etc. Let Bristowe s^ye, that S
Ambrose knew not white from black, as he says of me, and look better to his
conference, of S. Paul's abstinence, 1. Cor. 9. from all things ye were
offensive. But where he concludes, the measure of all abstinence is to tame
the body, and bring it in subjection to the spirit, but with such moderation,
that it fainte not in our necessary work, I agree with him, that so it ought
to be, but that so it is not, nor yet intended in the popish commaundment of
abstinence, as I have showed before sufficiently: As for the fasting of yt
children of the bridegroom, like to the fastes prescribed by the disciples of
Saint John, and of the Pharisees, it is impertinent to speak of, where ye
question is not of Christian fasting, but of apostaticall abstinence from
meats and marriage: although Christian fasting, is nothing like to the
Pharisaicall fasting, but only in refraining from meat, in the end and
manner altogether differing and unlike. Math. 6. Luke. 18. About the Sacraments
in general. Bristowe.




Of the Sacraments in general, I say: Pur. 450. We Fulke.
^eleeue that there are but two sacraments of the new ^estament, baptism, and
the Lords supper, instituted by Christ. 1. Cor. 10. Bristowe asks, if these
be sacraments of the new testament instituted by Christ, which Saint Paul
speaks of baptism in the clowd and s^^, and of the spiritual meat and
drink in Manna and the rock. Because he does only ask, it shall suffice to
answer only, yea, they are sacraments of the new testament, and instituted
by Christ, the mediator of the new testament, by which our fathers were
saved, although by Christ coming in the flesh, they were ^nstituted
differing somewhat in external form and matter, though in inward grace and
signification they were all one.

Secondly, supposing they are sacraments of the new ^estament, by Christ
instituted, he asks what reason ^t is, to argue of one place negatiuely,
only two are ^amed, ergo only two are instituted. I answer, the argument is
not of the only naming of two, but of the whole argument of the Apostle, which
is, to prove, that ^he fathers in participation of the sacraments, were equal
with us, which were not sufficiently proved, if having named only two, there
were other five, wherein we are superior to them: So that the naming of two,
is in this place the excluding of all other except those two. Now let us
discuss Bristowes reasons for the number of Sacraments to be seven. We read
of the other five in other places. Where I pray you? Of Confirmation, John the
7. You read more then I can find there named or signified, except you mean
of the increase of Gods spirit in more excellent and evident graces, which the
faithful should receive after the resurrection and ascension of Christ,
which differs far from confirmation of children by imposition of hands.

Of Penance, you read John. 20. Of power given to the Apostles to remit and
retain sins: I read but of auricular confession and satisfaction, I read
not.

Of extreme unction, you read Iac. 5: of annoynting the sick with oil, which
by a special gift recovered health of body, as well as remission of sins, at
the prayer of the faithful, I read: but of anealing men desperately sick,
which has no hope of bodily recovery, I read not.

Of orders, you read, Math. 26. but I read nothing at all, although I read
that the Apostles were commanded to continue the celebration of his supper
instituted by him, which were before ministers of his sacraments and preachers
of his word; but of Bennet and Collet, coniurer, subdeacon, or mass priest, I
read not in all the Scripture, nor of Deacon in that Chapter.

Of Matrimony, both yet and I read Math. 19 but not instituted at that time
by Christ, but long before in Paradise, and is no more a sacrament of the new
testament, then the raynebowe, which yet with the covenant thereof remains in
use among Christians. But you confess you read not in those places, that they
are sacraments, no more do you read, 1. Cor. 10. that baptism, or the
Lords supper are sacraments or any where else. This is a stale quarrel, of
the name of sacraments, which is not found in Scripture, although the thing
signified by the name, that is ye seals of Gods promises, and the name of
sign of Gods covenants be often found.

But your last refuge is, that the Apostle speaks only of the first
entrance into Christianity, which in antiquity was by baptism, confirmation,
the complement of baptism, and the Euchariste, and therefore speaks not of
the rest. Beside that this fantasy is manifestly contrary to the Apostles
purpose, which was to show, that the external sacraments of Gods grace,
without a godly life, would not serve to assure us, that God was pleased
withvs: it is clear, that the Corinthians, among whom Saint Paul so long had
preached, could not be without all other sacraments, if any other were. They
had children to be confirmed, they themselves were married, elders were to be
ordered, offenders by penance were to be reconciled, many were sick, and
some were fallen a sleep, to be anealed. And Saint Paul says expressly,
they were behind in no grace or gift of Gods spirit. 1. Corinthians. 1.
Wherefore, that they were young nouices newely entered the bars, and not
knights exercised in battle, it is a dream of Bristowes drowsi^ head, and
no truth to be verified of the Corinthians.

Secondly I say, of the sacraments in general, that they give not grace ex
opere operato, of the work wrought, but after the faith of the receiver and
according to the election of Go^. (...). Corin. 10. Again, how should the
sacrament give grace of the work wrought, if faith were requisite in them that
receive them? This argument, says Bristowe, holds as well against the working
of Christ's passion. Why sir, the passion of Christ gives not grace, but to the
faithful and elect of God.

But faith, you say, is no work, nor instrument, but only a dispofition as
dryness in wodde, that the fire works upon. I will not enter into any
philosophical disputation with you, whether it be dryness or moisture in the
wodde that the fire works upon, perhaps you think, that water is moyster
then air, which error, if you had no more, cannot make you an heretic.

But I marvel, what cause you will make faith, seeing you exclude it from
efficients, except you make it a matter, for the sacraments to work upon, or
else I know not what you mean by yt your disposition like drienesse in wood,
which in deed is the thin air, more apt to receive inflammations, then the
thick water, but perhaps you make it only a potentia, like materia prima, for
you add, that by our indisposition we do not put obicem.

But you hold that the sacraments give grace of the work wrought, without the
good motion of the vser, only so he do no part obicem, that is, so he do
not withstand the working, as if a man be baptized sleeping, and thinking
nothing of it. Nevertheless seeing the scripture often affirms that God
works in us by faith, faith must needs be an isntrumental efficient, when
you have said all that you can, except you will teach us new gramer and
Logike. You confess the scripture says, that by believing and other good
actions, we work our own salvation, Phil. 2. as by way of meriting, but it
says not that we work the effect of any sacrament: neither do I say, that
we work the effect of any sacrament, but that God works in us according to
faith, which he gives us, and his election. You say further; that the
scripture teaches, that the passion of Christ gives to our deeds virtue to
merit: where is that scripture written? for until you show me where it is
written, I will say still to you as I said to Allen, ye Church of Christ
abhors that blasphemy, believing steadfastly, that we are justified freely
by his grace through the redemption of Christ Jesus, without respect of our
works. Romans 3. 4.

But yet Bristowe will make men believe, that I show manifold ignorance, where
I say Purg. 35. The mean on Gods behalf by which we are made partakers of the
fruits of Christ's passion, and so graffed into his body, is his holy spirit
of promise, which is the earnest and assuring of our inheritance: who works
in us faith, as the only mean by which the righteousness of Christ is
applied unto us, Ephe. 1. And as for the sacraments, (which you seem to make
the only conduites of Gods mercy) we are taught in the holy scriptures that
they are the seals of Gods promises given for the confirmation of our faith,
as was circumcision to Abraham, when he was justified before through faith.
Romans 4.

Bristowes eyes being daseled at the clear light of this truth, turns his
head away from the matter, and wrangleth against diverse points of Caluinisme,
as he says, but in deed of mere Bristowisme. For Calvin never held any
such matter as he imagines: He asks whether this be to say, that all men are
justified before they come to the sacrament, as though Calvin said they were.
Whereas a great number are justified neither before, nor after the receipt of
them. But this is to say, that as Abraham was justified by faith, without
respect of the sacrament, so are all they that are justified, justified by
faith, without respect of the sacrament. Secondly he asks, whether all
sacraments be seals of such a matter. Yea verily, or else saint Paul proves
the justification of the Gentiles by faith, very feebly, after the example of
Abraham. Thirdly he asks whether all Jews were justified, before they came
to circumcision, which I never heard any man to affirm, but that as many
Jews as were justified, were justified by faith, as Abraham was, circumcision
no more regarded in their justification, then it was in the justification of
Abraham. Last of all he asks, whether circumcision were to the Jews a seal
of such a matter? still he calls it such a matter, because he dare not name
justification by faith. O the stinge of a wicked conscience. But to the
question. I answer that to ye Jews which were justified by faith,
circumcision was a seal of the righteousness of faith, which is imputed to
them, as it was to Abraham without merit, or respect of their circumcision.

Other points of mine ignorance, he says, are about the holy spirit of
promise, whereof Saint Paul speaks Ephe. 1. which I say is the mean, to make
us partakers of the fruits of Christ's passion: Item the mean to graffe us
into his body: Item, that it works in us faith. In the conclusion, he notes
the ignorance of the Protestants, where they hold, this spirit promised to
be nothing else, but the gift of tongues, that is to say, Christ's greatest
gift, to be his least gift. Out upon the shameless liar, which of the
Protestants can thou name, that so holds? We all hold that the holy
spirit of promise, Ephesians. 1. is the spirit of adoption, by which we are
assured of eternal life. Romans 8. And as for the spirit, prophesied by Joel,
and John Baptist, promised by Christ to be sent after his ascension, we hold
not to be specially of the spirit of adoption, which the Apostles and al ye
faithful had before Christ's death, and much less of that spirit, which your
Bishops give by imposition of hands, in their counterfeit confirmation, which
is the spirit of vanity, whose fruits appear not in any of the receivers:
But we hold that promised gift of Gods spirit, to be that wonderful
revelation of knowledge and understanding and vttera^ce in all states and
degrees of true Christians generally, beside a great number of particular
gifts, not perpetual, bestowed upon the Church in diverse special members,
for the certifying thereof in the first publishing of the gospel. As for your
conference of scriptures, whereof you prate so much, is a mere confusion of
matters of diverse senses. According to which manner of conference, not
weighing the sense of every place, by the proper circumstances thereof, but
following only a sound and similitude of some words, every heretic might
color his heresy, were it never so absurd, as the Valentinians of whom
Irenaeus testifies, that they patched diverse sentences together, to make a
show, as though their heresy were contained in holy write: which was nothing
else, but as if a man breaking a goodly image of a king in pieces, should of
the piece after his own manner joined together, make the image of a dog, or
a fox or other foul beast, Iren. lib. 1. Chapt. 1. such is your conference
of the spirit of promise, wherewith the faithful are sealed Ephesians. 1. with
the spirit of tongues and prophecy which came upon the twelve, on whom saint
Paul laid his hands. Acts 19. The last error of faith he charge me, to
be the only mean, which he says, is no mean but a disposition, he
thinks it sufficiently discovered before, whereunto I also think that I have
made answer sufficiently. About the sacraments in special. The necessity
and effect of baptism. Bristowe.




Concerning baptism, I say it is necessary for all christians Fulke.
to receive, that are not by necessity excluded from it. 1. Pet. 3. Bristow
says, it is necessary for all men, but when it cannot be actually had, the
effectual desire of it supplyeth the want: which desire infantes have not, and
therefore only the actual having of baptism, does quicken them in Christ,
being dead in Adam. Touching the salvation of infants of the faithful dying
without baptism, I said nothing but by implication, that there is no such
necessity of Baptism, that the want of the outward sacrament should
condemn the seed of the faithful, perteining to gods election and covenant,
where there is no default, either of contempt or neglect of it. To. 9. Ge. 17.
And seeing Bristow allows ye effectual desire in men of years to supply the
want, which yet ye words of his text, Iam. 3. of which he takes color and
authority of his doctors, that condemn all unbaptized infants will not bear,
what reason is it, why he should not extend his supply, unto the effectual
desire of those infants, parents, and friends, whose faith he acknoledgeth to
supply the want of actual faith in the infants that are baptized? Beside this
he says that he did mark well enough where I said yt the sacraments give grace
according to ye election of God. As though all infants baptized, and so dying
be not of Gods elect, or that some be not saved, although they be baptized,
and asks what scripture I have for this geere? But in deed he bow leth at
the wrong mark, for in saying yt the sacraments took effect according to ye
faith of ye receiver and according to gods election, I meant, yt God in baptism
gives grace to infa^ts, which have no actual faith of their own, according to
his eternal election in mercy. But whether al infants baptized and so dying be
of ye number of gods elect, as I do not know, so I will not contend. But this I
know, that if they were not elected of God before the foundations of the world
were laid, the receiving of baptism, cannot make them Gods elect. Ephe. 1.
Where Bristowe urges the saying of saint Peter, 1. Pet. 3. baptism saves us
now, it is a weak argument to prove the baptism of infants, either to save
them all that receive it, or to condemn all that receives it not. For
explicating him self of what baptism he speaks, he adds, not the putting
away of the filth of the flesh, as you would say, outward washing, which is
the external sacrament, but the interrogation of a good conscience toward
God, which is the thing signified by outward washing, and yet not found in
infantes, but in them that have knowledge, among whom, whosoever has it not,
he shall no more be saved then any was preserved from drowning that was not
in the Arc of Noah. In which Arc one at least was saved from bodily
drowning, which was not inwardly baptized with the spirit unto salvation. The
figure of whom, I might urge as probable as Bristow does of the whole number
saved, from drowning, like unto whom al they that are baptized are brought into
the visible Church, although some with Cham, are not members of the mystical
body of Christ. Real presence transubstantiation.



Touching the Eucharist I said, Christ is present at Bristowe.
his supper, but not after a gross and Capernaicall manner Fulke.
but as he was present in Manna to the fathers. 1. Cor. 10. Bristowes answer
is, it was a spiritual meat, a spiritual drink, for it signified Christ.
But Saint Paul says expressly it was Christ, and the Rock was Christ. But,
est, is, taken for significat, where it pleases the Papists, where it pleases
them not, it is blasphemy, impudency, falsification etc. Further he says,
they all did eat one, and the same meat, but not that they and we eat one,
and the same meat. Although Saint Augustine is clear, they did eat one, and
the same that we eat, yet I will prove it by argument out of the Scripture,
that which we eat and that which they did eat was, and is Christ, ergo they
and we eat one and the same meat, even as they were baptized with the same
baptism: for the church of God never had but one baptism. As for the
Capernaites, he says, I understand not the chapter, John 6. and so only
tells his fantasy upon it. But what mine understanding is of that chapter,
and also mine answer to al popish reasons, falsely gathered thereout: let it
appear in my confutation of Heskins and Sanders.

Concerning transubstantiation, I said, Of all follyes this is the greatest,
that when the Papists have prated never so long of the sacrifice of bread and
wine, at the last they will have no bread nor wine in their sacrifice. First
he says, this wise argument, proves the papists and their fathers the old
writers, to be fools. To this I replye, those old writers, which are none of
the papists fathers, although they supposed Melchizedechs bread and wine, to
be a figure of our sacrament, yet they were not such fools to deny bread
and wine to remain in our sacrament. But for answer, Bristow says, that I my
self confess, yt the drink of the water of the rock, was a figure of our
drink in Christ's Chalice, although that were water, and this is no water, no
nor made of water, how much more, might Melchizedechs bread and wine be a
figure of it, although there be no bread nor wine in it, considering it was
made of bread and wine, and retains the forms of bread and wine? etc. But
where has he this confession of mine? I never said the water of the Rock was
a figure of Christ's cup, but even Christ's cup it self, and the very blood
of Christ in a sacrament, to the faithful, as the wine in the cup is to us.
For Christ did even then feed his true members with his flesh and blood unto
eternal life. John. 6. Marriage of Votaries: as Bishops, Priests, Deacons.



Because we say, the marriage of votaries is sin and Bristowe.
no marriage. Fulke says, we are the forbidders of marriage, Fulke.
that saint Paul speaks off. 1. Tim. 4. But this says Bristow, I have showed
to pertain to the Eucratites, and Maniches etc. and I have showed that it
pertains more properly to the Papists. But saint Augustine answers them
and Fulke at once, says Bristowe, Cont. Faust. lib. 30. Cap. 6. Ille prohibet
nubere, qui hoc malum esse dicit: He forbids to marry, yt says it is a
naughty thing, non qui huic bono aliud melius, anteponit, and not he, which to
this good thing, prefers an other better thing. Well, if he forbid to
marry and to teach the doctrine of Devils, which says marriage is a naughty
thing, then you Papists, which (as you confessed before) say that the marriage
of votarics is sin, say it is a naughty thing, and consequently forbidding
to marry do teach the doctrine of Devils: neither can you shift a way to
say, you do not affirm, that which is marriage indeed, to be a sin but
that which is falsely called marriage: for you say even as the Manichees in
this point, it is a naughty thing, for the Clergy, and them that be in holy
orders to marry, and therefore you compel them to the vow, and forbid
marriage to all that will enter into those orders, and also into moonkery, which
you call religion, as though holiness and religion could not stand with
marriage. And therefore to you, as well as to the Manichees Saint Augustine
speaks in the. 4. Chapter of that Book, in defense of the catholic Church
which in his time forbadde not marriage, nor compelled any to virginity. Hoc
nobis primum responde^tis velim, etc. I would you should answer this thing
first unto us, whither it be the doctrine of Devils to make any virgins at
all, or only to make them by prohibition of marrying? if by prohibition, it
perteyneth nothing to us, for we our selves do judge it as foolish a thing
to stay one that is willinge (to be a virgin) as it is a wicked and very
ungodly thing to compel one that is unwilling. As for the preferring of
virginity, in them that have the gift, and for whom it is convenient, for
setting forth of the kingdom of God, before marriage, according to the
doctrine of Saint Paul, we agree with Saint Augustine and dissent from
Iouinian, if his doctrine were as it is reported. But if Iouinian taught (as I
said) Ar. 45. that such as could not conteyne, though they had vowed
virginity, should nevertheless be married, this was the doctrine of Saint
Paul, it is better to marry then to burn. And although Ambrose and Augustine,
account such marriage to be adultery, or worse then adultery, yet the holy
Ghost says: marriage is honorable in all men and the bed undefiled. Heb. 13.
And for them that cannot contain, although they have vowed virginity, it is
better to marry then to burn, 1. Cor. 7. except Bristowe think it better to
quench the fire of lust, with fornication and uncleanness: For all men cannot
contain, neither can all men make them selves chaste for the kingdom of God.
Math 19, But this conference of Scripture pleases not Bristowe, for he
counts it none at all, comparing me for want of conference of scripture to a
cloud without water: well then, let us hear what sweet dew comes from
Bristowes cloud.

First he asks what it is to burn. He answers, to be troubled with the
pricking of the flesh, say the heretics. Not so, say we: for Saint Paul
himself was troubled much, with such pricking, 2. Corin. 12. and yet he was
not bidden to marry, when he prayed so instantly against it, but it was said
unto him by Christ, My grace is sufficient for thee, my strength is perfected
in infirmity, etc. First he belyeth us, whom he calls heretics, to say
that to burn, is nothing else but to be troubled with the pricking of the
flesh: for we hold, there is no praise of virginity, where there is no
natural provocation unto lust. But to burn we say, is to be so troubled,
as men are, that are inflamed with lust, and have no lawful means to quench
the same.

Secondly, behold how shamefully he slaundereth Saint Paul, to be much
troubled with such pricking of the flesh, where he complayneth of the general
rebellion of the flesh, against the spirit, the messenger of Satan to buffet
him, even that law of his members, of which he complayneth Romans 7. which
brought him captive under the law of sin. As for that pricking, which
Bristowe speaks of to be so much in a body so exercised with afflictions
and travels, with hunger, and fastings, and in a man of such age, as Saint
Paul was at that time, when he wrote unto the Corinthians the second Epistle,
it is altogether incredible. And confessing a general rebellion of the flesh,
against the spirit unto all sin, it is not probable that he should in this
place, complain of that one kind only, from which age and weakness of
body would privilege him, if godly exercise did not rid him. What is it
then to burn, says Bristowe, or to be burned? saint Paul himself tells us,
it is, not to contain: If they do not contain, let them marry, for it is
better to marry then to burn, for marriage is honorable and undefiled, but
fornicatours and adulterers God will judge. The conference whereof is this: Let
married folk use their own bed, etc. and let the unmarried folk enter into
marriage, rather then not to contain, to burn, to commit fornication. So that
to burn, not to contain, and to commit fornication, by Bristowes conference,
is all one: So that he which commits not fornication, although he be
continually inflamed with filthy lust, yet by Bristowes judgment, he
burns not, he is continent, he is a virgin. Again, if not to contain, and
to burn be nothing else, but to commit fornication, it would follow in saint
Paul's words, that men are not commanded to marry, before they have made
trial of their incontinence by committing fornication, which seeing it is
horrible absurdity: it follows, that the Apostle to prevent fornication,
exhorting men to marry which contain not, seeing it is better to marry then
to burn, understands incontinence and burning, for an infla^mation of lust,
without fornication, or actual filthiness committed.

But whatsoever saint Paul speaks of marriage of them that do not contain,
he means it of such as have made no vow to live unmarried. For of those
that have vowed, his sentence is (says Bristowe) that they incur damnation
if they marry, because they have broken their first faith: 1. Tim. which faith
with S. Augustine he understands for their last vow of widowhood,
notwithstanding, that I showed, both by conference in the same chapter, by the
title of, first, and by the name of faith, that it cannot properly be so
taken, but for the faith of Christianity, even as he says: if any provide not
for his family, he has denied the faith. Where I find the word (...) in the
scripture is never used for a vow or promise made to God. Bristowe answers,
why? do not you say your self, that both there and once before in ye same
chapt. it is used for ye vow or promise made in baptism? no sir. I never said
it. I said that the first faith may aptly be taken for the faith of baptism,
and Christianity, except you will say that the faith of Christianity embraced
by baptism, is nothing else but a vow or promise made to God. Again, can you
remember never a place (says he) where the faith of god is the promise of God?
look Romans 3. yea sir, I remember (...) taken for the truth of Gods promise,
but I find not yet (...) taken for the vow or promise made to God, which
because you your self, so great and daily a conferrer of scriptures, could
not find, you cur^olled my saying, repeating my words for a vow or promise,
and leaving out that I added, made to God. The Latin phrase of the faith or
promise of marriage used by Saint Augustine and other Latin writers,
answers not to my demand, of the use of the greek word (...)(...) in the
scriptures: which if the Apostle had taken for the promise of widowhood made in
their admission, it is more like he would have called it (...), their former
faith, and not (...) their first faith. Again the conference which Bristowe
urges, of them that are already turned back after Satan, most aptely agrees
to the^ that had forsaken not only their widowhood, but also their
Christianity, Lo, says Bristowe, your self are compelled to grant, that
which you denied, to wit that they shall be damned because they forsake
widowhoode? and how forsake they widowhoode but by marrying? ergo, Saint Paul
says they shall be damned for marrying: so invincible is the text, in our
exposition. Fulke, it goes hard with you. And all this, because I said such
wanton young huswiues, proceed so far, that at length they forsake
widowhood, Christianity and al. Said I only because they forsake widowhoode?
No, but because they wax wanton against Christ, because they have forsaken the
first faith, which is Christianity, and not only because they have married, and
given over their widowhoode: whereof whether there were a vow or no, it is not
proved. Although it be probable, there was a promise made unto the Church,
because such poor widows sustained of the Churches alms, were employed to be
helpers 1. Cor. 12. in the office of Deacons. Romans 16. Considering that it was
not sufficient for the sick and impotent, that men should be collectors and
distributers of the alms, but women also were necessary, for diverse services
about them which were not convenient for men to exercise. But if I should
grant unto you, that the first faith here, signifies the last vow of
widowhoode, yet it follows not of this place, that all that have married after
rash vows made to the contrary, are damned. For Saint Paul speaks not of
them that were constreined by the necessity of incontinencie (which it is not
every man's gift to avoid) to fly to the general remedy appointed by God, for
avoiding of fornication, that every man should have his wife, and every woman
should have her husband, without any exception: but only of them he speaks,
yt waxed wanton against Christ, which being living to the world, were dead to
God. What is this against them, which ignorantly rashly or constrainedly made a
vow to perform, that which they were not able? namely continence or chastity,
without marriage, the breach whereof is not only by marriage, but much more by
fornication and uncleanness, yea by continual burning, without actual
filthiness, which with Saint Paul is incontinence.

And yet the Papists, as though there were no way to break such vow, but by
marriage, which is the best mean of chastity, for them that can not be chaste
in single life, cry out damnation only against married votaries, affirming
that infinite whoredoms and uncleanness, are less breach of vow, then marriage,
and the marriage of votaries to be no marriage. Yet Saint Ambrose, who counts
it an adultery against Christ, for a vowed virgin to marry, counts the
marriage of such a one, in respect of her bodily husband to be lawful
matrimony, and a much less fault, to enter into marriage, then once to commit
fornication. Ad Virg. Laps. Cap. 5. And more plainly Saint Augustine which
counts the marriages of such, of whom the Apostle speaks to be worse then
adulteries, in respect of the breach of their vow, made to Christ: yet
counts them to be marriages, and no adulteries, and detesteth the separation
of such married persons, De bono Vid^. Cap. 8. 9. 10. 11.

Where Allen railing against our Bishops, and as he terms our disordered new
ministry, says, that ere ever they be well warmed in their benisices, they
must for the most part, as it were Annexum ordini, have a wife. I answered,
Belyke Saint Paul takes marriage to be so annexed to the order of an
ecclesiastical minister, yt he never describes the perfect pattern of a
Bishop or Deacon, but one of the first points is, that he be the husband of
one wife. Bristowe says, I allege the text to salve our Bishops itching lust:
and more blasphemously speaks Allen against our ministers marriage, whom yet
they account to be but lay men. Where are they now that say marriage is a
naughty thing? But concerning the term of Annexum ordini, although I said in
derision thereof, Belyke, etc. as before, yet I meant not, that it was necessary
for every perfect minister to be married, but that none is more perfect, then
they that are married. Notwithstanding some men considering that the Apostle
requires hospitality, that is the charitable entertainment of poor
strangers, as a special virtue in a Bishop or minister of the Church,
think marriage to be more convenient then sole life, for that degree, because
diverse parts of hospitality, of which Saint Paul makes, the washinge of
the Saints feet, one, and such like, are not convenient but for women to
exercise, whom it were inconvenient, that a Bishop should keep in his house,
and not be a married man. But Bristowe will teach me to understand, what Saint
Paul means by the husband of one wife, by conference of that place. 1. Tim.
5. where he will have a widow to be chosen, such a one, quae fuit vnius viri
vx^r, as has been the wife of one husband: so that he requires in a Bishop,
Priest, or Deacon, to be made, that he have had only one wife. Indeed
Bristowe: I learn by this conference, that Saint Paul who knew how to write
his mind in Greek, although he had not spoken expressly of the behavior of
Bishops, and Deacons wives. 1. Tim. 3. yet using the present temps, in speaking
of Bishops, Elders, and Deacons, to be the husband of one wife, and the
preterperfect temps, in speaking of widows, which have had one husband did
mean, that he requires such a one to be made Bishop, Elder or Deacon, which
presently has a wife: and not which had a wife, that at the time of their
election were dead, as the widows husband. It behooves a Bishop (...) to be
unreprovable, the husband of one wife, sober, etc. except you will likewise
say, a Bishop must be such a one, as has been sober, etc. although he be not
so now. Again, (...) let Deacons be the husbands of one wife. And again
Tit. 1. ^i (...), if any man is vnreprehensible, the husband of one wife.
Therefore a Bishop, Elder, or Deacon, may be he, that has a wife, presently,
and not he that has had one which is dead, only. Moreover I learn by
conference of that place, 1. Tim. 5. that Polygamie, which is many wives at one
time, is forbidden a Bishop, and not second marriage, as it hathben commonly and
of old time taken of many: seeing there is no reason to exclude a poor widow
from alms and office in the Church, that has lived continently with more
husbands then one, so that she have kept her to one at one time: But it is not
meet, that she should be elected to an office in the Church, which has been
an adulteress, or unlawfully divorced from her husband, has married an other,
although she may be relieved by alms, if she be penitent.

But Bristowe would have men to mark it well, that yet never from the Apostles
time, to this day, any one Bishop or Priest, that is confessed to have been
a good one, did marry afterward, no not Iouinian him self. He would feign
if he durst, say that no Bishop or Priest had a wife: but that were easily
refelled out of Eusebius and all ancient histories. Clemens Alex. Strom. lib.
3. shows that the Apostles Peter and Philip, had wives and did beget
children. Also he says of Saint Paul, Vnius quoque vxoris virum utique
admittit, seu hoc Presbyter, seu Diaconus, seu Laicus viens matrimonio citra
reprehensionem. He allows the husband of one wife, whether he be Elder, or
Deacon, or lay man, using matrimony without reprehension. Seeing therefore he
puts no difference in respect of matrimony, between a Lay man, and a
Clergy man, it is plain, that it was as lawful for Elders and Deacons to
marry in his time, as for Lay men. Again the same Clemens says against them
that denied the lawfulness of generation, after he had cited diverse textes of
Scripture. Quid autem ad haec dicunt, qui in legem, etc. But what say they to
these things, which inueygh against the law, and against matrimony, as that
it was granted only in the law, and not also in the new Testament? What can
they say to these laws that are made, which abhor sowing and generation,
when he makes a Bishop also, him that rules his house well, guide of the
Church? And the marriage of one woman builds the house of our Lord.
Therefore he says, that all things are clean to the clean. Seeing therefore
that marriage is as free by his judgment by the new Testament, as by the law,
and Aarons Priests, were at liberty to marry, no man need to doubt, but the
Bishops and Elders of the Church of Christ, are at as great liberty, and
using their liberty in his time, were allowed for good ones.

Long after his time, the council of Gangra in their Epistle to the Bishops of
Armenia complain of Eustachius and his sect, saying, Presbyteros vero, qui
matrimonis contraxerunt, sperni debere dicunt. They say that Elders or Priests
which have joined them selves in matrimony, ought to be despised. Therefore
these catholic Bishops thought those Priests good ones, which did join them
selves in matrimony, and so they made their Canon: Si quis discernit
Presbyterum coniugatum, etc. If any man make difference of a married Priest, as
though by occasion of his marriage, he ought not to offer, and does therefore
abstain from his oblation, let him be accursed. Cap. 4. Of Deacons also the
Ancyrane council decrees Cap. 10. Diaconi quicunque, etc. Whosoever be
ordained Deacons, if at the same time when they were ordained, they protested,
saying that they would be joined in marriage, because they could not so
continue, if afterward they have married wives, let them remain in the
ministry, because the Bishop has given them license: But so many as have
held their peace, and taken imposition of hands professing continency, and
afterward be joined in marriage, ought to cease from the ministry.

Finally the Decree of Pope Stephanus is cited Did, 31. Aliter se by Gratian
and Iuo: lib 4. allowing the tradition of the oriental Churches for marriage
of their Church ministers. Aliter se Orientalium, etc. The tradition of the
Eastern Churches has it otherwise, and otherwise is the tradition of this
holy Church of Rome. For the Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons of their
Churches, are coupled in marriage: but none of the Priests of this Church,
from the Subdeacon unto the Bishop has license to enter into marriage. It
were hard if there were never a good one among all the Clergy of the East
Churches, since the Apostles time, which have been married and yet are.

To conclude, I trust it is apparent to the indifferent reader, that such texts
of Scripture as I alleged in those two books, which Bristow undertakes in
this confuse manner to confute, were rightly applied, and without all violence
or wresting, do prove sufficiently that for which they were called to
witness. And as for the popish conference of Scriptures, whereof Bristowe once
again with great lothsomnesse does brag, how sound it is, you may perceive
by this example, and taste, given by him in this Chapter. Wherefore I marvel
much what learned ministers of our church these were, whom Bristow affirms
(being in number more then a dozen, and diverse of no vulgar wits) by their
only hearing of your conference of scriptures to have become papists. By like
some vagabonde, irregular, and dishonest persons, being deprived of their
ministry for their ungodly behavior, have sought favor among them by
reuolting, or at least counterfaiting to be revolted to papistrie, when they be
of no religion, commended by Bristow for their wits, but neither for their
honesty nor learning.

CAP. IX.
To defend, that the doctors, as they be confessed to be ours in very many
points, so they be ours in all points, and the Protestants Bristowe.
in no point. All the doctors sayings that he alleges, are examined and
answered.

The first part of his doctors, generally his challenging words.

I confess not the doctors to be yours in very many points, nor simply in
few points, nor all in any point Fulke.
of controversy, but granting that for a few errors, which you have common
with them, in which you also far exceed them, as in prayers for the dead,
prayers to saints, some superstitious or superfluous ceremonies, I affirm
that in the greatest and chiefest points of controversy, they are either all
with us, or not one against us.

2 A general answer to his challenge, declaring that (...) need not to
answer his doctors particularly. Bristowe.


His first reason is, because I said: we stand for authority Fulke.
only to the judgment of the holy scriptures, which scriptures in the chapter
going before, he has satisfied. But how he has satisfied them, let the
indifferent readers judge. And seeing the Papists offer to stand to their
judgment in all things, and we refuse them not as witnesses unto the truth,
in most things, he is not discharged in reason of answering my doctors.

His second reason is, for yt I do answer all mine own doctors for him, if it
be well considered: and what is your consideration? In that I confess them to
have held with you the very same points, for which we must be condemned (no
remedy) as differing from the doctors in the greatest points. What are those
I pray you? Bristowe answers. For why does he say, that we are against the
honor of God, and against the offices of Christ, but because we hold
invocation of saints, and worshipping of their relics? yes sir, for other
more gross idolatry and defacing of the kingdom, priesthod, and prophetical
office of Christ, and for holding these two points more absurdly and grossly
then any of the doctors did. Again, why does he say, that we are against the
authority of Gods word, but because we hold with traditions, as the doctors
did? I answer, the doctors held with no traditions that were proved to be
against the written word of God, they made not the decrees of Councels and
Popes, of equal authority with the word of God as you do.

But of one of the greatest points he repeateth my words, in which I say
expressly: I confess with M. Allen, that the old writers, not only knew, but
also have expressed the value of our redemption by Christ, in such words, as
it is not possible that the Popish satisfaction can stand with them. And yet
on the other side (says Bristowe) see what follows immediately. Against the
value of which redemption, if they have uttered any thing, by the word of
satisfaction, or any thing else, we may lawfully reject their authority, not
only though they be doctors of the church, but also if they were angels from
heaven. But what I pray you concludes Bristowe of these two sayings. His
words follow immediately: So that now we no more need to defend against
him, that we are not contrary to the doctors, then that the doctors are not
contrary to them selves. As though it were impossible for men to be contrary
to themselves. And yet I say no more of them, then of the angels, that they are
contrary to the truth in this point, but that if they were, we might reject
them as lawfully as the angels, if they brought another gospel. Last of all he
says: We need not defend that we are contrary to our selves in the same.
For in what words the doctors speak thereof, the same do we. Neither is the
antecedent true, nor if it were, does the argument follow. For you will not
say as the old writers do, that through the redemption of Christ, a man is
justified before God by faith only. without respect of his works or merits.
And where you use the doctors words, you either use them in a contrary sense,
or else elude them with additions and distinctions, neither grounded on the
Scriptures nor on the old doctors, but invented out of your own heretical
brains. After which manner it is easy to defend that they say nothing against
any heresy, which they do not condemn by name, although they plainly
aduouche the truth, against such error.

3 I ioygne with him nevertheless particularly. Bristowe.


Although they ascribe not infallibility to a few, Fulke.
but only to the uniform consent of the doctors, yet he is content to join
upon this issue, that the protestants have not against them for any one
article at all, so much as any one doctor at all. How he auoydeth mine
evidence, you shall see in that which follows:

The second part. Of his doctors particularly: First, whether they expound any
scripture against us. Bristowe.


As touching antichrist, I said, Pur. 249. The seat of antichrist was appointed
to be set up in the Latin church Fulke.
according to the revelation of Saint John, and the exposition of Ireneus, who
judged yt Lateinos was yt number of ye beasts name spoken of Apoc. 13. To this
Bristo^^ answers, here are two ragged conclusio^s. The first, antichrist was
appointed to be set up in the Latin church, ergo the Pope of Rome is
antichrist. No sir, I made no such argument, but of the authority of Irenaeus
I proved, that the seat of antichrist was appointed to be set up in the Latin
church, and therefore superstition was somewhat forwarder then in the Greek
church. The other conclusion (says Bristowe) is this: Irenaeus judged that
Lateinos should be the name of antichrist, (as Jesus was and is the name of
Christ) ergo, he judged that antichrist was appointed to be set up in the Latin
church: I answer, the antecedent is yours Master Bristowe, and not mine. For I
said not, that Irenaeus judged that Lateinus should be the name of antichrist,
as Jesus is the name of Christ, as though antichrist should be a singular man:
For Irenaeus says it, in respect of his kingdom, which should be in the
Latin part of the world: V^lde verisimile est, quoniam verissimum regnum hoc
hab^^ vocabulum. It is very like, because the most true kingdom has that
name, which was the kingdom of the Romans. Therefore we must seek in the
Roman kingdom for antichist: in which kingdom have reigned hitherto
Emperors and Popes. Emperors have been heathenish and Christened: the
heathenish it could not be, because antichrist must sit in the Church, and they
were altogether without. Of the Emperors, some were Catholic, and some
heretical. The Catholic no man will charge: the heretical Emperors were no
false Prophets, as antichrist must be a false teacher, that with lying signs
and wonders shall deceive the world: wherefore it remains that of all that
have hitherto reigned in the Latin Empire, the Pope must be that principal
antichrist. For Calvin and Luther, whom Bristowe fondly names to be in the
Latin Church) never bare rule in the Latin kingdom. Bristowes last refuge
is, that Irenaeus did not so judge. He only says, it is very like to be so.
I ask no more but his judgment of the likelyhod: For I know he recites
other names, which have in them the same number, as Euan, Teitan, and in the
end will pronounce certainly of none, holding, that it is better to expect the
fulfilling of the Prophecy, then to pronounce rashly of any. But seeing
antichrist is already revealed, and all the prophecy of his apostasy and
seduction accomplished, we doubt not to join to that ancient likelyhod of
Irenaeus, the later likelyhodes of the same name agreeing in number with
Lateinos in Greek, Romiith in Hebrewe, not neglecting Ecclesia Italica. The
consent of all which names, signifying the region, the city, the kingdom,
bear so hard upon the Pope and the popish church of Rome, that Bristowe,
though he lay both his shoulders to it, shall never be able to remove it.

Secondly I said of Hierom, Pur. 373. He was not such a slave to the church
of Rome, yt whatsoever pleased the bishops of that see, he was ready to
accept: For then he would not have been so bold to call Rome the purple whore
of Babylon, Praef. ad Paul. in lib. Didym. Bristow replyeth: as though when he
calls Rome so, or when Augustine calls it the Western Babylon, they mean
the church of Rome. I said not they mean the church of Rome, as it was in
their time, but that antichrist should sit at Rome, whom the scripture
says, must sit in the temple or Church of God, 2. These. 2. Neither does
Augustine mean it of the empire, but of antichrist, which should arise in the
Roman empire. Neither does Hierom mean of ye Paganism of Rome, that
remained in his time, which in ye place by Brist. cited ad Marcell. Ep. 16. he
testifies to have been trovnder feet, but of the purple whore sitting aloft,
upon the rose coulered beast, of the wine of whose fornication, all nations
were made drunken, of the blasphemy written in her forehead, of the seven
hills etc. although in his time, he confess there was the church of God, the
tryumphe of the Apostles and Martyrs, etc. and gentilitate calcata and
Gentilitie being troaden under feet, the Christian name daily lifting it self
aloft. But that Hierom in doubts did seek for resolution of Damasus bishop of
Rome, and that all other must likewise do. Bristowe cites his Epistle ad
Damasum. To(...). 2. in which he consulteth with Damasus, whether he should
use the name of Hippostasis, and says further, that whosoever gathers not
with Damasus, does scatter: that is to say, whosoever is not Christ's is
antichrists, I answer, all this was well, so long as Damasus was a Catholic
bishop, but that Saint Hierome was not ready to accept whatsoever it pleased
the bishop of Rome, it is manifest by that he affirms Liberius to have
subscribed to the Arrians, in Catal. script. which he would never have done, if
he had thought it impossible for the bishop of Rome to err, or necessary for
him to follow the bishop of Romes doctrine in all things. The place cited ad
Damasum with answer to it, is in my confutation of Saunders Rock, Cap. 15.
And therefore the saying of Leo Epist. 89. That Christ took Peter into the
participation of the undivided unity, proves not, that it is all one to be
Peter's and to be Christ's, when Peter erreth from Christ, and much less, that
it is all one (as Bristowe says) to be in unity with Peter and his
successors, meaning the Popes, and to be in unity with Christ, from whom,
not only all Popes in matter now of controversy do. But diverse of the
Bishops and Popes of Rome have been divided into horrible and confessed
errors and heresies, of both parts: as Gentilisme, Arrianisme, Eu^ichianisme,
Menothelitisme, Sadduceisme.

Again, I said Pur. 320. Which of your prelates will follow Ambrose in his
co^mentarie upon the Apocalipse, where he interprets the whore of Babylon to
be the city of Rome? whose words Bristow will recite for me. This whore does
betoken in some places Rome in special, which then did persecute ye church of
God: in some places in general, the city of the devil, that is to say, the
whole body of the reprobat. Bristowe asks if it be not a perilous point to
touch the city of Rome in saint John's time, when it did persecute the church
of Rome? As though S. John tells a story of his own time, and not a
prophecy of the time to come. Ambrose therefore, or whosoever writes that
co^mentarie, interprets that prophecy, Cap. 17. to be fulfilled of the city
of Rome: which was not only of persecution, but of seduction. But the
undoubted Ambrose (if you remember, says Bristowe) of the church of Rome
says: In all things I covet to follow the Roman church, De sac. lib. 3. Cap.
1. but yet that he was not bound to follow the church of Rome, he says
immediately after: Sed tamen and nos homine sensum habemus, etc. But yet we
being men, have understanding. Therefore, that which is more rightly observed
elsewhere, we also do rightly observe. We follow the Apostle Peter him self,
we stick unto his devotion, what does the church of Rome answer to this?
Verily, Peter him self, which was a priest of the church of Rome, is author to
us of this assertion. In this Chapter he notes an error of the church of Rome
in yt they used not to wash men's feet in baptism. Unjustly indeed, he urges
that ceremony as necessary, but yet he shows, that his judgment was, that
the church of Rome might receive a custom contrary to y^ scripture.

Beside this (says Bristow) he calls Peter the first and the foundation in
the very same place, where say you, Pur. 320 he affirms, that Peter is not
the foundation. Howsoever I deal with my reader, you deal unfaithfully with
me: for my words are these: He affirms ye not Peter, but the faith and the
confession of Peter, is the foundation of the church: and that the primacy of
Peter was a primacie of faith, not of honor, of confession, not of authority
or higher order. De incaern. dom. Ca. 4. and 5. Ambrose his words are, Cap. 4.
Vos autem etc. But what do you say of me? Immediately (Peter) being not
unmindful of his place, he exercised the primacy: The primacie of confessing
truly, not of honor, the primacie of faith, not of order or degree. And Cap.
5. Faith is ye foundation of the church. For it was not said of Peter's flesh,
but of his faith, that the gates of death shall not preuailc against it, his
confession overcomes hell. The former of these places, Brist. corrupts by
adding this word, worldly, to the words of Ambrose, honor, and degree, a^
though Ambrose had meant, that Peter excelled in eccle siasticall honor and
degree, being equal to his fellows in worldly honor and degree. But such
folly was far from Ambrose, to say Peter was not better then the rest of the
Apostles in worldly honor and degree, when neither Peter nor the rest had any
worldly honor or degree of dignity at all. But he expresses wherein all his
primacie was, when he says, he was first in confession, first in protestation
of his faith, not being therefore of greater honor or higher degree then his
fellows, who all held the same faith and confession. And this of Peter's
person, never a word of his successors, which yet are not only the bishops
of Rome, when they were at the best, but all other bishops are the successors
of the Apostles, Hierom, Euagrius which succession cannot be esteemed by
places, in which the Apostles sat in person, but by authority of teaching
received from them with soundnes of doctrine.

To the later place (Bristow says) the devil may prevail against the flesh
of a Pope: but his faith, but his confession (as well in all articles that be
now in controversy, as in those at that time) will stand, when they shall all
be sonke down into their due place. But Saint Ambrose speaks not of every
bishop of Romes faith and confession, but only of the singular faith and
confession of Peter: Thou art Christ the son of the living God, which is
against all sects and heresies. Dies me citius etc. the day should sooner
fail me then the names of heretics and diverse sects. Yet this faith is
general against them all, that Christ is the son of God both sempiternall of
his father, and also borne of the virgin. Let now the reader judge, whether
of us has dealt more faithfully with Saint Ambrose.

Fourthly he gathers, that I say in diverse places: that Irenaeus,
Polycrates, Dionysius, Alexandrinus, Cyprianus, the Council of Africa, and
Socrates the historiographer, did preach or write against the Popes authority,
when it first began to advance it self, in Victor, Cornelius Stephanus,
Anastasius, Innocentius, Zozimus, Bonifacius and Celestinus.

To this Bristow answers: First, that all these Popes by my confession were
of the true church, therefore I am against my self in making other Popes to be
antichrist, for claiming such authority as these did. Whereto I replye, the
former bishops did but begin a little in comparison to discover the mystery of
iniquity, those later Popes that are antichrists, did openly show them selves
in the temple of God as God, and therefore great difference. Secondly, Bristowe
answers, that all those writers did communicate with those Popes: therefore
our separation cannot be excused. I replye, their ambitious usurpation tended
not to heresy, and therefore they were content to admonish them, but the latter
Popes, from whom we dissent, are fallen into open heresy and apostasy.
Thirdly, he says, that no one of these writers wrote against the Popes
authority, as he will show of Irenaeus, Polycrates, Dionysius, and Cyprian,
Cap. 10. in 28. demand, where I will show that they did write against such
unjust authority as those bishops did claim.

Yet concerning Saint Cyprian in this place, he says, that he exhorts
Cornelius to be as stout in not loosing certain African heretics, as their
own bishop had been in bynding of them. By which he would have men think,
that Cornelius had authority to undo, that which Cyprian had done, as the
Pope in these days takes upon him. But Cyprian yeldeth to no such authority,
but maruelleth that Cornelius was any thing moved with the threatening of
those heretics, to receive them into his chur^^, under pretense that Cyprian
had not written to him immediately of the constitution of Fortunatus a
counterfeit bishop by a few heretics, counting it sufficient that Cornelius
knew before, that they were excommunicated by the bishops of Africa, saying of
their gadding to Rome, Cum statutum sit, etc. Seeing it is decreede of us all,
and that it is meet and also right, that every man's cause should be heard
there, where his crime is committed: and a portion of the flock is ascribed to
every pastor, which every one should rule and govern as he will give an
account of his doing to the Lord, verily, they over whom we are set, must not
gad about, nor with their subtle and crafty rash, craze the concord of the
bishops, which cleueth together. But there to plead their cause, where both they
may have accusers and witnesses of their crime, except to a few desperate men
and castawayes, the authority of the bishops placed in Africa seems to be
less, which have already judged of them, and by the weight of their judgment
condemned their conscience bound with the snares of many trespasses. Their
cause already has been heard: the sentence is already pronounced of them,
neither is it congruent to the censure of priests to be reprehended by Leuits
of mouable and inconstant mind, etc. You see that Cyprian meant nothing less,
than to give Cornelius bishop of Rome authority, to reuerse the sentence of
the bishops of Africa, whose authority he judged to be nothing less then the
bishops of Rome or other places.

Moreover Bristow says that Cyprian does also note in S. Stephan some little
negligence, but much more wilful obreption, in those two lapsed bishops of
Spain, Basilides and Martialis, who had concealed from him the truth, that in
their supplication they should have expressed, which because they did not, he
says well, that their restitution by the Pope could not stand them in steed
against their former deposition by the bishop^ of their own province. This
which so plainly makes for the Popes authoritit (saves Bristowe) you are so
blind to bring against it.

Not so blind but I can see, that you acknowledge (...)e Pope i^ judgment of
bynding and loosing may (...)re. But what I pray you makes this for the Pope?
you (...)eane perhaps, that Cyprian does grant by impli^ation, if the
foresaid error had not deceived Stepha^^s, he had full authority to have
restored those two (...) apsed bishops. But Cyprian says not so, you heard
before what his judgment was of them that were condemned in one Province, that
their sentence could not ^e reuersed in another, but if they would return to
the Church, they should there be received upon their ^epentance, where they
were first condemned, and in this 4. Epistle he says: Quare etsi, etc.
wherefore although some of our fellow bishops there have been (most
well-beloved brethren) which think the divine discipline is to be neglected, and
do rashly communicate with Basilides and Martialis, this thing ought not to
trouble our faith. You see, that he reproves Stephanus and such as took his
part, for neglect of divine discipline, in communicating with those heretics
which were lawfully condemned in their own province, and therefore could not
by any other be restored.

As concerning the Councels of Africa and Mileuis, (says Bristowe) the
question between them and those other five Popes, was not about the matters of
the universal church, as for example, matters of faith. No was, is not the
Popes authority of you counted a matter of faith, and of the universal
church? although they agreed in all other matters. But Bristow shameth not to
say, it was not about the Popes authority in receiving of bishops appeals,
but what order the Nicene Council had taken therein. As though that counterfeit
Canon was not alleged, to justify the Popes authority in receiving such
appeals. But there are examples you say, of appeals, and namely of the
Patriarchs of Alexandria and Constantinople, but of which Patriarks and to whom
you show not. yea, S. Augustine him self, you say. uses it as a plea: That
Cecilianus was ready to plead his cause before other churches out of Africa.
Ep. 162. This proves not, that Cecilianus, although trusting in the innocency
of his cause, refused no indifferent judges: yet that he appealed to the Church
of Rome, and least of all to the singular judgment of the Bishop of Rome, but
to all other churches. And the appeals that were made in his cause were made
to ye Emperor, and from ye Bishop of Rome, being once delegate of the Emperor
to hear his cause with other Bishops, unto him the second time, who gave
aliud uidicium Arelatense aliorum scilicet Episcoporum etc. an other judgment
of A relate, of other Bishops, as it is plain in the same Epistle.

But such appeals were lawful, (says Bristow) by the council Sardicense
cap. 7. in the same Carthage council cap. 3. whose authority none of those
Africane Bishops did deny, for the same Bishops were of it, that were of the
Nicene: and Saint Augustine chap. 7. did expressly admit in the Canon of the
inferiori appealing from their own^ Bishops. In deed in the 3. chap. of the 6.
Council of Carthage, that forged Canon of Bishops appeals was aledged, which
is now read for the 7. Canon of the Sardicense council, but it was alleged
as a canon of the Nicene Council, and if it had been a true canon of Sardica
Council, why did not those Bishops allege it as a Canon of Sardica, as well
as the other Canon of the inferiors appealing from their own Bishop unto the
Bishops next adjoining, seeing the Bishops of Africa and S. Augustine himself,
were so ready to yield to the authority of the Council of Sardica. Therefore
it appears, that the Canon of bishops appeals to Rome being first forged as
a Canon of the Nicene Council, when it could not find any settling there, was
afterward foysted in the Sardicen Council.

Thirdly (says Bristow) these appeals were lawful by the Nicene Council
also, whereupon you say very insolently trusting overmuch your lying Luthera^
frinds, the Magdeburgiens that S. Augustine and his fellows took those Popes
with plain forgery of the Canons of Nice, and fetched them over the coals
meetely well for it. Bristow will still defend yt forged Canon, for other there
is none in the Nicen council yt allows such appeals. As for ye
Magdeburgiens I never read the^: but ye report of ye councels gathered by Peter
Crab, I have read (...) dosen years before I wrote against Allen. And in the
end of the African Council I read this Epistle of ye council to Celestinus
bishop of ye city of Rome. Domino dilectissimo and honorabili fratri
Celestino, etc. To our most well-beloved lord and honorable brother Celestinus.
We Aurelius, Palatinus, Antonius, Tutus, Seruus dei, Terentius, Fortunatus,
Martinus, Ianuarius, Optatus, Celticius, Donatus, Theasius, Vincentius,
Fortunatianus, and the rest which were present in ye universal Africa^ council
of Carthage: We would have wished if as thy holiness has insinuated by letters
sent by our fellow elder Leo, that you rejoiced of the coming of Appiarius: so
we also might send with gladness these writings of his purgation. Verily both
our and your chearfulnes should be now more certain, neither might seem too
much hasted and ouerspeedy which as yet had gone before as well of one to be
heard as of one that is already heard. Surely when our ho ly brother, and fellow
bishop, Faustinus came unto us, we gathered a Council, and believed that he
was therefore sent with him, that as by his help he had been before restored
to the Eldership, so rrow by his labor he might have been purged of so great
crimes as are objected by the Tabracenes, whose so great and so heinous wicked
factes, the examination of the course of our council has found out; that the
said persons hoped for patronage rather then judgment, and the aid of a
defender rather then the justice of an examiner. For first of al, how much he
withstoode ye whole congregation, offering daily diverse injuries as one that
maintained ye privileges of the Roman Church, and that would be received into
communion of us, whom thy holiness (believing that he had appealed, which he was
not able to prove) had restored to the communion, which nevertheless was not
lawful, and thou may know also better by the reading of the acts.
Notwithstanding holding a most painful judgment by the space of three days,
when being very much troubled, we inquired of diverse things objected unto
him, GOD the righteous judge, strong, and long suffering, to our great profit
has cut off either the delays of our fellow Bishop Faustinus, or the
crafty shifts of Appiarius himself, by which he went about to hide his
filthiness, not to be named. For his more vile and stinking obstinacy being
subdued, by which he would have overwhelmed so great and filthy mire with
impudency, our GOD strayning his conscience, and publishing even unto men, the
secret crimes which he did already condemn, which were as it were wrapped
close in his heart, suddenly this crafty denyer brake forth into confession
of all the wicked factes that were objected against him: And at length, of his
own accord convicted himself of all those incredible reproaches, and turned
into mourning even our hope by which we both believed and wished that he
might have been purged of so shameful blottes, but that he mitigated this
our heaviness, with one only comfort that both he discharged us from the
labor of longer inquiry, and also provided for his wounds such a medicine as
it was, although it were by unwilling confession, and his own conscience
striving against it, our Lord and brother. Therefore reserving our duty of
due salutation we earnestly desire you that henceforwarde you do not easily
admit unto your hearing, such as come from hence, nor that you will any more
receive into communion those yt are excommunicated by us, because your worship
may easily perceive, that this matter is also defined in the Nicene Council.
For although the provision seem to be there made of inferior Clerks, or lay
men, yet how much more would it, that the same should be observed concerning
Bishops: that being suspended from the communion in their province, they
should not seem by your holiness, either ouerhastily or unduly, to be
restored to the communion. Also let your holiness refuse the Iewde refuges, or
shifts of Priests, and other clerks as it is meet for you to do, because
that by no decree of the fathers, this is taken away from the Church of Africa,
and the decrees of Nice have most manifestly committed them, whether they be
clerks of inferior degree, or whether they be Bishops themselves unto their
own Metropolitanes. For most wisely and justly they foresawe, that all
businesses should be ended in their own places where they began, and that the
grace of the holy ghost, should not be wanting to every province, whereby
equity by the priests of Christ might both be seen wisely, and also held most
constantly, especially because it is granted to every man, if he shall be
offended with the judgment of them that shall hear his cause, to appeal to
the Councels of his own province, or else to a general council. Except
peradventure there be any man which believes, that our GOD can inspire the
justice of examination and trial, into any one man whomsoever, and does deny
the same to innumerable priests gathered together in council. Or how can the
same judgment given beyond the sea, be steadfast and sure, unto which the
necessary persons of witnesses, either for infirmity of sex, or of age, or
for many other letts that may happen, cannot be brought? for that any judges
should be sent as it were from the side of your holiness, we find it decreed
in no Synod of the fathers: For that decree which you sent unto us long ago,
by our said fellow Bishop Faustinus, as a decree of the Nicene council, in
the truer council copies which are received of the Nicene council, being sent
unto us, out of the authentical copy, by holy Cyrillus our fellow Bishop of
the Church of Alexandria, and by the worshipful Atticus Bishop of
Constantinople, which also have been sent from us before this time, by
Innocentius priest, and Marcellus subdeacon (by whom they were directed from
them to us) unto Bishop Bonifacius of worshipful memory, your predecessor
in which we could find no such matter. Also your clarks as executors of your
commau^deme^ts, neither send ye, nor grant ye, to any that shall require
them: least we should seem to bring the smokie pride of the world, into the
Church of Christ, which to them that desire to see God, shows forth the light
of simplicity, and the day of humility, for touching our brother Faustinus
(now that Appiarius a man to be lamented is removed out of the Church of
Christ for his vnspeable wickedness) we are sure that (saving the honesty and
moderation of thy holiness) thy brotherly love will not suffer him to remain
any longer in Africa: And written with an other hand, our Lord preserve your
ho lynesse, praying for us in long life, Lord brother.

Thus have I set down the whole Epistle, though it be somewhat long, that the
English reader may see, and judge of ye whole matter in controversy between
ye Bishops of Rome, and all the bishops, of all the countries of Africa which
was ye third part of the world, and how truly Bristow first denies ye
forgerie which was proved by copies sent from Alexandria and Constantinople,
out of ye authentical copy of the Council of Nice. Secondly yt he says ye
same matter in question for appeals, was decreed by ye council of Sardica,
when this Epistle affirms, y^, by no decrees of any Synod, any such thing was
appointed, but ye clean contrary by the council of Nice defined. Thirdly
where he says, those African fathers had small cause to stand so much with the
Popes in those appeals, that they show great cause. Fourthly, where Bristow
says, that by this their doing nothing can be inferred against the Popes
authority above provincial Councels, more then against a general Councels
authority above a provincial, when they show the last appeal to be
permitted to any man that finds himself grieved, unto the general councels.
Fifthly, where he says yt popish kings and bishops, at this day stand with the
Popes in ye right of giving benefices, appeals etc. with his own good leave,
without any prejudice to his superiority, I answer, ye bishops of Africa, without
the Popes leave, and against his will, decreed, yt whosoever did appeal out of
Africa, should not be received into communion of any in Africa. What the Pope
of servile fear is constrained at this day to yeald, least he should be
utterly forsaken of all, as he is of most, it is nothing to the purpose.

But I am most ridiculous, in Bristowes judgment, where I allege Socrates
the Nouatian, speaking against Pope Celestinus, for taking away the Nouatians
Churches in Rome, and counting it a point of foreign Lordshippe, not of
Priesthood. Thus the Papists defame such as write plainly against them,
Eusebius they make an Arrian, Socrates a Nouatian, even as he diffamed Saint
Paul in the last Chapter, with much pricking of bodily lust. But what cause
has he to charge Socrates with the heresy of Nouatus? He alleges none at
al, neither is he able ever to prove the crime. In deed Socrates living at such
time, as ye Nouatians joining in faith of the holy Trinity with the Catholics
against the Arrians, Macedonians, and such other heretics, were not so odious,
speaks less sharply of them, then of other heresies. Yet always he
accounts them among heretics: As Lib. 5. Cap. 19. Ab eo tempore quo
Nouatiani, etc. Ever since the time that the Nouatians departed from ye Church.
Is it like that Socrates was a Nouatian, when he confesses that they were
departed from the Church? Likewise having spoken of the divisions that were in
the Catholic Church, he comes to speak of the schisms that were among
heretics, and names the Arrians, Nouatians, Macedonians and Eunomians Supr.
and Trip. Hist. lib. 9. cap. 36. Thus much for the credit of Socrates: now to
the matter: where Bristowe says, he counted it a point of foreign Lordship to
expel ye Nouatians, etc it is false. But he shows the cause, why Celestinus
could not prevail to do any good with them, his words are: Verumillos
invidia corripuit Romano episcopai^ iam olim perinde atque Alexandrino vltra
Sacerdotii limits ad externum dominai^m progresso. But envy took hold of
them, because ye Bishoprik of Rome, long before even as the Bishoprike of
Alexandria, was proceeded beyond the bands of Priesthood into foreign
Lordship. Finally yt Socrates blames the immoderate authority of S.
Chrysostom, he does it not alone, but other writers as much as he, and Socrates
reports more of his severity toward his own clergy, the^ toward ye
Nouatia^s of who^ he was counted too much a favorer, and therefore Socrates
writes, that some judged, that he was justly deposed Eo quod multas Ecclesias
Novatianorum, Quartodecimanoru^, and aliorum tulisset haereticorum. Because he
had borne with many Churches of the Nouatians, Quartodecimanes and other
heretics. Trip. Hist. lib. 10. cap. 20. Last of all whereas I alleged
against the Popes supremacy, the decree of the Aphrican council Cap. 6. that
no Bishop of the first see, should be called highest Priest, or Prince of
Priests, but only Bishop of the first see: Bristowe says, it perteyneth only
to the Primates of Africa, and concerns not the titles, much less the
primacie of the Bishop of Rome. But the truth is, that it was made specially
to repress the ambition of the Roman Prelates, and therefore in the end of the
Canon, as it is contained in the decrees, Did. 99. cap. Primae. it is added,
Vniversalis autem, nec etiam Romanus pontifex app^lletur, and let none, no not
the Bishop of Rome be called universal. By which it is manifest that his
titles and authority also are commanded to be kept within their own bounds,
and not to be acknowledged to have any thing to do in the Churches of Africa,
by commandment or authority such as then was claymed. But the Affricanes
(says Bristowe) as appears in Saint Augustines works, never called him
Bishop of the first see, but Bishop of the Apostolic see. Although Saint
Augustines works can not be witness, how the Affricanes called him always:
yet what gayneth the Pope or Bristowe for him by this? What if they never
called him primate or Bishop of the first see? (for other inferior Bishops
were called Bishops of the second see.) The council forbadde them to give any
other titles of authority beside this Bishop of the first see, it did not
bind them that they should of necessity call them by that title. For it was
sufficient to call them the Bishops of Carthage, of Alexandria, of Rome, of
Antioche, etc. And that they called the Roman Prelate Bishop of the Apostolic
see of Rome, they gave him no more authority over the Churches of Africa,
then when they called the Bishop of Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus, Corinth, or
of any other Churches founded by the Apostles Bishop of the sea Apostolic.
Thus my Doctors (for any thing Bristowe can bring) remain constant witnesses
of my side, against the usurped and Antichristian authority of the Bishop of
Rome.

2 About only faith. Bristo.

I quoted Ambrose, Origin, and Cyprian, for justification by faith only. To
this Bristowe answers Fulke.
first generally, that has satisfied these Doctors Cap. 8. Par. 4. that they
mean a man may be justified by faith, although before he was a Christian
Catholic, he did no good works. But he cannot so escape, for they speak not
only of the first conversion, of a man, but of justification unto salvation of
every faithful man, according to the example of Abraham and David, who both
had good works, yet were not justified by them before God, but by their faith
only. And Saint Paul expressly says of himself, and all other Christians
that were in his time, and that shall be in all times, that the example of
Abraham's justification is the example of his and their justification: Romans 4.
Therefore his faith was imputed to him for righteousness, and it is not
written for him only, that it is imputed to him, but also for us, unto who^ it
shall be imputed, which believe in him that raised up Jesus from the dead, who
was delivered for our sins, and raised again for our justification. I wish
that Bristow in the next conference that he makes, after the reading hereof,
would mark this text with the circumstances of the persons of whom it is
spoken, and of ye temps in which the holy Ghost speaks, that faith shall be
imputed for righteousness. In the mean time, I must prove that these fathers
speak generally of all Christians and the only way of justification, and not
of new conuerts only, and of the instinct of their baptism or new conversion
only, but that they are justified by faith unto eternal salvation.

First Origin, after he had brought the example of the thief justified by
faith only, brings in the example of the sinnfull woman. Luke 7. Ex nullo
legis opere, sed pro sola fide ait ad eam, remit(...)ur tibi peccata tua: and
iteru^, fides tua saluam te fecit, etc. For no work of the law, but for faith
only, he says unto her, Thy sins are forgiven thee: And again, thy faith
has saved the, go in peace, But also in many places of the Gospel we read,
that our Savior used this speech, that he says, the faith of the believer,
is the cause of his salvation. By all which it is clear, that the Apostle
judges, rightly that a man is justified by faith without the works of the
law. See you not that justification is not only to set a man in free will,
discharged of his sins committed before baptism, but continues with him
unto salvation? Also where I said that Origin answers this objection, which
the Papists make against us, for teaching justification by faith only, (though
Bristowe say it is false) it is very true Lib 3. Cap 3. in epi. ad Romans Sed
fortassis, etc. but peradventure some body hearing this, may become idle and
negligent in doing good works, if only faith suffice to justification. Is not
this one of the Papists objections? Again that this doctrine of justification
pertains only to them yt are newly converted to Christianity, against which
Origin shows by example of the Pharisee trusting in himself that he was
righteous, and boasting thereof. Luk 18. that it perteyneth to all men, that
boasting may be excluded, and that none boast in any thing, but in the cross
of Christ, Vides Apostol(...) non gloriantem, etc. Thou see the Apostle not
glorying of his righteousness, nor of his chastity, nor of his wisdom, nor of
his other virtues and acts, but most manifestly pronouncing and saying, let him
that gloryeth glory in the Lord, etc. and so at length shows, that all this
does verify the saying of the Apostle, we judge that a man is justified by
faith, without the works of the law, which before he had interpreted by faith
only, whether they have no works going before as the thief, the sinful woman,
or whether they have works of the law without the faith of Christ, as the
Pharisee, or whether they have never so many works and virtues with the faith
of Christ, as the Apostle Paul, there is but one way of justification, for
all men, which is by remission of sins, through faith only. Where Cyprian
says: that faith only profits Ad Quirin. Cap. 42. Bristowe says, he
means that faith profits, and without faith nothing profits. I confess
in deed he means all that Bristowe says, and more too, namely that faith
profits, therefore works do not profit unto justification, as appears by
that testimony of Scripture which he cites, to prove his saying: Abraham
believed God, and it was imputed to him for justice. Genesis 15. By which Saint
Paul proves, that Abraham was justified by faith without works, and yet
Abraham was not void of good works. Out of the Book De duplici Martyrio I
cited Cyprians saying: That he believes not in God at all, which places not
the trust of all his felicity in him only. To this Bristowe answers without
shame, that the Book De duplici Martyrio is thought to be supposition, coined
by Erasmus: as though it were credible that Erasmus being such an utter enemy
to all forgery and supposition, would himself counterfeit a book under the
name of Cyprian. But Bristowe doubting, least he may be convicted by ancient
copies of this book, remaining in Libraries, as no doubt, but that he may, for
a second answer says, That this sentence is of it self Catholic enough. For
to trust Gods gifts, as in the Catholic faith, and good works that he
works in us, also to trust in Saints: to trust in these, I say, as they be
his, is to trust in him only.

I say, (says Bristowe,) what need we further witness or reason? But
Christ telling a parable, against them that trusted in themselves, that they
were righteous, tells of a Pharisee, that trusted in his works, as they
were the gifts of GOD, to whom he gave thanks for them. Luke. 18. This
auctority of Bristowe is enough to discharge Pelagius, Celestinus, and all the
rabble of freewill men, who trusted in nothing, but that was the gift of God,
and so acknowledged by them, in so much as they confessed, that a man was
justified by the grace of God, when he was justified by his own works,
because God gave free will, and power to work well, also a law by keeping
whereof, men might be righteous. Finally this rule of Bristowe, will justify a
man, which putting his trust in Angels, worshippeth them as Gods Angels, yea
which putting his trust in any of Gods creatures, trusts in him alone. So
that nothing is so singular, but he can make it general, nor any thing so
general, but he can restrain it at his pleasure.

Now yt Ambrose also extends the grace of justification by faith only unto
eternal salvation, it is manifest as generally throughout his commentary upon
the Epistle to the Romans, so notably in 1. Cor. Cap. 1. upon these words of
the Apostle, I thank my God always for you, for the grace of God which has
been given you in Christ Jesus. Datam dicit, etc. He says this grace which has
been given you in Christ Jesus, which grace is so given in Christ Jesus,
because this is decreed of God that he which believes in Christ, should be
saved, without works, obtaining freely remission of sins, by faith only.
Also in Praef. ad Gall. a praedicatione, etc. that from the preaching of John,
the law does cease, that only faith may suffice unto salvation, which is an
abridgment of the law. Likewise Exhortatione ad virgins: Videtis mysteria,
etc. you see the mysteries, you see the grace of Christ, the grace of the holy
Ghost, which is delivered as it were by a certain lot, because not of works,
but of faith, every one is justified of the Lord. For as the falling out of
the lot, is not in our power, but is such, as chance has brought, so the
grace of our Lord, is not as it were of the merit of hire, but is delivered,
as of his will. This writes Ambrose of all that are partakers of the grace of
God, and not of them that are newly baptized or converted only. Again in the
same Book, he says, speaking of all men that attain to salvation, Hic quidem
luctamur, sed alibi coronamur, etc. here truly we do wrestle, but in an other
place we are crowned. I have spoken not of my self only, but of all men
generally. For whence should I have so much merit, to whom pardon is in steed
of a crown? What can be said more plainly, to exclude the merit of good works
from justification? whereas the reward of good works that is freely given to
the justified man by faith only, both Ambrose and we do nevertheless
acknowledge.

3. About Purgatory. Touching Scriptures expounded against Bristowe.
it.
He says I am taken in a vain brag, because Fulke.
I being urged by Allen, to bring any Scripture expounded by any of all
antiquity against prayers for the dead, I bring only Hierom, referring the
reader to other places of Cyprian, and Origin, and other cited in diverse
places of my book. These places he says, are but bare names. But when we come
to expounding of these places, we shall find, either reason or auctority of
these Doctors for us. In the mean time, we will consider Hieronyme, whom
Bristowe says, that I confess to have allowed prayers for the dead: Wherein
he says untruly, for I never confessed simply, that he allowed prayers for the
dead: But Pur. 194. I said interrogatiuely and by way of concession, How
hapeneth it yt Chrysostom and Hieronyme, which both interpreted that place,
could gather no such matter, although they otherwise allowed prayer for the
dead? And indeed in so many books of Hieronyme nothing can be found whereby
it may be proved, that he allowed prayer for the dead, although it were a
common error of many in his time. And in this place cited in the decrees by
Gratia^. 139. 2. he simply denies that any prayers are profitable for the
dead.

The place in deed as (Bristowe says) is in his Comment. upon Gal. 6.
although he in exposition allude to 2. Cor. 5. we must all appear before the
judgment seat of Christ. But the answer of this place of Hierome, Bristowe
says, I might learn of the gloss, which expounds it of them that die
without repentance only, but in deed it is spoken generally of all men. As
the very words declare upon this text, Every one shall bear his own
burden. Videtur superioribus contrair^, vbi ait, etc. He seems to go
against the former sentence, where he says: Bear the burdens one of an
other: For if every one shall bear his own burden, one cannot bear the
burdens of an other. But we must consider that there he commanded, that we
which commit sin, should in this life help one an other, and in this present
world should be an aid one to an other: but here he speaks of the judgment
of the Lord upon us: that not of other men's sin, or of comparison of the
worser, but according to our own work, we shall be judged of him, either sinners
or holy, every one receiving according to his own work. Obscure licet
doce(...)r per han^ sententiolam, nouum dogma quod latitat: We are taught by
this short sentence though darkely, a new doctrine, or opinion which lies
hid: that while we are in this present world, we may help one another,
either by prayers or by counsels: but when we shall come before the judgment
seat of Christ, that neither Job, nor David nor Noe can entreat for any man,
but that every one does bear his own burden. That which Hierome speaks of
himself, and of all other, that prayers can not avail them, being out of
this world, when the gloss restreyneth only to them that die in mortal sin,
without repentance, it is as good as the old jest, Statuimus, id est
abrogamus. It is also worthy to be considered that Hierome as it seems
against the error of his time, calls this a new doctrine which he gathers
of that sentence.

That the most ancient doctors do not interpret the Scriptures by name
against Purgatory, I said it was because Purgatory in their time was neither
heard nor named. Bristowe replyeth, that I confessed Cap. 3. that the old
doctors heard both the name and the thing, etc. Thus he charge me still with
confessions falsely. For although Augustine heard of the name of Purgatory,
whereof he sometimes doubts, sometimes denies all places but two, yet no
writer before him. Neither were prayers for the dead heard in the Church,
before the heresy of Montanus. But to return to Hierome, whom I said in
Eccle. 11. to expound the North and South, not for the states of grace and
wrath, but for the places of reward or punishment: Bristowe says of both.
But I deny that he speaks of the state of grace, in that sort that Allen
means: namely, that any man so dies in the state of grace, that he obteineth
release of punishment after this life, which is the matter in question, but
that Bristowe is disposed to cavil. For although a man in this life, may be
removed out of the North into the South, yet when the tree is fallen, there is
no more removing by Hieroms judgment. Wheresoever thou preparest thee a place,
and a seat hereafter, whether it be in the South, or in the North, there when
thou art dead, thou shall continue. This which the Doctor speaks expressly
of a place, a seat of everlasting continuance, Bristow for want of a better
answer, expounds of merit, as though it might stand with Hieronyms
authority, that the place might be changed although the merit can not be
bettered.

Touching scriptures for Purgatory and prayer for the dead, whether the
Doctors say, No Scripture to make for it. Bristow^.

I said that Tertullian confesses, yt oblations and prayers for the dead were
not taken of the scriptures but of tradition. Bristow in diverse places denies
any such confession of Tertullian, restraining his meaning to an only
ceremony of oblation and prayers on the years day of their departure: as
though oblation and prayer for ye dead generally, were clearly taught in ye
scriptures, which thing if it be: why does not Allen or Bristowe, or any writer
young or old, bring one place out of the canonical Scriptures, allowing prayer
and oblation for the dead? and as touching Tertullian, his words are such, as
with no equity may be restrained to so particular a ceremony: Oblationes pro
defunctis, pro natalitiis, annua die facimu^. We make oblations for the dead,
for the day of men's birth on the yearly day. If Oblationes pr^ natalitiis, be
not found in the Scriptures at all, neither on the yearly day, nor any other
day, Why say we not the like of Oblationes pro desunctis? Again, why may it
not be, that the yearly day of celebration is meant only of men's birth, and
oblations for the dead left at larg^ for to celebrate the yearly festiuity of
men's birth, was usual among the Gentiles, every man for himself. But to
observe the yearly day of al men's death were infinite, either for their
friends or for the Priests to do. Wherefore it remains, that oblations for
the dead, what soever they were in Tertullians time, were not taken of the
Scriptures. And if they were Mass and prayers for the dead, as the Papists
say, Mass and prayers for the dead are not taken out of the Scriptures by
Tertullians confession.

The contradictions that he lays to me, I always reserve to their peculiar
Chapter. Augustine also denies a third place to be found in the Scriptures, D^
Verb. Apost. ser. 14. Contra Pelagian. Hyp. lib. 5. And De Verb. Apostol. Ser.
33 For praying for the dead, he alleges the tradition of the fathers, which
he is not wont to do, where scripture does not fail him. Epiphanius likewise
against Aerius brings no Scripture, but the custom and tradition of the
Church in naming the dead in their prayers. And which of the old writers
except Chrysostom, once goes about to allege Scripture for prayer for the
dead? Wherefore I made no vain brag in saying most of the old writers, that
defend such prayers, confessed they had them not of the Scriptures.

Of certain particular textes. Bristowe.

I said that Saint Augustine is clear, that the text (1. Fulke.
Cor. 3. of him that shall be saved through fire) proves not Purgatory,
affirming, that it is meant of the fire of tribulation in this life. Bristowe
cauilling, that he affirms not, but speaks doubtfully, etc. says that he
only shows it ought not to be expounded, after the heresy of the
Origenistes of hell fire. But Augustines words are plain: Ignis enim de
quolocutus est eo loco Apo^tolus, talis debet intelligi, vt ambo per eum
transeant, etc. For the fire whereof the Apostle in that place speaks, ought
to be understood such, that both may pass thorough it, that is, both he that
builds upon this foundation, Gold, Silver, precious stones, and he also
which builds Wood, Straw, Stubble. For when he had said this, he added:
The fire shall try every man's work, such as it is, if any man's work remain,
that which he has builded upon, he shall receive reward: But if any man's
work be burned, he shall suffer loss, but he himself shall be saved, yet so as
it were through fire. The fire truly, is the tentation of tribulation, of
which it is manifestly written in an other place, The furnace proves the
potters vessels, and tentation of tribulation, just men. This fire in this
present life, works that which the Apostle says, etc. By this you see that
fire interpreted of tribulation in this life, and denied to be spoken of
Purgatory fire, thorough which by their own consent all men do not pass.
Again he speaks not at all, against the Origenistes opinion of hell fire,
that it shall have an end, but against such as in his time did hold, That they
which forsake not the name of Christ, and are baptized with his lauer in the
Church, and are not cut off from it by any schism or heresy, although they
live in never so great wickedness, which they neither wash away by repenting,
nor redeemed with alms, but continue most stubburnely in them unto the end of
this life, shall be saved through fire, although they be punished according to
the greatenesse of their sins and wickedness with long, but yet not eternal
fire. But they which believe this, and yet are catholics, seem to me to be
deceived by a certain humane benevolence. For the holy scripture being
consulted, answers another thing etc. Enc. ad Laurentium. C. 67. Thus his
reasons are against a temporal purging fire, through which some should pass
and not all, therefore against the popish purgatory, although he deny not but
such a thing may be, yet it cannot be proved by this place, nor by any other
place of scripture, as hereafter we shall see more at large in ye 3. division
of this chapter, where Bristowe promises I wot not what, to show of
Augustines judgment for Purgatory. I answered Allen, apposing us, where we
had that new meaning of our saviors words, that he which is cast into prison
for neglecting of reconciliation while he is in the way, is cast into hell,
from whence he shall never come, I alleged for that sense Chrysostom,
Augustine, Hierom, and Chromatius. This is passing childish (says Bristow:)
For D. Allen demands no such thing. But this in deed is passing impudence:
for Allens words in the same division (after he has posed Calvin, Flaccus,
Luther, Jewel, about their interpretation of scriptures, are these: But I will
not make a reckoning of their unseemly gloses, I would their followers would
only but ask them in all matters, from whence they had such new meanings
which they falsely father on Gods word. Now the whole discourse of that
Chapter as appears by the title, is of that place, Math. 5. Pur. 132. Yet
says Bristow, it is not true, that all those doctors have that sense, which I
affirm them to have. But he only says it, let their words be read, Pur. 145.
Where Allen allows all interpretations of the place, 1. Cor. 3. so long as
they affirm no error: I said he may by the same reason allow contradictories
to be true. As in that saying, Matthew. 5. of him that shall not come out, until
he have paid the uttermost farthing, some have expounded, that he shall
always be punished: some, that he shall not be always punished. How is it
possible that both these interpretations can be true? Mary (says Bristow, with
as fine Rhetorike, as strong Logike:) Thus it is true, those he and he, are not
one he: but he that shall be always punished, is he, that to the end of the way,
that is this life, agrees not with his adversary, whom he has deadly
iniuryed, as saying to him, fatue, and thereby incurring the guylt of Gehennae
ignis, which i^ the prison of the damned. He that shall not be always punished,
is he whose injury was but venial, as Racha. And so both interpretations agree
well, not only together, but also with the text it self. In deed, this is a
fine distinction of he and he: but that he which agrees not with his
adversary in the way, shall be cast into prison, from whence he shall never
come, whatsoever the matter were betwixt them, there is but one prison, from
whence there is no deliverance, until the last farthing be paid, which by
those doctors exposition, is never paid. Whether the injury be greater or
lesser, the punishment is eternal, without reconciliation, or as Saint Luke
says, diligence to be reconciled. If thou being ready to offer thy gift at
the altar, do remember that thy brother has any thing against thee, go and
reconcile thy self, says Christ, and agree quickly with him while thou art
in the way. Mark that he speaks of all injury even offered by anger, or
saying Racha, and not only of saying Fatue. But as for, that he, which agrees
with his adversary while he is in the way, what trespass soever he has done
him, he is not at all committed to prison, were his injury great or small. So
that which He soever comes into prison, there is no way of escape, until
he have paid the uttermost farthing, which debt is always in paying and
never discharged.

Secondly, whether the doctors give any other kind of testimony Bristowe.
against us.

First, about the book of Machabees.

Where I said, that Allen pretends to prove the Fulke.
book of Machabees by authority of the church, when he cannot by consent
that it has with the scriptures of GOD: Bristowe replyeth, as though all
books are canonical which have consent with the Scriptures. Fulk reioyneth,
that he understands not his argument so, but that which has not consent
with other canonical books, is not canonical.

Where I take exception, to the Council of Carthage, which numbreth this book
among the canonical scriptures, as a Council provincial: Bristowe says, it
was by my confession confirmed in the sixth general Council of Constantinople
in Trullo, therefore it has ye authority of the whole true church. But I took
no exception to the generality thereof. But let it be as general as you will,
both that and the Council in Trullo erred by your own judgment, seeing Carth.
3. Ca. 26. decreed against the authority of the Roman prelate, even by name,
as Gratian witnesses, Did. 99. That in Trullo condemned Pope Honorius for a
Monothelite heretic Art. 16. and 17. Beside this, I allege, that this Council
of Carthage 3. among Canonical Scriptures, names five books of Solomon,
whereas the church allows but three. Bristowe answers out of Augustine
(which he says was one of the Council) that the book of wisdom and
Ecclesiasticus, of a certain similitude, were called Salomons books, whereas
they were written by Jesus the son of Syrach, although the former he retract
in rest. li. 2. Ca. 4. I ask no better to prove the error of the Council,
but that they named five of Solomon for three. Secondly, it appears by
Augustine which was one of the Council, yt although they called these books
canonical, yet they meant them not to be of equal authority with the rest of
the scriptures, Aug. co^tra Gaudent. lib. 2. Ca. 23. And this scripture of the
Machabees, ye Jews count not as the Law and the Prophets and the Psalms, to
whom our Lord gives testimony as to his witnesses, saying, it behooves that
all things should be fulfilled yt are written of me in ye law and in yt
Prophets and in ye Psalms. But it is received of the church not unprofitably,
if it be soberly read and heard. Bristowe says I ascribe unto S. Augustine. yt
which he reports of the Jews, when I say that he allows them not in full
authority with the law, the Prophets and the Psalms: fraudulently omitting,
that which I cited out of Augustine in the continued sentence that our Savior
Christ appealeth to these only witnesses, namely the law, the Prophets and the
Psalms, and so the Jews by ancient tradition, divide all the canonical books
into these three orders. Secondly, where I note yt Augustine allows not these
books without condition of sobriety in the reader or hearer: Brist. says, that
all Catholics and S. Peter do require ye same condition in ye reader of the
whole scriptures, as S. Augustine does in the Donatistes, which defended the
murdering of themselves by example of Rasis out of the Machabees. Whereunto I
reply, yt although sobriety be required in all readers of ye holy scripture,
and other writings also: yet it is not required, as a condition making ye
scriptures to be profitably received of ye church, if they be soberly read: for
howsoever ye canonical scriptures be read, and by whomsoever, although he be
mad and drunk yt reads or hears them, yet are they not only profitably, but
also necessarily received of the church, but this scripture of ye Machabes
(says Augustine) it is received not unprofitably, if it be soberly read or
heard. Who sees not a great difference between this scripture received under
condition, and the canonical scripture authorized by Christ him self? But
Augustine (says Brist.) and the Council, call these canonical, de doct. Chr.
li. 2. Ca. 8. In that place Augustine names all that by any church are counted
canonical, confessing in a manner as Bristow grants, that they were not all
generally received of the whole church, and therefore instructs ye stude^t of
divinity to prefer some before others. The reasons that I brought to prove
this book, not to be canonical, are these, first because ye author commends
Rasis for killing himself, which is contrary to Gods commaundment. Bristow
answers out of Augustine, yt the scripture has only told it, and not
commended it. But the place is manifest, 2. Match. 14. that the author of ye
book does not only report his murdering of him self, but also does highly
commend his manfulnes therein, willing (says he) rather to dye valiantly, than
to give him self into the hands of wicked men, and to suffer reproach unworthy
for his noble stock, and so forth to the end of the Chapter. Secondly, I said,
that writer abridgeth the five books of Jason: but the holy ghost makes no
abridgement of other men's writings. Bristowe says, the book of Kings in many
places abridgeth stories, telling where they be written in other books that
are not canonical. To this I answer: the holy ghost abridgeth not the stories
written by the spirit of man, but for civil affairs, sends the reader to
other writers, seeing they are out of his purpose to writ of them. Furthermore
he says, S. Mark is commonly called the Abridger of S. Matthewe, I answer,
not so commonly, as falsely, for many things he rehearses more largely then S.
Mathewe, and something he utterly omitteth, which is not the office of a true
abridger. And albeit yt he did, it were no answer to mine objection, yt
because the spirit of God tells shortly, that which he himself had told at
large, as in the Acts, the sermons of the Apostles, he is an abridger of
Chronicles written by profane men. The citing of the saying of Poets, Act. 17.
and Tit. 1. proves not that the holy ghost intending to write an history of
the church, uses the labor of ye profane man Jason the Cyrenian. I trow it
is one thing to cite a verse or a piece of a verse to confute men by their own
received witnesses, another thing to bring five books of an history into one.
Thirdly I said, the author of that book confesses, that he took that matter
in hand, that men might have pleasure in it, which could not away with the long
tedious stories of Jason. But the spirit of God serves not such vain
delights of men. Brist. asks, if profitable brevity be a vain delight? but
I speak not of the brevity, but the cause why he affected brevity, namely,
that men might have pleasure in his work. Fourthly, I said, the author shows
what labor and sweat it was to him to make this abridgement, ambitiously
commends his travel, and shows the difference between a story at large,
and an abridgement, all which things savor nothing of Gods spirit. Also he
confesses his infirmity, and desires pardon if he have spoken slenderly and
barely, whereby he testifies sufficiently, yt he was no scribe of ye holy
ghost. Bristow says (that he ambitiously commends his travel) is but my
blasphemy, all ye rest stands well enough with the assistance of ye holy
ghost. Concerning his ambitious commendation of his travel, where to serves
his great complaint of ye great labor, sweat, and watching ye it cost him? and
the wise similitude yt he takes of him that makes a feast, and seeks other
men's commodity, and has no small savor: so we also for many men's sake (says
he) are very well content to undertake this great labor. A great labor I
promise you, and to great profit of many. Likewise in the end, a passing good
similitude of wine, to finishe his book which he began with a feast. As it
is hurtful to drink wine alone, and then again water; and as wine tempered
with water is pleasant, and delights the taste: so the setting out of the
matter deliteth the ears of them that read the story. But to the rest,
Bristowe asks, if the scribes of the holy ghost, must be always eloquent,
or able to do all without sweat or labor? I answer, as vain eloquence is
not profitable for them, so they never complain for the lack of it, but
spiritual utterance they have abundantly, and that without sweat and watching,
when they write as the spirit of God does move them. Neither does S. Paul
confess, yt he lacks utterance, when he said he was rude in speaking: 2.
Cor. 11. but rehearsed what the false Apostles did object against him, for
otherwise his speech was so eloquent in divine eloquence, yt he was of the
pagans at Lystra taken for Mercury. Act. 14. Neither does he excuse his
boldness writing to the Romans, as Bristowe says blasphemously, but shows
that he was bold, upon his office, because he was ye minister of Christ unto
the gentiles. To. 15 That he used ye hand of Tertius in writing yt Epistle, or
any other, it was not to avoid ye labor of endi ting: Finally, yt he used
intolerable pains in preaching, It proves not, yt it cost him great labor,
and travel in studying, what to write or preach either, which ye spirit of God
did minister unto him plentifully: But never does he crave pardon, as one
uncertain whether he have don well or no, as the writer of the Machabees does,
confessing in the end that he has done as well as he could, and in the
beginning, leaving to the author ye exact diligence of every particular, so
submitting his labor as inferior in perfection to the work of Jason the
Cyrenian. That I speak not of so many falshods and fables as he affirms for
truth, which are refelled both by the former book of Machabees and by Josephus.

Where Allen alleged ye authority of Ierom in Prol. Mac. I said I knew not what
place he noted thereby, for in S. Ieroms works none such is found: now comes
Bristow, and tells me it is in a preface before the book of Machabees, in ye
vulgar latin Bybles, taken out of ye sense of Ierom, as diverse of those
prefaces be, and that will appear by these two places, which I cite out o^ him
to prove yt book not canonical: The former is in his preface upon ye book of
kings, where rehersing ye names of the canonical books, he omitteth this, and
after says expressly it is not in the Canon. Bristow answers, it is not in
the Canon of the Hebrews. As though the church of God, since Christ should
have more books of the old testament in ye canon, then ye church of the
Hebrews had. Ierom says yt this preface of his, may be set before all the books
which he has translated out of Hebrew into latin, v^ scire valeamus, quicquid
extrahos est, inter Apocripha esse ponendu^. That we may be able to know yt
whatsoever is beside these, is to be placed among ye apocriphall writings. So
yt Ierom speaks expressly, yt not only among the Jews, but among Christians
also these and al other books without ye canon, are to be taken for apocriphall.

The other place of Ierom is in his preface upon the proverbs, that they were
neither in the Churches canon. Therefore even as the church reads in deed ye
books of Iudeth, Tobias and Machabees, but yet receives them not among the
canonical scriptures: so also these two books Ecclesiasticus and Sapientia,
she may read to the edifying of the people, but not to confirm the authority
of the churches doctrine: To wit (says Bristow) against the Jews, as though ye
Churches doctrine, is not to be confirmed against heretics, and even to ye
Catholics themselves, by authority of the canonical scriptures.

That Augustine accounts these books canonical, after a sort, it was of me
confessed, and therefore needed none other testimonies as Bristow brings, de
praed. sanct. and de ciuit. Dei lib. 18. cap. 36.

But Ierom is also cited in his preface upon ye book of Judith to affirm the
book of Judith to be canonical by the council of Nice: if that were so, what
pertains it to the book of Machabees? But in deed it is not so: for though
we should doubt nothing of the credit of that preface in Judith, the words are
these: With ye Hebrews the book of Judith is read among ye hagiographaor
books called holy writings, whose authority to strengthen those things yt come
in controversy, is judged less convenient: yet being written in the Chaldee
tongue, it is counted among the stories. But because the Synod of Nice is read
to have accounted it in the number of holy scriptures, I have yielded to your
request, etc.

First he says it was read of the Hebrews among the Hagiographa, which is
false, as Hierom affirms Prolog. Gal. in lib. reg. Secondly, as Erasmus has
noted, he affirms not, that this book was allowed by the Nice^ council, but
says it is read to have accounted perhaps in some such writer, as coined the
canon sent unto the Aphrican council. Thirdly, if we shall understand
Hagiographa here as Bristowe would have them, not for those nine that be
canonical, but others that be Apocriphal, and yet holy writings, why should
we not likewise say, yt the computatio^ of ye Nicen council, was to receive it
among such Apocriphall holy writings, and not among ye canonical scriptures of
irrefragable authority? And therefore Fulke is even where he was before, in
saying yt Ierom does simply refuse ye books of ye Machabees, and says ye
church receives the^ not for canonical, and even that which Bristow says, I
should have showed, that the church neither did then nor ought afterward to
receive them, that we might be able to know (says he) speaking I dare say of
himself and all other members of ye Church, that whatsoever books are without
ye Cano^ of ye Hebrews are to be taken or placed among the apocriphal: where I
said that Luther and Illyrieus were not the first that doubted of the Epistle
of Saint James, but Eusebiu: before them, says plainly it is a counterfeit,
protesting that I speak it not to excuse them yt doubt of it, Bristo^ is not
content, except I would condemn the^ for heretics, which afterward reuersed
their error, especially Luther. Also he charge me to be a falsarie of
Eusebius, in saying that he refuses that Epistle as a counterfeite, when he
says the clean contrary, and so rehearses the words of Eusebius, I know not
out of whose translation But ye words of Eusebius are (...): It must be known
that it is a bastard or counterfeit.

2 About only scripture. Bristowe.

I said Cyprian would have nothing done in the celebration Fulke.
of ye lords supper, and namely in ministering of the cup, but that Christ
himself did. lib. 2. Ep. 3. Bristow answers ye he writes against ye
Aquarians which offered water only, where as Christ offered wine, which was
clean against Christ's doing. And what is your sacrilege, in robbing of ye
church of Christ of the whole cup? is it not clean contrary, both to his doing
and his commandment, drink ye al of this, and such doing as he did for a
tradition unto us, when ye Apostle rehersing yt tradition reherseth drinking of
the Lords cup by ye lay, as well as eating of ye bread? As for mingling wine
with water, which first was but a custom of sobriety, after grew into a
ceremony, if Cyprian should urge of necessity, he might be answered by his
own rule.

Likewise where Chrysostom says, it was decreed by the Apostles yt in the
celebration of the holy mysteries, a remembrance should be made of them yt are
departed, I said we will be bold to charge him with his own sayings: first Hom de
Adam and He^a: satis sufficere, etc. we think it suffices enough whatsoever
the writings of ye Apostles have taught us according to the foresaid rule,
insomuch that we count it not all catholic whatsoever shall appear contrary
to the rules appointed.

By this Bristow sees, yt I am a great reader of the doctors. For whosoever
made this homily (says he) he took those words out of ye instructions which
follows the Epistle of Pope Celestinus, in the first tome of councels, where
the words are not, the writings of the Apostles but the writings of ye see
apostolic, which are thought sufficient. Whatsoever my reading be, for the
maker of the Homily, I cannot depose, but I trust he will not deny, but it has
in all printed books gone under the name of Chrysostom, and it contains
nothing unworthy the judgment of Chrysostom. It is therefore more like that
Celestinus or whosoever gathered that instruction, borrowed those words out of
this homily, and from ye writings of the Apostles perverted them to the
writings of the sea apostolic, many such borrowing and peruersions are
commonly found in those pontifical Epistles. For admit that not Chrysostom, but
some later man made that Homily which borrowed such words out of yt Epistle or
instruction: Why did he alter them, if he thought the writings of the
apostolic see sufficient, to approve all catholic doctrine? except perhaps
his copy had also apostolica scripta, and that copy which Peter Crab followed
in gathering the councels is corrupted. Certain it is, the homily is ancient,
and made in the time when the Pelagian heresy begun to spring, which was in
the later time of Chrysostom, and therefore I have used no fraud, or
misdemeanour in citing this saying for Chrysostoms, whereto Bristow makes no
answer, but denies the authority. Likewise where I cite out of Chrysostom. in
Ge. Ho. 58. Thou see into how great absurdity they fall which will not follow
ye Canon or rule of ye holy scripture, but permit al to their own cogitations.
Bristow answers nothing, but yt Chrysostom. answers heretics which said our
Lord took not ture flesh: as though his se^te^ce is not general against al
heretics which go besid the scripture. Thirdly I said, if we be further urged,
we will allege yt he writes in Euang. Iac. Hom. 58. He that uses not the holy
scripture, but clymeth another way that is a by way not allowed is a these.

To this Bristow replyeth, that I will call Chrysostom a thief by his own
saying, for using tradition, yea verily if he be obstinate: and why not as well
as S. Paul, or an Angel accursed, if they bring an other Gospel? Secondly he
says, as though he uses not scripture, which uses tradition, or that
scripture does not warrant tradition as 2. Thessa. 2. I answer such tradition
as is warra^ted by scripture we refuse not, but if al your traditions were
warra^ted by scripture, where should be your unwritten verities? Thirdly (says
Bristow) the thing yt he speaks of, is that Antichrist and Pseudochrists,
cannot show any commission out of scripture. I answer that proves the Pope
to be Antichrist, who neither for his authority, nor for his doctrine, can
show any commission out of the scripture.

Fourthly I said, we may be as bold with Chrysostom, as he said he would
be with Paul himself, in 2. ad Tim. Hom. 2. I will say somewhat more, we must
not be ruled by Paul himself, if he speak any thing that is his own, and any
thing that is human, but we must obey the Apostle, when he caryeth Christ
speaking in him. Bristow asks, whether he spoke only by scripture. No
verily, but by revelation he spoke to S. Paul, by aud^ble and human voice he
spoke to the rest of the Apostles, and whatsoever he spoke any way pertaining
to our instruction, is committed to writing, and therefore I believe not
Chrysostom, alleging a tradition of the Apostles which is not found in their
writings.

Another place of Chrysostom, I cite in Luke, Chap. 16 saying that ignorance of
the scriptures has bredde heresies: Therefore he would have heresies kept
away by knowledge of the scriptures. We would the same (says Bristowe) but
what makes this for only scripture to be of authority? yes forsooth. If all
heresies come through ignorance of the scriptures, that which comes not
through ignorance of the scriptures, is no heresy: And that opinion which is
not contained in the scriptures, comes not of ignorance of the scriptures:
therefore he yt knows ye scriptures, knows all truth.

Unto Leo the great alleging custom and tradition, I oppose his own saying,
for only Scripture to be sufficient. Ep. 10. They fall into this folly,
which, when they be hindered by some obscurity, to know the truth, have not
recourse to the words of the Prophets, nor to the writings of the Apostles,
nor to the authorities of the Gospel, but to themselves.

He does not say (says Bristowe) that all truethes are expressed in the
Scripture. For he blames the heretic, for not having recourse to our common
Creed, as though there were any thing in our common Creed, which is not
expressed in the Scripture. And if only Scripture were not sufficient for men
to know the truth in any obscurity, how could they be blamed for not having
recourse unto them, for yt which they cannot find in them? The words of ye
council of Constantinople ye 6. Act. 18. of Bristows true translation are
these: If all men had simply, and without calliditie from the beginning
received the Gospels preaching, and been content with the Apostles
institutions, the matters verily had been well a fine, and neither the authors
of heresies, nor the fautors of the Priests, had been put to the pains of
conflictes: but because the devil not resting, rayseth up his squires,
therefore Christ also in time convenient has raised up his warriors against
them, to wit, the general councels, which to this time have been holden being
six in number. So expressly (says Bristowe) they avouch the authority of
councels, and you allege them for only Scriptures. I cry you mercy sir: Do
they allege the authority of Councels, as though the preaching of the
Gospel, and the institutions of the Apostles in their writings were not
sufficient: when they said before, if men would have been content with them,
there needed no councels? But you add, that in their words, there is no
mention at all of Scripture, but only of preaching and teaching. What I pray
you, is the Gospel, which they should preach no scripture? are not the
constitutions of the Apostles contained in their writings? I know you will
answer they are not all contained in their writings. At leastwise what sword
did these warriers use against Satan, styrring up his squires? does not the
council say expressly the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God
contained in the Scriptures? for what other word does Saint Paul commend to
the Ephesians. 6. but the holy Scripture which is profitable to reprove all heresies
into perfection? 2. Tim. 3.

Against Basil maintaining unwritten tradition I opposed his own auctority, De
Ver. Fid. in Proem. Moral. We know yt we must now and always avoid every
word and opinion that is differing from the doctrine of our Lord. But all is
not differing, says Bristowe, that is not expressed in the Scripture. Neither
do I say so, but all is differing that can not be proved by Scripture. And so
says Basil in his short definition, to the first interrogation. Whether it be
lawful or profitable for a man, to do or say any thing which he thinks to
be good, without testimony of the holy Scriptures: He answers: For as much as
our savior Christ says, that the holy Ghost shall not speak of himself,
what madness is it that any man should believe any thing without the auctority
of Gods word? Here you see, he extends the word of God no farther then the
holy Scriptures. Yet Bristowe says: If I saw the place, my malice passes.
For the words are these. Who can be so mad, that he dare so much as to
think any thing of him self? And it follows. But because of those things
and words that are in use amongst us, some are plainly taught in the holy
Scripture some are omitted. Concerning them that are omitted (says Bristowe)
We have this rule, to be subject to other men for Gods commandment renouncing
quite our own wills. In very deed I abridged the place, and gave the true
sense, because it is large. But if Bristowe understand Basills language, his
words are these: (...), etc, Seeing our Lord Jesus Christ says of the holy
Ghost, for he shall not speak of himself, but what things so ever he shall
hear, the same shall he speak: and of him self: the son can do nothing of
himself. And again, I have not spoken of my self, but the father which has
sent me, he himself has given me a commandment what I shall say and speak.
And I know that his commandment is life eternal. Therefore the things which
I speak, even as the father has said unto me, so I speak. Who is come into
so great madness, yt he dare of him self take upon him any thing (...) even
unto knowledge? which has need of the holy and good spirit as a guide that
he may de directed into the way of truth, both in mind and speech, and
deed, but walks blind and in darkness without the son of righteousness, yea
our Lord Jesus Christ, him which gives light with his commandments as it
were with beams? For the commandment of the Lord says he is bright,
lightning the eyes. Seeing then that of such things as we have in use, some are
under the com mandement of God prescribed in the holy Scripture, and some are
not spoken of concerning those that are written, no liberty at all is given to
any man, neither to do any thing of those that are forbidden, nor to omit ought
of those things which are prescribed. Seeing the Lord has once charged and
said: thou shall keep the word which I command thee this day: thou shall
not add unto it, neither shall thou take from it. For there is a terrible
expectation of judgment and zeal of fire, which shall devour all those which
shall be bold to do any such thing. And concerning those things, which are not
spoken of, the Apostle Paul has set us a rule saying: all things are lawful
for me, but all things are not expedient. All things are lawful for me, but
all things do not edify, Let no man seek his own profit but every one an other
man's. So that in every matter, it is necessary to be subject to God, according
to his commandment. For it is written, be ye subject one to an other in the
fear of Christ.

And our Lord says, he that will among you be great, let him be least of all,
and servant of all, that is to say, estraunged from his own will, according to
the imitation of our Lord himself, which says: I came down from heaven, not
that I should do mine own will, but the will of my father which has sent me,
Where has Bristowe, that we should be subject to other men in such things, as
are omitted by Scripture; therefore not my malice, but his ignorance passes,
and that willful also, although he follow the old barbarous translation of
Basil when he may have a better. An other place of Basil I cited in his Moral.
defin. 26. Every word or deed must be confirmed by the testimony of holy
Scripture for the persuasion of good men, and the confusion of wicked men.
Bristow says, he admonishes his monks being students in divinity, to be so
perfect in the Scriptures, yt they may have a text ready, at every need as when
we bid them, cast all away that is not written, they have this text ready,
where Saint Paul bids us the contrary. To hold the traditions which we
have learned, whether it be by his Scripture, or by his word of mouth. 2 Thessalonians. 2. And does Paul bid them hold such doctrine as was not to be proved
out of the Scriptures? did he preach any such doctrine among the
Thessalonians, when those to whom he preached daily, searched the Scriptures,
tosee if those things were even so. Act. 17. And where I pray you, did you
hear any tradition by word of Saint Paul's mouth, that you may object it to
us? we doubt not but whatsoever he preached was as true, as that he did put in
writing, if you can assure us of it: but seeing that is impossible, and it is
certain he preached no doctrine but such as he committed to writing, Basills
rule must still stand in force, that every word and deed must have
confirmation of holy scripture, or else it is not good, for all good works are
taught in the Scripture, and all true doctrine may be found in them. 1. Tim. 3.

Now comes Bristowe, to answer such things as I object out of Augustine
against unwritten traditions: which he digesteth into three sorts. The first
are quotations of 11. or 12. places in which he prefers the authority of the
canonical Scripture, before all writings of Catholic Doctors of Bishops, of
Councels, before all customs and traditions.

But this Bristow denies to be the question, but whether nothing but Scripture
be of authority: I answer, those places prove that nothing is of infallible
verity, but the scriptures, therefore they prove that they only are of
irrefragable authority.

The second sort of places are about this question, who has the true Church.
Of which question I affirm, that S. Augustine would have the Church sought
only in the Scriptures. And he^e he bids me read his first demand,
likewise I will send him to mine answer unto ye same. At length he confesses,
that Augustine is content in that question, to set aside all other authorities,
to try it by the Scriptures: But that nothing else is good authority in that
question, that he never says. Neither do we say it, or refuse any
authority, that is agreeable to the Scriptures. And as that one question,
which was between S. Augustine, and the Donatistes was determinable by the
only authorititie of Scriptures, so are all questions that are between the
Church of all times, and all heretics.

The Donatistes held that the Church was perished out of all parts of the
world, except Africa, as the Papists hold, that it is perished out of all
parts except a piece of Europa. Saint Augustine by the Scripture proves, the
continuance in the Church dispersed over all the world, and that we hold
against the Romish synagogue of Popish Donatistes, who have separated them
selves from the Catholic Church, into the function of an Italian Priest, as
the other did of an Affrican. But Bristowe says, I am as blind as a beetle,
in saying that the Papists did separate themselves from our Church, seeing it
is certain, that Luther did separate him self from the Popish Church. The like
might be said to all them that forsook the fellowship of any heretics, to come
unto the Church of God.

But Bristow is as mad as a march Hare, that bragging so much of the title
of ye church, he is driven to try it only by the Scriptures, as Augustine
calls upon the Donatists. The other places which I aledge out of Aug, (says
Bristowe) are about al questions with heretics, whatsoever. As that he would
oppress the Arrian Maximinus with the authority of the Nicene council. Lib.
3. Cap. 14. Bristowe asks, whether he might not press them with the
authority thereof, as he does the Donatistes? But ask Augustine him self who
says, he ought not in that case, that he charged the Donatistes, which it was
by their own concession, because they allowed it. But he says in the same
place, the Fathers of the Nicene council ratified Homousion, that is,
equality of the son with the father, Veritatis autoritate, and autoritatis
veritate, by authority of truth, and by truth of authority. This truth of
authority, Bristowe will have to be the authority of the Nicene council, as
though the council could not err: but then what needed ye authority of
truth? In deed where the council decrees with the truth, it is the truth
of authority, for other authority a Council has not, but of truth: to
declare truth, and not to make truth, for if it declare error, as the
council of Arimine did, it has no truth of authority, because it has no
authority of truth. Moreover Bristow says, I translate falsely these words,
Nec ego huius autoritate, nec tuillius detineris. Neither am I bounden to the
authority of the one, nor thou of the other. Whereas it should be: Neither
does the authority of the one hold me, nor of the other hold thee. There is
great difference between, being holden, and being bound. To the bare
authority of the council of Nice, Maximinus was no more bounden, then
Augustine to the bare authority of Ariminum. It was the truth of Nice, that
the Arrian was bound unto, and the falshod of Ariminum, that Augustine was not
holden with us. But after the example of Augustine (says Bristowe) we will not
allege the council of Trent, as our proper witnesses to our side, but the
authority of Scriptures common to both. Witness hereof, Bristowes motives,
where he would overthrow us by the bare name of Catholic, and heretic, etc.
Again he says, that we make challenge of 600. years also. And what then?
Witnesses of truth we take wheresoever they be, but authority of truth only
out of the Scriptures. Where I said, that Augustine, setting all other
persuasions aside, provoke only to the Scriptures, to try the faith and
doctrine of the Church: Bristowe answers: How true that is, appears in
the same book, De Vnitate Eccle. which you cite. For when he has proved
against the Donatistes, the Church to be his, he says expressly, that to be
enough also, for all other questions. Sufficit nobis: It is enough for us that
we have that Church, which is pointed too, by most manifest testimonies of the
holy and Canonical Scriptures. De Unit Eccle. Cap. 19. Does he say expressly,
it is enough for all other questions? I must needs say expressly you lie. For
the only question, being how the Donatistes should be received, if they would
come to the Catholic Church, as though they were the true Church, because
baptism given among them was not repeated in the Catholic Church, Augustine
after much concertation says. Quapropter cum dicatur haereticis, etc. Wherefore
seeing it is said to the heretics: Rightousnes is wanting to you, which without
charity, and the bond of peace, no man can have, and seeing they themselves
confess, that many have baptism, which have not righteousness, and if they
would not confess it, the holy Scripture conuinceth them, I marvel how they
think, when we will not baptize them again, having not their own, but the
baptism of Christ, that we do so, as though we judged nothing to be now
wanting to the^ and that because baptism is not given to them in the Catholic
Church, which they are found to have already, they think they receive nothing
there, where they receive yt without which, yt which they have, avails them
to their destruction, and not to their salvation. Which if they will not
understand, it is sufficient for us, yt we hold yt Church, which is showed
forth by most manifest testimonies of the holy and canonical Scriptures. Where
he speaks not of the authortie of ye Church to determine questions, but
shows it is sufficient to have proved by ye Scriptures, that they are the
true Church, although the Heretics will not understand how baptism being
ministered out of the Church, has not effect, but in the true Church, for if it
be manifest by the Scriptures that Augustine holds the true Church, that last
question of theirs, how they should be received, though it be not resolved, yet
can not disprooue them to be the true Church, nor prove the Donatists to be the
Church, seeing there can be but one.

Where out of this Book Cap. 16. I show, that Augustine declares, first that
Heretics must be confuted only by Scriptures, secondly that neither counsels,
succession of Bishops universality, miracles, visions, dreams nor
revelations, are the notes to try the Catholic Church, but only the
Scriptures: Bristowe says, they are notes with the Scripture, as he has
showed in his demand, I answer whatsoever agrees with the Scripture, may well
be received. But the Scripture without all these is sufficient, to try the
Church as Augustine shows, and therefore all the rest of Bristowes motives,
might be spared, if he durst join issue upon the Scripture only, as Augustine
does, but that he dare not do. He has a great quarrel of Augustine, for
translating manifestatur is proved, as though Augustine said, that true
miracles and visions lack weight and fashion of just probation. If you call
true miracles, that are done indeed and not counterfeited, I say that all such
make no just probation. For God tempts his Church by such, to see if they
will forsake his commandment. Deuteronomy. 13. But those that be true miracles
indeed, are joined with the truth of doctrine, which being tried by the word
of God to be such, confirm it or prepare men's minds unto it, of themselves
never sufficient to avouch true doctrine, without Gods word: and therefore I
will still t^^nslate, manifestatur is manifestly proved or showed, which is
alone.

Moreover out of Augustine Cont. Epist. sundam. Cap. 4. I showed, that though
consent, and universality, antiquity, succession, be good confirmation, when
they are joined with truth: yet when truth is severed from them, it is more to
be regarded then they all. Bristowe says, that Augustine grants not that
the truth can be separated from them. Yes verily, or else he should have stood
upon that point only, that truth can not be severed from those marks, which
undoubtedly the Catholic Church had, and the Manichees wanted. And although
he said, the Church had most sincere wisdom, yet he says not, that
wheresoever was antiquity, succession, etc. there must needs be the most
sincere wisdom.

Lastly out of the book De Pastoribus Cap. 14. I affirmed, that man's auctority
is too weak to carry away so weighty a matter, as was in question, using the
words of Augustine: Auferantur chartae humanae, etc. Let men's papers be
removed, let the voices of God be heard, show me one place of Scripture for
Donatus side, etc. Bristowe rehearsing the saying more at large as I did, Ar.
14. asks what makes all this for Fulke? unless he thinks he has any
vantage in his own false translation of Acta, turning it decrees. Surely
whether the word be well or ill translated, I seek no vantage thereof, and yet
if I should change my translations, I would rather call Acta acts of the Court
or records, then Courtrolles as you do. But every man may see, what vantage
you clasp at, among ignorant persons, by your false translation of Chartae
humanae men's Court papers, as though the word of Augustine were not general
to remove all men's writings, and to urge only the Scripture. But the Church
beginning at Jerusalem and spreading over all Nations, to the very last time,
which Augustine in all places proves against the Donatists, makes much
against us in Bristowes opinion. Nay rather against the Papists, which
restrain the Church into the Romish rabble, which we affirm, both is and was
always, scattered over all the world, although greater in number at some times
then at other some, seeing that Mahomet has infected a great part of the
world, and yet among the Mahometists we doubt not but Christ has his members,
that never bowed their knee either to Mahomet of Mecha, or to the Pope of Rome.

3 About certain traditions. Bristowe.

The oblations Pro natalitiis spoken of before Cap. 6. Par. 1. 5. I said those
oblations, with other superstitions Fulke.
fathered upon tradition of the Apostles, by the Nicen, and other councels, as
Rhenanus witnesses, are abrogated.

Bristowe answers that he speaks never a word of any other traditions. Yet
Bristowe confesses him self, that many of them are abrogated. Cap. 6. Par. 1.
4. and 5.

4 About the marriage of Votaries. Bristowe

The two places one of Epiphanius, the other of Hieronyme, which I cited for
the Marriage of Votaries, Fulke.
Bristo we says are about a matter, which they hold even as those fathers
did. But in deed they hold the contrary, for they held the marriage of such
lawful, the Papists dissolve them, and say they are no marriages. It is
better says Epiphanius, to have one sin, and not many. It is better for him
that is fallen from his course, ope^nly to take a wife according to the law,
and of long time to repent from his virginity, and so to be brought again to
the Church, as one that has done amiss, as one that is fallen and broken and
having need to be bound, rather then to be wounded daily with privy darts,
of that wickedness, which the devil puts into him. So knows the Church to
preach, these are the medicines of healing. Bristowe says, I gather that
marriage is an wholesome medicine for such men. Contrary to that I confess my
self, that he calls it a sin.

But he slaundereth me as he does often: I said Epiphanius does count it an
offense to marry, because it was a breach of vow, but neither he, nor I,
said that mar^i^ge is a sin Bristowe says likewise, the Apostles tradition
calls it a sin. But he slandereth the tradition or Epiphanius the reporter
thereof even as he did me. The words are Hae. 61. Tradiderunt, etc. The holy
Apostles of God have delivered, yt it is a sin after virginity decreed, to be
turned to marriage. They say not marriage is a sin, but by breach of vow to
marry is a sin. For their sin cannot pollute the ordinance of God. But the
wholesome medicines are penance and reconciliation, says Bristowe. And why not
marriage I pray you? whatsoever is good for the diseased, is an wholesome
medicine: to take a wife openly, is good for the diseased: therefore marriage
also is a wholesome medicine. As for your distinction of solemn vow, and sole
vow is a very babble: Epiphanius speaks generally of all that had vowed
virginity.

To the place of Hierome Ad Demetriadem, he answers that they which of two
sins will needs committ one, they counsel them to committ the less rather
then the greater. But Hierom makes no comparison of sins, but says to such
virgins as lived incontinently. It must be plainly said to them, that either
they should marry if they cannot contain, or else they should contain if they
will not marry.

5. About the real presence and transubstantiation. Bristowe.

About these points I will not stand, considering I Fulke.
have written so much already in confutation of Heskins and Sanders, and that
Bristowe brings nothing nor half so much as has been refelled in their
books concerning these places.

Where I said, it was not the belief of S. Aug. yt the sacrament is the
natural body and blood of Christ. Bristow asks if it be his mystical body, or
whether Christ have any more bodies. It were an easy matter to show that it is
called by Augustine the mystical body of Christ, which is his Church, but I
pardon Bristowes ignorance: and answer him, that the sacrament is neither his
natural, nor his mystical body in proper speech, But secundum quendam modum,
as Aug. says, after a certain manner, both, And I read in Theodoret of a third
body, which the sacrament is, De typico symbolicoque corpore, a typical or
sacramental body.

The place of Augustine in Psalm. 58. with the cauillation of Adoration, which
Bristowe makes, is examined in mine answer to Heskins. Lib. 2. Cap. 45. And
in mine answer to Sander. Lib. 6. Cap. 2.

The place of Augustine, which I translated word for word, and faithfully
gave the sense thereof, as every man may see that reads it, Purg. 309.
Bristowe shamefully peruerteth, setting the carte before the horse, in
rehearsing of it to make a contrary sense. But even in that same book and
Chapter De Trinitate, Lib. 3. Cap. 10. Augustine is clear, against that
monstrous opinion of transubstantiation, speaking of signs, and namely of the
bread which is spent in receiving of the sacrament: Sed quia haec, etc. But
because these things are known to men, because they are done by men, they may
have honor, as religious things, but wonder as miracles, they cannot have.
Whereof if he had known the carnal presence, and change of the bread, such as
the papists speak of, he must needs have acknowledged many wonders and
miracles contrary to the order of nature, which they are constrained to feign,
although no man can see them, whereas al corporal miracles wroght by God are
sensible

The place of Justinius with Bristowes cauil confuted, is in mine answer to
Heskins Lib. 2. Cap. 43. The place of Irenaeus in the same answer. Lib. 2.
Cap. 4^. And Theodoret the last Doctor that I cited, who perchance might he
ignorant of transubstantiation (says Bristowe) because it was not clearly
defined to be in form and matter, before the last council of Trent, you
shall find with his cavil confuted Lib. 3. Cap. ^2. and 56. Against Sanders
book of the sacrament. Lib. 6. Cap. 5.

6 About the sacrament of penance. Absolution. Bristowe

About the sacrament of penance, the Popish Church Fulke.
says four things: first that by the Priests absolution, the guilt of sin
and eternal pains due for it are taken away, but one hours torment in
Purgatory, as the master of the sentences teaches, is not taken away thereby,
and Allen confesses (Bristowe says) it avails to take away the torments of
hell. But Allen Purg. 167. requiring submission to Gods ministers for
absolution, gives them in most ample manner a commission of executing Christ's
office in earth, both for pardoning and punishing of sin: that suffering here
in his Church sentence and just judgment for his offenses, he may the rather
escape our fathers grievous chastisement in the life to come. Thus Allen is
clean contrary to Bristowe, and himself, and left naked in this place, as
almost in all places, by Bristowe, who would seem to take upon him his defense.

The second thing is temporal debt, remaining after absolution. Touching this
matter, I said Purg. 42. That Augustine says of the deaths of Moses and
Aaron, that they were signs of things to come, not punishments of Gods
displeasure. Quaest. in Number. lib. 4. cap. 53. Here Bristowe complayneth of my
synceritie, and rehearses the words before. When it is said to them, that
they should be gathered to their people: It is manifest, that they be not in
the wrath of God, which separateth from ye peace of the holy eternal society.
Thereby it is manifest, that also their deaths were signs of things to come,
and not punishments of Gods indignation. What want of synceritie is here,
except there be so great difference between indignation and displeasure? But
Bristowe cauilleth of the wrath that separateth for ever, as though they were
in a wrath that separateth for a time. Yet the scripture presses, where God
said you shall die, because you did not believe me. This was no satisfaction
for their temporal debt remaining after absolution, whereof the question is,
but a fatherly correction to them, and an example unto other. Yea such a
correction as was a greater benefit, namely to be received into the eternal
land of promise, then the punishment was, that they should not enter into the
earthly possession.

Likewise I reported, that Augustine Cont. Faust. Lib. 22. Cap. 67. and De
Pecc. mer. ac rem. Lib. 2. Cap. 23. says that the punishment laid upon David
after ^his adultery remitted, was the chastisment of Gods fatherly scourge.
Bristowe asks, if it be no punishment, because it is a scourge? yes verily:
and whether it be not for sin? yes truly. But never the sooner a temporal
debt remaining after absolution, when it is the scourge of a fathers
chastisement. For I chastise not my child, that his punishment should satisfy
any part of his fault, but to keep him in humility, and fear for committing
the like, and for example to the rest of my family, as wise a father and divine
as Bristowe will esteem me. And how can Bristowe defend Augustine against the
Pelagians, showing why death that came in by sin, still remains even upon
them whose original sins he confesses to be so fully forgiven in baptism,
yt they owe nothing, neither eternally nor temporally for them: if death in
such, be any temporal debt, remaining after absolution, when he will have the
fatherly scourge of God to be a punishment to satisfy the debt of sin.

But for a contradictorie of Allens assertion, I cited out of Chrysostom in
Romans Ho. 8. where there is forgiveness, there is no punishment. Bristow says,
he speaks of the forgiveness in baptism to a Jew: Allen of forgiveness in
penance. But he may not creep out at that hole, it is too straight for him.
Chrysostom speaks generally, wheresoever there is forgiveness, there is no
punishment, yea he says, Vbi gratia ibi and venia, where grace is, there is
forgiveness therefore if there be grace in penance there is forgiveness, and
where there is forgiveness, there shall be no punishment: neither does
Chrysostom in that place speak a word, either of Jew, or Baptism, but of
all Christians escaping by grace, the wrath which the law works, and being
made heirs of the promise by faith.

The third thing is satisfaction, against which, Bristow says, I alleged
Chrysostom, and Ambrose so fondly, that the words which I allege will
declare, Chrysostom. De Compunct. Cord. lib. 1. Non requirit, etc. God requires
not the burden of shirts of hair, nor to be shut up in the streightes of a
little cell, neither does he command us to sit in obscure and dark caves:
This only is that which is required of us, that we always remember our
sins. He requires only compunction of the heart, therefore he requires no
works of satisfaction, neither those, nor any other. Bristow will see nothing,
but the straight mourning of Monks. The word only is so little for his
purpose, that he cannot see it. And when he has praised this mourning as much
as he can, Chrysostom says it is besides Gods commandment.

To the place of Ambrose in Luc. 22. lib. 10. He says of Peter. I read of his
tears, I read not of his satisfaction. Bristowe replyeth, that he says
immediately before, I find not what he said, I find that he wept. Whereupon he
will gather, both confession, and satisfaction necessary. I would feign see
that collection in a syllogism.

Surely if they were both necessary, S. Peter, by judgment of Ambrose, lacked
two necessary points of repentance, which Judas had, and yet obtained not
forgiveness: But tears (says he) are a special kind of confession and
satisfaction. And yet where Ambrose says, they obtain pardon, Bristowe
says, they are not sufficient: so that Peter weeping, having beside his inward
contrition a special kind of confession and satisfaction, had not yt which
would serve. But Br. leaving this place as obscure, refers us to a plain
place. Ad vir. Lap. c. 8. For a passing great crime, is necessary a passing
great satisfaction. whereto I answered before, yt an heinous offense must be
earnestly bewailed, if the repentance be not cou^terfet, Brist. says, He
doubted not of her repentance to be unfeigned. What the^? He exhorts her to
continue her repentance, not for satisfaction to God, whose justice cannot be
sa^isfied by man's work, but by her earnest sorrow, to satisfy the Church
which was offended by her whoredom.

The fourth thing is pardons, whereof Bristowe speaks as he does commonly,
with wonderful confusion. I said the old satisfaction was in respect of the
offense unto the Church, and not to satisfy the justice of God, which is not
satisfied but by the death of Christ. The penance enjoined by the Church, upon
good consideration, might be and often was released by the Church, as appears
by many places of Cyprian, which Bristowe cites and many other, but not by the
Bishop only, and this release or remission, was called indulgence or pardon,
which is no more like to Popish pardons, then the creaking of a goose, is like
the song of a swanne. But as for pardoning of sin, they affirmed that it was
proper to God, as Ambrose to the virgin. Stick to penance even to the end of
thy life, and presume not that pardon may be given thee of man's day, for he
deceives thee that so promises the. For thou yt have in special sinned
against the Lord, it is meet that of him only thou look for remedy in the
day of judgment. Bristowe says, He did bind her to penance all her life,
bidding her not to hope for any pardon at his hand, as he bound the Emperor
Theodosius indefinitely, and loosed him after eight months penance, with a
pardon. Who sees not, quoth Bristow, that all this makes plainly for pardons?

But Ambrose tells her, not, that he would not pardon her, but that no man
can pardon the offense committed against God, and that if the Pope himself
should promise to pardon her, he should but deceive her. And yet the Church
might pardon the offense and slander where with they were justly offended, by
her whoredom, and restore her to the Communion, as I doubt not but they did;
although she should continue her repentance, all the days of her life, and when
Ambrose did bind and loose the Emperor, he did only use the discipline of the
Church, to bring him to repentance, that God might forgive his sins, not that
he might make satisfaction for ye slaughter of 7000. men, of whom the greatest
part were innocents by 8. months penance, but after such time, seeing him to
be sorrowful in deed, received him again into the communion. The place of
Cyprian In Sermon. de Lapsis is very clear to show that God and not man,
forgiueth the sins. Let no man deceive himself, let no man beguile himself,
only our Lord can give mercy, only he can grant pardon to sins, as being
committed against him, who has borne our sins, who has suffered sorrow for
us, whom God has delivered for our sins. Man cannot be greater then God,
neither can the servant by his indulgence remitt or ^orgiue that which by so
great offense, is committed against the Lord, least this offense also be
added to him, that is fallen, if he know not that it is foreshewed, Cursed is
he that puts his trust in man. Our Lord must be entreated, our Lord must
be pacified, with our satisfaction, which says, he does deny that man that
denies him.

Against this so plain a place: Bristowe cauelleth, that he speaks to
impenitents, that trusted also in lay men's pardons: which is false, for they
were not altogether impenitent, but not sufficiently repentant, neither did
they trust in lay men's pardons, but without dew repentance tried, made have
to be reconciled by entreaty of the Martyrs, yet with the hurtful facility of
the priests, whereof Cyprian complains: Sic oportet Dei Sacerdotem: So it
behooves the priest of God not to deceive with the deceiuable ye^lding, but to
provide with wholesome remedies. As for the pardons whose antiquity Bristowe
would have to be noted, were not pardons of sins, but release of time of
separation enioined by the Church to show repentance for their sins, as I
declared before. Which is even as ancient as the Gospel, whereas popish
pardons Apoena and culpa, are of a much newer stamp, and contrary to the
ancient custom in the giuers, for they were given by the whole Church, in the
persons, for they were given to men a live only, in the time, for they were
given but of a short time of penance enjoined in this life, and not of so many
thousand years, etc. in the thing released, for they were neither pardons of
punishment, nor of sin dew to Gods justice, but of time of satisfaction to
be made to the Church, when the Church was otherwise satisfied.

7 Of Purgatory, of the Canonical memento, of oblations, and Bristowe.
of sacrifice for the dead practiced by the Church.
Bristowe charge me to use the arguments from Fulke.
men's authority negatiuely, which I my self confess to be naught, but he
mistaketh the matter: I said the order of prayers and administration of the
holy mysteries, described by Justinius, and Tertullian, do sufficiently
declare what was the usage of the Christians in those purer times, in which no
mention being made of oblations and sacrifice for the dead, it is certain,
there was none used, not only because there is no mention, but because those
two old Fathers in their Apologies, declare whatsoever was done in their
assemblies. As for oblations for the dead, that Tertullian speaks of, cannot
be proved to have been used at the communion, but rather at the burial of the
dead. But Arnobius (says Bristow) about the very same time, as a witness to the
contrary, complaining that the connenticle houses of the Christians, were
pulled down by the Paganes, in which God is prayed unto, peace, and pardon is
asked, for all men, for the Magistrates, for friends, for enemies, for the
living and for the dead. Such a saying there is in Arnobius, Lib. 4. Con. gra.
I confess, but how proves Bristowe, that he was about the time of Justinius,
or Tertullian, when he confesses it was 300, years since Christians were
named, Lib. 1? and under Dioclesian he flourished, says Hierome, which was
six or seven score years after Tertullian, the later of the two who flourished
under Seuerus.

The old liturgy of the Greek Church in Epiphanius time, had a memory of
the dead, but seeing it was an oblation for the Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, etc. in the first institution thereof, it could be but an offering of
thanks giving, although Epiphanius expounded it after the error of this time,
to be a prayer for the sinner, and a separation of Christ from the order of
men. This is the effect of that I said. Bristowe says, I am deceived, by
thinking it is but one memory, whereof Epiphanius speaks, and sends me to
the countefeit liturgies of Saint James, Chrysostom, and Basil, which were
written long after their age, according as well to ye error of the time, in
which they were written, as in some expressing the name of the Emperor, and
Bishop, in whose time they were written. Also he sends me to diverse places of
S. Augustine, but which I know not, for the place Encherid C. 110. and Dulci.
q. 4. are of one sacrifice offered for all baptized persons that are departed,
which he says for the very good are thanksgiving, for them that were not very
ill asking of mercy, for the very ill no help, but a comfort of the living.
Chrysostom also speaks of a general memory of all that were departed,
instituted by ye Apostles Ad Philip. hom. 3. in which if there had been an
express form of prayer for ye dead, he needed not of that memory, to have
proved prayer to be profitable to the dead. The place of Origin he mangleth,
even as his Master Allen does, but he more usually, suffering no sentence of
any writer almost to be read together, without prejudice of his interlacing. In
Job lib 3. The former men did celebrate the day of their birth, loving but one
life, and not hoping for any other after this. But now do we not celebrate the
day of nativity, seeing it is the entrance of sorrows and temptations, but we
celebrate ye day of death, as yt which is ye putting away of al sorrows, and
the escaping of al temptations. We celebrate ye day of death, because they do
not die that seem to die. Therefore also do we make memories of ye Saints, and
devoutly keep the memories of our parents or friends, dying in the faith, as
much rejoicing in their rest, as desiring also for our selves a godly finishing
in faith. So therefore we do not celebrate ye day of nativity, because they
which die shall live perpetually. And thus we celebrate it, calling together
the devout men with the Priests, the faithful with the Clergy, inuiting
also the needy and poor, filling the fatherless and widows with food, that
our festiuitie may be done in remembrance of the rest, which is unto the souls
departed, whose memory we celebrate, and may be made of us a savor of
sweetness in the sight of the eternal God. First concerning my translation,
Bristowe will have Religiosos to signify Monks, as though none were devout,
but they, or as though the Church in Origens time, were so full of Monks, as
it was afterward. Secondly he says, that death is a putting away of the
sorrows of this life only, where Origin says of all, and it were small cause
of rejoicing, to put off the small sorrows of this life, if men should enter
the horrible torments of Purgatory. Again, the rest of the dead, he will have
to be only of their bodies. That were a poor refrigerium, if their souls
should fry in Purgatory. The savor of sweetness he will not have to be a
sacrifice of thanksgiving, but a work meritorious, as though it was a work
meritorious, that Noe offered clean beasts after the floode, when the text
says, the Lord smelled a sweet savor, Genesis 8. and not rather a sacrifice of
thanksgiving for his deliverance. The like ignorance (he says) I show, to
think that memory for one, cannot be a prayer for him. As S. Paul to the
Colloss. Remember my gives: and to the Hebrews, Remember them that are in
gives, etc. But where did I say so ignorantly, that prayer may not be joined
with remembrance? For I trust Bristow is not so brutish, to say that all
memory is a prayer. But how skillful is he, to compare the memory of
imprisonment, which is an admonition to pray for the imprisoned, with the
memory of rest which being obtained, what should we pray for? As for the
words in S. James his Mass, which was written by some Sir James, many
hundredth years after Origens death, I cannot be persuaded that Origin should
allude unto them.

Where Cyprian says, that Victor deserved not to be named at the altar in the
prayer of the priests, I showed by diverse good reasons, that he means not of
prayer for him, but such as was of thanksgiving for the dead, and for the like
godly departure of the faithful living. For his offense in making a Clarke
executor, was not to be punished with eternal torments, whereto Bristow
answers by telling of three things done in their Mass, which he says were
done in Cyprians time, but that is the matter in controversy. my reasons
alleged Pur. 284. he touches not at all.

I noted Pur. 259. that Allen had falsified 2. Counsels at once, the Council
of Carthage the 4, Cap. 95. and the Council of Vase, which speaking of such
executors as defrauded the Church of the oblations of the dead, which they had
bequeathed to the use of the poor: Allen says to excommunicate them, that
hinder the oblations for the dead. Now comes Bristowe and says, it is but
mere cauelling to distinguish oblations of the dead, and oblations for the
dead, because Cyprian says, there should be no offering for Victor. I have
showed, Pur. 284. that this offering was but a thanksgiving, and this
discipline was not to cut him from the Church, but an admonition to other. As
for the other Counsels of Toledo 11. Bracharense, with this of Carthage and
Vase, I have answered Pur. 426. against which, Bristowe here says nothing, but
repeateth them with his usual interlardings.

The Council Bracharense, which I twice promised to show forth against
Purgatory, when I came to it, Bristow says, I plainly confess the contrary,
to wit a memory for the dead. I said that for them that kill them selves, that
Council decreed, that no commemoration should be made. Ca. 34. and what this
co^memoration i^, I said it appears in ye next Canon, where they call it the
commemoration of the holy oblation, that is, they decreed, that no communion
should be celebrated, in which being a commemoration of the sacrifice of
Christ, no mention of them that so died should be in their thanksgiving, as
was used for them that died well.

Out of the 3. Toletan. Cap 22. I showed that it was decreed that the bodies of
the faithful should be buried only with singing of psalms, which must be
thought sufficient for all Christians: this I said, excluded both prayers and
oblations for the dead.

Bristow cauelleth, that although in carrying the corpse to the grane, they used
to singe psalms, yet they might have prayer and oblation for their souls in
the Church. I answer, the council thinks singingof psalms sufficient for
the office of their burial, therefore prayer and oblation were thought
needelesse. But that they had prayer and oblation in Spain, for the dead, he
would prove by a saying of Augustine De cur. pro mor. Cap. 1. where he says
the custom of the universal Church is, that in the prayers of the priest,
which are made to God at the altar, the commendation also of the dead has his
place. This commendation might be without prayer, as in the old liturgy the
oblation for all the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles etc. or if it were in
special form of prayer for the dead in Africa, it proves not that it was
in Spain. For Augustine speaks of the universal Church, no farther then his
own knowledge, or if it were in his time, it might afterward be reformed in
Spain, as diverse other errors were, namely in that Council of Toledo, and
other before it. But Bristowe urges me farther, and says, I might as well
say, the Papists pray not for the dead, because they carry the corpse with
psalms. But he will never see the little word, only, joined in the Canon to
psalms, nor the sufficiency of the office for the burial of all Christians.
Again he demands of De profundis, being a psalm, Is it not a prayer for the
dead, trow you? I trow no. Except all prayers that men make for them selves,
be prayers for the dead.

As for the burial of papists, claimed by ministers in England, I think you
belie them, for they could be content you had all the obstinate papists in your
bosom at Loueine, quick and dead: But such as die among us, we are not nice
in denying them burial in the usual cemiteries, although we communicate not
with them in their life, yet always protesting, that more severe discipline
were meet for them in their life, and to be executed upon them even in their
death, after the example of Cyprians time although we think worse of them then
Cyprian did of Victor.

I said farther, that the place of Possidonius speaking of the funeral of
Saint Augustine, proves that the sacrifice offered for the commending of his
bodies deposition, was the sacrifice of thanksgiving. Here first Bristowe
accuses mine ignorance in antiquity, that I understand deposition for the
putting of his body by death, where it is the laying down of it in the earth,
as Leuatio corporis, is the taking up of Saints bodies or relics, a
worshipful witness of antiquity. For Cyrillus testifies that they were not
in his time taken out of the earth Lib. 10. Cont. Julian. But mark how
skillfully Bristowe expounds Possidonius, saying, The sacrifice was offered to
God, for the commending of his bodies deposition. That is, says Bristowe
(expositione prima) for the laying down of it in the earth by burying. Why
might not his body be laid in the grave without a propiciatory sacrifice? The
second exposition is, that by commending the deposition of his body, which is
the laying it down in the grave, he means, the commendation of his soul to
God.

With such expositions he may prove what he will out of the Doctors. But to
admit this monstrous interpretation, how agrees it with popery? or Augustines
own opinion, that seeing he was a perfect man and died in persecution, while
his City was besieged, and the same day it was taken, that any sacrifice,
should be offered for his soul, seeing he himself says, it is injury to pray
for a Martyr, De Verb. Ap. 517? But that prayers for the dead were used in
Saint Augustines time, and at the celebration of the Lords Supper, it is not of
me denied, and therefore needed not of Bristowe to be proved. But he will make
me both answerer and replyer, Because I grant that S. Augustine prayed for his
parent, and yet taunt Allen for translating Memoriam sui, a memory of her to
be a memory for her, as though she would have her son to be a Chantrie
Priest, to sing for her.

First I say, that if the Pope himself, translate Memoriam sui, a memory for
her, the translation is false. Secondly, where he says, the sacrifice of our
price was offered for her: I showed that before, that so he called the
celebration of the Lords Supper, understanding it nevertheless not to be the
sacrifice it self, that being once offered, did perfectly redeem us, but a
memory and thanksgiving for the same, as I showed out of Augustine and other
Doctors, Pur. 316. and so forth in the rest unto the leaf 327.

Finally, Bristowe cites Augustine De Verb. Ap. Hom. 34. This as a tradition
of our Fathers, the whole Church does observe, that for them which are departed
in the communion of Christ's body and blood, when at the healthful sacrifice
they are remembered in their place, prayer is made, and it is rehearsed that it
is offered for them also: I answer this oblation, being general for all that
are departed in the faith of Christ, can be but a sacrifice of thanksgiving,
considering that the sacrifice of bread and wine, as they called it, in
remembrance of the only and insacrificable sacrifice of Christ, as S.
Augustine calls his propitiatory sacrifice, could be no propitiation, but a
sacrifice of thanksgiving, or prosperity, or praise. August. Contra Faustum
lib. 6. lib. 20. Cap. 18. and 21. Contra aduers. Leg. and Prophet. lib. 1. cap.
6. 7. 19. 20. and many other places through out his works.

Of particular Doctors. Whether Saint Augustine doubted of Purgatory.
Bristowe.

That Saint Augustine allowed prayer for the dead, Bristowe cites many places
but without need, seeing Fulke.
I con^esse it: but that he never doubted of Purgatory, that is not proved
thereby. The Grecians at this day deny Purgatory, yet do they allowpraier for
the dead. Whereas I cited Saint Augustine Encher. Chapter. 69. It is not
incredible, that such a thing is done, even after this life, and whether it be
so or no, it may be enquired. And either it may be found out or remain hid,
that some faithful men by a certain Purgatory fire, by how much more or
less they have loved perishing goods, to be saved sooner or later: yet not
such of who^ it is said, that they shall not possess the kingdom of GOD,
except the same crimes be remitted to them conveniently repenting.

Bristowes answer is, that there are two Purgatory fires, the one to punish
souls for sin, whereof S. Augustine is certain: the other not to punish
sin, but only to wear out by little and little, such affections to worldely
lawful things, as to wiue, etc. that without grief of mind, he cannot part
from them, so as the other which builded Gold, etc. whereof Augustine is
uncertain. Afterward he concludes, they are two operations of one
Purgatory, the one to purge sin with punishment, the other to purge worldly
lawful affections. If there be but one Purgatory fire, Augustine doubts not
only of the punishment, but of the purging fire. But Augustine speaks not of
purging lawful affections, for what purgation should there need, where no
unlawful thing is to be purged? But of unlawful affections of worldly lawful
things, which are loved so far above measure, that they cannot be lost for
Christ's sake, without grief: these Cupiditates greedy desires, Augustine
calls the wood, Straw, and stubble, which is builded upon the foundation
Christ, upon whom it is sin to build any thing, but Gold, Silver, or
pearls, etc. 1. Cor. 3. so that it is sin that Augustine speaks of.
Whereof he doubts, whether it is purged by a Purgatory fire after this life.
Again utterly excluding impenitent sinners, from hope of this purging fire, it
is manifest, that of penitent sinners he makes this doubt, whether they may be
saved by this Purgatory fire, after their death. Wherefore Bristows distinction
is clean contrary to Augustines meaning. Likewise where he makes a doubt
whether such worldly lawful affections remain in the souls of the elect,
departed, as love of wife etc. he shamefully slaundereth Saint Augustine, as
though he held any such opinion, when no such thing can be gathered out of his
words falsifying to his purpose the Doctors words, which are Rerum secularium
quamuis licite concessarum tales cupiditates: Such greedy desires of worldly,
although things lawfully granted, to call them such worldly lawful
affections, whereas Augustine says not, that such affections are lawful, but
that the worldly things are lawful, on which such affection is set. Likewise
Ad Dulci. quaestion. prima. he brings for example, a certain carnal
affection toward riches, a cogitation of those things which are of this
world, how a man should please his wife etc to be this wood, haie, etc. and
likewise doubtfully concludes whether therefore in this life only, men suffer
these things, or whether certain such judgments follow after this life etc.
excluding again murderers, fornicators, liars periurers, etc. The like doubt
he makes De Ciuit. Dei Lib 21. Ca. 26. saying, that peradventure it is true
that this purging fire is in this lite only, peradventure after this life
only, or both in this life and after, but yet for all men to pass through,
the perfect without sense, they that are entangled with these venial sins,
with sense of pain and loss etc.

But Augustine (says Bristowe) shows himself certain of purging pains De
Ciuitate Dei Lib. 21. Cap. 24. saying it is certain that such men are purged
before Doomesday by temporal pains etc. As for this place, being not found
in many ancient written coppies as Viues shows, seems to be a corrupted
place added by other, not written by Augustine. The like may be suspected of
the place Cap. 13. of the same Book, where he reports what he had said
before of remitting sins in the world to come, which yet is not to be found
in that Book, as for the places of Enchirid. Cap. 110. and Ad Dulc. (...). 2.
which he quoteth, have nothing but of prayers for the dead. Wherefore Augustine
although he allowed prayer for the dead, to avail them remaining in secret
receptacles, as he terms them Enchirid. Cap. 109. yet he was not certain of
Purgatory. Touching invocation of Saints (which I confessed Augustine to allow
according to the error of his time) and prayers to be profitable for the dead,
I said Pur. 317. that Augustine is full of doubts and questions in the matter,
and first whether the mothers supplication to the Martyr profited her son,
Augustine said, that did profit him buried in the holy place, if any thing
profited. Whereof I gathered, that he speake^h doubtfully. Bristow cries out
that I am past all shame: for Augustiue never doubted whether such supplication
might profitte, but whether the mother had any such cogitation. I answer, he
doubted at least, whether such kind of supplication did profit or no: for the
doubt of her cogitation was expressed before in an other condition, Si quidem
credidit, if she believe, etc. But to refell my impudency, as it should seem,
he has heaped up a sort of places, to prove that Saint Augustine clearly
affirmed supplication to Saints to profitte the dead: first, Non inaniter
fiun^, they be not made in vain. Cap. 1. But these words are not in that
Chapter. He says there Neque Ecclesia inaniter, Neither the Church nor the
friends care for the dead bestows in vain such devotion as it can: where he
speaks of prayers for the dead, but not of supplication to the Martyrs.
Secondly he cites Prosunt quibusdam mortuis, they profitte one sort of the
dead Cap. vlt. but neither are there such words, nor for such purpose.
Thirdly, Non sunt praetermittende, they must not be omitted, C^ 4. also, Fiunt
recta fide, ac pietate, they be made with right faith, and piety, Cap. 4.
These words in deed are there, but of prayers for the dead generally,
although there also in the same Chapter to his purpose which he notes not:
last of all, Religiosus amicus, etc. they be necessary, the devout friend must
in no case omit them Ca. 5. the necessary supplications he speaks of, are
prayers generally, not that prayer to Saints, are of him called necessary
supplications. But unto all the other doubts, which I in the place above
quoted, had noted out of that treatise of Augustine Bristowe speaks not a
word.

Whether S. Augustine denied Purgatory. Bristowe

Bristowe rehearses my words (with such fidelity Fulke.
as is usual to Papists) as though I had said, that Saint Augustine denied
Purgatory by the name of Purgatory, whereas my words are, that he seems to
deem all other receptacles of the souls departed, beside heaven and hell. But
of a third place (says he,) we are altogether ignorant, neither do we find it
in the holy Scriptures. Hypog, Cont. Pel De Verb. Apost. Ser. 14. Bristowe
says, I answer it my self, in saying, he writes against the Pelagians,
that imagined a third place for the everlasting rest of infantes that were not
baptized. But what says Bristowe to my reply? which is this, The same reason
serves as well against the Popish Purgatory, because we find it not in the
holy Scriptures. Bristowe asks whether Saint Augustine does so reason
against it? As though that were material, when the reason will bind one man
as well as another, and one matter as well as another. As for his opinion of
prayer for the dead, as I have often said, proves not a third place: as for
the two places De Ciu. Dei. lib. 21. cap. 13. and 24. the one manifestly
corrupted, the other justly suspected, I have spoken to them both already.

Other Doctors about prayer for the dead. Bristowe.

I cited Purg. 382. Gelasius 24. 92. C. Legatur, That no man can be absolved of
the Pope after his death: and Fulke.
wherefore then serve the Popes Pardons? Bristowe answers, that all their
suffrages are only for them that die in their communion, and not for
excommunicate persons. Very well: yet are you not escaped. For where is the
Popes commission for pardoning? Quodeunque, etc Whatsoever thou shall loose
upon earth, it shall be loosed in heaven, etc. if this be your commission, as
well for giving pardons, as for absoluing excommunicate persons, this
commission cannot be exercised but upon the living. We read, says Gel^sius,
that Christ did raise the dead: we read not that he did absolve them that
died in error. (If I had pleasure to enterlarde the Doctors sayings as you
have, I should add that we read not that Christ gave pardon to any in
Purgatory.) And because he alone had power only this to do, he committed it
to Peter the Apostle principally, Whatsoever thou shall loose upon earth, it
shabe loosed also in heaven, etc. He says upon earth, for he never said, that
he was to be absolved which died in his binding. Likewise that this authority
given by this text, be it more or less, is to be exercised only upon men
living on the earth: you may read, C. 24 q. 2. Quod autem. And that no man can
be excommunicated or absolved after his death, it is showed by the words of
the Gospel, in which it is said: whatsoever you shall bind etc. he says: upon
the earth, not under the earth. Where I cited out of Cyprian Cont. Demetr. Pur.
140. when men are departed from hence, there is no place of repentance, no
effect of satisfaction, Here life is either lost or saved, Here provision is
made for everlasting life, by the worshipping of the fruit of faith: Bristowe
charge me with clipping, because I left out the last periode, which is
neither to nor fro my purpose. Likewise where I said, he exhorts Demetrianus
himself to repentance, which had been a wicked man and a persecutor of
Christians, he charge me with changing, for I should have said, which
presently was. I changed no word of Cyprian, in saying, he had been, and a
reasonable man would have understood me, that he presently was such a one,
when I said Cyprian exhorts him to repentance. But what is the answer? This
which is expressly written of Infidells in hell, and of baptism, I pretend to
be written of the faithful in Purgatory, and of penance after baptism. I
answer, Cyprian speaks generally of all men, and not of Infidels only, and
of al men in this world and not of Infidels in hell. Nec quisquam, etc. Neither
let any man be staide: either by sins or by years that he should not come to
obtain salvation. To him that remains still in this world, no repentance is
to late. The way is open unto pardon: and to them that seek and understand the
truth, the access is easy.

Finally after he had said, that passage is from death to life, the place by
me cited, he adds, Hanc graiiam, This grace Christ bestows, this gift of
his mercy he gives by subduing death with the trophee of his cross,
redeeming the believer with the price of his blood, reconciling man to God his
father, quickening a mortal man by heavenly regeneration. Him, if it may be,
let us all follow, let us be esteemed by his sacrament and sign, he opens
unto us the way of life, he restores us to Paradise, he brings us to the
kingdom heaven: with him we shall always live, etc. These words declare that
Cyprian acknowledges one mean of salvation, as well for the Gentile to be
baptized, as for the penitent Christian by the only mercy of God in Christ
obtained in this life, without any satisfaction of pain, for ever after this
life: and therefore he says moreover, That being made the sons of God by
Christ, restored by his blood, we shall always rejoice with him. We Christians
shall be together with Christ glorious, blessed of God our father, rejoicing of
perpetual pleasure, always in the sight of God, and always giving thanks to
God. For he can not be but always joyful and glad, which when he was guilrie
of death, is made sure of immortality. Thus does Cyprian promise to
Demetrianus, if he did repent, but even immediately before his death, and were
baptized, that he should enjoy the same state of felicity, with all faithful
Christians, in perpetual joy after death with Christ.

In like manner he exhorts them that were fallen in persecution to repent in
this world, while confession may be received, and satisfaction and remission
made by the Priest is acceptable to God, which he speaks generally, as if he
had said, no satisfaction or remission made by the Priest, avails to them
that are departed.

To the place of Chrysostom which I cited against himself: Pur. 251.
Bristowe after he has removed the question from the cause to the person,
answers that no friend, no just man shall help him, that dies in mortal
sin, either committing evil or doing no good. I say no more but as I said
before, Let it be compared with Chrysostomes other saying, the Homily next
before 41. in 1. Cor. and with Allens exhortation in the same Chapter. Pur.
242. If thou yet chance, etc. Out of Ambrose although allowing prayer for the
dead, I cited in Psalm. 4. Been, etc. The Prophet did well to add on earth,
for if he be not cleansed here, he can not be cleansed there. I should have
said, clean (says Bristowe:) for though he be not clean from venial
sins, he may be cleansed there, as also from the temporal debt of his
remitted mortal sins. But he forgets the word of the Psalm, out of
which Ambrose makes his note: Vt emundet cum in terra, that he may cleanse him
on earth: why was it well added on earth, if he might be cleansed after this
life? There is no cleansing but on earth.

Where Ambrose was alleged by Allen Pur. 104. to prove that every man
immediately after his death, does feel that he must look for in the day of
judgment, I said Purgatory 105. I marvel wherefore it is brought in, if it
be not to overthrow Purgatory. For if it be true, no man feels pain after
this life, but he that shall feel it eternally. This last conclusion although
Bristowe confess, that Saint Ambrose him self says it expressly in other
places, yet he asks how I can infer it of the words of Saint Ambrose In
ep. ad Romans Cap. 5. which I infer not of his words, but of Allens words,
citing the place of Ambrose, as though the words were these: And therefore
Saint Ambrose says: that without delay the good poor man was carried to rest,
and the wicked rich out of hand suffered torments. THAT EVERY MAN (says he)
MAY FEEL BEFORE THE DAY OF IVDGEMENT, WHAT HE MVST THEN LOOK FOR. Bristowe
leaving Allen, as he does commonly, breechelesse, shows the words of Ambrose
to be otherwise, as they are in deed. Which I will rehearse somewhat more at
large then Bristowe has done. Maxima pars mundi etc. The greatest part of the
world did not know, that God should be their judge: and very few there were,
over whom death did not reign. But they over whom it reigned, after this
death, which is called the first, were received of the second death unto pain
and destruction to come: but they over whom death reigned not, because they
have not sinned in the similitude of the transgression of Adam, were reserved
under hope unto the coming of our Savior in a free place, as it is read of
Abraham, that although he was in the lower parts, yet he was disseuered by a
large distance, so that there was a great goulphe between the just and the
sinners: how much more should there be to the godly and just a c^olinge, to the
sinners parching heat, to the ungodly burning heat, that it might not be
hidden before the judgment, what every one was worthy of. This that Ambrose
speaks of the difference of the pains of the damned, before Christ, Bristowe
by his accustomed interlacing would have it seem, as though he spoke of
Purgatory: for to sinners he adds Catholics, to the impious or ungodly,
beretikes. But he marketh not the conclusion, that such heat as they felt
after their death, they should feel after the judgment. Again, Non latet he
translateth might be partly known, as though that which is not hid, is not
manifestly and wholly known. That I cited out of Saint Ambrose De bono mortis:
That death makes no man's state worse, but such as it finds in every one,
such it reserueth to the judgment to come: Bristowe says, that Purgatory
alters not the state of the evil to worse, nor promoteth the state of the
good to better, but every man's state is according to the merits of his life,
nor he that is cleansed in Purgatory has his merits multiplied or amplified,
but venial sins and temporal debts taken away. In deed if the state of a
thing were nothing, but that you will allow it to be, it were somewhat that
you say: but who will say, that he which is in torments in Purgatory, is in as
good state as he that is in pleasure or ease of this life? or that he which is
discharged of such debts, as you say must be paid in Purgatory, is not in
better state, then he that now dies and must be cast into the scalding house,
for such payment? But that you may understand he speaks not of the death of
the wicked, which must abie for it, as Bristow says: he adds Ipsa quiet
fouet, it cherishes with rest: this cannot be of the wicked to who^ there is
no rest, but to the godly, which al immediately after death enjoy rest,
notwithstanding they be not all alike good, for of two sorts only Ambrose
speaks, the wicked in torments after death, because of their wicked life, and
the godly in rest. He speaks therefore of the godly that death makes not
their state worse, as he said immediately before, Quia portus quidan^ ect,
because death is a certain haven of them which being tos^ed in the great Sea
of this life, desire a harborow of faithful rest.

To the counterfeit auctority of Eusebius Emissenus, that has served for a
patch to piece so many Homilies like the Cukcowes song, I will say no more then
I said Pur. 143 The auctority of Bernard in this case I always refused, as a
late writer not sufficient to testify of the old faith or errors either.

Whether Purgatory be only for venial sins. Bristow^.

Standing upon Augustines judgment Enchirid. Cap Fulke.
69. and other places, I maintained, that Purgatory could not be by his
judgment, for great offenses which by penance are made small. Against which
Allen cited Augustine De vera and falsa poenitentia: that some sins are
mort^l, which by repentance are made venial, etc. which if they be not purged
in this life, require punishment after this life, etc. And Bristow notes the^
more at large, as though I had not understood them, or not read ye book. The
truth is, I made none account of ye counter^et book, but noted the impudency
of Allen, that would cite it against the certain and known judgment of
Augustine. Whereas this counterfeit book, if nothing else did bewray it, in the
17. Chapter rehearses the opinion of Augustine by name, and does confute it.

But Bristowe passes impudence it self, while he alleges for the same with
Allen Enchir. Ad laurent. Cap. 71. Where Augustine says of the Lords prayer
in them that are regenerate. Delet omnino, etc. That prayer altogether puts
away those small and daily sins. Also it puts away even those sins, from
which the life of the faithful that has been wickedly led, but by ^epenting
being changed into better, departs. Here he says expressly, that by
repentance and prayer, great offenses are clean wiped away, even as small.
But how does Bristowe prove hereof, that mortal sins are become venial^?
Which also in the next world he admits. Cap. 6^. (says Bristowe). But
what does he admit? that small sins may be purged peradventure in the next
life. What, B^istowe? have you forgotten what you held even in this Chapter,
under the title (whether Saint Augustine doubted of Purgatory Fol. 250.) that
he speaks not of purging sins, but of purging worldly lawful affections,
wi^h grief of mind, etc.? But admit he speaks of purging small sins in
that place, by Purgatory fire, as indeed he does, although before you denied
the same: how prove you our present controversy, that mortal sins forgiven,
become venial, and may be purged in Purgatory* you say Cap. 70. Infanda
crimina, etc. The hainou^ offenses, if they be forgiven. Si conuenienter
poenitentibus eadem crimina remitiuntur: He grants they may be saved by
Purgatory fire, after this life. Good Lord, what will you be ashamed to
affirm? There is no such thing in that Chapter, no nor in that which goes
before, these words are not. But after he has declared his doubt of them,
that have loved perishing goods, whether they may be saved by purgatory fire
after this life: he says, Non tamen tales de quibus dictu^ est quod regnu^ Dei
no^ possidebunt, nisi conuenienter poenitentibus eadem crimina remit^^ntur. Yet
not such, of whom it is said, that they shall not possess the kingdom of God,
except unto them conveniently repenting the same crimes be forgiven. Here
although perhaps you may gather, that such persons are not excluded, yet can
not you infer, that for their great sins remitted, they should go thither,
but for their small sins, such as he spoke of before. What the opinion is of
him that made the 41. Homily De Sanctis under ye name of Augustine, it forces
not greatly, seeing he does not expound that place 1. Cor 3. as Augustine
himself does in many places: and yet holds that not capital, but small
sins are purged with that fire.

8 Of Limbus Patrum. Bristowe.

I denied not but Augustine was of opinion that the Fulke.
fathers before Christ were in hell, no not in that book Contr. Feliciam.
Arrian. But I wished his reason to be marked, wherefore he counted it
blasphemous to say, that our saviors soul was committed to prison in he^,
because the souls of good men are immediately called to Paradise, much more the
soul of Christ, who commended the same into his fathers hand, and promised to
be with the thief the same day in Paradise. To this reason Bristowe
answers nothing.

In the saying of I renaeus Lib. 3. Cap. 33. cited by Allen, I said it seems
the name Adam to be taken for a common name of mankind. But Bristowe wondereth
at my blind ignorance, as not knowing, that Tatianus against whom Irenaeus
writes, denied the salvation of Adam the first man.

As though it were necessary therefore, that Adam in this place must signify
that singular man: whereas it is evident, that rendering a cause why Saint Luke
beginning the genealogy at Christ, ends it in Adam, he disputes first, of
the mystery of our redemption generally, from Christ extending unto all ages:
and says, Necesse fuit etc. It was necessary, that our Lord coming unto the
lost sheep, and making a recapitulation of so great a disposition, and
seeking his own workmanship, to save even the same man which was made hi^
image and similitude, that is Adam filling the times of his condemnation which
was for disobedience etc. I see not what great blindness it is here to take
Adam for mankind, as well as the lost sheep: but admit he means our first
parent, which I denied not: of what skill proceeded it in Allen, to interpret
these words of Christ's descending into hell, which is the matter there in
question, when they are manifest of Christ's incarnation, to save all mankind
both the Fathers and us?

The other place of Irenaeus Lib. 5. almost in the end, I said to overthrow
the Popish fantasy of Limbus, I might have added also of Purgatory, where
Irenaeus affirms, that Christ after his death, went into such a place, as all
his disciples shall rest in, until the time of the general resurrection,
which was the place where the dead were before. Bristowe replyeth, he says
not, that the disciples shall go into the same place yt Christ went, but into
an invisible place etc. whereto I answer, how is it manifest that they shall
go into such a place, but by the example of Christ, who went into the place
where the dead were? And how can the text which he cites, prove it? The
disciple is not above the master, if every disciple should not go into the
same place, but as you hold, some to a much better, some to a worse, whereas he
speaks of one invisible place, appointed by God for all the disciples of
Christ.

And thus an end of al your caueling upon such places of the Doctors, as were
cited by me. Which how rightly I have discharged from your manifold wrangling,
that the indifferent teader might more thoroughly perceive, I wish him to
compare your cauills with those places of mine, which you quote, where he shall
see that you have taken greater pains to pick quarrels at me, then used
diligence to defend your Author, whose books you have undertaken to maintain:
beside that of every ten reasons that I bring against him, you have not
touched one.

The tenth Chapter.
That notwithstanding all which Fulke has said against D. Bristowe
Allens articles, in his first Book, being of that matter, or also in his other
of Purgatory: every one of my 51. demandes, (and therefore also every one of
my motives, and likewise every one of those articles) stands still in his
force. Every one (I say) and much more all of them, to make any man to be a
Catholic, and not a Protestant.

To Bristowes motives and demands, I have answered Fulk(...)
directly and purposely in a peculiar treatise, yt although he dare not join
with me in aunswering of Allen directly, yet he shall be driven to defend his
own bragges absolutely, or else forsake his challenge shamefully. The
demonstration that he boasts of in this Chapter is for the most part, nothing
else but a quoating of such places, where in his replye he supposes to have
confuted mine answers to Allens articles: unto which reply, seeing I have
orderly reioyned in every point, I will not stand to repeat, where I have
confirmed every answer, seeing this chapter of Bristow may be a sufficient
register to al such Chapters, and parts of Chapters where ye same may be
found. And for such points of his motives and demands whereunto he complains,
that in mine answer to Allens articles I have said nothing, I must require
both him and his readers, to have recourse to my Book specially written
against his said motives, and demaundes. For in aunswering Allen, I could not
prophecy, what arguments Bristowe would bring in those books set forth by
him so many years after mine answer to Allen was penned. But where he has any
argument or authority not directly answered before, I will here endeavor to
satisfy ye same in such plain order as I have observed in all the rest of the
book hitherto.

Omitting therefore the two first demandes of Collatio Carthaginensis, and
building of the Church, in the third of Going out, he says that Against our
imagined Church in the wilde^nesse, we are expressly warned Math. 24 Behold
Christ is in the wilderness, do not go out. This answer as senseless as
it is, is borrowed of Stapleton in his demonstration of doctrinall principles,
which I have confuted in a brief answer, showing that although we seek not
Christ either in the wilderness or in the secret places, no not in the Popish
pixe, but in heaven only, yet we are to seek his pilgrim Church, in what
corner of the earth soever she be, and seeing the holy Ghost has expressly
a^sirmed that she should be hidden in the wilderness, from the cruelty of the
bloody Dragon, what impudent ignorance, or malicious blindness is it in
Stapleton and Bristowe, to say we are warned by Christ never to seek the
Church in the wilderness? as though we were forbidden to see^e her, or else to
acknowledge her to be where sometime she should be. In the 4, demand of rising
after he would maintain 2 arguments, the first is this. Our first auctors can
not be named: Ergo they were none but the Apostles. This argument has no
consequens, and yet the antecedent i^ false. For of many of your errors, we
name the auctors, and of prayer for the dead, Montanus the heretic, until you
can name us a Catholic that held it, which was more ancient then he, and
although you would clear your selves of theft, because you have not stolen
that article but received it, yet seeing it came first from a thief, your
possession can not be just: and therefore ye must restore it to the heathen,
from whence Montanus stoale it. Where I brought example of the heretics,
called Acephali, and diverse other, Pur. 388. to prove that the first auctor of
every heresy can not be named; Bristow says, that he finds his name, to
have been Seuerus, and yt they were but a piece of Eutyches as the Puritanes are
of Calvin But when writers dout, and the common voice gave them their name,
because their bead was not known, the coni^cture of a name, will not serve the
turn. If they had added nothing to Eutyches, they should have been called
Eutychians, as for the cavil of Calvin, and the Puritanes, deserves none
answer. More like are the friars obseruants and general Franciscanes, to
those headless heretics, and the Eutychians. But Bristowe being driven from
the auctor, falls to the beginning of an heresy, which being showed to have
been later then Christ and his Apostles, is indeed an undoubted argument, to
reprove an heresy. And the beginning (says he) is showed by this, that the
primitive name of Christians would not serve them, but they must have new names
to be called by. By this demonstratine Logike, none shill so ^ptly be proved
heretics, as Monks, Friars, Nuns, etc who disdaining the primitive name of
Christians, have chosen to themselves new names, as Benedictines,
Franciscanes, Jesuits, etc. Whereas the old heretics did not willingly choose
the names that they were called by, but by like names, reproched ye true
Catholics: which argues yt the new name, except it be chosen by them ^elues,
is no good argument to convince heretics. Bris. asks, if the Papists do
acknowledge any founders of their faith, but ye Apostles of Christ? yea verily
ye Pope and the popish council, which have given you new articles of faith, yt
ye Apostles never taught, but y^ contrary, as transubstantiation, and communion
under one kind, etc. That Te^tul. and other latter writers do father prayer for
ye dead upon tradition of ye Apostles, it is no warrant for us, seeing ye
doctrine thereof is not found in all the holy canonical scriptures, but is
contrary, to the same, and Montanus is found to be the first that since Christ,
taught prayer for ye dead. That transubsta^tiation was lately decreed, he
answers it was the name and not ye thing, as Homousion was always believed
even before the Nicen Council, which first received yt name. A fit comparison:
but how can Brist. say, yt tra^substa^tiation was alwais believed? when ye
common opinion almost of al ye scholemen is, yt before ye determination of ye
Laterane council, it was no heresy, to hold impuratio^ or adnihilation of the
Elements, and he himself confessed in the last Chapter that perfect
transubstantiation was not decreed before the last Tridentine session. The
second argument is this: your first auctors can be named after the beginning of
the Churches rising with their new opinions: Ergo their opnions were heresies,
etc. To this argument I answer, denying the antecedent, for we hold no new
opinion, but ye foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ, being
the head corner stone. Where I take exceptions to Allens rule. Pur. 413:
Bristow expounds his meaning, to be of such an opinion as is contrary to the
truth, first preached by the Apostles, and upon his exposition not necessary
upon Allens words, charge me with nugation or triseling, in adding mine
exception, which is the same with his exposition. I pray the reader vouchsafe
to peruse the place, and see if there be any drop of shamefast blood left in
this blundering papist, which blusheth not to scoff at me for triselings when
he does nothing but cauil and trifle himself, and that without al wit, or
reason, truth or likelihoode.

In the 5. demand of contradiction of heresies in their first arising, where I
had showed, how some few plausible errors of prayer for the dead and to the
dead Ar. 39 by little and little prevailed, without any great contradiction
mentioned in Histories. Bristowe says, It is a fond part to tell why and how
a thing was done, which was never done. For the Scripture Es. 62. and August.
Ep. 119. Cap. 19. affirm that there ne should be, ne was any such silence in
the true pastors, etc. I answer both the Scripture and the Doctor speak of
silence, which may bring present overthrow of the City, or damnation of the
Citizens. Otherwise the true pastors in Saint Augustines time, not only in
silence passed, but by speech and writing allowed, the error of communicating
of infants and the necessity thereof, as I have showed before. And seeing
prayer for the dead and to the dead, by the holy Scriptures, are convinced to
be errors, it can be no justifying of them to say, no man preached against them
at their first rising. And seeing the Histories of the ancient time are very
few and short, it is more boldly affirmed, then soundly proved, that no man
preached against them. Epiphanius does not tell who preached against every
heresy at the first arising thereof. And even some of Origens heresies, of
which Bristowe takes example, slept almost 200. years in his books, before
they were openly contradicted in the days of Hieronyme, Ruffine and Augustine.
Touching that I allege of the mystery of iniquity working in the Apostles
time. 2 Thessalonians. 2. Bristowe charge me to say, that the Church of Christ
wrought this mystery of iniquity, wherein he does me open injury: for I know
it was Satan which wrought it, but yet in the Church where Antichrist should
sit, and not without it. He asks whether my text say, There was no
preaching against it. I answer my text says, it was a mystery not revealed,
and therefore could not at the first be openly preached against. But Antichrist
being openly showed, was preached against by the two witnesses, Apoc. 11.
although he were not espied in the first mystery of iniquity, yea when he was
yet in fashioning he was preached against by Irenaeus, Pollycrates, and others
Ar. 36. and in this book. Cap. 9.

The case of Cyprian and the Affricanes, being true pastors and yet
contradicting the truth, and other true pastors denying that such as were
baptized by heretics were to be rebaptised, I have clearly set down Pur. 413.
but that Bristowe can do nothing but cavil.

Allens rule is of the first rising of the persons, whereunto I require to be
added that their opinion must also be new, which if Bristowes blind malice
could have seen, he needed not to have painted his margent, with so many
quotations, to prove that the true opinion was ancient and perpetual.

Where I showed Ar. 93. that the Pope in secret, and not by open contradiction,
caused a most horrible blasphemous lake, called the Gospel of the holy Ghost,
etc. written by the Friars to be privily burned, for shaming their order, which
continued. 55. years, without reprehension of the Pope, or any, but such as
were accounted heretics, Bristowe calling it favorably, but a new scandalous
book, asks what fault it was. Verily such a fault, as proved him to be more
zealous of ye glory of beggarly friars, then of Christ and his Church, neither
can it be shadowed by the example of Augustine, at the first forbearing the
name of Pelagius, while there was hope of amendment in him, and he not
thoroughly understood his heresy. But contrary wise the Pope favors the
blasphe^^ous friars and condemns their reprehenders for heretics.

Where I said, this was an argument from man's auctority negatiuely, and
therefore nothing worth: No man preached against Purgatory, and prayer for the
dead, at their first entry: therefore they are true. Bristow says, it is
according to the Scriptures, Fathers and Histories, that All heres^es have b^ne
preached against at their first entry. Beside that he flitteth from errors to
heresies, as though there were no difference between the^: those Scriptures,
Fathers and Histories, are not yet showed by which it may be apparent, what men
and of what names, and in what time did openly preach against all heresies, at
their first entry, which is the thing that is urged upon us. In the sixth
demand which is of the name of Catholics, where I said he is a foolish
Sophister, that reasons from names to the things. Bristowe says he knows
not in what Logike, I have that axiom. He is a great stranger in Aristotel,
that knows not yt a carcass, although he be called a man, yet is not a man in
deed: moreover he charge me to reason so my self in ye seventh demand, where
indeed I do only deride the vain kind of reasoninge from the name to the
thing, when the name is not rightly given, retorting the argument upon the
Papists, who of us are called heretics, as we are of them.

But Saint Augustine reasons of the name of the Catholic Church. Aug. in
Psa Cont. Part. Donat. Dici^is, etc. You say that you be with me, but you see
it is false, I am called Catholic, and you of Donates part: I answer Saint
Augustine does not by the only name of the Catholic Church, as a sufficient
motive, prove ye Catholic Church, but by many other weighty reasons proves
that she was justly called so, because the question was between the Donatistes
and the Church, not only of the Church, but even of the name of Catholic.

Where I showed Ar 6. that the Grecians are called Catholics by as many
Nations, as the Papists: Bristow has nothing to reply, but that the heretic
Grecians and Latins, do not mistake the person, when common talk and books
call Catholic Latins, or Catholic Gr^cians: therefore they be true
Catholics. A miserable conclusion upon a false antecedent, for the Grecians
by the name of Catholic Grecians, understand enemies to the Pope, and by the
name of heretics Pap^sts, either Latins or revolted Grecians.

That in public edicts, by men of our side, papist^ are called Catholics,
it is more then I know, or think to be true, although edicts penned by papists
or neuters, call the papists Catholics, as they call us, of the religion
reformed, which appellations prove neither the one nor the other.

Where I compared the papists Ar. 67 glorying in the name of Catholic and
Church, to the Infidel ^ewes, criing: The temple of the Lord, when they had
made it (...) den of thieves: Bristowe answers, That our Lord both in the
Prophet Ier 7. and in the Gospel Math. 21. acknowledges it to be his Temple,
although they in it were thieves and wicked persons. The place indeed had been
the Temple of God, and therefore Christ used his auctority as high Priest in
purging it of corruptions, but of their making, it was not Gods Temple, but a
den of thieves, except Bristowe will say that a den of thieves may be Gods
Temple. And although unto the godly, notwithstanding the corruptions, it was
still the Temple of God, yet had not the ungodly the Temple of God, nor were in
it, as in Gods Temple, but as in a theeuish den, so are papists in the
Catholic Church.

Where I said, supposing we were not called Catholique^, we should not be in
worse case then Christ and his Apostles, who not only had not that name, but
were of the Jews (who were as rightly called Gods people, as the papists are
called the Christian world) called heretics and deceivers. Bristowe bids
me bate an ace of that, except I can show by predictions of the Prophets, the
reprobation of the Christian world, in these days, as they show the
reprobation of the Jews in those days. A wretched refuge, as though papists
were only named the Christian world, or that the Jews were reprobated in the
time of Christ's preaching, or the Apostles either, before the extreme
obstinate refusing of the Gospel. Or as if it were not sufficient, to show
the popish apostasy from the faith by those undoubted notes, which the spirit
speaking evidently does give of them. 1. Tim. 4. Beside this, Bristowe derideth
me, for requiring the Jews to use those names which they never heard of. And
is Bristowe so well read in the Scriptures, that the name of true Church was
never heard of the Jews in his opinion, as for the name of Catholic I
required it not of them, neither do I think we ought to be tried by the bare
name of Catholic, seeing we believe not barely and simply the Catholic, but
the holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church. Which Church is not called
Catholic, because it should be every where, (for that it never was, nor never
shall be) but because that wheresoever it be in parts, it is one body of Christ.
But here Bristowe takes me up for haulting, charging me to be the first of all
heretics, that say it is called Catholica, because it is Vna: but he plays
his old parts, for I say it is Catholic, because that being in diverse
parts, it is one, so that my reason is not only of unity but of universality
of the Church, which is Catholic in all the parts of it, being knitte in one,
and not of being in every particular place of the world, nor at all times in
most places of the world. And with this holy Catholic Church of the whole
world, our Church does and always has communicated, when it was not so
openly nor abundantly spredde in so many Nations as it is now. And therefore
Augustine in the place by Bristowe quoted Coll. 3. Die, etc. reproves as well
the Roman; as the Affricane Donatisme, whereinto Bristowe manifestly
incurreth, when most impudently he affirms, that the old fathers in their
Creed, believing one, holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church, meant the
Roman Church, as though the unity, holiness, universality, and Apostolic
foundation of Christ's Church, were nothing but the Romish Church.

Where I prove, that the Popish Church is not in every part of the world, and
therefore cannot be called Catholic, in that respect: Bristowe says it is
iumpe the argument of Cresconius, and refers us for the answer to Saint
Augustine. Con^. Cresc. Lib. 3. Cap. 63. but the answer is such, as he durst
not set it down. For Augustine confesses the Church is not called
Catholic, because it is every where, (for it was not in all places in his
time) but because it is to be dilated into all parts of the world, whereas the
Donatists held, it to be only in Africa as the Papists only in a piece of
Europa. And therefore it is false, that Bristow says, both the interpretations
of Catholic given by Saint Augustine De genesis ad Lit. imperf. Cap. 1. Because
she is universally perfect, and because she is spredde over all the world,
agree to their mother Romish Babylon, for she has nothing perfect, neither was
she ever nor at this day is spread over all the world, no not wh^re Christ is
and has long been named in Grecia, Macedonia, Moscouia, Armenia, Persia,
Assyria, A Ethiopia, etc. in most of which places are the Churches founded,
even by the Apostles themselves, and yet never subject to the Romish faction.
It is also false, that we renounce the latter, for we communicate with the
Church of all Nations, that has communion with Christ, and farther the
Catholic Church does not extend. As for the names of Church, Catholic,
baptism, heretic, schismatike, which he says our Apostasy has changed into
congregation universal, ablution, or washing, chuser, and cutter, it is a most
gross and sham^lesse lie, for although we may be heard sometimes perhaps, and
not often to interpret the Latin and Greek terms, by English words, yet
all that hear us. or read our writings, can testify that we most commonly
and usually, yea daily and hourly use the terms of Catholic, Church, and
Baptism Heretic, or Schismati^e, as often as occasion serves to speak of
those matters. As for the Greekish names of Priest, and Bishop, if they be
understood, for such ministers, as Saint Paul means by the names of (...)
and (...), we strive not for them. But when priest is taken for a Popish
sacrificer, and Bishop for a Baptizer of belles, etc. we like the names no whit
better, then the things. Otherwise it is not the ^^unde of words, that
troubles our ears, but the pestilent poison that is hid under such terms,
which our heart abhors In the 7. demand of heretics, where he charge me
to affirm, that whosoever of true Christian^ were called heretics, without
doubt are heretics in deed: and therefore Aerus, Iouinianus and Vigilantius,
so called and counted by true Christians, were heretics in deed. Of Aerius
there is no question, but he was an heretic, although not in that matter
Bristowe means. The error of Iouinian we defend not: but Vigilantius,
although baited by Hierome, was never generally condemned for an heretic.
Howbeit, that which I spoke but in de^ision, and imitation of the Popish manner
of reasoning, Bristowe takes it as though I had plainly affirmed, such a
principle, which was far from my purpose Hierome, and Ruffine, were both true
Christians, yet either charge the other with he resie in their heat. And what
will Bristow say of the two general Councels of Constantinople the 6. and Nicen
the 2? Will he not say they consisted of true Christians? Yet both the^ do
call, account, and accu^se. Pope Honorius for an Heretic. Will Bristowe
conclude, that therefore he proved so in deed? He dare not for his life.
Hierome charge Pope Liberius with subscription of he^esie in Ca^al. Liberatus
accuses Pope Vig(...)us of Eutychianisme Cap 22. Yet Pope Syluerius by his
Epistle, accu^seth his successor Pope Vigilius, yet are Hierome, Liberatus, and
Syluerius commonly accounted for true Christians, and as for Liberius, and
Vigilius, Bristow date not for both his ears say they were heretics.

Where I said, the Devil stirred up tyrants, Heretics, Popes, Saracenes,
and Turks to destroy ye Church: Who (says Bristowe) that counts Popes to be
heretics, would so divide? Verily he that counts Popes to be in an higher
degree of impiety, then particular heretics, namely to be autors of Apostasy
and Antichrists.

Where I object against this Popish rule, that the true Christians were of the
Arrians called, heretics, Bristow asks whether they were of the Arrians
commonly called Heretics? Yea verily, as commonly as we are of Papists.
Bristow says, if we should in our talk and writing, say heretics
simpliciter, as they do, we could not be understood to speak of them. Yes
in deed, as well as they among their own, are understood to speak of us. And
what other thing is meant by the name of Papists, but heretics, and traitors,
Antichristians, and Apostataes, enemies to God their Prince, and their country.
In the 8. demand, beside that which is confuted in answer to the 3 motive, he
denies, Franciscanes, Dominicanes, etc. to be sects, because a sect imports
a division. And i^ there no division between secular, and spiritual, Nominal,
and real, one sect and another? S. Paul co^plaineth, yt Christ was divided,
when one said I hold of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of Cephas, and I of
Christ. And howsoever you will now extenuate your schoolebrals, and contrary
sects, each has contended against other, as for ye truth of Catholic religion,
and against heresy, as ye Dominicanes, and Franciscans, Scotists and
Thomistes, that I speak nothing of ye Guelphes, and Gibellines, the firebrands
of ye world, In ye 9. demand (of ye conversion of Heathen nations) if suffices
not Bris. ye we hold ye same Gospel, which is taught in the writings of ye
Apostles, which converted ye first of al Heathen nations, yt were converted to
Christian faith: except wecan prove yt ye same nations are still of our religion
But he asks, if we will be tried by Affrike, (for example) whose religion we
know by Tertullian, S. Cyprian, S. Augustine, Optatus, etc. Or if we have any
better moniments of any nations religion, he bids me to name it, and let us
try it between us. How often have I named the holy Scriptures, the best and
the only true moniment, whereby we may try what Gospel the Apostles
preached, and into what faith they baptized the nations? And as for those whom
you name for Affrike, although they testify of some corruptions received and
allowed in their time, yet I dare take them for trial of the greatest
controversies that are between us, of justification by grace, and not by
merit of works, of the Popes antichristian supremacy, of the Lords supper,
of worshipping of images, and many other controversies. As for that brabbling
of converting of nations by them, or us, it is not worth the while, but a
matter of mere contention, which can not be decided, but by trial whether
they or we hold the true faith of the Gospel, for into that were all nations
converted, that were turned by the true Apostles. As for the conversion of any
nation into false Christianity, proves not the conuerters to be Apostles. But
Bristowe bragging of their wonderful conversion of nations of India and
Africa, (which no man reports, but lying Friars, and shameless Papists)
seems to deny, that any were converted unto false religion, by any false
Apostles or Heretics. And first, where I said, there are people in Aethiopia,
which, by circumcision and observation of the law, declare that they were
converted by the false apostles: Bristowe opposes the authority of Eusebius,
reporting the conversion of Aethiopia to have been of the right stamp, etc.
imagining belike that Aethiopia is so small a country, that it were not
possible for one piece to be converted into true Christianity, and another
part into corrupt. That there are such people as I said, Munster in his
Geographie of Aethiopia, does testify. As for the fable of their Emperors
submission, and the Abbots approbation of Popery in all points, may serve to
play mock holiday among the Papists, they can have no credit among us. As
great a mockery it is, that Bristow abuses the saying of Irenaeus, concerning
the Church of Rome in his time, lib. 3. cap. 3. In qua etc. In which always of
them that are round about, has been kept that tradition or delivery of
doctrine, which is from the Apostles. But the praise of the Roman Church of
that time, is the shame of the Popish synagogue of this time, which has
forsaken that tradition, and embraced new doctrine, never heard of, from the
Apostles days, unto the time of Irenaeus.

Where I say it is manifest, that the nations of the Alanes, Goths, and
Vandales, were first converted by the Arrians: Bristowe replieth, that in so
saying, I declare that I never read the ecclesiastical stories: such is
Bristows Logike. It were possible I had read them, and forgotten them. But what
could I either read or remember in the places by him quoted? First, Socrates
lib. 2. cap. 32. where it is said, that Vlphilas Bishop of the Goths assented
to an Arrian or neutrall confession, given at Constantinople, whereas before
that time he had followed the steps of Theophilus, which was Bishop of the
Goths, and being present in the Nicene Council, had subscribed thereto, and he
also had embraced the faith confirmed at Nice. First of ye Alanes, and Vandales
here is no word, nor in any of the places following; of the Goths it is said,
that Theophilus sometime their Bishop, was of right faith, and Vlphilas also,
before his subscription, and consequently a few that were converted to
Christianity, before the heresy of Arius. But what says Socrates of the
first nation of the Goths, that was converted, and of the second also, lib. 4.
cap. 27. which is the second place quoted? There were two nations of the
Goths, the one governed by Phritigernes, ye other by Athanarichus:
Phritigernes being oppressed by the power of Athanarichus, sought aid of
Valens the Arrian Emperor, and obtaining it, put Athanarichus to flight. Quae
causa fuit etc. Which was the cause (says Socrates) that very many of the
Barbarians received the Christian faith. For Phritigernes, that he might show
him self thankful for his benefit received of the Emperor, began to
embrace his religion, and to exhort his people to do the same. And for that
cause many Goths which then to please the Emperors humor, had addicted them
selves to the Arrian sect, unto this time cleave fast unto it. At the same time
V^phil^s Bishop of the Goths invented the Gothian letters, and as soon as he
had turned the holy Scripture into their tongue, he purposed that the
barbarous people should learn the holy Oracles of God. But as soon as
Vlph^las had taught the Christian religion, not only to them which obeyed
Phritigernes, but also to them that were under Athanarichus, the same
Athanarichus moving persecution, put to death diverse of the Arrian sect. etc.

The same history rehe^rseth Sozomenus lib. 6. cap. 37. which is the third
quotation interposing his opinion. At vero non istam etc. But truly I do not
think, that this was the only cause, why the whole nation of the Goths unto
this time, is adjoined to the Arrians: but yt Vlphilas their bishop, although
in the beginning he dissented nothing from ye Catholic Church: yet afterward
in the reign of Constantius, through lack of knowledge, he was present at the
Council held at Constantinople, with Eudoxius and Acacius, which were of the
number of Bishops that had been in the Nicen Council. And so being become an
Arrian, separated the whole nation of Goths from the Catholic faith. This
story shows, that Phritigernes was not the only cause of conversion of the
Goths: for Vlphilas the Bishop of those few, that were before that time
christened, being long before perverted into Arrianisme, was the principal
cause of turning both the nations unto Christianisme infected with Arrianisme.
But Theodoret, ^aith Bristowe, lib. (...). ca. 37. Who was a Catholic Bishop,
of purpose to take from the Arrians that vain brag of theirs, shows that
the Goths were first Catholics, and not as you say, first converted by the
Arrians: but only by false informations, and too much trusting of their bishop
Vlphilas, being an other Balaam lead out of the way. This purpose Bristowe
dreameth of, for no such appears in his words cap. 36. Sed ego operaepretium
etc: But my think I shall do a thing worth the labor, if I shall show to them
that know not, how the infection of the Arrian disease came to the
Barbarians. And then shows that by persuasion of Eudoxius. Vlphilas which was
the Bishop of those Goths, which before were lightened with the beams of
divine knowledge, entered into communion with the Arrian Emperor Valens, and so
deceived the whole nation. Where Theodoret says nothing contrary to other
histories, which show yt Phritigernes first brought the whole nation of the
Goths that was under him unto Arrianisme, and after Vlph^las turned the other
nation, ye was under Athanarichus, unto the same corrupt form of
Christianity, saving yt he is contrary to Socrates and Sozomenus, which
affirm yt Vlphilas was brought into Arrianisme at the heretical Council of
Constantinople, in the days of Constantius which reigned before Valens many
years. That I said of them that were converted by the Nouatians and Donatists,
Purg. 337. Bristow understands of whole nations, and requires my histories
and autors to prove that I said not. If Bristowe will say, yt none from
Paganism were converted to Christianity by ye Nouatians, Donatistes, or other
heretics, I will see what I have in store to prove it.

The conversion of the Moscouites by the Grecians, Bristowe asks whether it
were before their schism or after, and concludes it was in the time of their
emulation, and not in time of their schism.

I read the conversion of the Moscouites, to have been into the Greekish form
of Christianity, An. Do. 987. Ioachimus Cureas in Mieslao primo. about which
time, the controversy of ye proceeding of the holy Ghost, began to arise, but
long before, the Greek Church refused subjection to the Church and Pope of
Rome, which if you call but an emulation, you overthrow ye rock of your own
religion, and break off ye band of your unity, which you affirm to consist
only in subjection to ye Romish bishop.

In the 11. Demand, of Brittanie, where I said the Acts of the Apostles is
the best monument to show, into what faith as well this Island, as all other
nations were converted by the Apostles: Bristowe asks, Whether the Acts of
the Apostles were written to show into what faith all nations were converted,
that were turned by the Apostles? Yea verily: they were written to show that
the Apostles preached the same faith unto the Jews and Gentiles, which they
received of Christ according to the holy Scriptures: and thereof the b^oke is
called (...), the practice of the Apostles, according to such instruction as
they received of Christ. Secondly he asks is there so much as any mention of
the twelve Apostles, preaching to any nation of the Gentiles? There is mention
of the twelve Apostles preaching to the Jews, and of their agreement in
doctrine to be preached to the Samaritans and Gentiles, although it was neither
possible, nor needful, nor convenient, that they should all twelve in person
go to every nation. But what faith so ever any one preached to any nation, the
same did they all preach without difference in every nation, that they
converted. There is not one of the articles of the Creed necessary to
salvation, but it is to be proved by the Acts of the Apostles, that they did
preach it. But Bristowe will tell us an other cause, why that book was written.
No sir (says he) that book was written to show, only the beginning of the
Church (according to the prophets) to wit, at Jerusalem, and among the Jews,
and the taking of it from them for their deserts, and giving it to the
Gentiles, even from Jerusalem the head of the Jews, to Rome the head of the
Gentiles. If this were the only purpose of the Evangelist, (as Bristowe most
impudently affirms) he should have spared much labor in setting forth the
sermons, and sum of the doctrine, which the Apostles preached both to the
Jews and Gentiles. But let us hear Bristowe go forward. And there Saint Luke
ends it, not caring to tell, so much as the fulfilling of that which our Lord
had foretold Act. 27. to Saint Paul (in whose person this translation was
wrought, and not in S. Peter's for causes too long to be here rendered) Thou
must stand before the Emperor. Because his purpose was no more, but to show
the new Jerusalem of the Christians, and so to lead them to it, to know what
are the particulars that the Apostles taught. If this be true, all the
testimony and report that he makes of their doctrine, was beside his purpose:
yea, the history of the gospel which he writ of all things, that Jesus
began to do and teach, was out of this purpose. And he took the wrong way in
writing his gospel to Theophilus, to teach him the certainty of those things
whereof he had been instructed, as Saint Luke him self had received of the
Apostles them selves, whereas according to Bristowes imaginatiue purpose,
seeing there had been many writings of the gospel already, he should have sent
him home to the new Jerusalem of the Christians, and so have left him to it,
to know what are the particulars the Apostles taught. But where on gods name
learn we, that whore of Babylon that sits upon the seven hills, Apoc. 17.
to be this new Jerusalem on earth? when S. Paul. Gal. 4. brings all
Christians from the earthly Jerusalem, unto the heavenly Jerusalem which is
above, and is the mother of us all: not to an other Jerusalem on earth, and
that the mother of all abominations of the earth. Apoc. 17. And how falls
it out, that S. Luke having a purpose, so long and certainly continued, and so
necessary for the Church, not in one word commends to us this new
Jerusalem, on the seven hills, nor in one word makes mention of that, which
only changes (if any thing can change hell into heaven) Rome into Jerusalem,
namely the translation of Peter's chair or his person, or the least hair of
his head, or thread of his garment to Rome? But this belike is reserved among
the Apocriphal causes; as these are, why the translation was in the person of
S. Paul, and not of S. Peter.

Where I required one of those nations, to whom the Apostles preached
purgatory or prayer for the dead, to be named out of the Acts of the
Apostles: Bristowe answers, continuing his former speech: And so withal you
have one of those nations named; and that no common one, to wit, the Romans,
which received of the Apostles not only that article you require, but all the
rest which at this time it has, etc. When this is showed out of the Acts of
the Apostles, or any other Canonical scripture, I am answered. Where I require
it to be proved, that the same Apostle which first converted Britanie, taught
prayers or sacrifice for the dead: Bristowe answers, If you require us to
prove it out of the Scripture, considering that the Scripture does not tell of
our lands conversion you declare your self to be but a pratler. At the least
wise you declare, that you cannot prove it out of ye scriptures. But we can
prove out of ye scriptures, every article yt we believe, to have been taught by
yt Apostle or Apostolic man, whosoever first preached the says of Christ in
this land, although our lands conversion be not by name mentioned in
scripture. Yet seeing the doctrine of every one of ye Apostles was the same yt
is expressed in ye scriptures, we are able to prove, that he preached the same
which we believe, considering yt we believe all that is written in the holy
scriptures. As for ye confirmation of Eleutherius, which Bristowe says was an
accomplishing of yt which was begun by ye Apostles and Romans, if he mean of
a supply of doctrine, it is false: for Christianity having been in Brittanie
planted by the Apostles in the time of Tiberius, and continued more then a 100.
years before Eleuthe^ius; was perfect Christianity. To pass over yt pe^ke of
troubles, in which Bristow places me, because I do quietly confess, yt
Augustine brought much superstition into this Island, and yet: not the whole
substance of Popery, but the principal and most necessary grounds of
Christianity: where I affirmed yt in many things the faith and religion of the
old Saxons, was contrary to yt the Papists now do hold, as by diverse monuments
of antiquity may be proved, Bristowe with a double negative, would have it
seem impossible, Because in S. Bedes story, and in all his works* etc. we
find nothing against the Pope, nor against any one point of his doctrine. What
I have found in S. Bedes story, and other monuments of the Saxons religion, I
have set forth in confutation of Stapletons Fortress. As for that printed
Saxon Homily; which is against real presence and transubstantiation, which
Bristowe says, was so soon and so diligently called in again, it is abroad
in ye hands of many* never called in, that ever I heard of, but has since the
first setting forth of it, been printed three or four times, in Master Foxes
book of Acts and Monumentes.

In the tenth and twelfth Demands of Miracles and visions, where I had cited
the admonition of the Apostle, 2. Thessalon. 2. that the coming of Antichrist
should be in all lying signs and wonders: Bristowe asks me, what Scripture
tells me, that after the revelation of Antichrist, there shall be none but
feigned miracles? Whereas I inferred no such thing upon the text, but show even
that which he blames me not to have showed, how to know seigned miracles
from unfeigned, namely by the doctrine which they are said to confirm,
according to the Scripture. Deuteronomy. 13.

Where I said, that Augustine De unit. eccle. cap. 16. will allow no miracles
and visions for sufficient proofs, without the authority of Scriptures:
Bristowe says, I do shamefully abuse my reader, for he says expressly, What
so ever such things are done in the Catholic Church, therefore they are to be
allowed, because they are done in the Catholic Church. Yea sir, but it
follows that the Church is not showed to be Catholic, because such things
are done, but as he says there and else where, only by the Scriptures. But
Bristowe will have me allow all the miracles that Saint Augustine speaks of,
because they were done in the Catholic Church. As though Saint Augustine made
that the sufficient cause to allow any thing that was done or said to be
done, without joining that they were done to confirm the Catholic faith,
Cyprians miracles could not justify his error. In the Popish Church, the
sects of Dominicanes and Franciscanes in their dissension, about the
Conception of the virgin Marie, boasted both of their miracles, yet Bristowe
will not I ween allow both their miracles, except he will allow both their
opinions, which were contradictorie. Again, many things are feigned, even in
the Catholic Church by perverse zeal, to confirm truth, as ye history of
Paul and Tecla, confessed by a Priest of Asia Tert. de bapt. Neither will
Bristow I think defend, yt al ye miracles contained in the Alcoran of Frances,
Vitas patrum, Legend^ ^^rea, dormi secure, sermones discipuli promptuariu^
exemplorum, Festiual, and lives of so many Saints as are written, be all true,
and none feigned, although they all serve to prove Popery. Wherefore it may
be, that even some of those miracles that S. Augustine does report, might of
emulation and unordered zeal be feigned by some Catholics, to win credit
to the Church, against heretics. That Luther and Calvin whom he affirms,
not able to heal a lame horse, attempted wonders, it is as impudent a lie, and
gross forgerie, as that Li^danus tells, that Luther was begotten of the
devil. And yet there be diverse horseleaches among the Protestants, that have
healed more lame horses then ever S. Loy did, either when he lived, or since he
was worshipped of the Papists as an excellent horseleach.

Passing over 5. Demandes, which he does only name: In the 18. of destroying
idolatry, he says, that to all that he said, I say nothing, but like a
cuckowe: You have not destroyed idolatry, but set up idolatry, not waying
(says Bristowe) that I tell him according to the Prophets, that we have
thoroughly converted all nations from idolatry, that we have made them forget
also the names of their idols. In deed, that which Bristow tells me, is of
great weight, and therefore I am belike to blame, to wey it no more but as bare
words without matter, and wind without reason or authority. Otherwise I
think I have proved, that the Papists have converted few nations from
Paganism, and them whom they have turned, they have rather changed the
idols, then taken away the idolatry, or rather the very names, then the idols
themselves, seeing there was never an idol almost among the Gentiles, but they
retain the idolatry, under the name of one Saint or other. They had Castor
and Pollux, you have Loy and George: they had Februa or Febris, you have
Fiacre: that which Juno Lucina was to their women, ye virgin Marie is to
yours. etc.

In the 19 Demand of Kings and Emperors, Bristowe says, that although I
challenge the Kings of the first 600 years, to be of our religion, yet I bring
no proof at all, as though the proof of the doctrine of salvation received in
that time, which we hold, is no proof at all. But I (...) not answered so
much, as that Allen alleges, ^^we Constantinus received the sentence of the
priests (...) at Nice, as pronounced of God. What need any (...)were to this?
we honor it likewise. But Bristowe such, I confess there was prayer for his
soul, according (...) the error of his time. And he adds, that there was
(...) for his soul, with intercession of the Apostles, in (...)ose honor it
was offered at their relics and their ^^mple, and all by procurement of
Constantinus him self. Eusebius. in vita Constable. lib 4. cap. 58. 59. 60. 66. 71.
First cap. 58. there is nothing, but that Constantine builded a Church, which
should be called the memory of the Apostles: Cap. 59. follows the
description of the same Church and his intent, that the memory of Christ's
Apostles by that sumptuous building, should be continued always among all
nations: Cap. 60. his purpose is showed, that he being buried there, might be
made partaker of the prayers, that should be there made in the honor of the
Apostles: meaning the prayers made to God, which many moved by devotion of
that glorious memory of the Apostles, should make: Cap. 66. is nothing but a
description of a magnificent funeral pomp prepared: Cap. 71. are those
prayers which the people made for his soul yt I spoke of, and beside that
(...) etc. The tomb of the thrice happy soul, beautified with the name of
the Apostles, and adioined to the people of God, and made worthy of the divine
ceremonies and mystical liturgy or service, and inioining the communion of
holy prayers. But of sacrifice for his soul, with the intercession of the
Apostles, in whose honor it was offered, at their relics, there is no word:
although by any figure you understand the Emperors tomb whereof he speaks,
to signify his soul, which is rather a rhetorical exornation, showing how
his tomb was honored, as cap. 67. he shows that all the princes of the
army, and the Senate, worshipped his dead body, even as they did when he was
alive: which vain pomp, he commends as an honor appointed and allowed by
God, to be given to the Emperors. But in effect you can show no more of
Constantius favoring of your religion, but in that one error of praying for
the dead: to which I oppose his commandment, laid upon Metriades bishop of
Rome, to hear the cause of Cecilianus, E^seb. lib. 10. cap. 5. His calling of
the Nicen Council de lit. Constable. lib. 3. That I omit his admission of the
appeal from the bishop of Rome, and other like matters, showing his sovereign
authority over ye bishop of Rome and other Prelates. I said, that although
Theodoret report, that Theodosius the younger, prayed for his parents fowls,
yet the story says not, that he prayed to Saint Chry so stome for them.
Bristow opposes the Tripartite story, and Theodoret in Latin lib. 5. cap.
35. where is nothing of the matter, and 36. where Theodoret in his own words
speaking of the tomb of Chrysostom, says of Theodosius, (...): He setting
upon the tomb, both his eyes and forehead, offered a supplication for his
parents, desiring pardon for them, that had done injury of ignorance. These
words enforce not prayer to Saint Chrysostom, although prayer to the dead,
was at that time erroniously practiced. That Allen cites out of Ambrose, of
Honorius standing by the holy altars, while the solemnity of his fathers
funeral was celebrated, makes little to prove Honorius to have been a Papist,
although in that point I deny not (which can not yet of those words be
proved) that he might be occupied in prayer for the dead, according to the
error of his time. One error can not make a man to be altogether of the
Popish faith, who is known to have been of that religion which Ambrose sets
forth in his writings, contrary to Papistrie, in the most, and most
necessary points unto salvation. The 40. days mind, which Allen would beg
out of that place, to resemble their Popish months mind, I have sufficiently
reproved, by showing the continuance of the forty days solemnity, without
intermission. That the last day was one of the forty, and kept with singular
solemnity (as is usual in such cases) which Bristowe opposes, can not make a
just resemblance of the Popish moan these minds, which are a renouation of a
mourning or solemnity intermitted. Where I challenge the Christian Emperors
which were before the general desection, to have been of our religion:
Bristowe in a lurious rage, notes in the margent, Sce the impudent heretic,
them whom he condemned before. But who is this impudent heretic, that
condemned those Christian Emperors before? or where is there any word of their
condemnation? Is there no difference between reproving of an error, and
condemuing of the person? But let that pass among Bristowes impudent and
malicious slanders. The Kings of the earth (says he) have not committed
fornication with the whore of Babylon, when they humbly adored the Church of
Rome, and licked the dust of her feet, as they are commanded by the Prophet.
Esai. 49. 60. etc. This shall be confessed when it is proved, that the Popish
Church is the spouse of Christ, and not the strumpet of Babylon, although the
Prophet speak not of bodily bowing, kissing, or licking. Where I name Ziska
and Procopius, and George king of Bohemia defenders of ye Protestants: Bristow
says, it was an 100. years before the name, and much more the religion of ye
Protestants was coined, as though their religion might not be before yt name
was used to call the^ by? But yt Edward ye third was a Wicleuist, who ever
heard? says Bristow. And who ever heard me say or write, that he was a
Wicleuist? I said, Ar. 34 yt king Edward and other noble men in his time
defended Wickleues cause: and for yt you may read at large M. Foxes story of
Wickleue. Concerning the book of Caro lus Magnus, against images, I have
answered Sander and Bristowe else where. The book of Berttam is entitled ad
Carolum magnum, although Trithemius say, it was unto Charles ye king, brother
of Lotharius, ye antiquity of which inscription, is elder then Trithemius,
except he bring better arguments then his bare affirmation. But Bertram went
about the bush in Bristows fancy, and durst not openly declare his opinion
against real presence and transubstantiation, therefore Charles ye King or
Emperor did hold this opinion. He yt will read ye book, shall see he does
plainly express his judgment, against the corporal presence, and as for
transubstantiation, there was no question thereof in his time.

In the 21. Demand of Churches, where I say the Papists had won no more, if
we could show never a Church, but such as have been builded by Papists, and
to Popish uses, then the idolaters against the Apostles, which could show no
temples, but builded unto idols: Bristowe says, the challenge were not one,
because the Apostles renounced both those temples and their religion, we
renounce Popish religion, but not all their Churches. The cause wh^e the
Apostle renounced their temples, was for that many of them were not for the
use of Christian religion, although if credit may be given to our country
histories, the Pagans temples were converted to Christian Churches, both by ye
Brytons and Saxons. But those conuerters, says Bristowe, were the founders of
them: be it so, yet were they not the builders of them. Yet such as were
builded by Christian princes, were builded that their souls might be prayed
for in them, as that Church of the twelve Apostles builded by Constantine the
great, whereof mention is before etc. Of so many Chruches as he builded, only
in building that one, he had that erroneous conceit. Where I say, the old
Churches were builded only in the honor of God, and the Popish temples in the
honor of creatures, Saints, and Angels: Marie wellymet, quod Bristowe: They
were called Basilicae Martyrum and Apostoloru^, the Apostles and the Martyrs
Churches, etc. Ergo, They were not builded to the honor of God only, but to
the honor of creatures, when the old writers whom I cite Ar. 53. 55.
affirm, that a temple belongs only to God. And Augustine expressly denies,
that they were the temples, but the memories of those Martyrs, whose names they
bare, and as foraltars, he utterly denies them unto creatures.

Where I said, that Constantine made his great grants to the married Bishops of
Rome: Bristowe cries, blessing on Iouinian. Why Bristowe, Was there never any
Bishop of Rome married? Was there no priest married in Hierome and Augustines
time, although Iouinian could not persuade any priest which had purposed
continency to marry? To that I said of many of the Cathedral Churches in
England, builded for preachers and their wives to dwell in, Bristowe says, I
have won a whetstone as big as a mountain, but against the authority of
the histories, Ranulph. Cest. Math. Westminster. Petriburgens. and other which I
cited, Bristow brings nothing, but railing in filthy terms, meet for the
college of Cardinals life, and not for the holy estate of matrimony.

Where I show the differing form of the chauncels and altars of the ancient
Churches, with cross yles from the latter Popish erections: Bristowe makes me
a souden proctor of theirs, as though a chauncel and altar, a cross bar,
might not be named but by a Papist. Yea, he makes me contrary to my self,
for saying that Popish chauncels, which are at the East end of Churches, are
but late additions: and sanctifies, that we can abide no chauncels, no cross
yles, no length to the East, etc. of which things we make small account, either
to have the^, or to be without them. But it is more material, that he says,
Co^stantinus had tabernaculum crucis, a tabernacle or moucable Church of the
cross, whereas we can abide no cross or roode in our Churches, Eusebius. in vit.
Constable. lib. 2. cap. 12. lib 4. cap. 56, Sozomen lib. 1. cap. 8. The two latter
places show, that in his wars he used to have a tent or tabernacle, as a
Church, for prayer and ministration of the sacraments: the first place only
calls it tabernaculum crucis, which might be of ye form; but of any cross
that was in it, there is no mention, and much less of a rood, which is a
cross with an image on it. As for the cross which Paulinus the superstitious
Bishop of Nola, says was kept in the Church of Jerusalem, worshipped by the
Bishop and the people, if it were true, yet it proves not creeping to the
cross on Good Friday, as Bristow says, for there might be worshipping without
creeping, or Popish worshipping either. Again, worshipping of that same cross
that Christ died on, proves not creeping to any idol of it. Finally, where he
would prove out of Paulinus and Beda, the multitude of altars in one Church,
he labors in vain. Eusebius whom I cited, is clear both of the unity of
the altar in his time, and of the manner of standing, which was not after the
popish manner. Of like wisdom it is, that he will not allow me to talk of
chalices of wood and glass, because I say their vestiments be as good stuff
as their chalices, which the old Church knew not. Thereof he charge me not
(...) haue-read in Theodoret, lib. 2. cap. 27. of that Stola sacra etc. Holy
cope wouen with golden threads, which Consta^tinus gave to the Bishop of
Jerusalem, that he might wear it, when he did baptize. Yes I have read it, but
I spoke of an elder Church then Constantines time, in which such pomp was not
used. And yet that robe is lewdly translated of Bristowe a cope. Although
neither the Papists in baptism, have always, or ordinarily worn a cope. The
rest that he cites, out of antiquity for gorgeous attire, and golden
chalices, partly is false, and partly superfluous. For Ornatus, is by him
translated into ornaments. Valens commended Saint Basil, Quod tanto ornatu
tamque decenter etc, that with so great comeliness and so decently, he
exercised his priestlie office. Again, Sozomen, lib. 8. cap. 21. shows that
Chrysostomes priests taken by force in ornatu vt erant, in their attire as
they were, which was but a white garment, as appears by diverse places of
Chrysostom in Matthew. Hom. 85. etc. Likewise he asks whether there were such
need for redeeming captives, building of Churches, or that requies defunctorum
might be at the burial of the dead, that chalices were broken and sold,
seeing Ambrose allows, but these three causes of breaking and selling of
chalices. As though Ambrose spoke of buying of Trentals of Masses, with the
price of the chalices, where he says, Off. lib. 2. cap. 28. Nemo potest
dolere, quia in sepulturis Christianor^^n requies defunctorum est. No man can
be griened, because in the burial of Christians, the rest of the dead is.
Which he speaks of enlarging the places of burial, which is ye third cause,
Nemo potest indignari etc. No man can be angry, because the spaces are
enlarged, for burying of the reliquijs fidel^um, the bodies of the faithful.
Yet he asks, if I be not ashamed, to cite such places of antiquity, seel
hate chalices, because they be chalices, and because they be consecrated?
Whereas I said nothing against the necessary use of cups in the Communion,
but of the superstitious pomp of the Papists in their golden chalices, and
idolatrous manner of consecrating them: while they suffer the poor to sterue
for lack of necessary susten^nce, but once again most impudently he charge
Ambrose to say, that the sacred chalice is called there a vessel of our Lords
blood, and gold in which our Lords blood is powered: where he speaks of
breaking the cups, before they be sold, least they should offensiuely be
abused to wicked purposes. But there, says he, is not any such word of them,
and in the midst of the chapter, where these words are, they are not spoken
of the material cup, but of the godly use of them, when they are sold to
redeem captives, aunswering the objection of such things, that be once
dedicated to Gods service. Ille verus est thesaurus Domini etc. That is a true
treasure of the Lord, which works that which his blood wrought. Then I
acknowledge a vessel of the Lords blood, when I see redemption in both, that
the cup may redeem from the enemy, them whom the blood has redeemed from
finne.

And again, Agnosco infusum auro etc. I acknowledge the blood of Christ
powered into the gold, not only to have made it read, but also to have
imprinted in it the virtue of divine operation, by the gift of redemption. Such
gold the holy Martyr Laurence reserved to the Lord, etc.

But seeking to give the Papists a blow, Bristowe says, I care not though
the stroke light upon the Primitive Church, which had vessels of gold, not
only in these princely buildings erected by Constantine etc: but also in ye
crypts or caves of ye earth, in time of persecution. How Ambro^e and Acacius
used, and thought these golden vessel^ best bestowed, I have showed. But in the
persecution time, how proves Bristowe they had such plenty of gold and
silver? Forsooth out of Prudentius the Poet, who brings in the tyrant
speaking to Laurence, and r^quiring the treasures of the Church, as the cups of
gol^e and silver in which they did sacrifice, and set their wax candles. But
what answer did Laurence the Deacon return, what chalices or candlestickes
did he render, but the poor that were relieved by the aims of the Church and
sale of the golden vessels, if they had any, as witnesses S. Ambrose in the
place before cited?

Where I affirm, the ancient Churches were without images, because the tempse
of God, and images can not agree etc. Bristowe says, I may roll in such
rhetorike before fools, that receive our absurd principles, to wit, That the
idols of the Pagans, were images of the Christians. But thinks Bristowe, that
any of our auditors is so foolish, to believe so absurd a principle, as he is
malicious in feigning us to affirm such an impossible paradoxe? I am sure, it
never entered into the opinion of any preacher, to imagine, that the idols of
the Pagans were the images of Christians. But this we say, that Popish images,
although they be not the same that were the images of ye Heathen, yet they are
as abominable idols as theirs, and the worshipping of them as much to be
abhorred of all true Christians, as the worshipping of the images of the
Gentiles, and for proof of that, neither you, nor Sander shall ever find me
non plus, as you say you make me, by denying yt absurd principle, which is of
your own fantastical imagination, and not of our ignorant and unlearned
affirmation, as you feign it. As touching our livings, we are nothing
discouraged by the story of Ambrose de Basilicis tradendis, but that we may
enioie them with a better conscience, then you compare us, with the Arrians,
and our most Christian Prince, to the Arrian Empress.

In the 22. Demand of service of the Church, how vainly he affirms the
service of the primitive Church, to be the same that the Popish Church now
has, because two errors of prayer for the dead, and to Saints, were in the
old Church, of three or four hundredth years after Christ, I will not tarry
to declare. But where I note out of S. Augustine, affirming that no sacrifice
ought to be offered to Martyrs: seeing prayer is a sacrifice, that therefore it
ought to be offered only to God: and that Martyrs were not called upon in the
time of the sacrifice, but only named for remembrance: Bristowe to prove that
they were called upon, contrary to the express words of Augustine, cites
Augustine, Tract in Joan. 84. speaking of the blessed Martyrs: Non sic eos
commemoramus etc. We do not so rehearse them, as other that rest in peace,
that we also pray for them, but rather yt they may pray for us, that we may
cleave to their steps. These words prove not, that they did in public
service call upon the Martyrs with solemn prayers, but only interpret, what
Augustine supposed the meaning of the public liturgy to be, in that place,
where the Martyrs were named among other that are in rest, for whom they did
pray, as appears more plainly, by the other place, which Bristowe quoteth De
verb. Apost. 17. Perfectio tamen, etc Yet there is some kind of perfection in
this life, unto which the holy Martyrs are come. Therefore the Ecclesiastical
discipline has that which the faithful do know, when the Martyrs are
rehearsed in that place at the altar of God, where prayer is not made for them;
but for the rest of the departed, that are rehearsed, prayer is made. For it is
an injury to pray for a Martyr, by whose prayers we ought to be commended.
Note also in the former sentence, that they prayed for them that did rest in
peace; therefore they prayed not for deliverance out of purgatory, where they
are said to be in pain without rest. The other places, which he notes, of
private persons praying to Saints, proves not, that such prayer was used in
the public service of the Church, which although perhaps it were not sincere
in all points, yet was it much elder, than the error of invocation of Saints.
Where I note that no sacrifice was to be offered unto Martyrs: Bristowe says,
it is to be understood, of external sacrifice, as though the Christians had
any but eucharisticall or of prosperities But admitting his distinction of
external and internal sacrifice, how are the Gentiles answered by Saint
Augustine, that we worship not Saints as Gods, when we offer spiritual
sacrifice to them, which is most proper to God, which is a spirit, and
challenges the spiritual worship unto him self? You might as well grant
them external temples, as spiritual sacrifice, and much rather. For if they
must have spiritual and internal sacrifice, they must have a spiritual and
internal temple, wherein and upon which, it must be offered; which is all one,
as if you will dispossess the holy Ghost of his temple, and set up an other
altar in man's heart, to offer up sacrifice unto Martyrs thereupon. But
Bristowe, as it were, giving over his former distinction, says prayer to
Saints, is no more a sacrifice to Saints, then those dishes of meat, which
of some Christians were superstitiously brought into the Churches, as Augustine
shows, to be sanctified by the merits of the the Martyrs, de ciuit. lib. 8.
cap 27. But the Prophet says, A troubled spirit, (which sends forth
prayers) is a sacrifice unto God, Psalm. 51. and therefore ought not to be
offered to creatures; and Psalm. 140. he desires, that his prayer may be as
incense, and the evening sacrifice, etc.

Concerning ceremonies, he charge me to refuse al, by mine argument of
authority of Gods word negatiuely, and yet in other words to allow some.
Who so will confer the places, shall easily see his witless and senseless
cauelling. I refuse all superstitious and idolatrous ceremonies, but the word
of God allows such as are necessary for order and decency, not hindering,
but furthering edification. The order of service and ministration, which
Justinius describes the Church to have used, contains a sum of all that we
use in our liturgy. Bristowe says, it is the sum of the Mass also, and
there is water mingled with wine, plain against the Communion book. As for
the mingling of water with wine, how proves he, that it is named as a
necessary ceremony used in that time, and not rather to declare, how soberly
the Christians used wine in those meetinges, which were so maliciously
slaundered? But if it were a ceremony, what has it contrary to the communion
book, which although it require no more then Christ used, yet it forbids
not the addition of water, if any necessary occasion do require it? But I
would feign see the mass disciphered out of that description of Iustine, which
Bristowe says, is the very sum of the mass. Unless Fulke be so foolish to
think, says he, that the Bishops sermon, the receiving of all present, the
carrying of it to them that be absent, the rich men's offering may not to be
omitted in any mass, or for any cause. What so ever may be used or omitted at
any mass, or for any cause, I am not so wise, that I know, nor so careful
that I desire to know. But is Bristowe so mad, to make any endued with
reason to think, that Justinius describes, that which was seldom or never
used among them, rather then that which was uniformly observed in all their
meetinges?

But out of the scripture I reason affirmatively rejecting all the beggarly
ceremonies of popery, because God is to be worshipped in spirit and truth,
and yet in an other place, I admit some furniture: therefore (says Bristowe,)
that I have misused this text, with much babbling to little purpose. Mine
answer is, that although some external rites, are necessary for order and
decency, yet the true and proper worship of God, is only in spirit and
verity, and consists not in external rites, no not when they are best used.

Secondly, against popish lessons, responses, versicles, lewd lies and
uncertain tales, read and song as Gods service: etc. I alleged Mathewe, 15.
In vain do they worship me etc. Here he taxes mine ignorance in the
scripture saying, that the precepts of men are those which be of men and not of
GOD. And are not lewd lies, and uncertain tales such? yea, all your vain
distinctions of popish service: for which you cannot show any one
commandment of GOD, nor allowance of the Godly Church, but of the synagogue
of Satan, which your beggarly Logike craves in this answer, to be taken for
the Catholic Church of Christ. After this he charge me, to falsify the
Council of Laodicea cap. 59. when I say it decreed, That nothing should be song
or read in the Church, but the Canonical books of the holy Scripture. Unto
which accusation, I answer, that I gave the sum of the Council, truly and
without any falsification. That nothing should be read in the Church beside the
Canonical books of the Scripture, which are there named, Bristowe confesses,
and the words of the Canon are plain. This is sufficient to overthrow Popish
lessons, where of nine, most commonly not one is of the Scripture. But Bristowe
will make three Councels of Carthage, ca. 47. to expound this Canon of
Laodicea, where it is commanded that nothing be read under the name of the
divine Scriptures, but only the Canonical Scriptures. If this exposition were
allowed, yet Popish service is not discharged; for therein, the Machabees and
other Apocryphal Scriptures, which the Council of Laodicea does reject, are
read as the divine Scriptures. And as for matters to be soung, the Council
rejecting Psalms made by unskillful persons, means to admit none but either
the Psalms and Hymns of the Scripture, or at least, such as are consonant
unto them: and therefore would never have admitted that blasphemous versicle,
or what the devil so ever you call it: Tu per Thomae sanguinem quem pro te
impendit, Fac nos, Christ, scandere, quo Thomas ascendit. By the blood of
Thomas which for thee he did spend, Make us, Christ, to climb whither Thomas
did ascend. Nor a great number of such, not only unlearned songs, but wicked
and heretical ditties, that are contained in your Popish portuise.

Where I said, the festival days were kept of the primitive Church, not in
honor of the Saints, as they are of the Papists, but only for the memory of
the Martyrs, etc. to imitation: Bristowe opposes a saying of Augustine, which
to imitation adds consociation to the merits, and aid of their prayers.
Cont. Faust. lib. 20. cap. 21. As for fellowship of their worthiness, is the
fruit of imitation, the help of their prayers, is a smacke of that declining
time, which Bristowe always obtrudeth to us, as the only primitive Church,
which I understand for the first Church of the Apostles, and that which was
most ancient next unto them.

Where I cite out of Augustine, de ver. rel. cap. 55. that Saints and Angels
were of Christians in his time honored, with love, not with service; for
imitation, not for religion: First Bristowe asks, whether he does not
expressly here avouch their honoring? Yes verily, and as expressly he
denies that they are to be honored with service of religion. But seruitus
with Bristowe, is not the Latin of the Greek word Dulia, it is but mine
vnacquaintance is Saint Augustines writings. If mine acquaintance in S.
Augustines writings, were as small as his skill is in the Greek language, I
might be accounted a great stranger in them. But let us hear what Bristowes
familiarity with Saint Augustine has found of the signification of Dulia. De
ciuit. Dei. lib. 10. cap. 1. Latriam quippe nostri vbicunque etc. Where so ever
in the holy Scriptures, is put Latria, our interpreters have translated it
seruitus etc. very well: therefore the old Latin interpreters judged Latria
and Doulia to be all one. For even so have they translated Doulia, always by
the word seruitus. as Exodus 6. 13 20. Romans 8. Gal. 4. 5. Heb. 2. Wherefore Saint
Augustine not finding a proper Latin word, to express the worship of God,
and chosing Latria the Greek word, does only show how it was his pleasure
to use the term, and not what the word does properly signify. For (...)
differs not from (...) in signification, as even Suidas does confess,
although he say that (...) is a service, ((...),) for wages. And therefore like
a learned Grecian, Bristowe, says (...) is synonomum to (...), whereas (...)
is never used but for worship of GOD, or superstition, or religion: (...) is a
general name for any kind of service due either to GOD or men. But what shall
I reason with such a block, as challenges all authentical service, that ever
has been in any Church to be the Popish service, although it differ from it
both in form and matter, even as before he said, that Iustines description is
the very sum of the Mass.

Concerning the tongue in which the service is, Bristowe says, it makes no
difference in the service it self: but because I hold that it ought to be in
the vulgar tongues, he will consider my grounds thereof. First, the fourteenth
of the first to the Corinthians, proves it not, because he speaks there of a
miraculous gift of tongues. A strong reason, I promise you, nay much rather if
a special gift of the holy Ghost, must give place to the edifying of the
Church, much rather an unknown tongue, superstitiously usurped, must be
abolished.

Secondly he says, Saint Paul does not reject the gift, but moderate it, for
the variety of certain, much like to some Protestants, that think all
learning to be the tongues, and quoteth Pur. 7. It was not meet, that Saint
Paul should reject a gift of the holy Ghost, but show the right use of it.
But where Bristowe notes me to think all learning to be the tongues, and
quoteth the place, he shows him self to be a shameless lier: for although
I exemplify such learning, as is most necessary for the understanding of the
Scriptures, by knowledge of tongues and rational sciences: yet it follows
not, that I think all learning; or all learning needful for that purpose, to
be knowledge of the tongues and rational sciences, much less to be the only
knowledge of the tongues, as this proud Ass ignorant in the tongues, and
almost in all good learning, without all foreheade, or with an iron or brazen
face, does lewdly belie me. But if any man think (says Bristowe) that one
may argue of that Chapter a simili: Let him consider, first, that so, the
manner of simple Catholics, who pray to them selves privately in the Latin
tongue, which they understand not, is not condemned, but justified. A hard
matter, to justify superstitious ignorance, by similitude of the heavenly
gifts of Gods spirit, which is the spirit of truth and knowledge. Yes,
says Bristowe, he that speaks in a tongue, speaks not to men but to God.
Yea sir, but does he say, he that speaks in a tongue which he understands
not him self? Again the Apostle says, he that speaks in a tongue, does
edify him self: Verily he that speaks in a tongue, which he understands
no more then a Parot, edifieth not him self, nor any other. Again he says:
if I pray in a tongue, my spirit prays, but my understanding or mind is
unfruitful: which words Bristowe has impudently falsified, saying, For if I
pray in a tongue, my spirit (or affection) prays, though my understanding
be without fruit. Where not only he takes spirit for a blind affection,
which is meant of a spiritual gift, but also would bear us in hand, that
Saint Paul justified prayer with affection void of understanding, where it
follows immediately, that he will him self, and exhort all other to pray,
not only in spirit, or spiritual gift, but also with mind or understanding,
which shall be fruitful unto other. But he says further, as Bristow makes
him to say, If thou bless or give thanks in spirit, thou do it well: Where
neither his words, nor meaning is such, but speaks of them which use that
spiritual gift of tongues, to express godly prayer or thanksgiving, which
serve not to edify the congregation, but does not justify that what so ever a
man shall speak in prayer or thanksgiving with affection, is well spoken,
although the speaker understand not what he say. For how can he bless or give
thanks well, that knows not whether he bless or curse, in the words which
he utters, with never so good affection? Lastly, he cites out of Saint
Paul: If there be no interpreter, let him be silent in the Church, and speak
to him self and to GOD. And hereof Bristowe will-conclude, that mother B. is
justified to say her Aui Mari, Daminus stickum etc. As though he that spoke in
such a tongue as no man present could interpret, and he him self that spoke
it, did not understand what he spoke: but spoke merely in the air.

The second thing that Bristowe would have to be considered, is that the Church
in her public prayers, does not speak in a tongue, because the Latin tongue
is not in England a strange tongue, so as it were if one should say Mass at
Rome in the English tongue. And why so I pray thee, Bristowe? Because in
England here and there one, understands the Latin tongue? Verily in Rome
there be some also that understand the English tongue. Think you Bristowe
could have this consideration without his considering cap? and thereupon
concludes, And so the question is not now the same as was between the
Apostle and the Corinthians: But whereas the Church would do all things for
edification, the question is, whether this be obtained in the public prayers
of the whole world, rather by the Latin tongue, that is to say, by the common
tongue, or else by the several tongues, that is to say, by the private
tongues. Why, how now Bristowe? is the Latin tongue the common tongue of
the whole world? You that have all learning beside the tongues, will you deny
all other tongues to be common, but the Latin? But to let that pass, the
Catholics have one answer to this question, drawing all ^o common or unity,
with a little help you may by the same cord, draw in the community and
unity of Plato and the Anabaptists: but in the mean while, your edification
is void of instruction. But that is a small matter with you, to drive all men
into a common heap of ignorance and superstition, which is your drawing all to
common or unity.

But to come to examples of the primitive Church, he says I can not deny, but
that all nations of the Latin Church, had the service in Latin: I say, all
nations that understood the Latin tongue, as their vulgar speech, but not all
nations of the West, which understood it not. That most nations understood
the Latin tongue, which he calls an absurd position, he says I prove it,
by the Germane or French Councels of Toures, Magunce, and Rhemes, by which I
rather show the decaie of the Latin tongue in those regions. But my proves
are other then he is able to answer, and therefore he lets them pass,
cauelling that the Latin tongue was hard unto the people, where I show the
decaie of it: As also that the French tongue at this day is in some places
called the Roman, where I show the continuance of the rusticall Roman
tongue in France, out of the Council of Turon 3. cap. 17. as though the French
tongue at this day, were not much declined from the similitude which it had
with the pure Latin tongue, seven or eight hundredth years ago. To the decree
of the Council of Laterane cap. 9. which commanded, that Ministers should be
provided, which according to the diversity of rites and languages, should
celebrate divine service, and minister the sacraments, to people of diverse
languages, being conversant in one city. Bristowe answers, the Bishops
were not commanded to translate the service into English, and other vulgar
tongues, but to provide Ministers according to the rites and languages in which
the service presently was. Yes sir, they were commanded to provide Ministers
to serve them according to the diversity of languages, that were in every
city, where were people of diverse tongues. But otherwise Bristowe asks me,
why it provides for those cities and diocesses in which were people of diverse
languages, and not for all in general. I answer the provision is general,
according to the diversity of languages in any city or diocese. Last of all,
he asks why such translation was in no place put in execution? But first I
must ask him how he proves that in no place it was put in execution? And
although it were not, it declares the negligence of the Bishops, not the
understanding of the Canon.

In the four and twenty Demand of Priesthood and sacrifice, he charge us
with apostasy, for translation of the Priesthood, whereof must follow a
translation of the law. Which apostasy falls right upon the Papists, which
translated the Priesthood of Christ which he has (...) without succession,
unto their blasphemous sacrificing Priesthood. But let us see what balde reason
he brings, to prove that we have translated the Priesthood. First we have
labored to change the Apostolical names of Episcopus and Presbyter, into
superintendent and elder. So a translation out of Greek into Latin, or
English, is a change with him: and such as may not be abidden, for he
reproves me for translating Presbyterum in Cyprian, an elder.

Secondly, I help an other argument of theirs, concluding out of Ephesians. 4.
that the Popish Hierarchy is no part of Christian Ministry: by which I
declare, that we have changed the Priesthood of the Primitive Church, which
had Popish Bishops, Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, Exorcistes, Cantors,
Acolytes, Ostiaries, for which he cites Eusebius lib. 6. cap. 34. where there
is no such matter named, either in the Greek or Latin computation of
Grynaeus. I confess the names are ancient, and the offices in the Primitive
Church, were some necessary, some profitable, but I speak of the Popish
Hierarchy, in which nothing remains but the names. But Bristowe thinks I
do not consider, that S. Paul names there, the only Ministers of the word
or preachers. Yes verily: and therefore I exclude all these Popish orders, which
are such every one of them as may be and are given to men, that are no
preachers or ministers of the word. As for the order of Christian Deacons, for
ministering to the poor, and Elders of government, I know they are not to be
sought in that rehearsal. But for those Popish orders that Bristow says,
belong to the ministry of the altar, ye Scripture speaks no one word of
them. Yet he says, I may see the distinction of them, Act. 13. where some
preachers had not orders, and 1. Tim. 3. where some good Priests do not labor
in the word and doctrine. Concerning the first place, I know not what he
means, except he think Paul and Barnabas were not Apostles, before hands
were laid on them, and they dismissed to preach abroad among the Gentiles. Or
else, that those Prophets and teachers named in the beginning of the Chapter,
had now orders, which how he proves I marvel, specially seeing other
Papists do understand the word (...), which signifies ministering, for their
sacrificing.

As for the other place is of Elders of government, and not Priests of the
Altar. That the ancient writers used the names of Sacerdotes, Leuitae,
Pontifices, it was not because the ministers of the Gospel are a species or
kind of them, but abusiuely, for a certain similitude of the Leuiticall order
and Priesthood, with the ministers of the word and sacraments.

Thirdly he says, the Apostles, Bishops, and Priests, were made by other
Bishops and Priests; ours by Lay men, as of Kings and civil Magistrates,
which is an impudent slander.

Fourthly, we confess their orders to be good enough, because we reorder not
them, which is false: for I said, their admission of the Church is a new
calling. Bristowe says, that is a new way to give orders, showing him self
ignorant, that even in the old Church, such as were ordained by some
heretics, were received after they had abiured their heresy, to continue in
the degree of the Clergy, as of the Nouatians, Council. Nicen. cap. 8.
Wherefore the rest of his babbling, O your Divinity, O your Scripture, as that
I bring nothing to defend Pilkington, not to be a mock Bishop, but his
excellent learning and diligent preaching etc. I pass over, as also the great
preaching, which now at the last, is in Popish countries, where within these
threescore years, was as great silence as in England at the same time.

Fifthly, arguments need not, where I deny all Priesthood, but the spiritual
Priesthood common to all Christians.

Sixthly, If I will invent a third Priesthood, he says that the Primitive or
Fathers Priesthood was according to the order of Melchisedech, and to offer
sacrifice in bread and wine as Melchisedek and Christ did. Beware what you
say, of a sacrifice of bread and wine offered by you and Christ, as by
Melchisedek: But you regard not our arguments, they be but objections. At
leastwise I pray you answer our objections, or else they will be arguments to
prove you all blasphemous usurpers of Christ's singular priesthood. But that you
will do at leisure, and first you will prove your priesthood out of Augustine,
Contr. aduers. Leg. and Prophet. Lib. Cap. 19 and 20. Where he defends the
sacrifice of the Church to be after the order of Melchisedek, and yet but a
sacrifice of praise. So that you have neither your sacrifice propitiatory,
whereof the controversy is, nor your particular priesthood, for he says: The
Church from the Apostles time etc. does offer to God in the body of Christ a
sacrifice of praise etc. not after the order of Aaron, but after the order of
Melchisedeck. Now who knows not, that the sacrifice of praise, is a spiritual
sacrifice, common to all the Church, and not peculiar to any special order of
priesthood? So that S. Augastine naming ye order of Melchisedek, alludeth to
those places of the scripture, in which all Christians are called a royal
priesthood, and Kings and priests 1. Pet. 2. Apoc. 1. but never intended to
make the singular priesthood of Christ, confirmed to him by oath, Psalm. 110.
and which passes not from him, Heb. 7. common to ministers of the Church. If
you object, He speaks of celebration of the sacrament which is peculiar to
them: I answer although the ministration of the sacrament be proper unto them,
yet the sacrifice of praise offered in the celebration, is common to the whole
Church, as Augustine both here and else where affirms. So that although a
sacrifice be granted, yet a special priesthood is not proved. But the
sacrifice of the cross was both of thanksgiving, and of propitiatio^, he
troweth: and therefore the memorial sacrifice of the altar to be the one, what
does it let to be the other? This argument standing upon Bristowes trowing, and
confounding the members of a division, shall have none other answer for me.
The places that I cite out of Ambrose, ad virg. laps. and de virgin. Lib. 1. to
prove that he uses the names of sacrifice and propitiation, improperly, as
other of the fathers do, Bristow will not allow as sufficient, saying I might
as well so argue, that S. Paul speaks improperly, because he says our bodies
by mortification to be made a living sacrifice. whereas the Apostle, Heb. 10.
says Christ's body by death to be made a sacrifice. And what offense is it to
say S. Paul speaks improperly, where he speaks figuratively? as when he
says the rock was Christ. Howbeit in this example of Bristow, there is great
difference, but that such a blunderer as he cannot see it, which confounds
the propitiatory sacrifice of Christ, with the eucharisticall sacrifice of
Christians, as he confounded them both in the sacrifice of the Cross: the one
could not be offered, without death of the sacrifice and sacrificer, the other
is offered continually, the sacrificer living.

As for his rule to know proper and improper speeches, let him try to teach
his pupils: when I am disposed to learn, I will choose a better learned teacher.

But now he comes to answer objections. First I said the bringing forth of
bread and wine, was no part of Melchisedeks priesthood, seeing the Apostle
comparing him with Christ, in all things in which he was comparable, never
teaches it, as any part of his priesthood. This argument Bristow makes to be
of one place of Scripture negatiuely, not consideting it is the only place,
where such comparison is made, and that it is absurd to think, the Apostle
would omit so principal a part of Melchisedeks and Christ's priesthood. But
Bristow will examine the text. First their vulgar translation, beginning at
proferens, both gelding the text, and falsely translating At vero Melchisedek
rex Salem, proferens panem and vinum (erat enim sacerdos dei altissimi)
benedixit ei, etc. But truly Melchisedek King of Salem, bringing forth bread
and wine (for he was the priest of the highest GOD) blessed him saying. What
does this context help him, which is as much to say as he blessed him because
he was a priest? Bristow, fraudulently omitteth the parenthesis, and in
translation, changes the participle into the verb. But in the Hebrew (If we
believe Bristowe) the poynting declares, that also the Rabbines themselves
take it in the same sort. What a great Rabbine is Bristowe suddenly grown to
be, since his departure out of Oxforde? But what poynting should declare this,
he shows not, neither can I guess. The text is: And Melchisedek King of Salem
brought forth bread and wine: there is the middle of the verse: then it
follows: And he was a Priest, of the high GOD, there is the end: then it
follows, And he blessed him etc. In deed Rabby Solomon, but not in respect
of any poynting says of the bringing forth of bread and wine, for a true
exposition, First that it was usual to do so to men, that were wearied in
war: also that thereby he showed, that he was not offended with him for
killing of his Children, for he takes Melchisedek to be Sem, the middle son
of Noach: Secondly for a Mideash, or vain exposition, that it was to signify
the Minchoth and Nesecuth the meat offeringes, and the drink offeringes, which
his children or posterity, should offer in that place, not that Melchisedek in
respect that he was a Priest, did bring forth bread and wine. But all the
Fathers do agree in this similitude of Melchisedeches Priesthood with CHRIST.
I know that many do so, but one Apostle is of greater authority then they
all, yet none of them all speaks of a Priesthood, to offer up the natural
body of Christ in a propitiatory sacrifice, which is the principal matter in
question.

But if Melchisedek were a Priest, Bristowe will ask me, what was his
sacrifice, if it were not bread and wine, seeing none other is mentioned?

For my part, I am not ashamed to be ignorant of that, which the Holy Ghost
has not reueiled. Sure I am, if bread and wine had been his sacrifice, and
the sacrifice of Christ also: the Apostle would not have omitted it, which
compares much smaler matters in him, with Christ then that.

Where I say, it is horrible blasphemy, to challenge the Priesthood according
to the order of Melchisedek, which is singular to Christ: Psalm. 110. and Heb.
7. Bristowe asks, if the scripture say not, that there is one baptizer which
is Christ, and yet all are not blasphemers that are baptisers. I answer, if
any take upon him to baptize, with ye holy ghost and with fire, he is an
horrible blasphemer. But to baptize with water, that is to be ministers of the
outward sacrament, in which only Christ baptiseth inwardly, Christ has
called all those ministers of his word and sacraments. Show you the like
calling for your blasphemous Priesthood, after the order of Melchisedek, or
else your example of baptisers will not discharge you of horrible blasphemy.
But you have another docterlike argument, when you have scoffed out my poor
doctershippe. Were not all the rest in the old time the ministers of Aaron,
but Aaron himself was Priest only in his own time, and after him every one
in his time was Priest as well as he, and therefore in that law were many
Priests. He asks the question, as though it were out of question. Were not
all. etc. O famous and illuminate doctor, where did your docters hoode learn,
that all the high Priests successively, (whereof every one was a figure of
Christ as much as Aaron) were ministers of Aaron? For you speak of high
Priests, or else what mean you to say, that Aaron him self was priest only
in his own time, for all his sons were priests, although he only the high
priest in his time. Upon this strong foundation, you build a similitude and
dissimilitude. So that the old testament was like to England since the
conquest, having successively many Kings, But the new testament is like to
England duduring the time of one King: who being but one, yet has many
ministers, as one might say so many ministerial kings. You show learning
enough in this similitude and dissimilitude to make you a doctor after ye popes
order. But let us under correction of your doctors hood, examine your
co^pariso^. The old Testament was like England since the Conquest, having
successively many Kings. Had not every of those kings, many Ministers under
them? And every Aaronicall priest had also many Priests and Levites under
him? And was not Christ head of the Church of the Jews, in the several times
of every the high Priest? Wherefore the old testament is as like to England
during the time of one King, as the new in those points, but the difference
is this: that the figurative high priests were many, because they could not
continue, but by death were always changed: Christ being an everlasting
Priest, has a priesthood that descends not by succession: so that although
he have many ministers, yet he only has the everlasting priesthood, which is
according to the order of Melchisedek, Heb. 7. As for your term of
ministerial kings, how well it agrees to your shaven crowns, I will not
stand here to discuss.

My third argument, as Bristowe calls it, is this: The Apostle to the Hebrews
cap. 10. teaches us, that Christ offering but one sacrifice for our sins
(and that but once cap. 9.) has made perfect for ever those that are
sanctified: that our sins are taken away by that sacrifice, and therefore
there is no more sacrifice for sins left. To this Bris^owe answers, that I
do not understand, what the Apostle means by those that are sanctified; by
their making perfect; by sacrifice for sin. The sanctified are only the new
baptized by his judgment, for which he quoteth 1. Cor 6. where the Apostle
says: But now you are washed, you are sanctified, you are justified, by the
name of our Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. By which he plainly
shows, that although they were baptized long before, and had committed many
sins sithence their baptism, yet the cleanness of their washing, the
holiness of their sanctification, the righteousness of their justification,
they retained still, and therefore exhorts them to keep it to the end. So
that while Bristowe (as he does always) charge me with ignorance, not
knowing what is meant by their making perfect: he incurreth great
forgetfulness, even of ye Apostles words where he expounds, which are not
only, he has made perfect, but, he has made perfect for ever, them that are
sanctified. So that if sanctification were restrained to baptism, which no
logike can prove, yet it follows, that they which are sanctified by Christ's
death in baptism, are made perfect not for a moment, as these obstinate blind
Papists teach, from which perfection they fall immediately, and must recover
it by masses, and as Bristowe says, by penance, etc. But Christ by that one
sacrifice but once offered, has made perfect for ever, all those that are
sanctified. That the purpose of the Apostle (in all that Epistle to the
Hebrews) was no more but to exhort the standing to perseverance, as Bristowe
in so many words affirms, let him believe, that can think, the greatest
part of his disputation, for the abolishing of all ceremonies, and sacrifices
of the law, to be idle and beside his purpose. Likewise that if they fall, he
tells them that Christ's death will not work in them an other baptism, but
remedy he tells them none. Verily there is no remedy, for them that make
the death of Christ of none effect unto themseues, by an utter and universal
fall from CHRIST. But it is an horrible slander of Gods spirit, that he
tells no remedy by repentance, from particular faulles and daily offenses:
when he shows the perpetual clensing of our conscience by the blood of
Christ, Hebrews, 10. verse, 14. and in the 12. Chapter he has many and earnest
exhortations to repentance, verse, 1. and 12. showing the necessity of Gods
fatherly correction to bring us to repentance, Verses 5. 6. 7. etc. But I show
great ignorance, where I conclude, that if the greatest part be left to the
sacrifice of the mass, namely to take away all sins committed since
baptism, Christ has not made them that are sanctified perfect for ever by a
sacrifice once offered for all. For Papists divide not remission of a man's
sins between baptism and the mass. No: but you ascribe the whole in such
sort to either of both, that you divide the power of making perfect for ever,
from the only once offered sacrifice of Christ. But you think it is highly
for the honor of that one high Priest to have many ministers, and many
ministeries, as it were conduites to derive his purchase, and his redemption to
his people. In deed, if he had not one spirit that were of power to apply the
grace of his redemption unto all his elect, he had need of many conduites,
such as you speak of, for which purpose he uses not the ministry of man,
but the virtue of the Holy Ghost. The ministry of man is such as man can
execute, that is by the word, audible and visible, to speak to the ears and
eyes of men, and being ^^i^red up by the holy spirit, to commend the whole
effect of his word to the grace of God. But you think to avoid exclamation,
if you ascribe nothing to any man, nor any thing, but from that Priest, and
from that sacrifice: as though it were lawful for you to take any thing from
the Priest and sacrifice, and bestow it upon any man or thing, without
commission: yea, against commandment, and against the excellency of
perfection of that singular Priest and singular sacrifice, which being once
offered need, noe more to be repeated.

The scriptures thus examined, he comes to the doctors: And first to
Augustine, or rather Fulgentius, de fide ad Petrum. cap. 19. cited by me Pur.
316. and 292. to prove that the old doctors, vsinge the name of sacrifice,
meant not the popish sacrifice propitiatory of the natural body and blood of
of Christ, because he calls it Sacrificium panis and vini, the sacrifice of
bread and wine. Bristowe replieth, that he also calls it the the sacrifice of
the body and blood of Christ, wherein as it is cited by him, so is it answered
by me, cap. 6. of this book. Secondly where he says, In this sacrifice is
thanksgiving and commemoration etc. Bristow replieth, that he says also that
in this sacrifice is evidently showed, what is given for us, and he is
announced already killed. But because this is nothing to ye purpose, he
compares it to ye martyrdomes of Peter and Paul commemorated upon their feast
at Rome evidently showed and announced by their very bodies and heads there
seen and visited. A new way to understand old doctors, by practice of
Idolatrous iugling and faining of relics. If these Apostles by their bodies
be whole at Rome, so many Churches of Peter and Paul as have presently, or
have had in times past, relics of their bones, were greatly deceived. For
notwithstanding that Petres whole head is at Rome, his nether iawe, with his
bearde is at Poyters, and many of both their bones at Triers, Saint Paul's
shoulder at Argentina: yea a piece of Saint Peter's brain was at Geneua, where
it was tried to be a good pumice stone.

The second doctor is, August. de ciui. dei, lib. 22. cap. 10. saying, the
martyrs are that body, which is offered in sacrifice, whereof I conclude, that
it is not the natural body of Christ, but his mystical body, which is offered
in a sacrifice of thanksgiving. Bristowe answers, that the mystical body is
offered in the offering of the natu^ll body. But Augustine never says, that
the natural body of Christ is offered, but expressing what body is offered,
shows that the mystical body is offered. Nevertheless Bristowe compares it
to the oblation of Christ's natural body, in offering whereof for his Church,
he offered his Church to God with it. But how proves he yt Christ offered his
Church to God for a sacrifice? The sacrifice of himself was propitiatory for
the sins of his Church, which before he had purged by his sacrifice, he could
not offer as a clean and acceptable sacrifice unto God.

The third doctor is, Tertullian, which says, that prayer is the greatest
sacrifice that God has commanded. Bristow says, That in the name of that
prayer, he comprehends all that is said and done in the mass, which to this
day the priest therefore begineth saying unto us after the gospel, Dominus
vobiscu^, oremus, let us pray, and immediately goes to the bread and wine etc.
You may think I jest: they be the very, words of Bristow and his only
answer. Yea, but there be reasons of this saying: Because that pure sacrifice
is made and celebrated with prayer, as Hierom says, by the p^iestes prayers.
What are then the words of consecration? And because even the old house of
those leuiticall blood sacrifices also, was Domus orationis, the house of
prayer: Therefore the mass is nothing but a prayer. So is Tertullian answered.
Who would not wonder at this clearkely answer? For I think no man can
understand of what reason it holds.

The last doctor is Irenaeus saying of the sacrifice of the Church, Libr. 4.
cap. 34. The conscience of him that does offer being pure, does sanctify the
sacrifice, and causes GOD to accept it as coming from a friend. The
sacrifices do not sanctify a man, for GOD has no need of sacrifice. etc.
This cannot be verified of the natural body of Christ. Bristowe answers,
they say the same. Yea do, Bristowe? Is the sacrifice you offer, the body of
Christ? Yea? does the conscience of the offerer, sanctify the body of Christ?
Out upon thee filthy blasphemous dog, if thou dare affirm it. But Bristow
asks Wether any heretic canpleade by their verdit, that he pleases God in
offering to him bread and wine? As though that were the question. Yea or also
the body it self and blood of Christ, so as all Priests do in their
Caluinicall communion, no less then we do in the mass? What news is this?
do all Priests in the Caluinicall communion, offer the body and blood of
Christ as much as you papists do in your mass? I think even the same: for
none that communicate with Calvin, do at all offer Christ's natural body and
blood, and no more do you, although arrogantly and blasphemously you presume
to do it.

In the 25. demand of Monks, where I say the old Monks were nothing but
Colleges of students: Bristowe says, in ouerthtowing of Popish Abbeis, in
which was nothing almost but ignorance and filthmes, and Idolatry, we have
spoiled the Church of God, of great utility. But he says further, they were
votaries, and so they be not in colleges of students: their vows were not
such that could make them other then students, they vowed to serve God
uprightly, and his Church, when they were called, and they in Colleges which
having once promised the same, forsake this holy purpose, have small
commendation among students. I know in time superstition prevailed, and that
which first was free, at last became coact: and that which was of conueencie,
was thought of necessity, even as true religion declined, and in the Romish
Church at length degenerated into Idolatry and superstition.

In the 27. demand of Councels, where I prove that Councels may err. First by
the prayer usually said after the end of every general Council: Bristowe
says, the prayer is not in respect, for any false decrees or beleeuings of
their whole bodies, but by reason of certain ignorances and frailties of their
members: when in the prayer, they expressly declare their fear, lest ignorance
has driven them into error, which can be understood of none other common
errors of this life, but of their error in decrees, seeing the prayer is
appropriate unto the Council. And that the words going before, and after do
manifestly declare. Te in nostris principiis etc. Thee in our beginninges we
require an assister, thee also in this end of our judgments or decrees, we
desire to be present a pardoner for our faults, that is, that thou would
spare our ignorance and pardon our error: that to our perfect desires, thou
would grant a perfect efficacy of work. And because our conscience
accusing us, we do fainte for fear, lest either ignorance has drawn us into
errror, or rashness of will perhaps has driven us to decline from justice;
therefore we desire thee, and we pray thee, that if we have drawn unto us, any
offense in the celebritie of this Council, thou would vouchsafe to pardon
it, and to make it remissible. Who would pray thus, in the name of the whole
Council, which he thought could not possibly fall into any error.

That I allege out of Augustine, de baptismo contra Donat. libr. 2. cap. 3.
That general Counsels are and may be reformed, the later by the former:
Bristowe understands of Counsels not confirmed by the Pope, which may be
reformed even by ye see Apostolic alone. That was a point more then S.
Augustine saw. But how can they be called Plenaria concilia full and whole
Counsels, where lacks any necessary confirmation? This is a shameless
eluding of the Doctors sayings. For first Augustine includes all catholic
Bishops, in possibility of erring in doctrine, not excepting the Bishop of
Rome, then provincial, and last of all general Counsels: only the scripture
cannot be amended, as that which has no error in it.

Where I said, the Counsels are received, because they decreed truly
according to the word of God, and not the truth received, because it was
decreed in Counsels: Bristowe says, I might as well say, the scriptures are
received, because they are written truly: and not the truth received because it
is written in the scriptures. But I say the comparison is not like: For truth
is not so necessarily bound unto general Counsels, as it is to the holy
scriptures; and therefore both the scriptures are received because they are
written truly, and the truth is received because it is known by the
scriptures. It follows not so of counsels: that what soever they have
decreed is truth, although the Bishop of Rome have confirmed them. Leo Bishop
of Rome confirmed the 6. of Constantinople, which condemned Pope Honorius his
predecessor for an heretic, whom you hold cannot err in doctrine, which is
an argument sufficient, to strangle any papist in either of these two
blasphemous assertions: The pope cannot err: The general Council confirmed by
the Pope, cannot err.

In the 28. demand, of the Sea Apostolic, where I bring the example of
Victor Bishop of Rome, withstoode by Irenaeus and Polycrates, when he went
about to usurp authority over other Churches in excommunicating all the
Churches in Asia, and yet Irenaeus and Polycrates with other so reproving ye
Bishop of Rome, were not heretics: Bristow babbling about the cause of Victors
displeasure, which is no matter in question, says he usurped no authority,
nor was so charged, but that his censure did seem to harp to S. Irenaeus, as
if the Pope would now excommunicate all them that would not receive the
Council of Trent, it would seem likewise to many, who confess he has
authority over al. But none of these Bishops, that withstoode Victor,
confessed, that he had authority over them, or that he could not err. But
contrariwise Polycrates charge him with usurpation, where he says he will
not be troubled with his terrifying censure, seeing he follows (as he
thought) the scripture and ancient traditions of the Apostles. Likewise
Eusebius says, that Victor was sharply reproved of many, and namely of
Irenaeus in the behalf of all the brethren of France, whom he governed. Yea,
he says expressly, that Victor with his censure was countermanded, by many
Bishops: (...). They did countermaund him, or gave him contrary commandment,
to set his mind on things pertaining to peace and unity, and love of his
neighbor. Irenaeus in his Epistle to Victor showing, that Polycarpus could not
be persuaded by Anicetus Bishop of Rome in some small things, wherein they
differed, declared, that it was not then of Polycarpus or him self otherwise
thought, but that the Bishop of Rome might err.

The other example, I brought, was of Stephanus Bishop of Rome, misliked by
Dionysius: Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 2. 3. 4. 5 etc. and sharply reproved by Cyprian,
accusing him of presumption and contumacie, Epist. ad Pomp. because he
threatened excommunication to Hilenus and Firmilianus, and almost all the
Churches of Asia, thinking that such as were baptized by heretics, should be
baptized again. Also Cyprian in his Epist. ad Quirinum, saying that Peter
himself was not so arrogant, nor so presumptuous, that he would say, he held
the primacie, and yt other men should obey him, as his inferiors: Bristowe
says none of these denied ye primacie of Peter. I say they al denied the
primacie of authority, although Cyprian in ye same place says: For neither
Peter, whom our lord chose first (which argues no primacie but of order) upon
whom he builded his Church, when Paul did afterward dissent from him, about
circumcision, did boast him self or take upon him any thing insolently or
arrogantly, that he should say, he held the primacie, and that he ought rather
to be obeyed of new scholars and aftercommers. Here you see it had been in
Cyprians judgment, a point of insolency and arrogancy in Peter, if he had
challenged the primacie of authority, and certainty of truth against al men.
But Bristowe says, when there was no remedy, but they must yield or be
Schismatikes, because Stephanus would no longer tolerate them, they did like
Catholic men, for all their Councels, conform their new practice to the old
custom, and quoteth August. de bapt. cont. Donat. lib. 5. cap. 23. and 25.
where there is no such matter, also he refers us to his fifth Demand, where
he cites Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 2. 3. 4. 5. but neither is it there testified.
Only cap. 6. Dionysius changes his judgment, being admonished in a vision,
and that he had learned that not now only, but of old time, both in Aphrica
and other places, the truth was received, etc. but of any constraint for fear
of being Schismatikes, if they dissented from the bishop of Rome, there is no
word.

The place of Hierome ad Euagrium, which I cited Pur. 374. defending a custom
of the whole Church, against a custom of the Church of Rome, Bristowe says,
does not prove a Church, a rule of truth, and Christianity, without the
bishop and Church of Rome, because Hierome says, as also there I cite: Nec
altera etc. we must not think, that there is one Church of the city of Rome,
and an other of all the world, etc. By which words, he shows, that the
Church of Rome, if she will be a member of the Catholic Church, must conform
her self to the Church of all the world, and not the Church of all the world
conform her self to the Church of Rome.

Where I say, we believe the Catholic Church, has no chief governor on
earth but Christ, unto whom al power is given in heaven and earth: Bristowe
obiecteth: suppose, that one Christian King or Emperor should reign sometime,
as far as the Church reaches. To this impossible supposition, I answer,
that one King should have no more authority, than every King has now. But
Bristowe obiecteth, that Kings and Queens be no more named among S. Paul's
officers, etc. Ephesians. 4. and 1. Cor. 12. and therefore as a Puritan belike, I
would pull them down. In the motive of Apes, he discharged me from being a
Puritan, by his censure; but now he burdeneth me to be a Puritan so far,
that I should also be a traitor, as he and all his fellows are. To his wise
objection I answer, that as Kings and Queens are not named among Saint
Paul's officers, so they are no Ecclesiastical, but civil Magistrates, and
the Church may be without them, as it was many hundredth years. Yet when Kings
and Queens are Christians, they have chief authority over persons and in
causes Ecclesiastical, as far as the godly Kings of Israel and Judah had,
David, Solomon, Iehosophat, Ezechias, Josias, etc.

But Christ professing that all power is given him, Matthew 28. signifies that
with good authority, he might commit what authority he would, and therefore
bids all his Apostles go, teach, and baptize^ and to one of them
singularly, feed my lambs and my sheep. No marvel, though my ignorance in
the scriptures be often reproved, when such learned conclusions come from
Bristowe. Christ said to one, feed my lambs and sheep, therefore he said
it singularly, and he has universal charge, and all his successors to. But
for the Popes supremacy, the Apostle says expressly, 1. Cor. 12. the head
(under Christ) can not say to the feet, you are not necessary to me. But who
taught you to foyst in your own gloss, under Christ? when the Apostle
speaks of the members of a natural body; whereunto every several
congregation and ye whole church also is like. If you seek the head of every
several congregation, you must look to the chief governors thereof, but if
you seek the head of the whole Church, the scripture teaches but one, which
is Christ, for one head under another, in one whole body is monstrous. But you
think perhaps, Christ as he is head of his Church, may say to the feet, he
has no need of them, and therefore it must be understood of an head under
Christ, but then you must remember, that although Christ be most perfect in him
self, yet as he vouchsafes to take upon him this office to be head of ye
Church, he is not perfect without al his members, which is the singular comfort
of Gods children, Ephe. 1. ver. last. But Saint Paul, Ephe. 4. as Bristowe
says, under the name of the Apostles includes the successors of the Apostle
S. Peter, whose see for that cause is called the Apostolic see in singular
manner, and their decrees and acts esteemed of Apostolic authority in all
antiquity. This cause is a shameless and senseles lie, for no antiquity, for
600. years after Christ so esteemed ye see, or the decrees thereof. Again.,
what reason is it, yt Peter's successors should be included, more the^ the
successors of the other Apostles, seeing this souereigntie of Peter, is not
grounded upon his Apostleship, but upon his Bishoplike office, as Sander
maintains? As for the principality of Apostleship, and principality of the
Apostles chair, which he quoteth out of August. de bapt. Cont. Don. li. 2. ca.
1. and epi. 162. have often been showed to be insufficient, to make every one
of Peter's successors equal with Peter in authority, or Peter him self
superior to the rest of the Apostles. And consequently there is no cause to
think, that calamity of the Greeks to be fallen upon them for departing from
that see.

In the 29. Demand of Traditions, where I charge Papists out of Irenaeus lib.
3. 2. to be like to the Valentinians, which accused the scriptures of
imperfection, saying, that they are ambiguous, and that the truth can not be
found in them, by such as knew not the tradition, which was not delivered by
writing, but by word of mouth, etc. Bristowe answers, that S. Irenee him
self, as al Catholics, will have both scripture and tradition. Yea sir, but
what tradition? any truth of doctrine, conserved by tradition, which is not
contained in the holy scriptures? nothing less. But appealeth to the
testimony of the Churches tradition, for confirmation of that which is taught
in the scriptures. Hunc patrem etc. This father of our Lord Jesus Christ to be
preached of the Churches, they that will, may learn out of the scripture it
self, and understand the Apostolic tradition of the Church, seeing the
Epistle is auncienter than they which now teach falsely etc. So that what so
ever the Apostles delivered, is contained in their writings, and it is still
an heretical assertion to say, that all true doctrine is not delivered by
writing, but some by word of mouth.

In the 34. Demand of Authority, where I affirm, the order of the Apostles
school, is first to hear the word of God preached, and then to believe, Romans
10. reproving Allen which commended his friend, that he first believed, and
afterward sought to understand: Bristowe obiecteth the authority of Augustine,
lib Retr. 1. cap. 14. where he shows the cause, why he did write his book
de vtilitate credendi to have been, for that the Manichees derided the
discipline of the Catholic faith, that men were commanded to believe not
taught, by most certain reason, what was true, whose slander Augustine
confuteth in that book, and not defends Bristowes preposterous order. As for
examples of believing Christ and his Apostles, without requiring a reason of
their doctrine; how vain it is, I leave to children to laugh at, seeing I
speak not of reason, but of the word of God preached, which must needs go
before faith: Neither does Augustine mean any otherwise in his book de vtil.
cred. cap. 13. where he says: It is rightly appointed by the majesty of the
Catholic discipline, that faith before all things is persuaded to them which
come to religion. But how should faith be persuaded, but by the preaching of
the word of God, without curious inquisition, according to the reason of man?

Where I say, that Protestants will be ruled by their superiors, so far as their
superiors are ruled by the word of God: Bristow derideth their authority, who
by our own confession may swerve from the truth of Gods word: as though the
Popish superiors might not, or their supreme head, although beside so many
blasphemous errors, as he holds, whereof ye controversy is with ye Papists,
it have not been often proved, yt diverse Popes have been condemned, even by
general Councels for heretics. Where I said the Greek Church will be ruled
by the Patriake of Constantinople, and the oriental Churches by their
Patriarchs and Bishops. Bristowe says, if I knew the story of the Florentine
Council, wherein the Patriarchs agreed with the Catholics Church in all
things, and yet could not reduce their countries from schism, I would not so
say. But I knew that story before Bristow knew whether he would become a
professed Papist or no. This consent is a forged paper, found in the hand of
Joseph the Patriarch, who died soudenly: but in no act of that Council any
such submission or agreement in all things, appears, but the contrary.

Where I said, that to believe the Catholic Church, is not to believe all and
every thing which the Catholic Church does maintain: Bristowe would have me
suppose, the Apostles had said, Credo. S. Romanam ecclesiam, and then asks,
how I would have construed it. Verily even as I conster Credo ecclesiam
Catholicam. And so would I conster Credo Sanctas scripturas Canonicas etc. But
if the Apostles would have taught us, to give credit to the Church of Rome in
all things, they would have taught us to say, Credo Romanae ecclesiae. And
Credo scripturis Canonicis, duodecim Apostolis, quatuor Euangelistis, etc. I
give credit to the holy scriptures, to the twelve Apostles, and to the four
Evangelists. For Credo with an Accusative case, to signify I give credit,
how so ever you deride my grammatication, will not be admitted in the kingdom
of Grammarians, except his holiness will do as much for that term, as he is
reported to have done once for fiatur.

In the 35. Demand of Unity, where I said, the Church may be called the house
of peace, because there is in it peace and agreement in the chiefest articles
of faith: Bristowe says, by this reason, many old heresies were with in the
house of peace, because any one article be it of the chiefest or of the
meanest, may break peace, as that of quartadecimani, who disagreed only in
the day of Easter but that and such like disagrements in opinion, might be in
the house of peace, as Irenaeus testifies, if obstinate contempt of general
order did not make a schism, and of a schism an heresy, as in the
Donatistes. Otherwise difference in a ceremony (as I said) makes not division
of faith: Bristowe says, yes, if they hold their ceremony necessary. But
then they hold it not as a ceremony, or the Churches ceremony unlawful. But
that makes not division. Polycarpus thought his ceremony to be the right
ceremony, against Anicetus, yet he was not divided from him, for he considered
the error in a ceremony not to be of such importance, that it ought to break
the unity of the Church. And therefore he refused not to communicate with
Anicetus, nor Anicetus with him. No more do they among us, that differ in
opinion of ceremonies, except some few schismatic heads, that are
condemned of all men for their contention and stubbornness.

The difference of opinions between the Popish Divines and Canonistes,
Bristowe says are such, as may be among Christians, as Augustine testifies,
Cont. Iul. lib 1. cap. 2. de bapt. Cont. Don. lib. 1. cap. 18. until a general
Council allow some part for clear and pure, but we will not allow the
authority of any general Council, if Bristowe may be believed: If we might
have a Christian general Council for such matters, as are in controversy
among us, I doubt not but we should agree, better then the Papists which boast
so much of unity. As for the contention of the Popes and Councels
superiority, remains still among you, notwithstanding the Florentine
Council, which you say most impudently, that I confess to have resolved the
matter, when an other Council, and an other Pope at the same time, determined
against it.

In the 36. Demand of Owners or Keepers of the scriptures, where I say the
primitive Church, which commends the scripture unto us, does not condemn
Luther or his doctrine for heresy: Bristowe says, it does in Aerius,
Iouinian, Vigilantius, etc. as though there were no primitive Church before
these men, which commended the scripture unto us, and yet knew neither prayer
for for the dead, nor superstition of relics, or any thing that Luther held
with those men.

Where I tax the blindness of the Popish Church, not discerning the
scriptures Canonical, from Apocryphal: Bristowe brings in a saying of
Augustine, showing that it is of necessity, for him to believe the Acts of
the Apostles, if he believe the Gospel: because the Catholic authority
commends both the scriptures alike unto him. But I have showed, that the
Maccabees, Ecclesiasticus, Iudeth, etc. are not commended to us by the
Catholic or universal authority of the Church. After other contentious
points stoutly affirmed or denied, without proof, he comes to charge me
with a substantial lie, because I say our Church which is the only true
Catholic Church, has always had right and possion of the word of God, as
appears by this, that our Church believes nothing but that she learneth in
them. If this be not a notable plea, Bristowe reports him to our Lawiers. But
I report me to al Logicians, whether it be not a good argument, by proving us
to be the true Church, to claim continual right and possession of the
scriptures, as for ye novelty of Luther, and our congregation, is a weak plea
to dispossess us of ye Church, when y^ antiquity of our faith and religion,
proves us to be of the oldest Church, and therefore the only true Church.

Where Allen made his offer, that if I could show any Church, that has safely
kept the scriptures, saving the Popish Church, he would recant: I show him the
Greek and Eastern Churches, which are not Popish, whereupon he is bound by his
offer to recant: yet Bristowe without all shame says: Every article of D.
Allens is not to prove absolutely, that we be the Church; but some only that
you be not the Church. True it is, that neither every one nor any of them all,
are sufficient to prove, that you are the Church and not we. But that Allen
meant they were sufficient, it is manifest by that he promises to recant, if
any of them can be proved to agree to any other, than to the Popish Church.

In the eight and thirty Demand of old Heresies, where I showed that many of
the Popish ceremonies, were first instituted by heretics, aunswering directly
to Allens challenge, that offered to recant if any man could prove, that any
Church but theirs had instituted all their ceremonies: Bristowe says they are
such matters, as agree none otherwise to them then to those whom I dare not
condemn etc. Which if it were so, yet does it not show but that I have
answered Allens challenge, and therefore do, according to his promise, claim
his recantation.

Of the Messalians or Martyrians I said, they learned first to shave their
beardes, and let their locks grow long: Bristowe out of Epiphanius says,
they did let their hair grow long like women The Popish Priests do not so,
but round them. Yet can he not prove out of Epiphanius, that the Messalians did
not keep their hair in order by rounding or otherwise. Further he says, some
Protestants do so. I answer, none of ceremony does so. Thirdly, Priests in
Italy and Spain do poll their heads and keep their beardes. I answer, they
keep the text of the decree, and you the gloss, which says, statuimus, id
est abrogamus etc. We decree, that is we abrogate that Clearkes neither wear
long hair, nor shave their beardes. Last of all he says, I have no great
matters to charge them with, when I lay their hairs to their charge. My reply
is, that my charge goes no further then Allens challenge, which urges me to
show any other to have first instituted any one ceremony in Popery, but the
Popes only Catholic Church. And so I say to the superstitious masking
garments, instituted by the Pharisees, although the ancient Church about
four or five hundredth years after Christ, received such robes in use.

Also the daily use of Popish holy water, to put men in mind of baptism, had
an elder institution of the Hemerobaptistae that were baptized or washed every
day. Here Bristowe with a very stale jest, acknowledges their fault, and
lays it upon Saint Paul, who has deceived them, Romans 6. where baptism is
in deed remembered, but holy water I trow is not there. O, then it is 1. Tim
4. where Saint Paul was to blame (says Bristowe) to tell us, that the
creatures of God are sanctified by the word of God and by prayer. Wonderful
Divinity, that can bring Popish holy water to so holy a beginning! No
marvel if we be blind, which think the Apostle speaks there of the lawful
use of meats (forbidden by the Pope) and of all other of Gods creatures being
sanctified by the word of God, which give us the use so by prayer, that we may
use them well. But specially says Bristowe, he was to blame for saying. The
holy Ghost does help our weakness, praying for us with groans unspeakable,
how so ever blind heretics think he will do nothing by water for prayer. In
deed when the scriptures be so plain for holy water, it is wonder that any
be so blind they can see it.

Of the Ossenes I said, they took their hallowing of water, salt, oil,
bread, etc. and use to swear by them. Bristow asks if I be an Anabaptist,
that will condemn all swearing or swearing by creatures. I answer, I will
not condemn all swearing, but this customable swearing of Papists, by this
bread, by this salt, etc. and as for swearing by creatures, I am of the same
judgment that our Savior Christ is, Matthew. 5. 34. But Papists swear not by
them as the Ossenes did, what then? the controversy is not therein, but of
their resemblance with the Ossenes in some part.

Elxai the father of the Ossenes taught his scholars a prayer in a strange
tongue, whose interpretation they might not seek, whom the Papists follow
in teaching the people to pray in a tongue unknown, and will not, (if they may
chose) let them know the interpretation. Bristowe answers, that Epiphanius
says, his prayer was nothing at all when it was interpreted. Is it like
Epiphanius would say so? How could it be interpreted, if it had no
signification? Epiphanius in deed shows it was a vain thing, whereof he made
so great a mystery, and your ignorant people of the great mysteries of the
Lords prayer, the Salutation and the creed, make vain and ridiculous matters
while they can scarce pronounce their words together truly.

The Marcosians in baptism used for greater admiration certain Hebrewe
words; so do the papists: Bristowe asks, why S. Mark in his greek
writing, uses yt word Eppheta? I answer, more lively to express the miracle
of Christ: yet does he it not without interpretation. Likewise Saint John, in
his Apocalipse uses Amen and Alleluia, words, whose signification was as
commonly known to all Christians, as their own mother language. What is this
to justify the use of that word in baptism, which neither Mark nor John
speak of? But it was used in the time of Ambrose. So Ambros. de Sacralib. 1.
cap. 1.
were other needless matters, yet was it used to them that understood the
whole office or service of baptism in latin. Augustine says it was not
lawful for any Barbarian, or Latin man to translate the words, Amen and
Alleluia, which al nations do singe in the Psalms, into his own language. For
thus he coteth De doct. Chri. lib. 2. cap. 11. and inter Epist. 174. but in
neither of the^ do I find any such matter. Certain it is that Augustine does
give the signification of them both in latin. Of the Marcionistes (I said)
they learned to give women leave to baptize: Bristow says, we do our selves
therein by order of our book as much as they do, but he is deceived: there is
no permissio^ in the book for women to baptize. Touching the necessity of
baptism, we have spoken before cap. 6. Finally I said the Papists are
Pelagians for holding free will, and merits of works, as they did, and not
predessination and grace as S. Augustine did, Bristow cites Hierom. Cont. Pela
saying, yt it was the heresy of the Manichees, to take away free will. So it
was in deed to affirm that the will of man was enforced or constreined. But
that the will of man, is free from the thraldom of sin, and has power to
merit, without grace, or with grace more easily, it was the heresy of the
Pelagians as Augustine in whole books written against the^ does declare: But
August. Epist. 46. says, That by the grace of God a wicked man may be made a
just one, and so may begin to have good merits, which God shall crown when the
world shall be judged. I answer by merits he means works and not deserts:
for else how says he elsewhere (in Ps. 101. and diverse places beside) that God
crowns his gifts and not our merits, where he uses the name of merits,
for deserts? where I said the papists color Pelagianisme with their
distinction, De congruo and condigno: Bristow says we do like hypocrites
conceal before the people, the distinction of merits before grace, and after
grace, for they hold that a man cannot merit the grace of God De congruo
without Gods healpe, although they have no resolute warrant to call the
contrary Pelagianisme or heresy. And why have you no warant? for rear you
should condemn diverse of your chief pillars the scholeme^ for heretics,
which hold contrary to that you hold, and yet you all hold that a man may
dispose him self unto a certain aptnes to receive the grace of God by the
power of his free will. Where I said God is as much bound to congruitie as to
condignitie: Bristow says I immagine that if God do not that which is
co^gruous, he does against co^gruitie. Now good sir says he, It is co^grue to
his mercy, to save the simple that are out of the Church, which is not
co^gruus to his justice But good sir, I pray you dispute not so of congruine,
yt you oppose Gods mercy to his justice, there is nothing congrue to
hismercie, which is not co^grue to his justice, for unto who^soeuer he will show
mercy, he has received for them satisfaction to his justice, in the person of
Christ: yet Bristow has another example for condignitie: For God to save all the world, it is condign to the merits of Christ, yet he damneth innumerable,
because it is condign to their own merits. By this it may be inferred, that
God yields not to the merits of Christ, so much as they deserve, because the
merits of many men do hinder, as though ye merits of al men do not deserve
damnation of co^dignitie, and then what cause is this, why God gives not to
Christ's merits so much as they are worthy to receive, because many deserve
damnation? This foolish sophistry rises by reasoning from possibility of
Christ's worthynesse, to the act of men's worthynesse. But compare act with
act, and God saves all his elect for the worthynesse of the merits of Christ
by his mercy: and damneth all the reprobate for the worthiness of their
sin, by his justice of predestination denied by the papists, as it is
defended by S. Augustine Bristow speaks never a word.

In the 39. demand which he calls Inconfessed heretics only: where I
answering to the question of Allen Pur 421. 422. with an other question or
demand why it was reueiled, first to the Arrians in council, that the
article of Christ's descent into hell was meet to be added to the Creed which
was not in any symbol before. Bristowe first surmising, as his manner is,
that which was never thought of, at last confesses this article to be added in
an Arrian Creed, Theodor. Lib 2. cap. 21: affirming that it was before that,
in the Apostles Creed, but thereof he brings no proof nor witness. The
judgment of the scriptures and not of men's opinions argues heresies. Let the
writings of the Apostles try whether of us is departed from the doctrine of
ye Apostles.

In the 40. demand which he terms, They never before now. Where I said we
agree with the most ancient fathers in the chief and most substantial
articles of faith: Bristowe says, I confess his purpose. For Vigilantius,
Iouinianus etc. did much more agree with them in such articles, yet were not of
their church, could not be, and would not be. How prove you that Vigilantius
was not of the Church, or would not be, although he dissented from Hierom? As
for Iouinian, although we hold no part of his assertion in manner as he held,
yet his error was not so great, that he might not be saved with it. Few of
those fathers but had as great errors as that. It seems you would have no man
to be of the ancient Church, except he agree with the ancient fathers in all
their errors: if it be proved out of the holy scripture yt Hierom erred, in
that wherein he dissented from Vigilantius, why is heto be allowed in that
error, more then in other things wherein he and other of those ancient fathers
erred.

Where I doubt whether Apostolici in S. Bernard^ time were slaundered: Bristow
says it is a poor and foul shifte, because Bernard himself is witness
against them, as though it were not possible that Bernard might be deceived by
miss^information, of them that envied such kind of men as they were.

Where I say it is certain that Panperes de Lugduno were slaundered: Bristow
says I prove it not. They prove it themselves, being now and long since openly
known to have continued in their unity from the time of Joan. Waldo, who
separated them by his doctrine and example from the whore of Babylon, in
Calabria, Mora(...), and France. Where have been whole ci^ties or towns of
the^, as Merundal, Cabriers etc. Wherefore it is an impudent assertion of
Saunder, to say they were friars. etc.

In the 41. demand of studying all truth, Bristowe affirms, that with
friars and other catholics, all lea^ning had been packed away, if the princes
had not erected a few petite schools, so he calls not only great
colleges, but also whole Universities lately erected. But is there any man so
ignorant of the time of suppression of Abbeys, that he would think all
learning was in friars and other papists? Where I say there was never greater
store of learning in any age, then is now in protestants: bristow, makes me
still a child in the grammar school, which thinks no man can be better
learned then his master, saying: We that know your and the Catholic
schools, can but laugh at your childishnes. Why Bristowe, does no man know the
learning of popish universities but you? I have seen and heard something in the
most famous university in Europe, and yet I saw nothing, that Cambridge and
Oxford may not be bold to compare with it, except it be in multitude of
students. Where I speak of the tongues and rational sciences: Bristowe is
boulde to affirm. There are more declamations in Greek in one common school
of the Jesuits, then in both your universities (I dare say being joined
together. What dare you not say, that have determined to supply in bragging,
that you Jack in learning? if you had named the number, we must perhaps have
yealded to you, if happily our number of Greek declamations be not so great
as yours. But to give you an estimation, by that I know of one, and one of ye
lesser sort of colleges in Cambridg, for the number of Greek declamations,
there are a dosen poor scholars of new erection, since her Majesty's reign
which are bound to declaime in greek every Term, beside their weekly
exercise of versifying in greek and latin, and their competent knowledge in the
hebrewe tongue, required in them by their foundation, before they can be elected
to those places. By which you may guess, that the knoweledge of the laerned
tounges, are not so dainty in our universities, as you think. Yea, he dare
say they have better masters of art of two or three, teaching through out all
Logike and Phylosophie, then with us in seven years. This childishe brag,
whereof there is no trial, comes of the spirit of pride, wherewith Satan
puffs up the Papists, that although in the multitude they be far inferior
to the professors of the truth, in any kind of good learning, and for the best
of them nothing superior: yet every one of meanest knowledge, among whom I take
Bristowe for one, so swells in opinion of his learning, that he contemns
even them whose skill he never assayed. But their masters of Hebrewe, Greek,
Latin, Poetry, Logike, Philosophy, do not count themselves learned in
divinity, which they never studied, or better learned in it, then the
professors of it, lacking the tounges, or eloquence, as Saint Thomas Aquinas,
Saint Augustine, the Apostles. And what I pray you, do masters of other
sciences among us challenge the knowledge of divinity which they never
studied, or think themselves better learned in it, then the professors of it?
But wherefore join you to Thomas Aquinas, who in deed lacks both tounges
and eloquence. S. Augustine, who was a master of eloquence, and not ignorant in
tongues, and especially the Apostles, which were endued with heavenly
eloquince, and knowledge of all tongues? But it is rudenes and barbarousnes
(says Bristow) in our country, to think ae mere grammar schoolmaster
sufficient to be doctor of divinity, yea and a Bishop also, not for other
quali^^es, but even for divinity. I cannot deny, but it were rudenes and
barbarousnes so to think. But I utterly deny, that any mere gra^mer
schoolmaster in our country is so preferred as you most slau^deiously
aff(...)me. For the person whom you prick at, is well known, to be
excelle^tly well learned in divinity, and so to have been many yeare^ before
his preferme^t, as his learned labors, even against popery, are in hands of
men to testify. But seeing you make it so strange a matter for a man, to be
called from a grammar scholemaster to be a doctor in divinity: It seems you
have not observed (for I know you have read all things) what Eusebius writes
of Origenes, who being a teacher of Philosophy, Geometry, Arithmetike, and
other liberal arts, for his knowledge in divinity, was made a doctor of the
Church. And why might not this our Bishop be taken out of the grammar school,
as well as your White in Queen Mary's time? Is the same matter that was
wisdom in you, become barbarousnes in us? But regnum gramma^icoru^ is post
date, all are not children, as they were when this gear began: your tongues
will not now serve, no nor your study of diuini^ie in Caluines schools: come
once to the Catholics schools (says Bristowe) and you will be ashamed of
your self, as many a one is, that ^hought, himself at home, and was thought
of others a iol^ie fellow. No no master Bristow (for I must requite your
courtesy, seeing once in your life you call me master Pulke) we need not come
to your popish schools, to see your learning, you bewray it sufficiently by
your public writings. And as for ye kingdom of gramarians, I marvel why
you scorn us with it, as though we had not atteined to the kingdom of any
other science or learning. But although we list not to make such large brags of
our learning as you do, I for my part would be ashamed, if there were any
knowledge yt in any age was counted good learning, wherein our side should not
be found as forward in England, as any Papist in the world. As for the
slanderous and witless railings, of the heretic Stancarus, preferring the
Master of the sentence, before so many Luthers, Melancthons, Caluines, etc. we
esteem as much as the barking of a dog against the the Moon. Would God we
might all meet in some University, where better trial might appear of both
our knowledges, then wise men may gather by our boasting.

In the three and forty Demand of succession, where I said, there is no such
succession of persons and places, promised, as the Papists boast of: Bristowe
says, the saying of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. promises a continuance of Pastors
and Doctors unto the end: which I confess, but yet is not the orderly
succession of persons and places thereby proved, there shall always be Pastors
and teachers in the Church, but it follows not, that they shall continue in
succession of the same rooms, in the same places, as the Papists boast of the
succession of Popes. That he defends the offices of Apostles, Prophets and
Evangelists, to continue always in the Church by succession, being a gross
error, I will not stand to confute, because it is none of the principal
matters in controversy.

Where I said, that if succession of persons and places were sufficient, the
Greek Church is able to name as many, as the Latin Church, and in as orderly
succession, Ar. 27. Bristowe asks, what of that, but only this, that they
therefore may better claim the Church than we? Yes this one thing more, that
by this my showing of succession in the Greek Church, which you can not deny,
Allen is bound to recant; and that the Greeks by title of succession, may
claim the Church as well as you. But those heretical and schismatic
Greeks (says Bristowe) can no more show succession than your false Bishops,
which are in the sees of Poole, Bonner, Thirlby, etc, and yet I ^ro^e, he will
not thereby claim succession. We may by as good right as you claim succession
to the Apostles, and godly Bishop of Rome, whom you succeed not in doctrine.
For neither have you any right succession, but from them that began your
heresies and separation from the Christian Church, Boniface the third and his
fellows. But Gregory says, the Church of Constantinople is subject to the
Church of Rome. But so does not the Councels of Constantinople, which before
Gregory's time decreed, that the Church of Constantinople should be equal in
all things with the Church of Rome, the title of senioritie only reserved:
because Constantinople was new Rome. Socr. li. 5. cap. 8. Sozomen. li. 7. ca.
9. Euag. li. 2. ca. 4. Conc. Constantinop. 1. ca. 2. etc.

In the 44. Demand of the Apostolic see, where I say it avails not the
Papists, that the Church was planted at Rome, by the Apostles, except they can
prove succession of doctrine, as well as of men: Bristowe says: In proving the
succession of men only, we do as much as the Fathers did. But I say that is
false, for the fathers allege succession of doctrine in the persons succeeding.

In the 45 Demand of changing, where I cite the Epistle of Hulderichus Bishop
of Auspurge, witnessing that Gregory was ye first that compelled Priests to
live unmarried: Bristowe answers, that seeing I confesst, that he revoked his
error, he made no change from his fathers faith: Yes sir, although he revoked
his decree, yet was the same received by them that came after him. But the
story of that Epistle is derided by Cope, which affirms, that Pope Nicholas
the first was dead 56. years before Vdalrichus was made Bishop. Thus these
impudent Papists, when they can neither corrupt, nor wrest to their purpose,
the monuments of antiquity, they will utterly deny them.

Whereas the Papists contrary to the old usage of the Church by Allens
confession, do absolve before satisfaction: Bristowe says, both manners have
been always used, and brings example of men absolved i^ sickness, which if
they recovered, performed their satisfaction after. But Papists absolve them
that are in health before satisfaction, which is contrary to the old usage.

Where I tell them, that Sabinianus condemned the decrees of his predecessor
Gregory, and Stephanus of Formosus: Bristowe says, not one Pope, has
condemned any decrees made of doctrine. It were hard for him to prove, that
none of those Popes, all whose acts their successors disanulled, made any
decrees of doctrine. And certain it is, that Gregory made decrees of
doctrine, or else the Popes Canon law does lie, al whose decrees, yea and
books also, as containing heresy, his successor Sabinianus condemned and
burned. But supposing (says he) that Pope Honorius was a Monothelite, both in
opinion and in some secret writing, yet did he not change, nor go about to
change the Romans into Monothelites. What meant he then to write heretical
Epistles, but to draw other into his heresy? Did not his writings to Sergius
Bishop of Constantinople, plainly discover him to the Council, that he
followed that heretics mind in all things, and confirmed these ungodly
opinions? Con. Constantin. 6. Action. 13. And to what end? but between them to
change the faith of the whole Church, both of the East and of the West. into
Monothelitisme? But that you may see a plain contradictorie unto Bristowes
bold and lying affirmation, I will rehearse the words of Pope Leo the second,
in his Epistle unto the same Council, Act. 18. Pariterque anathematizamus etc.
Also we accurse, the inuentors of the new error etc. naming them, and among
them Honorius which did not lighten this Apostolic Church, with doctrine of
Aposto like tradition, but by profane treason, did go about to overthrow the
immaculate faith. Yet against all this testimony of antiquity, Sander in his
Monarchy proves, that Honorius was no Monothelite, and that John 22. did not,
as Calvin and we belie the story, deny the immortality of the soul, and
resurrection of the body, neither was any such thing laid against him by his
contentious enemies, but whether the souls do see God before the general
resurrection, but he also denied that error etc. To this I must needs say,
that Bristowe is either an ignorant reporter, or an impudent lier, except he
will say that Calvin or some of us wrote, the report of the Council of
Constance, where he was accused and convicted by witness, to have denied the
mortality of the soul, and the resurrection of the body, and life
everlasting, Session. II. And in the next Session he confessed, that the
Council of Constance was most holy, and could not err. As for the assertion
of Pope Ioane the feminine Pope, I refer the reader to Master Jewels reply
to Harding, where he proves it, by auncienter testes, than Martinus Polonus,
how so ever Bristowe saw it in a marginall note, I wot not where, not in what
Protestants hand, as he reports.

In the six and forty Demand of our auncetors saved or damned, he
maruelleth where my wit was, when I alleged against Canonization, ye example
of burning Hermannus the heretic in Ferraria, where he was worshipped twenty
years Apocryphally. But if he had not been canonized as you say, where was the
Popes care of the Church, that so near him in Italy, he would suffer such
gross idolatry, so long time to be committed and continued? Wherefore except
you bring better prose for your negative the affirmative that he was canonized,
which so long had been worshipped, without contradiction is more probable,
seeing you hold that the Romish Church can not suffer any ungodly usage, so
long to be uncontrolled.

Where I said, the Papists can not prove, that the Pope and Popish Church
has canonized the Apostles and principal Martyrs: Bristowe asks, if making
of holy days, and to name them in diptychis among Saints, in the holy Canon
of the Mass is not proof sufficient, of their canonization. No sir, if that
be canonization, which your late Canons and practice does allow: but if it
were, I say, the Apostles and principal Martyrs had days of remembrance of
their godly life, and doctrine, names in the tables, and at the celebration of
the Lords supper, before canonization was thought to pertain only to the
Pope. As for our abrogating of Saints days, does not disprove our Communion
with the Saints, which is in consent of their faith, not in celebrating of
their feasts. Concerning the canonization of King Henry the sixth: Bristowe
requires mine author for a dilatorie plea, because he can not otherwise
defend the Popish corruption. Mine author is Edward Hall in his Chronicles of
Henry the seventh, where I said we acknowledge those to be Saints, whose
names are written in the book of life. Bristowe like a black dog scoffeth
at it, and says, we might do well to set out that book in print, that they
might correct their Calender by it. Or else the Churches declaration is the
most certain way to know who are written in it. If none should be written,
but such as the Pope does canonize (for that is your Churches declaration)
innumerable Papists, should have no place therein, and not only Papists, but
the true Saints of God, of whom not one among ten thousand, has been
canonized. Where I say, the Popish Church does injury to the Saints of God,
that she does not so account them while they live: Bristowe says I would be
called Saint Fulke, by mine own industry, and that out of hand. Thus has he
nothing but Heathenish scorns, to delude the textes of Scripture, which I
cited, to prove that the Church of GOD counts all true Christians Saints,
even in this life, not by their own industry and merits, but by the
sanctification of the blood of Christ.

He is angry that I compare the Popes canonizations with the Heathen Senates
canonizing of their Gods, saying, we do the like in canonizing our selves,
because we account our selves Saints, and true Christians, which is all one,
and because I show, the emulation of the Bohemians, in solemnizing the
memories of John Hus and Hierome of Prage, which differs as much from Popish
canonization, as their faith and religion differs from Popery.

In ye 47. Demand of communion of Saints, he boasts of increase of Papists in
England, affirming, yt beside the^ which are Catholic in heart and of their
communion, there be innumerable of them reconciled, which he says, to prepare
the minds of his friends unto their intended massacre and rebellion. I suppose
in deed, there are too many of those dissembling and professed traitors: but
yet not so many, but they may be numbered. But how many so ever they are, I
doubt not, but there are Christians of such number and power in England, as are
able to give all the Papists both on this side the sea, and beyond it, as
black a day as the Popes army found in Ireland, if ever they attempt to put
in practice their long intended and certainly purposed treasonable devises.

In the 48. Demand, where I show the fruits of the Gospel, being urged
thereto by Allen, Pur. 241. to appear notably in the liberal provision for
the poor of all sorts in England, and namely in the city of London: Bristowe
calls it beastly impudency: yet is he not able to name any Popish city,
that makes such provision; but falls into open railing, upon the corrupt
manners of all the city, as though for the fault of many, (which yet Gods name
be praised, are not the most) the whole city were not inferior to Sodom and
Gomorrhe in wickedness: In which place as being very populous, there are many
offenders, so are they punished if their offenses may be known. But who so
knew London in the time of Popery, and now also considers the manners of
the multitude, must be a very unequal judge, if he acknowledge not great
reformation in a great number, though he can not see it all. As for the city
of Rome, which Bristowe compares with Solomon, whose Priests were more
excellent than the report that went of him: as by ye story and relation of
them which knew it before this time, so by report of some which even in this
time have visited the same, we have sufficient understanding, that without
great reformation, it still continues the mother of all abominations of the
earth, and reaching forth ye cup of poisoned wine, unto such as seek her
whorish familiarity, makes them therewith so drunk, that there is no cause
why Bristowe should marvel why nothing confirms more our countrymen in
Popery, nor alienateth them from the Protestants, than to go and see Rome.

The eleventh Chapter.
What gross contradictions Fulke is driven to utter against Bristowe.
him self, while he struggleth against Gods Church, and the doctrine thereof.

As in his whole reply, he has drawn almost all ye arguments Fulke.
and authorities, which I used in those two treatises, unto other ends and
purposes, than for which I brought them: so to make a show of Contradiction,
he rendeth a number of my sayings from their proper places, and compares them
together, to make such as know not what a Contradiction means, to think that
I affirm and deny mere repugnancies, without any possibility to reconcile
them. But when they are considered according to the circumstance of the place,
in which they are written, I hope there are not many of so mean judgment, but
they will acknowledge, they are rather the cauils of Bristowe, than the
contradictions of Fulke.

The first Contradiction he notes, that I say, Art 96. You are never able to
answer the arguments that Peter was never at Rome. And the^ where is the
Apostolic see? etc. And the^ on the conirarie side: the Church of Rome was
founded by the Apostles, it was an Apostolic Church. For this he quoteth Purg.
361. 363. 374. To this I answer: In the first part he falsifieth my words,
which are these: You are never able to answer the arguments, that are brought
to prove that Peter was never Bishop at Rome, and then where is all your
bragges of Apostolic see and succession? etc. The Church of Rome might be an
Apostolic see, though Peter was never there: but all your bragges of
Apostolic see, and succession are vain, if Peter was never Bishop of Rome.

The second: Those ancient Fathers did appeal to the judgment of the Church
of Rome against all heresies, and among the Catholic Churches, especially
named the Church of Rome, because it continued in the doctrine of the Apostles,
Pur. 373. 374. Contrat And by the way note here the brag of the Roman faith
Pur. 405. The former proposition is not mine, but patched by him, yet if I
grant the sense and words to be, as he has forged them, they are not
contradictorie to the latter proposition. For heretics may brag of that
which Catholics use to do: and yet not be Catholics.

The third: It had by succession (speaking of the Church of R(...)) retained
even until their days, that faith which it did first receive of the Apostles.
Pur. 374. Contra: She the Church of Rome has had no orderly succession of
Bishops, except so many schisms as they write of, be orderly successions. By
the time of these Fathers (says Bristowe) there had been four schisms. Ar.
85. Answer. In the first proposition I speak of Tertullians time and
succession of doctrine, and name succession simply. In the second proposition
I speak of the whole time until our days, and of succession of persons, and
of orderly succession: therefore no contradiction.

The fourth: It continued at that time in the doctrine of the Apostles, it
retained by succession that faith which it did first receive of the Apostles.
Pur. 373. 374. Contra: he charge it with sundry errors here cap. 3. and 4
namely P. Liberius with Arianisme. P. Innocentius for housling of Insantes, and
eight Popes for the supremacy. I might answer, that the charging of the
Popes, charge not the Church. but in the first proposition, I spoke of the
Church of Rome, in the time of Irenaeus, and Tertullian, holding the doctrine
of the Apostles, contrary to those heresies against which they write.

The fifth: It was a true Church, and Apostolic Church, a faithful Church,
true and Apostolic faith and religion have dwelled in her. Pur. 374. Ar. 79.
Contra: The Church of Rome never preached the truth. She never had since she
first arose the ministering of sacraments according to Christ's institution. The
true Catholic Church has overthrown heresies of all sorts. But the Popish
Church was never able to encounter with heretics. Rome may be a nurse of
Antichristi(...)ns, but never did good to Christians. I am able to prove that
the primitive Church affirmed your Church to be the Church of Antichrist. Ar.
85. 16. 106. 10. 27.

The latter part of this contradiction, with as many falsifications as there be
quotations, do sufficiently declare, that in all those places, I speak of the
Popish Church of Rome that now is, and not of the true Church which of old
time was at Rome. Yet to give the reader a taste of his falsification of my
words Ar. 106. which he rehearses thus. Rome may be a nurse, etc. in truth
they are these: Rome which feeds her babes with poison of man's traditions, in
stead of the milk of Gods word, and will rather see them famish than they
should taste of Gods word, may well be a nurse of Antichristians, but never
did good unto Christians.

The sixth: The Popish Church is a puddle of all false doctrine and heresy,
whereof the whore bears a cup full, out of which all nations have drunk.
Ar. 102. 38. Even from the Apostles ^ime the devil never left to set in his
foot, for his son Antichrists dominion, until he had placed him in the
temple of God, and prepared the wide world for his walk, and then came the
general defection. Pur. 287. Contra: all nations never consented to the
doctrine of the Papists. For it has been often said, the Greek Church and
(all) other Oriental Churches (of Assa and Africa) never received the Popish
religion, in many chief points, and specially in acknowledging the Popes
authority, they will not unto this day acknowledge her doctrine to be
Catholic, nor her authority to be lawful. Ar. 38. 16 33. 34.

These places being both full of falsifications, yet if they had been in so
many words set down by me, employ no contradiction. For it may be, that all
n^tions, (meaning as the scripture, whose words I cite Apoc. 18. not all of
every nation, but some of all nations) have drunk of the whores cup, and yet
never received her religion in all things. And the general defection is meant of
that great apostasy that S. Paul speaks of, in which the greatest number
shall fall from Christ, though they fall not all to the Pope. For many are
fallen to Mahomet, many revolted to idolatry, many to other heresies beside
Popery.

The 7. The religion of Papists came in, and prevailed in the year of our Lord
607. in which the Pope first obtained his Antichristian exaltatio^ to wit,
Boniface ye third of Phocas the Emperor, that the Bishop of Rome should be
called and counted the head of all the Church. Ar. 36. Contra in the same
place: Because you speak of the first entering of Popish religion, which
depends chiefly upon the Popes authority: it first began to advance it
self in Victor, about the year of our Lord 200. What contradiction is here?
Popish religion in one piece first began to advance it self Anno 200. and
after came in and prevailed, Anno 607.

The 8. The Popish Church is a puddle of all false doctrine and heresy. Even
in the Apostles time, and from that time, in all times, when so ever, and where
so ever was any piece of myste or dark corner, there were the steps of your
walk. It may be a shame for you Papists, to leave and condemn for heresy,
all that is true in the Fathers writings, and agreeable to the scriptures. Ar.
102. Pur. 287. 238. Contra: Where he dictinguisheth the religion of the
papists, from the great heresies, and open adversaries, that sought to beat
down the chief foundations of Christian faith, as the Valentinians,
Marcionistes, Manichees, Arrians, Sabellians, and such like monsters. Ar. 43.
He falsifieth my distinction, which is not of the religion of the Papists, but
of the first beginnings of such errors in the time of the ancient Fathers,
which among the Papists are grown to be in manner as great as the monsters of
Valentinians, Marcionistes, etc. And yet there can be no contradiction, where
the subjects of both propositions are not all one. But here the one is of the
Popish Church (which is a member of the malignant congregation of Satan) the
other is of the religion of Papists. The Papists by communion of the devils
Church, communicate with all heresies.

The 9. We say not that the religion of Papists came in soudenly, but that it
entered by small degrees at the first: and therefore ^a^^esse espied by the true
Pastors being earnestly occupied against great heresies, not preached against,
winked at, because it had a show of Piety and Charity, and at length allowed
of Augustine and others, who followed the common errors of their time.
Specially when a general defection, and departing from the faith was
foreshewed, what marvel were it, if none cold preach against it as it first
entered? Ar. 43. 36. 38. Contra: The Church of Christ in such places as she is,
suffers no man damnablie abusing her religion, without open reprehension. Ar.
92. 36. 37. The former proposition has manifest forgeries, as that I should
say, The religion of papists was not preached against etc. Winked at etc.
Allowed of Augustine etc. For I never said so of the whole religion of papists,
but of some few errors budding up in ancient times. But both Ar. 36. where I
ask What marvel etc. as an objection, I do nevertheless show who preached
against the usurpation of the Bishop of Rome, which yet tended not to a
damnable error; and Ar. 38. I affirm, there was both preaching, teaching, and
writing against it.

The 10 The true, catholic Church has always resisted all false opinions,
contrary to the word of God, as her dewty was, and fought against them, and
obtained the victory, and triumphed over them. Ar. 11. Contra: In those
ancient times they of the true Church, did not always weigh what was most
agreeable to the word of God: but if heretics had any thing that seemed to
have a show of piety or charity, they would draw it into use. So they took
into the Church of Christ, many abuses and corruptions, until at the length,
An. 607. the religion of the papists prevailed. And since that time that
devilish heresy has always increased in error until the year 1414. Pur.
419. Ar. 35. 36. The former proposition is directly spoken and meant by me, of
heresies against the truth, and other articles of faith: That which is mine in
the latter patchery and falsification, is spoken of small errors and idle
ceremonies.

The 11 That blasphemous heresy of purgatory, which is most blasphemous
against Christ, against the blood of Christ, against his merits and
satisfaction for our sins, and against Gods unspeakable mercies: and occasion
of most licentious wickedness in all them that believe it, nothing convenient
for the disciples and members of Christ. No suffrages were made for the dead by
the Apostles or their lawful successors. To the reader, Pur. 26. 166; 184.
177. 269. 362. 363. 419. 186. Contra: here. cap. 3. he confesses that the
fathers held it, and yet notwithstanding, that they were members of the true
Church (cap. 2.) and held the foundation of Jesus Christ (cap. 5.) and all the
substance of true doctrine: And also that they did invoke Saints: denying in
other places that such be true Christians. The like of fasting. Pur. ^93. 405.

I never confessed those godly fathers to hold purgatory in such blasphemous
sense, as the papists do, nor yet prayer for the dead, or invocation of
Saints. By fasting, I know not what he means, for in the page, whereto he
sends me 141. is no such matter spoken of, nor fasting once named.

12 The opinion of Purgatory and satisfaction of sins after this life, is
the very doctrine of licentiousness, to maintain wicked men in their
presumptuousnesse. For what have will they make to amendment and newenesse of
life, when they have hope of release after their death? Pur. 51. 26. 166. 177.
184. Contra: As Saint Augustine says, it is but for small faults: or as M.
Allen says, for great faults that by penance are made small. And is God such
a merciful father to punish small faults so extremely in his children, whom
he pardons of all their great and heinous sins? Pur. 448.

The latter part of this prete^sed co^tradicto^ is not mine, but Allens
assertion, which I rehearse to show the absurdity of his exposition of the
happy rest promised. Apo. 13.

13 How long soever the true Church were hidden, whether i^ were a 1000. years,
or 2000. years, this is certain, that out of this Church none could be saved.
Ar. 73. Contra, here cap. 5. he counts it enough, if the faith of their
salvation were in the only foundation Jesus Christ, and that in such a sense
as agrees to men indeed out of the Church.

The whole faith of their salvation is in the only foundation Jesus Christ, in
such such sense as I speak cannot be out of the Church.

14 They which hold the foundation, that is Christ (to wit the Article of
Justification by the only mercy of God, and of the only son of God) are
doubtless members of the true Church of Christ. Ar. 61. ^4. Pur. 2^8. Contra:
here cap. 10. where he says, that the Anabaptists are abominable heretics,
and that they are not Protestants: who yet do hold that article i^mp as the
Protestants do.

It is a loudly, and never said of me, that the Anabaptists do hold that
article iump as the protestants.

15 A general departing from the faith, was foreshewed, and it was fulfilled
An. 607. Contra: The Church was never lost (neither when the departing was
general) but hidden (in the wilderness, that is) from the eyes of the world.
She is to this day preserved, and shall be to the worlds end. Christ has never
wanted his Spouse in earth, he has ever been a head without a body. Ar. 36.
38. Ar. 71. 78. 79. 80.

The general departing from the faith, was not of all persons, but of most in
all nations: and therefore the Church never failed.

16 The primitive Church of the Apostles has continued unto this day by
succession not of persons and places, but of the doctrine, faith, and truth.
These verte words contain a manifest contradiction. For how can a Church, or
doctrine, faith, and truth continue, but in persons and places? in so much
that he says also: We doubt not, but God has always stirred up some faithful
teachers, that have instructed his Church in the necessary points of
Christian Doctrine. Ar. 2. 96. 26. 27.

These words contain no contradiction. For the Church may continewe in
persons and places, although not by continual succession of persons in the same
places. Bristow forgets his rules of contradiction, opposing continuance by
succession of persons and places, to continuance in persons and places.

17 The true Church of Christ has always stood steadfast and inseparable from
Christ her head, though the blind world, when they see her, will not
acknowledge her to be his Spouse, but persecute her, as if she were an
adultresse, Contra: in the same place: The true Church under the Emperors
Constantinus, Constans, and Valens, was greatly infected with the heresy of
Arius. And in another place: The visible Church may become an adultresse, and
be divorced from Christ. And so is that faithful Church of Rome become an
harl^^.

This contradiction is made up with a falsification of my words: The true
Church under the Emperors Constantius, etc. For I say not, the true Church,
but speak generally of the Church, which suffered persecution until
Constantine, which was ye visible Church, under which name many heretics were
persecuted. Visible Church is not always the true Church.

The 18 The true Church consisting of Gods elect, and the lively members of the
body of Christ, shall never commit such adultery etc. But the visible Church
may separate her self from Christ. As though there were an other Church
besides the visible Church, and so two churches. Contra: Wheresoever the
Catholic Church be in parts, it is one body of Christ.

There are not two Churches, but one. The catholic Church is always
invisible: the militant Church on earth, which is a part thereof, is to the
world sometime visible, and sometimes not seen of the world.

The 19 Anno. 607. the Church fled into the wilderness, that is, out of the
sight and knowledge of the world, there to remain a long season: where all this
while God has preserved her until such time as he thought good, now in our
days to bring her out of her secret place in the wilderness, into the open
sight of the world again. Ar. 16. 27. 79. 36. Contra: Diverse times it was bold
to challenge preaching and ministering of the sacraments, yea and so boldly,
that it cost many of the chalengers their lives: As Berengarius, Brumo,
Marsilius de Padua, Ioannes de Gaudano. Ioannes Wickleue, Waldo, Ioannes Hus,
Ieronymus de Praga, etc. Ar. 77.

The only show of contradiction, is a falsification of of Bristow, reporting
my words, Where all this while etc. As though the Church has always bin so
hidden, ye no members thereof might appear. But those words be of his own
cauillous co^positio^, and not of my writing. But here beside the
contradiction, he notes two things against me, One, that it cost not all
these, yea, very few of these there lives. Neither did I say, it cost al, but
many, to justify this multitude: John Hus and Hierom are expressed beside many
hundrethes that are contained under etc.

The other matter is that neither these before appearing, were secret
protestans, but open papists. Belike he would bear us in hand, that their
open appearing and conversion from popery, was both in a moment of time. But
what if some of them were first papists, and afterward returned from popery to
ye catholic Church, as Hus and Hierom, being converted by certain Englishmen,
yet weere they not al such, for Waldo was never any papist, but a christian
Catholic, who seeing the horrible enormities of the Romish synagogue, openly
with many thowsands, I renou^ced her communion, when she would not be reformed
at his godly preaching.

20 To bring her again into open light. Which is now brought to pass in our
days. Ar, 16. 9^. Contra: from the year of our Lord 1414. (being the time of
the Council of Constance) the bright beams of the Gospel have shined in the
world. Ar. 36.

I see no sign of co^tradictio^ in these words, except these propositio^s be
co^tradictorie: The bright beams of ye sun do shine in ye morning before ye
sun be full risen: and, ye same is seen in open light after he is fully rise^
above ye earth.

The 21 The revelation of Antichrist (with the Churches flight into the
wilderness) was An. 607. when Bonifacius the 3. etc. For until then the
mystery of iniquity was preparing for his revelation and coming, and for the
general defection. Ar. 38. 36 16. Contra: She has not decayed there in the
wilderness, but been always preserved, until God should reueile Antichrist,
which is now brought to pass in our days. Ar. 16.

The revelation of the mystery of iniquity was, when Antichrist himself did
openly show that iniquity which before was not thoroughly discovered. God
reueileth Antichrist, when he opens unto men his horrible wickedness, which to
them were unknown. A wonderful contradiction of Antichrist reueiling
himself, and God reueiling Antichrist.

The 22 The Churches being in the wilderness, was, to be out of the sight and
knowledge of the wicked. Ar. 27. 95. Contra, speaking of the same space, She was
narrowly persecuted of the Romish Antichrist for a long season. Again:
Although it were known to the papists, yet it was in Italy when Marsilius of
Padua preached: in France, when Waldo: in England, when Wickleue: in Bohemia,
when Hus, and Ierom of Prage did flourish. Why? all these were well known to
the papists. As though the Church could not be persecuted in her members,
except she were al knowne^, or known to be the Church by her persecutors.

23 A rule of ye Logicia^s: No man knows a relative, except he know the
correlatiue thereof: Therefore though Christ had a body in earth. yet could it
be known of none, but such as knew Christ the head of that body, of whom the
papists were ignorant. A 1. 80. Contra: Our Church is now again brought to
light and knowledge of the world. Ar. 96. So that now belike the papists know
Christ, or the Logicians rule is verified only for the time of the Churches
being in the wilderness, according as in other places he moderateth the matter,
saying: We believe that the Church is not always known to the wicked upon
earth. Pur. 150. Ar. 77. 79, 80.

Whether the papists know Christ or no, certain it is, they will not
acknowledge him, who came into the world, which was made by him, and yet the
world knew him not, whom they would not acknowledge. The papists cannot say,
they know not our Church, although they will not acknowledge her to be the true
Church, and so my saying is true, that our Church is brought into knowledge even
of ye world of papists. The rules of Logicia^s are always true, but they are
often ill kept by popish sophisters, as ye rules of co^tradictio^ here by
Bristow.

24 We believe that the universal Church is not seen at all of men, because it
is in heaven Pur. 405. Ar. 95. 82. 74 80. Contra: Our Church, when it was most
hidden, might rightly be called Catholic (that is universal) etc. Here Cap.
10. Them. 6: And whereas you say, that no man alive could name the place where
it was, you make an impud^nt lie: For although it were unknown to the Papists
and enemies thereof, yet was it known to the true members thereof.

I see no opposition, except you will say, there is no knowledge but by bodily
sight, or that some members of the Church, may not be seen in earth, because
Jerusalem the mother of us all, is above.

25 And as for our Mother Church is no certain place, or company of men in
any one place upon earth, but Jerusalem which is above, is mother of us all.
Pur. 377 Contra: That no man alive could name the place where it was, is an
impudent lie. It was in Italy, when Marsilius preached, etc. Vt supra in
contrad. 22. Christ has never wanted his spouse in earth, though the blind
world when they see her, will not acknowledge her to be his spouse, but
persecute her as if she were an adultresse. She was known to them that were
her children. The church of Christ is the nurse of Christians. Jerusalem that
is from above, is mother of us all. Ar. 95 79 82. 106.

Those are as great contradictions as these. Bristowe is at Louane. Bristowes
foot is in his shoe. The whole Church and mystical body of Christ is in
heaven: therefore some members and parts thereof can not be on earth.

26 It is not called Catholic, because it should be every where. For that it
never was, nor never shall be. Ar. 95. Contra: It should ouerflowe and fill all
the world with righteousness. Esai. 10. That God has an holy universal
congregation, it is necessary to believe. It is dispersed in many places over
all the world. Ar. 73. 83. 80.

It is not every where: and it is in many places: be not contradictorie. And
the remnant may ouerflowe and fill the world with righteousness, as Esai
says: although it fill not every place and person thereof, nor most places and
persons always.

27 Christ's church is now by GOD enlarged further than the Popish church. Ar.
12. 3. 69. Contra: It is but a small flock in comparison of the malignant
church (of Antichrist) whose number is as the sand of the sea. Apoc. 20.

The Popish Church is not so large as the malignant Church of Satan by many
parts, which contains all the wicked of the world, the name of Antichrist is
added by Bristow. Yet are there more Antichrists than ye Pope, although he be
the chief yt sits in the temple of God.

28 It is a good argument, that the Popish church is not the church of Christ,
because it was never hidden since it first sprang up: in so much that you can
name the notable persons in all ages, in their government and ministry, and
especially the succession of the Popes, you can rehearse in order upon your
fingers. And it were a token that our church were not the true church, if we
could name such notable persons in their government and ministry. Ar. 27.
Contra: Such officers as are necessary for the conservation of Gods people in
the unity of faith and the knowledge of Christ, our Church has never lacked,
notwithstanding that through injury of the time (because our Church had not so
many Registers, Chroniclers, and remembrauncers) the remembrance of all their
names is not come unto us. For the authority of the Bible, we have the
testimony of the true Church in all ages. Our congregation has ever had
possession of the Scriptures. GOD has never suffered the true Church to be
destitute of the necessary use of the Scripture: Which the Popish Church has
so kept in an unknown tongue, that the people could have no use, much less
the necessary use thereof. The Church of GOD has always had Schools and
Universities for the maintenance of godly learning. The true Catholic Church
has always resisted all false opinions. It was never so secret nor hidden,
but it might be known of all those that had eyes to see it. That a thousand
years there was gathering together for preaching, ministering, and correcting.
God has always stirred up some faithful teachers. The Church has never been
afraid to do her office toward her children and true members, in teaching,
exhorting, comforting, confirming, etc. Ar. 28. 27. 9. 6. 5. 52. 11. 74. 75.
26. 82.

In these large propositions, howesoeuer they be patched, I see no
contradiction. Except these be contraditories: The Church was sometime hidden
from her enemies: and yet where she was gathered, did perform all duties to
her friends and children. It was not seen of the blind, but it was seen of
them that had eyes.

29 The Popish Church was never hidden since it first sprang up. Ar. 27.
Contra: The Church of Rome has not always practiced open preaching, and never
preached the word of truth. Ar. 85.

There was small preaching before the orders of begging friars began to supply
the want of the pastors. And yet the popish Church glistered in her whorish
pomp.

30 Touching the text Matthewe 5. of a city built upon an hill, which can not
be hidden, after he has given his sense of it, he says: Hereby it appears
how fondly some Papists (and some of the Doctors in their error) do expound
this place to grove, that the Church must always be visible. Ar. 100. Contra:
even in his own exposition there: It is properly meant of the Apostles and
their su^^essours the Ministers of the Church: he teaches them above all other
men, to look diligently to their life and conversation: for as they excel in
place and dignity, so the eyes of all men are set upon them. As a city
builded upon an hill, must needs be seen of all that come near it, so they
being placed in so high an office and dignity, shall be noted and marked above
all other men. One part of the Church is always visible to the eyes of all
men, and can not be hidden: and yet the whole Church, and so also that part, is
not always visible, but may be hidden, and was hidden for a thousand years.
So he says.

The whole Church, which is the mystical body of Christ, is invisible.
Although the ministers of the Church and their conversation, can not be hidden
from the members of every particular Church.

31 The true Church decayed immediately after the Apostles time. And so the
error of praying for the dead was continued from a corrupt state of the church
of Christ, unto a plain departing away into the Church of Antichrist. Contra:
The Primitive pure church for the space of an hundredth years after Christ.
Again: Anno 607. The church fled into the wilderness, there to remain a long
season, where she has not decayed, but been always preserved, until God
should bring her again to open light now in our days. The true church shall
never decay, but always reign with Christ. The false synagogue shall' daily
more and more decay, until it be utterly destroyed with Antichrist the head
thereof. If this be not contradiction, it is much worse, to wit, that Luther
and his Apostles have given us a visible church which shall not decay, Whereas
Christ and his Apostles gave us a visible church which did decay, yea and
plainly depart away into Apostasy.

The places show that decaying has double understanding. The true Church soon
after the Apostles, decayed in syncerity, yet never decayed nor shall decay in
continuance. Luther gave no Church; but even that Church which is best
lightened by his preaching, may decay in sincerity, if the pastors be not
diligent to teach the word of God simply.

32 At every word he calls the Pope Antichrist, and the head of the
malignant church. Contra: in some places he makes two distinct heads and
their distinct companies. As, when Mahomet in the East, and Antichrist the Pope
in the West, seduced the world, then the church fled into the wilderness.
Again: The Popish church is not in every part of the world: for Mahomets sect
is in the greatest part. Ar. 16. 65.

I call the Pope Antichrist oftentimes: but that I call the Pope head of the
malignant Church, though Bristowe says I do it at every word, yet he is not
able to note one place where I do it, rather Bristowe makes a flat
contradiction in saying of me, At every word he calls the Pope the head of
the malignant church. Contra: In some places he makes two distinct heads, and
their distinct companies.

33 That the true church may err, and has erred, notwithstanding any
privilege it has by Gods spirit, we heard him say, cap. 3. Now to the
contrary. Neither has the spirit of God failed to lead her into all truth.
There be some prerogati^es of Gods spirit, that are necessary for the
salvation of Gods elect, as the gift of understanding, the gift of faith, etc.
And these the spouse of Christ has never wanted. True faith, etc. might be
signs of the true church. The spouse of Christ hears the voice of Christ,
and is ruled thereby. The church of GOD is the pillar and stay of truth, so
called, because that where so ever the church is, either visible or invisible,
there is the truth. Saint Paul by this title does admonish Pastors and
preachers, how great a burden and charge they sustain, that the truth of
the Gospel can not be continued in the world, but by their ministry in the
church of God, which is the pillar and stay of truth. This their duty true
preachers considering, are diligent in their calling to preach the truth. As
our church is the pillar and stay of truth, so is she also the house of
truth, which knows nothing but him that is the truth it self Jesus Christ,
and his most holy Scripture, in which this truth is signed and testified. We
require you to believe the true Catholic church only: and immediately again
to the contrary: We require you not to believe any one company of men, more
than an other. Ar. 82. 81. 93. 99. 62. 77. 100. 108. 62.

This contradiction is easily reconciled. The true Church may err, but not in
any point, that is necessary to everlasting salvation. We require men to
believe the true Catholic Church only, not for the company, but for the
truth.

34 The error (of Purgatory and praying for the dead) is continued from a
corrupt state of the church of Christ, unto a plain departing away into the
church of Antichrist. Contra: The true and only church of God is so guided by
Gods spirit, and directed by his word, that she can not induce any damnable
error to con^^n^^: No, nor suffers any man da^nably abusing her religion,
without open reprehension: and yet Purgatory, etc. came in with silence.

The error of praying for the dead, was not damnable, while it continued in the
Church of Christ, the Church of Antichrist by derogating full satisfaction from
the blood of Christ, has made it damnable.

35 The church of Christ has of the holy Ghost a judgment to discern true
writings from counterfets, and the word of GOD of infallible verity, from the
writing of men which might err. She has commended the books of holy
Scripture to be believed of all true Christians. We persuade us of the
authority of Gods book, because we have most steadfast assurance of Gods
spirit for the authority of it, with the testimony of the true church in all
ages. Ar. 5. 4. 9. Contra: All other writings are in better case than the
Scriptures are with you. For other writings may be counted the works of their
authors, without your censure: the holy Scripture may not be counted the word
of God, except you list so to allow it. Other writings are of credit according
to the authority of the writers: The holy Scriptures with you houe not
credit according to the authority of God the author of them, but according
to your determination. Pur. 219.

Here is no show of contradiction, but a wretched begging of the principle,
that the Popish Church is the true Church of Christ. Of such contradictions you
may make not 50 but 500000.

36 Those that by true Christians have been called and counted for heretics,
have proved so in deed. Ar. 65. Contra: This Demand has a false principle:
that the church ought to be a Christian man's (only: it is not in Doctor Allens
principle) stay in all troubles and tempests.

The first proposition is an Ironicall imitation of Allens absurd proposition,
and not an absolute assertion of mine.

37 And therefore the Papists, being called and counted heretics of true
Christians (that is, of the Protestants) without doubt are heretics in deed.
Ar 65. Contra. He is a foolish Sophister, that reasons from names to things:
as you do most vainly and childishly. Ar. 66.

The former proposition, is the conclusion which I retort upon Allens
principle, that whosoever by true christians are called heretics, do prove so
in deed.

38 There is never heresy, but there is as great doubt of the church, as of
the matter in question. Ar. 86. Contra: Augustines argument of the public
prayers of the church, took no hold of the Pelagians by force of truth that
is in it, but by their own confession and grant, of that prayer to be godly,
and them to be of the church that so prayed. But now the controversy is not
only of the substance of doctrine, but of the church it self also. The
Donatistes challenged the church to themselves. Pur. 367.

Here is not so much as any shadow of contradiction, for in the heresy of the
Donatists, the chiefest controversy was of the Church: as for the prayer of the
Church, they used it themselves as well as the true Catholics, out of which
prayer Augustine gathers an argument against them.

39 But for the chief points of christian religion, and the foundation of our
faith, that is, Real presence, etc. the most approved writers are utterly
against you, and therefore can not be of your church. Contra: But the
Lutheranes and Zuinglians (as it pleases you to call them) are of one true
church, although they differ in one opinion concerning the Sacrament, the one
assirming a Real presence, the other denying it.

The contradiction is easily avoided, by showing, that the real presence among
a number of things in that place rehearsed, may be one chief point of
religion, and yet not a foundation of our faith. For I say the ancient fathers
agree with us in the chief points of religion, and the foundation of our
faith, which seeing the Lutherans hold with us, the dissent in one chief point
of religion, can not disseuer them from the Church, and yet they dissent not
unto idolatry, as the Papists do. And where Bristow slandereth me to say,
that I count the errors of some of yt latter sort of old fathers (in honoring
relics invocation of Saints, merits, traditions, unwritten verities, images
of the cross) to be contrary to the foundation, he is able to show no place
where I so affirm. And albeit they did so earnestly maintain some of those
errors, that they condemned by their private sensure, the contrary truth, for
heresies: yet it follows not that they were heretics. For it is one thing to
hold an error earnestly, an other to hold it obstinatly, so that he is
condemned of his own conscience, when he will not yield to the manifest truth
plamly proved out of the word of God.

40 We know that Luther did not obstinately and maliciously err in any
article of faith, concerning the substance of religion. Luther, Calvin, and
Bucer, shall come with Christ to judge the world. As for Illyrians, if you call
them of Flaccius Illyricus, they be Lutherans in opinion of the Sacrament, and
differ only in ceremonies, which can not divide them from the faith. Ar. 10.
61. Pur. 403. Contra: What Flaccius, or any such as he is, has said, neither
do I know, neither do I regard, let them answer for them selves: But
whereas you charge M. Calvin, etc.

Because I know not how Illyricus, and such contentious persons as he,
expounds the anointing in Saint James, but refer them to answer for them
selves, therefore I speak contrary to my self, where I say they differ not in
faith, from the Lutherans.

41 There is never heresy, but there is as great doubt of the church as of the
matter in question. Therefore only the Scripture is the stay of a Christian
man's conscience. Ar. 86. Contra: The Church is the ^ay of truth. If that
argument of the Church without trial which is the Church, might take place, it
would serve you both for a sword and a bucklar. The church says it, and we are
the church. Therefore it is true. Pur. 367.

It seems Bristowe is beside himself, in coining of contradictions. These
words, The Church is the stay of truth, for which he quoteth Pur. 367. are not
mine in that place, but his own addition: although in other sense I confess
the Church is the stay and pillar of truth, not that all is true which is
always in the Church, but that truth can not be preserved on earth by the
Church.

42 Among the arguments that Augustine uses against the Pelagians, one (though
the feeblest of an hundred) is, that their heresy was contrary to the
public prayers of the church. Contra: All other persuasions set aside, he
provoke only to the Scripture, to try the faith and doctrine of the church,
namely in beating down the schism of the Donaistes, and the heresy of the
Pelagians. Where also he contradicts him self again, in showing the reason
why he argued against the Donatistes of only Scripture, but against the
Pelagians of the churches prayers also: The Pelagians granted them to be of
the church that so prayed. And therefore when Augustine had to do with the
Donatistes that challenged the church unto them selves, he sets all other
trials aside, and provoke only to the Scriptures.

Let the readers judge: for I can not imagine where there be should be so much
as the shadow of a contradiction, gathered out of these words, except he
mean, that he which provoke only to the scriptures, may not use an hundredth
arguments out of them, yea or many persuasions beside the scriptures, and yet
stand only upon the auctority of the scriptures.

43 We stand for authority only to the judgment of the holy scriptures. Pu.
432. Contra: The ground that we have to persuade us of ye authority of gods
book, is, because we have most steadfast assurance of Gods spirit, for the
authority of that book, with the testimony of the true church in alages. The
church of Christ has a judgment to discern the word of God, from the
writings of men. The primitive churches testimony of the word of God we allow
and believe. You should bring a great prejudice against us and passing well
provide for the credit of your cause, and the discredit of ours, if you could
bring the consent and practice of the primitive pure church for the space of a
hundredth years after Christ, or something out of any Authentical writer,
which lived within one hundred years after the Apostles age. Ar. 9. 5. 10.
Pur. 364. 331. Ar. 21. 39. 42.

The first proposition (as in the place quoted is manifest) is spoken of
questions of doctrine: and not of our persuasion of the scriptures to be the
word of God. The last sentence, You should bring, etc. being patched out of two
places of my book, Pur. 364. and 331. are not contradictory to the first
proposition: for although we stand for auctority only to judgment of the holy
scriptures, yet we are content to give you this advantage against us, if you
can bring any thing out of those eldest writers for Purgatory or prayer for the
dead.

44 Saint Paul 1. Cor. 11. declares without color or couerture, the only
right order of ministration. Contra, in the next line: I know the Papists
will flee to those words of the Apostle, The rest I will set in order when I
come. That is manifest to be spoken of matters of external comeliness, and
therefore (say we) of the order of ministration. Pur. 362.

In rehearsing my words, he leaves out five lines of my saying, between the
words Couerture, and The only right, etc. which declare that I speak of the
ess^ntiall order of ministration, against Allen which affirms oblation of the
host for the quick and the dead, both generally and particularly, and a
solemn prayer for all departed in Christ, to be necessary parts of the order
of ministration of that Sacrament.

45 The old Doctors never heard Purgatory named, nor prayer for the dead.
Pur. 438. Contra: About S. Augustines time, the name of Purgatory was first
invented. And long before that also, Montanus had in all points the opinion of
the Papists, etc. Here cap 3 page 23. And yet again, Before Chrysostomes time
it was but a blind error without a head. Pur. 356.

My words are of the heresy of Purgatory, and my meaning of those old
Doctors, in comparison of whom Saint Augustine is but a punie, being younger
almost by 300. years, in whose time although the name of Purgatory were
inverted, yet the heresy was elder in Montanus. How prayer for the dead came
into the Church, it was uncertain in Chrysostomes time, and therefore I say it
was a blind error without a head.

46 In Saint Augustines time, Satan was but then laying his foundation of
Purgatory. Pur. 54. Contra: That error of Purgatory was somewhat rifely
budded up in his time. Pur. 161. And specially here, cap. 3. page 14 saying:
And this I think is the right pedigree of prayers for the dead and Purgatory,
where he puts the very last generation of it to have been in S. Augustines
time, and the foundationlong before Christ's time.

It were a strange contradiction, that could be picked out of these two
allegories, laying the foundation, and rifely budding; seeing the foundation is
the beginning of a building, and budding is the first towardness of fruit As
for the pedigree, is not to the last generation, as Bristow says, laid in
Saint Augustines time, but from the first auctor how it was continued unto
Saint Augustines time, since which there have been many dissents before popish
Purgatory were thoroughly shaped and brought forth.

47 M. Allen affirms that after men's departure, the representation of alms
by such as received it, shall move God exceedingly to mercy. O vain
imagination, for which he has neither Scripture nor Doctor. Pur. 242. 243.
Contra: Chrysostom allows rather alms that men give before their death, or
bequeath in their Testament, because it is a work of their own: than that
alms which other men give for them, howbeit also such alms are available for
the dead, he says. Pur. 236. 237.

That which Chrysostom speaks of little help, will not serve Allen to prove
that alms shall move GOD exceedingly to mercy.

48 The ancient Doctors did hold the foundation. Contra: cap. 4 page 28. He
says, The third Council of Carthage did define, that it is unlawful to pray
to God the Some, and GOD the holy Ghost.

The Council of Carthage by that decree denied, neither ye person nor office of
Christ, nor of the holy Ghost, therefore they held the foundation.

49 Here cap. 8. he says, that the just of the old Testament went not to
Lymbus Patrum after their death, but to heaven immediately. Contra: The fiery
and shaking sword that was set to exclude man from Paradise, was taken away by
the death of Christ, when he opened Paradise, yea the kingdom of heaven
(whereof Paradise was but a sacrament) unto all believers, so, that the
penitent these had passage into Paradise.

The virtue of Christ's death extends to the old fathers for their salvation:
as much as unto us, yet the cause which opened paradise and the kingdom of
heaven, was the death of Christ, by Gods ordinance appointed to work
righteousness for all the elect, as well before the time of his suffering, as
since.

50 Who so denies the authority of the holy scriptures, thereby bewraieth him
self to be an heretic. Contra: I say not this (here cap. 9 page 170. that
Eusebius was not accounted an heretic) to excuse them that doubt of the
Epistle of S. James. As Martine Luther and Illyricus, for I am persuaded that
they are more curious than wise in so doing.

My words be not alleged truly, in neither of both propositions. In the
former they are these, I will not gainesay, but whosoever denies, etc. I do not
always affirm, that I will not gainesay. I may be in doubt. But to grant
that I had affirmed the first proposition absolutely: what contradiction do I
make in saying that Eusebius although he affirmed the Epistle of Saint James to
be a counterfeit, was not accounted an heretic? Shall other men's account be
joined to mine affirmation, to charge me with contradiction? Again, the former
proposition, Who so denies, etc. If it be affirmed, must be understood of
such as deny the scriptures which are once received generally, because they
are contrary to his opinion. If he mean the contradiction to be, for that I
say: I will not excuse Martine and Illyricus which doubt of the Epistle of
Saint James, for that I am persuaded they are more curious then wise in so
doing: I must tell him, that doubting of the scriptures is not denying them,
neither is foolish curiosity like by heresy.

Last of al, where he charge me with falsification of Allens words to avoid
a shameful absurdity ensuing of his affirmation, he plaieth his old parts,
first in falsifying my words: where I say to reduce, he says to redeem:
secondly he says, that Allen speaks of him that now leads a godly life,
but will not be reduced to the perfection thereof by repentance, or
satisfaction of his loathsome life past. The very words of Allen be these: This
our adversary, Math. 5. here signifies our brother, which has just quarrel
against us in judgment, for yt we would not give ear unto him sharply
admonishing us of our faults, being therefore an adversary to our vices and
fleshly conversation. In which sort to us that are flesh and blood, and ready
to evil from our youth, all be adversaries that preach Christ, the amendment
of licentious manners, repentance of our loathsome life past, or else use against
us the rod of correction and bodily punishment, that our souls may be saved in
the day of the appearing of our Lord. To this kind of adversary Christ
counsels and commands us, for our great good, to agree and consent whiles
we be here in the way of this our pilgrimage and transitory life, least all
these means which he wrought to reduce us, to the perfection of a Christian
godly life, be as it were, a witness of our contempt, and him self our
accuser before the Judge, that shall so justly reward every man according to
his deeds: that is Christ him self, to whom the father has given all
judgment.

Now the words in which I reprove this absurdity of Allen, are these. But
before we go any further, let us see how the doctrine of this chapter agrees
with yt we had in the chapter next before. There we were told, that Purgatory
serves but for venial sins, or else for such mortal sins, as by
forgiveness in this life obtained, are made venial trespasses. But here not
only vices and fleshly conversation, but also contempt of all that preach
Christ, and repentance of our loathsome life past, etc. are said to be the debt
that must be discharged in Purgatory to the uttermost farthing, then the which
no vice is more mortal, nor further from forgiveness. For he that not only
leads a loathsome life, but also contemns all those means that Christ has
wrought, to reduce him to the perfection of a Christian godly life; (I use his
own words) how can he have remission of his sins in this life? and yet
Master Allen dare promise him, that the tolleration of bands in the prison of
Purgatory, shall recompense his debt, and bring him from thence into the
blessed presence of Christ.

The twelfth Chapter.
A nosegaie of certain strange flowers picked out of Fulke, Bristowe.
that they which delight in such a Gardener, may see his handie work.

The first flower is that I say, Pur. 283. the sacrifice Fulke.
propitiatory was offered in the law only by the high Priest, once in the
year. But Bristowe says, that sacrifice propitiatory, and for sin are all
one: which sacrifice for sin was offered, not only once in the year, in the
seast of expiation, but also in many other feast days, ordinarily and
extraordinarily; when so ever any occasion was ministered etc. I know not
whether I should here accuse his ignorance, or his malice. Which confounds
that singular sacrifice propitiatory (unto which the Apostle compares the
sacrifice of Christ's death, Heb. 9) with the often and usual sacrifices for
sin, saying they are all one. When that one above all the rest is described
with such solemnity, that the high Priest that day only enters into the
holiest place, that he may offer that holocaustum or the burnt offering, etc.
And that it should be an everlasting ordinance to make an atonement for the
children of Israel, for all their sins once a year. Leuit. 16. Wherefore the
other sacrifices for sin had their virtue of that shadowie or sacramental
propitiation, of this principal sacrifice, which was the most lively pattern
or example of the only true sacrifice propitiatory, which our Savior Christ
offered on ye cross; once for all: which proportion is observed by the Apostle,
Heb 9. ver. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10.. etc. and Heb. 10. ver 11. and 12. But where
Bristow says, beside this one propitiatory sacrifice, Fulke finds none, but
sacrifices of thanksgiving in the law, he affirms that which was neither
said of me, nor is truly collected of him. For I said, that Cyprian in these
terms, sacrifice, priest, altar, alludeth to the sacrifices of thanksgiving
in the law, because he uses also the name of Levites, by which he calls
Gods ministers. Let Bristowe now go and say, that Levites also offered
sacrifice propitiatori^ in the law.

The second flower of mine ignorance is, where to deface the sacrifice of Judas
Macha(...)aeus, I say that both the high Priest at that time was a wicked and
ungodly man, to wit, either Jason, Menelaus, or Alcimus, and namely Menelaus,
the worst of them all three: and also that the other Priests of that time,
were given to the practices of the Gentiles, 2. Machab. 4. In so much, that it
is like that Judas Machabaeus, if he devised not the sacrifice of his own
head, yet took by imitation of the Gentiles. Frst he maruelleth, how I
could think that Machabaeus had any commnion with the Gentilizers, against
whom all his fighting was, seeing it is written first of Macab 4 that he chose
priests without spot, having their heart in the law of God. I answer being
such as they were described. 2. Machab. 4. he had hard choice to find a
sufficient number of unspotted priests. But although he were an enemy of
gentility, in that corrupt time and state, he might be drawn into imitation of
the gentiles in some point that had a show of piety, although it were not
agreeable to the law of God.

His next accusation is, that I call them high priests which were but
antipontifices and usurpers. I answer, I justify not their title, more then
their manners and religion, but whereas by his greekelatine word, he supposes
that there were other true high priests in their time, he bewraieth his own
gross ignorance. For whereas he says that the succession of the true high
priests for that time was this: Onias, Mathathias, Judas. Ionathas, Simon: The
truth is, that Mathathias and Judas were never high priests, neither does the
Story 1. Macc. 2. or 1. Macc. 3 which he quoteth, show any thing to prove that
they were: It says that Mathathias was a priest, but not that he was the high
priest. And Josephus who did write an history of the Maccabees, testifies
plainly that from Iacimus to Jonathan, for 7. years there was no high priest,
which Jonathan was made high priest in the year 160. Joseph. Antiqu. Lib. 20.
Cap. 8. 1. Maccab. Cap. 10. verse 21. which was many years after Judas his
brother was slain. Therefore at such time as Judas should send the offering to
Jerusalem, there was no such good Bishop, as Allen says: but even Onias
cognomento Menelaus, as Josephus calls him, which was deprived both of his
life and of his high priesthood at Berytus or as the corrupt story of the
Machabes says, at Berea. 2. Macc. 13. called in the first of the Machabees
Bethzetha. But whereas Bristow makes Ionathas or Simon chief priests in the
absence of Judas, and not Menelaus, he forgets that in those expeditions
which Judas made from Jerusalem, for which he quoteth 1. Macc. 4. 5. it is
plain in the same chapter, that Simon was sent with an host into Galilee, and
Jonathan went with his brother Judas over Iordane into Gilead: which story, how
he will reconcile with the 2. Mac 12. either for time or persons, I have great
marvel. But that Menelaus, as he was then in office of the high priest,
though unworthy, so that he was at Jerusalem, it appears by this record of
the time. The Temple was purged (as Bristowe confesses,) and it is written 1.
Macc. 4. Anno 148. in the 25. of the Month Cislewe, and in the same year
Antiochus Eupator by letters sent to Lysias commands that the Temple should
be restored to the Jews, whereof Lysias writes to the Jews the 24. of the
month of Jupiter, Corinthus and king Antiochus himself, with letters bearing
date the 15. of the month Panticus sends Menelaus to comfort the Jews. 5.
Mac. 11. And ye next year after Anno 149. Antiochus came into Iewrie, and did
execution upon Menelaus, and made war upon Judas, etc. 2. Macc. 13. and
ordained Iacimus high priest, which continued in that place 3. years. Iosep.
Antiqu. Lib. 20. cap. 8. If that this account of the second book of Maccabees,
agree not with the story of the first book, as in deed it does not, let
Bristowe look ^^to it, that defends these books to be Canonical: it is
sufficient for me to justify that I cited out of this latter book, by the
report of the same book: and by Josephus, who knew the succession of the high
Priests of his nation, better than Bristowe, whose arrogant ignorance is so
much the more odious, that he would charge me with oversight, in that he is
most ignorant him self: and that against his Master Allen, who supposes some
other to be high Priest or Bishop, and not Judas him self.

The third chapter, of my gross or rather malicious ignorance, is said to be
about Antichrist: As that the Church of Christ should prepare his way, or work
his mystery. But this is a fable of Bristowe, never affirmed by me. As for the
other assertions of the time of his revelation, of the Churches fleeing into
the wilderness, of the time of Antichrists reign, etc. because they are
condemned by the only authority of Bristowe, without any argument or
testimony of Scripture, or Fathers, I will refer the reader to such places,
where I affirm any of them, to consider my reasons, and to judge indifferently.

The fourth point is, that the body of Christ is not offered to him self, but
thanksgiving is offered to him for the offering of his body for us. Pur. 316.
Against this, his reasons are these. Why sir, did not he upon the cross offer
his own body as a Man, and a Priest to him self as to God? Sir, the Scripture
tells me, that Christ being an high Priest, by his eternal spirit, offered
him self unreprovable to GOD: Hebr. 9. verse 14. Ergo, you will say to him
self as God, because the persons of the godhead are undivided. Yet I trust you
will distinguish ye humanity from the deity, and so Christ offered not his
body to him self, yt is, neither to his humanity, nor to ye person of the
mediator, which is God and man. For though God was made man, yet God the
Father was not made man, nor God the holy Ghost, but God the Son only. And
although it were granted, that Christ offering him self to God, was offered
to him self, yet it follows not that men of whom I spoke, can offer the
body of Christ, yea whole Christ to him self, then the which nothing is more
absurd. An other reason Bristow brings: that I noted others for saying, it is
not lawful to pray to God the son. As though it were al one to pray to
Christ, and to offer his body to Christ, him self to him self. The fifth: That I
call it a vain amplification and fond suppositio^ to extend the force of
Christ's death beyond the limits of his will. My words are of Allens
supposition, that the full force of Christ's death would sup up al sin and al
pain for sin, death temporal, and eternal, hell, purgatory, and all
pain, etc. But what reasons has Bristow against my saying? First: my
assertion is (says he) As though it were not of force to work any whit more
than it works in act, as to save so much as one of them that shall not be
saved. I say, it is of force to work even as much as God will, but not to
work against the will of God. But I speak contrary to the express
scripture. He is the propitiation for our sins, and not for our sins only,
but also for the sins of the whole world. 1. Ioh. 2. If you understand the
whole world, for every man in the world, then it follows, that God is
reconciled for all men, and so no man shall be damned. But S. John means by
his general word, all the elect of the world: as when he says, The whole world
is set on mischief; he means not every person, but all the reprobate 1. Ioh.
5. And that Christ's death is not a propitiation of the sins of all the wicked
of the world and reprobates, it is certain, by that he refuses to pray for
the world, that is, for the reprobates of the world, John 17.

But Bristowe urges me with mine own saying, in an other contrary to this.
Concerning the sufficiency of Christ's redemption, there is nothing that can
be spoken so magnifically, but that the worthiness thereof passes and
excels it. This should have come in among the contradictions, if Bristowe
had remembered it. But I beseech you sir, in commending the sufficiency of
Christ's redemption, do I extend the force of his death beyond the limits of
his will? Are any more redeemed than Christ would?

The sixth: I say, that to remit sins, is proper to his divinity. That is
(says Bristowe) as though Christ does not remit sins, according to his
humanity. I say Christ which is a person consisting of God and man, does
remitte sins by absolute auctority, but that is proper to his divinity and
not to his humanity, as for the power which he has given to his ministers, to
remit sin, is not absolute, but to declare remission of sins in his name.
Neither did the people which glorified God for giving such power to men Matthew.
9. acknowledge the doctrine of the Church for the remission of sins by the
ministry of man, but praised God for giving the gift of healing unto Christ,
whom yet as young scholars, they acknowledge not to be God, but an holy Prophet
sent of God. And so the other Evangelists report their praising of God to have
been for that they never saw it so: they had seen wonderful things that
day. Mark. 2. Luke 5.

The 7. he charge me to teach a pestilent doctrine of desperation, Where I
say, there be sins for which the Church ought not to pray, even of men
remaining in this life: for which it is not lawful to pray: which by the mercy
of God are not pardonable: it is false, that so long as men are in this world,
they may repent. For which he quoteth Pur. 274 127. 128. 135. 283.

After he asks how many such sins there are? and says in one place I name
two, and after more, and after concludes that in some I say, that it is
unlawful to pray for any wicked person, of what sort so ever his wickedness
be, so long as he continues in his wickedness: yea, and it is impossible for
the wicked but to continue in his wickedness. This is a pestilent slander, for
I never accounted any sin irremisible, but only the sin against the holy
Ghost: for obstinate and wilful apostasy is ye sin against the holy Ghost,
whereof a fruit is final contempt of all that preach Christ, and of all
means that Christ has wrought to bring us to repentance, such was the sin
of Saul and of the obstinate Jews, for whom Samuel and Jeremy are forbidden
to pray.

As for that I should say, it is not lawful to pray for any wicked person,
etc. I never thought it, but only for those that sin against the holy Ghost,
of whom Saint John says, they sin unto death, and I say not that any man
should pray for that. 1. Joan. 5. Nevertheless Bristowe affirms, that we are
worse then the Nouatians, when I say, That some sins neither by the mercy of
God are pardonable. But where do I say so? he quoteth before, Pur 128. And
what be my words there? Verily who so will turn the book, shall read them
thus: For by the justice of God all sins are mortal, but by his mercy they
are all pardonable, except that sin unto death, whereof John speaks. 1. Ioh.
5. Thus am I worse tha^ a Nouatian, for saying, ye sin against the holy Ghost
shall never be pardoned, neither in this life, nor in the world to come. But
perhaps Bristowe will cavil, that even that sin is pardonably by Gods mercy,
if God would: which is not contrary to that I said. For I speak of that which
may be, Gods eternal will standing, according unto which the Apostle says, it
is impossible that they which so offend can be renewed by repentance.
Hebrews 6.

The heresy of the Nouatians as Bristowe affirms of the report of Aresius
their Bishop was: That they who after baptism, fall into that kind of sin.
which the holy scriptures call sin unto death, ought not to be admitted to
receive the divine mysteries, but to be exhorted to repentance, and to look
for hope of forgiveness, not of the Priests, but of God, who both can and
has authority to forgive sins. In which sentence, a double error of the
Nouatians is included: first that they took that sin unto death whereof Saint
John speaks. 1 John. 5. to be falling through frailty in time of persecution,
even as Bristowe does, the wilful prolapsion and Apostasy that the Apostle
speaks of. Heb. 6. Secondly that they thought the sin unto death might be
remitted of God, contrary to the manifest denunciation of our Savior Christ.
Matthew. 12. As Bristowe does the sin against the holy Ghost, which is all
one and the same. But that the Catholic Church did then by her Priests
forgive all sins without accepting the sin against the holy Ghost, which
Bristowe affirms out of the confession of Acesius, I marvel how he proves.
Yea, he is so impudent to say, that the Protestants also do admit all to
their Caluines bread, so the blasphemous dog barketh against the holy
Communion: whereas we never receive any whom we know to be excommunicated,
and much less would we receive any apostata, that is clean fallen from
Christianity, not of weakness or ignorance, but of malicious contempt; or
any whom we might know to have sinned that sin unto death, and to have
blasphemed against the holy Ghost.

But now let us see what miserable comfort Bristowe will minister against
desperation, in answering such places of scripture, as I brought, to prove the
sin against the holy Ghost to be irremissible.

First the place of 1. John 5. he says is meant of them that be dead and
damned in hell, as he has taught us: cap. 8. but because I refuse that
interpretation, as false and new, he cites Augustine. in ret. li. 19. cap.
12. whose interpretation at the first was as I hold, but afterward he adds,
if he end his life in this peruersitie. For we must despair of no man, be he
never so wicked, so long as he is in this life. Neither is prayer made unwisely
for him, who is not despaired of. Here are two contrary expositions of one
man, in which we must consider whether is more proper to the place, and not
whether better or last pleased the author of them.

That no man is to be despaired of, while he lives, as it is contrary to the
scripture, so to the practice of the Church, which refused to pray for Iulianus
the apostata, and prayed to God against him.

Maris also the Bishop of Chalcedon, denounced him to his face to be impious,
and an apostata, and enemy of God. Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 10. Sozo. lib. 5. cap.
4.

The second text, Heb. 6. Bristowe expounds it of falling through frailty in
persecution, of them which can not be renewed by baptism, but the Apostle
says expressly by repentance, and therefore speaks not of lapsion or
falling, but of prolapsion or falling clean away from Christ, with manifest
contempt of his grace and redemption.

The terrible denuntiation of Christ against the obstinate and malicious
Pharisees Matt. 13. Mar. 3. Bristowe faith, he speaks it not to drive them to
desperation, but to move them to repentance. What if that be granted, that by
showing the danger of malicious obstinacy, which grows to irremissible
wickedness, he should admonish them to beware in time, as the Apostle does, Heb.
6. Does it therefore follow, that no man sins irremissiblie, while he
lives? Although it is plain, that our savior Christ denounces their
damnation as men so obdurate in their wickedness, that nothing could reclay me
them, or bring them to repentance. But Bristow would make me contrary to my
self, who though in express words I count D. Allen and his fellows such as
(by you) Heb. 6. cannot repent, yet do exhort them truly to repent. etc. Pur.
461. But how proves he, that I count Allen and his fellows such as cannot
repent? Forsooth because I say, they have sometime been lightened and tasted
of the good gift of God. Why sir, are all such come to prolapsion? I trow not,
In deed I admonish them being in the way of prolapsion, that are curable.
Whether Allen were ever a protestant, I know not: but certain I am, that some
of his fellows have been lightened and were protestants, of whom I speak, and
not of him. If I say Bristow and his fellows which are laymen: do I say
Bristow is a lay man? This wilful and malicious cauilling (Bristow) if you
take not heed of it in time, argues that you are fallen very deep, if you
be not yet at the bottom of apostasy.

But this is a cunning co^forter of them that are in desperation, which
affirms, that Christ does no otherwise say that such sin and blasphemy
shall not be remitted, then he says that all other sin and blasphemy shall be
remitted: and therefore many one, yea, and above all number may be and is
forgiven, the sin against the holy ghost.

He means, because the condition of repentance is not expressed in them that
are forgiven. But if that condition were to be understood in them also that
sin against the holy ghost, what distinction were there for which he should
say? that blasphemy and sin shall not be forgiven, neither in this world,
nor in ye world to come? Such a sinner has no remission of sins, but is
guilty of eternal damnation. For that none shall be forgiven, without
repentance, as every man knew without that distinction. But Bristow would have
it to be an extraordinary matter for God to forgive the sin against the holy
ghost, and so he forgave one of those Pharisees, and he the very worst of them
all: namely S. Paul, who had bin indeed a Pharisee, as he confesses. Act.
23. and 26. but none of those Pharisees: for he knew not, Christ in the flesh.
2. Cor 5. yea, he had been a persecuter and a blasphemer, as he confesses 1.
Tim 1. but not the worst of all Pharesees, for he was an elect vessel of God,
and his persecution and blasphemy was not of malice or sin against the holy
ghost, but of ignorance and blind zeal of God: for he adds immediately, but
I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly in unbelief. As for those
Pharisees, against whom our Savior Christ thundreth that judgment, did
blaspheme the holy ghost against their own conscience, and knowledge,
maliciously attributing unto the devil, that which they knew to be the finger
of God.

That which I speak out of Samuel, Jeremy, and Ezekiel, Bristow says, is all
spoken in one sense, of temporal matters, to wit of casting Saul from his
kingdom, and the Jews into captivity. But except the persons had been
incurable, God would have been entreated to give them repentance, and to have
continued Saul in his kingdom, and the people in their country. The rule
that Ezechiel. 33. is understood of sins that are not against the holy
ghost, as the examples do plainly declare.

The 8. point is, that strange interpretation of the creed, (a^ he calls it)
Christ descended into hell to redeem us out of hell, by suffering the wrath of
God for our sins. Heb. 5. First Bristow says, there is never a word of that
article, and much less of the interpretation thereof, in that chapter, yet
after to prove that to be prayer, which I said was a complaint, as though it
might not be be a complaining prayer, he cites the 7. verse of the same
chapter of Christ, who in the days of his flesh, with a mighty cry, and with
tears, offered up prayers and supplications to him that was able to save him,
out of death, and was heard from his fear or from that he feared (...). But by
this text, Bristow would prove, that Christ was not forsaken of his father, no
not corporally, although he complained, that he was forsaken, as though his
lamentable complaint hadbeene more then needed, when he said, My God my God,
why have thou forsaken me? which to him that was God, was greater torment of
hell, then any heart of man can conceive. And therefore Bristow, which makes
all to stand in the bodily death of Christ, and raileth at Calvin for showing
how necessary it was for Christ, to suffer in soul as much as in body, for
the redemption of ye whole man, does nothing but cauil and slander, one while
fayning yt Calvin should make two deaths of Christ, another while, yt he was
in fear lest he should have bin damned for ever etc. Which he says also
shall be my reply. But when Bristow says that Christ's bodily death without any
suffering of his soul was the full redemption of the world, he makes his
torments of mind, whereof he complains that his soul was heavy unto
death, which made him to sweat blood before his body was touched, to be of no
force, except it were to argue great imbecillitie of Christ, who feared so much
bodylie death, that many of his servants have joyfully embraced, and that
strange cry and tears with which he uttered his prayers on the cross, and
that most lamentable complaint, that God had forsaken him, were for nothing,
but for that he was not delivered from the cross, (as Bristow writes) it is
too much injurious to his most bitter passion to imagine, and therefore we must
needs acknowledge, that he suffered more in the sight of God, whose justice he
was to satisfy, then he suffered in the sight of men. And so the question that
Bristow propounds to me, is answered, why descendit ad inferos, comes after
sepultus, because the order of the Symbol is first to show, what suffered
before men, and then what hesuffered in the sight of God. As for the blasphemy
of Theodorus Mopseuestenus that Christ had inclination to sin, etc. there is
no more reason why Bristowe should charge us with it, then with those other
blasphemies, that Christ did despair in God, or blaspheme God, or commit some
other sin against God, for our redemption, which he affirms to be
maintained of some Caluinistes. For which detestable slander, if he have no
better ground then he shows, let him remember yt the mouth which lies
kills the soul. I will spare to amplify, though I lack no matter, albeit yt
Bristow fayneth mo^sters of slau^ders, as Jupiters Giantes, and then casts
the^ down with thu^derbolts, deriding myknowledge in amplification.

The 9. is about the honor of the virgin Marie, wherein first he charge me
with the heresy of the Heluidians and Antidicomarianites, who were condemned
for heretics for denying her perpetual virginity; whereas he comes nearer to
the Colliridians, likewise condemned, the^ we to ye Heluidians. But let us see
his impudent quarrels. First I say: As for the perpetual virginity of the
mother of Christ, as we think it is true, so because the scripture has not
reueiled it, neither pertains it unto us, we make no question of it. Here is
a great co^iunctio^ with heretics, which trobled ye Church with contention a
bout a matter which they were not able to prove by ye scriptures: yet says
Bristow, you forge a principle of only scripture in their favor. Surely that
principle as it is not forged, so it favors them nothing at al. For their
contentious assertion they were not able to prove by the scriptures, but within
4. lines before, I am contrary to my self, where I say all truth may be proved
by the scripture. If I had to do with a man of reason, as I have to do with a
papist, he would understand my proposition according to the whole matter in
controversy, of such things as are necessary or profitable for a christian
man to know unto salvation. For otherwise I think many things to be true, that
are not contained in the scriptures: As I think that Bristow lacks wit,
learning, and honesty, thus to quarrel which is not written in the scriptures,
but gathered by other reasons: yet he says, I might wc more honesty have
said, yt it may be proved by scripture, where she says, Luke 1. Because I
know no man, that is (says he) because I have made a vow of virginity. A like
matter, yt she would marie if she had made a vow of viginitie. Yet Bristow
confesses this place proves not inuincibly her perpetual virginity,
although it so prove her vow. But if Bristow were condemned, or had vowed to
lie in prison until he could frame an invincible argument to prove her vow, out
of that place, yea, or any other place of the scriptures, it were all one, as
if he were condemned to perpetual prison or vowed the same.

Another point of that dishonor is, where I controld Allen for excepting the
mother of Christ, when he speaks of sinners, which is all one as if he had
said, Christ was not a savior of his mother, or that she had no need of his
salvation. And here he charge me with reading Calvin more then Augustine, as
though Augustine defended the virgin Marie to be free from sin, because he
says against the Pelagians, that he would have no question of her for the
honor of our Lord, when he speaks of sins. For hereof we know that more
grace was given to her, to overcome sin of all parts, which was worthy to
conceive and bring forth him, (...)om it is certain that he had no sin, Denat.
and great. 136. It is all one with Bristow, to overcome sin, and to be void
of all sin. What victory is there without a battle? if the flesh in ye
virgin Marie, did not rebel against ye spirit, what victory had she by grace?
But it is plain Pelagianisme, to hold that she was void of sin or perfectly
righteous. The Pelagian names also, ipsam etians domini etc. the very mother
of our Lord and Savior, which he says it is necessary for godliness, that we
confess that she was with out sin. But thereof Augustine for ye honor of
our Lord will have no question: signifying that although she were not clear
and exempted from fi(...)e, but had grace to overcome sin, yet for reverence
of Christ her son, he would not reason thereof to bring her within the common
compass of al siners. But Bristow perceives that I would not have so
answered, seeing I affirm yt by the reprehension of Christ, John, 2. she did
offend, for he would never have reproved his mother without a cause. And said,
what have I to do with thee, woman? except she had intermedled in his office,
more then of duty she ought. But Bristow would color his reproof, two ways:
one by false translation of the words (...)? what to me and thee, O woman? not
understanding the greek phrase, which is by those words to refuse to have to
do with one. As the devils Matt. 8. cried (...)? What have we to do with thee,
Jesus, thou son of God, and not as Bristowe translateth, What to us and thee
Jesus etc. But because Bristow says, that if Christ should mean, that the
want of wine perteined neither to him nor to his mother, yet she were not
discharged of error, to move him in a matter, which belongs neither to him
nor her: He says, I might do well to tell him, what were those sins of
hers. I think the answer of Christ shows what her offense was here, and
Luke 5. that she presumed to intermeddle under color of her motherly
authority, with matter apperteining to his divine office, of being Christ the
mediator, with which she had nothing to do, as a mother, but was esteemed of
him as a woman, who knew when it was convenient for him to do, whatsoever were
for the glory of Gods kingdom, to be done, without her or any other bodies
admonition. Neither do I charge her as Chrysostom in Ioann. Hom. 20. Optabat.
enim. etc. For she wished that he might now win the favor of men, and that
she might be made more noble by the favor of her son. And perchance she was
moved with some humane affection, even as his brethren, when they said, show
thy self to the world, being desirous by his miracles, to win themselves a
fame. Therefore he answered more sharply: what have I to do with thee, woman?
my hour is not yet come. For that he did reverence his mother, Luke does
testify, that he was subject to his parents, and this Evangelist does show,
how great care he had of his mother in the time of his passion. For where his
parents did nothing hinder the mysteries of GOD, did offend nothing, it was
meet and necessary for the son to be obedient, neither could he deny
obedience without great peril. Contrariwise, when they desire an unseasonable
thing, and that which would have been an hinderance to spiritual things. Who
is my mother and my brethren? quoth he. For as yet they had not such opinion of
him as they ought: but Marie after the manner of mothers, thought she should
have commanded her son in all things, by her authority etc. But the
council of Trent (says Bristow) shows that she had more need of Christ's
grace then all other saints, to preserve her from sin. But in the mean time,
she had no need of his redemption, for the remission of sin, who was
appointed to save his people from their sins, who came to seek and to save
that which was lost, both of the house of Israel, and of the Gentiles, so many
as attained salvation. So therefore howsoever Bristow scorneth at my divinity,
I will still conclude that the virgin Mary, being so principal a person of
Christ's people, was saved from her sins, by the redemption of his blood, was
lost, but sought up, and saved by him. Which divinity being taken out of the
scriptures, I trust is more commendable, then the contrary doctrine derived
from the Pelagians, and defended by the Papists.

The 10. point of mine ignorance is, about the definition of an heretic, whom
I said to be a man in the Church. I have showed before, that I distinguish
between him that is in the Church, and him that is of the Church; a Papiste,
an Anabaptist, may be in the Church, but they cannot be of the Church, except
they repent. Where I added unto my definition, that if any of us can be proved
obstinately to maintain our opinion, contrary to the doctrine of the
scriptures, we refuse not to be counted heretics. Bristow says, they may say
the like. But the trial is all. Bristow says, they bring plain scriptures to
prove that all the doctrine of the Apostles traditions, is the doctrine of the
scriptures. And we say the same, that whatsoever the Apostles delivered in
speech, they delivered also in writing, and neither contrary to other. But
that all true doctrine necessary to salvation, is not contained in the
scriptures, that you prove not, neither that such things were of the Apostles
delivery, as you call traditions of the Apostles. As for the particular
points you prate of, concerning the time of the Churches persecution, and
Antichrists reign, have been answered in their proper places. The words of
Christ, This is my body: we acknowledge to be true, in such sense as he spoke
them, neither can you prove that they importe your carnal Carpernaiticall
presence, what you hold of Justification by works, Worshipping of Images,
Insufficiency of Christ's redemption, Impeccabilitie of Marie etc. contrary
to the express and plain textes of the scripture, it were out of place here o
make rehersall.

The 11. is mine ignorance in wondering at Allen for saying, that a christian
scholar should first believe, and after seek for understanding, he has noted
cap 10. Them. 34. and there have I answered.

The 12. point proceeds of like ignorance, where I am said to wonder, when I
hear that the sacrifice of the mass is a likeness of the sacrifice of
Christ's death upon the cross. And then I am asked whether I know not that
sacraments are not likenesses of other things: and Augustine is called to
witness, with much ado, as though it is all one to have sacraments which are
similitudes of Christ's death, and to have a sacrifice of similitude or
likeness, which I said truly was contrary to the whole scope of the Epistle
to the Hebrews, that there should be any shadows or resemblances, when the
body and substance it self is come: which I spoke, supposing that Allen by
likeness of the exemplar, means the mass with all the apish pageants thereof,
to be like the sacrifice of Christ's death. And indeed it was that monstrous
saying of Allen, which I wondered at. By likeness of ye exemplar (as indeed
being in an other manner the very selfsame. But Bristow setting a good
countenance, upon so great an absurdity, asks what boy has not heard it
said, of one and the same man being changed by age, sickness, apparel,
shauing, etc. he is like or unlike himself? But tontrariewise, what boy in
Oxford or Cambridge, would not reply, that this similitude or likeness or
unlikeness, is of two several shapes, and not of one and the same substance
unto it self: as Allen says, the sacrament is like the body of Christ, and is
the very same in another manner that is under couerture of accidents that
belong to another kind of substance. But Bristowe is not so quick to
understand me where I understand not my self as he weeneth, where I say:
neither will it help, that Allen says, it is the selfsame in another manner,
so long as the same respect remains: I am sorry that Bristowe is so dull
headed, that he cannot understand, what the same respect means in
opposition, which if it not observed in the things opposed, they are not
always opposite, and specially relatiues who hang altogether upon respect.
But Bristowe asks who can imagine, that the very same respect remains,
when the same manner does not remain?

Why sir? what is the respect of the likeness of the sacrifice of the mass,
with the exemplar? seeing you confess the manner tobe unlike, but the very
identitie of the thing sacrificed, which is the monster that I marvel at: as
also that you cannot imagine the same respect, where there is not the same
manner. Is not God, the father of our Lord Christ, in the same respect that
Abraham is the father of Isaak, but yet after a far other manner? yea, to
follow your own wise examples, is not Abraham father of Isaak in the same
respect, when Isaak is young, and when he is old; when he is clothed, and
when he is naked; when he is shaven, and when he was bearded; when he is sick,
and when he is whole? Such are the manners in which you houlde that the
sacrifice of the mass, is the same after another manner.

The 13. is where I attribute to diuorsement, which the scripture in many
places does deny to diuorsement, and does attribute only to death. What is it?
to make her no wife, that was a wife. Verily diuorsement for adultery makes
her no wife, that was a wife, as is gathered even by those textes of scriptures
which Bristowe quoteth Matt. 5. and 19. Mark. 10. etc. where the exception of
fornication, makes the case to be the same that was used by permission of the
law, in diuorsementes, and marriage after diuorsementes. But Bristowe says, I
utter herein my skill, in many things. As in saying that marriage after
diuorsements is dispensed with all by the Pope. And do I not say true,
although the Popes law denies such marriage to be lawful? Are there not many
examples of such dispensations?

Secondly I say, that the Popes canon law has far many more causes of
diuorsement then for adultery. Bristow distinguishes the perpetual divorce,
for adultery, where the innocent party cannot be compelled to receive the
guilty party, although he become never so chaste; and separation, where the
fury of a man is so great, that the wife is in danger of her life: asking if
we do not allow her to dwell away from him until he be amended: No verily,
but we would compel him to lie in prison from her, until his amendment might
sufficiently appear. But what says your law, concerning frigiditie,
concerning error in the condition of the person, as if she marie a man which is
bond, who^ she supposed to have been free etc. Does not your law allow
diuorsements perpetual in such cases? But where I wish that adulterers might
be punished with death, first he quarelleth, as though I held that the
Judicial law were still to be observed: as though it be not free in such
points, as it is convenient for other common welthes to receive it, albeit, it
is not necessary. Secondly he houldeth that a man was not punished by death,
if he sinned against his wife with a single woman. Where as the case is
expressly of a single man, lying with another ' man's wife, or of one that was
betroathed to another man, which must needs be all one, of a married man lying
with a single woman. Leuit. 20. and Deuteronomy. 22. And yet he notes mine ignorance
of the law: because I charge the Papists to allow dispensation for such
persons to marie, as the law of God and nature abhors. Then he asks me,
what law of God do I mean? but Leu. 18? and whether I think that law to
bind Christians? Yea verily, for the sense of nature abhors all those
forbidden conjunctions. What else moved the heathen Romans to make laws even
of the same? But Bristow brings in Gods dispensation in the old Testament,
which is false: for after the propagation of mankind, for which it was of
necessity allowed, it can never be proved that God allowed any one of those
marriages forbidden. 18.

But the Pope dispenses not only with marying of the brothers wife in
affinity, but even with the Uncle to marie his Niece, in consanguinitie, as we
see in the marriage of King Philippe of Spain in our days.

The 14. after such ignorance in Gods law discovered, Bristow marueileth not
if I be ignorant in the Popish Churches law and divinity, in making it a
certain thing, that the Pope gives his pardons by the sacrament of penance.
Athough it be no great shame for me to profess mine ignorance in many of the
popes laws and some part of his divinity: yet herein Bristow does me wrong,
to charge me to say absolutely, that ye Pope gives his pardons by the
sacrament of penance. As though the Pope being at Rome, might minister a
sacrament to one in England. And that so great a D. does not trow that the
power of binding and loosing is exercised many other ways besides that
sacrament. Seeing the Master of ye sentences co^prehendeth under the title of
the sacrament of penance, all that power or what soever he can enquire or define
of it Lib. 4. Did. 14. 15. 16. 17. But if sins may be forgiven in popery
without repentance, and that ye Popes pardons require no repentance in them
that should take ye benifite of them, it is one point of popery that I am
content to confess that I have learned of Bristow.

The 15. point is, that I am ignorant in our own divinity, because I wonder
that a Papist should say, that God sometime punishes sin with sin, and
complain that when we say, but half so much, they chardge us to make God the
auctor of sin. For Bristowe asks, if it be not a common position and large
discourses upon it in our masters books, that God is the author of sin? O
impudent and malicious liar, have thou read those books of Calvin Insti. lib.
1. cap. 17. 18. and Melanctho^. ad Romans which thou quotest, and dare thou for
shame of the world, if thou have no fear of God, to charge them with holding
such a blasphemous positio^, when they in the same books do refute it, as an
horrible slander which they never thought of: but always affirmed that God as
a righteous judge, not as an evil author Ioseth Satan, and uses his
ministry for the punishment of sin and sinners, and for the trial and
amendment of his children as in David and Job? As for those blasphemies that
God works sin in us by himself, willing, appoynting, and predestinating us
to sin, no less the^ he, which leads a blind man out of his way etc. are
nothing else but Bristowes lies and slanders always detested of those godly
writers, and of all them that truly profess and embrace the Gospel.

The 16. point is of mine ignorance in histories ecclesiastical, as of the
celebration of Easter by the Britons and Grecians, noted before and answered.
Secondly because I say (as it seems) that Iulianus the Apostata was Emperor
after Valens the Arrian. Surely where I learned that he was a persecutor of the
Church, I might have learned the time of his Emipre, that he was next to
Co^stantius, and after him Iouianus, Valentinianus, and Valens, and sure I am
that I learned it out of Carions Chronicle 30. years ago. Which being so
vulgar a matter, I thought none had been so malicious to charge me with
ignorance thereof. But indeed he charge me very injuriously, for when I say
after that when Iulianus the Apostata was Emperor, I mean to show how
persecution and Gentility was restored after that Constantine had given peace,
beside the trouble of heresy which was in the time of Constantius and
Constans, to whom I joined Valens, as agreeing in that same heresy of
Arrianisme. Again where I said, the new Testament is printed in the Syrian
tongue at the Emperors charges, for the increase of Christian faith among them:
Bristowe asks me, what Emperor, or what faith, but Catholic or Popish? That
which I said of the Syrian Testament, was to show that the Churches in
Chaldea have preserved the scriptures, which yet are not subject to the Church
of Rome; with the Emperors profession I dealt not, but his purpose I suppose,
was to increase Christian faith, and I am persuaded the reading of the
scriptures in the mother tongue will not increase Popish faith, seeing Papists
are so unwilling, that the people should read the word of God in the native
language.

Fourthly that I say the fathers alleging the succession of Bishops against
heretics, specially named the Church of Rome, because those heretics for ye
most part had been sometimes of ye Church of Rome, as Valentinus, Marcio^,
Nouatus. Against this Bristowe tells me, yt Allen speaks also of the
Arrians, Donatists, and al heretics. But I spoke of those fathers, that
alleged the succession of Bishops, namely Irenaeus, Tertullian and Cyprian.
Irenaeus testifies of Valentinus, Cerdon and Marcion, that they were at Rome
under Hyginus, Pius, and Anicetus, and that Cerdon came often into the Church
and made his confession, and yet taught his heresy privily and was
excommunicated. For Nouatus that he was a Priest of the Church of Rome,
Eusebius is clear. Lib. 6. Cap. 42. But Cyprian calls him Nouatianus,
whereas Nouatus had been of Carthage, but from thence was also gone to Rome. I
deny not but the similitude of the names might cause the Greek writers to be
deceived, as Bristowe says, and it may be that the name of Nouatianus in
Cyprian is corrupted for Nouatus, and the other called Nouatus in stead of
Nauatus, which name was then in use. But seeing the person of the heretic is
certain, it is folly to strive for his name, I have showed mine author for
Nouatus (...) Rome, and so for the rest: wherefore I have not bewraied any
ignorance therein, as Bristowe pretends.

The 17. and last point of mine ignorance is, where I show, wherein the
communion of Saints consists: In that I say, one can not merit for an other,
no not for him self, but every man has his worthiness of Christ. As though
(says Bristowe) neither Christ could merit for any other, no nor for him
self, because he had his worthiness of God. But I say that Christ, because he
was God, had his worthiness of him self, and therefore did merit for us. And
see what secret blasphemy is contained in this comparison of Bristowe: Where
he would make a similitude of meriting between us which please not God, but
only through his mercy; with Christ, who satisfied the justice of God. But
Bristowe charge me so to define the communion of Saints, that I allow no
place for the prayers of ye members alive, made for others yt are alive. A vile
slander, when I speak of the grace and gifts of God, which as every one has
received of God, so of charity he is bound to employ the same to the profit
of his fellow members here on earth. But if we be bound of charity to pray
one for an other (says Bristowe) why are not these members in heaven as well?
Because there is not a law appointed for them that are in heaven, and them
that be in earth, we know prayer is commanded us, we know not any prayer
commanded them: neither are we to trust to any such thing. But the Scripture
says, that Christ's friends do rejoice in heaven with his penitents in
earth, It says so in deed of the Angels, and I doubt not of the like
affection of the blessed spirits, but of their knowledge: and if their
knowledge were certain, yet it follows not, that they pray for the
conversion of sinners: and much less that the mutual offices of love, whereby
one member has compassion with an other, can by any means touch the state of
the dead, to receive any benefit thereby. But an other quarrel is, where I
make the communion of the whole body, to be the participation of life from
Christ the head. If this be all (says Bristow) then there is no communion. For
what communion were it between the members of your natural body, if they did
only receive life from your head, and could not use the said life to profit
one an other? etc. This man has great leisure to trifle without any matter.
Who so shall read my words, Pur. 199. which he quoteth, shall find me to
say, That the communion of the whole body, is the participation of life, and
all other offices of life that every member and the whole body has of the
head, as S. Paul teaches plainly. Ephesians 4. If it be any office of a
Christian life, for one member to assist an other in that it may, and as it
ought, I have comprehended it, but that Bristowe does wilfully hold my saying,
and then play with it at his pleasure. Yet he charge me with belying of
Allen: that he will have other works and ways of salvation, besides ye blood
of Christ, because he groundeth all works and ways of salvation in the blood
of Christ. But I reporting his words truly, by plain distribution do gather,
that Allen will have other works and ways of salvation beside the blood of
Christ: except you will say, that is no way nor work of salvation of it self,
without these ways and works of men. If the blood of Christ of it self be one
way and work of salvation: and there be other ways and works, though
grounded in it, then are there more ways and works of salvation, than the
only redemption of Christ, which I understand by the blood of Christ, so I
have done Allen no injury, but he has offered heinous injury to the blood of
Christ, and so do al they which mixed it with any to purchase Gods favor,
who is reconciled by none other merit or satisfaction, but only by the blood
of the cross of his Son our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be praise for ever
more.

In the thirtienth chapter or conclusion, Bristowe does only show, yt there is
in my two books stuff enough to make an other book as big as this, to the
discredit of my party. I trust this book of his, as big as it is, has
wrought no discredit to the cause I maintain, because I have showed how it
is stuffed with lies, slanders, falsifications, and cauillations; such stuff
he may have great store in the devil his masters school, to make a book
ten times as big as this was: but for so much as he has not answered any
one of mine arguments, or refelled any one of mine aunsweres to Allen, in any
right order, leaving the defense of him (as he pretends to defend the Church,
I confess he has left matter sufficient, for any man, that will undertake the
confutation of my books (which this his unorderly and insufficient reply,
notwithstanding) I protest to remain still in their strength and unanswered.

GOD BE PRAISED.
The cauils of Nicholas Sander D. in Divinity, about the Supper of our Lord,
and the Apology of the Church of England touching the doctrine thereof,
confuted by W. Fulke Doctor in Divinity.
MAN HV, what is this?
The figure. Exodus 16. This is the bread which our Lord has Sander.
given, etc. The prophecy. Proverb. 9. Come, eat my bread, and drink the
wine which I have mixed for you. The promise. John 6. The bread which I will
give, is my flesh for the life of the world. The performance. Matthew. 26. Luke
22. He gave saying: take eat, this is my body which is given for you. The
doctrine of the Apostles, 1. Cor. 10. The bread which we break, is the
communicating of the Lords body. The belief of the Church. Hilar. lib. 8. de
Trinit. Both our Lord has professed, and we believe it to be flesh in deed.
The custom of Heretics. Tertul. de resur. car. The contrary part raises up
trouble, by pretense of figures.
THese notes and sentences, D. S. has set Fulke.
before his book, as the pith and martowe of all his treatise. In which, as he
pleases him self not a little, so he shows nothing, but his ignorance,
vanity, and falsehood. His ignorance in the interpretation of the Hebrew
words: Man Hu, which do signify, This is a ready meat, prepared without
man's labor, as even, the author of the book of Wisdom expounds it. Which
Sa^der reads interrogatiuely, following the error of some old writers, which
could put no difference between the Hebrew, and the Chaldee tongs. For Man in
Hebrewe signifies not what, neither does the Chaldee Paraphrase expound it so,
but Manna hu, that is, This is Manna, that is to say, a ready meat. Again, he
shows him self ignorant in the Apostles doctrine, when he makes Manna a
figure of the sacrament, which the Apostle plainly affirms to have been the
same spiritual meat, which the sacrament is to us. 1. Cor. 10. His vanity
appears, that when he can rack never a saying of the Prophets to his
purpose, he dreameth of a prophecy in the Proverbs of Solomon, which book
was never accounted of wise men for prophetical, but doctrinall: and this
pretended prophecy is an allegorical exhortation of wisdom to embrace her
doctrine, and not a prophecy of Christ instituting his sacrament: an inuiting
of men in Salomons time, and all times, to study wisdom, and not a
foreshewing of a supper to be ordained by Christ in time to come. In the words
which he alleges, for the promise of the sacrament, is discovered a manifest
falsification of the text of Scripture, to pervert the meaning of Christ,
which is of his passion, unto the institution of the sacrament thereof. For the
words of our Savior Christ, Ioh. 6. 51. are these: And the bread which I
will give, is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. These last
words (which I will give) Sander has fraudulently omitted, yt this promise
might seem to be referred, not unto the passion of Christ, in which he gave
his flesh for the life of ye world, but unto the giving of the sacrament of his
flesh, in his last supper.

In the title of performance, he omitteth to show, what Christ gave: when he
said, This is my body, that he might seem to have given nothing but his body,
whereas the Evangelists teach, that he brake and gave the bread, which he
took, affirming it to be his body. The doctrine of the Apostles Sander does
not hold, because he neither breaks bread, which he denies to be in the
sacrament, nor acknowledges a communicating or participation of the Lords
body, which he allows to be received of the reprobate, which have no
communicating or partaking with Christ. So that he denies the sacrament, or
outward sign to all men, and gives the heavenly matter or thing signified by
the sacrament, even unto wicked men. The belief of the Church which Hilarie
professes, Sander maintains not: for Hilarie says, that we do truly eat
the flesh of the body of Christ, sub mysterio under a mystery, and per hoc
vnum erimus, and by this we shall be one with him and the father, which can not
be understood of the Popish corporal receiving.

Last of all, he follows the custom of heretics, which is to draw men's
sayings inio a wrong meaning, for Tertullian in the place by him alleged,
speaks not of such heretics, as pretended a figure in the sacrament, where
none should be acknowledged, but he him self, by that the bread is a figure
of the body of Christ, proves against Marcion the heretic, that Christ had a
true body. ad Marc. lib. 4.

To the body and blood of our Savior Jesus Christ, under the Sander.
forms of bread and wine, all honor, praise, and thanks be given for ever.
I Can not tell whether I should complain more of the Fulke.
vanity, or blasphemy of this dedicatorie Epistle: the form whereof being so
new and strange, that the like was never heard of in the Church of Christ,
every word almost contains a great and gross heresy. For not content to
make the sacrament the very natural body and blood of Christ, he makes it the
very essential deity it self. For unto whom is all honor and glory dew, but
unto God himself? Again, seeing he ioineth not the persons of God the Father
and of God the holy Ghost in participation of the praise, by this form of
greeting he does either exclude them; or if he will comprehend them, for that
inseparable unity which they have with the godhead of Christ, he brings forth
an horrible monster of heresy, that God the father and God the holy Ghost, is
with the body and blood of Christ, under the forms of bread and wine. Much
like the Sabellians and Patripassians, which affirmed that God the father was
borne of the virgin Marie, and was crucified as well as God the Son. Even so
Sander by this blasphemous and heretical epistle, if he deny not honor,
glory, power, and presence every where unto the Father, and the holy Ghost,
yet comprehends them with GOD the Son, and God the Son with his body and
blood, under the forms of bread and wine. For thus he writes: I adore thee my
God and Lord, really present under the forms of bread and wine. To which also
he says: And to whom should I refer the praise and thanks for it, but unto
thee alone? Or of whom should I crave the protection thereof, but of thee?
seeing thou only art a meet patron for the defense of any book, which only
art always present, wheresoever and whenever it shall be examined. To the
honor therefore of thy body and blood, I offer this poor mite etc.

By these words you see, that Sander acknowledges no GOD, nor Lord, but him
that is really present under the forms of bread and wine: except he
acknowledge more Gods and Lords than one. And consequently, yt either he
acknowledges not God the Father, and God the holy Ghost, or else he
acknowledges him present under the forms of bread and wine, without
distinction of persons, and with a blasphemous confusion of the substance of
the two natures in Christ. For the figure called the Communication of speeches
can not help him in this case, seeing he will admit no figure, but a most
proper speech in these words: This is my body. Whereas it is evident to all
men, that are not obstinately blind, that if Christ had purposed to make the
sacrament really and essentially all that him self is, and would have declared
the same in proper speech, he would not have said: This is my body, and this
is my blood, which is but a part of him, and the lowest part of him; but he
would have said, take, eat, this is Jesus Christ, or this is al yt I am. But
when he says: this is my body, and this is my blood (which if it be not a
figurative speech, should be a dead body and a senseless blood) he shows
manifestly, that he commends not a meta physical transmutation of the
elements into his natural flesh and blood: but an heavenly and divine
mystery, teaching us and assuring us that God the son being joined with us
in the nature of his humanity, which he has taken unto him, by the spiritual
virtue of his body broken and blood shed for us on the cross, does wonderfully
feed us and nourish us, as it were with meat and drink, unto eternal
salvation, both of body and soul. If any man think that I refer the words of
Sander, to the Sacrament, which he speaks of the divinity of Christ
generally, let him read the whole Epistle, and comparing it with the title of
salutation which I have set down in his own words, consider whether Sander,
professing that he speaks therein to the body and blood of Christ under the
forms of bread and wine, can be reasonably understood of Christ, after any
other sort then under the forms of bread and wine. Wherefore such bold
speeches as he uses in this dedication, tending to so gross heresy, were a
declaration of his proud stomach, now broken forth into heinous treason
against his own country, and actual rebellion against his sovereign and
natural Prince.

But thou O Lord Jesus Christ our only Savior and Redeemer, whom we adore
and worship, as our King and God, not under the accidental shapes of bread
and wine, but above all principalities and powers, sitting on the throne of
magnificence of God thy eternal father in heaven, to whom with thee and ye
holy Ghost, we give al honor and praise for ever, vouchsafe (if it be thy holy
will) to convert these enemies of thy majesty, unto ye true understanding of
thy blessed word, or if their obstinate resisting of thy spirit, so require,
show forth thy glorious might in their speedy overthrow and confusion, that
we thy humble servants, beholding thy wonderful judgments, may laud and
magnify thy holy name, as well in the salvation of thine elect, as in the
destruction of thine enemies, to thine everlasting praise and renoune for ever
and ever.

Amen.

The preface to the Christian reader. Sander.

THe proposition of this painted preface, is yt the scriptures Fulke.
must be expounded according to the greatest auctority that may be found in
that kind, which Sander assumeth to be the use, custom and practice of the
Catholic Church. This assumption is false, although if it were true, it
helps the Papists nothing at all, which can not show the practice of the
Catholic Church of all times, for any error, which they maintain against us.
The greatest authority in expounding of the scriptures, is of the holy Ghost,
whose iudgemenr can not be certainly found, but in the scriptures them selves:
wherefore conference of the holy scriptures of God, is of greater auctority
then ye practice of men. The scriptures inspired of God, are able to make us
wise unto salvation, they are sufficient to make the man of God perfect
prepared to all good works. 2. Tim. 3. Wherefore the practice and custom of
Gods people, must be examined by the scriptures, and not the scriptures
expounded after it. Exposition of the scriptures or prophesying must be
according to the analogic of faith. Romans 12. But faith is builded upon the
word of God, and not upon the custom of men: therefore exposition of the
scriptures, must be according to the word of God, and not after the usage of
men.

The example which Sander uses, to confirm his false assumption, is of
baptising of infants of Christians, before they be taught, which doctrine he
denies to be proved by the order of Christ's words, Matthew. 28. but by the use
and consent of all nations. To this I answer, that the use and consent of all
nations, were not sufficient to warrant the baptism of infants of the
faithful, except the same were warranted by the Scriptures in other places: As
is manifest in the institution of circumcision. According to the covenant
whereof, the Apostle says, that all our fathers were baptized in the cloud
and in the sea, 1. Cor. 10. and the children of the faithful are holy,
therefore to be admitted to baptism, 1. Cor. 7. because they are comprehended
in Gods covenant, according to which scriptures they are baptized, and the
infants of Jews or Gentiles refused, and not only upon the ground of the
Churches custom and use therein (as Sander affirms,) which custom is good,
because it is grounded upon the Scriptures, but the scripture is not authorized
by that custom. Wherefore popish confirmation, and adoration of the body of
Christ in the sacrament, (although he falsely affirms, that they are the like
custom of the Catholic Church) are Iewde and ungodly practices of the
Papists, because they are not warranted by the holy scriptures, but are proved
contrary to the same.

But whereas we allege the judgment of the fathers of the Church, for six
hundred years after Christ, to be against transubstantiation and adoration:
Sander replyeth, that things uncertain, must be judged by things certain, and
not contrariwise. This principle is true: but it is false, that the judgment
of the fathers in the first six hundred years is uncertain: as also, that
those four certeinties which he rehearses, be either all certeinties, or
certainly on his side. The first is the words of the scripture, This is my
body: about whose understanding is all the controversy, and therefore no
certeintie that they are on their side, more then these words are certain on
our side against transubstantiation. The bread which we break, etc. so often
as ye eat of this bread, etc. The second is false, that in the Catholic
church, all men worshipped the real body of Christ under the forms of
bread, etc. for it is the practice only of the Popish Church, and that but of
late years, never admitted by the Oriental churches, beside many churches and
members of Christ's Church in the West, that ever did abhor it. Thirdly, the
Council of Laterane, kept 350. years past, was no general Council of all
that profess Christianity, but only of the Papists: no more was any that
followed, at Constance, Basil, Trent, nor yet that of Florence, in which,
although there were some Grecians, yet the council of Basil, was against it,
and many Oriental Churches, that were never called to it, neither was there
any thing for transubstantiation, or adoration, therein agreed by the Grecians,
that were there.

For in the last session it is thus recorded: Quibus quidem quatuor
quaestionibus dissolutis, summus pontifex petiit, vt de diuina panis
transmutatione, quae quidem quarta quaestis fui^ in Synodo, ageretur. At Graeci
dixerunt, se sine totius orientalis Ecclesiae* ^auctoritate quaestionem aliam
tractare non posse, cum pro illa tant^m de spiritus sancti processione Synodus
conuocata fuerit. Which four questions, being dissolved, the Pope desired,
that of the divine transmutation of the bread, which was the fourth matter in
controversy, it might be treated in the synod. But the Grecians said, that
they without the authority of the whole Oriental* Church could handle none
other question, seeing the synod was called together, for that only question,
of the proceeding of the holy Ghost.

Fourthly, although Berengarius, was condemned by three Popish councels, and by
many learned preachers of his time thought to be an heretic, yet seeing his
doctrine is agreeable to the Scriptures, and the judgment of all the ancient
Church, for six hundred years and more, after Christ, and was also received
by diverse learned preachers in his time, the same being now taught in England,
is true doctrine, and no heresy. Wherefore, none of the four certeinties, are
certain and true on Sanders side. But he will examine us, what Gospel, what
Church, what councels we have.

First he says we can bring no Gospel, where it is written, This is the figure
of my body: Neither do we affirm, that it is only a figure of his body, nor
deny that it is his body, after a certain manner, as Augustine says. And
Sander will not deny, but that it is a figure, which were not true, except it
were proved out of the Gospel, which speaking of the Cup, says: This is the
new Testament in my blood. And what Gospel does Sander bring? saying, This
bread is turned into my body.

To the second demand, I answer: The primitive Church, for six hundred
years, did believe of the presence of Christ in the sacrament, as we do,
during which time, as there was no controversy, so there needed no general
Council to be gathered for confirming of that doctrine.

As there are many other articles agreed on both parts, which were never
decreed in general Councels: because there never was question about them. But
when the question did arise, it was in the time of the prophesied defection,
from Christ unto Antichrist, and the true Church was miserably oppressed and
dispersed, so that no general Council could be gathered about it, neither
yet can, by means of the civil dissension between Princes that profess
Christ, and the tyranny of heathen Princes, which hold many parts of the
Church in miserable captivity and slavery.

But the first six hundred years (says Sander) make not for the Sacraments,
which is declared inuincibly, by three means: First, diverse fathers require
us instantly to believe these words, This is my body, etc. although they seem
to be against natural reason and sense. And yet no wise man will require us
to believe figurative words.

O shameless and senseless heretic! will not every wise man require us to
believe all the figurative words of holy Scripture? Are not these words true,
although they be contrary to natural reason and sense? The rock was Christ,
I am the true vine, I am the door, etc? and if these words are true, are they
not to be believed of us, in their true meaning? even so these words: This is
my body: are true in their meaning, and therefore credit is worthily required
to be given unto them. The second reason is, that the same fathers teach
expressly, that adoration of the body and blood in the mysteries, which is a
loud lie, understanding it of popish adoration. The third reason is, because
the fathers teach, that we are made naturally and corporally one flesh with
the flesh of Christ, in the worthy receiving of the blessed sacrament. But
this is false: for they teach that the sacrament is an argument as a sign, of
our natural and corporal conjunction with Christ, which is by his
incarnation: for our conjunction by the sacrament, is neither natural, nor
corporal, but spiritual unto the body and blood of Christ crucified for us.
Wherefore these reasons notwithstanding, the six hundred years make still for
us. Yet can we not assure our selves of the first six hundred years (says
Sander) by the writings of the fathers of those times, because none of them
goes about to prove, that the body of Christ is not under that, which the
Priest blesses, etc. or warned the people to beware of idolatry, or have used
such words, as the Sacramentaries do now use. If Sander had not in him more
impudency then learning, he would not reason from authority negatiuely,
although his negatiues are not all true. For some of the old writers deny in
express words, the sacrament to be the very body of Christ: Aug. in Psa. 98.
Chrysostom. in Math. That they warned not men to beware of idolatry in
worshipping the sacrament, it argues, that none in their time did worship it,
seeing you Papists confess, that idolatry may be committed in worshipping
the Mass cake, if it be not consecrated, and therefore teach men to worship
it, with this condition, when they see it, if it be consecrated. Such words as
the fathers used in explication of the mystery, we^ use when we teach, that
it is a figure, a token, a representation, a signification, a similitude, a
symbol, a type of the body and blood of Christ; and what words soever we
use, we utter none contrary to their meaning, and teaching, of the holy
sacrament. But (says Sander) that they call the sacrament a figure or holy
sign, it hinders not the real presence, because signs instituted by
Christ, have real truth in every sacrament. Neither do we say the
contrary, but that the real truth of Christ's body, is given unto us in the
sacrament of the supper, even as the holy Ghost is given us in the sacrament of
baptism, and yet we deny the bread which is the sign, to be turned into the
natural body of Christ, even as we deny the water, which is likewise the
sign, to be converted into the substance of the holy Ghost. But the fathers
(says Sander) are not against the doctrine of the Papists, because no Papist
finds fault with them. By the same reason, he might prove, that none of the
Jury which have found a thief guilty, did go against him, because the
thief challenged none of them. And yet Gardener and others challenge Theodoret
and Gelasius. Again he says, The fathers are against the Protestants, because
they excuse Hilarie, Chrysostom. Cyrill, by the figure of Hyperbole, which is a
Rhetorical lie, but in deed, this argument is a lewd lie, of one which
knows neither Logike, nor Rhetorike, but like a young smatterer, or a
sophistical cauiller. For the figure of Hyperbole, is not a lie, more then any
other figure of Rhetorike, in the true understanding thereof, whereas after
wrong understanding, even that which is spoken without all figure, is false,
and untrue. Finally, whereas he charge us to deny the works of the ancient
writers, Dionysius, Ignatius, Polycarpus, Abdias etc. that is a loud lie,
shadowed neither with Rhetorike nor reason: for we deny not the works of
those fathers, but we refuse counterfeit works falsely ascribed to them, which
thing if we prove not by manifest demonstration, we require no credit. As for
that which he cauilleth against master Nowel, I omit, as being confuted by
master Nowel him self. But where he says, the scriptures would never abide
him, that should say: This is not my body: I answer, we never say: This is
not Christ's body, after any manner: but this is not his body after a gross,
carnal, or natural manner, and that saying the scripture will abide, even as
well as this, The rock was not Christ, naturally, substantially, or
essentially, although the scripture say, The rock was Christ. Or this: Christ
was not a vine, properly, naturally, or substantially, notwithstanding, that he
says: I am a very or true vine. The proud brag which Sander makes, that
popish Catholics lack no scripture, for any of their assertions, how true it
is, let all men judge: seeing that for many things they confess they have
nothing to show, but tradition unwritten. Likewise, how aptly in this
controversy of the supper, he has examined the words of Christ's supper,
noted the circumstances of things done and said there, conferred the
scriptures of both the testaments, and joined the fathers of the first six
hundred years. And yet he favors him self so much in his doing, that he
boldly affirms us to have no help of those things. For scriptures we cannot
confer, to make the words of the supper plain, because Doing, and the words
thereof, are more plain then any other place of scripture, concerning it, as ye
passion of Christ is more plain, then the law and Prophets. etc. If this were
true, the Apostles labored in vain, to prove the passion of Christ, out of the
law and the Prophets, and the rest of the writings of the Apostles, are
needless, and uncertain instruction, if the historye of the passion, does
teach all the doctrine that is necessary to be known, concerning it. But it is
a clarkly conclusion of Sander: That if the words of the supper be figurative,
none other can be plain: as though figurative speeches, cannot be plain, when
they are used for playnesse sake, of them that know how to use them. And
because Sander charge us, Tell me masters etc: I say likewise: Tell me
masters, Are these words recorded, to be spoken in the institution and action
of the supper? This is the new Testament in my blood. Tell me I say, are these
the very words which Christ then spoke, or the interpretation of them? If they
be the very words, which of you will say, they are not figaratiue? If they be ye
interpretation, then are they more clear and plain, then those words which he
uttered: This is my blood. Now whether the judgment of the primitive Church,
for the first 600. years makes for us, as it has in many treatises, so in
this that follows, it shall be showed sufficiently. Last of all, it will
appear, both by the scriptures, and testimony of the fathers, that the
judgment of the external senses, or natural reason, was not the first
argument that might move the^ that first departed from antichristianitie, to
the ancient and true understanding of the mysteries of Christ in his supper. Of
ye almighty power of Christ we doubt no more, then of his will reueiled in
scriptures, in which seeing we learn, yt Christ concerning his humanity, was
made like us in all things, except sin: and that our bodies, after the
resurrection, shall be made like to his glorious body, Heb. 2 ver 17 Phil. 3. 21
which seeing it cannot stand with transubstantiation, we may not reason of his
power so, that we should overthrow his will. For he is almighty to do
whatsoever, he will, and not willing to do whatsoever he can. But of ye whole
matter, we shall entreat more at large, as occasion is given, in the books
following.

CAP. II.
Certain notes about the use, and translation of holy scripture, Sander.
to be remembered of him, that shall read this book.

Sander, prosessing that he follows most, the vulgar Fulke.
Latin translation, and lest the English Bible, because it almost never
translateth any text well, whereof any controversy is in these our days,
takes in hand to prove, many falsifications and wrong translations, in the
only matter of the sacrament of Christ's body and blood. The first is John
the 6. ver. 27. (...) Operamini cibum permanentem, The true English were: work
the meat which carries. The English bible turns: Operamini, labor for. We
labor (says he) for that which we seek, and (...) not; we work that stuff,
which is present with us. This corruption the Sacramentaries have used, because
they do not believe the meat which taryeth to be made really present, so that
we may work it by faith and body. This final cause is falsely alleged, for
we believe the meat that tarieth unto eternal life, to be made really present
by faith, to them that receive the sacrament worthily. Contrariewise, the
papists hold, that the same meat is received, where it taryeth not unto
etetnall life, namely in the wicked. And concerning the corruption pretended,
it is false: which Sander says, that (...) signifies always to work, that
which is present, and not to labor or seek for that which is absent: for
saint Paul writes, 2. Thessa. 3. ver. 10. (...). Si quis non vult operar^: If
any man will not labor, neither let him eat. Every man cannot work that
stuff which is present, as in Sanders example of a Carpenter, working a piece
of timber, therefore, (...) signifies to labor generally, either in seeking
that which is absent, or in working that which is present. Wherefore this is a
doltish distinction of doctor Sander, and a manifest corruption of the text, by
leaving out such words as show the vanity of this cavil, and overthrow the
difference of this distinction: For the words of Christ are these, speaking to
the Jews which sought him being absent, not because they saw his miracles,
but because they had been filled with his bread. (...): Labor ye, not for the
meat which perishes, but for the meat which abides unto eternal life.
(...), is but once set down, which must be referred as well to the meat which
perishes, as to the meat which taryeth; but being applied to the meat which
perishes, it cannot be turned, Work not the meare which perishes, as stuff
that is present, but Labor not or seek not for it (as you do) which is
absent, therefore it must be so turned, as it may serve for both. And where as
Sander says, that this meat is not labored for, because it is not sought out
by our diligence, but given by Christ: it is a fonder reason, except you will
say that we must not labor for any good things, because all good things are
the gifts of God. Finally, that you may see what a singular quarrelling, and
vain glorious person he is, to seek a knot in a rush, you shall understand yt
the papists themselves translate this place even as ye great bible does:
namely Heskins, as well learned a Papist as Sander: lib. 2. Cap. 2. of his
popish Parliament.

The second text which he pretends to be falsified, is ver. 57. of the same
chapter: (...) Qui manducat me, and ipse viuet propter me. The true English is,
He that eats me, he shall also live for me. The english bible reads, he that
eats me, shall live by the means of me. The best color of his cauil, is
that propter patrem, is translated in the same ver. For the father. Howbeit,
seeing (...) or propter, signifies the efficient cause, there is no fraud in
turning it, By the means of me, which is the same that is meant by, For me:
and as I think was so turned by the translators, to show that, For the
father, includes not the final cause, as it might seem, but the eternal
efficient cause of life. As for the cauillation, that a man may live by means
of him, which is absent, is altogether childish and ridiculous: for who can
understand him to be absent, which is eaten? The controversy is not of the
presence: but of the manner of the presence. But how can the Papists digest
this saying of Christ? He that eats me, shall live by me, or for me, when
they affirm that wicked men eat him, which live not by him, for this is
generally true of all that eat him, and not to be restrained to them that eat
him worthily. For the Sacrament in deed, may be eaten unworthily, but Christ
himself, is not eaten, but where he gives life.

The 3. corruption observed by Sander, is verse. 58. of John. 6. (...): Qui
manducat hunc panem, viuet in aeternum: The true English were, He that eats
this bread, shall live for ever. The Bible does english it, He that eats of
this bread. The adding of this word, Of* may be the Printers fault: for many
translations read without Of. But seeing Sander confesses it is a true
saying, he that eats of this bread, used by Christ before, verse 51. here
can be no corruption, or falsification proved. As for the distinction, which
Sander makes, between, eating Christ, and eating of Christ, eating his flesh,
and eating of his flesh, is friuolus and vain: for none eat of him, but they
which eat him. Yes (says he,) Of him we may eat, without the Sacrament, but
him self we properly eat, only under the form of bread. How untrue this
is, you may see by this argument: None can have eternal life, except they eat
Christ and the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood: But many
have eternal life, which eat not the Sacrament: Therefore many eat Christ,
and the flesh of Christ, which eat not the Sacrament. Joan. 6. ver. 53. and
57.

The 4. falsification is, in S. Matthew. 26. (...). Cum accepisset Jesus panem,
and gratias egisset, fregit, and dedit discipulis, and ait. The true English
is, Jesus having taken bread, and given thanks (or blessed) brake and gave to
the disciples, and said. The common Bible reads: Jesus took bread, and
when he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave i^ to the disciples. The holy
scripture says not, that Jesus brake it, neither that he gave it, but that
he brake and gave. Again in saint Mark saint Luke, and saint Paul, five
times putting the particle (it) which is neither in the Greek, nor in the
Latin Bible. Who would think, that an ancient man would play the boy so
kindly? What say you Sander, is not the particle (it) added, neither in Greek
nor Latin? When the accusative case is once set down, and then follow
transitiue verbes, is it the phrase of the Greek or Latin tongue, to add the
particle it? You say he brake and gave, but not brake it, nor gave it. Will you
teach us a new Grammar, that fregit and dedit be verbes newters absolute? Or
if you will say they be verbes active transitiues, lest the wild Irish boys,
that go to the Grammar school, should hiss at you, as you go about your
popish and traiterous commission, I would wish some young Redshanke ladde to
oppose you, and ask you, what he brake, and what he gave? If he brake not
and gave not it, which he took. If you say, he brake his body, and not the
bread, because you say, he so gave his body, that he gave no bread, advise
your self, how you will answer the breaking of Christ's body, which was but
once broken for us on the cross, but yet not broken into several pieces, as
that thing, whatsoever you will call it, was broken which he gave to his
disciples. And this undoubtedly you mean, when you say, The words of saint
Matthew, do not all stand in order, in so much as Christ said: the words of
consecration, before he brake the sacrament, or gave to his disciples. And do
you now complain of Saint Matthewe for disordering ye words? Verily saint
Mark, saint Luke, and saint Paul, place the words in such sort as saint
Matthew does. And if all these Evangelists, and Apostles, do set the words
out of order, whence come you, that will take upon you to set the^ in order?
Have you other places of scripture to prove this pretended inuersion of order?
And if you had, have you forgotten, what you did write even now in the
preface; that if there be any obscurity found in the words of the supper,
there is no other part of scripture that can clear them? But standing of the
words out of order, and that in every one that rehearses them, must needs
make uncertainty and obscurity, yea this standing, or not standing out of
order, may decide a great part of the controversy: for if the words were
spoken after he brake and gave, then he brake and gave bread. And seeing the
placing of the words in all the Evangelists, and saint Paul favor this
opinion, you shall not easily prove the contrary against so many faithful
and prudent witnesses, which had a care to place the words in such order, as
they should give no manifest occasion of heresy by disordering them.

The fifth corruption is in saint Luke 22. and Saint Paul, 1. Corinthians. 11, (...)
Hoc facite, the truest English were, make this thing. The fullest, do and make
this thing. The common Bible reads, in Saint Luke, this do. In saint Paul,
This do ye. And that which is most abominable of all, in the homily of the
sacrament, it is translated, do ye thus. This great abomination, if in any
book it be so found, is but the Printers fault, although in sense there be
no great difference. But seeing (...) and facere signifies to do, as well as
to make, what corruption or falsification can there be when it is translated To
do? As for Sanders fullest translation, by doing, and making, is most absurd.
For when a word has two significations, no wise translator will render them
both, but only that, which is most proper for the place, and doing is here
more proper then making. For though it sound not absurdly, in Sanders
blasphemous ears, when he says: do this, is all one as if he had said,
make this my body: yet yt the body of Christ should be properly said to be
made, by me^, which was once made in ye womb of the virgin, by ye holy ghost,
in all godly men's minds, it is both absurd and blasphemous. And that the word
facite, is to be translated by doing, and not by making, it is evident by this,
that S. Paul refers it to the whole action of the supper, 1. Cor. 11. (...)
etc. This do, as often as you shall drink it, in my remembrance: etc So does
S. Cypryan manifestly lib. 2. Ep. 3. Caecilio. Quod si and a domino
praecipitur, and ab apostolo eius hoc idem co^firmatur and traditur, vt
quoties^unque biberimus, in commemoratione^ domini, hoc faciamus, quod facit
and dominus, inuenimur non obseruari a nobi^ quod mandatum est, nisi eadem quae
dominus fecit nos quoque faciamus: Et calicem pari ratione miscentes, a diuino
magisterio non recedamus. If then it be commanded by ye Lord, and the same
thing is confirmed and delivered by his Apostle, that so often as we drink, we
should do this thing in remembrance of our Lord, which our Lord himself did,
we are found that we do not observe that which is commanded, except we also do
the same things which our Lord did. And ministering the cup after the same
manner, we depart not from his divine teaching. Last of all Heskins the papist,
and other likewise before this Momus translate it as we do. Hesk. lib. 2. ca.
42 Where he cauileth that our translation omitteth the word Thing, it is
without all shadow of reason, for by This, what can be understood, but, this
thing? And seeing our English Pronown This, does aptly answer the Greek
pronowne (...), what need is it to add the word, Thing, which is not
expressed either in the Greek or in the Latin?

The sixth falsification is affirmed to be in S. Luke, and Saint Paul Luke, 22.
1. Corinthians. 11. (...), In meam commemorationem. The true English were, For the
remembrance of me, or To the end I may be remembered. The common bible turns,
in the remembrance of me. A strange quarrel, if a man could understand it. A
thing (says he) may be done best in the remembrance of a man, when the man is
first remembered, and afterward the thing is done in the remembrance of him. And
may not a man be first remembered and afterward a thing don for the remembrance
of him? Or would Sander, that Christ should not be thought upon, before he see
the Mass cake lifted up, which he says is made for the remembrance of him?
For thus he fantasieth that Christ should say: When my body is made by the
priest, and lifted up to be adored, and all the people taught to bow down to
the body of Christ, and to come with pure conscience to receive it, then Christ
is remembered, by reason of his body made: and so the scripture is fulfilled
which says, do and make this thing for the remembrance of me. If this be the
fulfilling of the scripture, then was it not fulfilled for more then a thousand
years after Christ, until elevation and adoration of the sacrament were
decreed. And then is it not fulfilled in any private Mass, where none of the
people receive, nor yet be taught to receive it. Where he says, that Christ
can not be remembered by eating of bread and drinking of wine, as the
Sacramentaries would have it, so effectually, and with such contrition,
confession, and satisfaction, as he requires, but by following of his cross
and death, by penance, by humility, by confessing our finnes to his ministers,
and taking absolution of them: I answer, the Protestants require not only
eating and drinking, but preaching of the Lords death, repentance, faith, love,
and reverence in the receivers: as for the rest of popish trumpery, when he can
show that Christ required, or the Apostels used, we will gladly admit it. In
the mean time let the readers judge, how this later kind of remembrance, can
be learned out of the former, which I have set down in his own words, of
making, lifting, adoring, etc.

Beside these great corruptions, there are other two small faults, in S. Paul.
The first, 1. Cor. 10. that (...) is turned, the partaking, where it should be,
the communicating of the body and blood of Christ. This he counts a lesser
fault, because the Catholic Latin translation, in one place calls it
participatio, a partaking: which is (says he) when part of a thing is taken,
and not the whole. I think the translatour used the word of partaking, because
it is better known to English me^, then the term of communicating:
Especially, seeing the Apostle uses both terms indifferently, as one. For in
the next verse, he says, (...): The vulgar Latin is, Omnes qui de vno pane
participamus: All we which do partake of one bread: And speaking of them
which did eat the Sacrifices of Israelites, of which, every one did not eat
the whole, he said they were (...), communicators of the altar. And them that
take part of the sacrifice of the Gentiles, he calls (...), communicators
with devils. And returning to the Christians, he says: (...). You cannot
partake of the table of the Lord, and of the table of devils. Wherefore in
that translation, there is neither falsification, nor corruption, great or
small. The last fault is, 1. Cor. 10. in the place by me cited: we all
partake (...), which should de Englished of the one bread. For such strength
has the Greek article (...), and sometime the common bible turns the Greek
article into That. What say you, Sander, has the Greek article such strength
always? If you say so, you will be thought to be a simple Grecian. If only
sometimes, you must show better reason then you do, why it has such strength
here, or else the English translation is good enough. For by the outward
sign which is the partaking of one bread, the Apostle proves the spiritual
conjunction of all the faithful in one body, and uses not the name of bread
siguratiuely, for that which Christ calls the bread of life, etc. And unto
this translation, agrees S. Ambrose in 1. Cor. 11. saying: The gift that is
offered perteyneth to all the people, quia in vno pane omnes significantur: per
id quod enim vnum simus de vno pane nos omnes sumere oportet: because in one
bread they are all signified: for in that we are one, we ought to receive all
of one bread. Of the same judgment is Hierom upon the very place, saying: Omnes
quidem de vno pane, and de vno calice participamus. We all partake of one bread
and of one cup. The like is Chrysostom. and all the old writers in a manner. You
see what shameless cauilling, and racking he uses, to make a show of
corruption in the English Bible, against which his malice is so great, that he
charge not the translators, but the English Bible to have turned, to have
falsified, to have corrupted, as though that if there were any just fault to be
found in ye translation, the English Bible should bear the blame for it, and
be despised of all English men. God be thanked, that although it may not be
denied, but some faults have and may escape the best translations, yet the
translators have a clear conscience from falsifying, and corrupting, and the
faults are not so great, that any pernicious error may be grounded on them,
nor so many by a thousand parts as are in that Latin translation, which the
Papists admit, as only Catholic and authentical.

CAP. III.
The state of the question between the Lutherans, Zuinglians, Sander.
Caluini^^es, and Catholics, concerning the Sacrament of the altar.

This Chapter contains no proof of any thing, but only sets down the
bare assertions of Sander, ^ulke.
upon every matter, which if they be false, it shall be as easy for me to deny,
as for him to affirm them, referring the trial of every cause as he does,
unto the treatise following. First it is false, which he affirms, that from
the beginning of the Christian Church, unto the year of our Lord 1517. All the
Church both Greek and Latin openly professed the carnal presence of Christ's
body and blood under the forms of bread and wine. For the Greek church never
received transubstantiation, nor yet taught so grossly of the real presence,
as the Papists: nor held the same opinion of consecration which the papists
do. For after the words of Christ uttered in their liturgye, they pray thus
unto God: Fac panem quidem hunc, honorabile corpus Christi tui, quod autem in
calice est, honorabilem sang(...) Christi tui, ea sancto tuo spiritu
transmutante. And make this bread, the honorable body of thy Christ, and that
which is in the cup, the honorable blood of thy Christ, thy holy spirit
changing them. This was objected unto them in the late Council of Florence. It
is also false, that he says, no man in open pulpet, with the auctority or
toleration of any spiritual pastor, did preach the contrary: for Wickleef whom
he names a corner whisperer, in open pulpet preached the same, as his homilies
remaining in writing, are a plain testimonye, as in Hom. 5. Sept. quad. in. 6.
Joan. Here it is needful for men to wite, that there ben two manner of meats,
ghostly and bodily: but bodily is well known. But need were here to know how
men should ghostlye eat Christ. For no man that has wit dreadeth, that
Christ speaks not here of bodily eating and drinking of his flesh and his
blood. For else no man should be saved: for no man is an etene, to seed him
thus bodily of Christ, and therefore it were to wit, how men should ghostly
feed them thus. For Christ tells in his words, how men should eat him
ghostly, and to this, wite says Christ here, that the words that he speaks
to them, be spirit and life, for such is wit of his words. These words in
their own kind ben such as were his other words, but wite of these words
there is spiritual and man's life. Also Christ says there soothly, that each
man that shall be saved, shall be fed of Christ thus. But this may not be
vnderstonden of fleshly food of Christ's body: And so it mote be vnderstonden
algatys of gostly food, for of bodily food of Christ may not two be fed
together, and so Christ speaks of ghostly food, by which many be fed far
and near. Also the sermon of Aelsri^ in the Saxon tongue, appointed to be said
in all churches of England teaches the same doctrine. But I break promise to
stand in con^^tation of so impudent lies. And where he says a belee^e which
had continued 600. years could not have been suddenly changed, it is very true,
for the doctrine of Antichrist concerning the carnal presence, was not come
unto full ripenes, before the Council of Laterane, which was more then 600.
years after the first age of 600. years. And although the efficacy of error.
prevailed by Gods just judgment over a great part of the world, yet had Christ
always his two witnesses, to protest against it, as Berengarius, Scotus,
Waldo, Hen^icus de Gauduno, Wickliefe, etc. which although they were condemned
by Antichrist for heretics, yet seeing they taught nothing but the ancient
Catholic faith, of the primitive church, grounded on gods word, their
condemnation in an hundredth councels, can be no prejudice to the truth.

The mean that makes present that blessed body (says Sander) is
transubstantiation, which being made present thereby, who can deny, but that it
is a sacrifice above all other external kinds of worshipping, sith at the time
of the consecration, it is given for us vnbloodily, as the words of Christ
sound, Luke 22. which is given for you. But seeing S. Paul in exposition of the
same words, says: which is broken for you, who is either so ignorant, or so
blasphemous to deny, that the giving in S. Luke, is to be referred unto his
death and bloody sacrifice, which was his only sacrifice of himself offered
once for all. Again, when al ye three Evangelists, speaking of the sacrament
of his blood, say, (...), which is shed for many and for you, since at the time
of the consecration it is shed for us, as well as his body is given for us; who
is so shameless, to say, that it is given for us vnbloudily inye sacrament? Or
if the word of shedding being of ye pre^^nt temps or preterimperfect temps,
must be referred to the passion which was afterward; who is so mad as D. S.
to refer the word (...) which is, given* to a present giving or sacrifising?

But proceeding in his vain purpose, he shows, that the faults of the
popish clergy advanced by transubstantiation, caused them to be contemned of
the people, which contempt by Gods justice stirred up Martin Luther, like a
proud king of Babylon, to come out of the North, to fight against Jerusalem.
Can you forbear laugh ing? They that were carnal in the Popish Church, priests
bishops to hold their livings, Abats and Monks for good pensions received
this doctrine and gave up their abbeys to the Prince. But this good has Luther
done, that he separated the good from the badde, especially from the Popish
votary, the married Monk and vowed Priest, which says, No man ought to vow
chastity, condemning thereby, not only an infinite number of virgins, but also
the blessed mother of God. To this I answer, that first of all he slaundereth
them, which deny the vow of chastity, or rather celebrate (for every man is
bound to live chastely) to be lawful, for they deny it, to be lawful only to
those which are not certain, that they have the gift of continency to continue
with them long as they live. And as for ye vow of the virgin Mary, I pray you
how proves he that she made any? Because (says he) she wondered how she might
have a child, seeing she knew not any man. Whereunto her own reason might have
replied that hereafter she might know a man, except she had vowed her self
not to know at all any man. I answer, that though her reason might have so
replied, for having a child, yet for having such a child, as should be the
son of ye highest, reason could not satisfy her, and therefore she desired
to be instructed by the angel, by what means it should be, without that any
vow of virginity, can be concluded in any lawful form of argument, out of
this place, by any Logician in the world. But contrariwise, that she was
betrothed unto a man, it is an undoubted argument, that she vowed not
virginity. For if she should have made any vow before her marriage, she would
not have deluded her husband, to promise her body to him, when she had
determined the contrary. If they say, she vowed after marriage: it is plain by
the Gospel, she did it without her husbands knowledge, and therefore her vow
could not be lawful. For before Joseph was instructed by the Angel of her
case, his purpose was to have taken her home to him, and used her as his wife,
until she was perceived to be with child, and then he would have privily
forsaken her.

After this he shows what were ye opinions of Luther, Zwinglius and Calvin,
which he makes to be three, in number, when by the consent of ye Churches of
Heluetia and Sabandia it is manifest, that the judgment of Zwinglius and
Calvin, concerning the manner of eating and drinking of Christ's body and
blood in the sacrament of his supper, was all one. Now concerning that Calvin
wills us to go into heaven by faith, there to feed of Christ spiritually:
Sander likes it not, because our nature not being able to climme up to the
seat of God in heaven, the son of God came down to us, to life us up into
heaven, in taking upon him our human nature. So when our faith called for
Christ to come from heaven to help us, he let down the cord of his
humanity, and of his flesh and blood. And shall we now, when it is let down
to be fastened in our bodies, and in the bottom of our hearts, by eating it
really, shall we now refuse it, and say, we will go into heaven by faith
our selves, and there take hold of Christ, whereby we may be delivered out of
the deep vale of misery? As though the cord should have needed to have
been let down, if we could have fastened our bodies to anything in heaven,
and ye^ our bodies are they which weigh down our souls chiefly. In deed, if
the son of God, had not come down unto us, and joined our nature unto his,
the anchor of our faith, could have had no hold in heaven. But seeing the son
of God did not only come down unto us, but also is ascended from the earth,
and has carried us up into heaven with him, Ephesians. 2. ver. 6. he lets no more
down unto us the cord of his humanitye, but we cast up the sure anchor of our
souls, which is faith, entering into the inward part of yt spiritual
tabernacle, which is heaven, whither our forerunner Jesus is entered, being an
high priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek. Heb. 6. ver. 19. And unto
this ascension by faith, the Apostle exhorts us Coll. 3. 1. If you be risen
again with Christ, seek those things that are above, where Christ is sitting
at the right hand of God, set your mind upon things that are above, and not
upon things that are upon the earth. These authorities prove sufficiently, that
we must go into heaven by faith our selves, for the son of God after his
dispensation fully accomplished in this world, comes no more down to us in
his human nature, until he come again to receive us actually into the
participation of his glory, according to his promise. John. 14. 3. But now let
us see, what wholesome doctrine Sander teaches in those his words even now
set down. First, that faith pertains only to the fathers before Christ, and
in them called for Christ to come down unto us, which when he is come, and
daily lets down the cord of his humanity, we have no need of faith to
fasten it in our bodies and hearts, but of our hands. For faith he compares to
the tongue, by means whereof, help is called for, but when a cord is let
down, the use of the tongue is needeles, and the hands must be occupied.
Therefore he says: It is not sufficient for a man to use his tongue still, and
to let his hands alone. So that by this kind of reasoning, eating it really,
being let down, is the hand, that without the tongue of faith fasteneth it to
our bodies and hearts. Thirdly he holds, that Christ neded not to have been
incarnat, if men could have fastened their bodies to any thing in heaven.
Whereby he denies, that the fathers of the old Testament by faith, were
fastened in heaven, before the incarnation of Christ, restreining the virtue
thereof, not only unto the time, since the same was actually performed, but
also to the actual and carnal manner of conjunction of the body of Christ
with our bodies, which they imagine to be in eating the flesh of Christ really.

To conclude, professing that he intends not to speak against the persons,
but against the opinions of the Sacramentaries, specially against Zwinglius and
Calvin, his purpose is, to prove out of the word of God: That Christ gives
in his last supper, the true substance of his flesh and blood, not only to our
souls, by words of promise, but also to our bodies under the forms of bread
and wine. Note here, that the giving, wherein is the controversy, pertains
to our bodies, and not to our souls. Also that the giving of Christ's flesh
and blood to our souls, if I understand this saying, is not really, but by
words of promise: whereof it ensues that they, which have not eaten the flesh
and blood of Christ with their bodies, from the beginning of the world, are
all perished, because none can have life in them, but they that have eaten his
flesh and blood, which Sander holds cannot be eaten, really and in deed, but
under the forms of bread and wine in the sacrament.

CAP. IIII.
What the supper of Christ is, according to the belief of the Sander.
Catholics.

He promises to show, first, out of the word of god, Fulke.
and next out of the monuments of the ancient fathers, what the belief of the
Papists is, concerning this sacrament. Although he esteems even Albertus,
Thomas, Bonauenture, Alexander, etc. worthy of credit, by a rule of S. Aug.
cont. ^u. li. 2. because they lived before this question rose between the
Sacramentaries and the^: by which rule so understood, we may esteem
Berengarius, Bruno, Henricus de Gauduno, Waldo, Bertrame, etc. worthy of
credit, because they lived long before this question rose between the
Papists and us. Wherefore in this rule of Augustine is to be considered, not
between what persons, but what time the question first arose between any
persons, and so the fathers of the first 600. years are the best and lest
partial witnesses.

Furthermore, he shows that the supper of the Corinthians, was not the supper
of Christ, but he had a supper of his own. And so rehearsing the words of the
institution, out of the Eua(...)listes and S. Paul: he affirmeth^ that we are
informed by these words, the supper of Christ to be his own body and blood,
given under the signs of ye bread and wine, whereupon he gave thanks, turning
by his almighty power the substance of bread and wine, into the substance of
his body and blood. That Christ gives his body to them that receive the bread
and wine worthily, it shall be no controversy between us. But that he gives it
under ye signs of bread and wine, understanding (as he does) signs for
accidents, he should have proved out of Gods word, if either he would or
could have kept promise, likewise, that Christ gave thanks upon the bread and
wine, and thirdly, that he turned the substance thereof into ye substance of his
body and blood. But leaving other arguments for other places, and not being
able to prove these things in any place, he will enquire, whether the name and
nature of a supper be more agreeable to their belief, or to our meaning? that
is (says he) whether Christ made his last supper of the substance of common
bread and wine, or of his own real body and blood. As though we affirmed,
that the only substance of Christ's supper were common bread and wine, and not
the body and blood of Christ. But to proceed, and let him go with that lie,
his first argument to prove how deintie and costly a banquet Christ made,
taking his leave of his friends, is taken of the great preparation and promise
made of it so long before, which promise and preparation, how evil fauouredly
he proves out of Melchizedeks bread and wine, Manna, the table of David and
Solomon, ye bread and flesh of Elias, etc, I omit. His conclusion is, we must
not suppose, that Christ at his farewell, gave any other deinties, beside
common bread and wine sanctified in use only, and not consecrated in
substance. You may see, how absurdly he speaks, common bread sanctified,
which is as good as if he would say, Christ gave white black bread, or whot
cold wine. We affirm that ye bread and wine were consecrated, not in
accidents, but in substance, to the use of an holy sacrament, yt they might be
the body and blood of Christ, to as many as received the same worthily, not by
conversion of the natural substance of one thing into another, but by a
wonderful divine and unspeakable change of that which is ordinatily a weak
element, of ye world, to be a mighty food, unto eternal life. The second
argument he uses to prove the excellency of the banquet, is of the fine
cookerie (I use his own term, which also he does exemplify by making 16. or
20. dishes of eggs alone, which cannot be without many spices and mixture, and
great labor, etc.) But Christ, like a most cunning workman, of simple and
little stuff, and that without help of his disciples, to prepare it, made the
gretest and finest feast that ever was heard of, using no shifts, but only
blessing or thanksgiving. The sinesse of this cookerie he sets forth, by a
fine speculation of ye furniture of the world, by the Angels, heavens and
elements, from whence it pleased God to make a revolt of al things, from the
bottom of the earth, upward again toward him self: And so made out of ye
earth vegitatiue things, then sensible creatures, and last man, with a
reasonable soul, as a brief sum of all creatures, and a little world, who
being seduced by the devil, was by the incarnation of ye son of God,
restored, and then al things were briefly brought again to God. So that in
this banquet, where Christ is given, there is served in one dish a composition
most delicate, of angels, heavens, elements, of herbs fishes, birds, beasts,
of reasonable men, and of God himself. No kind of salet meats, sauce, fruits,
consectio^, no kind of wine, aqua vitae, aqua composita, liquors, syrops, can
be found in nature, made by art, d^uised by wi^^e, but it is all set upon this
table, and that in a small ro^^e, etc. Thus do the Catholics teach of the
supper of our Lord, and believe it agreeable to his word and worthy his
worship. What say you, M. S. is this the doctrine of the Catholics? that the
bread and wine, being turned into the body and blood of Christ, are also
turned into Angels, heavens, elements, herbs, fishes, birds, beasts, men,
and God him self? yea, into all salets, meats, sauces, fruits, confections,
all kinds of wine, aqua vitae, aqua composita, all liquors and syrops, beside
porredge, puddings, pyes, pancakes, and a great many other things, which you
have not named, but comprehended in general words? Is there a real
conversion in deed, by reason of your heraphicall revolution? And is this
doctrine agreeable to the word of God? In what place is it written, I pray you?
I suppose it to be this: Ephesians. 1. It has pleased God to restore in Christ all
things which are in heaven, and which are in earth in him. Where the Greek
word (...), imports a brief gathering into one certain head and sum, that
all things in heaven and earth, are brought unto Christ, and in him as it were
again, begone and renewed. And cannot this be done, except the body of Christ
do really contain all things by your surmised revolt? for I dare not
understand you siguratiuely, seeing you abhor figures in this matter of the
supper; nor Hyberbolically, for that you count no better then a rhetorical
lie. Wherefore, if these things be really contained, as you say, I think it
small for the worship of Christ's banquet, whose excellency I take to be so
great, that it contains not these gross meats of the body, but an heavenly
refreshing of the soul. And that will the old fathers, whom you cite for
your cookery, plainly testify with me. First Cyprian de Coen. Dom. Vident haec
sacramenta, etc. The poor in spirit see these sacraments, and contenting
themselves with this one dish, they despise all the delicats of this world, and
possessing Christ, they disdain to possess any stuff of this world. Behold
Cyprian says nor, that this dish contains al fowls, fishes, sauces,
spices, etc. but that al these are despised of them yt are partakers of this
dish. Again, speaking of the wicked, Et a secretis diuinis omnium intra se
continentibus summam, diffugiunt and recedunt, etc. They fly and depart from
the divine secrets, which contain within them selves the brief or sum of
all mysteries.

He says not, they contain meats and drinks, syropes and confections, but
ye sum of al mysteries or heavenly, and divine treasures, But (says Sander)
when saint Cyprian says, intra se, within them, he means within the
compass, or forms of bread and wine, for these only are the things that we
can point unto, within or without: Belike he will teach us new Grammar, and
new Latin also. For in our old Latin and Grammar, we learned, that sui and
suus were reciproca, but Sander will teach us that, se, signifies the compass
or forms of bread and wine: Or if the word se, signify themselves, as it
was wont to do, Sander will teach us, that the compass or forms of bread and
wine, are the divine secrets themselves. For Cyprian says yt the divine
secrets within themselves contain ye sum of al mysteries. But mark his
reason, and you will think that an Ox has lowed it out, rather then a man
spoken it. The compass or forms of bread, are ye only things yt we can point
unto within, or without: for other meat and drink, we see not, quoth he. He
will have nothing but yt he can point unto with his hand, and see with his
bodily eye. Whereas divine secrets, whereof Cyprian speaks, can neither be
seen with the eye, nor poynted at with ye finger, but only be understood by
faith, in them to whom God has reueiled them.

His next witness is Chrysostom: in 1. Cor. Hom. 24 Quando corpus Christi,
etc. When the body of Christ is set before thee, say with thy self: For this
bodies sake, I am no more earth and ashes. For this I hope to receive heaven,
and the good things which are in heaven, immortal life, the seat of Angels,
the company of Christ. The very table is the strength of our soul, the bond
of trust, the foundation, our hope, salvation, life. If we go hence pure with
this sacrifice, with most great confidence, we shall ascend to the holy porch
or entry, as it were compassed round about with golden garments. But what
rehearse I things to come? whiles we are in this life, this mystery causes,
that the earth is heaven to us. Whatsoever Chrysostom says here, we
acknowledge to be true as he did mean it: but nothing he says for Master
Sanders revolution, and as little for the carnal manner of presence or eating
of Christ's body. For even as we are no more earth and ashes, and as earth is
made heaven, which is after a spiritual manner by faith, and yet truly and
undoubtedly, so is the body of Christ present and eaten, at ye table.
According to which meaning he says in the same homily, Quemadmodu^ enim corpus
illud vnitu^ est Christo, ita and nos per hunc panem union coniungimur. For
even as that body is vaited to Christ, so we also by this bread are joined in
an union. Note here, yt body and this bread to be diverse things in natural
substance: and again our conjunction to be by the bread mystically: for
naturally and substantially we are not joined one to another, but in an
heavenly kind of union, we are made one body of Christ, and members one of
another. And this is not an emptye dish of faith, as Sander calls it, but a
full mystery of salvation. And although faith shall cease when we have the
full fruition of Gods promises in heaven, yet does Sander both absurdly, and
unfaithfully gather thereof, an opposition of faith and truth, whereas faith
has thereof the name in Hebrew, because it is grounded upon truth. But what
means he by truth, that which he prefers above the receiving by faith?
Namely the carnal manner of receiving Christ's body, which he holds the
wicked may do to their damnation. A worthy truth, in respect of which, says
is counted little worth as an empty dish, which yet by their own doctrine, must
make their truth effectual to salvation. But see I pray you, how cunningly
he reasons of the final cause. Christ took flesh (says he) that our bodies
might have a banquet made to them, as the souls of the faithful never lacked
God, whom they might feed on by faith and spirit. By which reason the godly of
the old testament, before Christ's incarnation, were but half nourished,
namely in souls only, and not in bodies, if Christ's flesh be not a meat
otherwise then received into the body, after the Popish meaning. Yet he
supposes, that Cyrillus favors this argument, In Joan. lib. 4. Cap. 14.
Oporiui^ enim cert^, vt non solum anima per spiritum sanctum in beatam vitam
ascenderet, ver^netiam vt rude atque terrestre hoc corpus cognato sibi gust^,
tactu and cibo, ad immortalitatem reduceretur. For it behooved truly, that not
only the soul should ascend, by the holy Ghost into the blessed life, but
also that this rude, and earthly bodic should be brought to immortality, by
tasting, touching, and by meat, which were of alliance with us. Cyrill means
of the outward element, by which our faith being instructed as our bodies are
fed, so we are taught that the whole man is nourished to immortality.
Therefore he says, immediately after in the same place: N^^ putet ex tarditate
mentis suae Iudaeus, inaudita nobis excogitata esse mysteria: videbit enim, si
attentius quaerit, hoc ipsum a Mos^ temporibus per figuram semper factitatum
suisse. Quid enim maiores little ab ira Aegyptiorum liberauit, quando mors in
primogenita Aegyptiorum sae^iebat? nonne palam est quia diuina institutione
perdocti, agni carnes manducauerunt, and posts ac superliminaria sanguine
perunxerunt, propterea mortem ab eis diuertisse? pernicies namque, id est,
carnis huius mors, aduersus genus humanum propter primi hominis transgressionem
surebat. Terra enim ^s, and in terram reuerteris propter peccatum, ^udiuimus.
Verum quoniam per carnem suam Christus atrocem hunc euersurus erat tyrannum,
propterea id mysterium apud priscos obumbrabatur, and o^inis carnibus atque
sanguine sanctificati (Deo ita volente) perniciem essugiebant. Quid igitur O
Iudaee turbaris, praefiguratam veritatem iam videns? our inquam turbaris, si
Christus dicit, Nisi manducaueritis carnem filii hominis, and biberitis
sanguinem eius, non habebitis vitam in vobis, cum oporteret, Mosaicis te
legibus institutum, and priscis vmbris ad credendum perdoctum, ad intelligenda
haec mysteria paratissimum esse. Neither let the Jew of the dulnes of his
mind, think, that we have invented such mysteries as were never heard of: for
he shall see, if he will search more attentively, that the same thing has
been always done by figure, since the time of Moses. For what has delivered
their ancestors from the plague of the Egyptians, when death raged against ye
first borne of the Egyptians? Is it not manifest, that they being taught by
the institution of God, did eat the flesh of a Lamb and anointed the posts
and upper door posts, with blood, and therefore death departed from them? For
destruction, that is the death of this flesh, did rage against mankind for the
transgression of ye first man. For because of sin we heard, Earth thou art,
and into earth thou shall return. But because Christ by his flesh, was to
overthrow this cruel tyrant, therefore that mystery was shadowed to the old
fathers, and being sanctified with the flesh and blood of ye sheep (God so
willing) they escaped destruction. Why therefore o Jew, art thou troubled,
seeing the truth already prefigured? Wherefore, I say, art thou troubled, if
Christ say, Except ye eat the flesh of the son of Man, and drink his blood,
you shall have no life in your selves, whereas it behooved thee being instructed
in the Law of Moses, and taught to believing by the old shadows, to be most
ready to understand these mysteries? This place of Cyrill, shows at large,
that he means not by taste and touching, or meat which is of alliance with
us, the natural body of Christ, but the outward part of the sacrament:
namely, the bread and wine: for of the body of Christ, there is neither taste,
nor touching bodily in the sacrament. But even as by eating of the Lambs
flesh, and anointing of the blood, which prefigured the flesh and blood of
Christ, and was a meat of kindred or alliance with them, with whose taste and
touching they were acquainted, the Jews were assured of their deliverance: so
we by eating, and drinking these outward signs of Christ's body and blood,
are assured of eternal life. For you must note, that he says hoc ipsum the
self same thing, was always done by figure, from the time of Moses. What was
that? namely, that not only our souls by the holy Ghost, but also our bodies
by external sacraments, were brought to immortality. But the same thing
could not be done according to the Popish meaning before Christ's incarnation:
therefore Cyrill is nothing less then of the Popish meaning.

The last witness is Tertullian de resur. Carnis: The flesh is washed that the
soul may be cleansed. The flesh is oynted, that the soul may be consecrated.
The flesh is signed, that the soul may be defenced. The flesh is shadowed by
imposition of hand, that the soul also may be illuminated. The flesh is fed
with the body and blood of Christ, that the soul also may be made fat of God.
They cannot therefore be parted in reward, whom work ioynesh.

We agree to that which Tertullian says, yt our flesh is fed with yt body and
blood of Christ, but not after a carnal or natural manner, by receiving the
body and blood at our mouths, etc: but after a spiritual manner, as he
himself shows in the same book. Nam quia durum and intollerabilem
existimauerunt sermonem eius, quasi vere carnem suam illis edendam
determinasse, vt in spiritum disponeret statum salutis, promisit spiritus est
qui vi^ificat. For because they thought his saying hard, and intolerable, as
though he had determined that his flesh was to be eaten of the^ verily, that he
might dispose the state of salvation into the spirit, he said before: It is
the spirit that quickens.

In these words Tertullian counts it, the error of the Capernaites, to think
that Christ determined, that his flesh should be eaten verily, meaning that his
flesh was not to be eaten after a gross and natural manner, with the mouth
and teeth, but with faith, and heart. Again the argument of the resurrection
of our bodies, which he draws of eating the body and blood of Christ, cannot
stand but with a spiritual eating thereof. For what hope should all the
fathers before the incarnation of Christ, and so many thousand Christians as
since that time have never received the sacrament, have of the resurrection of
their bodies, if the virtue thereof were included in the popish imagined manner
of eating? Therefore Tertullian means plainly, that the external sacraments,
which are received with the body, and bear the name oftentimes of the things,
whereof they are sacraments, are arguments and assurances, that salvation
pertains both to the body and to the soul, and not that the body eats
and drinks really the substance of Christ's body and blood, under the forms
of bread and wine, any more then the body receives the holy ghost under the
form of water, or imposition of hands etc.

What the supper of Christ is, according to the doctrine of the Sander.
Protestants and Sacramentaries, with a confutation thereof.

He affirms that we say: Christ gives to the body bread Fulke.
and wine, but to the soul he gives himself by says, spirit, and
understanding. This he makes to be all the banquet of the new brethren.
Against this he inueyeth in a long chapter. But either he is ignorant what we
teach, or rather he is not willing to show it, that by rehersing it
imperfectly, he might have more advantage to dispute against it. We believe,
that Christ giving unto us bread and wine, as visible seals of his invisible
grace, gives to ye whole man, his body and blood, to be received of him by
faith, after a spiritual and wonderful manner, passing al understanding of man,
whereby we are assured, that we are spiritually fed, unto eternal life, eue^ as
by the seal of baptism, we are assured that we are spiritually, and
wonderfully washed from our sins, and born anew to be ye sons of God. We say
not therefore ye god gives himself by faith, spirit and understanding, to our
souls only: but he gives himself unto us, to be received by faith and
spirituallie. But now let us see what fault he finds with our saying: we say ye
truth (says he) but not all the truth. For this had been somewhat worth,
before ye incarnation of Christ, when Christ was eaten only by faith, but since
his incarnation, he gives us an other kind of truth the^ ever he gave to the^
So faith M. S. But S. Paul says, our fathers did al eat ye same spiritual
meat yt we do, and drink the same spiritual cup yt we do, for they drank of
ye rock, which rock was Christ, as substantially as ye bread and wine are his
body and blood unto us. 1. Cor. 10. But S. says our eating lacks some truth,
because ye whole man is not fed. I answer yt is no cause, for we hold yt the
whole man is fed with Christ, to be saved both body and soul. For where he ^^ith,
yt faith seedeth but ye soul, it is false: for God by faith feeds both body
and soul unto eternal life. But this is Sanders error, yt he thinks Christ
cannot feed our bodies by faith, except he thrust his body in at our mouths.
He might likewise say, that in baptism we are but half regenerated in soul
only, because the holy ghost is not powered over our bodies: yet we believe that
we are washed and regenerated wholly both in body and soul, so that our bodies
by baptism are engraffed into the death, burial, and resurrection of Christ.
Romans 6 and so we believe, yt by eating of this bread, and drinking of this
cup of the Lord worthily, our whole man is fed after a spiritual manner,
with the quickening flesh and blood of our savior Christ, unto everlasting
life. And whereas Leo says, That is taken by the mouth, which is believed Ser.
6. de Iei^. 7. men's.
by faith: he means none othewise, then when the scripture says, that
baptism is ye lauer of regeneration; and when we confess yt the body of
Christ is eaten, when we mean the sacrament thereof is eaten bodily. In which
sense, the same Leo writes Epistel. 10. ad Plaui, against the heresy of
Eutyches. Videat que (...) transixa dauis pependerit in crucis ligno, and
aperto per militis lanceam latere crucifixi, intelligat vnde sa^gnis and aqua
esfluxerint, ut ceclesia Dei lauacro rigaretur and poculo. Let him see what
nature being stricken through with nails, has hanged on the wood of ye
cross, and when ye side of him that was crucified was opened, let him
understand, from whence yt blood and water flowed, yt the church of god might
be moistened, both by a lauer, and by a cupp. By these words he shows, that
ye blood in ye cup, is none otherwise ye blood of Christ, the^ ye water of
baptism, is ye water that issued out of his side, which is far from ye popish
understanding. As for ye often eating and drinking, recorded in ye scriptures,
in ye sacrifices, Manna, ye rock, water, ye Paschal lamb ye shewbread, and c:
which Sa^der would have to be but figures of ye bodily eating of Christ's flesh:
I answer they were sacraments of ye spiritual norishme^t of ye faithful
appointed for that time, as this supper is appropriated to our time, and not
because the bodily eating of the forbidden fruit, could not otherwise be
purged, from us, but by bodily eating of Christ's flesh, as he assurmeth. The
sin of Adam was not in eating, but in eating disobediently, so that eating of
it self, was no fault, nor any poison was in the nature of the fruit, that
was eaten, as Sander dreameth, but disobedience was the sin of Adam, which by
the obedience of Christ is done away as S. Paul teaches, Romans 5. ver. 19. As
by the disobedience of one man many were made sinners, so by ye obedience of
one man many shall be made righteous. Neither does Cyprian say otherwise,
although he allude to the tasting of the forbidden fruit, De Coen. Dom.
Bibimus etc: We drink of the blood of Christ himself commanding, being
partakers of eternal life with him, and by him, abhorring the sins of
natural lust as vnpure blood, and granting our selves by taste of sin to have been deprived from blessedness and condemned, except the mercy of Christ, had
brought us again unto fellowship of eternal life by his blood. Although
Cyprian here allude unto the act in which disobedience was committed, yet in
the end he shows, that by the obedience of Christ shedding his blood for us,
we are restored into the favor of God, and not by actual drinking of the
natural blood of Christ into our bodies. Neither does Prosper Aquitanicus
think otherwise, Cont. Collat, Liberum ergo arbitrium etc. Free will therefore,
that is, the voluntary appetite of the thing that pleased it self, after it
had lothed the use of the good things which it had received, and the aids of
his own happiness, waxing of such account with it, bent his impotent greedines,
unto the experience of disobedience, drank the poison of all vices, and
drouned the whole nature of man with the dronkennes of his intemperance Thence
it comes, that before the eating of the same flesh of the son of man and
drinking his blood, he digest that deadly surset, he fails in memory, erreth
in judgment, wauereth in going, neither is he by any means meet to choose and
desire that good thing, whereof he depryued himself of his own accord. This
eating and drinking cannot be understood of eating and drinking the Sacrament,
for the will of man must be prepared both to choose and desire that good, from
which man is fallen, before ever he be admitted to the Lords table, as every
Papist will confess. What impudency then is it, upon shadow of some
allusion, to draw the ancient Doctors sayings so contrary to their meaning?
But Sander seeing the shameful absurdity that follows of this his imagined
real eatinge of Christ's flesh, to satisfy for the real eating of Adams
aple, for so he calls it, says it is no more needful that every man should
eat the body of Christ in his own person, then that every one should eat of
the aple to make them guilty, but it is absolutely needful (says he) that some
^r other eat it as really, as ever the apple was eaten, that all the rest, who
by baptism enter into the same body, may be one perfectly with Christ, whiles
they are one mystically with the^, who really eat the substance of Christ's
flesh, being the substance of our true sacrifice, truly roasted upon the cross.
This shift of descant, then will not serve the fathers of the old testament,
which were not baptized verily as the Papists hold, but in figure only.
Secondly if any such real eating were necessary, it were not to be fulfilled by
any, but by our savior Christ: for what soever the transgression of Adam was,
who being but one, made al guilty of damnation, that was to be satisfied by the
justification of one man, which was Christ, sufficient for all men unto
justification of life, Romans 5. ver. 18. Last of all I pray you mark Sander
his phrase of speech: The flesh of Christ was truly roasted upon the cross. To
omit the gross figure of rosting., and to register it among the other
points of fine cookery in the chapter before described: Mark that he says,
it was truly roasted upon the cross, and yet I dare say, he means not that
the cross was a very spitt, nor yet burning with fire to scorche it. But when
we affirm that Christ is truly eaten, he can by no means allow our saying,
except we should mean as he does, that Christ is putt in at our mouths, and
if not chewed with our teeth, which some of them hold, yet swallowed down our
throat, and so received into our bodies, to nourish them. But if he say well
that Christ's flesh was truly roasted upon the cross, because his body being
broken on the cross, was made meat for us, although it were not roasted with
fire, etc. then may we rightly say, that Christ's body and blood is truly
eaten and dronken of us by faith, although it be not put in at our mouths, nor
swallowed down our throtes, etc. He says ^^was truly roasted on the cross, and
truly rising from death, to the intent it might be truly eaten of us. etc. As
truly as his flesh was roasted, so truly is it eaten: but we acknowledge no
cooklike rosting, but a mystical preparation: even so we believe no eating with
champing, chawing, and swallowing, but a mystical and spiritual feeding and
nourishing, of which we are assured by the visible seals of bread and wine,
which we eat and drink bodily. After this, he alleges Gregorius Nyssenus in
Orat. Cathe^. to prove that it is necessary, as ye poisoned apple was eaten of
Adam to infect us with original sin, so, that the body of Christ be received
into our body, as really by our mouths, as ever the apple came in the mouth of
Adam. That he names not the 37. Chapter, where such a matter is spoken of, it
may be, the copy he saw, had no division of Chapiters: but rather I fear he
suppressed it of fraud, because that Chapter is confessed even by Sonnius a
Papiste, not to be found in many copies of that Catheticall book of Gregory:
and in deed the argument of that part of ye oration which goes before, and of
that which follows after, being of regeneration in baptism, which argument
is interrupted by this discourse of the supper, shows that it is foysted in
by some late writer, which would have the new doctrine of transubstantiation to
be credited under color of the authority of this ancient father. For if
Gregory had been purposed to have spoken of ye Lords supper in this book of
instruction, which he did write for to show the order and doctrine of
Catechizing, he would first have finished his treaty of baptism and
regeneration, and afterward have descended to the other part of Gods
dispensation, which consists in preserving and feeding his children that are
borne unto him, which grace is represented in the Lords supper. I pass over
yt Nicephorus testifies, even yt book in his time to have been corrupted by
diverse heretics and Origenists by name, which corruption and diversity of
copies gave some transubstantiator good hope, that his addition in such variety
of books might happilye of some be accounted for the authentical authority of
Gregory. And he was nothing deceived. For M. Sander, whether he think it to be
such, or only would have us to acknowledge it for such, dissembling the un
certeintie thereof, which other papists confess; sets it forth, as the
sound and undoubted authority of Gregory Nyssene. As for his vain
cauilling, that the figure of a medicine heals not, is foolish and absurd:
for so he might reason, that baptism is no medicine for original sin, but a
figure of a medicine. We make not the sacraments figures of medicines, but
outward signs of inward and spiritual healing. The virtue of cleansing
sins, is not included in the water, no more then the spiritual feeding is in
ye bread and wine. And more absurd it is, that he charge us with shadows
in the sacraments. And where he says, that all spiritual gifts are
inferior to ye flesh of Christ being in our mouth: if he mean inferior in
vtility, it is false: for by those spiritual gifts without that flesh, which he
imagines in our mouths, ye Papists confess, that we may be saved, but with
that flesh in our mouths, by their own doctrine, we may be damned.

From this place he begins to rave against Calvin, although he have
appointed a whole chapter following to confute his error. Caluines supper he
says, in respect of Christ's real substance, is but a mere savor of sweet
meats. As though Calvin did not acknoweledge that Christ is truly eaten of
them, yt worthily receive the sacraments. Beside this he charge Calvin, as
one yt sets forth the kingdom of the devil, and abaseth the kingdom and
gifts of God. Because he has diligently and eloquently set forth ye doctrine of
man's fall and damnation, but in ye doctrine of salvation and renouation by
Christ, he has dealt faintly and weakly. God be thanked, they which will read
Calvin of this point, with indifferent judgment, will confess, yt he has showed
no less diligence and eloquence therein, then in the other. And wherefore has
he set forth y^ one, but for the glory of the other? And even by those things
which be not slanders in Sand, by which he says he has abased ye kingdom and
gift of God, he has greatly magnified the glory thereof: which is, that all
power, virtue, help, comfort, grace, and gifts, come only from God by the
only means of Jesus Christ. Hereof it is that Christ's little flock is
contemptous in the eyes of the world, that many are called and few are
chosen, that his Church has no sacrifice propitiatory, no popish priesthood,
no one shepherd on earth, but only the death, eternal priesthood, and
great sheephearde Jesus Christ. As for the cold supper, small offering of
sufficient grace, baptism like a sheepemarke, no authority to make laws, no
communion of Saints, no real joining and uniting with Christ's flesh and
blood in the holy mysteries, etc. be Sanders lies, and slanders; not Caluins
assertions. After he has railed a crash at Calvin, unto whose felicity this
may be added, that he is slandered by so evil a person, as Sander is, he
repeteth the diverse suppers of Luther, Zwinglius, Calvin, joining to them
also the fantastical opinion of that epicurian gospeller, Carolastadius, and
disseuering Calvin from Zwinglius, with whom he agrees fully. And Caluines
supper he says, were good for Angels, to feed upon immortal meat in their
souls, but Christ has given his body and blood to be eaten and drunken of
our bodies to feed on. Verily, even as he has given the holy ghost to wash us
body and soul from all our sins, and to regenerate us to be the sons of
God: Sander might say, if he would, this were a regeneration, or birth, good
for Angels, that have no bodies. For he will not understand, that both body
and soul may be nourished by spiritual food, as well as both body and soul
borne a new by a spiritual washing and engraffing into the body of Christ.
But the Corinthians (says he) had two faults, both which the heretics do
follow. The first fault, they came to it after they had eaten their own
supper, so the heretics first devise what supper they will allow Christ, and
then they come to it, conforming it to their devise. In deed so do the
Papists. The second fault was, they did eat and drink alone without making
their meat common to the poor: so the heretics eat and drink alone,
teaching, that every man eats Christ only by measure of his own faith. Nay
rather the Popish heretics eat and drink all alone often times, not tarying
for other to communicate with them, and always they drink all alone, giving
no part to them that would drink with them, which is worse then the
Corinthians did: for they eat not their supper alone, which teach that Christ
must be eaten of the whole Church together, requiring faith in every man that
shall receive the Sacrament worthily. But Sander makes Christ so liberal,
that he gives himself to all that sit at the table, rich or poor, good or
badde. In deed, he offers himself to al, but he gives himself to none, but
to such as receive him thankefully, and which take profit by him: wherefore he
says, He that eats me, shall live for me, whereupon it follows inuincibly,
that he which lives not for him, eats him not. Neither says Hierom any
thing contrary to this, where he says, that Christ has given his body to be
eaten, himself being the meat and the feaster or guest. True it is, that
Christ alone in his death, was the priest, the Sacrifice, and the temple, or
altar, not playing all parts, as Sander lewdly speaks, but perfourming
thoroughly in his own person, whatsoever was necessary for our full and
perfect redemption, the seal and assurance whereof, with all benefits thereto
belonging, he gives us in his holy supper, and not bare odours of spiritual
grace, but a true communicating of his body and blood unto everlasting life, of
as many as with a true and lively faith receive it spiritually, as their bodies
receive the outward elements of bread and wine bodily. Like as in baptism we
receive not bare odours of spiritual grace, but are verily borne a new, and
ingraffed into the death, burial, and resurrection of Christ, after a divine
and heavenly manner with forgiveness of our sins, even as outwardly our
bodies are sprinkled or washed with pure water. Wherefore, that which we
teach of the receiving of the body and blood of Christ by faith, is no denying
of the Lords supper, but a clear exposition and setting forth of the same,
according to the holy scriptures, and the institution of our Savior Christ
himself.

CAP. VI.
A special error of Calvin is confuted, who taught, This is Sander.
my body, which is given for you, to be words of promise, in the way of
preaching at Christ's supper, whereas they are words of performance in the way
of working.

The long babbling, quarelling, and wrangling, that he uses in this large
Chapter, is grounded upon one poor Fulke.
sophistication of Sander, in disioyning those things, that are to be
conjoined and matched together. Namely, where Calvin says, the saying of
Christ to be words of promise: Sander presses him to say, they be words of
promise only, where he says expressly, that they are also words of
perfourmance, as Sander himself translateth his words: They are a lively
preaching, which may show his efficacy in accomplishment of that it promises.
Is not efficacy in accomplishment, which is al one with perfourmance, here
joined with promise? To omit therefore his railing against Calvin, for
singularity, and against ye preachers of England, for following his fancy,
etc. let us see, what matter he has to bring against Caluins saying, yt those
words are words of promise. First he confesses, yt they are words of promise,
fulfilling a promise made before, at Capernau^. Also they are words of promise,
in respect of the death of Christ, which is promised in these words which is
given for you, or, shall be given for you, etc. but this saying. This is my body,
is no more words of promise, then the saying: This is my well-beloved son,
which are words of witness, of a thing present. Then he will teach the
difference between a promise and a perfourmance: a promise (says he)
begins the bargain, the perfourmance ends it. Let it be so, that should
prove the words of Christ to be a promise, whereof the perfourmance follows
upon the conditions required.

In the institution of the supper, there is mention of a new covenant. In
every covenant there must be two parties at the least. Christ is one party,
but who is the other party, will Master Sander say? Every man, or every
faithful man only? The new testament is a covenant of forgiveness of
sins, but forgiveness of sins is not obtained of all men, but only of
them that believe: therefore not all men, but only the faithful are the other
party in this covenant. Wherefore, though the promise of eating of Christ's
body, even as of forgiveness of sins, is offered by Christ generally to all
men, yet the perfourmance is only unto the faithful, which are the other
party of the covenant. Whereof it follows, that the wicked men eat not the
body of Christ, and so the words of Christ are words of promise, the
perfourmance whereof was in them that did receive faithfully, that which he
offered. But the words of Christ (says he) speak not of the time to come, but
of the present time, ergo no promise. A sorry reason, by which he might prove,
a thousand words of promise in the Scriptures, to be no words of promise,
because they are spoken, not only in the present time, but also in the time
past. And yet the words of Christ must have relation unto the time to come.
For Christ did not consecrate bread and wine into his body and blood, but with
purpose, that they should be eaten and drunken. And therefore he bids them
first eat and drink, and then says, This is my body, this is my blood, that
is to say, In eating and drinking this bread and this cup, you shall eat
and drink my body and blood: Therefore, in these words, This is my body:
the covenant is not ended, as Sander says, until that which is offered on the
one party, be accepted on the other party. Where he affirms, that words of
promise, consist in bare talk, he gives a bare judgment of the promises of
God, which are effectual in work, although they be uttered in words. And
when he says, they have no condition, or delay annexed, it is untrue,
although it be not necessary, that every promise should have a condition, for
many promises are made absolutely. But Gods promises require the condition of
faith, in them that shall obtain the performance of them, and so does this.
And therefore the promise of spiritual communicating, (which Sander obiecteth)
helps not Judas, because he receives it not with faith. Sander asks
Calvin, whether the condition of faith, be written in the supper or no: If
not, how dare Calvin supply it? Has he not choked Calvin with this question,
trow you? But if Calvin can find a covenant in the supper, he will not seek
far off, to find faith, necessarily required in the receivers thereof. But
he has two other reasons against ye promise, one of the word, This; another
of the word, Is. This (says he) shows where the thing is, that it points
unto. The body of Christ is promised, and also pointed unto. If the word,
This, be such a pointer, I pray you sir, where is that which is pointed unto,
when he says of the cup: This is the new testament in my blood? Was that
which seemed the cup, or that in the cupp the new testament, which was
pointed unto? If it were a sacrament or seal of the new testament, confirmed
in his blood which was shed for us, then was the other a Sacrament or seal of
the new testament, confirmed in the breaking and giving of his body for us. It
angreth Sander, that Calvin should: say Christ saying, This is my body,
speaks not to the bread, but to his disciples, wherein he would make him so
singular, that not only the Papists, but also all Lutherans and Zwinglians,
do confess the words to be spoken to the bread, which is a shameful lie,
both of the Lutherans and of the Zwinglians, for none of them is so mad, to
think that when he began to speak to his disciples, and say: Take and eat,
then he turned his tale from them, and spoke to the bread, when he said: This
is my body, and then again to his disciples, when he said, which is given for
you: For, if he had spoken to the bread, he would have said, thou art my
body, and not, this is my body, which is of the third person. And to put all
out of doubt, S. Mark says, speaking of the cup, (...), and he said unto
them, This is my blood. If he spoke not to the wine, but to his disciples, when
he said, this is my blood, then surely he spoke not to the bread, but to his
disciples, of the bread: when he said, This is my body. Mark this well, for
although it be but a small matter, yet it overthrows the whole mystery of
Popish Consecration. The argument of this verb, est, is, takes for proof,
that which is in controversy, namely, that it is put properly, because it is
indeed Christ's body, when the words are spoken. But seeing by your own
divinity, it is not the body of Christ, before the last syllable, vm, be
pronounced, how could the Verb est, be taken properly: when neither before
it was spoken, nor while it was in speaking, the body of Christ was made of
bread? But Sander will know, by what Scriptures, Calvin proves his lewd
interpretation: As though Calvin affirms any thing, of this matter, which
he proves not plentifully by the scriptures, which are of the nature of
Sacraments generally: and of this Sacrament especially, of the nature of the
humanity of Christ, and of many tropicall speeches, used throughout the
scriptures, which he that will, may read at large in his writings. In the mean
time, let us see, how Sander does confute his fond opinion by the word of God.

The first argument of confutation, is gathered of ye present te^ps, used in
these words: This is my body, which agrees not with the nature of a promise,
which is a prediction of a thing to come. I have before answered this lewd
argument: for all promises are not uttered in ye future temps: Esaias says, Puer
natus est nobis, a child is born unto Esaias. 9.
us, when he was not borne, 500. years after. I have showed before, that the
words, This is my body, have relation to ye eating which followed after they
were uttered. Calvin says further, yt Christ speaks not to ye bread, that
it should be made his body: But he commands his disciples to eat, and
promises them ye communicating of his body and blood. Against this, Sander
replieth, yt God said to his disciples, take, eat, which is a commandment,
and no promise: He says further, This is my body, that is, ye making of the
meat, which must be eaten, and the showing of it, but no promise. S. Paul
says, 1. Cor. 10. The bread which we break, is it not the communicating of
the body of Christ? Who dare say the contrary? But is the bread which we
break, an actual communicating of the body of Christ, before we eat it? No
verily. How is then the bread that we break, a communicating of the body of
Christ, before we eat it, but by promise of communicating to them, that shall
eat it faithfully? And if these words, This is my body, be not words of
promise, of communicating his body, what other words of promise, can Sander
show in the institution? But now will Sander prove at large, that Christ
spoke not to his disciples, when he said, This is my body: but to the bread.
Although I have already proved, out of the words of S. Mark, that Christ
spoke to his disciples, so plainly, that Sanders ears may gloe on his head
for shame, to read it: yet will I consider all his particular arguments, by
which he takes upon him to prove, that Christ spoke to the bread.

The first reason, Christ speaks sometimes to insensible creatures: as to the
winds, ye figtree, and all creatures here ye voice of God, when he speaks
to the^, so he speaks here, to the bread. If this consequent, did hang to
the Antecedent by any necessity, I would grant it; otherwise I must deny it.
Well, yet thus much is gained, that it is not absurd, that Christ should
speak to the bread, being a senseles creature. yes very absurd, that
beginning to speak to men, he should suddenly make an apostrophe to bread, and
without any transition, but even with a relative, as sodenlie return to speak
to men. And yt speaking to bread, he should use no word of ye second person,
which he uses, in speaking to the Winds, and to the Figtree.

The second reason begins thus: Calvin says, Christ spoke not to the bread
I tell him, he spoke to the bread, not as to a thing which should carry
bread, but as to that which should be changed into his body: For he called
the bread his body. Is not this a magistrall, or doctorall kind of reasoning?
I tell him (quoth Sander) it is so: but how proves he yt Christ spoke to the
bread, because he called it his body? Which if Calvin will deny, he has it
ready out of Tertullian, aduer. Marc. lib. 4. Panem corpus suum appellat: He
calls the bread his body. But we cannot call a thing, except we speak unto
it. Therefore when Christ called the bread his body, he spoke unto the bread,
as if he had said unto the bread, be thou my body. Who would have thought it?
Sander cannot call a stone, a stone, but he speaks to a stone: nor a shouell,
a shouell, but he speaks to a shouell. And with Sander, it is all one, to
say: This is a shouell, or a stone, and be thou a shouell, or a stone. Nay, he
will say, with God, calling and making is all one, where he will make one thing
of another. In deed that is another matter. If this will of God could be
proved, of the bread to make his natural body, calling and making might be
one, and yet it would not follow, that Christ intending to turn bread into
his natural body, by these words: This is my body, could not do it,
except he spoke to the bread.

But now let us see, how he proves, that Christ made the bread, his
natural body. First, Ambrose writes de iis qui mist. init. Cap. 9. Ante been
dictionem etc. Before the blessing of the heavenly words, it is named another
kind, after consecration, the body is signified. He himself names it his
blood. Before consecration, it is named another thing, after consecration it
is called blood. And thou say, Amen: that is, it is true. That which the
mouth speaks, let the inward mind confess. That which the speech sounds,
let the affection feel. Out of these words, Sander says, that it is evident,
that Christ spoke to the bread and wine; but by what reason, I cannot devise:
and that the making of them, is in deed so as they are called and signified,
because the people answered, Amen. I grant the bread and wine, are made
sacraments, to signify the body and blood of Christ, and that is it, which
the people confess, if Ambrose expound the words of Christ truly, when he
says, that the body of Christ is signified after consecration by that which
was called bread and wine before the words of blessing, and afterward is
called the body and blood of Christ. This 1. witness speaks not so much
against him, but Tertullian, his second witness speaks much more. Acceptum
panem and distributum discipulis, corpus suum illum fecit: Hoc est corpus meum,
dicendo, id est, figura corporis mei. He made the bread which was taken, and
distributed to the disciples, his body, saying: This is my body, that is to
say, the figure of my body. Lo he made the bread his body. We confess,
but how his body? That is to say, a figure of his body: but being a figure
stops not the real truth of his body (says he): no more then Christ,
being a figure, printe or form, of his fathers substance, which is yet also
his substance in deed. What say thou, Sabellian heretic? Is not Christ a
distinct hypostasis, from his father, because he is Homousion of the same
substance, and is not that proved, because he is Character substantiae patris?
And yet there is great difference in comparing the persons of the divinity,
with the figures of Christ. Yea says Sander, There can be no more gross,
more vile, more blasphemous opinion, then to think that Christ is a bare man:
etc. Or that his figures are like the figures of the old Law. And again,
look what odds is between God and man, so much believe thou to be between
his naming, or his figures of the new Testament, and all other figures. Why
Sander, were the namings in the old Testament of man, and not of GOD? Were the
figures instituted of man, and not of God? Yea, were they not instituted of
Christ himself? If they were instituted of God, how follows thy beastly
conclusion, of the difference, or odds of figures, and naming of the new
Testament, and figures, and namings of the old Testament? The rock was
Christ, it was a figure and naming of the old Testament, so named and
instituted by Christ himself, why should there be more transubstantiation of
the bread, then of the rock? except as thou wast even now a Sabellian, so in
this thou art a Marcionite, that beleeuest another GOD, and Christ of the new
Testament, then was of the old Testament.

Augustine, speaking of the figures of the old Testament, and comparing them
with the figures of the new Testament, says, Sacramenta illa fuerunt, in
signis diuersa sunt, in re quae significatur paria sunt. Those were sacraments,
they are diverse in signs, but in the thing which is signified, they are
equal. in Joan. 6. Tr. 26. Over, and beside this, examining Tertullian, let us
ask him, what did Christ distribute to his disciples? He will answer panem,
bread. Again, how made he the bread his body? he answers, he made it
a figure of his body. Yea says Sander, the Sacrament is a figure of Christ's
body: because it shows his death until he come.

But what is the sacrament with you Papists? The natural body of Christ.
Then the natural body of Christ, is a figure of the body of Christ: if this
be not shameless trifling, I report me to you. Tertullian is a good
expounder to interpret the name of Corpus, by figura Corporis, if Corpus be
taken properly. But to proceed. The next reason to prove that Christ spoke to
the bread, is this: The Sacrament is a sacrifice, ye act which offers it,
and voweth it, pertains as well to the thing offered, as unto God, to whom it
is offered: as when a Lamb is offered, God in the Lamb is honored, prayed
unto, blessed, thanked, and praised. I omit these strange phrases: God is
prayed to, in a Lamb. etc. But speak plainly Sander, if thou dare: is the
Lamb spoken unto, when it is said, This is the Passover: This is the blood
of the covenant, which God has made with you? For thou must not think, to
reason with men in such sort, as boys would not suffer thee to pass. The
act of sacrificing perteyneth to the thing offered: therefore the thing
offered is spoken unto. But how prouest thou, that this Sacrament is a
sacrifice? Because, it is the remembrance of that great sacrifice, made by his
death upon the cross, It must also needs partake that nature, whereof it is a
remembrance: and consequently, it must be certainly believed, to be a true
sacrifice, as that of the cross was. Who will grant, or how can thou prove,
the mayor of this argument, Every remembrance must partake the nature of that,
whereof it is a remembrance? Is the remembrance of a man, a man? or the
remembrance of God, God? or to pose thee in thine own popery, is the memory of
a Mass, as you call it, a Mass? But that reason cannot prove, authority shall
enforce. First Irenaeus lib. 5. ad Haereses says, that when the bread broken
and the mixed chalice percipis verbion dei, the eucharistie of the body and
blood of Christ is made. The bread (says Sander) cannot take the word, which
is not directed to it. Yes, as well as all creatures are sanctified by the word
of God, spoken by God to men, and by prayer directed to God by men, and not to
ye creatures yt are eaten and dronken. The same Irenaeus, is cited lib. 4. Cap.
34. saying, Panis percipiens vocationem dei, bread receiving the calling of
God, is not now common bread, but the eucharistie consisting of two things,
earthly and heavenly. If vocation be not here taken for invocation, or calling
upon God, as it is most like, yet at least, it is taken for the virtue of Gods
word, which it may receive, although the word be directed to men, and not to
bread. But the earthly thing whereof the sacrament consists, (says Sander) is
the old form of bread, as though accidents without the subject and substance
of earth, be earthly. Secondly the heavenly thing is the body of Christ: this
is true, if he meant as Irenaeus means, the body of Christ, the divine virtue
and efficacy of Christ's body sacrificed, for our redemption. But as he
understands it, for the natural body of Christ: like as it is monstrous to
affirm that the form or shape of bread is an erthly matter: so is it
heretical and anabaptisticall, to say, that the natural body of Christ is an
heavenly matter or substance.

The second authority is, Justinius in Apol. 2. Cibu^ qui per verbum
precationis, etc. We have learned that the food which is consecrated by the
word of prayer, which we took of him, to be the flesh and blood of Jesus
Christ. He yeldeth the words of Justinius, who interlaceth this Parenthefis
next to the word, Food, (...), of which food our blood, and flesh by
transmutation, are nourished: which confuteth transubstantiation, and carnal
eating. But to the matter in question. This word of prayer (says Sander) can
be none other, but, This is my body: as though Christ has not taught us to
frame our prayers, but by that saying. But see the conclusion that will
follow, admitting these words, This is my body, to be words of prayer:
Then are they not words of performance: for prayer and performance differ as
much as promise, and performance. Again, when Sander says, they are not
words of preaching, because they are words of prayer: for preaching is
directed principally to the people, and prayer only to GOD. Mark the
conclusion. If they be words of prayer, and words of prayer be directed
only to God: then are they not directed to the bread.

The like may be gathered of that he says, that they be words of
sacrifice, which were Idolatry, to direct to any but to God: and therefore
charge Calvin with horrible Idolatry, for directing them to the people, not
remembering that it is as great Idolatry, to direct them to the bread, if
they were words of sacrifice. But they are directed finally to GOD (says
he) as though words of preaching, were not finally directed to GOD: and by
the way of sacrificing, they appertain to the bread, as though words of
sacrificing appertain not to the people, for whom the sacrifice is offered,
as much and more, then to the thing that is sacrificed. For what is a sacrifice
of an Ox, or a Calfe (of which he takes similitudes) but a figurative
preaching? Has any man so great leisure to confute such insensible arguments?

But Hierom ad Euag. tom. 2. says, that at the prayers of Priests, the body
and blood of Christ is made. Doubtless at none other prayers (says Sander)
then wherein they say, with mind of sacrificing over bread, This is my
body: etc. seeing his argument is nothing else, but doubtless, we may not
doubt upon it. A strange prayer, wherein nothing is asked, and he that
prays, speaks not in his own person, but in the person of another. But
August. says in Psalm. 39. The performance of things promised, has taken away
ye promising words, I will give, is a word of promise; I have given, is a word
of performance. The Eua^gelists testify, yt Christ has given, therefore his
words are not words of promise. I answer, The Evangelists testify, that
Christ gave bread, which he brake, and gave unto his disciples, promising the
communicating of his body, to them that did eat it faithfully, in saying, this
is my body which is broken for you: the condition of faithful receiving,
required in all Gods couenantes, must needs be included in this, although in
every place where mention thereof is made, it be not expressed.

From this matter, he returns to the former talk of sacrifice. These words
(says he) fulfill the act of sacrifice, and therefore they are called of
Justinius Martyr (...) the word of prayer, or vow. It is false that he says
that Iustine calls these words, This is my body, words of prayer, or vow:
for he says, the food to be (...), that for which thanks is given by word of
prayer: yet Augustine says Ep. 59. Vouentur, etc. Al things are vowed which
are offered to God, specially the oblation of the holy altar. And again,
Orationes. etc. We take prayers to be said, when that which is on the Lords
table, is blessed and sanctified and broken to be distributed. This blessing
and sanctifiing (says Sander) is made by prayer, that prayer is vowing to God
of bread and wine: let all this be granted, what follows? The word of vowing,
is to say over it, This is my body. That is the matter in controversy, which
with Sander, is always a good argument, but yet remains to be proved. But
now we must see ye difference between Calvin and the old fathers. Augustine
calls the Sacrament an oblation. Irenaeus li. 4. Ca. 32. witnesses that
Christ having taken bread and given thanks, said. This is my body, and
confessed the chalice to be his blood, and taught a new oblation of the new
testament, which also he proves out of Malachie the Prophet. Calvin will
have no working upon the bread, but only in the minds of the hearers, and
neither prayer, nor vow, nor sacrifice, in these words. Neither has Sander
proved, that in these words, is either prayer, vow, or sacrifice.
Nevertheless, Calvin acknowledges, the celebration of the supper to be such
an oblation as the fathers under stood, namely a sacrifice of thanksgiving,
and not of atonement for sins. For thus writes Irenaeus: Noui testamenti
docuit oblationem quam ecclesia ab Apostolis accipiens, in vniuerso mundo
offert deo, ei qui alimenta nobis praestat primitias suorum munerum, etc. He
taught the oblation of the new testament, which the Church receiving from the
Apostles, offers to God through out the whole world, even to him which
gives food unto us, the first fruits of his gifts. Here is no oblation of
the body and blood of Christ, but thanksgiving unto God for his benifites. And
what the sacrifice foreshewed by Malachie was, he expounds out of S. John, in
the Apocalipse, the prayers of the saints. Cap. 35. Also Cap. 34. expounding
what is that pure sacrifice foreshewed by Malachie, and taught by Christ, he
says: Oportet enim nos oblationem deo facere, and in omnibus gratos inueniri
fabricatori deo, in sententia pura, and fide sine hypocrisi, in spe firma, in
dilectione feruenti, primitias earum quae sunt eius creaturarum offerentes: and
hanc oblationem Ecclesia solapuram offert fabricatori, offerens ei cum
gratiarum action ex creatura eius. For we must make this oblation to God, and
in all things be found thankful to God our maker in a pure mind, and faith
without hypocrisy, in steadfast hope and fervent love, offering the first
fruits of those creatures which are his: and this pure oblation, the Church a
lone offers to her maker, offering to him of his own creature, with
thanksgiving. Thus writteth Irenaeus of the sacrifice of the Church, which
cannot stand with the Popish sacrifice, of Christ's natural body and blood.

And whatsoever Gregory Nyss. Chrysostom, or Ambrose write, of changing the
bread, consecrating of the things set forth, working of Christ's words, has
none other meaning, but of the spiritual changing, consecrating, and working
of God, in the worthy receivers of this sacrament, as in more proper places,
shall be showed out of every one of them.

The next argument to prove that Christ spoke to the bread, is of the custom
of the East Church, in which, the people answered Amen, when the words of
consecration were pronounced alowde, which he proves out of Ambrose. The same
appears in Augustine sermon ad insants, which proves, that it was the
custom of the Latin Church in those days, to pronounce the words openlv: for
Ambrose and Augustine were both of the West or Latin Church, and therefore the
fecret whispering of the Popish Church, is proved to be but new, in
comparison, belike invented since transubstantiation came to town, and
therefore that custom proves nothing worth the answering, howsoever Sander
prefer it before the custom of the elder Church. To the which I answer, that
Amen may be said, as well to words of promise, and more properly, then to
words of performance. For Amen, does not only affirm a thing to be so, but
also wishes that it may be so.

But now, there is another ancient custom, witnessed by Irenaeus out of Eusebius.
lib. 5. Cap. 24. who reproouing Victor bishop of Rome, for exco^menicating the
Churches of Asia, dissenting from him in the celebration of Easter, affirms
that Soter, Anicetus, Pius, Higinus, Telesphorus, and Xystus, used solemnly to
send the Eucharisty to those priests, who came out of those quarters, where
Easter was kept otherwise then it was it Rome. Ergo (says he) the sacrament is
a corporal real thing, which may be preserved, carried, sent up and down, and
so at last received. And so consequently, the words in question, are words of
performance, and not of promise. Although the consequence is not sure, yet the
foundation of this whole argument is naught. For Irenaeus says not, that the
Sacrament was preserved, carried, sent up and down, but that it was sent
solemnly unto strangers, not into foreign countries, but to such as came to
Rome, neither does he say, that it was sent unto their lodginges or Innes,
but for any thing that he says, it was sent unto them, being present at the
time of distribution and celebration of the supper: for he says before:
Nunquam tamen ob hoc repulsi sunt ab Ecclcsiae societate, aut venientes ab
illis paribus non sunt suscepti. Yet were they never for this repulsed from the
society of the Church, or coming from those parts, were not received. And
afterward he shows, that Anicetus did give place unto Polycarpus,
permitting him to minister the Communion, as one whom he honored. So that no
reservation, nor sending up and down, is hereof proved, other then sending
the communion by the Deacons, about the Church, as their custom was. But
Justinius says expressly, that it was sent unto them which were absent, by the
Deacons, which had no power to consecrate, and therefore Calvin reprooueth
that custom for an abuse.

But for as much as Justinius makes mention before of the collation of alms,
which was also blessed, and that he affirms, that the Deacous carried it, is
not unlike, but that this carriage might be of bread and wine, which was then
offered in great quantity, to the relief of such poor, as being let by
sickness or imprisonment, could not be present, at the holy assemblies. Or if
you will needs understand, that which was sent to be the sacrament, although
the Deacons might not consecrate, yet might they declare the virtue and force
of the consecration, and the use of the Sacrament, unto such as they did carry
it, from the congregation, with which, those that upon necessary cause were
absent, were present in spirit, and might communicate more tollerably, then
they which among ye Papists, when they have no let, refuse to communicate with
the priest, and after in sickness receive their mass cake, communicating with
none at all. Nevertheless, it cannot be denied, but such carrying of the
sacrament, if it were used in the eldest Church, was an abuse, because it has
none allowance in the holy Scriptures of Christ's institution, but a
commandment to the contrary: for these words, Take and eat, be words of
commanding: therefore keeping and sending, which are contrary to these,
cannot be defended, howsoever they might be excused. Wherefore, it is without
reason, that Calvin is charged with intolerable pride, for finding fault with
the primitive Church, and bringing no reason of his reproving. For Calvin
opposes the commandment of Christ, the end of the institution, which he
worthily calls the truth, against any custom, of any man, how good soever
he were. Cyprian says, we must not regard what any man has done before us,
but what Christ, which is before all, has done and commanded to be done. lib.
2 Ep. 3. The custom of ministering with water, was ancient, and used in the
primitive Church, by some (as it should seem by Cyprian) otherwise godly men.
But he concludes against it, Neque hominis consuetudinem sequi oportet, sed
Dei veritatem; Neither must we follow the custom of man, but the truth of
God. It is therefore a fault, to keep the sacramental bread and wine, or to
send it about, because Christ has neither done nor commanded it to be done,
but the contrary, to be eaten and dronken. This reason of Cyprian is Caluins
reason, of whose writings, Sander wills all men to take heed: and yet he
says, they shall find in them neither learning nor honesty. If there be no
learning in them, there is no great danger of hurt by reading of them. I
marvel, what that is, which you Papists call learning: for if it be
knowledge of sciences, of tongues, of ancient writings, of things past, of
things present, weight in reasoning, eloquence in uttering, power in reproving,
or whatsoever was in old time accounted for learning, I trust al indifferent
men will confess, that great steps thereof may be found in Caluins writing.
But if learning be nothing else with Papists, but that which they fantasy
themselves to know, there is none learned but Papists. Whereas Sander
threatens upon the defense of Caluins supposed error, taken in hand by any of
his scholars, to discover more of the ignorance of their arrogant Master, if
he can have so much leisure from his traitorous practices in Ireland, which he
has lately taken in hand, under the service of his devilish blasphemous and
antichristian master, the Pope, I wish him not to spare: not doubting, but as I
have so discovered his proud, and yet blockish ignorance, in this Chapter, in
such sort as his friends will blush to read it, although he be past shame
himself: so in any matter, wherein the Church of England does consent with
Caluins writing, I shall be able by Gods help, so to defend the truth, that
all his much babbling, trifling, quarrelling, controlling, lying, railing, shall
turn to his own confusion, and the reproach of the Baby lonicall strompet,
which he labors, both with pen and sword, tongue and hand, both like an
heretic and a traitor, to protest and maintain against the church of God.

The second book.
CAP. 1.
The Catholics require their cause to be uprightly tried by the Sander.
holy scriptures, which they have always studied and reverenced.

THis request is reasonable, if it were Fulke.
faithfully meant, but it is nothing but an heretical brag, because you seem
to have color in the holy scriptures, for your carnal, and as you call it,
real presence, otherwise, what study soever you have followed in your closets,
your open writings declare small reverence unto the holy Scriptures. For
Pigghius one of them, whom you name to have convinced these heresies in our
days, by holy scripture, calls the holy Scripture a nose of wax, and a
dumb Judge. These I ween be words of small reverence. Eckius, another of
them, calls the Scripture, a black Gospel, and an inkish divinity. And
Hosius, a third man says, these words of our Savior Christ, Drink ye all
of this, if they be understood generally, as well of lay men as of Priests, to
be the express words of the devil, and that there is no word in all the
Scripture of power to save, but one only word, Dilige.

And generally, all Papists, which before our time, and in our days, have
taken upon them the exposition of the holy Scriptures, submitting the
understanding of them to the Popes determination, declare, that they reverence
them not as the holy word of God, but esteem them as a leaden rule, which
they may draw to any thing that shall please them. The absuide and lewd
interpretations of many of the Popes, and other their applesquires, whereof the
subtiler Papists in these days, are ashamed, would fill a large volume, if I
should go about to rehearse them. The best excuse that Harding can find for
many of them, is that they are spiritual daliance (in the devils name) by
which you may see, what reverence they bear to the holy scriptures, that make
them an argument of daliance.

CAP. II.
It is proved by the word of God, that evil men receive the Sander.
both of Christ in his supper.

The Apology against which Sander fights, professes, That in the supper
(unto such as believe) there is Fulke.
truly giu en the body and blood of the Lord. Sander replyeth, that Judas
received the body of Christ, ergo not only they that believe. Concerning
Judas, it is a question, whether he received the Sacrament or no. Not only
because, as Sander confesses, that some ancient fathers thought that he went
out before the supper, namely, Hilarious in Math, Can. 30. Post que Judas
pr^dit^y iudicaur, sine quo Pascha accepto calice and fracto pane conficitur.
After which things Judas is declared to be a traitor, without whom the
Passover is made, the cup being taken, and the bread being broken: But also
by consequence of Sanders own confession in lib. 1, Cap. 4. fol. 18. where he
affirms, that Christ did institute the Sacrament after he had eaten the
Paschall Lamb, washed his disciples feet, and then sat down again to
supper. But S. John testifies, that Judas departed immediately after the soppe
received, which was before supper was ended. For this soppe could not be the
sacrament, (as Augustine thinks) seeing the word (...) signifies a soppe
dipped in brothe, and so was this soppe dipped in the platter, and not in the
cup. But to admit that Judas was present, and did receive the Sacrament;
how proves he, that he received the body of Christ? That which Christ
delivered, Judas received: Christ delivered his body, ergo Judas received his
body. Neither the mayor nor the minor of this argument, is out of
controversy. For Judas received not whatsoever Christ delivered: for Christ
delivered a spiritual communication of his body, as Saint Paul witnesses to
them that would receive it, which Judas received not: therefore the mayor is
false. The minor takes as granted, that whereof is all the controversy:
namely, that Christ delivered his body under the forms of bread, which we
deny, affirming that he gave bread into their hands, and his body after a
spiritual manner, to them which received it by faith.

The Apology further affirms, the Papists to teach the very body of Christ
to be eaten substantially, not only of wicked men, but also (which is horrible
to speak) of mise and dogs. Sander answers, that it is not worth the
while to discuss, whether mise and dogs, in some sense eat the body of
Christ, because the Catholics keep it so warily, yt neither mouse nor dog may
com nigh it: wherein he controlleth the scholemen, who have long disputations
and doctorall determinations of that question. In the end he thinks it worse,
yt wicked men should eat, then if dogs or mise should eat it. But in deed
they are both blasphemous absurdities. As for the fathers, whom he quoteth,
for wicked men's eating of the body of Christ, we shall consider in the next
Chapter, which is proper for that title. His next argument is out of S. Paul:
whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cupp of the Lord unworthily,
shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. Of this text he reasons
thus: unworthy eating, supposes an eating. It is very true: but Saint Paul
calls it eating of this bread, and not eating of this body. Yea, says
Sander, Saint Paul does warily describe that kind of bread, both with an
article and a Pronoune: ergo that bread is the body of Christ. I deny that
argument. The article and the Pronoune, show that it is not common bread, but
the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. But how can he which eats
this bread unworthily, be guilty of the body of Christ, which he eats not?
Very well. For he which abuses the Kings seal, is guilty of ye kings
Majesty, which he acknowledges not. But this argument out of Saint Paul, he
refers unto another time, returning again to Judas. That thing whereof
Christ said to the twelve, Take, eat, and drink, was taken, eaten, and
dronken of all the twelve, and was but one thing only concerning eating and
drinking, that is his body and blood: therefore Judas did eat the same that
Peter, James, and John did.

We heard in the last Chapter of the first book, that it consisted of two
things, by ye judgment of Irenaeus, an earthly sub stance, and an heavenly,
the one all received, the other only the faithful, therefore, the antecedent
of this argument is false. But if that argument be not plain enough, we must
take another. Judas and John did eat one thing: Each of them, that food,
whereof Christ said, this is my body: but John did truly eat Christ's
body: ergo Judas did truly eat Christ's body. I answer, the mayor is
ambiguous, for if one food be taken for one bread, it is true, but if one
thing be taken for the body of Christ, it is the matter in controversy, and
denied of us. Likewise the Minor is ambiguous. For if ye understand eating of
Christ's body truly, eating by faith spiritually, it is true, and as the
Apology means: if you understand eating Christ's body carnally, it is
false, and denied of the Apology, that John did so eat the body of Christ.
The argument is no better then this: Judas and John, did hear one Gospel each
of them, that whereof it is said, that it is the power of God to salvation:
But John did hear the Gospel to his salvation: ergo Judas did hear the Gospel
to his salvation. But Sander cauelleth, of delivering of bakers bread, and
nothing else, but Bakers bread. Christ offers two things, earthly bread,
and his divine body. Now if Judas receive the one, and refuse the other, what
folly is it to reason, of Christ's delivering? which is like as if a man will
deliver an obligation as his deed, and the party that should receive it,
will not receive it, but as a scrolle, and so renteth it in pieces. In deed
therefore Christ offers his body to all men: but they only receive it,
which believe. But eating by faith, (says Sander) is a preparation to worthy
eating, but the meat is all one, even as the baptism is all one, to the
wicked and to the godly. I will ask no better example, then of the Sacrament
of Baptism, where indeed, the water, which is the outward element, is common
to all that are sprinkeled or washed, as the bread is to all that eat: but
regeneration, the thing signified by the water, is proper only to the elect
of GOD: Even so the body of Christ, which is the thing signified by the
bread, is not received but of them, which believe unto eternal life.

CAP. III.
The ancient fathers teach, that evil men receive truly the body Sander.
of Christ.

The first father cited, is Origin, in Psalm. 37. who Fulke.
^aith: that those which come to the Eucharistie, without examining and
clensing themselves, are like to men sick of an ague, who presuming to eat
sanorum cibos, the meats of whole men, do hurt themselves. Whereupon Sander
gathers, that the meat of the supper, which is provided for whole men, is
truly, but not profitably eaten of the wicked. But that Origin was of no such
judgment, it is manifest by his express words, spoken of the eating of the
sacrament, and of the eating of the thing signified by the sacrament. In Math.
Chap. 15. Et haec quidem de typico symbolicoque corpore. Multa porro and de
ipso veroo dici possunt quod factum est caro verusque cibus, quem qui comederit
omnino viuet in aeternu^, quem nullus mallus potest edere. Etenim si fieri
possit, vt qui malus ad^^c perseueret, edat verbum factum carnem, cum sit
verbum and panis vi^^s, nequaquam scriptum fuisset, Quisquis ederit panem hunc,
vinet in aeternum. And these things truly are spoken of the figurative or
symbolical body. Many things also may be spoken of the word himself, which
was made flesh and very meat, which whosoever shall eat, undoubtedly he shall
live for ever, which no evil man can eat. For if it were possible yt he which
continues still evil, should eat the word which is made flesh, seeing he is
the word and ye bread of life, it had not been written: Whosoever shall eat
this bread, shall live for ever.

The second father is Basil: de baptismo, lib. 1. Cap. vlt. Asking what shall a
man say of him, who dares in vain and unprofitably, eat the body and drink
the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ? To this I answer, that Basil speaks
not of wicked men, but of the faithful, in whom the spirit of God was, and
yet a great work of mortification: therefore it follows, after the words
cited by Sander, (...), etc. and therefore much more giving the holy spirit.
They are not wicked, in whom the holy spirit is. Therefore the Aduerbes, Idely
and unprofitably, are not spoken simply, but comparatively, for, not so
diligently as they ought, not so profitably as they might.

The third father is Cypriane, de Coen. Domini. The sacraments for their part,
cannot be without their proper virtue, neither does Gods majesty by any means
absent it self, from the mysteries. But albeit the sacraments permit
themselves to be taken, or touched of unworthy men, yet those men cannot be
partakers of the spirit, whose infidelity or unworthiness withstandeth such
holiness. This authority is flat against Sander: the wicked may receive the
Sacraments, but not the spirit of Christ, if not the spirit, then not the
body, for Christ his body, is never disseuered from his spirit.

The fourth father is Hierome: but where, he shows not. Opponis mihi, etc.
Thou layest unto me the one measure of Manna called Gomor, and we take the
body of Christ equally. According to the merits of them that receive, that
which is one is made diverse. etc. The Sacrament is one in it self etc. There
is no question, but that the wicked are partakers of the Sacrament, which is
called the body of Christ, but of the body of Christ in deed, they are not
partakers. For it cannot, be truly said, of the natural body of Christ,
that it is made diverse, but the Sacrament which is called his body, is made
diverse, according to the faith or infidelity of him that receives it.

Augustine is the fifte witness: In Epist. 162. Tolerat etc. Our Lord him
self bears with Judas, he suffers a devil, a thieefe, and the seller of
himself, to receive among the innocent disciples, that which the faithful
know, our price. Nothing is our price (says Sander) but the body of Christ.
Yet may the Sacrament be called our price, as it is called the body of
Christ, for as touching that Judas received not the same with the rest of the
Apostles, Augustine shows in Joan. Tract. 59. Illi manducabant panem Dominum,
ille panem domini contra dominum. They did eat that bread which was the
Lord, he did eat the bread of the Lord, against the Lord. What should I
say more, when Sander confesses, that Saint Augustine says, de ciuitat. Dei
lib. 21. Cap. 25. Evil men are not to be said to eat the body of Christ. But
this he shadoweth with a vain gloss, that they receive not the effect of the
body of Christ, and cites other words of August. De verbis Dom. Ser. 22. Non
quocunque modo etc. Not howsoever a man eat the flesh of Christ, and drink
the blood of Christ, he abides in Christ, and Christ in him: but by a
certain kind of way. As though S. Augustine said (says he) Every way, the
flesh and blood of Christ is received in ye supper of our Lord. But how
shamefully he belyeth S. Augustine: you shall hear by his own words. Nec isti
ergo dicendi sunt manducare corpus Christi, quoniam nec in membris computandi
sunt Christi, vt alia taceam, non possunt simul esse and membra Christi and
membra meretricis. Denique ipse dicens, Qui manducat carnem meam, and bibit
sa^guinem meum, in me manet, and ego in eo; ostendit quid sit, non sacramento
tenus, sed reuera corpus Christi manducare, and eius sanguinem bibere. Neither
are evil men to be said, to eat the body of Christ, because they are not to
be accounted in the members of Christ: for to speak nothing of other matters,
they cannot be at once, the members of Christ, and the members of an harlot.
Finally, he himself saying, (He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood,
abides in me, and I in him) shows what it is, not as far as a sacrament
goes, but in very deed, to eat the flesh of Christ, and to drink his
blood. This saying of Augustine may serve to expound, not only what he
himself, but whatsoever any other ancient Father, seems to say of wicked
men, eating the body of Christ: namely, that they do it, Sacramento tenus,
but not reuera, they eat the body of Christ, as it may be eaten in an
outward sacrament, but not in deed.

The sixte witness is Gregory, in prim. reg. libr. 2. C. 1. Salutis, etc.
They receive not the fruit of salvation in eating of the healthful sacrifice.
Of these words, Sander can gather nothing, but that he adds of his own,
that the healthful sacrifice, is nothing but the natural body of Christ,
which Gregory neither says, nor means: but the sacrament which is
healthful to them which receive it faithfully.

The last that speaks (for he has six or seven more dombe names) is Beda
in Lucam Cap. 22. Whose antiquity, although it be not so great, as that we
should be bound to take him, for a lawful witness, yet because he lived
before the carnal eating of Christ's body was received, we will admit him.
H^^ compares (says Sander) that man to Judas, who with his sinful members,
presumes to violate illud inestimabile and inuiolabile domini corpus, that
inestimable, and inviolable body of our Lord. How could he violate it with
his members, if no part of his body touched it? I answer, by violating the
sacrament thereof, which they receive vnfaithfullie, and contemptuously. How
can he tread under his feet the son of God, and esteem the blood, in
which he was sanctified, common. etc. which never came near the one nor the
other, with his body? Heb. 10.

Let the reader judge, whether the judgment of the Fathers, does favor
Sander, more then the Apology. If any man will see more of this controversy,
he may resort to mine answer unto Heskins. lib. 3. from the 46. Chapter, to
the 56.

CAP. IIII.
What is the true deliverance of Christ's body Sander.
and blood.

The Apology says, that in the supper, there is truly Fulke.
delivered the body and blood of Christ, the flesh of the son of God,
quickening our souls, the food of immortality, grace, truth, life. This
doctrine, Sander confesses to be sound and Catholic, but out of it, he will
prove the Popish real presence, and that by two arguments.

The first reason is: Christ delivered but one thing at each time, when he
said, This, and This: The Apology confesses, that he delivered his body and
blood: ergo he delivered neither bread nor wine, but in appearance, and his
body and blood only in deed. I deny the Mayor, for unto the faithful (of
whom the Apology speaks) he delivered two things, of diverse natures in one
sacrament, or one thing consisting of two diverse natures, the bread and wine
corporally, his body and blood spiritually, as Irenaeus says. Neither is
there such force in this, and this, but that one thing of diverse natures, or
two things in one mystery, may be signified thereby. When God said: This is
the passover, it were a mad conclusion to say, it were no Lamb, or, This is
the new Testament, therefore it is not his blood: because, This can be but
one thing: Yet 'Sander clappeth hands to his own argument. O masters, truth
is strange, and by the adversaries own weapon, gets the victory.

His second reason is, When the body of Christ is truly delivered, it is
delivered according to the truth of his own nature. The nature of a body, is
to be delivered after a bodily manner: therefore the body of Christ is delivered
bodily. The Mayor is false, for the body of Christ may be truly delivered,
when it is delivered after a spiritual, and divine manner. For in the saying of
ye Apology, truly is contrary to falsely, and not to spiritually. And all the
Papists confess, that the body of Christ may be, and must be eaten
spiritually. Which of them dare say, the body of Christ is eaten falsely, when
it is eaten spiritually, or not eaten, when it is eaten spiritually, even
without the sacrament? Again, if Sander like this Mayor, I will thus infer
upon it: When the body of Christ is truly delivered, it is delivered
according to the truth of his own nature: But the nature of a body is to
occupy but one place at once, and that to fill with his own quantity, etc.
Therefore the body of Christ is so delivered, as it occupies but one place,
reteyneth quantity, and all other things required in ye nature of a true
body. Finally, whereas Sander in the determination of ye Apology, misseth
quickening of our bodies, but that he is disposed to play Momus, he might have
found that he misseth in the food of immortality, which touches our bodies
as well as our souls, and more properly.

CAP. V.
What it is which nourishes us in the supper of Christ. Sander.


The Apology says: that by the partaking of the body Fulke.
and blood of Christ, we are nourished to immortality. Hereupon Sander
infers, that nourishme^r is meat really present ergo the body and blood of
Christ is really present. This shall be granted, that the body and blood of
Christ, is really present with them, whom it norisheth, understanding really,
for truly and indeed, and unfeignedly. But Christ (says Sander) gave with his
hands that which nourishes. In proper form of speech, this is false: for he
had not his natural body, and blood in his hands, but a sacrament thereof,
which was a seal, and certain persuasion unto the faithful, of the
performance of his promise, which was the communicating of his body and blood,
which was performed after an heavenly, and spiritual manner.

CAP. VI.
The union, which is made by eating Christ's real flesh, must Sander.
needs be a natural union, before it be a mystical.

For this natural union, he brings no proof, but Fulke.
promises the proof in other places following: and therefore, unto those
places I defer the answer. In the mean time, it is a monstrous absurdity,
that seeing the mystical union with Christ, is of all the elect that ever
were, he affirms yt it cannot be without a natural union, by eating Christ's
flesh and blood, in the sacrament.

CAP. VII.
That the Apology speaking of the Lords supper, goes clean Sander.
from the word of God.

The words of the Apology, are these: We do acknowledge the Eucharist or the
Lords supper, to be a Fulke.
sacrament, that is to say, an evident token of the body and blood of Christ.
This is to bring men from the word of God (says he) to ye traditions of men.
For where have you in all the scripture, that the Lords supper is a sign or
token of the body and blood of Christ, that is, a sacrament? And because these
words are not found in the scriptures, from the beginning of the Genesis, unto
ye end of ye Apocalipse; written in so many letters, he fometh and fretteth like
a mad dog, against the authors of the Apology, for going from the word of
God, to the authority of men, Augustine and Ambrose, etc. Then the which
quarrels, nothing can be invented more foolish, or further from all wit,
learning, and honesty. For when we appeal to the authority of the scriptures
in all things, we never meant or said, that all other words should be
forsaken, which are not expressed in the bible; but that no doctrine is to be
credited, by what term so ever it be uttered, except the same be grounded upon
the manifest sense and meaning of the holy scripture, either expressed in
plain words, or else gathered by necessary consequence. Therefore seeing the
meaning of the names of sacrament, sign, or token, may necessarily be proved
out of the holy scriptures, and for that cause have been taken up and used, by
the ancient fathers, in the primitive Church, we use them as freely as they
did, and as we use other names likewise, the meaning of which, is plain to be
found in the scriptures, although the terms them selves be not: as Trinity,
persons, consubstantiall, etc. If Sander durst deny the names of sacrament,
sign, or token, to be agreeable to the scriptures, I would take pains to
prove them: but seeing he confesses, that they are good and lawful to be used
of the supper of Christ, it were superfluous la bour to travel in a needless
question. Among the names, that are given to the Lords supper, in the
scripture: That the cupp is called The new testament in the blood of Christ;
and that of S. Paul the supper is called spiritual meat and spiritual drink
(which last name Sander heaping up the rest omitteth) it does prove the names
of sacrament, sign, and token, so inuincibly, that we are no more afraid to
use them, then any of the other expressed in plain words of the scripture.
The name of sacrifice, which he enterlaceth by the way, because it is afterward
more at large discussed, I omit to write of, at this time.

CAP. VIII.
That S. Ambrose and S. Augustine taught more then two sacraments. Sander.


It had been meet that a sacrament had been first defined, Full(...)
and then this trifling should not have arisen, of the word. Sander himself
understands, mysterium in S. Ambrose, for a mystery, or sacrament. And in
deed the Greeks call that (...), which the Latins call Sacramentum. But if
every mystery, shall be a Sacrament, in that sense that baptism and the Lords
supper are so called, there shall not be only seven Sacraments, as he would
have, but more then seventy. The name therefore of Sacrament or mystery, is
somtims generally taken for every secret thing, that has an hidden
understanding, so is matrimony of S. Paul called a mystery, and of Augustine
the Sacrament of matrimony, and ordination is used. De bon. Con. Cap. 24. so
is oil and imposition of hands, cont. Donat. lib. 5. Cap. 20. reckoned among
the mysteries and Sacraments. But that which Sander does allege out of
Ambrose, is enforced: for speaking of the power which priests have to remitt
sins by repentance, or by baptism, he says, Vnum in vtroque mysterium. Sed
dices quia in ^auacro operatur mysterioru^ gratia, Quid in poenitentia? nonne
dei nomen operatur? There is one mystery in both. But thou will say, because in
baptism the grace of the mysteries does work, What in repentance? does not
the name of God work in these words, although he call them both mysteries?
Yet he puts a manifest difference, for in baptism he acknowledges the
grace of the mysteries to work, with yt visible seal: in the other, the name of
god only, without a visible seal: which Sander perceiving, and not being able
to answer these places of Augustine and Ambrose which are cited by the authors
of ye Apology, for the number of the Sacraments flies to the authority of
the late council of Florence, not regarding what Ambrose or Augustine has
written, who (he says) had not the charge to reckon up how many Sacraments
there are, And I say, that the seven Sacraments were not named in any session
of that council, but only in a decree of Eugenius the fourth, upon the sur^ised
reconciliation of ye Armenians, which is of small credit, ye same Eugenius for
his notable wickedness, being long before deposed by the council of Basil, and
an other Pope being chosen in his place.

CAP. IX.
That the supper of our Lord is the chief Sacrament of all, but Sander.
not acknowledged of the Apology, according to the word of God.

Seeing the holy scripture prefers not the one Sacrament Fulk.
above the other, and they are both a like effectual seals of the mercy of God
to the salvation of his elect, there is no cause, why the Apology should
acknoweledge such excellency of the one above the other, as Sander would
imagine. But it is a matter of great importance with Sander, that Dionysius
calls it the Sacrament of Sacraments, whereby it is not only proved to be
the worthier of the two, but also the chief of many Sacraments. The authority
of Dionysius, which he voucheth, as though it were without controversy of
antiquity, has often been disproued, to be without the compase of the six
hundredth years, seeing neither Eusebius, nor Hierom, nor Germadius, in their
several times, did ever hear of any such books of Dionysius the Ar^opagite.
S. Paul's disciple.

But where the Apology confesses, the Lords supper to be a Sacrament, a
sign, and an evident token, of the body of Christ, Sander says, it is
constrained, to believe many unwritten verities, and will not believe that only,
which is written in the scripture, of this supper, that it is the body and
blood of Christ.

Behold the vanity of this fond quareller, because these truethes are not
expressed in so many Latin or English words in the scripture, therefore they
be unwritten verities. The froward man himself, in the Chapter last before
confessed, that mysterium in the Greek, was the same, that is called
Sacramentum in Latin. If therefore the Lords supper, be called in Greek
mysterium, we may find it in the scripture to be called a Sacrament. For where
S. Paul says: let a man thus esteem us, as the ministers of Christ, and as
the dispensers of the mysteries of God: who doubts but under the name of
mysteries, the Lords supper and baptism is comprehended? although the name of
mystery, be larger in Greek, then we use the name of Sacrament in English: yet
in spite of the devil, the name of mystery and Sacrament, is truly verified
out of the scripture of the Lords supper and baptism. Likewise the name of
sign, being given by the holy ghost, usually, to other Sacraments, by
analogy, must likewise apperteine to this Sacrament. Ge. 17. Circumcision is
called the sign of the covenant, between God and the people. Likewise Exo. 12.
the blood of the Paschal Lamb, is called a sign, and S. Paul To. 4. calls
the sign of circumcision, a seal of justification.

Last of all, having found in the scriptures, the Lords supper to be a
Sacrament, sign, or seal; the argument of relatiues, leads us by ye hand,
to call it an evident sign, or token of ye body and blood of Christ, given for
us: for that is ye thing signified, which is proved by these words, This is my
body, which is given for you, etc. Even as the Lamb is called the passover,
which was the Sacrament, sign, or evident token of the Passingouer, and not
the Passover it self. But Sander urges us to answer, whether the sign of the
body, and the body it self may stand together or no? I answer him plainly,
except he destroy the nature of things opposite, the sign and the thing
signified, cannot stand together at one time, and in one respect: as it is
impossible, that Abraham can be the father of Isaac, and the son of Isaac
also. But in diverse respects, they may stand together, as Abraham is the
father of Isaac, and the son of Therah. So the bread and wine cannot be both
the sign of Christ's natural body and blood given for us, and the very same
natural body it self. But as it is a divine mystery, and heavenly seal, it
is truly called that, whereof it makes assurance, namely, the body and blood
of Christ, even as the cup is called the new testament, whereof it is a
seal and assurance, and as baptism is called regeneration, being a seal and
assurance thereof unto the children of God.

CHAP. X.
That the supper of our Lord, is both the sign of Christ's body, Sander.
and also his true body, even as it is a sacrament.

He requires diligent ear, as though he had found out a great argument for
his cause, when in deed, it overthrows Fulk.
himself altogether. For he will show, that such a sign as belongs to
Christ's institution, must needs have the same truth present, whereof it is
the sacrament. Which being granted, it proves no more the truth present in
the one sacrament, then in ye other, seeing they belong both to the institution
of Christ. But God and Christ (says he) cannot institute a false sign or
token. I say so also: and withal I say, that seeing God instituted all the
Sacraments of the old Testament, which were signs and tokens of Christ,
Christ was truly present in them, even as truly as in our Sacraments: and
therefore Saint Paul teaches, that Our fathers did drink of the same
spiritual drink, that we do; for they drank of the spiritual rock, which
rock was Christ. If Sander could content himself with such truth and
presence of Christ, as he does exhibit in baptism, and did exhibit in all the
Sacraments of the old testament, which were of his institution, we might soon
be agreed. But in the mean time, you see him overthrown in his own argument.
Other matters, not incident to the present controversy, I omit, as that the
holy ghost in baptism, at the same instant does wash the soul from sin, as
though the effect of baptism extended no farther, then to the time of washing
with water. Likewise, that the outward pronouncing of the words over the
bread and wine, is the Sacrament. Whereby it follows, that when the sound of
the words is once past, it is no longer a Sacrament, and consequently, the
Papists must not call that which they worship, the Sacrament of the altar. etc.

CAP. XI.
What sign must chiefly be respected in the Sacrament of Sander.
Christ's supper, and what a Sacrament is.

There be (if we believe Sander) four kind of signs Fulk.
in the Sacrament of the altar. The first be tokens making and consecrating the
Eucharist, which are the words of co^secratio^: the second, be signs of it
made, which are the accidents of bread and wine. The third, a signification of
the Church. And the fourth eating, is a sign of a marvelous banquet in the
life to come. Of these four, ye first must be chiefly respected, which is an
outward toke^ of an inward truth: the outward token, is called the Sacrament:
the inward truth is called the thing of the sacrament, whereupon the
diffinition of a sacrament alleged by Gratian out of S. Augustine, is this: A
Sacrament is the visible form of invisible grace. Out of this diffinition,
which imployeth two parts of a Sacrament, he will prove the truth of the real
presence: for if the body be not present (says he) the words make a false
toke^. I deny the consequence, for the words make a true token, and yet the
body is not present, after his gross imagination of bodily manner of presence.
His exemplification of the order of priesthood, given to the Apostles by these
words, Hoc facite, do and make this, is to make a proof of one controversy
by another. For we deny the power of making, which he pretends there to be
given, affirming, that it is a commandment to continue that sacrament of his
institution, and showing the use thereof.

His second argument is, that Christ spoke not figuratively, because a
figurative speech can signify no certain thing, until it be plainly
understood. This I deny: for a figurative speech may signify one certain
thing, which the speaker means, although the hearer understand it not at all.
Howbeit that which Christ did here speak figuratively, was easily understood
of all his hearers, which were well accustomed to such kind of speeches. But
Sander replyeth, that the Apostles were simple men and Idiots, and understood
not the scriptures: therefore they could not understand how ye sign might be
called by the name of the thing. I answer, although they were simple unlearned
men in deed, and such as understood not the scriptures, in such full measure
as was necessary for them to discharge so great an office, as was laid upon
them: yet Sander does them too much wrong, to make them, or any godly person of
yt time, so ignorant in the scriptures, that they understood not the nature of
a Sacrament, considering they were circumcised, and did celebrate the Passover
every year, the very name whereof must needs teach them, how the sign may be
called by the thing signified. And therefore it is out of measure ridiculous and
foolish, that Sander prateth of the true and first meaning of the words of
Christ. For what will the vain iangler make to be the true and first meaning
of these words of Christ, This cupp is the new Testament? What verifying of
contradictories, what diverse soundings? what true tokens, what things present?
O great divinity of Popish doctors.

But the Apology is confuted by his own saying, when he calls the Eucharist
an evident token of the body and blood: if it be evident (says he,) it is
quickly understood. Call women and children, and ask them what token the
words of Christ make. Nay, rather call Turks and Sarazens, and ask the
question, if it must be evident to them unto whom the mystery is not
revealed. The token is evident to them that are instructed, not to such as
never heard of it, as belike, where Sander has to do, women and children are.
But God be thanked, women and children instructed in the Church of Christ, can
tell him how evident a token it is, of their spiritual feeding, on the body
and blood of Christ.

But that words must be taken as they commonly sound, he will prove by the
institution of the sacrament of Penance, as he terms it, Whose sins you
forgive, they are forgiven, etc. where, as much is given, as is signified by
the words. If this be true, all cases reserved, both episcopal and Papal,
are in case to be forgiven, by every priest of the lowest degree. But here the
Apology, which denies the Sacrament of Penance, is charged to have falsified
the words of Christ, saying, they are meant, whose sins you declare to be
forgiven. If the Apology do not truly expound the words of Christ, yet
does it not falsify them, except Sander will say, that every wrong
exposition is a falsification. How Christ's words are to be taken, as Sander
will not dispute in this place, so neither will I stand here to discuss. But
this is a bold determination of him, that many words may signify improperly
in other places, but the principal words of a Sacrament, cannot be improper.
For the nature of the thing, does limit the interpretation of the words. If
this doctorall determination be true, then these are proper speeches, The rock
is Christ, the Lamb is the Passover: the cup is the new Testament,
baptism is the lauer of regeneration.

And S. Augustines rule, De doct, Christ, lib. 3. Ca. 16. must give place to D.
Sanders decree: Si autem flagi^iis, etc. If the words of scripture seem to
command any wicked nor ungodly act, or to forbid any profit or well doing,
it is a figure: Except ye shall eat (says he) the flesh of the son of man,
and drink his blood, you shall have no life in you, it seems to command a
wicked or heinous act. Therefore it is a figure, commanding us to communicate
with the Lords passion, and profitable to keep in remembrance, that his flesh
was crucified and wounded for us. Again, Locut. de Genesis lib. 1. fol. 72. Tres
fundi tres dies sunt, no^ dixit tres dies significa^t. Et multu^ haec locutio
notanda est, vbi aliqua significantia earum rerum quas significant nomine
appellantur. Inde est quod ait Apostolus, Petra autem erat Christus, non ait
Petra significabat Christum. Three basketes are three days, he said not, they
signify three days. And this kind of speech is much to be marked where any
signifying things, are called by the names of those things which they do
signify. Hereof it is, that the Apostle says, And the rock was Christ, he
says not, the Rock did signify Christ.

Finally, where Sander says, it is against the nature of a Sacrament, not to
signify plainly, I agree with him, affirming that the bread and wine, which is
eaten and dronken, do plainly signify, that we are fed spiritually, with the
very body and blood of Christ, unto the full assurance of our perseverance, and
continuance in the favor of God, even until we be put in possession of
eternal life, and the words in this Sacrament, be as plain as in the other,
but the devil to advance the kingdom of Antichrist, has devised a monstrous
interpretation of them, to make a most abominable Idol of desolation of the
most holy and comfortable sacrament of Christ's death and passion.

CAP. XII.
Which argument is more agreeable to the word of God: it is Sander.
a token of the body, made by Christ, and therefore not the body, or else,
therefore it is the true body of Christ.

Sander, to dispute for his life, would take the conclusion Fulk.
thus: it is a sign of his body, therefore it is his body in deed. So that
Sander to dispute for his life, would overthrow the nature of opposites, which
cannot stand both together at one time, and in one respect. But as though
Logike were contrary to the word of God, he will have the argument tried by
the word of God. And first he rejects the Sacraments instituted before the
incarnation of Christ, which he says, were signs in part empty and void of
the truth, which they signified, because truth is made by Jesus Christ. As
though Jesus Christ concerning the truth of doctrine, and the grace of
salvation, were not yesterday and to day the same, and for evermore, the Lamb
slain from the beginning of the world, Hebr. 13. Apocalipse. 13. Secondly,
he brings examples of the Angel speaking to Marie of Christ, speaking to
the leprous man, to him that had the palsy, to the disciples of John baptist,
to the dumme man; to prove, that when at the doing of any thing, an outward
sign of an inward grace is rehearsed, that which the sign sounds, the
grace works.

When Sander shall dispute for his life, he must choose him an easy adversary,
for else he will soon loose his life, for lack of good arguments, if he
escape hanging, drawing, and quartering for treason. Except he think there be
any children among us, brought up in their Catechism, that be so ignorant, to
think the words of Christ intending to work a particular miracle, be signs
and Sacraments, in the same nature, that bread and wine is, being appointed by
him, to be an ordinary pledge and assurance of his grace, unto his whole church.
Again, we deny, that the words of Christ are the Sacrament, but we say with
Augustine: Accedat verbum ad elementum: Let the word come to the element, and
then it is made a Sacrament. Last of all, concerning the truth of Christ's
words: This is my body: This cup is the New testament, etc. we nothing
doubt, but that grace in Gods elect, works that which the words sounds,
according to the true meaning of them.

But if Sander could have made his matter good, he should have reasoned of the
water of baptism, which is a sign of regeneration, and if he could prove, that
the water in baptism is not water, but regeneration in deed, because it is a
token of regeneration, he should have reasoned somewhat like, for his life. But
that which he says of doing or making, he would not have it wrested to the
mere doctrine of Christ, which he spoke doing or making nothing: for therein
he used parables, but Christ (says he) did, rather then taught in his supper;
and therefore, his words must be understood even as they sound. If this rule
be true, Christ drank and gave wine at his supper, which is the fruit of the
vine, according to the sound of the words, and therefore no
transubstantiation in the cup. But where he says, that Christ did, rather
then taught at his supper, he would have us think, belike, that Christ did
celebrate his supper, like the Popish Mass, in which is much ado, and no
teaching at all. But beside that, all the three Evangelists, do set forth unto
us, the sum of his doctrine. S. John does in four Chapters, from the 13. to
the 18. describe at large, that he was occupied in teaching rather then doing.
You have heard how Sander would dispute for his life.

CAP. XIII.
The words of Christ's supper, are not figurative; nor his token, Sander,
a common kind of tokens.

The first part of this title, that the words of Christ's supper, arenot
figurative, he proves not by any one Fulke
word, and as for ye other part, yt Christ's token is not a common kind of
toke^, which he proves somewhat at large, he needed not to have proved at al.
For it is confessed of us, that the sacrament is a more excellent token, then
can be ordained by any man. And where he says, that none of ye fathers
teaches, yt these words: This is my body, etc. be words figurative, it shall
suffice, to oppose Augustine, who in plain terms says these words: Except ye
eat ye flesh of the son of man, etc. are a figurative speech. Which words
notwithstanding, among the Papists, have the same sense, that these words:
This is my bo De Doct. Chri. Lib. 3. Cap. 16. the words are cited Cap. 11. And
what other thing does Augustine mean, when he says, Sicut ergo secundum
quendam modum sacramentum corporis Christi corpus Christi est, sacramentum
sanguinis Christi, sanguis Christi est, ita sacramentum fideifides est.
Therefore as after a certain manner, the sacrament of the body of Christ, is
the body of Christ, the sacrament of the blood of Christ, is the blood of
Christ, so the sacrament of faith (meaning baptism) is faith. Epist. 23.
Bonisacio. Is it not manifest, that he means the one is a figurative speech,
as well as the other? Fie upon this impudent boasting of the Papists, which
care not what lies they make, so they give not place to the truth. As for the
sayings of Cyprian, Chrysostom, Basil, etc. or any of the ancient Catholic
fathers, concerning the wonderful manner of the presence of Christ in the
sacrament, do all prove a spiritual and divine manner of eating and drinking
the body of Christ, as in their proper places shall be severally declared.

CAP. XIIII.
That the supper of our Lord is no sacrament at all, if these Sander.
words of Christ (This is my body, and this is my blood) be figurative.

Two leaves and an half of this Chapter are spent, Fulke.
to show the difference between figures of Rhetorike and sacramental
figures, and that words must be joined to the elements to make sacraments:
all which is needeles, for it is commonly known, and confessed on both parts:
saving that he would make ignorant Papists believe, that Oecolampadius,
Calvin or Peter Martyr, when they read in Tertullia^, and in Augustine, these
words of Christ, This is my body, to be so expounded, yt is to say a figure or
sign of my body, they should understand a figure of Rhetorike as Metonymia,
or Synecdoche, and not a sacramental token. No, master Sander, they were not
so young Grammarians, or Rhetoricians, as you would bear fools in hand, but
they could understand the difference of a rhetorical, and a sacramental
figure, although they could tell that a rhetorical figure is used, when a
sacramental token is spoken off, as in so many examples of the scripture,
they have showed. But now let us see, what maine argument you have, to prove
that the supper is no sacrament, if the words (This is my body, etc.) be
figurative. The words, say you, do not signify a figure of his body,
therefore either they work his body, or they make nothing at al. I answer with
Tertull. and August. The words do signify a figure of his body. For so do they
expound ye words. This is my body, yt is to say, a figure or sign of my body,
which their exposition, were false, except those words This is my body, do
signify a figure or sign of his body. Therefore Master Sander, you may teach
boys, that body signifies a substance and not a figure. Tertullian and
Augustine will not not be so answered at your hands. They tell you that the
interpretation of Christ's words is such, as proves his speech to be
figurative, in spite of your heart. And that every boy, that reads this
chapter, may laugh at your arrogant impudence, I set down once again these
words of Christ: This cup is the new Testament in my blood, which if they be
not confessed of you, to be figurative, you will not confess that fire is
hot, nor water moist: If they be figurative, what Sacrament will be made with
them? Where you tell us, that the body of Christ under the forms of bread and
wine, is a figure of the same body walking on earth, suffering on the cross,
or sitting in heaven, you do as much, as if you would teach us, that Abraham
sitting close in his tent, so that no man could see him, was father of the
same Abraham him self, as he was the son Therah, and came with him out of Vr
of the Chaldees, and as he begat Isaac in the land of Canaan, and as he is
now at rest with God in heaven. When you can persuade us, I say, that one man
can be father and son of himself, then will we believe you, that a figure,
and the thing figured, be all one.

CAP. XV.
The real presence of Christ's body is that, which sets his death Sander.
and life before us.

The eating of common bread (says Sander in answer to Fulke.
the Apology) and drinking of common wine, is but a homely manner of setting
the death, and resurrection, and life of Christ before our eyes. But if the
bread and wine be turned into the same body and blood of Christ, which dyed,
rose again, and wrought all the miracles in the world: then is the death,
resurrection, and conversation of Christ, in deed set before the eyes of our
faith. Is not this an absolute answer, to tell us of the eating and drinking
of common bread and wine, when the Apology speaks of the Eucharistie, which
as Justinius says, we have learned to be common bread and wine, but the
body and blood of Christ, that was incarnated for us. Confessing thus much,
what need has our faith of transubstantiation of bread and wine, into his
body and blood, more then of water into the holy ghost in baptism? Tush
(says Sander) all other ways of setting the death, resurrection and
conversation of Christ before our eyes, without the real presence, is painting
and shadowing in comparing of this lively representation. If this be true
preaching of the death of Christ, by which he is even crucified among us, as S.
Paul says, Gal. 3. is painting and shadowing: the ministration of baptism, by
which we are ingaffed into the death, burial, and resurrection of Christ, Romans
6. is but painting and shadowing with Sander, and no lively representation. But
what affinity (says he) has bread and wine, with the death and resurrection
of Christ? I will ask him like wise what affinity has water with the death,
burial, and resurrection of Christ? which is not nakedly represented, but so
as we are ingraffed into them by baptism. Romans 6.

By this profane question you may see what faith he means, when he speaks
of setting the death and life of Christ before our eyes, namely an hystoricall
faith, which because it is common to true Christians, with devils, is not the
faith, that we come to feed upon in these divine mysteries. But such a faith
as applies to our own comfort, the effect and fruit of the death,
resurrection and conversation of Christ, with the which, the eating and
drinking of bread and wine has as great affinity, as things corporal can have
with things spiritual, teaching that the most necessary and only sufficient
nourishment of our souls, is received by faith, even as the outward signs
thereof are taken with the body Yet Chrysostom says Hom. 83. in Math. Ipsum
igitur vides, ipsum tangis, ipsum comedis. Thou see himself, thou touchest
himself, thou eatest himself. See (says Sander) whether the Apology do more
truly teach, yt the sign or token without the real presence, or ye body it
self present, does set forth the death and life of Christ. Then hear
Chrysostom in the same homely, speaking of the Eucharistye. Si mortuu^ Jesus
non est, Cuius symbolum ac signum hoc sacrificium est? Vides quantum ei studium
fuerit, vt semper memoria teneamus pr^ nobis ipsum mortuum fuisse. If ye Jesus
has not dyed (as some heretics affirm) whose token and sign is this
sacrifice? Thou see how great desire he had, yt we should always keep in
remembrance yt he has died for us. But I know he will press ye former words,
thou see himself etc. therefore not a sign, without the real presence. But
seeing the real presence whereof he speaks, by his own judgment and
confession cannot stand without transubstantiation, if transubstantiation be
not yt real presence which he holds is not. And that there was no
transubstantiation in the supper of Christ, Chrysostom tells us plainly,
Quando hoc mysteriu^ tradidit, vinum tradidit, when he delivered this mystery
or sacrament, he delivered wine. And this says Chrysostom against the^ that
used to celebrate with water. But to help out transu^stantiation, he brings in
Damascen a writer, out of the compass of the challeng, which says De ortho.
fid. lib. 4 cap. 14. Non quod corpus illud (...) coelo descendat, sed quia
panis and vinum in Christi corpus and sanguinem transmutatur. Not as though the
body of Christ cam^ down from heaven, but because the bread and wine is
changed into the body and blood of Christ. Damascene helps not so much,
with the word of changing, as he hinders you with denying the coming down
of the body of Christ except you say, it is every where. And therefore advise
your self, what presence and manner of change Damascene speaks of, when the
body of Christ comes not out of heaven into the priests hands. But Cyrillus
(says he) teaches, That we touch the body of Christ when we come to the
holy communion, even as Saint Thomas touched the side of Christ, when he cried
out, My Lord and my God. So we touch that flesh, when we touch the form of
bread, as saint Thomas did touch the Godhead, when he touched the flesh of
Christ. For in each place, we touch not either the Godhead, or the flesh
visiblie. These are high points of Metaphysike, Master Sander, to touch the
godhead, which is insensible, and to touch visiblie, or invisibly, except you
mean by touching not visibly, to touch that which we see not as we may handle
a thing in the dark, which we see not. But howsoever you would cloak ye
matter by leaving out ye words of Cyril, he says, that Christ in the
sacrament appears visiblie. Where is then your distinction of visible and
invisible presence? nay where is your carnal presence become, which you
ground upon touching, when he is none otherwise present to be touched, then
he is present to be seen, and so says Chrysostom also in the place by you
cited, Thou see himself, thou touchest himself, thou ^atest himselft, If
Christ be none otherwise eaten, then he is seen, and is not seen, but by
faith, it will follow that he is not eaten, but by faith. And now let us hear
Cyrillus, beginning one sentence before Sa^d. was disposed to hear him speak.
I n Joan. lib. 12. cap. 58 I^ reigitur sanctae congregationes die octa^o in
eccles^^s fiunt, foribus sublimiore modo clausis, visibiliter simul atque
inuisibiliter Christus omnibus apparet: inuisibiliter quidem vt Deus,
visibiliter autem in corpore. Pr^bet enim nobis carne^ sua^ tangendam. v^
firmiter credamus, quia templum vere suum suscitauit. Quod autem mysticae
benedictionis Communio, resurrectionis Christi quaedam confessio est, verbis
ipsius probatur. Fractum enim panem distribuebat, dicens: hoc est corpus meum,
quod pro vobis tradetur in remissionem peccatorum: hoc facite in meam
commemorationem. Participatio igitur mysterii, vera quaedam confessio and
commemoratio est, quod propter nos and pro nobis, dominus and mortuus sit, and
reuixerit, and diuina nos benedictionem propter hoc replet. Fugiamus igitur
infidelitatem post tactum Christi, and firmi atque stabiles ab omni long
ambiguitate inueniamur. Worthelie therefore the holy congregations are made in
the Churches on the eight day, and ye doors being shut after an high manner,
Christ appears to us all, both visiblie, and invisibly. Invisibly truly as
God: but visibly in his body. For he gives us his flesh to be touched, that
we might believe assuredly, that he has truly raised up his temple. For that
the communion of the mystical blessing is a certain confession of the
resurrection of Christ, it is proved by his own words For he distributed the
bread after it was broken, saying: This is my body, which shall be delivered for
you, for the remission of sins, Do this for the remembrance of me. Therefore
the participation of the mystery, is a certain true confession and
commemoration that for our sakes, and for us, our Lord both has dyed and is
revived, and through that, fills us with divine blessings. Let us therefore
flee infidelity, after the touching of Christ, and let us be found steadfast
and strong, being far from al doubtfulnesse. You see both Chrysostom and
Cyrill agree that Christ is visiblie present in the sacrament, as they agree
that he is touched. And as Chrysostom affirmed, that Christ gave wine, so
Cyrill affirms that he distributed bread. By both which confessions, it
appears, that bread and wine, and not the shapes of bread and wine, are
given in the sacrament, and that the body and blood of Christ is visiblie
present, which cannot be vndestoode of the Popish presence, and therefore of
necessity must be meant of a spiritual manner of presence, which is seen
only by faith.

CAP. XVI.
Our thanksgiving and remembrance of Christ's death, is alsogether Sander.
by the real presence of his body.

I have often showed, what manner of presence we allow, Fulke.
agreeable to the scriptures, and the judgment of the ancient fathers. But that
will not satisfy Sander, except he have a making of Christ's body, which
making, he says, is the thanksgiving for his death. Whereupon it follows,
that seeing, making by his judgment, pertains only to the priests, that
thanksgiving also pertains only to the Priests. But Chrysostom (whom he
cites) makes thanksgiving common to all the faithful, Ipso genere
sacrificii, etc. By the very kind of sacrifice, inuiting us to thanksgiving
for his benefits. And by the way, Chrysostom teaches, what kind of
sacrifice the celebration of the communion is accounted of him: Namely, a
sacrifice of thanksgiving, and not of reconciliation. And therefore he writes
in the same Hom. 26. in Matthew. Propterea and reuerenda and salutaria illa
mysteria, qu^ omni certe ecclesiae congregatione celebramus, Eucharistia, id
est gratiarum actio nuncupantur. Sunt enim beneficiorum recordatio plurimorum,
caputque ipsum divine erga nos charitatis ostendunt, nosque faciunt debitas Deo
gratias semper exoluere. Therefore even those reverend and healthful
mysteries, which truly we celebrate in every congregation of the Church, are
called Eucharistia, that is a thanksgiving. For they are a calling to mind of
many benefits, and show unto us the very head of the love of God toward us,
and make us to yield dew thanks to God always. But to a Christian, says
Chrysostom, He himself is set before thee daily, lest thou should be
unmindful. Behold (says Sander) not by a feeble token doubtfully, but by
his own presence he is called to mind. Note here that he calls it a feeble
token, where Christ is bodily absent, by which it should follow, that
baptism is but a feeble token, where Christ is not bodily present. But Christ
is present in both his sacraments, although he be absent bodily: and so
means Chrysostom that he is present spiritually. For in the same Hom. 51. in
Mat. he says, Ipsum enim si volumus, non vestis solum sed corpus ipsius nobis
propositum est, non vt tangamus solummodo, sed vt comedamus and saturemur. For
not only his garment, but his body is set before us, not only that we may
touch him, if we will, but also that we may eat him and be satisfied. Mark
in these words, after what manner the body of Christ is set before us, to be
touched and eaten: verily even as his garment is set before us to be touched.
But no man will say, that the garment of Christ is otherwise set before us,
then after a spiritual manner: no more verily is the body of Christ.

CAP. XVII.
The true resurrection of our bodies, comes by eating Sander.
that body of Christ, which is both true, and is true in us.

This is confessed by the Apology, that the resurrection Fulke.
of our bodies to glory, comes by the eating and drinking of the body and
blood of Christ: but that this eating and drinking, may be without the
Sacrament, it is manifest by this, that many shall be partakers of the
glorious resurrection, which did never eat this Sacrament. But now let us
see, what vain reasons Sander brings, to prove that the resurrection of our
bodies comes by eating of Christ in the Sacrament only. First Christ
prepared a supper, and set it forth upon his table, but the bread and wine was
prepared by the baker and the vintener: therefore Christ's preparing was to make
of earthly bread the bread of everlasting life, which was his body that he
delivered, and they received.

All this we confess. Yea says Sander, but he delivered it with his own
hands, or else doubtless they did not eat his body. But where is the
necessity of this consequence? For he said in respect only of that which
he delivered, Take and eat. Yea sir, but how prove you, that he delivered
only with his hands, that he delivered, and whereof he said, take and
eat? Is there nothing delivered in baptism, but the water which is in the
hand of the minister or in the font? The only proof he brings, is
Chrysostom, Hom. 82. in Math. where there is no such words at all to be
found, yet thus he cites them: Cogita quid manu capias, Bethink thy self
what thou takes^ in thy hand, and keep it from all covetousness and violent
robbery: consider again, that thou tak^st it not only in thy hand, but also
put it to thy mouth, and after thy hand and tongue, thy heart receives
that dreadefull mystery. Here (says Sander) the hand and tongue, receive
the same body, that the heart does. And yet Chrysostom (if ever he have
such a context) names not the body, but the mysteries. It is one thing to
receive the mysteries, another thing to receive the body in such manner as the
Papists do teach. And Chrysostom using the same words, but not in such
context, ad Pop. Antiochen. Hom. 21. has also linguam sanguine tali
purpuratam, and factam aureum gladium, the tongue dyed purple with such blood,
and made a golden sword. Likewise the eyes, by which thou have seen the
secrets and dreadful mysteries: which sayings do show, that he spoke not
of a bodily presence, or receiving, but of a spiritual receipt and faith, by
which we see Christ present, and acknowledge our tongue to be dyed purple
with his blood, and to be made a golden sword, which is not done corporally,
but spiritually.

The last argument is, that the Lords supper has been of old time called
the Sacrament of the Altar, by which (says he) we are informed, that the
sacrifice is made upon a visible Altar, or table, and so S. Augustines mother
confessed, yt from ye altar was dispensed, yt holy sacrifice, whereby ye
ha^dwriting yt was contrary to us, has been put out. And we do likewise
confess, that from the holy Altar or table is dispensed in the holy communion,
the sacrifice of Christ's death and passion, by which only, that handwriting
was put out, and nailed on the cross, except you think S. Augustines mother
was of another opinion, then S. Paul. Col. 2. v. 14. We confess, yt
regeneration by the spirit of God is dispensed out of the holy font of
Baptism, and yet it follows not, that the holy ghost is contained in the
font, or water: no more does the dispensation of the sacrifice of Christ's
death from the table, prove that Christ's body lies upon the table. The
argument of the resurrection of our bodies, which Irenaeus, Tertullian, and
Cyril do gather of receiving of the Sacrament, is from the sign to the thing
signified: and therefore Tertullian makes ye same argument, from the washing
of baptism, and from other ceremonies of annoynting, signing, and laying on of
hands, lib. de resurrectione carnis. Caro abluitur, vt anima ema^^litur etc.
The flesh is washed, that the soul may be cleansed. The flesh is anointed, that
the soul may be consecrated. The flesh is signed, that the soul may be
defended. The flesh is shadowed by laying on of hands, that the soul may be
lightened of the spirit. The flesh eats the body and blood of Christ, that
the soul may be made fa^t of God. What reason is there that there should be a
transubstantiation in the last, more then in all the rest? The flesh is washed
with water, anointed with oil, shadowed with men's hands, signed with men's
hands: therefore the flesh is fed with bread and wine, which Sander makes
such a dangerous matter, yet the same is affirmed both by Irenaeus, Cyrill,
and Justinius Martyr.

CAP. XVIII.
Nothing is wrought in the supper of Christ according to the Sander.
doctrine of the Sacramentaries.

We abase not the supper of the Lord (says the Apology) Fulke.
or teach that it is but a cold ceremony only, and nothing to be wrought
therein, as many do falselie slander us. Yes (says Sander) you pluck down
Altars, etc. and call the blessed sacrament of the altar, by vile names, etc: I
answer, we pluck down none, but Idolatrous altars, neither give we any vile
names to the blessed sacrament of Christ, but to the stinking Idol of the
Papists, which is no sacrament, but a profane execrament, we call not the
honor done to Christ's body, worshipping of bread, for that which the
Papists worship, is not Christ's body, but vile bread, although they call it
Christ's body. And when we teach, that Christ gives us in his supper, an
assurance of our spiritual nourishment by him, and conjunction spiritual with
him, we teach a work of Christ in the supper. But you teach not (says Sander)
that any substantial thing is wrought in the bread and wine. In deed we
teach no change of the substance of bread and wine, but that they remain in
their former nature and substance, but we teach a supersubstantiall thing to be
wrought by Christ's word, which being joined to bread and wine, makes of
earthly and bodily nourishment, heavenly and spiritual food, to feed both
body and soul unto everlasting life. And this is sufficient to prove, that
something is wrought in the supper of Christ by our doctrine, babble Sander what
he will to the contrary, although no transubstantiation be wrought, except he
will say, that nothing is wrought in baptism, because there is no
transubstantiation taught either by them, or us in our doctrine of baptism.

CAP. XIX.
The real presence of Christ^ flesh is proved by the express naming Sander.
of flesh, blood, and body, which are names of his humane nature.

Sander would bear men in hand that there is great Fulke,
fraud hidden in these words, when the Apology says: that we affirm that
Christ does truly and presently give his own self in his Sacraments, in
baptism, that we may put him on, in his supper* that we may eat him by faith
and spirit. For by these words, His own self, his own self, his own
self, so often repeated, they mean no more then the coming of his grace and
charity into our souls, by faith, spirit, and understanding, wholly robbing
us of that flesh which dyed for us, and of that blood which was shed for
us. If we did never use the names of giving his body, his flesh, his blood,
we might perhaps come in suspicion of Mani^heisme: but when we use these
names, and the other of Christ, giving himself, and us eating of Christ,
which the Scripture does affirm, as well as the other, none but a peevish
wrangler, would take exceptions to our terms. Of the two natures in one
person Christ, there need to be no question, but that Sander, by telling
what Scriptures are proper to both the natures, would by authority of one
Saint Germanus, I cannot tell whence he came (for the Louanistes are great
coyners of antiquities) teach us that these words of Christ, Matthew. 28.
Behold I am with you to the end of the world, may be meant as well by the
nature of manhood, which we have with his godhead in the Sacrament, as by the
only nature of the Godheade: and that in this place of Matthew. 26. The poor
you shall have always with you, me ye shall not have always. By the word
Me, he means not his Godheade, but the nature of his manhood, as it was
when he spoke in a visible form of a poor man, but not as it is in the
Sacrament. What, Master Sander? think you to play bopeepe with the nature of
manhood, in form visible and not visible? Is not the nature of Christ's
manhood, the same whether it be in form visible or invisible? If it be the
same, and the nature of the manhood is simply denied to be present, how can
you make the same nature that is absent to be present, unless you will say,
this word Me signifies neither his Godhead, nor the nature of his manhood,
nor both together, but the visible form of a poor man? Fie on these beggarly
shifts, too badde for boys to use in their sophismes. S. Augustine is a
clear witness against you for understanding of both the textes. Loquebatur de
praesentia corporis sui. Nam secundum maiestatem suam, secundum prouidentiam,
secundum ineffabiiem and inuisibilem gratiam, impletur quod ab eo dictum est,
Ecce ego vobiscum, omnibus diebus vsque ad consummationem saeculi. Secundum
carnem vero, quam v^rbum assumpsit, secundum quod de virgin natus est,
secundum id quod a Iudaeis prehensus est, quod ligno crucifixus, quod de cruce
depositus, quod linteis involutu^, quod in sepulchro conditus, quod in
resurrectione manifestatus, non semper habebitis vobiscum. Quare? Quoniam
conuersatus est secundum corporis praesentiam 40. diebus cum discipulis suis,
and eis deducentibus videndo, non sequendo, ascendit in coelum, and non est
hic. Ibi est enim, sedet ad dextram patris and hic est, non enim recessit
praesentia maiestatis. Aliter secundum praesentiam maiestatis semper habemus
Christum: secundum praesentia^ carnis, recte dictum est discipulis: me autem
non semper habebitis. Habuit enim illum Ecclesia secundum praesentiam carnis
paucis diebus, modo fide tenet, oculis non videt.

He spoke of the presence of his body. For according to his majesty,
according to his providence, according to his unspeakable and invisible grace,
it is fulfilled which was said of him: Behold, I am with you always, even to
the end of the world. But according to that flesh, which the word took
upon him: according to that he was borne of a virgin, according to that he
was taken of the Jews, that he was crucified on the tree, that he was taken
down from the cross, that he was wrapped in linen clothes, that he was laid
in the sepulcher, that he was manifested in his resurrection, you shall not
always have him with you. Wherefore? Because he was conversant with his
disciples 40. days, according to the presence of his body, and they bringing
him on his way by seeing, not by following, he went up into heaven, and is not
here: For he is there where he sits at the right hand of the father, and he
is here, for he departed not in presence of his majesty. Otherwise according
to the presence of his majesty, we have Christ always, according to the
presence of his flesh, it is rightly said unto the disciples, but me you shall
not always have. For the Church had him according to the presence of his flesh
a few days, now she holds him by faith, she sees him not with eyes. In
Joan. 12. Tr. 50.

But to return to Sander, it is the flesh and blood of Christ which works
our salvation (says he) and we say no less, if the material cause may be
called a working. He that takes this from the Sacrament, depriueth us of the
mean to come to eternal salvation, says Sander. This I deny, for he that
should take away the San crament, cannot deprive us of the mean to come by
eternal life. Yes (says Sander) for that redemptiowhich was wrought by his
flesh and blood, is applied to all that be of a lawful age, by worthy eating
and drinking thereof. But where has he that exception of them that be of
lawefull age, or that eat it worthily? Christ speaks generally and
absolutely, of both. And why should we think, there is any other mean to
apply the redemption purchased by the flesh and blood of Christ for us, then
was for the fathers, as before Christ came in the flesh? Faith was the only
mean unto them, and the Sacraments were the seals of their faith: What other
means need we to atteine to the same salvation? He says, when the flesh of
Christ was crucified, the soul of Christ delivered the soul of Abraham and all
the other fathers out of prison. But where finds he, that Abraham and the
fathers were in prison, until that time. We find before that time, that
Abraham was in so happy estate, yt his bosom was a receptacle of comfort for all
his faithful children. Luc. 16.

But to end the matter so evil fauouredly begun, Sander says, that Christ
to show that he would be in his supper by the nature of his manhood, for that
cause named not his person, but his flesh, his body, his blood; and Saint Paul
names; his bones. And therefore mark this again and again, believe thou ^he
presence of body, blood, of flesh and of bones as the word of God speaks.
Mark you Papists, mark again, and again, Sander says, he named his flesh,
body and blood, because he would be in his supper by nature of his manhood,
ergo it is true. S. Paul says that every true Christian and member of the
Church that was from the beginning of the world, is a member of Christ's body
and of his flesh, and of his bones, ergo believe thou the presence of Christ's
body, flesh and bones in ye Sacrament. Verily we believe pledge and assurance of
this communication and union with Christ, to be given us in the Sacrament; but
in such manner as it was given to all the faithful before the incarnation of
Christ, who were likewise members of Christ's body, of his flesh, and of his
bones: but such a monstrous presence, as the Papists do imagine, as we know
it to be needles, so we affirm it to be against all such places of the
scripture, as teach us the truth of Christ's human nature, to be like unto us
in all things except sin. Heb. 2.

CHAP. XX.
It is a cold supper which the Sacramentaries assign to Christ, Sander.
in comparison of his true supper.

The eating of Christ by faith and spirit, which we Fulke.
affirm, Sander confesses to be no slight or cold thing, but to say that
no more is done in his supper, that is slightly and coldely said. Why so
Master Sander? Partly (he says) because it may be done without the supper. And
is it therefore a cold supper? Because a man may eat at dinner the same meat
which he eats at supper, does it follow that he eats a cold supper? may not
his supper, be as warm as his dinner? Alas this is a cold reason partly, it is
a cold thing to call men, who consist of bodies, to a supper of Christ's
making, and to give their bodies none other meat, then corruptible bread and
wine, whereas Christ did forbid us to work the perishing meat, at his banquet.
You might likewise say, it is a cold bath, to call men which consist of bodies
to regeneration, and to give their bodies nothing but cold water, whereas the
holy ghost says, the washing of the fill thines of the flesh saves us not, 1.
Pet. 3. or else Sander makes another cold and wreched reason, we call men to yt
supper, wherein Christ being received by faith, dwells in us by his spirit,
and we are fed unto the salvation, both of body and soul. Last of all how can
it be called the supper of Christ, which every man may make at home without
coming to the table of Christ? For every man may eat bread and drink wine,
at his own house, with his wife and children, and remember that Christ died
for them, neither will Christ leave his good devotion unrewarded, wherein the
supper that you assign to Christ, consists and is fulfilled. Beside the
shameless slander, that our supper is fulfilled in such a private presumptuous
act, mark how he allows, the sacrilegious arrogance of him, 'that should
vsurp (if any were so mad to do, as he is to imagine) such a ridiculous
counterfeting and mocking of Christ's institution: he does assure him that
Christ will not leave his good devotion unrewarded. But this is but a cold
assurance. Like as it is but a cold preparation, which is made by
transubstantiation, whereby after so great broiling, rosting, and saucing, to
compass such cookery as Sander taught us in the first book Cap. 4. such a
presence is wrought, as makes the body of Christ none otherwise present to a
faithful man, then to an infidel, than to a dog, a cat or a rat. Alas that is
a cold presence, and a cold body, yt is without efficay of spirit and life, in
them which receive it. But certainly the flesh and blood of Christ, is of
another nature, where it is received by faith, which is able to warm the
stomach of a penitent sinner, whose heart was cold, for fear of Gods justice,
and punishment dew for his sins. And when Sander has prated never so whotly,
and reasoned never so coldly, it will be but a cold comfort, that he can
minister with his surmised bodily presence, except he borrowe the chafingdish
of faith and spiritual eating to warm it: which though he confess, that we
acknowledge, yet he affirms it makes but a slight and a cold supper,
whereas by his own confession, there is no heat in his fantasied presence,
without faith and spiritual feeding: and faith and spiritual eating is a good
warm recreation, even without the Sacrament.

CAP. XXI.
By eating, we touch the body of Christ, as it may be touched under Sander.
the form of bread.

That is (says Sander) as we are truly said to kiss Fulke.
the Kings knee, when we kiss his hose, under which the knee is contained.
But that is not properly to kiss the Kings knee, which is to kiss his hose:
for kiss, and not kiss, as I take it, be contradictories. But who can devise
an eating of meat in a supper, which shall be without touching the meat with
teeth and mouth? (says Sander) Christ says, my meat is, to do the will of
my father that sent me John. 4.

And he promises his Apostles, that they shall eat and drink at his table in
his kingdom. Luc. 22. This eating and drinking, is without teeth or mouth. And
Saint Augustine speaking of eating the body of Christ, says: Vt quid par as
dentes and ventrem? Creed, and manducasti. Why do thou prepare thy teethe
and thy belly? Believe, and thou have eat it. In Joan. Cap. 6. Tr. 25. Again,
Panis quippe iste interioris hominis quaerit esuriem. For this bread seeks
the hunger of the inner man. Tr. 26.

And upon these words: If any man shall eat of it, he shall not die. Sed qui
pertinet ad virtute^ sacramenti, non qui pertinet ad visibile sacramentu^. Qui
manducat intus, non foris, qui manducat in cord, non qui premit dente. But he
which pertains to ye virtue of ye sacrament, not he which pertains to y^
visible Sacrament. He which eats within, not without; which eats in his
heart, not he which presses with his teeth. Likewise, Cyprian de Coen. Dom.
Haec quoties agimus, non dentes ad mordendum acuimus, sed fide sy^^^ra panem
sanctum frangimus and partimur. As often as we do these things, we do not
whet our teeth to bite, but with sincere faith we break and divide that holy
bread. Thus you may see, how we may eat that which we touch not with teeth
and mouth. And whereas Chrysostom and Cyrill, as we heard before, said that
Christ gives his flesh to be touched, they speak improperly, and mean a
touching by the mouth of faith, like as they affirm also, that he gives
himself to be seen, which is not but with the eye of faith. And it is
strange, that Sander dare not as well say, We see him, as, we may see him,
under the form of bread: as that we touch him under the form of bread: but
the matter is, that then he should destroy his doubtie distinction of the
bodily presence visible and invisible. Although Cyrillus, as is showed before,
affirms that Christ is visibly present in the sacrament of his body. Touching
by belief, Sander will not deny at length, although in the beginning, he
marueiled how touching could be without the mouth and teeth, but that touching
by belief, he says, is furthered by touching that visibly, wherein we
believe ye flesh of Christ to be inuisibly. A sorry furthering, by touching a
bare accident of that which is not there, nor is the proper accident of that
which is said to be there. But how much more furtherance is it to our feeding
by faith, to eat substantially, that which is Gods seal and assurance of that
food which nourishes both bodies and souls unto everlasting life?

It is an old custom of heretics (he says) by assertion of one truth, to
imbarre and stop another truth: but so do not we, for we bar not any truth
that is admitted by the Scriptures: but it is a custom of the devil to be
enemy to all truth, whom the Papists follow in this their heresy of
transubstantiation, denying the bread and wine to be in the Sacrament, whereas
they be in deed, and affirming the natural body of Christ to be substantially
contained under the accide^ts of bread and wine, even in the mouth of wicked
men, and of brute beasts, which is both false and blasphemous.

CAP. XXII.
The Sacramentaries have neither understanding, nor says, Sander.
nor spirit, nor devotion to receive Christ withal.

We have no understanding (he says) because we say, This is my body, does not
mean, this is my body. Yes Fulke.
sir Sophister, we say the words to mean his body, after a certain manner,
as Augustine says, although not after your gross manner. And how do you
understand these words spoken of the other part of the Sacrament? This cup
is the new Testament in my blood. Will you not say in some sense, it is not
the new testament? Secondly, ye have no faith, that believe not the working and
effectual words of Christ, which were spoken with blessing. Yes forsooth sir,
we believe they wrought and brought to effect, whatsoever it pleased him to
do by them. Thirdly, we have no spirit, in Sanders corporal judgment, when
we know not the words of Christ to be spirit and life, as the which make all
that they said in the consecration of his holy mysteries: but we acknowledge
his words to be spirit and life, because he never gives his flesh, but with
effect of his quickening spirit. And that is a gross spirit, and a deadly
life, which imagines all that to be made in the mysteries which the words
sounds, for then the cup should be made blood, and the new testament in
his blood. What is, They are spirit and life, says Augustine? in Joan. T. 27.
Spiritualiter intelligenda sunt: they are to be understood spiritually,
therefore not according to the sound of words, but according to the mind of
the speaker.

It is cold devotion (says Sander) that hearing the body of Christ, by
himself affirmed to be present, can eat without adoring, and deny godly
honor to it. We eat not without adoring (Master Sander) although we adore
not that which we eat bodily, but that which we eat spiritually, giving this
divine honor unto him, that we put our whole trust and confidence in his
redemption, whereof this external and visible sacrament is a pledge and
assurance.

CAP. XXIII.
The real presence of Christ's body is proved by the confession of the
Apology. Sander.


The Apology confesses that Christ is given us in ye Fulke.
mysteries, that we may certainly know, we be flesh of his flesh, and bone of
his bones, and that Christ continues in us and we in him. If Christ be given
us (says Sander) in these mysteries, he is present in them: for a gift is not
made of a thing absent. Yes, Master Sander, if the Prince at Westminster, give
a manor lying in Yorkshire by letters patents, the Patentee which receives
his Patent at Westminster, has the manor truly given unto him, which is in
Yorkshire. Therefore, a gift by sufficient assurance, may be of a thing absent
in nature thereof: and so is Christ's body given us in the mysteries, which are
the seal of Gods promise, truly giving Christ's body unto us, which according
to the natural and corporal manner of presence, is in heaven, and not on the
earth. Col. 3. But Sander would understand how we know, that we are flesh
of his flesh, and bone of his bones, except it be by the real and corporal
presence of Christ in the mysteries? Yes forsooth, we know it by the word of
God, which so testifies, Ephesians. 5. and by the spirit of Christ which dwells
in us, Romans 8. and last of all, we have assurance thereof by the holy sacrament,
as by a seal, confirmation, and pledge of the perfourmance of Gods promises
unto us.

But a conjunction betwixt the flesh of Christ, and the flesh of men, cannot be
made (says he) by faith, spirit, and understanding. As man and wife cannot
become one flesh by consent of marriage, except in deed they come bodily
together. Yes sir, we hold, that Christ is actually joined to the nature of
man, by his incarnation, but this conjunction profits not all men, but only
them to whom he is joined, by spirit, faith, and understanding: and so the
incarnation of Christ, made all the fathers of the old testament, flesh of his
flesh, and bone of his bone. For otherwise, it is the spirit that quickens,
the flesh prositeth nothing. What avails it the reprobate, that God is become
man, joined in the same substance of flesh, blood and bones, and humane soul?
Nothing: because they lack the spirit of Christ and faith.

Last of all, where he says, that man and wise cannot become one flesh without
carnal copulation, it is a beastly opinion. For he that said, they shall be
two in one flesh, spoke of the holy conjunction of two persons in marriage,
according to Gods institution, before carnal copulation, by which, the act of
generation is sanctified, and the bed made to be undefiled, not restraining
the conjunction to the coupling of their bodies. For the Scripture called
Joseph and Marie, husband and wife, although there were no coming together of
their bodies. And how can the Papists affirm Matrimony to be a sacrament,
when the conjunction in one flesh, which is ye effect thereof, cannot be
wrought by the word of God, but is left in the choice of the man and the
woman? Last of all, where Sander says, there is no other means taught in the
Gospel, how Christ may be present in flesh, or his flesh joined to our flesh,
but by means of transubstantiation, it will fall out, that seeing
transubstantiation is not taught in the Gospel, neither was thought upon six
hundred years in the Church, but the contrary manifestly proved, that Christ
is not present in flesh at all, nor his flesh should be joined to our flesh by
any means. Such truth is in his assertions.

CAP. XXIIII.
The contrariety of the Apology is showed, and that the lifting up of our
hearts to heaven, is no good cause why we should lift Sander.
the body of Christ from the altar.

First he charge us with great forgetfulness. Afterward Fulke.
to make a show of contrariety, he falsifieth most impudently the words of
the Apology, which he cited himself in the Chapter last before. Christ gives
him self present in these mysteries, etc. therefore he is not here, but in
heaven, feeding us from thence. This word, Present, he now adds, which
because he missed before, he would seem to prove it by reason. Shall I say,
who ever had to do with such a forgetful man, or rather, with so shameless
an heretic? Although the Apology never denies simply the presence of Christ
in the mysteries, but always, that manner of presence, which the papists
affirm, and is now in controversy between us.

That the exhortation to lift up men's hearts, is no good argument to prove
that Christ is only in heaven, he uses much foolish babbling, as though that
saying only were brought for an argument, or that saying of it self for a
sufficient argument, or that saying for any argument. But where the Scripture
says, that Christ after his ascension, concerning his humanity, has left the
world, Joan. 16. (which the Apostles understood to be spoken plainly, and
without all parable) and that he sits in heaven, and not on earth, Col. 3.
the Apology says, this is the cause why the people are exhorted to lift up
their hearts: and not as Sander peruerteth it, because the people are exhorted
to lift up their hearts, therefore Christ is not present in his mysteries.

But lifting up of hearts with the old fathers, was to acknowledge the
mysteries upon the table, to believe the sacrifice of the Mass, and not to
deny the real presence of Christ, says Sander. Do you not look for some
sound argument, to prove this gear, especially of him which immediately before,
charged the author of the Apology, to use an argument more like a tinker, than
a divine? you shall hear his argument of authority of Chrysostom, Hom. de
Eucharistia. Did thou not promise the Priest, when he cried, Lift up your
minds and hearts: and saiedst thou not: we lift them up unto our Lord? Will you
see a wonderful matter? The table is furnished with the mysteries. The lamb
of God is offered for thee, the Priest is hofull for thee, a spiritual fire
flows from the table. Lo here be the mysteries upon the table, here is the
lamb of God offered which is the sacrifice of the Mass. But I pray you sir,
what is the spiritual fire that flows from the table? O that is a figurative
speech, you will say, alluding to the burned offering of the old law. Nay, if
ye have figures of rhetorike, then you have no truth, you have but foolish
dreams, you have nothing made by your words. Is not this your own Logike,
Master Sander?

CAP. XXV.
What be gross imaginations concerning the supper of Christ. Sander.


The words of the Apology are these: Cyrillus says: that in the receiving of
the mysteries, all gross imaginations Fulke.
must be put away. Sander charge the fine penner of ye Apology, with foul
play, in belying Cyrillus, as though he had spoken against the real presence
which they believe, and therefore cites where Cyrillus speaks of those gross
imaginations because the place is merueilous evident against him. Would you not
think that Sander had great advantage, that so dare be bold to rail? you
shall hear the words of Cyrillus In 11. Anathemat. ad Enoptium, against
Nestorius: but whereas shameless Sander cutteth of the one half of the
sentence, which is merueilous evident against him, I will set down the whole
sentence, even to the period, and the sentences following also, which gives
some light to the former. Number hominis comestionem nostrum hoc Sacramentum
pronun^^as, and irreligiose ad crassas cogitationes vrges eorum qui crediderunt
mentem, and attentas humanis cogitationibus tractare, quae sola, pura and in
exquisita fide accipiuntur. Quoniam enim minime editur diuinitatis natura,
propter hoc commune dixerit quis sanctum corpus Domini? Scire autem
operaepretium est, quod sicut supra diximus proprium est corpus eius verbi quod
omnia vinificat. Quoniam autem est corpus vitae, viuificum est. Nam per hoc
mortalibus nostris corporibus largitur vitam, and mo^ti^ imperium euacuat,
viuificat autem nos aequali modo and sanctus spiritus Christi. Spiritus est
enim qui viuificat secundum e^^sdem saluatoris vocem. Do thou pronounce this
our Sacrament, to be the eating of a man? And do thou irreverently enforce
the mind of the faithful to gross cogitations?

Here Sander choppeth of: but Cyrill proceeds: And do thou attempt to
handle by human cogitations those things which are received, by only pure
and vncurious or simple faith? For seeing the nature of the Godhead is not
eaten, for this cause shall any man say that the holy body of our Lord is a
common body? But it is profitable for us to know, that as we said before, the
body of that word which quickens all things, is a proper body. And seeing it
is the body of life, it is of power to quicken. For by this it gives life unto
our mortal bodies, and does make void the power of death, and in equal
manner the holy spirit of Christ does quicken us. For it is the spirit that
quickneth, according to the saying of the same our Savior.

Thus far Cyrillus, whose words do plainly show that he calls all those
gross and humane cogitations, by which it is said, that Christ, is eaten in
the Sacrament, as a natural man, and any otherwise received then only by
faith. Such are the imaginations of the Papists, that Christ is eaten
carnally, even without efficacy of his spirit, that he is included under the
forms of bread and wine, that he is received with the mouth, pressed with the
teeth, swallowed with the throat, essentially and naturally turned into the
substance of our bodies, or our bodies turned into him, and an hundredth other
such gross cogitations, as the Papists have of digestion, corruption of the
accidents, eating of the Sacrament by brute beasts, these be gross
imaginations, of which Cyrillus speaks, that tend ad (...), to the eating of
a man, or to any kind of eating the flesh of Christ, other then by faith only.
And therefore Sander might have spared his pains in noting ten other gross
imaginations.

The first, that we should not imagine Christ to lie, where he says, it is
his body, as though we did imagine any such blasphemy.

The second, that we should not imagine his saying to be dark or obscure,
when Cyrillus ad Calosyrium says, Eo manifest dicente, since himself says
manifestly. Although we do not imagine his words to be obscure, yet this is
a gross argument, to prove that his words be not figurative, because Cyrill
writes he says manifestly, that is, it is manifest that he calls the bread
his body, for he says as manifestly, this cup is the new Testament.

The third gross imagination, that we should not think any other body to be
eaten, but the true body of Christ, who in one person is God and man, as
Nestorius thought that the body of a man was eaten, but not the proper body of
God the word. We imagine no such matter, but we deny that true body to be
eaten in the Sacrament otherwise then by faith only, as Cyrillus teaches us.

The fourth gross imagination, that we should eat the body of Christ dead,
and passible, whereas it is quick and of power to quicken us, as Cyrill says,
Quoniam, etc: Because the flesh of our savior joined to the word of God, which
is life naturally, is made able to give life, when we eat it, then we have
life in us, being joined to that flesh which is made life.

According to this saying of Cyrillus, we believe, that we cannot eat that
flesh, except we have life thereby, but the Papists grossly imagine, it may
be eaten without effect of life. The fifth gross imagination, that we should
eat Christ's flesh raw, as the Capernaits: and as grossly do they imagine,
which teach, that it is prepared with such cookerie, that all spices,
confection, sauces, etc. are contained in it, as Sander does. The sixth gross
imagination, that it should be eaten by pieces, one a shoulder, and another a
leg, against which eating Saint Augustine speaks. And as gross it is to
imagine and mere monstrous, that the natural body should be eaten after a
corporal manner, whole of every men, and in so many places at once. The
seventh gross imagination is, of the Lutherans, which think the flesh of
Christ is eaten with bakers bread, whereas Christ would not have in his
supper an earthly substance of material bread. More gross is the imagination
of the Papists, which hold, that the glorious body of Christ must be eaten
with vain accidents of bread and wine, which Sander calls the veiles and
curteines, to co^er the said flesh, because our eyes are not able to see that
glorious and mystical kind of presence. Beware Sander, what you say, lest you
prove a Sacramentarie. Was the presence of Christ in the Sacrament, another
manner of presence, then that presence which the Apostles beheld with their
eyes sitting before them? Yea, it was a glorious and mystical presence. If you
could hold you there, we should soon be agreed. The eight, is to confess
the real presence, and to deny adoration, let them answer, that defend such
presence. The ninth, how gross is it to deny it to be a propitiatory
sacrifice? si^h it is his body, who is the propitiation for the world. Nay,
how gross is this consequence? seeing he was but once offered in sacrifice,
and by that one oblation, found eternal redemption. Heb. 9. and 10.

The ^enth gross imagination is of him, who teaches, that the words that are
spoken of a gift presently made and delivered, be words of promise, and of
preaching Nay rather it is a gross imagination of him, which teaches a gift
to be made, delivered, and received, when he which receives it, is never the
better for it.

Finally, whatsoever the Papists teach of the Sacrament, it is gross
falsehood, and mere humane invention contrary to the holy Scriptures, the
sense of which, and not the sound of words grossly understood, is the word
of God.

CAP. XXVI.
What the first Council of Nice has taught, concerning Christ's Sande^
supper.

The Apology touches briefly, that the Council Fulke
of Nice, as it is cited in Greek, of some, does expressly forbid us, that
we should not basely occupy ou^ minds about the bread and wine set before
us, Sander takes pains to set down the words at large, and gathers great
matters out of them. Iterum etiam hic in diuina mensa, etc. Again, here also
in the holy table, let us not basely attend the bread and cup set before
us, but lifting up our mind, let us understand by faith: That Lamb of God
which takes away the sins of the world, to be set on that holy table, to be
vnbloudily sacrificed of the priests, and that we truly taking his own
preciou^ body and blood, do believe these to be the mystical tokens of our
redemption. For this cause we ta^e not much but little, that we may know we
take not to fill us, but for holiness. Out of these words, ten arguments he
has, to prove, or to help to prove, the real presence of Christ's body
under the forms of bread and wine.

The first is, that bread and wine are set on the table, not to be basely
considered, ergo they are changed into the body and blood of Christ. This is a
poor, and a forlorn help, and a miserable argument. For the contrary does
follow, the bread must not be basely considered, ergo it is bread, although
it be highly considered and regarded as the water in baptism.

The second argument, is, that seeing the words of consecration be past (in
respect of which, the Council says, the bread and wine must not be basely
considered) the words did not only make them a Sacrament, as in baptism,
etc. but also did work some real thing under the forms of bread and wine,
which remains still, as long as the said forms and signs remain. Nay
rather, the Council signifies, that the celebration of the Sacrament and
consecration thereof, is not perfect, before the use and receite of it: whereof
it speaks soon after, and therefore is not to be basely considered, as
common bread and wine, but sanctified to a special use of an holy Sacrament
and pledge of our redemption: as for the forms, and signs, and colors of
bread and wine, the Council speaks not one word of them, but of bread and
the cup, which be substances, and not accidental forms.

The third, We must understand (says he) not by seeing, but by lifting up
our minds to heaven by faith. In deed, that is the only way to understand
the mystical presence of Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament.

The fourth, We must believe, that to be the Lamb of God, which is on the holy
table, whereon stands that which seems bread and wine. But the Council
speaks not of that which seems, but of that which is bread and wine, and
that by lifting up of our minds into heaven, by faith, We believe it to be
the body and blood of Christ.

The fifth, The Lamb is there so, that he is put, laid, and situate there, as
a thing may be situate, which is under the forms of another thing. But if a
man should ask you, how that may be? I marvel by what thing you would
exemplify it, and yet your words import a fimilitude. Therefore seeing it is
without example, your position is after an imagined manner. Whereas the
Council never thought of any such quiditie, but that lifting up our minds
into heaven by faith, we understand that Christ is dispensed unto us, by his
holy mysteries, as we are incorporated to him by baptism, not that one thing
is situated as another thing, which is no where, neither any such thing can be
showed, and therefore is nothing, but an idle toye of an evil occupied brain.

The sixth, The Lamb is so truly made present, that he is outwardly offered
of the Priests, vnbloudily. Where have you the word, outwardly, or what
argument have you of an outward oblation, except you think Priests cannot
offer, but outwardly? Nay, rather in that the Council says, the Lamb is
offered vnbloudily, it signifies, that it is not offered for a propitiatory
sacrifice, to take away sins, for without shedding of blood, there is no
sacrifice for sins, Hebr. 9. but that a remembrance of that only
insacrificable sacrifice of Christ, is celebrated in that holy action.

The seventh, After the sacrifice made, the people do partake with the altar,
which could not be, except a permanent substance were made by consecration.
The Council speaks not of partaking with the altar, but of receiving the
body and blood of Christ, in the mystical tokens of our redemption, which
overthrows private Mass, Communion in one kind, and transubstantiation, and
shows the Sacrament not to be perfect, before it be received.

The eight, Truly taking of the precious body and blood of Christ, is to take
it really and bodily. The Council speaks of no bodily taking, but of taking
by faith, when we believe the bread and wine to be the mystical tokens of
our redemption, we truly take the precious body and blood of Christ.

The ninth, taking of that which stands before us on the table, is by the
instrument of our bodies: therefore it is delivered by the corporal ministry
of the priests, so that all is truly and externally done by the judgment of
the Council. A shameless collection of a false argument. For that which
stands on the table, the Council calls bread, and the cup, which is
taken and delivered externally, and by corporal instruments, the rest must be
understood by faith, which is not of external things, but of things invisible.

The tenth, we truly taking them, believe them to be the tokens of our
redemption, or as some read, resurrection: for bread and wine be not tokens of
our redemption. Did bread and wine redeem us? or did they rise from death,
quoth Sander? No verily: But the Council says for all that: that these things
which are set on the table, namely, bread and the cupp, are believed of us to
be the mystical tokens of our redemption, which the words following do
declare. For this cause we take not much, but little, that we might know we
take not to fill us, but for holiness. What can that be, whereof, not much but
a little is taken, but the bread and wine? for the body and blood of Christ, is
not taken in quantity more or less. Secondly, what need we by taking little,
be admonished, that it is not to fill us, if we did think there were no
bread nor wine there, which could fill us? Finally, why take we a little for
holiness, if we take that which is nothing but all holiness it self, and of his
own nature, whether we take little or much. You see therefore, the Council
meant not to make Christ's body a mystical token of it self, which is a
monstrous saying, and as monstrous an opinion, but the bread and wine in the
sacrament, to be mystical and divine tokens of our redemption, wrought in the
body and bloudshedding of our savior Christ. Wherefore the Apology without
fraud or purpose of deceiving, has left out no words of the Council, that
make against it, but whatsoever it has omitted, it has left of that
advantage, it might justly have taken, if it had thoroughly and at large
discussed them.

CAP. XXVII.
That the Catholics have the table of Eagles, and the Sacramentaries Sand.
have the table of Iayes.

The author of the Apology is charged with impudency, Fulke.
for alleging the place of Chrysostom, in 1. Cor. Hom. 24. speaking of flying
high with Eagles, unto the body of Christ, as though the body of Christ were
not upon the altar, but we only should by faith ascend into heaven, whereas
Chrysostom speaks of going into heaven by good life also, and not by faith
only. Afterward he rehearses his words, but without the head or former part
of them, which shows that Chrysostom teaches us, how we should come unto
Christ, and where we should find him. Likewise he translateth corruptly, to
draw them to his imagined flying by good life. Ad hoc enim inducit nos
sacrificium formidandum and admirabile, quod inbet nobis ut cum concordia and
charitate maxima ad se accedamus, and aquilae in hat vita facti, ad ipsum
coelum euolemus, vel potius supra coelum. Vbi enim cadauer (inquit) illie and
aquilae. All this has Sander left out. Cadauer domiri corpus propter mortem,
nisi enim ille cecidisset, nos non resurrexissemus. Aquilas autem appellat, ut
ostendat ad alta eum oportere contendere, qui ad hoc corpus accedit, and nihil
cum terra debere ei esse commune, neque ad inferiora trahi and repere, sed ad
superiora semper volare, and in solemn just(...)tae iniu^ri, mentisque oculum
acutissimum habere. Aquilarum enim, non graculorum haec mensa est. For unto
this does the dreadful and wonderful sacrifice bring us, which commands us
that with concord and greatest charity we come to it, and being made Egles in
this life, we fly up unto heaven it self, or rather above heaven. For where
the carcass is (says he) there also be the Egles. The Lords body is the
carcass, through his death, for except he had fallen, we had not risen again.
And he names eagles, to show, that he must get up on high, which comes to
this body, and that he ought to have nothing to do with the earth, nor to be
drawn down and creep to the low places, but always to fly up unto the
high places, and to behold the son of righteousness, and to have the eye of
the mind most clear. For this is the table of Egles, not of Iayes. Judge now
whether Chrysostom mean to tell us, that the body of Christ is upon the
altar, or in heaven. For we must be made Egles, not to hoouer upon the
table, but to fly up into heaven, or rather above heaven. Wherefore must we
fly into heaven or above heaven? because Christ is there. Wherefore must he
that comes to this body contend unto the highest place, and to have nothing
to do with the earth or lower places, if the body of Christ lies below
upon the table? But we must have a most clear eye of the mind, (says
Sander) to see the body of Christ under the forms of bread and wine, as an
Egle flying on high, will fee a fish under the water, and catch it, as
Augustine writes. But Chrysostom teaches us, not to fly upon high, to look
down from on high, and see the body of Christ under the water or clouds of
accidents, but always to fly up on high, and to behold the son of
righteousness, which is in heaven, and not below on earth; for if the body
were come down so low as the table, what need we fly from it, to behold
it from so great a distance?

And whereas he says, that we are Iayes, because we see weakly, and
content our selves with a base banquet of bread and wine: I would he knew,
we have a most clear eye of the mind, which through that base banquet of
bread and wine, can behold and see the very body and blood of Christ,
sitting above all heavens, and fly so high with the wings of faith, that we
not only see it, but also that we are thereby fed and nourished into
eternal life.

That we think good works to bring small aid to life everlasting, it is,
because we fly like Egles to an higher cause, the only mercy of GOD in Jesus
Christ, and Papists be like Iayes flying below, which think the imperfect
works of earthly and sinful men, can help to bring them to perfect
happiness in heaven. But (says Sander) he speaks of the table, which
stands in the Church before us, he speaks not now of heaven, which is
above the sun. This says Sander, without all proof and against all reason.
For Chrysostom says, it is the table of Egles, therefore it is an higher
table then the table in the Church, where unto we must fly upward always,
even into heaven, where that body, which once was dead, is now sitting in
glory, yea above all visible heavens, and therefore above the sun. So that
ye table in Chrysostom, signifies metonymically, the spiritual meat and
drink, which the faithful receive by faith only, whereof the table on
earth, with that which is on it, is only a Sacrament, pledge and assurance.
But Chrysostom in the same homily says: If no man will rashly handle, an
other man's garmente, how dare we to our great shame and reproach, receive
this pure and immaculate body, which is the Lord of all, which is partaker of
the divine nature, etc. Here (says Sander) Chrysostom shows us, to receive
the body of Christ, from the holy table or Altar, as truly concerning the
substance thereof, as we may truly touch another man's garment. I answer, he
speaks in this place neither of Altar nor Table, and seeing he has before
showed, how and from whence, Christ's body is in deed received, if
afterward, he call ye external Sacraments by the names of yt which they
signify, and perform to the worthy receiver. What proof is that, for the
carnal presence? Neither does he show at all, how truly Christ's body is
taken but what injury it is unto his body, to have his sacraments despised or
unworthily received.

CAP. XXVIII.
The bread which is the meat of the mind^, and not of the Sander.
belly, can be no wheaten bread, but only the bread of life which is the
body of Christ.

This saying of Cyprian (says Sander) proves that Fulke.
the substance of bread remains not: for material bread, cannot be meant
of the mind, but of the belly. Yes forsooth, as well as material water c^n
serve for the washing of the mind. And yet Saint Peter says, it is not the
washing of the body, but the answer of a good conscience which is baptism
that saves us. Wherefore it may be material bread though not prepared to
feed the body, but consecrated as a sacrament to feed the mind. The plain
meaning of Cyprian is, that the body of Christ, enters not into the body of
man, but into the mind: being no bodily food, but spiritual food, as the
Apostle calls it. 1. Cor. 10. As for that which Tertullian says, The flesh
is fed with the body and blood of Christ, yt the soul may be made fat in
God; I have showed before, how it must of necessity be understood, of the
external sacrament, which bears the name of that whereof it is a sacrament,
seeing he speaks there altogether of the external signs received in the
body, and virtue thereof applied to the soul. But Cyprian says further, in
the same treatise de coen* dom. Panis iste etc. This bread which our Lord
gave to his disciples, being changed not in shape, but in nature, is made
flesh, by the almighty power of the word. This place is often alleged by the
Papists, for transubstantiation, but Cyprian did mean no such matter, but
only that common bread by the almighty power of the word of God, is changed
from the nature of common bread, which is a bodily food, to be an heavenly
and spiritual food, as I have declared more at large in answer to doctor
Heskins. lib. 1. Cap. 17. and shall have better occasion to speak of the same
place repeted afterward.

CAP. XXIX.
Sacramental eating differs from eating by faith alone, whereof Sander.
only Saint Augustine speaks in the place alleged by the Apology.

The Apology to show the natural body of Christ, Fulke.
not to be sought on the earth, but by faith in heaven, cites this place of
Aug. Tr. 50 in Joan. How shall I hold him, that is absent? How shall I reach
forth mine hand in^o heaven, that I might hold him there sitting? Reach out
says he faith, and thou have caught him. Here Sander scoffeth out of measure,
saying that Augustine in that place spoke not one whit of the Sacrament, but of
believing in Christ, that he speaks not to the faithful, but to ye
unbelieving Jews; and therefore it is one thing to receive Christ by faith
alone, another thing to receive him by faith and sacrament together. In deed
it is true, that Christ may be received by faith alone, without the sacrament,
and it is as true, that Christ is received by faith alone, with the sacrament,
seeing by this place of Augustine, it is showed, that Christ is absent from the
earth, and to be sought in heaven only by faith. No (says Sander) although he
be absent to infidels, that are not baptized, yet he, is not absent to the
faithful, that are admitted to the Lords table. As though Augustine in the
same treatise, shows not at large, that the body of Christ is not with the
Church on earth, upon these words, The poor you shall have always with you,
but me you shall not have: the place I have ci^ed at large before, and in the
same treatise, shows how Christ is present in the holy sacraments, namely in
one as he is in the other. Quid est enim non semper, and quid est semper? Si
bonus es, si ad corpus Christipertines, quod significat Petrus* habes Christum,
and in praesenti, and in futuro, In praesenti per fidem, in praesenti per
signum Christi, in praesenti per baptismatis sacramentum, in praesenti per
altaris cibum and potum. Habes Christum in praesenti, sed habebis semper: quia
cum hinc exieris, ad illum venies, qui dixit latroni: H^die me^um eris in
Paradiso. Si autem male versaris, videris habere in praesenti Christum quia
intras ecclesiam, signas te signo Christi, baptizaris baptismo Christi, misces
te membris Christi accedis ad altar Christi, in praesenti habes Christum
sedmale viuendo non semper habebis. What is meant by not always, and what is
always? If thou be a good man, if thou pertain unto the body of Christ, which
Peter does signify, thou have Christ, both in this present time, and in ye
world to come. In this present world by faith, in this present world by ye
sign of Christ, in this present world by the sacrament of baptism, in this
present world by the meat and drink of the Altar, Thou have Christ in this
present world, and thou shall always have him. For when thou shall depart from
hence, thou shall come unto him, which said unto the thief: This day thou
shall be with me in Paradise. But if thou leadest an evil life, thou seem
to have Christ in this present world, because thou come into the Church,
signest thee with the sign of Christ, art baptized with the baptism of
Christ, ioynest they self with the members of Christ, come unto the Altar
of Christ, thou have Christ in this present world, but by evil living thou
shall not always have him. By these words it is evident how Christ is
present in the meat and drink of the Altar, namely as he is present in
Baptism, which is not corporally but spirituallie. Secondly, yt the ungodly
so receive Christ in the sacraments, that they only seem to have him, when in
deed, they have nothing but the sign of him. Thirdly, that all the faithful
in Augustines time, received as well drink as meat at the Altar. Last of all,
while Sander iesteth at the penne^ of the Apology, he shows him self most
ridiculous of all. For although Augustine speaks of the Jews by Apostrophe,
which he wishes might be^ converted, yet he speaks in an homily or Sermon
to the faithful for their instruction, at which never a Jew was present. And
where as Sander argues, that because no infidel was admitted to be present
in time of mass, therefore Augustine might not lawfully talk to a Jew of the
mystical presence of Christ in the Sacrament: he shows double follye, for
why might he not expound even to the Jews, that which our Savior Christ
him self spoke to the unbelieving Jews of the eating and drinking of his
flesh and blood* and secondly, when he preached publicly of that mystical
presence, or writ of it in books which he set abroad, to be read of all
men, how could he prohibit infidels to hear the one or read the other? And
yet I know the ancient Fathers, had such regard to speak of the mysteries of
our religion, before infidels, that they should not take an occasion to scorn
them or deride them. Nevertheless they were not so dangerous, as Sander
imagines: Justinius Martyr in his Apology to the heathen emperors and Senate
of Rome, and in his Dialogue with Tryphon the Jew, fears not plainly to
express what the faith of the Christians was concerning these holy mysteries,
wherefore Augustine although in these words he spoke not of the presence of
Christ in the Sacrament, yet in other words of the same homily, as you have
seen, he speaks of the presence of Christ, even in his sacraments.

The third Book.
In the Preface of ye third Book he promises to prove, First that Christ in
the sixth of S. John, spoke of the gift he made afterward in his parting
banquet. Secondly, yt the real presence of his flesh and blood, is evidently
proved by such words of promise, as he there uttered. Afterward he excuses
himself, that he is driven to handle deep and obscure matters, being a poor
scholar of Oxford, and yet inferior to 200, that were in the late Tride^tine
council. So that if any Parliament man brought up in hawking and hunting, think
he writes too profound ly for his understanding, he must think, that he is
less able to be a judge of this whole controversy, and of all questions in
religion. As though it were necessary, for every member of the Parliament,
that shall entreat of cases of religion, to be trained up in school points of
Popish divinity, which the farther they be, from ye understanding of yt common
people, y^ further they are from faith and Christian religion, which ought to
be commonly know^ eue^ to the simplest women and children. And albeit that
every parliament man is not able of himself to judge of al controversies of
religion, yet they altogether, by the instruction of so many godly learned men,
as are among them, may decree what laws are necessary to be made, for the
advancement of Gods glory in religion, as well as for the furtherance of the
common wealth in quiet and tranquillity. To conclude, his foolish preface has
never done craking of hard and difficult matters, as though he were a man of
such ripe judgment in them, that whatsoever he did write, were the Oracles of
Apollo, where as in deed, every mean wise man shall easily perceive, that
when he would seem to wind himself out of a difficult and intricate matter,
he shows more boldness in aduouching, then soundnes in his approving.

CAP. I.
The argument of the sixth chapter of saint John, is declared. Sander.


First he affirms that Christ may be received three Fulk.
ways, by faith and spirit only without the Sacrament, in the Sacrament of
the Altar only without faith and grace, or in both together. Of the last kind
of receiving, he affirms that Christ speaks toward the later end of the
Chap. In the beginning upon occasion of the miracle of multiplying bread and
fishes, he exhorts the Jews to work the meat that perishes not, which the
son of man will give them. This gift (says he) is plainly meant of his
last supper, and so says Theophilact, a late writer. But because they could
not come to the working of this gift, without faith upon him, therefore he
teaches, for a preparation, that he is the bread of life, etc* After which
preparation made, he returns (says he) to expound his own gift, showing
most expressly, that, which he will give in his last supper. And the bread
which I will give, is my flesh, for the life of the world. But the gift of
spiritual eating was not to come, when Christ spoke unto his disciples, but
Christ says, his peculiar gift was to come. This only reason he uses in
this Chapter. Wherein you must note, first that here of a falsifying mind,
he cites the words of Christ otherwise then Saint John did write them. For
his words are these: And the bread that I will give, is my flesh, which I
will give for the life of the world. In which words, the gift is manifestly
referred unto his passion, and not unto his supper. Wherefore although
spiritual eating of his flesh, was from the beginning of the world, yet that
singular act, by which the flesh of Christ had virtue to feed unto eternal
life, and was given for meat, was not then performed, but was soon after
accomplished in his death and passion. For all benefits of Christ, have like
streams flowed always, from the blood of his cross, and our redemption and
reconciliation thereby. If Sander will excuse him self of falsifying the
scripture, because the vulgar translation in the later end of the sentence,
leaves out these words, which I will give, which it is certain, by the Greek
text of saint John, that our savior Christ did speak, he cannot so escape:
for the Latin text without his preiudicate opinion, brought unto it, although
it want the words, yet may well retain the sense. But Sander wilfully leaving
out these words, which he knows both to have been used by Christ, and which
give a clear and clean contrary sense, to that which he affirms, and
that in so weighty a matter, as is the passion of Christ, wittingly incurreth
the horrible curse of GOD, pronounced against all them that add or take any
thing from his holy word.

CAP. II.
It is proved by circumstances, and by the conference of holy Sander.
Scriptures, that Christ speaks in saint John of his last supper.

The circumstances are 6. the conferences 17. and yet Fulk.
neither any one, nor altogether, prove, that Christ speaks of his supper,
otherwise then as it is a seal of the do ctrine which he teaches in that
Chapter.

The first circumstance is, ye time, which he supposes to be Easter
tweluemonth, before his supper instituted, to argue, that he speaks of his
supper, is a vain argument, both because the time is uncertain, and also
because the time of Easter, if it were certain, has better relation to his
passion, then to his supper.

The 2. circumstance is, the miracle made in bread. A ridiculous matter, as
though it were not made also in flesh. But in deed the miracle made in meat,
gave occasion to that doctrine uttered in that Chapter, as S. John shows. The
3. circumstance, the Prophetical promise, what he would do the Easter
tweluemoneth after. I answer, that promise was fulfilled in his passion.

The 4. the conference of things done and said about the sea of Tiberias, and
at Capernaum, with that was done and said in the last supper. This conference
follows afterward in the 17. conferences. The 5. the present eating of the
fathers gift. The 6. the eating of Christ's gift to come. To these two
circumstances, I answer, that Christ exhorts the Jews to the present eating
of his flesh, upon pain of damnation: Except ye eat the flesh, etc. He which
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has life everlasting. Therefore the
flesh and blood of Christ, might be eaten and drunken before his supper.
Wherefore none of these circumstances do prove a promise of a sacramental
eating, which may be without profit, nor an eating of the natural substance
of flesh and blood of Christ in the sacrament, which at that time was not
instituted. But now we must come to the conferences. Four of which
conferences, are bread. 2. blessing. 3. thanksgiving. 4. eating in both. I
answer, so there was in all the dinners, and suppers that ever he did make.
Beside that, here is multiplying, and fish, which is not in the last supper.
Therefore a vain conference. The fifth is that as here, he begins his
talk of common bread, and ends with eating and drinking his flesh and
blood, so in his supper, he took common bread in his hands, and ended his
banquet in eating and drinking of his body and blood. But when Sander can make
a consequence, of this conference, I will yield unto it, that he speaks of
Sacramental eating.

The 6 and 7. the son of man is the giver, and meat is given in both: ergo
he speaks in both of the Sacraments. I deny the argument, for the meat
which the son of man gives, may be eaten without the Sacrament, and
therefore he says, he that now eats my flesh and drinks my blood, when
as yet that sacrament was not instituted. The 8. conference. He says, the
bread which I will give, is my flesh, and not the bread which I will take. So
in his supper, he took one kind of bread, and gave another. This is a noble
conference, to tell us what Christ said not. According to which, I might
confer this: He says, the bread which I will give, he says not, the
drink which I will give, is my blood, therefore in the supper he gives not
his blood.

The 9. conference, the flesh is given in the one, and nothing but the body
in the other, for the substance of common bread was changed. This reason in
deed is of great weight, if transubstantiation were granted.

The 10. No common bread is given in either of both places, if by common
bread he meant profane bread, and not dedicated to holy use. I confess the
conference, but seeing by common bread, he means natural bread, I deny
it. For though no natural or material bread was promised to be given in the
sixte of Saint John, yet was natural bread given in the Sacrament.

The 11. The flesh that dyed for us, is given in both. That is true, but after
diverse manners: in the one it is given in a Sacrament, in the other more
generally, but in both to be spiritually received, and not carnally. The 12.
The gift is eaten in deed in both: I confess, but spiritually and by faith,
yet with this difference, that in the one, it is eaten often without the
sacrament, the other is a seal or a sacrament of that, which is eaten even
without it.

The 13. The blood of Christ is drunk in both. It is so drunk, as the flesh
is eaten. The 14. As in the sixth of John, there is no wine spoken of: so Christ
in his supper neither spoke of wine, but of drinking, nor gave any wine at all
to be drunk, because it was by his words changed into his blood. I
answer, If bread were spoken of, in that which was taken into his hands, wine
by Metonymia was spoken of, by taking the cup. Secondly, if the fruit of the
vine be the matter of wine, wine was spoken of. At Caparnaum, there was no wine
spoken of, nor any occupied. Let Sander see how he can make the conference
with the supper, in which wine was occupied, although he say, it was not drunk,
which is a weighty argument, when that which is in question, is brought for
the proof. Last of all, if Christ at his supper, gave no wine at all to be
drunk (as Sander says) how agrees the Popish communion with Christ's supper?
seeing the Papists do give wine to be drunk, unto the lay people.

The 15. The twelve Apostles most faithful, tarried with him at Caparnaum, so
they alone were admitted in the night of his betraying, to his holy table. In
ye faithful tarying of the twelve Apostles, he forgets Judas, and that the
twelve only were present at the institution of the supper, it is uncertain.
For it is certain there was more then twelve present at the eating of the
Passover: and it is proved before, that Judas went out before the Sacrament
ordained.

The 16. Peter with the twelve protested in both places, not to forsake
Christ. So they did at other times and places, where no mention was of eating
Christ. The last, Judas was reproved in both places. I answer, Judas was
reproved in other places, where no promise or mention of the supper is made.
Finally I answer, that not any one, nor altogether of these conferences, can
make any consequence, to prove that our Savior Christ in that sixth of John's
Gospel, speaks of the Sacrament, otherwise then as it is a seal, a pledge,
an undoubted token of assurance, of that spiritual eating and drinking of
Christ's flesh and blood, which in that Chapter is commended unto us.

CAP. III.
It is proved out of the holy Fathers and general councels, that Sander.
Christ in S. John spoke of his last supper.

I have showed even now, in what sort Christ may Fulk.
be said to have spoken of his last supper, in that chapter; and of that
sense and meaning, are the most ancient and sound fathers, whom Sander cites
to be understood. And not one which affirms the eating of Christ's flesh
and blood, which there is spoken of, to be peculiar unto the supper, and
singulerly to be understood of eating in the sacrament, and not otherwise:
which is the only thing which we deny, and not that the doctrine of that
Chapter, does not at all pertain to the supper, but that it is further to be
extended, then to the supper, by which, the carnal manner of eating of
Christ's flesh, is manifestly overthrown. But let us briefly, run over his
authorities. First Ignatius, Clemens, Alexandrinus, and Origin he omitteth,
because they speak nothing almost sounding to his purpose. But Cyprian in
orat, dominica, seems unto him clearly, to prove, that it is meant of the
supper, because he writes, that who so is any long time kept from the
sacrament, is in danger of everlasting life: alleging this text of saint
John: Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, etc. For he should
wholly fail of his proof (says he) if that place did not prove the
necessity of communicating sacramentally. I deny the argument: for he
speaks of them which were cut off from the body of Christ by
excommunication, whose admission unto the communion, was an assurance of their
incorporation again. This place is answered more at large in my confutation of
Heskins lib. 2, cap. 4. The second is Athanasius in syn. nou. test lib. 4.
which says, Christ reasons with the multitude concerning the mysteries. A
sorry argument, as though the spiritual eating of Christ's flesh were not a
mystery. It had been very unseasonable, to reason with them of that which as
yet was not instituted, although as I have said, his doctrine may be extended
also to ye sacrament. The 3. is Hilarie lib. 8. de Trin. disputing of the
natural verity of Christ, which is in us by the sacrament, alleges these
words: My flesh is meat in deed. I answer, Hilarie affirms that the
natural verity of Christ's flesh is in us, by his incarnation if we be
faithful, which is testified by the mystery and sacrament of bread and wine.
Therefore he says, n^^que vere sub mysterio carnem corporis sui sumimus: we
do truly, under a mystery, take the flesh of his body: Again, naturam
carnis suae ad naturam aeternitatis sub sacramento nobi^ communicande carnis
admis(...)it: he has joined the' nature of his flesh unto the nature of
eternity, under a sacrament of his flesh to be communicated with us. The 4. is
Basil, Dei bap lib. 1. Cap. 3. comparing the words of his supper, with the
words of this Chapter, which proves not the matter in hand, otherwise then I
have showed, but of Basil we must see more afterward touching this
controversy. The 5. is Gregory Nyssene his brother, in vita Mosis, who says:
that the bread which came down from heaven, which is ye true meat, is no
vnbodily thing, for how should a thing that lacks a body, be made mea^^
unto the body? Doubtless (says Sander) Christ is made meat unto our bodies,
no where but only in the Sacrament. Sanders Doubtless, is all the argument,
judge of it as ye list. The 6. is Cyrillus of Jerusalem in Catech. Mistagog. 4.
who entreating of ye Sacrament, cites these words, except ye eat: ergo these
words are to be understood only of eating in the sacrament. Here he desires
license, being compassed with such a multitude of witnesses briefly to run
over the rest, as he has not been very long in any of the other, and the like
license I require, that one answer may serve them al, which are worth the
answering; that although the Fathers did refer the doctrine of the sixth of S.
John, unto the supper: yet they refer it not only unto the supper, which is
the matter we stick upon. Neither Ambrose, nor Eusebius Emissenus, and much
less Chrysostom and Augustine, which do plainly extend it further then to the
supper. And last of all Hierom in the place by Sander cited, in 1. Cap. Ep. ad
Ephesians. where he says, the flesh and blood of Christ is understood two ways,
either that spiritual and divine, whereof he said: My flesh is meat in deed,
etc. or else, that flesh which was crucified for us, and that blood which was
s^ed with the spear of ye soldier. Where either he speaks not of the
Sacrament at all, or else he declares manifestly, that the flesh which was
crucified, is not given us in this Sacrament. And what his judgment is of that
place, he shows evidently in Ps. 147. Quando dicit, qui non comederit carnem
meam, and biberit sanguinem meum, licet and in mysterio possit intelligi, tamen
verius corpus Christi and sanguis eius sermo scripturarum est, diuina doctrina
est. When he says, he which shall not eat my flesh, nor drink my blood,
etc. although it may be understood in the mystery, yet more truly the body
of Christ and his blood is ye words of the scriptures, it is the doctrine of
God. The next is Cyrillus, whom Sander most impudently affirms to interpret
the whole Chapter of the Sacrament of the altar, because sometime he names the
mysteries, and the mystical blessing, and the communicating of the holy cup.
For thus he expounds that saying, which Sander makes the promise of his
supper. The bread, which I will give, is my flesh which I will give for the life
of the world. Morior inquit pro omnibus, vt per meipsum omnes vinifice^, and
caro mea omni^^ redemptio fiat, mori^tur enim mors morte mea, and si^ul me cum
natura hominu^ resurget I die (says he) for all men, yt I might quicken al men
by my self, and my flesh may be made ye redemption of al men: for death by my
death, shall die, and ye nature of man shall rise again together with me. Likewise
he expounds these words: He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood,
dwells in me and ^inhim. Quonia^res ardua est and fide magis qua^ alio modo
recipitur: ideo multis atque varijs modis, mirabile^ eius vtilitate^ exponit
fundamentum and basim fidem esse confirmans. Because the matter that is high,
and is received by faith, rather then by any other means, he sets forth the
merueilous profit thereof, by many and diverse means, confirming y^ faith is
the ground and foundation. Concerning the rest, whom he reherseth, as Sedulius,
Leo, Isychiu^, Proiper, Eucherius, Cas^iodorus, Primatius, which apply any text
of this Chapter to the Lords supper, I answe^^ as before, it is not sufficient
to prove, that the bread is either only or principally to be understood of the
Lords supper. As for Damaseen, Haymo, Bernard, with other late writers, the
last council of Trent, and the second of Nice, what errors they followed we
have not to regard, and much less the practice of the Popish Church, reading
that text for the Gospel of Corpus Christi day, but the first council of
Ephesus, which he iumbleth up among the rest, in Epistola at Nestorium,
affirms no such matter as he adnoucheth, but shows, what they judged of
that flesh, whereof they received the sacrament, namely, that it is the flesh of
the son of God, able to give life, as more at large I have showed in answer
to Heskias lib. 2. Cap. 16.

CAP. IIII.
Answer is made to their objections, who teach out of the holy Sander.
fathers that the sixth Chapter of S. John ought to be expounded only of
spiritual eating.

Where it is alleged, that the fathers expound the words of that Chapter,
partly of belief in Christ, partly Fulk.
of the unity which rises by the Sacraments of baptism and penance (says
Sander) this shall be a sufficient answer. First so many fathers do ^et expound
it of any others argument, as do conformably expound it of the supper of our
Lord.

To this I reply, y^ al or in a manner all do interpret it of our spiritual
conjunction, with the body and blood of Christ, whereof the supper is a
Sacrament, and confirmation. Secondly he answers, that those fathers which
have expounded the words otherwise then of the supper, have also expounded
them of the supper, whereby their authority is as great, for that which I say,
as it is against it. I reply, that none of them expounds the words of the
supper so, as they be singular unto the supper, and therefore none of them
makes for Sanders purpose; nor expound them otherwise then I have showed in
reply to the first answer.

Thirdly he answers, that no one of the fathers is brought forth, who denies
these words in S. John to apperteine to the supper. A lewd answer, for none
of us denies those words to apperteine to the supper, but to be a promise
singularly to be referred to the supper. Fourthly, many of the places brought
for the contrary opinion, do manifestly and as it seems to Sander,
inuincibly prove the words in S. John to be literally meant of the supper of
Christ. This shall appear by the examples following. First Cyprian ad Quir^num
lib. 3. Cap. 25. and 26. writes that a man can not come to the kingdom of
heaven without baptism, because it is written: Except a man be borne again,
etc. and likewise, Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, etc. Here
(says Sander) he expounds not the words of baptism, but means according
to the custom of the Church, which was to give the cummunion to infantes, not
so much for necessity, as for suerties sake, of which custom we have mention
in Dionysius, Ambrose, and other. The like answer (he says) may be made to
Innocentius, Augustinus, and Eusebius Emissenus, which bring these words
against the Pelagians: Except'ye eat the flesh, etc. to prove that infantes
can not have life, except they be baptized. To this I reply: it can not be
denied, but such an erroneous custom contrary to ye word of God, was used in
those ancient times, to give the communion to infantes, whereof grew afterward
an opinion of necessity, which Pope Innocentius and Augustine, and all the West
Church, (as Augustine says) did hold, although Cont. dua^ epist. Pel. lib. 2.
Cap. 4.
Sander would excuse it, to have been practiced not for necessity, but for
suerty: yet hereof it follows not, that the words of S. John in Cyprian and
the rest, are literally understood of the supper, otherwise then as the supper
is a Sacrament of that eating and drinking the flesh and blood of Christ, which
Sander confesses may to be without the Sacrament, even of such eating of the
flesh of Christ, as the fathers were partakers of, unto their salvation, before
Christ came in the flesh, whereof Augustine speaks most plentisully. In Joan
Tr. 26. and concludes of this question: Huius rei Sacramentum, id est vnitatis
corporis, etc. A Sacrament of this thing, that is of the unity of the body and
blood of Christ, in some places every day, in some places by certain distances
of days, is prepared in the Lords table, and from the Lords table is received:
of some to life, of some to destruction. But the thing it self, whereof it is
a Sacrament, is received of every man to life, of none to destruction,
whosoever shall be pertaker of it. And because, Sander says, the maintenance
of life depends ordinarily upon the Eucharist alone: The same Augustine says
to the contrary, Hoc est ergo manducare illam escam, and illum bibere potum in
Christo manner, and illum manentem in se habere. Ac per hoc qui non manet in
Christo, and in quo non manet Christus, pro^ul dubio nec manducat spiritualiter
carnem eius, nec bibit eius sanguinem, licet carnaliter and visibiliter premat
dentibus Sacramentum corporis and sanguinis Christi, sed magis tantae rei
Sacramentum ad iudi^itan sibi manducat and bibit. For this it is to eat that
meat, and to drink that drink, to abide in Christ and to have him abide in
us. And by this, he which abides not in Christ, and in whom Christ does not
abide, out of al doubt, neither does he eat spiritually his flesh, not drink
his blood, although carnally and visibly, he press with his teeth, the
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, but rather he eats and drinks
the Sacrament of so great a thing, unto his own damnation. Here Augustine
opposes the eating of Christ's flesh spiritually, with eating the Sacrament
thereof carnally, whereby he shows, that Christ's flesh is not eaten but
spiritually and effectually, although the Sacrament thereof be eaten carnally
to destruction. And by this you may see, how well red Sander is in Augustine,
which professes, that in his works he never saw one syllable, why to think
that he would the litteral sense of the sixth of S. John to belong only to
spiritual eating, when Augustine says expressly, This is to eat that meat,
to eat spiritually, to have Christ abiding in us, etc. But yt same Augustine
de peccat. merit. lib 1. Cap. 20. says: Dominum audiamus, inqu^m, no^ quidem
hoc de Sacramento lauacri dicentem, sed de Sacramento sanctae mensae suae, quo
nemo rite nisi baptiza^us accedit. Nisi manducaueritis carnem meam, etc. Let us
hear our Lord, I say, not saying in deed, this of the Sacrament of baptism,
but of the Sacrament of his holy table, whither no man comes well, unless he
be baptized. Except ye eat my flesh and drink my blood, you shall not have
life in you, etc. Here (says Sander) it is plain by Augustines judgment, yt
Christ in that Chapter speaks not of baptism, and that he speaks of his
supper. I answer, Augustine writes against the Pelagians, which denied baptism
to be necessary for infantes, as for them that had no original nor actual sin,
laboring to prove the necessity of baptism by those words of Christ: Except
a man be borne of water, and of the holy Ghost, etc. to bring infantes under
the compass of sin and to establish their salvation only by grace, and not
by merit of their works. His cause in deed was good, but his argument was
weak, to prove the necessity of baptism by that text, even as to prove the
necessity of communion for infantes by this text, of the 6. of S. John, which
is not needful, nor lawful to be given unto them at all. Yet such was his
error, that he thought infantes were charged by this text to communicate in
pain of damnation. That he judged they ought to be partakers of ye body and
blood of Christ, it is true by yt text, but that he thought this partaking was
by the Sacrament in young children, he was deceived, yet Sander says, it was
not of necessity, but of surety, whereas Augustines error is manifest to urge
it of necessity. An vero quisqua^ etia^ hoc dicere audebit, quod ad paruulos
haec sententia no^ pertineat? possintque sine participatione corporis h(...)us
and sanguinis in se habere vita^, quia non ait, Qui non manducauerit, sicut de
baptismo qui no^ renatus fuerit, etc. Is there any man that dare say this also,
that this sentence pertains not unto young children, and that they may
without the participation of this body and blood have life in them, because he
says not, he that shall not eat, as of baptism, he that shall not be borne
again? I will make answer to Augustine not in defense of the Pelagians, but
in discovering of his error. Regeneration is undoubtedly proved necessary for
infants, by that place of John 3. as eating and drinking of the body and blood
of Christ in this 6. of John: which is enough to overthrow the Pelagians, but
neither in the one place, nor in the other, the necessity of the external
sacrament is required, but as it may possibly, and ought to be profitably
received according to the word of God. Wherefore Augustine in this place
applying the text unto the sacrament, in arguing from the sign to the thing
signified, or contrariwise, must be understood according to his deliberate
exposition, in Ioh. Tr. 26. or else he should be found contrary to himself.
And whereas Sander says, This text so appertains to the supper, as it
appertains not to baptism, and therefore can not be taken of the spiritual
uniting with Christ which is in baptism: I deny the argument, for although it
does not so properly pertain to the sacrament of washing, as to the sacrament
of feeding and nourishing: yet does it also pertain to baptism, in as much
as by baptism we are not only washed by Christ's blood from our sins, but
wholly regenerate, and borne a new to be the children of God, which we cannot
be, but by participation of flesh and blood with our brother Jesus Christ, and
therefore we are also in baptism spiritually fed with his body and blood.

To that which is brought out of Basil, Ep. 141. That Christ in this text
calls his whole mystical coming, flesh and blood: Sander answers, that
saying may be verified of the Sacrament of his supper, because he that
receives worthily, is partaker of all the mysteries of Christ. But that it
cannot be singularly applied to the Sacrament, which is all the question, his
own words shall declare. Edimus enim ipsius carnem, and bibimus ipsius
sanguinem per incarnationem participes fientes and sensibitis vitae verbi and
sapientiae. Carnem enim and sanguinem totum suum mysterium aduentum nominauit,
and doctrinam and actiua and naturali, ac theologica constantem indicauit per
quam nutritur anima, and interim ad veritatis speculationem praeparatur. For
we eat his flesh and drink his blood, being made partakers by his
incarnation both of sensible life of the word and of wisdom. For he named
his whole mystical coming flesh and blood, and showed his doctrine,
consisting of active, natural and theological, by which the soul is
nourished, and in the mean time prepared unto the beholding of the truth.
Thus by Basils judgment, by faith in Christ's incarnation and doctrine, we
eat his flesh and blood, whereof we are assured by the Sacrament, therefore
the text is not a singular promise of Christ's natural flesh, to be after a
corporal manner received in the Sacrament.

CAP. V.
Their reasons are answered, who deny Christ to speak properly Sander.
of his last supper in S. John.

The reasons are for the most part such, as Papists Fulke.
have made, which think in their conscience, that this Chapter is not properly
to be referred to the Sacrament: against whom Sander opposes him self, not
regarding with what conscience, but with what show of words, he may maintain
his false position against all men. The arguments as he numbreth them, are
five. The first is this: There is no mention of bread and wine in this Chapter:
ergo, it speaks not of the supper. This argument Sander denies, because a
man may be invited to a pastie or tarte, although it be not told him of what
stuff it shall be made. Good stuff I warrant you. Again, he says, the matter
of a sacrament, is not more necessary, then the form of words. But Christ
saying to Nicodemus: Except a man be borne again of water, etc. although he
name the matter, shows not the words that make the Sacrament, yet speaks
he there of baptism, ergo here of ye supper. I deny that he speaks of
baptism there, otherwise then of the supper here, by comprehending ye seal of
assurance under the promise of the thing it self. But this argument Sander
allows well: Christ speaks not of bread nor wine, therefore he means not to
bind us to receive under both kinds, but to receive that thing which is his
flesh and blood under what kind soever we receive it. If this be true, it were
well done to take the bread from the people another while, and to serve them of
the cup consecrated, for a whole communion. But behold the synceritie of this
Academical disputer, alowing this argument to maintain horrible sacrilege, as
though Christ does not name drinking, almost as often as eating: although he
name neither bread nor wine. And if his blood be drink in deed, then is it
not received with the bread, which is not drunk, but eaten.

The second argument is, Christ speaks of eating him by faith and therefore
says: this is the work of God, that you should believe in him, whom he has
sent. He that believes in me, shall not hunger: but there be some of you which
believe not, so yt the eating is believing, and ye not eating is, not
believing. To this argument grounded upon the authority of Scripture, he has
nothing to answer, but by a lewd distinction of eating of Christ, that is of
his grace by faith, and eating Christ, that is his whole flesh, blood, soul
and godhead into our bodies, by color of these words, Manducare ex hoc pane,
and manducare hunc panem, which our savior Christ manifestly co^foundeth, and
uses for all one. But that you may see his gross folly and madness, you must
remember yt he makes these words to be the chief words of promise of his
supper; The bread which I will give, is my flesh, etc. Now ye whole context is
this: I am yt living bread which came down from heaven, if a man eat of this
bread, he shall live for ever, and the bread which I will give, is my flesh,
which I will give for the life of the world. Mark now what will become of
Sanders distinction. To eat of this bread, is to be partaker of grace, by
faith, which he confesses, may be without the Sacrament. But that bread whereof
he shall eat, is the flesh of Christ, which he will give for the life of the
world: therefore, to eat the flesh of Christ, is to receive Christ by grace,
although it be without the Sacrament.

The third argument is, Christ was presently ye bread of life, when he spoke
to the Jews, saying I am ye bread of life, and my father gives you the true
bread from heaven, therefore Christ was the bread of life, when he was first
incarnat, for even then he came down from heaven. Therefore his words cannot
be applied to his last supper, which was not yet instituted. Sander confesses,
that Christ was by his godhead and manhod, the bread of life to be eaten of the
Jews, presently by faith, and not corporally. But he said also: Work the
meat which the son of man will give you, and the bread which I will give, is
my flesh: which gift is fulfilled in his supper. For no reason can be showed
(says he) why Christ should say, his gift was to come, except it had been
some other gift then to eat him by faith alone, which was lawful at that
instant. To this answer of Sander, I replye: first that he groundeth upon a
strange translation of his own, of working the meat, etc. Secondly, of a
patching together of two textes that stand far a sunder. Thirdly, the work
of meat spoken of in the former text, whereunto they are exhorted, is
expounded of faith by Christ himself immediately after: This is the work of
God, that you should believe in him whom he has sent. Fourthly, the gift which
Christ says, in the Future tense he would give, proves not that it was yet
present, but promises it, to them that will receive it presently. For if a man
have a Ring in his hand; he may truly say to them that stand before him: I
will give a Ring to them that shall first come to me. Here the word of giving
is in the Future tense, promysing the Ring to him that shall come first for it;
yet for all that is the Ring still in his hand. Fifthly, this reason I show,
why Christ says, he will give his flesh for the life of the world, which
presently might be eaten, and was eaten, almost four thousand years before,
because his passion, by which it is communicated to the faithful of all ages,
at that time when he spoke, was not performed in act, although in effect he
was the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world.

The fourth argument, which he consesseth to be of Caietane, is that Christ's
gift is not meant of his supper, because it was the gift of himself, to death
upon the cross, such as shall redeem the world. Which gift was only
performed upon the cross, and was partaken always of the old fathers, and
may be daily and hourly partaken of us, which points do not agree with the
gift of the holy Eucharist in Christ's supper. This argument (says Sander) is
wittily devised: no doubt, because it was used by Caietane a Papist, but yet it
is insufficient for many causes.

The first cause is, because Christ spoke of a meat that he would give, even
unto our bodies, and not only unto our souls. How proves he, that he spoke
of such a meat? because he ordained the miracle of multiplying the five loaves
to be an introduction unto this talk, which loaves were eaten corporally, as
also that he showed himself to be the true bread, that would fulfill and exceed
Manna, the figurative bread of the Jews. Two blind causes, as though he might
not take occasion of corporal eating, to speak of spiritual eating, as in the
fourth of John, of corporal drinking he takes occasion to instruct the woman
of Samaria, of spiritual drinking, and in the same Chapter, his Apostles of
corporal eating, he teaches them what spiritual meat was. As for the
figure of Manna, of which he speaks, as of a corporal meat, whereof they
that did eat, died: our Savior Christ was even to them that did eat it
faithfully, life everlasting; and Manna was the flesh of Christ unto them. But
the distinction and contradiction which Christ makes of Manna and this bread,
is that which is necessary to be between the bare sign, and the thing
signified, from which to reason, as Sander does, Manna was eaten corporally
and spiritually, therefore the flesh of Christ is to be eaten corporally and
spiritually; is to ioygne together, things that are to be divided, which is a
poor shift of Sophistry. Beside that, it is a ridiculous argument, to reason
of the similitude of those things, wherein the auctor shows them to be
unlike. For our Savior says, not as your fathers did eat Manna in the
wilderness, of which saying, it is much more probable to reason, your fathers
did eat Manna corporally, therefore you shall not eat this bread which I will
give corporally. But he obiecteth that Origin says: as it is alleged in the
decrees, De Cons. Did. 2. C. De hac. No man eats properly the flesh of
Christ as it was crucified. Therefore Christ speaks not of his death. Nay
rather therefore no man eats Christ corporally, for he was crucified
corporally. But Sander will have us to mark, that Saint Hierom distincteth the
flesh of Christ, whereof he speaks in Saint John* from the respect which the
same flesh has, being crucified. in Ep. ad Ephesians. Chap. 1. Saint Ierom says,
the flesh of Christ is two ways to be considered. that spiritual and divine
flesh, whereof he speaks, when he says, My flesh is meat in deed, etc.
and, except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, etc. and that flesh which
was crucified. This distinction is of the manner of receiving the one, which is
only spiritually, and of the manner of handling the other, which was
corporally, or it is that distinction which is between the effect and the
cause. Such difference is by Ierom, between Christ crucified, and Christ's
body eaten and drunken, which Sander would have to be all one in substance and
differ only in eating.

The second reason, that Christ speaks of his supper, as well as of his
death, is, that the Greek text mentions two gifts: The bread that I will
give, is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. Here (says he)
is, I will give, twice: ergo two gifts, and then he defends the Greek text to
be true, although the Latin have, I will give but once. You see the cunning of
the man, that can make them both serve his purpose. But it is Popish Logike, to
conclude two gifts of saying twice, I will give, as in this example: The land
which I will give you, is the manner of Dale, which I will give to you and to
your heirs. Here is, I will give twice: therefore two gifts by Master Doctor
Sanders Logike. O wonderful learning of Popish Doctors!

The third reason is, that Christ speaking of the meat, says, the son of man
dabit vobis, will give to you, and not only for you. But his death was given
more properly for us, then to us. For it was paid to God for our debtes, but
was not properly given to us, for then a sacrifice should be made of Christ to
us, and consequently God the father robbed of his glory. What say you Sander?
Can nothing be said properly to be given us, but that which is sacrificed unto
us? So God loved the world that he gave his only begotten son, that every
one which believes in him, should not perish, but have life everlasting. John.
3. And Esai says, The son is given to us. The spirit of God is given to us,
etc. is there no gift but by way of sacrifice? are you not ashamed of such
senseles shifts? Christ in his death was given in sacrifice to his father for
us, and his father being reconciled to us, by that sacrifice, gives him to us,
and Christ also gives himself for us, because all the fruit of his death,
and sacrifice is referred to our salvation. The fourth reason is, that Christ,
naming bread, meat, food, Manna, etc. promises an eatable thing, which is
his flesh in a banquet, the Jews understood his flesh really, not erring in
understanding, but in faith: for Christ confirms their understanding with an
oath, says: verily, verily, except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, etc.
ergo, their sense which reterre the gift only to his death, is not sufficient,
but it must be meant also of the last supper. This argument follows not: for
although the names of bread, food, flesh, etc. prove that Christ's flesh is
eatable, yet it proves not, that it is eatable only in the supper. Secondly,
that the Jews erred only in faith, it is false, for they erred also in
understanding, taking the eating of Christ's flesh to be performed carnally,
which he meant only spiritually. His oath confirms not their understanding, but
his own promise of giving his flesh for ye life of the world, which except
they did eat spiritually, they could have no life in them. But whereas it is
objected, yt Christ speaks of that gift, which was common to the whole world,
even to ye Patriarchs and Prophets, and therefore it is a spiritual gift, for
else David and Abraham could not have partaken it: he answers, yt Christ does
not pro mise any one meat unto the whole world, but his flesh to be eaten,
which is given for the whole world. I reply: ye words are plain, the bread
which I will give, is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world,
and not only for the Jews. Neither does Christ in his supper, give a far
better meat, than he gave to Moses and Elias, for he gave even to the^, his
flesh and blood, to be their spiritual food unto eternal life: witness the
Apostle to the 1. Cor. 10. that all our fathers did eat and drink the same
spiritual meat, that we do, and that their meat and drink was Christ.
Concerning yt daily we may eat that bread which Christ promises, he answers,
the Sacrament is left to be our daily and supersubstantial bread, either
because we may receive it daily if we will, or because it tarieth always with
us by some spiritual effect.

To this I answer, that all men cannot receive it daily, and some men not at
all, which yet must have spiritual food to feed them unto everlasting life:
therefore, this bread may be eaten without the Sacrament.

The last argument that he would seem to answer, is this: Christ in S. John,
speaks of that eating, which makes us tarry in him, and him in us, therefore
not of Sacramental eating: for Christ tarieth not in all that eat him in the
Sacrament. He answers, the fault is not in ye Sacrament, but in them yt abuse
the gift of God to their own hurt. As though our Savior Christ did speak only
of ye power of his flesh, being eaten, and not of ye effect. The flesh of
Christ being eaten, makes us one with him, and him But Augustine is cited,
contr. Crescon. gram. lib. 1. Cap. (...). Quid de ipso corpore, and. what say
we concerning the very body and blood of our Lord, the only sacrifice for our
salvation? Although our Lord himself says: Except a man do eat my flesh,
and drink my blood, he shall not have life in him, does not the Apostle teach,
that the self same thing is made hurtful to them that use it evil? For he
says: whosoever shall eat the bread and drink the cup of the Lord
unworthily, he shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. But it
follows immediately in Augustine: E^ce quemadmodum obsint diuina and
sanctamate vtentibus. Cur non eodem modo baptismus? See how divine and holy
things do hurt them that use them amiss. Why not baptism after the same
manner? These last words declare that Augustine saying that the body and blood
of Christ, may be hurtful, speaks of the Sacrament, and not of the thing or
matter of the Sacrament, as in baptism. As he teaches in exposition of the
doctrine of Christ in Saint John. The Sacrament of this thing, (says he) is
received of some to life, of some to destruction, but the thing it self, or
matter of the Sacrament, which is the body and blood of Christ, is of none
received to destruction, but of all unto life, as many as receive it. By whose
whole discourse it is manifest, that Augustine understands Christ speaking of
spiritual eating, which may be without the Sacrament: and makes a difference
between ye meat there spoken of, which presently was offered to be eaten, and
the Sacrament thereof which afterward was instituted. Therefore whatsoever Sander
does glory, of all authority upon earth, concurring to his position, there is
no authority from heaven, to prove, that Christ in the 6. of S. John spoke of
his supper at all, or that his supper may be understood therein, otherwise then
the Sacrament and seal of that spiritual and heavenly eating and drinking of
Christ's flesh and blood, which of the fathers and of all the faithful has
been eaten and drunken, unto eternal life, not only in this Sacrament, but in
other Sacraments of Gods ordeining, and without all Sacraments, by faith and
power of Gods spirit.

CAP. VI.
The meat tarying to everlasting life, which Christ promises Sander.
^o give, is meant of his real flesh and blood to be given at his last supper.

Sander by conference of this verse, Operamini cibu^, etc. Fulke.
labor for the meat, or as he translateth i^, work the meat that perishes
not, etc. with that which follows, where he says, the bread which I will
give, etc. proves that Christ speaks of his flesh and blood to be eaten
and drunken. But that the same is to be given only at his last supper, which is
the only matter in controversy, he is not able to prove. His first reason
is, that because Christ says, his flesh is meat in deed, the word vere
declares not only a metaphorical work, by faith, but a true work of the body
and soul, the one in believing, the other in eating. As though Christ is not
meat truly, when he is eaten by faith in the soul, or as though a metaphorical
meat, can not be called a meat truly or in deed, when Christ speaking
metaphorically, says he is a true vine. But Tertullian says, the flesh
feeds of the body and blood of Christ, as before we have often heard, where
he speaks of external Sacraments and outward signs, as of baptism,
oynting, imposition of hands, etc. What Theophylact a late writer says, we
esteem not worth ye weighing. But Cyrillus he alleges for his purpose, who
refers the gift plainly to the incarnation of Christ, and not to his supper:
In Joan. lib. 3. Cap. 28. Diuina humanis, etc. He has joined the things of
man to the things of God, and touched the whole mystery of his incarnation,
etc. Last of all, he cites Ignatius in Ep. ad Romanos, who expounds the
bread, and flesh, and blood spiritually, and not of ye Sacrament. Non mihi
placet, etc. The perishing meat and pleasures of this life please me not. I
will have the bread of God, the heavenly bread, the bread of life, which is
the flesh of Christ the son of God, and I will have the cupp of his blood
which is incorruptible love and life everlasting. If the cup of Christ's
blood be incorruptible charity and life everlasting, then is it the effect of
Christ's blood, that Ignatius speaks of, and not his natural blood, which is
the cause thereof. Other proves then these, Sander has not in this Chapter
for his purpose, which prove it nothing at all.

CAP. VII.
The equality of substance with his father, which Christ alleges Sander.
for his gift, proves the real presence of his body and blood in the
Sacrament of the altar, even as God the father gau^ him real flesh and blood
at his incarnation.

This argument is thus framed: The son of man i^ equal Fulk.
with God his father. God the father has given his son to the world, and
made him true man, the true bread of life: therefore God the son being equal
with his father, will give us the same true flesh of the son of man as meat
that shall tarry with us to everlasting life. But his father gave him to the
world, not only in faith and spirit, but in real and substantial flesh.
Therefore God the son by drift of his talk does signify, that he will give
in his supper, whereof he speaks, not in spirit and faith only, but in truth
of nature and substance, the self same real and substantial flesh. O what
sport would such an argument make among the Sophisters in Cambridge and
Oxford: In which be so many terms and never a mean, so many false
propositions, so many petitions of principles, so much more in the conclusion,
then was in the premises, finally so many words, and so little to ye purpose.
But I will make answer briefly and plainly. The equally of Christ with his
father, proves in deed that he is able to do whatsoever it pleases him, and
to perform whatsoever he promises. But he no where in his Chapter promises
to give his real and substantial flesh to be eaten bodily: therefore his
almighty power proves nothing of that purpose. But he promises to give us
the same true flesh, which he received of his father to be meat tarying unto
eternal life. This promise he perfourmeth daiely unto the elect, making his
body and blood which was crucified and shed for us, to be food of
everlasting continuance. Yea (says Sander) but God gave him to the world, not
only in faith and spirit, but in truth of nature and substance: therefore
Christ will give us his real flesh in substance not in faith and spirit
only. A strange argument, God gave Christ to ye world in the true nature and
substance of flesh, not in spirit and faith only. What mean you by this: God
gave him not in spirit and faith only? For any thing that I understand of
your meaning, God gave him not in faith and spirit at all. For when you speak
of Christ's incarnation, and of God sending him in the flesh, what sense is it
to say, he sent him in faith or in spirit? But God gave him natural flesh, and
God gave him to the world manifested in the flesh. But how does the world
receive him being given in real and substantial flesh? How did all the
Patriarchs, Prophets, and elect before the time of his incarnation receive
him, who being given to the world, must needs be given to them also? Verily no
otherwise, then in spirit and by faith. Even so Christ promising to give his
flesh and his blood to be meat and drink unto us, means not, that it should
otherwise be received then in spirit and by faith, either in his supper or in
baptism, or without any of the Sacraments. And hereunto the divine power of
Christ serves to assure our faith, that he can give us his very natural and
divine flesh, to be received spiritually, and faithfully, to feed and nourish
us unto life everlasting assuredly.

CAP. VIII.
Seeing Christ is the bread of life to us by the gift of his Sander.
flesh, the eating of that flesh by our faith and spirit suffices not, but it
self also must be really eaten.

It is marvel, why it should not suffice us to eat hi^ flesh, which is the
bread of life, as all the children of Fulke.
God did eat it before his incarnation, and as many thousands since, which
have been partakers of eternal life, and yet never were admitted to the
Lords supper. But Sander says, it is expressly against the word of God,
that by the incarnation of Christ, we have not the bread of life given us by
any other way then we had it before. The reason belike is this: That the bread
of life is now first promised by the gift of Christ, as who came into the
world to bring us this everlasting meat. Mark this Popish divinity which
restrains the virtue of Christ's incarnation to the instant and time, in
which he took flesh, and thereby denies eternal life to all the Patriarchs
and Prophets, who by his reason never tasted of the bread of life. He talks
much, and to little or no purpose of the controversy, that the godhead is life
properly, which that it might be communicated to us, it assumpted flesh, and
this flesh is made meat for us, but what is the conclusion? It is given at
Christ's supper, under the form of bread, no other mean of giving will
serve. Does he not by this conclusion exclude all them from eternal life,
which have not been admitted to the Sacrament? and yet like a folish
hypocrite, he cries out of our cruelty, which depriving men of the true flesh
of Christ, deprive them of the godhead and of eternal life. Whereas he
slandereth us altogether: for we affirm, that every one of Gods elect from the
beginning of the world, has been fed truly with the very natural flesh
of Christ, but spiritually received, and by other means then under ye form of
bread in the supper, namely by faith, and in other Sacraments in them that
were of discretion, and might come to them, and even without faith and without
Sacraments (in such of Gods elect, as lacking age were prevented by death,
before they could be partakers of sacraments) by the only working of Gods holy
spirit, who no less works in this wonderful spiritual nourishment, then in
any spiritual regeneration.

And therefore Sander reasons like a gross Philosopher, when he says: that
no sign is able to comiey that heavenly bread to us. It is horrible blasphemy
to say, that my faith is able to derive the substance of God, as meat into my
soul and body, seeing faith is but a creature only, wherein the fullness of
Godhead dwells not, and therefore is not able to attain to the union of Gods
nature, and much less able to give it me. And yet for all this that Sander
says, the Apostle prays that Christ, in whom the fullness of the godhead
dwells corporally, may dwell in our hearts by faith. In deed, not by the
worthiness of faith, but by the grace of the holy spirit, who gives strength
to the weak elements of the world, and to our imperfect faith, to bring to
pass wonderful effects, as we may see in baptism. Wherefore, to reason of
the weakness of signs, and unableness of faith, severally from the spirit
of God, is as much, as if you would go about to prove, that because a man's body
without his soul can do nothing, therefore, being united to his soul, it is
not of force to do any thing. To prove that we cannot be partakers of the
Godhead of Christ without his flesh, he alleges Cyrillus and Augustine, whose
authorities, it is needeles to repeat, seeing we grant as much as he would
have to be proved by them. But beside them, he cites Hilarious lib. 8. de
Trinit. Si vere verbum, etc. If the word be truly made flesh, and in our
Lords meat, we truly receive the word made flesh, how can it be but he
must be judged to dwell naturally in us? Hereof, he gathers that we receive
Christ into our bodies after a carnal manner of receiving, which is far from
Hilaries meaning, although he use the word naturally, which even Sander must
confess to be improperly used, or else he shall admit many unnatural
conclusions. Wherefore by naturally, he means properly, verily, and truly,
yet after a divine and spiritual manner, not after a gross, natural, and
sensible manner of habitation.

Again, this dwelling of Christ in us naturally, does not prove, that he is
corporally received into our mouths, and settled in our stomakes. But this is
sufficient to prove, that he means Christ to be spiritually received, in
that he affirms, it is not possible but that he must dwell naturally in them
that receive his flesh in the Lords meat. Sander adds, worthily: But
Hilarie says, truly. Therefore whosoever truly receives the flesh of
Christ in the meat of our Lord, Christ must needs dwell in him naturally: but
Christ dwells not at all in the ungodly, therefore the ungodly receive not
his flesh in the Lords meat, as the Papists say, in whom also he should
dwell naturally, if he were received truly, or as they say, corporally.

CAP. IX.
By the three diverse giuings, which are named in Saint John, Sander
it is showed, that Christ gives his real flesh under the figure of another
thing.

The three times of giving, do not prove that three (...).
diverse things are given (neither does Sander say one word to prove that
they do) and where is then the ground of this disputation? God by Moses
(says Sander) is said to have given in time past, he has given them bread
from heaven to eat. But Christ says, Moses gave you not bread from heaven,
but my Father gives you the true bread from heaven: Even he which gave them
Manna for a Sacrament of the true bread, even he gave then, gives now, and
shall give for ever the true bread from heaven, which is the flesh of our
Savior Christ incarnate, crucified, revived, and ascended into heaven for our
salvation. And how can Sander prove, that Christ saying, he will give his
flesh, means any other gift then God his father did always give, except he
refer his giving to the time of his passion, the fruit whereof was and is
given unto the end of the world. That the bread which Christ gives, is true
under a figure, that is the form of bread, fulfilling the figure of Manna, is
a dream of Sanders own head, for Christ speaks not of any giving under a
figure or form of bread, or of giving the bread of his supper, but of the
general food of eternal life, which it is necessary that al they be
partakers of, which shall be partakers of eternal life. And therefore it is out
of measure absurd, that Sander would prove his figurative form by Irenaeus,
which says, that the Eucharistie consists of two things, of one earthly,
which is the form of bread and wine, the other heavenly etc: Irenaeus says,
not yt the forms of bread and wine are the earthly part of the Sacrament, but
bread and wine in deed, for those external forms or accidents, be not any
earthly thing, which is a substantial matter. Irenaeus says, of the bread
and wine, our bodies are increased and nourished: so can they not be of Sanders
Accidents lib. 5. But he will show the absurdities that rise of the
Sacramentaries opinion. If Christ's gift (says he) consisted of the substance
of bread sanctified in quality, and made a sign of his body (as the
sacramentaries teach) it should neither be the true bread, which his father
gave him, nor better then Manna, etc: But where do the Sacramentaries teach,
that Christ's gift spoken of in this Chapter is the substance of bread
sanctified in quality etc. We teach that Christ's gift is his own natural
body and blood given in his passion to all the faithful of the world, to
be the food of eternal life, as for the substance of bread given in his last
supper, we teach that it is a Sacrament and seal of this gift. Therefore he
must seek other Sacramentaries to fight against, if any such be. For we teach
the true doctrine of the Sacraments, according to the word of God, making
difference as all Christian divines have done before us, of the sacrament and
the matter of the sacrament.

CAP. X.
By the shadow of the law past, and by the naked truth to come Sander.
in heaven, it is perceived that the middle state of the new Testament
requires the real presence of Christ's body under the form of bread.

He groundeth upon the 10. to the Hebrews: The Law F^lke.
has the shadow of good things to come, and not the very image of things:
applying the shadow to the Law, the image to the gospel, and the things
themselves to the life to come. In which application, he sees not how he
grants to the Gospel, but an image of things, and not the things
themselves, and thereby in deed, denies the very flesh of Christ to be given
us, but an image thereof, For his gloss will not stand with the Apostles
words, that we have the very flesh of Christ under the image o^ form of
bread, the Apostle saying, we have the image of things: which image if it be
none other, but the accidents of bread, we have no great prerogative above
the Law. In deed the Apostle means, that the same things which were but
rudely shadowed, as it were with a cole, to the fathers in the Law, are in a
lively image described, and set forth unto us in the Gospel. For the Gospel
has not those good things which are to come, but possesses them by faith.
Therefore how foolish is that conclusion of Sander, upon this text? Christ
gave us his real flesh under the form of bread, or else he gave not the thing
it self: and if he gave it without figure, out state were not an image of the
things themselves. Whereas the Apostle speaks not of these things which are
given, but of the clearenes of the doctrine, of those things which are
promised: and therefore he calls them good things to come, and Christ an high
Priest of good things to come. As mad, yea and more frantike is that
conclusion, that Christ cannot be a mediator between the two Testaments,
except he gave his flesh under the form and figure of bread. By which drunken
conclusion, it should follow, that Christ's mediation depended upon the
institution of the Sacrament, which the Apostle in express words does affirm
to have been made complet in his death, which was effectual unto all ages
alike. Heb. 9. Also that Christ in Baptism, has not showed himself to be a
mediator greater then Moses, because he has not therein given us his natural
flesh, which is in heaven: And last of all, that Christ is not a mediator unto
the fathers that lived before the institution of his supper, but only to them
that are partakers of his flesh in the supper. Again, as untrue it is, that
because Christ came to fulfill the Law, therefore it was necessary, that he
should give his flesh under a figure: which flesh was not given to them that
lived under the Law: as though there were one mean of salvation for them, and
another for us.

The scripture does often distinguish the Law, and the Gospel, showing what is
peculiar to either of them, but it never affirms, that the persons living in
the time of the strength of Moses Law, were saved otherwise then by the
Gospel, that is by remission of sins, through faith in ye mercy of God
reconciled to us by Jesus Christ. Therefore it is more then blockish, to wrest
the distinction of the Testame^ts, to make a difference of the salvation of the
persons. Seeing the new Testament was not first ordained (as Sander seems to
say) when Christ did institute his supper, which he called the new Testament,
but even from the beginning of the world, but yet to take effect, virtue and
strength, by the death of Christ, of which Testament, the supper is a
sacrament, bearing the name of the thing whereof it is a Sacrament, as well
when it is called the new Testament, as when it is called the body and blood
of Christ. And therefore the example of the precept, of not killing, expounded
by Christ to extend to anger, proves not any new truth to be added by the
Gospel, but the ancient right meaning of the commandment, delivered from the
gloss of the Pharisees, which expounded the precept, only of murdering with
the hand. For who will say that such anger as Christ forbids, was lawful
before the time he made that exposition; or that to commit adultery in heart,
by lusting after a woman, was not sin, before Christ did so interpret that
commandment. If it were sin, then it was a breach of the Law: if it were a
breach of the Law, it was of the Law that was given: therefore the Law was
always spiritual, and had that true meaning, and was so taken of all good
men, before Christ reproved the corruption of the Pharisaical glosses. That
all legal instruction, and prophetical figures, are transferred into the
sacraments of Christ, as Leo says, we agree. We deny not, that which Dionyse
says, although we may not acknowledge him to have been S. Paul's scholar:
that our holy government partaketh of heaven, spiritual contemplation, and of
the Law sensible signs. Neither of both these autorities prove ye matter in
question. As for the distinction of gifts, whereunto Sand. tumbleth again, in
the end of this chapter, we make not void by our figurative doctrine. But such
distinction as was in deed, between that which Moses gave, and God gave, we
uphold by our figurative doctrine, which shows y^ right difference between
the auctor and ye minister, the sign and the thing signified. But yt
distinction between ye gift which ye Father gave always, and yt which the
son promises to give to be diverse, when Sander ca^ prove, we may be brought
to acknowledge it: In the mean time, yt promise of continuance of that gift,
in the Future temps, which Christ has always given, is a slender argument to
prove the distinction of gifts imagined by Sander.

Finally in substance of the food of eternal life, as we differ not in the
life eternal it self, we are not preferred before ye jews. They did all eat
the same spiritual meat etc: Our prefermente is more clear sight and
understanding, even such difference as is between the knowledge, obtained by a
description of a body shadowed, and lively set forth in colors, which is the
shadow and very image that the Apostle speaks of. Heb. 10.

CAP. XI.
The bread that Christ promises to give which is his flesh, must needs be
meant of the substance of his flesh. Sander.


There is no doubt but Christ did give the substance Fulke.
of his flesh, which being crucified for us, is made ye bread of life and
spiritual meat and drink to be received of us, not after any corporal
manner of eating, but by faith in spirit, not only in the Sacrament of his
supper, but in baptism also, and without any sacrament. But that it must stand
for a truth universally received, that Christ saying, The bread which I will
give is my flesh, meant ye bread which I will give you at my last supper, that I
say I deny. What Sander vaunteth he has proved thereof, in the 5. and 6.
chapters of this book, let it be examined with mine answer. But admit he had
spoken principally of his supper, yet does it not follow, which Sander does
infer, that he promised to give his flesh to Judas because he was one of the
twelve which tarried with him at Capernaum, for his promise in offer, was as
large to all that departed, and to the world, for the life whereof he promised
to give his flesh, therefore it cannot be concluded that it was not only a
spiritual gift that was promised but an external gift delivered by hand,
which Judas might receive. For Christ promises such a gift, as if it be
received, works eternal life in the receivers.

Finally, it cannot be proved, that Judas was prse^t at the supper, who
departed about his treason, before the institution of the sacrament, as
appears by saint John immediately after the soppe received, whereunto some of
the ancient writers also do consent. Furthermore, yt the gift of Christ does
differ from ye gift of his father in person and time, and therefore cannot be
given by faith only, it is no good consequent. For God gave his son for the
world, and Christ gave himself for us, yet but one gift. The difference of
time, I have often answered. As for the objection, yt he faineth the
Sacramentaries must say, that that flesh here stands for the sign or figure
of his flesh, is of his own making, for as I said before, we understand the
flesh of Christ given for the life of the world, his natural body, crucified
for us, and not the sacrament of his body given in his last supper.

CAP. XII.
A further declaration of the real presence of Christ's body and Sander.
blood, taken out of the discourse of his own words concerning the different
eating of him by faith, and the receiving of his flesh and blood in the
Sacrament of the Altar.

First he repeteth his three gifts. God gave by Moses, Fulke.
naked figures, as Manna: God gives presently, the flesh of Christ to our eyes
and hearts: and Christ will give hereafter the same flesh, under the form of
bread. Of these gifts he makes three diverse works: the first by teeth and
belly, the second by faith and spirit, and the third by both. The gift of
Christ differing from Manna, is expressed in the Chapter. But any difference of
the gift of the father, and of the son, there is not expressed, nor to be
gathered by any note of distinction or dissentanie argument. Yet Sander has
found out a great number of differences, to prove that although the Father
and the Son give one thing, that is the flesh of Christ, yet not one way to
be received, the Father gives it to be received by faith only, the Son to
be received corporally.

The first difference is, of the time, The Father does give in the Present
tense, the Son will give in the Future tense. This I have often answered to
be no differe^te, for Christ says in ye present temps, except ye do eat ye
flesh: etc. ergo he did presently give it. Again, he that does eat often, is
often times repeted, in ye present time, and my flesh is meat in deed: all
which prove that Christ's gift, was present when he spoke to be received,
therefore it differs not from the Fathers gift, and way of receiving the same.

The second difference: the Father gives Christ in the form of man, by the
manner of the Fathers gift, the faithful may see yt son of Man, upon whom
they believe: as it is said, This is the will of my Father which sent me, that
every one who sees the Son, and believes in him, may have everlasting life.
And again: ye have seen me, and have not believed. Of the Sons gift it is
not said, that his flesh shall be seen, but rather insinuated, that it shall be
under the covering of another kind of food. I answer, that Christ in neither
of both these sayings, speaks of the corporal sight of his body. But in the
one which is first placed in S. John, Ye (...) au: seen me, and not believed;
he exprobrateth to the Jews their wilful blindness, which had acknowledged
him before to be ye Messiah, when he fed their bellyes, and now refuse to
believe him, when he offers to feed their souls. In the other place, he
shows, yt obedience of faith joined to a manifest acknowledging of Christ, by
the will of God, is the way to eternal life. For if seeing, should be taken for
bodily seeing of Christ's flesh, it could not extend to us which cannot
bodily behold him. Again, this difference overthrows Sanders supposed way
of the fathers giving, which is by faith and spirit only and not sensibly to
the eye of the body. Last of all, it is a weak argument, it is not said in
this or that text: ergo it is not meant, or it is not true at all.

The 3. difference: The Fathers gift is called the true bread from heaven: The
Sons gift is called, not only true bread, but also truly bread and meat
in deed. Some true meat may chance not to be truly meat, bec^^se it is not
eaten: but nothing is meat in deed, and truly meat, except it be in deed
eaten. If this difference be worth a straw, then your consecrated hosts be
not the Sons gift, before they be eaten: and except they be eaten (as some
time ye wo^^ well they are burned) they be not his gift at all; if not his
gift, then not flesh and blood. The difference of a true Vine, and a Vine
truly, is sufficiently discussed in the later end of the fourth book
answered by master Nowel. Sander cannot or will not consider ye difference of
the opposition between truly and falsely, and truly and properly.

The fourth difference: The Jews and disciples, went not away from Christ,
for any thing, that was spoken about the Fathers gift, thinking that a gift
of eating by faith, might stand with the custom of Gods people, but in the
Sons gift, they saw more apparent absurdity, not lacking understanding, but
faith, and therefore departed. I answer, they lacked understanding, as much as
faith, and therefore Augustin^ says: Sed qui aderant plures, non intelligendo
s^andaliazti sunt: non erum cogitabant haec audiendo nisi carnem, quod ipsi
erant. But many of them that were present, were offended for lack of
understanding: For heating these things, they thought on nothing but flesh,
which they themselves were. It is a simple difference, that is gathered of ye
Jews ignorance and incredulity.

The 5. difference, The gift of the father is called by such names only, as
belong to the person of Christ, or to his divine nature to say, the bread of
life, the lively bread, the true bread (for God only is absolutely the true
bread of life) or by the Pronoune I: The gift of Christ is called also by the
names of his humane nature, to wit, the flesh and blood of the son of men. If
this difference prove any thing, it proves not the diverse ways of giving
the same thing, but that the same thing is not given by the Father and the
Son: Where as Sander said before, that the Father gives Christ in humane
nature, to the world. If the humane nature of Christ be given of the father,
the names thereof may well agree to the Fathers gift.

The 6 difference, That Christ ends his talk of each gif^, with repeting the
old figure Manna, betokening by both, the shadow of Manna to be fulfilled. But
Manna was more perfectly fulfilled in outward doings by the sons gift. This
is an agreement rather then a difference, except in the last illation, which is
a mere begging of the matter in question. But there is a great difference, in
that it is said of the one, If any man eat, ex hoc pane of this bread; in the
other, he that eats hunc panem this bread: and here is made a great
difference, between eating of Christ, and eating Christ himself: the one is
only by faith, the other in the Sacrament of the Altar, the one is to be
partaker of the virtue and grace of Christ, the other to receive the substance
of Christ. etc. But our savior Christ in S. John confounds this difference,
using the Accusative case and the Ablative: with the preposition, for all one.
I am the living bread, which came down from heaven, if any man shall eat of
this bread, he shall live for ever: Here is the Ablative with a preposition,
but what is this bread, of which he that eats shall, live? he answers: The
bread which I will give, is my flesh, whereof he says afterward, Except ye eat
the flesh of the son of man, etc: where he uses the Accusative: by which it
is plain, that with Christ, to eat this bread, and to eat of this bread, is
all one. Saint Paul also overthrows this difference, showing that the
Israelites did drink of ye spiritual Rock, which was Christ, unworthily, where
as none can receive the effect of Christ's death unworthily. So he says we
are al partakers of one bread. But Sand, not satisfied, asks if this be ye
end of our long disputation, yt Christ came into the world to give a less
token, then God had given before, under Moses etc? as though Christ came into
the world for no end but to give ye sacrament. As for so many differences as he
dreameth of his fathers gift, and his, we find not any one, but that they may
all agree in one gift, which was not his supper, but himself to death, for the
life of ye world, whereof every one of his elect is made partaker, as of
spiritual food, by faith and his holy spirit.

But this difference is learned, says he, out of Chrysostom, upon John. Ho.
45. etc. where he notes first the diversity of persons, saying: Se, non
patrem, that he, not his father dare to give (says Sander) but he falsifieth
Chrysostom, which says dedisse, to have given, which proves that it is not
given only in the Sacrament, which then was not instituted. 2 That he says,
Hom. 44. that Christ speaks first of his divinity, and about the end, of
his body, proves not that he speaks only of the Sacrament: For Hom. 45.
he says plainly, as Sander confesses, that ye bread signifies either the
doctrine of Christ, and salvation, and faith in him, or else his body. Wherein
he dissenteth altogether from Sanders interpretation, who will not have the
body of Christ promised before flesh be named.

But Chrysostom says upon these words: my flesh is meat in deed: etc. that
he so said, to the end they should not think him to speak in parables; but
by flesh, to mean the sign of flesh, or by eating, to mean be leeuing is to
speak in parables. I answer, that we say neither of both: but that Christ is
verily eaten by faith, and by the spirit of God: yet Sander omitteth the other
cause which Chrysostom renders of his so saying: A^^ quod is est verus cibus,
etc. either that he is the true meat which saves the soul, or else etc. But
he saves not the soul only by eating the Sacrament: therefore this meat is
not eaten only in the sacrament.

Finally that which is noted out of Hom. 83. in Matthew. that Christ is joined
unto us, not by faith and love only, but in very deed: We confess, but so
is he joined to infants that never received the supper, and so was he joined
to all the faithful before his incarnation, in as much as they all were
members of his body. And so confesses Chrysostom, in Joan. Homil. 46. that
Abraham by eating and drinking the flesh and blood of Christ, shall be
partaker of the resurrection, and therefore Christ said, He that eats my
flesh, and drinks my blood, has life eternal and I will raise him up in the
last day. The testimonies of Theophilact, and Euthynius which are but late
writers in comparison, I will not stand upon.

CAP. XIII.
The like precept made to men of lawful age for eating Chris^^ flesh, as was
made generally for baptism, shows his flesh to be Sander
as really present in his supper, as water is in baptism.

Neither the one precept of regeneration is principally of baptism, neither
the other of the Lords supper. Fulk.
And the necessity of eating and drinking the flesh and blood of Christ, is
not ^aide only upon men of lawful age, because they were of lawful age to
whom Christ spoke, any more then the necessity of regeneration upon all
men, seeing Nicodemus, to whom Christ said, Except a man be borne etc. was
of lawful age. For spiritual food, which is nothing else but ye body and blood
of Christ, is as necessary for all ages, as for perfect age. But that the flesh
of Christ is as necessary in the supper to feed us, as water in Baptism to
wash us, it is a froward and foolish comparion: for water washes not our
souls, nor regenerateth us, but the holy ghost, whereof water is a sign: so
the flesh of Christ is as necessary in the supper to feed us, as the holy
ghost, to wash us and regenerate us, which seeing it does without
transubstantiation of the water into the spirit, likewise does the flesh and
blood of Christ nourish us, without transubstantiation of the outward signs
into them. The right Analogy is between water, and bread, and wine, and
between the spirit of God, and the flesh and blood of Christ, not between
outward water and spiritual flesh of Christ, which is as preposterous a
comparison, is if you would compare the holy ghost in baptism, with the bread
and wine in the sacrament. But of the error of Cyprian, Innocentius, and
Augustine, he will prove, the necessity of the presence of Christ's flesh in
the supper, because they gave the communion to infantes, yt could not receive
it with faith and understanding: therefore they thought ye very body and blod of
Christ to be really contained in ye sacrament. I answer it was not because
they thought so, but because they thought ye one sacrament as necessary as the
other, which might, and may in deed be ministered to infants, yt have not faith
nor understanding actually. Therefore that they ministered the communion to
infants, it showed their error proceeding of ignorance, as all error does: but
it shows not, yt they thought ye one sacrament to be other wise then the
other, a seal or assurance of justification, without any dream of
transubstantiation. That Sand would excuse their custom to have bin used more
for a security, then for necessity, is to no purpose. It is manifest yt they
thought erroniously, yt the eternal sign or seal was necessary in both, as
Aug. and Innocent. B. of Rome has defined, denying eternal life to infants yt
dyed without the communion and baptism, as though the grace of God had been
necessarily tied to the outward elements.

CAP. XIIII.
That S. Augustine did not teach th^se words: Except ye ea^ the Sander.
flesh etc: To betoken the eating of Christonely by faith and spirit, nor yet
the eating of material bread with faithful remembrance of him, but the eating
of his flesh, to the end we may be the better joined to the spirit of God.

There is no better way to be joined to the spirit of Fulk.
god, the^ by eating ye flesh of Christ spiritually, which Aug. does teach, not
ye carnal manner of eating which Sander does defend. S. Aug. de doct. Christ
lib. 3. ca 16. as Sander does confess, affirms yt this speech of Christ,
Except ye eat yt flesh etc: contains a figure. And what the meaning of this
figure is, August. tells us: It is a figure (says he) commanding, that we
should communicate with the passion of our Lord, and that we should sweetly
and profitably remember, that his flesh was crucisied and wounded for us. But
Sander replyeth, first against ye Lutherans, yt August. calling this speech a
figure, means not to deny yt it appertains to the last supper. And which of
the Lutherans I pray you, denied, that it appertains to the last supper,
although they deny yt it is singularly spoken of the last supper? Secondly he
fathereth upon ye Zwinglians an untruth, that they grant the place to be
understood of Christ's last supper, to prove ye necessity of both kinds,
which is a fable: for they grant none otherwise, then I have often showed, and
yet a good argument for necessity of both kinds may be taken out of yt place,
because Christ gives us a perfect nourishment of meat and drink, or as
Iustine says, of d^ie and moist nourishment, unto which spiritual truth, the
external seal must be made consormable. But now, will Sander teach us to
understand, what S. Augustine means by a figurative speech, which is al one
as if he would teach us to go to supper, as it is in the Greek proverb. First
a siguratiue speech must not deny any word in the speech, to be used
improperly, but is measured by faith and good manners. Whereas Augustine
tells us, that if in any sentence of the scripture, the words sound against
faith, and good manners, the words must not be taken in their proper sense, but
they are a figure, and signify some other thing, then the words in their
proper taking do sound, as diverse examples which he brings in the same
place, beside his plain words, do declare. This saying he affirms to be a
figurative speech, Thou shall heap burning coals on his head, which he does
thus interpret: Vt intelligas carbones ignis, esse vrentes poenitentiae
gemitus, quibus superbia sanatur eius, qui dolet se inimicum fuisse hominis, a
quo eius miseriae subvenitur: That thou m^ist understand coals of fire, to be
the burning groanings of repentance, by which his pride is healed, which
sorroweth that he has been enemy of such a man, by whom his misery is
helped. Behold, even as coals of fire in this text, are not taken in their
proper sense, for a bodily substance of woodde incensed: so is not eating and
drinking in ye other sentence, taken in the proper sense, for receiving at our
mouth, chawing and swallowing, But as Augustine interprets, for communicating
with the flesh of Christ by faith and spirit, etc. either in the Sacrament, or
without it. And it is a foolish cauil of Sander, to say that charity is not
broken, when we eat Christ whole under the form of bread, without hurting of
him, etc. For Augustine counts it slagitium, an heinous offense, to eat the
flesh of man in proper sense of eating, that is corporally: Yea, faith Sander,
to eat it in pieces, as it is sold in tho shambles. As though to eat an
whole man after that manner, were not more monstrous, then to eat a piece of
him. But Sander to show his synceritie, rehearses a large place out of
Augustine in Psalm. 98. which, how cunningly he can wrest for his purpose you
shall see. Durum illis visum est etc. It seemed an hard thing to the Jews:
except a man eat my flesh, he shall not have life everlasting. They took it
foolishly, they thought of it carnally, and supposed that our Lord minded to
cut of certain small pieces of his body, and to give them. This is an hard
talk, say they. They were hard, and not the talk. For if they were not hard
but gentle, they would say to them selves: He speaks not this thing rashly,
but because there lies privy some sacrament being gentle and not hard they would
tati with him, and shall learn of him yt thing which after their departure, those
learned who tarried. For when the twelve had tarried with him (the other being
departed) they (as who were sorry for ye others departing) warned Christ that
they were offended with his word, and so were departed. But Christ instructed
them and said: it is the spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits not, the
words which I have spoken to you, are spirit and life. Understand yt which I
have spoke^spiritually. Ye shall not eat this body which you see, we shall not
drink that blood which they shall shed, who will crucify me: I have
commended to you a certain Sacrament, which being spiritually understood,
shall make you live. And although that Sacrament must needs be visiblye
celebrated, yet it must be inuisibly understood. Three things Sander notes
out of this saying: First against the Lutherans, that Augustine understands
the precept of eating Christ's flesh of the Sacrament. I answer, that
Augustine in other places, and namely in his purposed commentary of that place,
understands it not to be singularly spoken of the eating in the Sacrament,
but otherwise also: which is all that we affirm and deny of referring this
place to the Sacrament. Secondly he no teth against the Zwinglians, that the
figurative speech which Augustine says to be in these words, is to be meant
of the manner of eating, in the natural understanding of c^r^all men, by
cutting, tearing, chawing, etc. not denying the substance of his flesh whole,
sound, and quick, to be eaten under the form of bread. I answer the
natural understanding of carnal men is by eating to receive in at the mouth
that which is eaten etc. wherefore Augustine denies that also. Thirdly he
notes that he calls it Sacrament which in his book de doct. Christ, he
called a figure, taking the name of a figure for a holy sign of an higher
truth. This is a grosle and shameless collection, for he calls the words of
Christ a figure, and a figurative and improper speech, which must not be taken
according to the sound of the words: S^ hoc propri(...)sonat, nulla pute^ur
figurata locu^i^. If it sound this properly, then let it be taken for no
figurative spech. By which words you see that a figurative spech is an improper
speech. But how can this snake slide away from those words of Augustine? You
shall not eat that body which you see, nor drink that blood which they shall
shed, I commend unto you a Sacrament. Therefore y^ Sacrament is not his body
which then was seen, nor his blood which afterward was shed. But Sander
gliding over these words, as though he saw them not, presuming upon the
credulity of Papists, which must believe that they make nothing against the
carnal manner of presence, if he say so: he passes to another saying of
Augustine in Joan. Tr. 26. and. 27. to prove that the error of the jews was
not concerning the substance of ye flesh that must be eaten really, but
concerning ye manner of eating of it. Because Augustine says carnem
intellexerune quomodo, etc. They understood flesh, so as it is torn in a
carcass, or sold in the shambles, and not as it is quickened with ye spirit of
God. I answer, this was one of their errors, but not all. For Augustine in Ps.
98. brings in Christ, denying them his natural body and blood: ergo they
erred in the substance as well as in the manner: and in Joan Tr. 24. he says:
Illi putabant eum erogaturum corpus suum, ille aut em dixit se ascensurum in
coelum vtique integrum. Cum videritis fiuum hominis ascendentem vbi erat prius,
certe vel tunc videbitis, quia non eo modo quo putatis, errogas corpus suum,
vel tunc intelligetis quia gratia eius non consumitur morsibus. They thought,
that he would give out his body, but he said, that be would ascend into heaven
whole. When you shall see ye son of man ascending where he was before,
certainly even then at lest you shall see, that he gives not out his body
after that manner you think, even then at lest you shall understand, that his
grace is not consumed with bitinges. In these words, the argument of his
ascension, takes away all corporal presence as well of Christ whole, as broken
in pieces, secondly the exposition of his grace not consumed with biting, shows
after what manner he understands his body to be present, namely by spiritual
grace, not by corporal substance. Therefore all Sanders iangling of signs and
figures, is to no purpose. For when he has prated what he can, a sign shall
never be the thing which it signifies; nor a figure the same thing that it
figureth, except opposites may agree to one thing at one time, and in one
respect.

For to use his own foolish example, a loaf of bread, which a baker sets
out, to signify that bread is there to be fold, although it be of that kind
of bread, which it signifies to be in ye house in greater quantity, yet it is
not that same bread, whereof it is the sign. No more is the Sacrament, that
same thing, whereof it is a sign, and yet an assured testimony that the thing
signified is given to our souls and faith, as certeinely as the sign to our
bodies. But because Augustine says, except ye eat my flesh, are words
figurative. Sander will reason thus: as cunningly I warrant you, as any collier
in Cambridge or Oxford. The eating of Christ's flesh and drinking of his blood,
being real deades which must be performed in Christ's supper, and yet being
called for good respect figurat(...)e words, must needs be figures of
somewhat, and the deeds and words being referred to the supper, must needs
betoken somewhat, as they are considered. But the eating of the flesh in Christ's
supper, can betoken nothing at all, except his flesh be there eaten* the eating
whereof may be the ground of this betokening. Therefore these words import
of necessity, that in Christ's supper the flesh of Christ is really eaten, and
his blood is really dr^nken. For the flesh of Christ can not be made the
figure of baker^ bread, etc.

O what whistling and hissing would be in the Sophisters schools, if such an
argument came among them, which reasons jointly of things to be divided!
Augustine says the words are figurative, and not the deeds of eating and
drinking, which are signified by the words, Except ye eat, etc.

The words I say, of eating and drinking of the flesh and blood of Christ,
are figurative, betokening another thing then they sound in common and proper
understanding; and what they signify, he shows, the communication with the
passion of Christ, and profitable remembrance of his death, which as they are
represented in the supper, so may we eat and drink his flesh and blood
without the Sacrament, by faith and working of Gods spirit. But (says Sander)
if the eating of Christ's flesh be not the figure, the words Except ye eat my
flesh, be not figurative. Se you not how this fond Sophister, confounds the
distinction which he him self before had made of figurative speeches and
figures of things themselves? between rhetorical figures and sacramental
figures. I say the spiritual eating which is the communication, with his
passion, etc. is not a figure, but that which is understood by those
figurative words, except ye eat the flesh, etc.

And although there may be a real eating to warn us of spiritual eating; yet
that spiritual eating which Saint Augustine calls communicating with the
passion of Christ, etc. may be without the Sacrament, and so is Augustine
discharged of Sanders Sophistry.

But now he will discover the errors of the Sacramentaries in expounding these
words: the first is, that they make the words of Christ to be figurative
only passiuely, whereas they are also figurative actiuely. But how I pray you
are the words figurative actiuely? He answers, the actual eating of
Christ's flesh, is not only said to be figured, but also is taught to be a
figure it self, of another spiritual eating.

If Sander were as ignorant, as his arguments are absurd, he were the most
notable Ass, that ever wrote in divinity, but I impute it not to ignorance,
but to malicious deceitfullnes, that he confounds words and deeds, and
reasons thus: the words be figurative actiuely, because the deed is
figurative actiuely, which is such a monster, as Sophistry never bredde a
greater. And what proof have you of this actual eating of Christ's flesh, to
be a figure actiuely of spiritual eating? Nothing but a mangled place of
Ambrose, (...) 1. Cor. Cap. 11. wherein he charge us with corrupting his
words, with evil pointing or distincting, which he does himself most
manifestly. For upon these words he writes: Mortem Domini annuntiantes done^
venerit.) Qui^ morte Domini liberati sumus huius rei memores in edendo and
potando, carnem and sanguinem quae pro nobis oblata sunt significamus. So often
as you shall eat of this bread and drink of this cup, you shall show the
Lords death until he come.) Because (says that writer) we are delivered by
the death of our Lord, we being mindful of this thing in eating and drinking
do signify the flesh and blood which were offered for us. But Sander
reads, in eating and drinking the flesh and blood, we signify those things
which were offered for us. Against this wresting by mispointing, first is the
relative quae, which lacks an antecedent, if flesh and blood which was
offered for us, be not signified: Secondly the words Carnem and sanguinem are
put absolutely, not showing whose theie are, and the relative is referred to
uncertain things. For if he had meant the same to be eaten which was offered, he
would have said not quae but eadem, last of all the accusative case following
the verbs eating and drinking, can be reasonably none other in an expositor,
but the accusative case which Paul uses, that is this bread and this cup.

The second foul error of the Sacramentaries, is that they expound the words
of Christ: Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, that is to say the
figure of his flesh, which is bread and wine. And here he cries what
ignorance? what abusing of Gods word? what blasphemy? where is honesty? where
is shamefastnes? where is common understanding? I answer, that for honesty and
shamefastnes, it is in the devil, as soon as in Sander. For what honesty or
shamefastness is it? thou a^^ant traitor, and stinking heretic, to feign such
an interpretation of the Sacramentaries, as if thou would hang thy self,
thou can not find that ever any used, or said, that the flesh of Christ is a
figure of bread and wine, or that Christ in that place speaking of his flesh
and blood, spoke of a figure thereof. But if no man have either written or
spoken so, thou will perhaps infer it of other sayings or writings of theirs,
which say, those words belong to the supper so truly, that they build falsely,
upon them the necessity of both kinds. But will thou not understand by an
hundredth times repeating, that none of us refers those words or any other
in that Chapter, unto the supper, otherwise, then as the supper is a sacrament,
seal, or outward token ordained of Christ to confirm our faith in that
doctrine of our spiritual food, to be given by him unto eternal life, which
is given to the worthy receiver in that Sacrament, in baptism, and without
either of them, by the working of Gods spirit only in some, in men of
discretion not without faith? As for the necessity of both kinds, is proved
by that analogy which ought to be between the things signified and the
signs: and also upon your own concession, who understanding those words
only of sacramental eating and drinking, may no more exclude drinking then
you can do eating.

CAP. XV.
Christ's flesh being meat in deed, must needs be really received Sander.
into our bodies.

Three things (says Sander) must be considered of him Fulk.
that will know, why the flesh of Christ is called meat in deed. The first,
that the Jews asked how he would give his flesh to be eaten. The second, that
Christ says, the eating of his flesh was necessary and profitable, both for
body and soul. The third, that Christ confirms these his sayings with this
reason. For my flesh is meat in deed, and my blood is drink in deed: that
is, it has truly and in deed, those properties, that any man would wish for
in true meat. But the properties of true meat are, to be received into the
body, and to be a medicine against death. If none be true meat, but that
which is received into the body, then that which Sander so often calls the
fathers gift, the bread of life, which came down from heaven is not true
meat, for that he has often said, may be received by says and spirit not
entering into the body, yet thereof says Christ, that he is the true bread. But
Chrysostom upon these words, My flesh is meat in deed, etc. says that it
means that flesh to be the true meat, which saves the soul, or else he
speaks it to confirm them in the former words, that they should not think
him to have spoken in parables darkely, but that they should know it to be
by all means necessary, to eat his body, in Joan. Hom. 46. He that grants
both these senses (says Sander) must needs grant that the true eating of the
flesh, stands not for eating truly the sign of the flesh, because he
spoke not obscurely in parables. Verily he were worthy to wear a cockescombe,
that would say true eating of the flesh, stands for eating truly the sign
of the flesh. Against whom then does Sander fight, but against an idol of
his own brain? but it is an obscure saying to put eating for believing. I
answer, Chrysostom speaks of the meat, and not of the manner of eating:
for if there be no obscurity in the manner of eating, let Sander speak of his
small conscience, when he says the manner of eating to be under another kind,
then it self is, which is most obscure and imperceptible. But if his flesh be
called meat, because it must be eaten bodily, wherefore then is his blood
called drink in deed, which Sander holds not to be necessary to be drunk
bodily? For if his blood in that sense be drink in deed, it must be drunk in
deed, and not eaten with the body. But Augustine, lib. 13. De ciuitate Dei.
Cap ^0. says: Tanquam caetera, etc. That other trees of Paradise were a
nourishment; the tree of life, a Sacrament: So that the tree of life should be
taken to be after such a sort, in the bodily Paradise, as the wisdom of God
is in the spiritual intelligible Paradise. Of which wisdom it is written, It
is the tree of life, to all that embraece it. What can Sander make of this
saying? As corporal tasting in the tree of life, was necessary for the
spiritual effect of incorruption, so Christ's flesh must be corporally tasted
that it may be meat indeed. I deny the comparison, which should be made of
the tree with bread, and of life with Christ, and not of wood with the flesh
of Christ. And it is certain, that Augustine not only compares the sacrament
with the sacrament, but also calling Christ, the spiritual part of the
sacrament, the wisdom of God, which is a tree of life to all that embrace
him, signifies that Christ is otherwise received, then with the mouth: for
embracing is more aptly said to be with the arms of faith, then with the
lips of the body, who can not touch the wisdom of God. But Sander once
again to make his matter good, repeateth his rank and rotten distinction of
two gifts, two giuers, two manners of eating, true meat, and meat truly:
affirming meat truly to be because it is received in at the mouth, and goes
into the body, after such sort, as other meats do, although it nourish
spiritually. Where there is no effect of that he calls meat truly, but it
is by plain words of the Chapter, ascribed to that which is called true meat,
which he consesseth may be received only spiritually: even the virtue of
raising up our bodies: for which cause he would make the bodily eating to be
necessary. He that believes in me, has life eternal, and I will raise him
up again in the last day.

Afterward, he cites Hilarie: who presses the word vere against the Arrians.
But yet Sander translateth him falsely. For to make it seem, that Hilarie
spoke of such bodily eating as he does, he turns these words, Haec accepta
atque hausta efficient: these things taken and swallowed: whereas he should
say, these things, that is the flesh and blood of Christ, being taken and
drunken, do cause this, that both Christ is in us, and we in him, which must
needs be taken for eating and drinking spiritually: For eating and drinking
his flesh corporally, Sander confesses to have no such effect. How Christ
tarieth in us naturally, and how we truly under a mystery take the flesh of
his body, I have spoken before, and these places of Hilarie are discussed more
at large in mine answer to Heskins, lib. 2. Cap. 20. and 2^. by which it may
appear, that Hilary taught no corporal manner of receiving, but sub sacramento
carnis communicandae, under a sacrament of his flesh to be communicated, vere,
sub mysterio, truly, under a mystery, and so as therebie Christ of necessity
dwells in us and we in him. The last auctor is Gregory Nyssenus in vita
Mosis. Puro defaecatoque animo coelestem cibum sumere, etc. To take the
heavenly meat with a pure and clean mind. The which meat (says he) no
sowing brought forth unto us by the art of tilling the ground. But it is
bread provided for us without seed, without sowing, without any other work
of man, It flowing from above, is found in the earth for the bread which came
down from heaven, which is the true meat, which is obscurely meant by this
History of Manna, is not a thing without a body. For by what means can a
thing without a body, be made meat unto the body? The thing which is not
without a body, is by all means a body. Here (says Sander) Nyssenus proves
the truth of Christ's body, by the truth of the eating thereof, which must be
really taken into our bodies, by our mouths, or else Nyssenus fails in his
whole discourse: which is a shameless manifestly. For Gregory says
expressly, we must take that heavenly meat with a pure and clean mind of
taking it into our bodies, by the mouth he speaks not. He gathers that
Christ's body is a true body, not because it is bodily eaten, but because it is
meat unto our bodies, which yet as spiritual meat nourishes spiritually, as
Sander confessed even now. How strong the argumen^ of Nyssenus is, I force
not, but he neither affirms, neither any thing can rightly be gathered out
of him, which we do not confess and acknowledge in as ample manner as he, That
Christ has a true body, and that his flesh is heavenly meat indeed, to
nourish the whole man, which must be received with a pure and clean mind, not
put in at our mouths, nor swallowed down our throats.

CAP. XVI.
By the manner of our tarying in Christ, it is proved, that we receive his
real flesh into our bodies. Sander.


The tarying of Christ in us, and we in him, Chry(...) Fulke.
sostome in Joan. H. 46. calls a mingling with him: which Cyril declares by a
similitude of pouring wa^^ upon melted wax, in Joan. lib. 4. Ca. 16 and of a
little leave(...) which tempereth the whole lump of dowe: so a little of the
blessing draws the whole man into it self, and fills us with h(...) grace,
and so does Christ dwell in us, and we in him. By a little of that blessing,
Cyril means a small portion of the sacramental bread, or that which seems
bread as Sander. will have it. And by these interpretations (says he) it
cannot be avoided, but that the heavenly food which we receive into our
mouths, is the real substance of Christ's flesh. For it is called benedictio,
the blessing, which word is not meant of an inward virtue, coming from
heaven, but of that which seems bread, and is visibly received. To all this I
answer, first, that the terms of mingling, and similitudes of pouring wax
and of leaven, must have a spiritual understanding, or else they will breed
monstrous absurdities. And unto the term^ blessing, I say it is taken for the
external Sacrament, even as the body of Christ, the flesh of Christ, the
blood of Christ. etc. by the figure synecdoche of the most principal part of
ye Sacrament, not in respect of that which seems bread, and is visibly
received, but of the spiritual blessing, whereof they are partakers which
receive the Sacrament worthily. Therefore says Cyrill, a little blessing
draws us into it, and fills us with his grace, and so Christ tarieth in us
and we in him. I ask how, but by his grace? For Sander will confess, that
which seems bread to tarry but a little while in us: likewise, that the body
of Christ tarieth no longer in us then the kinds or shows of bread and wine
tarry in us: Where* fore the tarying of Christ by grace in us, proves not his
real receiving of Christ's flesh into our bodies. Yea, Sander says himself: A
little of that blessed food being received worthily of us, is not so properly
said to tarry in us, as we to tari^ in it, for that though it be small in form
yet in virtue it is great. I pray thee Sander, tell us what is that blessed
food thou speak of, which does not properly tarry in us? For of his flesh,
Christ says, that it is meat in deed, and that he tarieth in him which
eats it. And what is that which is small in form, the body of Christ, or the
external sacrament, which thou call the shows of bread and wine, which in
deed are small in form? The body of Christ, I suppose thou art not so mad,
to contract into smaller quantity then it is, and as for the accidents or
shows of bread and wine, what virtue is in them? And in deed, yt only word
of Cyrill, A little of the blessing, meaning thereby the external Sacrament,
for the internal virtue thereof, overthrows Popish transubstantiation, and
carnal manner of receiving into the mouth. For by a little of the blessing, he
means not a little of the body of Christ, nor the body of Christ in a little
quantity, but a little of the consecrated bread and wine, which by divine and
spiritual operation, is of infinite virtue to convert us into an heavenly and
spiritual nature, aunswerable to our regeneration, which is testified unto us
in baptism. But Sander replyeth, that if the Sacrament were wheaten bread, it
could not be true that a little thereof should draw the whole man unto it. I
answer, if it were nothing but wheaten bread, it could do no such thing: but
Cyril calls it by the name of that which it is more principally, as it is a
Sacrament, that is a blessing, which draws the whole man to it, and fills
him with grace: E^ ho^ modo in nobis Christus manet, and nos in Christo, and by
this mean does Christ dwell in us and we in him. To the term of tarying
naturally, used by Hilarie, I have answered before. Theophylact I force not of,
as being a late writter, although he say nothing in effect more tha^
Chrysostom and Cyrill. But Sander still urges, what joining as of wax and
leaven, what mingling can be made of things so far distant as heaven and
earth? If you say, by faith and spirit, either you give a cause of joining
(says Sander) which may stand with the cause alleged by Christ, or else you
correct his cause and put a better. I answer, we neither ad to, nor correct
the cause of joining alleged by Christ, but express ye very same which he
does: The words which I speak, are spirit and life, but there be some among
you that believe not. Nay (says Sander) our tarying in Christ is assigned to
eating, and not only to believing. But we reply, that this eating is not
corporal eating, but eating by faith and spirit, which may be without eating
the Sacrament, and yet eating the flesh of Christ, not leaving the eating
thereof (as Sander says) and staying upon feeding by faith alone, which is an
absurd saying, for by faith we feed upon Christ through the virtue of his
holy spirit.

CAP. XVII.
We are made one with Christ by natural participation of his Sander.
flesh, as he being one nature with his father, has assumpted our nature into
his own person.

Sander always reasons so, as he makes eating by Fulk.
faith and spirit, to exclude the flesh of Christ and the virtue thereof, as
in this chapter, he says, He that eats Christ's flesh, receives life of
him, not by the means of faith and spirit only, but also by natural
participation of his flesh: as Christ lives for the father, so he that eats
Christ shall live for him: but Christ lives not for his father in faith, nor
by mean of spirit alone, as we take spirit for devotion or spiritual gifts
and qualities, but by his whole substance present in him. But when we say,
that we eat Christ by faith and spirit, we mean not by spirit, devotion, or
spiritual gifts, but the working of the holy spirit, as the principal
efficient cause, and faith as the isntrumental cause, by which we eat Christ
present in whole substance. The controversy is not, whether we must be
joined to Christ by eating of his flesh and drinking of his blood, for that we
believe without al controversy, that from the beginning of the world, to the
end, none can be joined to Christ otherwise then by eating his flesh and
drinking his blood: but whether Christ's flesh can be eaten and drunken without
eating bodily the Sacrament, that is the question. And therefore Sander makes a
large and needless discourse, in this Chapter, to show how Christ lives for
his father and how we must live for him, that is by participation of his flesh
and blood, which is that natural participation, whereof Hilary speaks
against the Arrians, which said, we are joined to him only in unity of will,
which is not so: for he by his incarnation, is naturally joined to us, and we
by participation of his flesh are naturally joined to him, so that we are
flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, of which conjunction the Sacrament is
an heavenly pledge and assurance. But now comes Sander, and says, that in
four points the Sacramentaries be against S. Hilary: first b^couse they
pr^suppose Christ's flesh not to be eaten of us, and consequently not to be in
us, in his own nature and substance. This is a false supposell, for we affirm
Christ's flesh to be eaten of all the elect of God, and whole Christ to be in
them. Secondly they are against the Godhead of Christ, if we do not live by
eating of Christ's flesh as he by the father. This is the 2. slanderous cauell,
answered before. Thirdly they are against the life of our bodies, because they
say that in the Sacrament, we eat nothing into our bodies, but bread and wine,
which are not able to give life to our bodies, whereby they may live for ever.
This is a peevish Sophistry, we eat into our bodies, and we eat in the
Sacrament bodilye nothing, but bread and wine, therefore we eat not at all.
Yes, we eat the flesh of Christ both in the Sacrament and without it, with our
souls which is of force to give life both to bodies and souls. Fourthly they
are against the food of our bodies, which is the flesh of Christ. No forsooth,
we acknowledge that flesh of Christ to be food to feed the whole man, body
and soul unto eternal life, but yet so to feed the body as it is not
received corporally, nor feeds corporally, but after a spiritual and divine
manner. And here he makes the Zwinglians to affirm, that the sanctified
bread in the supper, is the food of our bodies, unto eternal life, as water
in baptism is the instrument and mean as well to bodies and souls of
everlasting life. Which is utterly false, for they affirm, neither ye bread to
be food, nor the water to be regeneration otherwise, then as holy signs,
seals, pledges, assurances of spiritual feeding and regeneration. But Sander
by scripture, will destroy this comparison, affirming that God in deed may use
what means he will, to save us, but by his word, he has testified his will, yt
baptism has his promise of salvation annexed to it, but no promise is made to
material bread and wine, nor to him that eats and drinks them. I answer,
neither is any promise made to the water in baptism, but to him that receives
it worthily, and to him that eats and drinks material bread and wine in
the Sacrament, the like promise is made of remission of sins and of eternal
life: not in respect of ye bread and wine, but in respect of him that feeds
our faith by that Sacrament, and by faith and working of his holy spirit
feeds us with his flesh and blood, even when that Sacrament is not received.
But Cyril says in Joan, lib. 10, Cap. 13. Non poterat, etc. This corruptible
nature of the body could not otherwise be brought to incorruption and life,
unless the body of the natural life, were joined unto it. This is true: but
the manner of the conjunction is all the matter we stand upon, which we affirm
must be such, as may join every body of Gods elect that has been and shall
be, to the body of the natural life, which cannot be the Sacrame^tal
coniunctio^ or corporal receiving of Christ's natural body into our bodies,
which was denied to al ye fathers before Christ's incarnation. And yet except
every one of their bodies had been joined to the body of Christ, which is the
body of natural life, they could not be partakers of incorruptio^ and life, as
Cyril says. Therefore the manner of our conjunction, is not the receiving of
Christ's body in at our mouths, but an heavenly and divine manner wrought by
the spirit of God, apprehended by faith in all that have heard the word of God
^^d are partakers of it.

CAP. XVIII.
The eating of Christ's flesh was so true, that it was (...)ght Sander.
with the loss of many disciples.

If Christ had not meant to give his flesh in deed (says Fulke.
Sander) he would not have cast a stumbling block in his disciples way, nor
hindered their faith by words more hard then needed. I answer, he meant to
give them his flesh in deed, to be eaten, not only in his supper, but even
then presently, if they had been faithful to have received it. And therefore
he says to them, he that eats me, shall live for me or by me, my flesh is
meat in deed, and my blood is drink in deed. Sander must remember, what he
has taught us before, that Christ's flesh cannot be meat in deed, except
it be eaten, but Christ says it is meat in deed, before it was to be eaten
in the Sacrament, therefore it was presently eaten by faith and spirit, and he
speaks not there of Sacramental eating only. Neither does Cyrill say, that
only in the Sacrament, Christ's flesh is eaten, although he show that Christ
instructed his Apostles, when he gave them fragmenta panis, pecces of bread,
how his flesh might be eaten, in Joan lib. 4. Cap. 14. namely spiritually and
not corporally.

CAP. XIX.
The right understanding of these words: It is the spirit that Sander.
quickens, the flesh profits nothing.

Basil, Chrysostom, and Augustine, (says Sander) Fulke.
expound the name flesh for carnal and fleshlye understanding of the Jews:
which Calvin of Luciferian pride reprocueth: And yet Augustine and Cy(...)l
do chiefly follow another understanding, which also Call(...)e follows,
that Christ's flesh, should not profit any thing, but that by the spirit of
his Godhead, it is made able to give everlasting life. See the ran^or of
Sander, which condemns Calvin of devilish pride, for refusing one
interpretation of some fathers, and taking the exposition of others, and that,
which one of the same fathers does cheefely follow, as Sander does confess.
But now (says he) what need more ado? If this saying apperteine not to the
last supper, it makes nothing against our belief. If it do apperteine, they
are words prophetical, fulfilled in the supper. I have often showed how all
this doctrine of eating the flesh of Christ, pertains to the supper, and how
it pertains not. And this I prove out of this saying against your Popish
opinion, wherein you hold that wicked men eat Christ's flesh. Our savior
Christ showing whence his flesh has power to give life, namely not of it
self, but of the spirit, does also show the necessary effect of his spirit,
which is never separated from his flesh. The spirit (says he) quickneth or
gives life: seeing therefore that no man can receive the flesh of Christ
separated from his spirit, no man can receive his flesh, but he that receives
it quickening or giving life. But where Sander says, that when Christ gave his
body, he gave it after a spiritual sort, and no^ after a fleshly manner. It
might seem that he fully agreed with us in mind, as he does in words: but
when he comes to expound spiritually and fleshly, he declares, that he
means not to exclude, all fleshly manners, but only one manner of eating his
body by pieces, as though the eating of it whole according to their imagination
into their bodies were not also a fleshly manner: but when he comes to
spiritual sort, he expounds it only by invisible sort: as though he which
gives a piece of gold closed in a paper, so that it could not be seen, did
give it after a spiritual manner. As for the conversion of bread and wine into
his body and blood, his presence at the table and in their mouths, and in
heaven, etc. show not a spiritual manner of giving his body, but a monstrous
alteration of bodily things, which are affirmed to be so really and
corporally, and yet contrary to the nature of all things and bodies spoken of.
I omit his ridiculous interpretations of Ieremies saying. Let us put wood into
his bread, which he applies to the crucifying of Christ's flesh, where yet
wodde was not put into his flesh, but his flesh put upon wodde. But the Prophet
rehearses the saying of his adversaries, which threatened to give him wood in
steed of bread, that is to famish him in the stocks. Likewise of Abacuks
saying: Horns are in his hands, which he meanein of the almighty power of
God, often called figurative horns, Sander refers it to the corners of the
cross, which yet were not in the hands of Christ, but his hands stretched out
toward them.

CAP. XX.
The words of Christ being spirit and life, show, that his (...) flesh is
made present in his last supper, above all course of (...) Sander.
and reason.

Sander, as his manner is, can rest in no certain (...)sition, Fulk.
but will have every interpretation to (...) sense of the place, if it affirm
any thing that (...) first, because the flesh of Christ is unprofitable, (...)
the spirit which gives it power of quickening (...) have this saying all one
in effect with the woe(...) ing before, it is the spirit that quickens.
(...) upon occasion of a phra^e used by Cyrillus, (...), (...) words are of
the spirit, he will have the meaning to ^e, yt the words of Christ have in
them some of his spirit and divine power therefore the naming of flesh and
blood before, was not figurative, but proper. I grant the conclusion, but I
deny the argument: for he uttered other words before, which we^ figurative and
improper as, I am the bread that came, etc. yet were these words spirit and
life, and so are all the words of the Gospel, that is, give h^^, if they be
spiritually understood, I say not always figuratively, but always believed to
be true in that sense they are uttered and meant by him, whether they be
figurative or proper, as concerning the prhase. Thirdly, the words of Christ
are spirit and life, because they make the spiritual body of Christ, which is
a spiritual food, as Ambrose says, de ijs qui myster, init. Cap. 9. Ambrose
says truly, that for as much as the body of Christ is a spiritual body, it
is not a corporal food, but a spiritual food. Why is it not a corporal food,
seeing it feeds our bodies as well as our souls? Verily, because it is not
received corporally, but spiritually, which is ye difference in which we
stand. We agreefully with Augustine, in Joan. Tra. 27. The words of Christ
are to be understood spiritually, and so are spirit and life to us, as they
be of their own nature, howsoever unfaithful persons esteem of them, they
work whatsoever it pleases him to signify to be wrought by them, as Basil
teaches de Bap. lib. 1. Cap. 2. We believe, as Chrysostom teaches, Hom. 47.
in Joan. That they contain no natural course, but are free from all earthly
necessity. And therefore, when Christ promises to give us his flesh to be
eaten, and delivers the bread, calling it his body, we believe his words to
be spirit and life, that is not to contain any natural course, but to be
free from all earthly necessity, that is, we believe unfeignedly to be fed with
Christ's body and blood, although we do not eat and drink it corporally with
our mouth, which is a natural course of eating, we believe, that by the flesh
and blood of Christ, both our bodies and souls are nourished wonderfully unto
eternal life, not thinking it necessary, that the flesh and blood of Christ
should carnally enter into our bodies, as the Papists teach, for that is an
earthly necessity, from which the words of Christ, are free, and yet the
only thing that Sander urges so vehemently, and without the which he thinks
it impossible to communicate with the flesh and blood of Christ.

But Sander commands al heretics to cease to mock them, for making so many
miracles in the Sacrament of the altar, because the words of Christ, This is
my body, are spirit and life. Nay verily, this argument will stir up all men
to mock the Papists more then they did before: seeing they think it lawful
to feign what miracles they will in the Sacrament, because Christ's words be
spirit and truth, and yet more to laugh at Sa^ders reason, which will prove
these words to be most proper, and least figurative, because they partake most
of the godhead, in which there is no change, whereas figures or tropes come of
the Greek word, which signifies changing. Notwithstanding this great clerk,
oftentimes before has taught us, that whatsoever is spoken of bread and meat,
and eating in John 6. Chapter, until he come to this saying: (And the bread
which I will give is my flesh) does pertain to the godhead of Christ, and the
participation thereof by faith: in which words he cannot deny, but bread,
meat, eat, hunger, thirst, etc. must be taken figuratively. But what
drunkenness is it to reason of these words only? This is my body, when all the
words of Christ, as well figurative speeches, as proper, be spirit and life,
as well as these. Yet now now we shall see a whole world of difference between
the words of the Gospel and the interpretation of false gospellers, between the
old fathers and ye new brethren. For Christ (says he) was by his incarnation
made the bread of life to the end we might eat his godhead otherwise then the
fathers had done before. The new brethren bid us feed upon him by faith
alone, as Noe and Abraham did. I trust it shall be sufficient to prove those new
brethren, to be ye right children and heirs of those old fathers, when they
have all one matter of salvation, the flesh and blood of Christ, and all one
instrument of eating, faith alone. And why should the new brethren eat the
godhead, or manhood of Christ, otherwise in substance, then the old fathers
did? But Sander asks, where is the word of God so given me after his
incarnation, as it could not be given before? And I ask Sander, wherefore it
should be given now otherwise then it was before? and why it could not be
given before so as it is given now? but that he will bind the word of God to
a natural course, and not suffer his working to be free from earthly
necessity? He demands further, where is any everlasting meat for his body?
I demand likewise, where was any everlasting meat for the body of Noe and
Abraham our fathers? But Sander says his flesh is rebellious to his spirit,
and has need to be fed, his body was the mean to poison his soul,
therefore his soul must have a medicine, which shall be received into his
body. I answer, the flesh of our old fathers Noah and Abraham was rebellious
to the spirit, had need to be fed, were a mean to poison the soul etc, yet
needed they not, that the flesh of Christ should be received into their bodies,
that it might be a medicine unto their souls: no more is it needful for the
new brethren that are their children. But let us see the other differences.
Irenaeus reproved them that denied the resurrection of men's bodies, because
Godly men in scripture are called spiritual: the new brethren wrest the name
of spirit or spiritual body, to deny the real substance of flesh in the
sacrament: Nay, they infer yt the manner of ye eating must be spiritual, in
which respect it is called a spiritual body, and not only for the power of
quickening which it has of yt spirit of Christ. But it is a great mystery,
that where S. Paul 1. Tim. 3. would have Deacons to be chosen of such men, as
have the mystery of faith in a pure conscience, Sander thinks, he means
the Sacrament, which in their mass at the consecration of ye blood, is called
mysterium sidei, and in Justinius time was delivered by ye Deacons. O blockish
imagination! such be the arguments of popery. But if it be so, why is not the
bread so called in your Mass, as well as the cup? And if there be a
special reason why the cup should rather be so called, what conscience
have your Priests and Deacons to spoil ye people thereof, and not to deliver it
as the Deacons did in ye time of Justinius? The other differences that without
order he heapeth and repeteth, come al to this end, yt we deny the flesh of
Christ any way to be profitable; yt we affirm yt spirit to quicken us, without
eating of Christ in his supper; we wrest to the spirit of man, that which
Christ says of ye spirit of god: al which is false and sla^derous, for as I
have often showed. We believe it to be of necessity yt we should eat and drink ye
flesh and blod of Christ, which by virtue of his spirit has power to give
eternal life to al them that receive it, we acknowledge all the words of Christ
to be spirit and l^^e, so as no mortal man's words can be, neither did we eu^^
say that flesh and blood signifies bread and wine, and the same bread and
wine must again signify the flesh and blood of Christ: although we say that
bread and wine in the sacrament are a seal and confirmation of that doctrine
which Christ teaches in this Chapter, concerning the eating and drinking of
his very true and natural flesh and blood, which has power to seed unto
eternal life, them that eat and drink it spiritually, as there is none other
way of eating and drinking thereof, but by faith through the almighty working
of Gods holy spirit.

The fourth Book.
The preface of the fourth Book declares, that he purposes in the same to
show, that the words of the institution of the supper are proper, and not
figurative, and so have been taken above 1500. And that they are proper: he
wili prove by circumstances of the supper, by conference of scriptures, out of
the old and new Testament, and by the commandment given to the Apostles to
continue the sacrament until the second coming of Christ. Last of all, he*
craves pardon, if he chance to say somewhat, that was touched before,
affirming that his purporse is not so to do, although by affinity of the
argument, desire to have the thing remembered, or by his own forgetfulness, he
may be caused to fall into that default.

CAP. I.
That no reason ought to be heard, why the words of Christ's supper, should
now be expounded improperly or fig^ratiuely. And Sander.
that the Sacramentarics can never be sure thereof.

Christ (says he) in his last supper, was both a testator and a law maker: a
testator, in giving his body and Fulk.
(...)oude; and a lawemaker, in commanding his Apostels (...)d their
successors, to continue the making of this (...)acrament. This testament and
law was soon after writ(...)n and published. At which time, and ever since,
the Church has taken these words, This is my body, not (...)guratiuely, but
properly. This last saying, is utterly, (...)alse, neither can it be proved,
by Ambrose, Chryso(...)tome, Augustine, Theodoret whom he names, or any
before or after their time, for 600 years, that ever the visible Sacrament was
adored as ye very body of Christ. If he have any thing to show, we shall have
it hereafter. But it is a folly (he says) upon allegation of a thing so far
beyond the memory of man, as the primitive Church is, to leave the custom of
the present Church, which Christ no less redeemed, governs, and loves, then
he did the faithful of the first six hundredth years. I answer shortly, that
is not the Church of Christ, but of antichrist, which of late years has
taught, the worshipping of the sacrament, as God and man. And whereas, Sander
replieth, that then we shall have no quietness or end of controversies, if
heretics may appeal to the primitive Church, as the Trinitaries in Poolande,
and the Circumciders in Lithuania, for these appeal to the primitive Church,
and deny writings of Fathers and scriptures, as the Protestant: I answer, the
Protestants receive all the canonical scriptures, by which all heresy may be
condemned, the authority or practice of the primitive Church, they allege but
as a witness of truth, which is sufficient proved out of the word of God.
Whereas he says, there was but one universal change to be looked for in
religion, which was to be made by Christ: I affirm, the truth of Christ's
religion to be unchangeable, but there was an universal change to be looked
for from Christ's religion, to Antichrist, which saint Paul calls an
Apostasy, and saint John in the Revelation, the cup of fornication, whereof
all nations should drink etc. Yet was not this change so universal, but that
the servants of God, though in small number and credit, with the world, were
preserved out of that general apostasy, and called out of Babylon, as we see
it now come to pass, by the preaching of the eternal Gospel, then also
foreshewed, Apocal. 14. 17. 18. etc.

Another reason, why we should give none ear to them, that say the words are
figurative, is for that then we should doubt of our former faith, and in
doubting become men that lack faith. And why should you not only doubt, but
refuse a false opinion, believed contrary to the word of God? But we must
tell Sander, whether he that gave ear first to Berengarius and Zwinglius, may
give ear to an other that should say the Apostels had no authority to write
holy Scriptures. No forsooth, for he that gave ear to Berengarius and
Zwinglius, did hear them, because they brought the authority of scriptures,
which is the only certain rule of truth, against which no question or doubt
may be moved. As for the opinion of carnal presence, if it had been as
generally received before Berengarius, as Sander falsely affirms, yet it was
lawful to bring it to the trial of holy Scriptures, as we do all the
articles of our faith which are true, not so much because they are generally
received, as for that they are manifestly approved, by the authority of the
holy scriptures.

But Sander will yet enter farther, into the bowels of the cause, and before he
hear what reasons ca^ be brought against the popish faith, he says the
Sacramentaries cannot possibly have any ground of their doctrine, that the
words of Christ in the supper are figurative, either in respect of the word
written, or the faith of all Christians, or the glory of God, or the love of
Christ toward us, or the profit of his Church. Yes verily, all these five
respects, move us to take the words of Christ at his supper to be figurative.
And, First the word written by saint Luke, and saint Paul, This cup is the
new Testament in my blood: which words being manifestly figurative, have the
same sense that the other rehearsed by Saint Matthewe, and Saint Mark, This is
my blood: and that these words have, This is my body, which are used by all
four: Therefore by the written word, they are all figurative and signify the
delivery of a Sacrament or seal of the new covenant established in the death
and bloudshedding of the son of God.

Secondly, the faith of all Christians, for six hundred years and more after
Christ, has been sufficiently proved to have understood the words
figuratively, for a figure, sign, token, pledge of the body and blood of
Christ, and not for the very substance contained in forms of bread and
wine. Insomuch, that the very gloss upon the Canon Law, De cons. did. 2.
Cap. Hoc est, has these words, Coeleste Sacramentum quod vere representat
Christi carnem, dicitur corpus Christi, sed improprie: vnde dicitur suo modo,
sed non in veritate sed significante mysterio, vt sit sensus, vocatur corpus
Christi, id est significat. The heavenly Sacrament which truly represents
the flesh of Christ, is called the body of Christ, but improperly. Whereof it
is said to be after a peculyar manner, but not in truth of the thing, but in
a signifying mystery: So that the sense is, it is called the body of Christ,
that is to say, it signifies it. The author of this gloss, durst not have
written thus, if it had not been an opinion generally received, that the
words of Christ were not proper, but figurative.

Thirdely it is against the glory of GOD that the body of Christ, should be
so made present, as it should enter not only into the mouth of wicked persons,
as a dead body working no life, but also into the bellyes of brute beasts,
which is even horrible to name.

Fourthly it is not agreeable to the love of Christ toward us in his second
coming, that his body by such a presence should be thought to have lost all
natural conditions of a substantial body, seeing the scripture puts us in
hope, that our vile bodies shall be made confirmable at his coming to his
glorious body, Philip. 3. Wherefore that heresy of carnal presence, is
contrary to our faith of the resurrection of our bodies.

Fifthly, it is against the profit of Christ's Church, which by his ascension
is drawn upward into heaven from the earth, but by this imagined presence, is
moved to look down unto Christ upon the earth. Col. 3. Therefore in all these
respects, the exposition of the words must be figurative.

Another reason Sander has, that seeing all figures were invented either for
lack of words, or for pleasantness of speaking, and Christ neither lacked
words nor can be proved to have spoken figuratively, only for his pleasure,
therefore he spoke not figuratively. If there be no more causes of figurative
speech, then these two noted by Sander, then Christ never used any figurative
speeches, for he never wanted words, to have spoken properly that other men
could speak properly, neither can he be proved to have spoken figuratively,
only for his pleasure, and least of all, he affected the praise of Eloquence.
But if it be out of question: and Sander also confesses, that in other places,
Christ spoke figuratively, then is it out of question, that this argument of
Sander is not worth the paring of his nails. For there are other causes of
figurative speeches, then these two by him alleged, and especially the profit
of the hearers, who are more moved, and better understand often times by
figurative, then by proper speeches. And for this cause, y^ holy ghost speaking
of Sacraments, does usually call the^ (figuratively, by the names of that they
signify and seal unto us, as the Lamb is called ye Passover, baptism
regeneration, the bread his body, the cup the new Testament. The profit
that we take by these kind of speeches, is great, for they admonish^s to be
as sure of the things, as we are of the signs, when the signs bear the name
of the things signified and promised by them.

Of Saint Augustines rule of figurative speeches, Sander, that loves no
repetitions, has written a whole Chapter before, lib. 3. Cap. 14. and
therefore I will say no more of it here, only I note that by quoting the
place, he abuses Augustines rule, against his own example which he brings
of eating and drinking the body and blood of Christ, to prove that Christ's
words are not figurative, when Augustine says expressly, those words are
figurative which Christ spoke of eating and drinking his flesh and blood.

The rock was Christ, (he says) must needs be a figurative speech, because
it can not be proper. And for the same cause, say we, These words. This is my
body, are figurative, for yt they can not be proper. But Sander replieth, that
if he had said, this bread is my body, it might have been so thought, for
bread cannot be his body no more then the rock be Christ. yet S. Paul
doubts not, to say, this bread, of that of which before he had said, this is
my body. 1. Cor. 11. And I ask Sander, what was that which Christ had in his
hand, and whereof he said this? It could not be his body, before the words of
consecration spoken as all Catholic papists affirm: then it was bread, then,
the word following Is, will not suffer the sense to be, this shall be my body,
wherefore in effect it is all one to say, having bread in his hand, This is my
body, and to say, This bread is my body, the one is impossible by Sanders
confession: ergo by necessity of argument the other.

CAP. II.
That at all other, so the words of Christ's supper, ought to Sanden.
be taken properly, until the contrary does evidently appear.

By authority of Tertullian and Marcellus the Lawyer, he labors to prove,
that all words must be taken in Fulke.
their proper signification, except the contrary be manifestly showen.
Likewise Epiphanius affirms, that all words in the Scripture, need not to
be taken figuratiuelie, and that to know which is figurative, and which is not,
diligent consideration and ancient tradition helps much. All this I confess,
but withal I affirm, that these words: This is my body, both by diligent
consideration, and ancient tradition, are found to be figurative. Neither has
Sander any thing to the contrary. Yes I wis: the Pronowne, This (says he)
points not to a thing absent. No verily, for it points to the bread that
was in his hand. Neither the Verb, Is, can be said of that, which presently
has no true being: ergo it cannot be said of the body of Christ, which by
your own divinity, has no being in the Sacrament, before the last syllable
of Hoc est corp^^ meum be pronounced, then it is necessary to be said of
the bread in his hand, which had a true being. And then by your own rule in
the Chapter before, these words being as much, as This bread is my body,
must needs be figurative, because they cannot be proper, for bread and
Christ's body, be two seuerall-natures, that cannot stand together.

CAP. III.
The proper signification of these words: This is my body, Sander.
and This is my blood, is, that the substance of Christ's body and blood is
contained under the visible forms of bread and wine.

If the speech were proper and not figurative, yet Fulke.
the substance of bread being showed, and the substance of the cup, and of
that which is in the cup being showed, it would not follow, the body and
blood to be under these accidents of bread and wine, but either with the
substance of bread and wine, or rather that his body and blood were bread
and wine. For Sanders similitude has nothing like to this matter, this is an
Elephant, that is, the substance of an Elephant is contained under this visible
form. But let him bring example of any thing which bearing visible form of
one substance, is called by the name of another substance. Might not Moses have
said truly to the Israelites in the wilderness in the behalf of God, pointing
to the Rock: This is Christ, or the body of Christ, as well as Saint Paul
says, that Rock was Christ? Therefore look what would be the sense of those
words, the same will be the sense of these words, taking the speeches either
as proper, or figurative.

But Christ (says he) has forced us to seek out this interpretation in
causing Saint Luke and S. Paul to write, This Chalice is the new Testament in
my blood. For of necessity we must interpret these words, This Chalice, that
is to say, the thing contained in this Chalice, is my blood. I pray you sir
what necessity? except the speech be figurative. You will say it is
figuratively only for the cup, to signify that which is contained therein.
If you so say, then tell me once again, whether these words, The new
Testament in my blood, be all one in proper speech, with these words, my
blood. If the new Testament in my blood, be all one in sense, with these
words my blood, they are figurative: for no man properly uses so to speak,
that he names the new Testament in his blood, when he names nothing, but
his blood naturally. If these words be figurative, not only in the name of
cup, but in the words following, which are, is the new Testament in my
blood: then the words of the supper are found to be figurative, and all the
babbling about This, and Is, and body, and blood, and mine, etc. are vain and
foolish: for This and Is, are in this figurative speech, and that in one manner
of speaking is called, My blood, in an other, is called the new Testament in
my blood, and by necessary analogy, that which in one manner of speech is
uttered by these words, My body, may and ought truly to be understood and
uttered in these words: The new Testament in my body crucified. That the
Pronowne hoc, is the Neuter gender, and hic the Masculine gender, it proves
not the alteration of substance, for the genders follow the names, and note no
substantial property, where the things differ not in the sex. But where you
said first, the Pronowne points to the visible forms, now you say it
pertains rather to the Substantive (body) where it ends, then to the
forms, you are not only contrary to your self, but also to the schoolmen,
which say it points to neither of both, but unto indiuiduum vagum, a singular
uncertain or wandering thing. But point it as you will, it can have no true
literal sense, if you will hold your own principles: for if the body be
not present before the words of consecration uttered, as all papists (I
think) except Sander, will affirm: That which he had in his hand was
bread, at that instant, when he said, This. And Sander himself says: This
which appeared to them bread, to be in substance at the ending of the words,
His own body: Ergo it was not so before the words ended, and how can, is, a
Verb of the present tense, signify that which shall be after, although it
be never so soon after? But of the Pronowne This, we shall have occasion to
speak in three Chapters following, and diverse times it is repeted in this
book, although he protest in the Preface that he delighted not to speak one
thing twice.

CAP. IIII.
That the pronowne (this) in Christ's words, can point neither Sander.
to bread nor to wine.

I have proved before, that if it can point to nothing else, if it point to
any thing, that was there Fulke.
present, but unto bread and wine, because body and blood, by your own
principle, was not there present before the last syllable of the sentence
uttered.

But Sander says (this) signifies a substance, because Christ says not, This
is in my body, but this is my body, which is a blockish reason, for Christ
says, This is ye new Testament, which is an Accident, and in my blood, as well
as This is my blood. Well, the Protestants opinion is (says he) that This
points to the bread and the wine, which signify his body and blood. But
that cannot be, because this cannot agree with bread and wine, neither in
Greek nor Latin, and then tells us, the genders of the nownes, etc. But
good Sir: the pronowne This, is the newter gender, put absolutely,
comprehending in signification that thing, which was showed, which needed not
to be called bread and wine, because it was so to be judged by the bodily
senses. But then (says Sander) you correct the words of Christ, as though he
had said, This which is bread, is my body, and then every substance of bread
should signify his body. He that gives the true meaning of Christ's words,
does not correct them, neither do we refer the Pronowne This, to the
general substance of bread, but affirm, that it demonstrateth that bread
only, which he at that time took for to make thereof a Sacrament. And whereas
it is translated in Latin: Hic est sanguis, the Greek retains the Newter
gender. And an Adjective between two Substantives of diverse genders, may
agree with either of them, but that the Pronowne This, is to be referred to
the wine, the other Evangelists do show, which utter it thus, this cup,
that is, the wine in this cup. And whereas Cyprian says, haec est caro mea,
he might as well have said, pointing to bread, hoc est caro mea, or hic panis
est caro mea, and yet his words, as he utters them, have none other meaning,
even as Moses speaking of the rainbowe in the person of GOD, says, Hoc est
signum foederis, etc. This is the sign of the covenant, where hoc agreeing in
gender, with signum, does yet demonstrate the rainebowe, which is there a
Nowne of the Masculine gender.

Moses speaking to the Israelites of Manna, Exodus 16. says: Iste est panis,
quem dominus etc. This is the bread, which the Lord has given you to eat.
In the Latin, the pronowne This, agrees with panis, which is the Masculine
gender, yet does it demonstrate, Man, which is the Newter. Therefore this
grammatical discourse, of genders of nownes, Adjectives and their
Substantives, serves to no purpose, to prove that bread and wine were not
poynted in the words of Christ by the Pronowne This.

CAP. V.
That the Pronowne (This) cannot point to any certain acts, Sander.
which is a doing about the bread and wine.

The Pronowne (says he) is of the singular number, and therefore it cannot
signify many things, done about the bread, as taking, breaking, blessing,
etc. and seeing it can point but one thing, it can point no one act
certainly. To this ridiculous argument, I answer, that the Pronowne (this)
does demonstrate that bread, with all actions, and accidents belonging to it,
so that the sense is: This bread thus taken, blessed, broken, given, eaten, is
my body, that is (as Tertullian, and Augustine say) a figure or sign of my
body, even as the Lamb is said to be the Passover, but not a Lamb nakedly
considered, but with all circumstances and actions to it belonging: such a
Lamb, so taken, killed, the blood so sprinkled, the body ^osted, eaten,
standing with staves in their hands etc, this is the Passover, that is, a
Sacrament of the Passover. You see that the Pronowne being the singular
number, may demonstrate a singular substance, but with all actions belonging to
it.

CAP. VI.
That the Pronowne This, points finally to the body and b^^^d Sander.
and particularly signifies inChristes supper one certain kind of food.

He takes for proved, that which is proved to be untrue, Fulk.
that the Pronowne This, points not the bread and wine, and thereof
concludes, that it points only the body and blood: but the first is false,
ergo, the later. But if you be so hasty, says Sander, that you will not
tarry the speaking of four words, to know what particular and final
substance the Pronown This, does point unto, then this does mean, this
eatable thing. Sir, our haste is not so great, but we can stay a much longer
time to know our masters meaning: But seeing you bear us in hand, that one
substance is made of another, by these words spoken, which ask a time in
speaking, and you your selves determine at what instant the change is soudenly
made al at once, and would prove the same by the Pronowne This, and every other
of the words, you must give us leave to consider every moment of time, in
which they are spoken. For then every word is true, when the things whereof
the words are signs, agree with the word, in that time in which they are
uttered: for this proposition, every man is dead, cannot be true, because every
man shall die, before every man be dead. And to that you say, This, means
this eatable thing, I affirm, you are never the near: for, if there be not
bread, what thing is there eatable before it be the body^ and the body it is
not, before the words are all uttered. If by an eatable thing, you mean Duns
his indiuiduum vagum, then you renounce your former position, so often
aduouched, that the Pronowne This points to a certain substance, and so you
are rapped on the sco^se on both sides, and with your own staves.

CAP. VII.
The naming of the chali^e proves not the rest of Christ's Sand
words to be figurative.

He were a mad man that would reason so: that because Fulke.
one word is figurative, all the rest must be figurative: but this is a good
argument: one word is figurative, ergo more may be, and figurative speeches are
net inconvenient to be used in the institution of a Sacrament. Therefore Sander
might have spared his seven reasons, which he brings to prove, that the
naming of the chalis proves not all the rest of the words to be figurative.
But the naming of the chalis, the new Testament in his blood, does inuincibly
prove, al ye other speeches to be figurative. For the same sense is of these
words: This is my blood: and of these, This cup is the new Testament in my
blood: but ye sense of these latter words is figurative, not only in respect of
the word chalis, but of the new Testament in his blood: ergo the sense of the
former words is figurative. And whereas Sander says the Apostles could not
conjecture, that est, was put for significat, which few but great doctors can
discern, token of things, to be sometime called by the names of things
themselves: I say he does the Apostles wrong, who being brought up in the
daiely exercise of the Sacraments of the law, could not be ignorant, that the
Lamb was called the Passover, whereof it was a token, and circumcision the
covenant of God, whereof it was a seal, and so of many other: but these two
were their principal Sacraments, unto which with us, baptism and the Lords
supper does answer.

CAP. VIII.
That the words of Christ's supper be proper, though many other be figurative
and improper. Sander.


Why these words of our savior, This is my body, be not like other of his
sayings, in which he is said to be Fulk.
the door, the way, the true vine: John Bapt. to be Elias: or the rock, to be
Christ, he promises to declare in the last Chapter, which is specially
entitled against Master Nowels challenge, and by him thoroughly confuted. The
universal consent, that he boasts of, in discerning of figurative speeches,
can never be proved, to have received the words of Christ for proper. Two
reasons yet he alleges, why none of those propositions, does so much as seem
to sound, like the words of the supper. One, for that they name two several
natures as John baptist and Elias. That is false, for not naming John Baptist,
Christ says (...), This is Helias. The other, they speak not of any certain
thing, or else they point not to it as to a thing present. This is likewise
false, for Helias was a certain thing, and he that was pointed unto, by the
Pron^une, This, was present. Last of all, where he chalengeth us to show,
where that Proposition is figurative, which first instituteth and makes any
thing, I have showed before, that the propositions, which God uses instituting
and making the sacraments of circumcision and the Paschal, are figurative. For
speaking of circumcsion of the flesh, he says to Abraham, this is my
covenant, Genesis 17. And of the Lamb to be slain and used as he appoints, he
says, you shall eat it in haste, for it is the Passover of the Lord. These
are words of institution, yet are they figurative, for circumcision was not the
covenant, nor the Lamb the Passover, but figuratively seals, signs, and
tokens of them.

CAP. IX.
It is showed by 27 circumstances of Christ's supper, that he Sander.
made his real flesh and blood present, under the forms of bread and wine,
and consequently, that his words are proper. The first circumstance of Christ's
last supper, is to consider who made it.

How necessary the consideration of the circumstances of every place of
Scripture is, for the true understanding Fulke.
thereof, every wise man will acknowledge, but no circumstance alone, nor all
the circumstances together, do prove these words of Christ to be proper and
not figurative. As first we acknowledge ye maker of the supper to be almighty,
to do whatsoever it pleased him, but although he were sent in the flesh to men
that were flesh, promises his flesh, and gives his flesh, all which we
constantly believe: yet it follows not, that he purposed to give his flesh in
the Sacrament, after his incarnation, otherwise then he gave it to the
Patria^kes, before his incarnation. Acknowledging also the providence, wisdom,
truth, and goodness of the speaker, we affirm, that he speaks here most
wisely, prouidently, truly, and well, but yet figuratively, without that he
does blind his spouse with figurative words (as Sander says) which he does no
more, then God blinded his spowse, the Church of Israel, with figurative
words; when he spoke figuratively in the institution of the Sacraments of
circumcision, and of the Paschall lamb.

The second circumstance may be to consider the time when Sander.
the supper was made.

The consideration of the time, which was the night Fulke.
before he suffered, forbad him not, to use figurative spech sufficiently to be
understood, by the usual phrase of the scripture, speaking of Sacraments.
And therefore he said, This cup is the new Testament in my blood: neither is
he to be burdened, with the misunderstanding of heretics, which upon color
of his words, imagine a presence, that can not stand with the truth of his
body, like unto our bodies, contrary to other manifest places of scripture
Heb. 2. Phil. 3.

The third circumstance concerning the persons who were a^ Sander.
the last supper.

The Apostles that were present, have sufficiently in their writings testified
those words to be figurative, Fulke.
although they have not expressedly said, they are figurative. S. Matthew
calling that which Christ drank and gave to be drunk, the fruit of yt vine,
which is not blood but wine, S. Paul. calling it bread, which is broken, etc.
and the cup the new Testament in his blood, beside many other arguments of
the nature of Christ's humanity, like unto ours in all substantial points,
which must of necessity enforce a figurative speech. And whereas Sander says,
that parables are spoken, so that men hearing do not understand: ergo Christ
spoke not in parables to his Apostles, to whom the mysteries of the kingdom
were known. The argument is naught. For although parables are to blind the
reprobat, yet are they to give understanding to the elect, and therefore Christ
spoke many things in parables, which are for better edifiyng of the Church
then if they had been spoken plainly and without all parable. Thirdly the
Apostles, which tarried at Caparnau^, by his doctrine there delivered, had
learned how to eat ye body of Christ and to drink his blood, not as Sander
says, really under the forms of bread and wine, but spiritually, by faith in
a Sacrament or mysteric.

The 4. circumstance, concerning the ending of the old Passover, and the
making of a new. Sander.


The ending of the old Passover, which was a sign, Fulke.
does no more hinder the institution of a new sign, which is not corporally,
that which it signifies, no more then the ending of circumcision, hinders the
ordeining of baptism, which is not actually that, which it represents. That
Sander denies Moses and Phinees to have eaten the flesh of Christ, because
the law brought nothing to perfection, it is a slender reason: for Moses and
Phinees did not eat the flesh of Christ, by virtue of the law, but by promise
of the Gospel, by force whereof, Christ was the same matter of salvation to
them that he is to us. Augustine says our Sacraments are signis diuersa, in re
quae significatur paria, diverse in signs, equal in the thing that is
signified. In Joan Tr. 26.

The fifth circumstance, concerning the preface which Christ made before his
supper. Sander.


The preface he speaks of, are these words of Christ: I have desired with
desire to eat this Passover with Fulk.
you, before I die. Which words he forces not whether they be referred to the
old Paschal lamb, or to the new. If they be referred to the new, Christ
desires only to eat his own body with his Apostles, as Chrysostom says,
to encourage them not to be afraid thereof, which he could not do by faith
only, therefore he did it really, wherein is none absurdity to eat it,
Angels feed of it, seeing other men have eaten their own flesh in a gross
manner, either for hunger, or for anger, or fancy, etc. To this I answer:
first if a liar could always remember himself, it should skill to Sanders
purpose, that these words should not be referred to the new Sacrament, for
then Christ in calling it, this pascall lamb, or Passover, should begin to
speak figuratively.

Secondly, I marvel, why he says, it is a thing clean impossible, that
Christ should eat it by faith. How did he at other times eat the Paschal
lamb? did he not eat it with faith? how was he baptized? did he not also
believe? Although Christ partaking the Sacraments instituted for sinful men,
had a singular manner of partaking, which no man else had, that is for the
profit of other, and not himself, who needed them not, yet there is no doubt,
but bearing our person, he did partake them with faith. For, of whom is it
said? he trusted in God, etc. Psa. 22. And to that which Sander says, he did
eat of it, as Angels feed of it, (which cannot be corporally, but
spiritually:) I agree with him, that it is no absurdity, so he will grant me
two things: the one, that he did none otherwise eat his body in the supper,
then he was borne again in baptism. The other, that it will suffice him, that
we so eat the body of Christ, as Angels feed of it, which are thereby
nourished and established in eternal life, and yet cannot receive his body
corporally into their spirits. As for the argument taken of other men, eating
their own flesh, for hunger, anger, or fancy, to prove that it is no
absurdity for Christ to eat his own flesh corporally, is very absurd. For
a^^eit, some men have eaten their flesh for hunger, ange^, or fancy, yet was
it an absurdity for them so to do. Then of an argument, which is
Consentaneum, to conclude negatiuely, it may be called absurdum absurdorum.
Again, if it had been none absurdity for men to eat their own flesh, for
hunger, anger, or fancy, yet no man did ever eat his whole body: and
therefore the absurdity of Christ eating his own body after that manner, is
not by their example avoided.

But if the desire of Christ (says he) be referred to the old Paschal Lamb,
yet was it in respect, that at the ending thereof, the new might be
instituted, which Chrysostom calls the truth, that was performed when the
figure was past, in Psa. 37. Lo Christ desires ye truth, which is his own
substance, which is the only meat, wherein God takes pleasure. To this I
answer, a desire is, of that which is absent, Christ's substance of his flesh
was never absent, since his incarnation: therefore it was not that which he
desired, but another truth of the old figures, namely, the sacrifice of his
death, of which the Apostle says: Christ our Passover is slain and offered
up. 1. Cor. 5. Again, where he says, his own substance united to his
godhead, is the only meat wherein God takes pleasure, he speaks contrary
to Christ, which says, My meat is to do the will of my father, and finish
his work, which was brought to pass in his suffering, which also he names
expressly in the words of ye preface. It was the last Passover, that he did
eat, before his suffering, so that this circumstance makes nothing for the
bodily presence.

The sixth circumstance concerning the love which moved Christ to institute this
Sacrament. Sander.


Even the same love moved him, which moved him Fulke.
to institute ye Sacrament of regeneration, neither in promising to give his
body, did he speak more, then he did perform. For he gave his body in
deed, and daily gives it to be received spiritually, under the sacrament of
bread and wine. But that he should give it by conversion of the elements
into his body and blood, love could not move him to give it otherwise, than as
it might be most profitable for us; and most honorable for him, and that was
to give it, spiritually to be received.

The seventh circumstance of washing the Apostles feet. Sander.


Because Christ washed his Apostles feet, the custom of the Church (says he)
has been, that all catholic Bishops and pri^si^ Fulke.
have used before they came to consecrate, to wash the very tops of their
fingers, not to handle bread and wine, for then Christ might have washed his
disciples hands before they had eaten the Paschall Lamb, at the eating
whereof was bread and wine, but clean consciences were sufficient for eating
of that bread and wine, but the other must have also the bodies purified, for
the more worthy receiving thereof. This is new diuinitiea, nd new Logike also
Christ washed his Apostles feet, therefore Bishops and Priests use to wash the
tops of their fingers before they consecrate, when it were more reason they
should wash the peoples feet, who by his saying, must have their bodies also
purified for the more worthy receiving This is a poor circumstance, to prove
yt Christ's words are not figurative.

The eight circumstance, concerning the place of the last supper. Sander.


If the house in which Christ kept his Passover, had Fulk.
been material, some of ye Evangelists would have noted yt it stood in Zion, as
well as Nicephorus and Damascen, who could hardly know the place, seeing
Jerusalem was utterly destroyed long before their time, and another city built,
not standing in place of the old Jerusalem. That a great and unaccustomed matter
was done in the house, so found by miracle, we confess, but that proves not
that Christ's speech was proper, because it was not abroad in ye temple or
synagogue, but in a close parlour. But where Sander says, Christ gave to every
one of his Apostles a loaf, under the form whereof, his own substance was
contained, it is against y^ scripture, which says, he brake the bread, he
gave them, against Cyrillus, which says he gave them pieces of bread, against
reason, that every one should eat a loaf of bread, although they were but small,
when they had supped twice before in that evening, at ye Paschall Lamb, and at
an ordinary supper. But if the table be real (says Sander) much more the meat
is real. We deny not, but the meat is real: that is real bread and wine to
the body, and the body and blood of Christ to be received of the soul: for,
if al things be real, why should not the bread and wine be real?

The ninth circumstance of the taking bread and wine. Sander.


Christ took bread and wine, who never touched the thing which Fulke.
he did not sanctify. Yes, he touched Judas lips with his lips, yet did he
not sanctify them. But he sanctified ye bread and wine to the use of his
supper. Neither went the virtue from him (as Sander says) by touching of his
garments, but by faith, for many at the same time, did not only touch him, but
thrust and throng him, yet they all received not virtue from him. Secondly, he
took unleavened bread, which was already figurative bread: therefore he goes
not about to do that was done already, to make it figurative bread. I answer,
the Paschall Lamb was eaten, and therefore the bread was common bread, although
unleavened, which was to be eaten seven days after. But what lets, if it
once figured one thing, but that he might take it to make it a figure of an
other thing? for Saint Paul shows that it figured sincerity and truth: now
it is a seal of the remission of finnes, by the death of Christ.

Thirdly, Christ taking bread and wine, points not to his Apostles, as though
he would consecrate somewhat in their breasts, (as Calvin dreameth) but in
bread and wine, we must seek the first work of his supper. And therefore,
Sander dreameth, that Christ meant to consecrate nothing in the Apostles
breasts. He begone with taking bread and wine, ergo he did work nothing in the
Apostles breasts. A sound reason, I promise you.

Last of all, this puts us in mind of that great Priest Melchisedek, as
Cyprian teaches. But the Apostle writing to the Hebrews, could have taught us
more certainly, if he could have seen any such comparison between Christ and
Melchizedeck. Heb. 7. And every sacrifice (says he) is changed in substance
from the former nature it had, sometime killed, sometime burned, sometime
eaten: therefore Christ must change the bread and wine into his body and
blood. If we should admit a sacrifice (as most of the old writers call the
celebration of the supper a sacrifice of thanksgiving) verily the change by
eating and drinking, were sufficient to make it answer to the change required
in a sacrifice, without transubstantiation, which was not used in any sacrifice.

The tenth circumstance of blessing. Sander.


First, when Christ blesses, it is not necessary, that he should make any
outward token of lifting up his eyes or Fulk.
hands, and least of all, with making the sign of ye cross, as Sander
dreameth waking. And although, when he bless, he speak, by the way of doing
or best^^ing some real benefit, it follows not, but that his speech may be
figurative, which is not always imperfect, as Sander says, but being well
used, is better then common speech. Although what blessing means in this
place, the other Evangelists do declare, which call his blessing,
thanksgiving. And yet I deny not, but Christ blessed the bread and wine, which
he sanctified, to be a divine sacrament of his body and blood, for the
assurance of remission of sins, by the new testament, which is established
in his blood.

The eleventh circumstance of giving thanks.

The best thanks (says he) are those, that are given in Sander.
word and deed: therefore Christ gave not thanks figuratively, Fulke.
neither be the words of thanksgiving figurative, as the Sacramentaries say:
The words in which Christ gave thanks, are not expressed, and therefore ye
Sacramentaries say not that they are either figurative or proper. But Sander
would have these words, This is my body, to be the words of thanksgiving,
because Irenaeus says, Panem, in quo gratiae act^e sunt, corpus esse domini,
that the bread, in which thanks is given, is the body of our Lord: as
though thanks could not be given, but by those words only, which are not
words of thanksgiving to God, but of declaring to men, how to esteem that
which Christ gives, namely as a true pledge of his body and blood: as if one
delivering the broad seal to a condemned man, say, this is a pardon for you.
That Christ gave thanks to God both in word and deed, not only at this
time, but at all times, there is no question: for in all things he was
obedient to his father, even to the most curssed and shameful death of the
Cross: neither was it necessary, that he should make transubstantiation, so
often as he gave thanks in word and deed. Neither are those our ancestors,
which denied the sacrament of Eucharistie or thanksgiving, of whom Igna^tius
spoke: for we both receive it, and believe it to be the flesh and blood of
Christ, in such sense as he meant it, and as Ignatius took his meaning.

The twelfth circumstance of breaking. Sander.


First Sander finds fault with the order of words Fulke.
used by all the Evangelists, in placing breaking, before the words of
consecration, because Saint Paul says the bread which we break, is the
communion of the body of Christ: which is no good argument: for Saint Paul
thereby shows, that the bread is not altered from his substance, although it
be used for a Sacrament of our spiritual communication of Christ with us, and
of us one with another. 1. Cor. 10. But he will salve the matter, by saying,
the Evangelists first join all the deeds of Christ together, and then
express his words.

The deeds, he says, are taking bread, blessing, thanksgiving, delivering:
mark yt here he makes blessing, and thanks giving to be only deeds, which
imediatly before he affirmed to be by saying, This is my body. But howsoever
our adversaries are pleased with all (says he) let it go for a truth, that
Christ did break, and give, after the words of consecration. Thus when he has
nothing to prove it, a stark lie must go for a truth, contrary to the order
observed by all the Evangelists, because that order is contrary to Popery, and
the Popish custom, which first consecrateth, and then breaks. But taking it
for a truth: the breaking of that which appeared bread, does show Christ to be
wholly contained in every piece thereof, whereas Christ eaten only by faith, is
received according to ye measure of every man's faith, which is more or less,
contrary to the figure of Manna. I answer, whole Christ is received by every
one, that receives the bread and wine in what quantity soever, although
Christ bestow not his graces equally. For Christ does dwell in our hearts by
faith: ergo he is wholly present by faith, Ephesians. 3.

And this means Hieronyme in the place by Sander cited aduers. Iouin li. 2.
after he had spoken of Manna. Et not etc. And we also take the body of
Christ equally. There is one sanctification in the mysteries of the master and
servant, etc. although according to the merits of the rec^iuers, that is made
diverse, which is one. By merits, Hierom means not works, but worthiness of
faith, by which the grace of God is effectual unto good works, in some more
than in other. Neither has Eusebius Emissenus aniething contrary to this
meaning, Homil. 5. in Pasch. Hoc corpus etc. This body when the priest
ministers, is as great in the small piece, as in the whole loaf. Of this
bread when part is taken, every man has no less, then altogether: one has
all: twain has all: more have all, without diminishing.

These words (says Sander) cannot be understood of material bread, nor of
inward grace, neither of which are equally received. But yet Christ and a seal
of this redemption is equally received, without change of the bread into
Christ. For Eusebius speaks of bread and a whole loaf, as Sander himself
translateth, bread is not the name of accidents, neither was there ever heard
of a loaf of accidents of bread: nor of breaking of accidents of bread,
before the Laterane Council. But what says Germanus Archb. of Constantinople?
Post eleuationem, etc. after the elevation, by and by, a partition of the
divine lody of is made. But truly although he be divided into parts, yet he is
acknowledged and found undivided, vncutt, and whole in every part of the
things, that are cut. Where he says, the divine body is parted, he means
the bread, which is called his body, for the Greeks to this day, do not
acknowledge transubstantiation. Although the authority of Germanus be not
worth the standing upon, being but a late writer of a corrupt time.

But what speak I of fathers, says Sander? The bread which we break, is
it not the communicating of our Lords body? Because we being many, are one
bread, one body. For so much as we all partake of the one bread. If the
bread be broken, (says he) how partake we all of one bread? that which is
broken, is not one in number. No sir, but it was one in number before it was
broken, whereof when every one received a part, we understand that we all
pertain to one whole. But the Corinthians (says he) have more then one loaf
broken among them. How prove you that, sir? the words of Paul seem
otherwise, and if they had twenty loaves, yet was it al one bread in kind,
whereof the Apostle said, we all partake of one bread: which if it be not
material bread, how is it broken? for the body of Christ is not broken. And
Saint Paul, saying we partake all of one bread, which is broken, means not
yt the visible Sacrament, is nothing else but many accidents, and no bread at
all.

The thirteenth circumstance of giving. Sander.


Sander will have the words of consecration to go before the delivery of the
bread, contrary to the order of Fulke.
all the Evangelists: for else Christ should not give a sacrament, and he
promised to give his flesh, etc. I answer, he gave a Sacrament, and his flesh
at his supper, although the Sacrament were not perfect in every singular
action that belonged to it, but in the whole. Where he says, the meat of
Christ's supper came from his hands, and that it is horrible blasphemy, to say
it came another way, because he only says it, it shall suffice plainly to
deny it. He gave bread and wine from his hands, but he gave his flesh and
blood, from his eternal spirit, which gives life unto his flesh, and the
working of the holy ghost, the third person in Trinity, makes it to be
effectual, which God the father by his son Jesus Christ, gives us in his
supper.

Now he alleges Saint Mathewe, Saint Mark, Saint Luke, and Saint Paul,
which say, he did give with his hands, and seeing in Saint John he had
promised to give his flesh to be eaten, what other perfourmance of his promise
is there, then this gift by his hand? and here he asks what other Gospel
we can bring forth, wherein Christ fulfilled at any time his promise there
made? and here he craves pardon to cry out upon false preachers; Ye cruel
murderers of Christian souls, where is that meat given, but at Christ's
table, etc? Thou false hypocrite and errant traitor, and murderer both of
Christian bodies and souls, we have no Gospel, but the Gospel of Christ,
written by his Apostles and Evangelists. But thou contrary to the order of all
the four witnesses, which thou namest, thou, I say, defendest the giving to
be after the saying. And whereas they all say, he gave that he took, and he
took the substance of bread, thou denyest that he gave the substance of
bread.

Thirdly, where Christ says, The bread which he will give, is his flesh,
which he will give for the life of the world, which was on ye cross, thou
affirmest, that he gives it only at his supper. And last of al, whereas he
gave presently, which then presently was eaten, when he said, he that eats me
etc. thou restrainest his gift only to his supper, wherein, although he gave
that before he promised, yet he gave it not only there, nor first there, nor
there with his hands, but with his spirit joining with his hands, that gave
the external signs. For of giving by hands only, without his spirit, it may
be truly said, The flesh profits nothing, Ioh. 6. And therefore the Apostle
speaking of the oblation of Christ's body on the cross, says, he offered
himself by his eternal spirit. Heb. 9.

The fourteenth circumstance of saying. Sander.


Words are used for profit, and for necessity, therefore the words of God
are greatly to be regarded, and Fulk.
especially, the words concerning the sacrament, which is an hidden mystery,
and therefore has need to be declared by words: but the Sacramentaries
looking to Christ's deeds, as taking bread, etc. trust not his words, saying,
This is my body, testified by four of his disciples. Yes master Sander, those
whom you call Sacramentaries, trust them better, and more certainly believe
them to be true, in that sense which Christ did speak them, than you popish
transubsta^tiators do in your popish error, which to make your selves
godmakers, of arrogancy and covetousness, you defend among the ignorant. But
deeds, except they be expounded by words (says he) may have many
interpretations: And the deeds of the last supper, seem to him to be
undoubted parables, which the words expound, and therefore be no parables: for
mere figurative words expound nothing. Who is so madd to grant to Sanders
see^ings, that the deeds of Christ in taking bread, blessing, thanksgiving,
breaking, giving, are parables? but ad^itte they were parables, why may not
mere figurative words, expound parables? Christ himself expounds the
parable of the tares, Matthew. 13. altogether by worde^ as mere figurative, as
these of the supper. He that sows good seed, is the son of man, the feeld
is y^ world: The good seed are the children of the kingdom: the tares are the
children of the wicked. The enemy is the devil, The harvest is the end of
the world, The ^^^pers are the Angels. And yet it is so strange a matter to
Sander, that a mere figurative speech should expound a parable, who thinks
and says, that this reason alone ought to persuade any man.

But he will bring a greater reason: the words of the supper, give substance
to the deeds, for no Sacrament can be made without words, ordained of God.

If I should urge this rule against five of your Sacraments. I might easily
prove them to be no Sacraments, because they have not words ordained of God
to give substance of Sacraments to the external deeds. Well, the word of
Sacrament (says he) must be common and known, therefore not figurative. I
have showed often before, that Circumcision, and the Paschall Lamb were
instituted by such figurative speeches, as these words, This is my body, This
is my covenant. This is the Passover, baptism is regeneration, etc.

The fifteenth circumstance of take. Sander.


Christ bad all the twelve take: ergo (says he) he had Judas to take that
which he called his body, which was either bare bread Fulke.
a figure of Christ, or his body under the forms of bread. For an ^ff^ctuall
sign no man corporally took, because Judas rock that the rest took* and a
bare sign, Christ was not sent to give, n^r only spiritual gifts, which were
given to the old p^triarke^, who took his manhood to leave us corporal
means and (...) of grace, which might work upon our souls, etc. I have
proved before, that Judas was not present ^t the supper, but (...) b^^n p^es^^^
(as somti^^ there are as (...) as he) yet nothing is gained by t(...), (...)
Christ gave bread a^^ (...) of his body and blood crucified and shed for
remission of our sins. And what inconvenience is it, if one as ill as Judas
receive this effectual sign, which has none effect in him, because he
rejects and contemns it? Is not the Queens broad ^eale an effectual sign
of her pleasure, which a traitor may receive into his hands, contemptuously,
and break in pieces maliciously? But Augustine says, Ep. 162. Our Lord
suffers Judas to receive among the innocent disciples, that which the
faithful know, our price. Against Augustine, who says he was present, I
oppose Hilarious, which says he was absent, in Math. Can 30.

Against Sanders exposition of these words, our price to be nothing else, but
the body of Christ, and not only a Sacrament thereof, I oppose Augustine
himself to expound his own meaning, who says of the rest of the Apostles,
and of Judas, Illi manducabunt panem Dominum, ille panem Domini contra Dominum.
In Fuan. Joan. Tract. 59. They did eat the bread which was our Lord, he did
eat the bread of our Lord against our Lord.

The sixteenth circumstance of eating. Sander.


Christ says, eat ye once only, meaning that they should eat bodily, that
he gave them, and eat it also spiritually. Fulke.
This I allow, for under the sign of bodily eating, ^e willed them to be
assured of spiritual participation of his flesh and blood and all benefits of
his passion. But this will not satisfy Sander, but seeing he says, eat ye,
but once, he would have them to eat bodily the same substance, which they
should eat spiritually, which is no good argument. And therefore he is
shamefully graueled when he says, the verb eat, by this mean, stands not
improperly (for he can abide no figures) because eating, belongs naturally,
both to the soul and the body, which would make any Philosopher blush to
hear, but the reason more: because the cause of eating principally belongs
to the soul, and the mean principally to the body, which has instruments to
eat; for a dead body can not eat, nor a soul without a body can eat
properly. What say you Sander? is the soul the principal cause of eating, and
the body the isntrumental cause? By this means the soul goes, rides,
lies, speaks, leapeth, daunceth, and all whatsoever a dead man can not do.
Well, grant then this speculation: what then? what other spiritual eating can
be meant by this word eat ye, then by any other eating, for every man eats
whatsoever he eats, by this reason spiritually and bodily. Wherefore in
spite of your nos^, if Christ commanded his Apostles to eat spiritually, as
Christians use to speak, and not according to your physical argument, either
he commanded it by an other word, or else this word is improper. For to eat
by faith, is to eat improperly, and not to eat physically, as all other meats
are eaten.

The seventeenth circumstance of these words, This is my body. Sander.


He will speak of these words, but as of a circumstance, if the ^^^be Is,
import no more but a bare sign, Fulke.
Christ is greatly promoted, to give thanks for leaving a bare sign. I
answer, Christ gave not a bare sign, but his body to be spiritually received,
with a seal and an effect^^ll sign, but every figure and token (says he)
which d(...)th in substance from his truth, is always bare and naked in
respect of the truth it represents: M(...) ^^we the d^gge barketh against
the dignity of baptism, and all the Sacrament of the old time, and ca^^lleth
foolishly, by disioyning of things to be conioy(...)d. But Christ (says he)
having a body, presented not bread and wi^e, as figur^s of his body and blood
in (...)e to (...) ^^ther, and gave thanks for them. This is a p^lting
(...)ion of that in question, for we deny the Sacrifice pretended: yet Christ
at other times, gave thanks for bodily meat, much more now for spiritual
food of the soul, as the Sacrament is, being worthily received.

As for Melchisedek his Sacrifice in bread and wine, we find none that he
offered to God, but a refreshing to Abraham, whom in deed he blessed as the
Priest of God, and so has Christ blessed us with eternal happiness. Therefore
all this babbling of Sander, that Christ offered bread and wine, to his father,
which were all one as if a man should offer to a Prince a fat Ox, and give
him in a paper written, this is a fat Ox, etc. is not worth one Goats hear.
Christ offered but one Sacrifice propitiatory, and that but once, shedding his
blood, the great mystery of which redemption, he delivered to his Apostles in
the outward creatures of bread and wine. But let us see, how he proves,
that these words are not figurative.

First Ambrose says: In the divine consecration, the self words of our Lord
and Savior do work, and Chrysostom says, that by this word, This is my
body, the things set forth, are consecrated. but figurative words work
nothing, therefore they are not figurative. This minor is a stark lie often
times confuted: These words in the very institution of the supper, are
figurative, This is the new Testament in my blood, and yet work as much as
these, This is my body. Likewise the words of Christ, are spirit and life,
therefore not figurative, is a beastly argument, unworthy answering, which would
deny al figurative speches to be ye words of Christ. As blockish and brockish
it is, that in these 4. words Hoc est corpus meum, we leave never a one in his
own signification, plucking them from their gender and case, when we expound it
thus: This does signify my body, which is a toy to mock with an Ape. For who
can expound a sentence in other words to keep the same case, and gender, and
kind of words always?

But it is a weighty matter, that Sander has observed in Saint Paul's order of
words, placing the Pronowne (...) next to the Pronowne (...), uttering the
words after this manner. This of me is the body: whereas the other
Evangelists say, This is the body of me. Verily, there is not here so much
odds, as between a milhorse, and an horsemill. But what is the great
mystery, that lies in this observation? forsooth it gives conjecture (such
as in the order of words may be had) that the Pronowne This, only rests and
ends his signification in the substantine Body, and cannot be referred unto
Bread. For it were an hard speech to say: this bread of me is the sign of
body. But if I say, this bread does signify of me the body, what other
sense has it, then if I say, this bread does signify the body of me? I
blame not Sander for scanning narrowly whatsoever is uttered in the scripture:
but in urging the composition of the Greek speech, which is not like the
English tongue, where there is no difference in sense, seeing the Latin
composition w^l well admit that which sounds hardly in the English speech,
Hic panis mei signum est corporis.

The eighteenth circumstance of these words, which Sander.
is given for you.

Sander plays the fool out of measure, to urge the Fulke.
accidents of grammar in a figurative speech. Saint Luke says, Hoc est corpus
meum, quod pro vobis datur. If you take corpus figuratively (says he) then the
sense must be, Haec est figura corporis mei, quae pro vobis datur: This is the
figure of my body, which figure is given for you, and so not his true body,
but a figure thereof was given for us. Sander thinks he has to do with young
laddes, that learn their accidents of grammar, which may perhaps wonder at
his learned collections. But what if we expound it thus, Hoc est corpus meum,
id est, figura corporis mei (as Tertullian does) and reteining the gender of
the Relative, say, quod pro vobis datur, This is a figure of my body, which
body is given for you?

Sander has his answer ready, that the relative must repete his whole
antecedent, which cannot have at once both a proper and improper meaning. What
could Priscian, or Aristarchus have uttered more learnedlie?

But when God says in Gene. 17. Hoc est pactum meum quod obseruabitis inter me
and vos etc. This is my covenant which you shall observe between me and you:
etc. If pactum be taken for signum or sigillum pacti, the sign or seal of the
covenant, as it must needs be, for circumcision, whereof he speaks, was not
the covenant, how does the relative repete the whole antecedent? how has one
word a proper and improper understanding? Again Exodus 12, Haec est religio
phase, Omnis alienigena non comedet ex eo. This is the religion of the
Passover, No stranger shall eat of it. Here co is a relative agreeing in the
newter gender, with phase his antecedent, and yet phase the passover,
signifies a Lamb, which was the sign of the passover. Again when it is
said, Hoc est postr^mum pascha quod comedit Jesus cum discipulis: This is the
last* passover that Jesus did eat, with his disciples: has not quod the same
relation which it has in these words quod pro vobis datur? But to cut off all
these nice questions of Grammar, what if the figure be laid in the verb est,
after this manner, Hoc est, id est, significat corpus ^^um quod pro uobis
datur, this signifies my body which is given for you? Where is then our
Aristarchus become with his antecedents, and relatiues? But he has found
another mystery in the Greek word (...), which must needs be reserred to
corpus, and cannot be referred to figura corporis. And here he obtesteth,
that he may be instructed, wherein he does misconstrue the words. I have
already satisfied his request, and further I say, he does without all Grammar,
Rhetorike, Logike, Philosophy, and Divinity, refer hoc to corpus, which is
to be referred to that thing which he had in his hand, which by their own
Popish divinity could be nothing but bread before he had spoken out the
words of consecration.

As for him that will lay the figure in the Verb (...), to take it for
significat, Sander counts him an ignorant man, because it must be resolved
by est significant, and then the reason of signifying shall be found in the
nowne (body) rather then in the verb (Is:) for which cause Occolampadius
admitted either ye one or the other that is est, for significat, or copus, for
signum corporis. In deed the matter is not great, for the sense, but when you
call us to construing the words by Grammar: But taking the proposition thus:
Hoc est significans corpus meum, I say the reason of signifying consists not
in the word Body, but in the subject of the proposition, which is the sign
of the body, although significans follow the Verb est: For the action of
signifying pertains to the bread, the passion signified pertayneth to the
body. Where Sander challenges all the Grammarians in Christendom to find
another construction, I appeal to all the Grammarians in the world, whether
these words, Hoc est corpus meum quod provobis datur, may not be construed
grammatically, as well as these other examples out of Genesis, Exodus, and a
thousand more of like, that might be added.

The 19. circumstance of the Verb facere, to do, or make, or to offer
sacrifice. Sander.


The Verb facere, which signifies most generally making and doing, he will
have now to signify, offering Fulke.
sacrifice, because that is the most excellent deed, that can be made, which
is a mad reason, if Christ, which does always the best things, should be
said to offer sacrifice so often as he said facere. For every thing that he
did, was the best, in all respects, that he did it. But to prove that facere
signifies sometime to offer sacrifice, he quoteth two places of Scripture, but
reherseth neither of both for shame: the first 3 Reg. 18. Where Elias says to
the Baalites, ego faciam bouem alterum: Where facere signifies not to offer
sacrifice, but to prepare or dress, or make ready an ox; or at the least, is
taken for interficere, to kill an ox, which afterward is laid on the wo^de
and offered by invocation. The other place Leu. 15. is of two turtle Doves,
faciet vnum pro peccato, and alterum in holocauslum, he shall prepare the one
for a sin offering, and the other to be a burnt offering, where facere
signifies, as before, to make ready by killing, drawing washing, and dressing
as the Law prescribed. The same Hebrewe verb (...) which is used in both
places, being spoken of the Calfe, that Abraham made ready for his guestes,
the old interpreter turns by the verb coquo. which signifies to dress as
a cook dresseth. Genesis. 18. Wherefore we have not yet found facere in the
scripture, for sacrificare to offer sacrifice. But Sander saying it sk^leth not
whether it be joined with another word in the accusative, or ablative case, or
stand alone, does insinuate, that although in scripture it cannot be proved
to have that signification, yet in some other writer, it is used for
sacrificare, joined with a nowne of the ablative case, namely in Virgil, Cum
faciam vitula pro frugibus, ipse venito, where yet a good Grammarian will not
construe facere absolutely to sacrifice, but understand oblationen, or rem
di^^nam, or some such like word. But in our text the circumstance of deeds
and words (says he) do make it so to signify. First because the 14. day at
evening he began the blessed sacrifice of his passion. Secondly, he has
offered the old Paschal Lamb, the chief sacrifice of the Law. These two
circumstances, show it was time to go about his only sacrifice on ye cross,
they prove not yt he offered another sacrifice at ye table. Thirdly hetoke
bread and wine into his hands, part of the sacrifice of Melchisedek. I
answer, the scripture tells us not of any such sacrifice of Melchisedek.
Fourthly, he blessed and gave thanks, wherein he consecrateth his own body,
the only sacrifice of mankind. I answer, his own body had no need of
consecration: he consecrated bread to be a sacrament of his body, which was
not the only sacrifice for mankind, which was but once and no more offered, or
to be offered. Not that he should oftentimes offer up himself, says the
Apostle. Heb. 9. ver. 25. wherefore his commandment hoc facite, do this, is
not to make a sacrifice of Christ's body, which he made not. But Cyptian
(says Sander) takes the verb facere so, lib. 2. Ep. 3. Jesus Christus etc.
Jesus Christ our Lord and God himself is the hiest priest of God the father,
and first has offered sacrifice unto God the father, Et hoc fieri (...) sui
commemorationem praecepit, and has commanded this thing to be done in his
remembrance. That fieri signifies here not offerri, but generally has
relation to all yt Christ did: not only the whole argument of the Epistle
which was against ministering with water only, but also the very words
following, which Sander has fraudulently cut off, declare sufficiently, vtique
ille saccrdos vice Christi vere fungitur qui id quod Christus fecit, imitatur
etc: Verily that Priest does truly supply the room of Christ, which imitateth
that which Christ has done: and then he offers a true and full sacrifice to
God the father in the Church, if he so begin to offer, according as he may see
Christ himself to have offered. Nay, that Cyprian means not that Christ in
his supper did offer his own body in sacrifice to his father, for redemption
of he world, but only a sacrifice of thanksgiving, and commanded the same
to be kept in remembrance of his passion. Cyprian himself testifies in the
same Epistle. Et quia passionis eius mentionem in sacrificijs omnibus facimus
(passio est enim domini sacrificium quod offerimus) nihil aliud quam quod ille
fecit facere debemus. And because we make mention of his passion, in all
sacrifices (for the sacrifice which we offer, is the passion of our Lord) we
ought to do nothing, but that which he himself did.

Note here the sacrifice which Cyprian offered, was the passion of Christ: as
well as the body of Christ, but it was not the passion of Christ properly,
therefore it was not the body of Christ properly. I might allege other places
out of that Epistle, to refell the impudency of Sander: but this is
sufficient, that neither facere in Cyprian, signifies to sacrifice, neither
the body of Christ was otherwise sacrificed of him, then as it suffered in his
sacrifice.

The 20. circumstance of the pronowne Hoc. Sander.


Christ says, do, or make this thing, or as Haymo Fulke.
says. Make this body, for he says not, sic facite, do so, but hoc facite,
do or make this thing: I have answered sufficiently this making in the first
book, where Sander finds fault with our translation, whereunto I add that
which Cyprian writes, in the Epistle last mentioned. Nam si in sacrificio quod
Christus est, non nisi Christus sequendus est, vtique id not obaudire and
facere oportet, quod Christus fecit, and quod faciendum esse mandauit, cuns
ipse in Euangelis suo dicat, si feceritis quod mando vobis, iam non dico vos
seruos sed amicos. etc. If in the sacrifice which is Christ, none but Christ is
to be followed: verily that we ought to obey and to do, which Christ did,
and commanded to be done, seeing he himself says in his Gospel, if you
shall do that which I command you, now do I not call you servants, but
friends. In this saying, Cyprian refers the verb facere, to all things
that Christ did, and not to making his body. But if we should grant facere
to signify only to make, yet could Sander get no more of us by making, but a
sacrament of his body: yet for his exposition, he says, he has Justinius
Printed by Robert Steuens at Paris, Anno Dom. 1551. where he writes thus. The
Apostles in their commentaries which are called Gospels, have delivered, that
Jesus gave them thus in commandment, who when he had taken bread, and given
thanks, said, Do and make this thing, for the remembrance of me (...), that
is to say my body.

First Sander has put in more words then Justinius, for he has (...), for
which Sander gives Do and make, he might as well have added, and sacrifice.
Secondly the whole weight of the matter stands upon the error of the
Printer, omitting one small letter o, for in the next line continuing the
history of the institution, he rehearses the very words of Christ. This is
my blood, wherefore there is no doubt, but lustinus telling what Christ said,
does not only rehearse these words, Do this in remembrance of me, but also
these: This is my body, and so have all the translato^s taken it, as Sander
does confess. Neither does the process of Justinius, prove that he did write
(...), and not (...), because he said, before they took the meat, that was
consecrated by the word of prayer, to be the flesh and blood of Christ, for
that the Apostles do witness that Christ has given them such a precept, Hoc
facite, do or make this thing, that is to say my body: for he proves it by
the whole history of the institution, remaining in the commentaries of the
Apostles, in which it is written, that Christ said, Do this in remembrance of
me, This is my body, and likewise after he had taken the cup and given thanks,
that he said, This is my blood. This process therefore declares, what Christ
said, as well in the one part, as in the other, and therefore excludes the
vain cauillation of Sander, grounded upon a letter missing in one print, which
in other copies is not omitted, as all the translations declare.

The 21. circumstance, of the words, in meam commemorationem Sander.
for the remembrance of me.

The end of the institution was the remembrance of Christ's death, but that is
best remembered by the Fulke.
presence of him self, ergo he is really present: for Christ would make the
best remembrance that could be. I answer, Christ says in the remembrance of
me, and not only of his dying, but of me dying and redeeming. It is against
the nature of recordation, or having in mind, to have the thing remembered
actually present, and therefore Christ ordained the best memorial that could be
reteining the nature of recordation, and considering other circumstances to be
considered, as he did in all tokens yt ever he made, which were ye best that
could be devised, for God in all things does ye best: wherefore this reason of
Sand, would prove ye real presence of Christ in all sacraments, yt were before
his incarnation, as well as in this. And whereas Chrysostom says, Christ
himself is daily set before us, that we should not forget him: he means as
saint Paul to the Galathians, where he says, he was crucified among them, and
to the Corinthians, saying: his glory showed unto us, with uncovered face
which is by doctrine, more clear then the figures of the Law. Gal. 3. 2. Cor.
3. and not in the Sacrament only. Last of all, whereas a pot of Manna, was
commanded to be reserved for a memorial, unto the children of Israel, with
what bread the Lord had fed their fathers in the wilderness, to prove that
a thing may be the remembrance of it self: I answer, that it is nothing like.
For there a part of that visible food was reserved, for a sensible token of
remembrance, not of it self, but of that which was eaten being of the same
kind. But in this sacrament, there is no such matter, except we should
believe the tales of a bloody finger seen in the patten etc. as a part of the
whole body, etc. and the Papists confess, that Christ is not sensibly
present, as that Manna was.

The 22. circumstance of these words, drink ye all of this. Sander.


They all drank of one cup, Judas and al (says he) Fulke.
for if two or three had drunk up all, either Christ must have consecrated the
cup again, or the rest must have received a drink not consecrated, as they
do in England, when one cup is drunk up, an other is filled out of a
profane pot, that stands by: therefore this circumstance does show, that
more then wine is drunk. This conclusion shall be granted, of them that drink
worthily, without this circumstance, and of them that drink unworthily also,
for they drink judgment to themselves. But concerning consecration, Sander
imagines it to be a magical murmuring of words over yt wine which is present
in one cup. Whereas the consecration of Christ, and the ministers of England,
is a dedicating to the holy use of the supper, of so much bread and wine, as
shall be occupied in the celebration, and neither more nor less. But because he
says, it is not the will of Christ, that one Priest should consecrate in one
ma^^eany more then once, each kind of the sacrament, because Christ dyed but
once, and then both kinds together, because his blood and soul must be
signified, apart from his flesh and body. I ask him what large cup they
had, or how often in a day they said mass in the time of Leo, bishop of Rome,
when a great Cathedral Church, as big as Paul's Church in London, was diverse
times in one day filled with communicants? Leo Ep. 79. I marvel what vessel
of wine was consecrated to serve them all, if it be necessary to have it in
one cup when it is consecrated, as Sander seems to affirm, or else how
many cups they had standing on the table, that could suffice so great a
multitude, that all must drink of the blood of Christ, though there be diverse
chalices which hold it, when the people are many as Sander says, I doubt not,
understanding the blood of Christ sacramentally: but I marvel with what face
he can reprove our ministration with profane wine, if we did minister so as
he slandreth us, when he and his fellows do altogether rob the people of the
sacrament of Christ's blood, and give them nothing but profane wine.

The 23. circumstance of these words, this Sander.
is my blood.

Because it is in the common vulgar translation, Hic est Fulke.
sanguis meus, Sander makes not a little ado, that hic can agree with none,
but sanguis: but when the Greek is (...) Hoc of the newter gender, it may well
be translated this thing, and so the relation must be to the wine, like as the
other Evangelist render it (...) this cup, that is the wine in this cup: for
blood it cannot be, before the words of consecration, if they will hold their
own principles. And therefore the best interpreters, to take away cauilling,
turn it, Hoc est sanguis meus, This thing is my blood, as this thing is my
body, where est may still stand for significat. And yet I deny not, but hic
est sanguis and haec est caro, may well be used, as Cyprian does in the same
sense: for a relative between two antecedents, or an adjective between two
substantives of diverse genders, may agree with either of them without any
change of the sense, as in Genesis. Cap. 2. Adam says of the woman: Hoc nunc
os ex ossibus meis and caro de carne mea, haec vocabitur virago. This is now
bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh, she shall be called woman. Here the
Pronoune is of both the genders, and yet there was conversion of a bone into a
woman. Likewise God speaking of the Rainebowe, which is there the Masculine
gender, Genesis 9. says: hoc est signum foederis, where hoc agrees with signum,
yet the sense is hic arcus est signum, this bow is the sign. Absalom. Sam. 2.
Cap. 18. erected a pillar, called in the vulgar translation ti^^lum, which is
of the masculine gender, and thereof says: Hoc erit monimentum nominis, this
shall be the moniment of my name, meaning this pillar, and yet hoc agrees not in
gender with it. I might multiply examples, infinitely, if these were not
sufficient to show the vanity of Sander, which of the gender of the pronowne,
would prove the speech not to be figurative. Where he says, we build a
roof without walls or foundation, as Hierom says of heretics, that
neglecting ye literal sense, builded al their fantasies upon allegories: I
answer, we do not so but rather the Papists, which build a sacrament without
an element, denying bread and wine to remain in the supper, as for the
literal sense of scripture, we believe to be the only true sense, although
the words many times be improper and figurative, even as Sander himself both
in his rotten Rock, and in this book takes, this to be the literal sense of
these words, I will give thee the Keys of the kingdom of heaven, meaning
authority.

What the new testament is whereof the holy Sander.
scripture speaks.

A testament (he says) is a solemn ordeining of a thing by Fulke.
words confirmed by death of the testator, dedicated with a sacrifice, offered
to God bloudily. The new Testament is a covenant or truse made by Christ with
us, to have forgiveness of sins, if we keep his law. The blood of the old
Testament was put in a basen, the blood of the new Testament in a Chalice. I
omit, that he says, the promise of the old Testament was but of a temporal
inheritance, for keeping the law. But to return to the new Testament, which
he so handles, that there is neither rhyme nor reason in his argument. Three
things (says he) are required in a solemn Testament, the covenant,
bloudshedding, and application of the blood. When Christ says, This is my
blood of the new testament, either all these, or one of these may be called
the new testament. But when saint Luke, and saint Paul report Christ to have
said, This cup is the new testament in my blood, they seem (says he) to
take the word Testament, for the substance of the thing which does confirm
the new testament, and not properly for the new truse or promise thereof. What
say you, Sander? is there any improper speech in the words of consecration? is
a substance expressed by the name of an accident? where be the nownes,
pronownes, verbs, and paticiples; where be the relatiues, antecedents, cases
and genders, that fight for the proper sense of hoc est corpus meum? why serve
they not here? But hear a little more. This that is in the Chalice (says he)
is not the promise of remitting sins, but it is ye new testament in Christ's
blood: That is to say, it is the thing that confirms the new law. Why sir?
even now you told us that it might be called a new testament, as it is a law,
covenant, or promise. Will you make us believe, that the Evangelists reporting
one saying of Christ, which can have but one sense, in the one of them the new
testament is taken for a promise; in the other it is not taken for a promise?
But let it be the thing that confirms the promise: what thing is that I pray
you? His blood, you will say. Why then, the sense of these words, the new
testament in my blood, is my blood in my blood. This cup is my blood in
my blood: What sense is this? But Sedulius I trow helps you much in 1. Co.
11. Ideo colix etc. Therefore the Chalice is called the testament, because it
did bear witness that the passion should be soon after, and now it
testifies that it is done: although you are feign to alter the common reading,
and to put in testamentum for testamenti. How prove you by these words, that
Sedulius was of your mind? Alas he has nothing to say, but being taken with a
figurative speech, he slinketh away like a Dog that is whipped, with his
tail between his legs. For these words of Christ, This cup is the new
testament in my blood: if all the Grammarians in the world have them in
hand, to construe, cannot have a Grammatical sense, but must needs be taken
figuratively, and being so taken, chaseth transubstantiation out of the doors,
for the true sense of them can be none other, but this. This cup is a seal
of the new testament established in my blood, which is shed for the remission
of sins, and the like understanding must needs be of these words, This is my
body.

The 24. circumstance of the blood of the] Sande^.
new testament.

The blood of the new testament is the blood that confirms the new
testament, but that is real blood, Fulke.
therefore this is real blood, says Sander. I answer, the argument is
naught, because in one proposition, the speech is figurative, in the other
proper. But he replieth, that the old testament, had none other thing to
signify the blood thereof, but the blood of Calves, therefore the new
testament has nothing but the blood of Christ. I answer, the blood of
Calves and Goats was it self a figure of the blood of Christ, by which the
new testament is confirmed, and therefore, there was no figure of that blood
to be made. Heb. 9.

But S. Luke and S. Paul, by reciting the words otherwise, do so evidently
name blood in the proper signification, that no reasonable man will say, that
the name of blood stands figuratively for the sign of blood, saying, this
cup is the new testament in my blood. In deed I confess in this sentence,
the word blood, signifies properly, the blood of Christ, shed upon the
cross, which is that blood which answers the blood of the old Testament
and not that which is in the Chalice. But then the former words: This cup is
ye new testament, are figurative, for in proper manner of speaking the cup
was not, ^e is not, the new testament, but a sacrament or sign thereof, which
new testament was confirmed by the blood of Christ powered forth in sacrifice
upon the cross. This one sword is sufficient to cut the throat of
transubstantiation and carnal presence: for as much as Saint Luke and Saint
Paul, give the true sense of these words, This is my blood, which is shed
for you, which in effect is thus much to say, this is the sacrament or seal of
the new testament established by shedding of my blood on the cross. But
Sander can see nothing in Saint Luke and Saint Paul, but blood taken properly,
whereby he would prove, that in the speech reported by the other Evangelists,
blood should not be taken figuratively, which is as good an argument as this.
Blood in the exposition of a figurative speech, is taken properly, therefore in
figurative speech it self, it is not taken figuratively.

The 25. circumstance, of these words: This ^^ppe or Chalic^. Sander.


The cup (says he) is named to show the manner Fulke.
of fulfilling the old figures, in which the blood was put in a cup, as
Chrysostom and Oecumenius affirmed, and presently sprinkled. I deny not that
the cup might show the manner of fulfilling the old, figures of sprinkling of
blood in the sacrifices, but that was referred to the passion of Christ, and
not to the sacrament, for those bloody sacrifices, were figures of Christ's
bloody sacrifice, in which was fulfilled whatsoever they did signify, and not
in the supper. The supper, as Augustine says of all our Sacraments, is
diverse in sign, but equal in signification, with those ancient Sacraments
in Joan. Tra. 26. The putting of blood in the ba^en, did not show the pouring
of wine into the cup, as Sander trifleth, but they both did signify the
pouring forth of the blood of Christ upon the cross. But Oecumenius says,
that in steed of the blood of beasts, our Lord gives his own blood, and
that well in a cup, that he might show the old Testament to have shadowed
this thing before. I answer, that Occumenius a late writer, to whose
authority I am not bound, of the Sacrament, speaks sacramentally, ascribing
to the sign, that which is proper to the thing signified. Otherwise, there is
nothing in his writing to warrant transubstantiation.

The 26. circumstance of the verb est, left out in S. Lukes words. Sander.


Saint Luke leaves out the verb ^s, according to the Fulk.
phrase of the Hebrewe tongue, what verb will you bring in his place? (says
he) the verb significat you cannot, because (...) is the Nominative case, then
must you needs have the verb est: but as soon as it is in his place, shall it
immediately be cast out and changed into the verb significat, etc?

And here he amplifieth ye matter with such eloquence as Rhetorike will aford
him. But when you have spoken your pleasure of taking in, and casting out, of
compulsion and enforcements, of verbs substantive and adjective etc. I pray
you, what great piaculum is it, if being compelled to take in the verb
substantive to make perfect the grammatical sense, we be also enforced to
understand est for significat, to make good the logical sense? And how in Gods
name do you understand the verb substantive est, in these words of Saint
Luke: This cup is the new Testament, in your 23. circumstance, when you
expound it so, that you say, that which is in the cup, is not the new
Testament, which is the new truce or covenant of remitting sins, but the
thing which witnesses it to be confirmed? You will say, the figure is in the
words new Testament, and not in the verb es^. Then must I set upon you, with
your own weapons which you fight with all in ye 18. circumstance. I would
feign see the brazen face of Sander, with what countenance he would defend this
shamlesse stuff.

The 27. circumstance of these words, which is shed for you.

This cup is the new Testament in my blood, which Sander.
is shedd for you, says S. Luke. Here (says Sander) the Fulke.
relative, which, is referred to the Nowne Cup, and not to the Nowne Blood,
because (...) is the nominative case, and can not agree with (...), which is
the dative case, wherefore the sense must be the cup, that is, that which is
in the cup, was shedd for us. but the only real blood of Christ was shed
for the remission of our sins, therefore the only real blood of Christ was
contained in the cup. And here he asks what answer can be framed to this
argument, if hell were let loose. To the gra^maticall construction I have
answered sufficiently, in confutation of his rotten rock of the Romish Church,
unto the g. his 9. mark of an Antichristian. That if he will neither admit the
conjecture of Beza, that those words might, by error of the writers, be taken
into the text, nor that S. Luke uses the figure of Soloecophanes, in that
place, as in diverse other: yet at the lest, that the article prepositiue
stands for ye relative (...), as often it does, and that the verb (...) is
here understood, being left out as in the former part of ye sentence, For
howsoever it be, it can not be translated nor understood thus: This cup, that
is to say this blood, which is shed for you, is the new Testament in my
blood. For what sense can these words have? This blood is the new Testament,
and this blood is in my blood. And now to the argument in which seeing he
understands the speech to be proper, I deny the mayor or proposition. This
liquor in the cup of Christ's banquet was shed for us, and I prove it to be
false even by the words of Christ uttered by S. Luke and S. Matthew. The
fruit of the vi^e was not shedd for us, the liquor in the cup of Christ's
banquet, was the fruit of the vine: therefore the liquor in ye cup of
Christ's banquet was not shed for us. That Euthymius a late gatherer, refers
these words of shedding for us, to the cup, I force not, and yet he means
the cup to be his blood not really, but Sacramentally, even as his blood is
not there shed really, except the Papists will now give over their old
distinction of unbloody Sacrifice, to say that the blood of Christ is shedd
forth in the Sacrament, as Sander says it was presently shed in a mystery,
and the next day shed naturally. What misty speech is this? The natural
blood of Christ is shed in a mystery, if we speak after that manner, the
real body and blood of Christ is present in a mysterye, eaten and drunken in a
mysterye, etc. he cries out that we build a roof without a foundation of the
natural manner of presence and receiving. But he must be admonished that the
Greek word is (...), signifying which is shedd forth, and simply shedd, and
therefore the word has relation to the blood which in his passion was shed
forth of his body. which shedding forth of his body, if Sander will confess
to be in his Mass, he must utterly renownce the unbloody Sacrifice, so much
prated of among the Papists, for what else is a bloody Sacrifice, but that
whereof the blood is powered out or shed forth?

The last circumstance of the hymn said at Christ's supper.

We never read of any hymn said or song after any Sander.
feast, but this, and yet Christ gave himself by faith and Fulk.
spirit at the supper time, to some of his disciples, before that night as to
S. Marie at Bethanie, Joan. 12. therefore the hymn externally song or said,
was dew to this external work of God, wherein with his own hands, he gave
his own body and blood, etc. Because Sander confesses that this circumstance
above does not prove the real presence, I will take his confession, It may
not be denied but that Christ song or said the hymn at other times, although
it be expressed but this once. And if it were certain, that this was the first
and last that he song with them, yet there might be great and sufficient cause
of his joyful thanksgiving at this time, wherein he made an end of the old
ceremony, and having instituted a new sacrament of thanksgiving, was even
the same night to begin his passion, which was the principal caufe of his
coming into the world for the redemption of mankind. As for these
circumstances which he confesses, do not every one by them self prove the
real presence: when he can make an argument of them altogether able to prove
it, I will take in hand to answer it. In the mean time, as he has set them
down severally, I have answered, that never a one of them has any force of
argument to prove that he entendeth by them.

CAP. X.
The real presence of Christ's body and blood, and the proper meaning of his
words, is proved by the co^fere^ce of holy scriptures, Sander.
taken out of the new testament, and speaking of our Lords supper.

The places that he will confer, are three: first, John. 6. The bread which
I will give, is my flesh: and my Fulke.
flesh is meat indeed. The second, Math. 26. Take, eat, this is my body,
and, this cup is the new testament in my blood. The third, 1. Cor. 10. The
chalice of blessing which we bless, is it not the communicating of Christ's
blood* And the bread which we break, is it not the communicating of the
body of our Lord? Of these sentences Sander will confer every word together
which is not the right order of conference of scripture, to confer the words
whereof some are proper, some are figurative: but to confer the Logical
sense of diverse places together, which either are both manifest in their
several senses, or else may be made open by the circumstances of the places.
But to follow Sanders conference. In the first sentence he says, The bread
which I will give, is described in the supper, by these words, Take, eat
(this:) and in S. Paul is called, The bread which we break. But I utterly
deny, that the words of Christ in Saint John, are all one with those of the
supper. And therefore the referring of this to an eateable thing or food etc
is not showed by that conference. But S. Paul and Christ. Matthew. 26. speak in
deed both of one matter, namely by the sacrament: Christ in S. John speaks
of that meat which tarrieth to life everlasting, but the sacramental meat
does not so: for according to the earthly part of it, as Origin affirms, it
goes the same way that all other meats do. Ille cibus qui sanctificatur,
etc. That meat which is sanctified by the word of God and prayer, according to
that which it has material, goes into the belly, and is cast out into the
dunghill, Origin, in Matthew, cap. 15. And according to the heavenly part which
is the body of Christ, by the Papists confession, it tarieth not in the wicked,
nor in the godly in substance, but in effect as Sander told before, therefore
Christ in S. John speaks not of the sacramental meat.

Secondly, the breaking of the bread, which is done before the words which the
Papists account the only words of consecration can show the pronowne this,
to signify no material substance but bread: although Sander affirm, the
breaking to be after, because it is so used in the popish Mass. Again when
the Apostle says the bread which we break, he speaks plainly of a thing that
is broken actually, but so is not the body of Christ: as for Sanders shift of
that food, and that eatable thing, which we break, is but a cloak of words,
for if yt food be the natural body of Christ, and that food is naturally
broken, then the natural body of Christ, is naturally and really broken. Last
of all, ye conference of this and this cup, to prove that this, means
generally ye substance under this, is not worth a chippe, for these words this
cup, do not mean a general metaphysicall substance, but the wine in this
cup which is also called the fruit of the vine, and therefore This in the
other saying, signifies yt substance only, which was in his hand, which was
bread, and by their own doctrine could be no other substance but bread, before
hoc est corpus meum were said all out, over it. The verb, is, in the words of
Christ, The bread which I will give, is my flesh, although it respect the
natural flesh of Christ, yet it proves not, that the verb, is, in the
supper must be referred to the son, more then the same verb in Saint Paul
the Rock was Christ: yet because you may see what a foolish conference Sander
makes of words, I will reason with him in his own sense, and overthrow him
in his own conference.

I say not (says Sander) that the bread shall be, but the bread is my flesh. If
the bread is his flesh, then his flesh is the bread: and if the word, bread,
signify an eatable thing, as we have been often told, then ye flesh of Christ
is an eatable thing, when he so says: and consequently, the flesh of Christ,
which he said he would give for the life of the world, might be eaten before
the institution of ye Sacrament. The word communicating, is the next matter of
conference, which being used of S. Paul, does interpret the verb Is, to
signify a substantial, and not an accidental being: for communicating does
show, that all thing is common between it and Christ's flesh: no division, no
separation, no distinction comes between these two, but a bar^ sign of
bread can make no such communicating, because it is clean of another kind,
etc. That Sanders argument may be the stronger, he disputes against that often
times, which we utterly deny. For we never said, that natural bread or a
bare sign, can make us to have communion with Christ, but the very body and
blood of Christ, yet not corporally but spiritually joined unto us, of which
communicating, the bread and wine are effectual seals and sacraments. As for
Sanders assertion, of communicating to signify all thing common between Christ
and us, not only without division, but even with out distinction, is horrible
heresy, and detestable blasphemy. Saint John, Ep. 1. Cap. 1. uses the same
word often, saying, that we have (...) communicating with God the father, and
his son Jesus Christ, have we then all thing common with God the father, so
that there is no distinction between us and him? O intolerable blasphemy! The
same Apostle says, we have (...) communicating one with another, by which he
not only shows, that the word of communicating, signifies not all that
which Sander says it does: but also teaches, that our communicating with
Christ, and with ye members of Christ, is spiritual, whereof S. Paul speaks,
1. Cor. 10. We being many, are one body, etc. And last of all, that we have
this (...) or communicating by other means then by receiving the Sacrament.
That we have seen and heard, says Saint John, we preach unto you, that you
also may have communicating with us, and that our communicating may be with the
father and with his son Jesus Christ. Again, if we walk in the light, as he
is light, we have communicating one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ
his son, does purge us from all sin.

The last words of conference, are body and blood, for which he heapeth up so
many texts, as they are named in, and more then either they are named and meant
in, to prove that body and blood stand not for sign or figure of body and
blood, and in the end concludes, that because these words are taken
properly, therefore, to defend the words of Christ's supper to be figurative,
is ignorance in Grammar and Logike, blindness in divinity, malice inexcusable
in the day of judgment. But so long as it is but Sanders sophistical
conclusion, it is little to be regarded. what Logike, divinity, or conscience
he has that reasons thus, let all the Logicians, divines, and men of good
conscience consider, until Christ come and judge all things. The word body
in this saying: This is my body, is not figurative, therefore the whole saying
is not figurative. This, signifies a general thing, and not that thing in his
hand: Is, declares that to be presently, which is not until all the words be
said: body, is taken properly: Therefore the sense of this whole saying,
uttered together, cannot be figurative. But now we shall see conference of
other places of scripture. It is evident (he says) that John is not Elias, and
uses many arguments to prove it: yet will he admit no arguments out of the
present words, This is my body, to prove that the saying is figurative, as
well as, This is Elias. And yet there is more odds between the body of
Christ, and natural bread, then (he says) is manifest between John and
Elias. Secondly, The rock was Christ, must needs be figurative, because it
speaks of two diverse natures: as though bread and ye body of Christ were not
two diverse natures. But there is no conversion of any rock into Christ: for
Christ did neither say of the rock, This is my body, nor command us so to say.
Seeing the holy ghost says, the rock was Christ: who doubts, but that it
was so by the word of Christ, although not expressed by Moses? And seeing the
Apostle speaks so, in the time past, who will deny but that Moses or any man
by the authority of Gods words, at such time as the Israelites did drink of
it, might have said of the rock: This is Christ?

The other places which prove, ye absence of Christ in his humane nature from
the world, as the poor ye shall have always, but me you shall not have
always, He is risen, he is ascended into heaven, he sits at the right hand
of God, etc. Sander says, they deny not his invisible presence in the
Sacrament, nether is any thing impossible to God, and Christ sitting in heaven
is almighty, etc. But Christ does not only tell his Apostles, yt they shall see
him no more after his ascension, saying, I go to my father, and you shall see
me no more, John 16. ver. 10. but also he tells them plainly, and without
any parable, as they confess, that he leaves the world and goes to his
father. Io. 16. ver. 20. whereas if he had said, I depart out of the world,
when he only departed out of sight, and purposed still to be present
inuisibly, he had not spoken plainly, but very darkely. Whereas Chrysostom de
sacerd. lib. 3. says, it is a great miracle, that he which sits with his
father in heaven, at the same instant is touched with the hands of all men,
and delivers him self to those that will touch and embrace him. It is
manifest, he speaks of the heavenly mystery figuratively. For immediately
before he says: when thou see turbam circumfusam, pretioso illo sanguine
intingi ac rub^fieri, etc. the people standing about to be dipped and made
red with that precious blood: do thou think thou art still among mortal
men, and stand upon the earth? Art thou not rather immediately removed into
the heavens? Do thou not casting away all cogitation of flesh, with naked
soul and pure mind, look round about upon those things that are in heaven?
These words declare plainelye, that Chrysostom dreamed not of
transubstantiation, but spoke of a spiritual handling and receiving of Christ,
as of a spiritual dipping and making read the people with his precious blood,
and of feeding on Christ in heaven by faith. And so it is more wonderful, that
we in body remaining on the earth, do feed on Christ sitting in heaven, not
by bringing him down unto us, but by lifting us up unto him. The places of
scripture that Sander quoteth, as perteining to the supper, although they all
pertain not unto it, yet when he can make any argument out of any of them for
his carnal manner of presence, I shall easily answer it.

CAP. XI.
Why the Sacrament is called bread Sander.
after consecration

If Master Sander had first proved, that the Sacrament Fulk.
is not bread after consecration, we might easily have yielded to the reason
that might be brought why it is called, that which in nature it is not. As we
can yield many reasons, why the Sacrament is called the body of Christ, although
it be not the body of Christ in the nature of it: yet it is meet, that first
we prove that it is not his body after that manner, that the Papists defend,
and then show reasons why it is called by the name of that which it does
signify. But let us hear Sanders reasons.

First the Hebrew tongue, which the Evangelists and Apostles writing Greek,
does follow, uses ye name bread for all manner of food. Secondly, a thing is
called by the name of yt which it was, and not which it is, as Aarons rod is
said to have devoured the rods of the coniurers, yet was it turned from a
rod to a serpent. Exodus 7.

Thirdly, a thing is called not only as it is, but as it seems outwardly to
be: so the Angel which the woman saw at the sepulcher, is called a young man.
Mark 16. And in all these three respects, the Sacrament is called bread, when
it is not natural bread. For it is a kind of food, it was bread, and seems
to be bread. But I will prove, that in none of these respects, it is called
bread, but because it is natural bread in deed, without conversion of the
substance.

First, whatsoever is said in Saint John. Cap 6. is not particular to the
Sacrament: for bread is there taken figuratively for spiritual food, which
we have without the Sacrament.

Secondly, when S. Paul calls the Sacrament bread, after consecration, there
is no reason why the name of bread should not be taken for material bread,
changed in use, not in substance as the name of bread taken before
consecration 1. Cor. 11. and where the Apostle says the bread which we
break, he shows plainly, that he speaks of material bread, for the body
of Christ, nor spiritual food, nor general food are not broken. Secondly, in
the conversion of Aarons rod, there was a sensible change, there is none such
in the Sacrament. Thirdly, as the Angel had some appearance of a man in
external shape of body, so he had other manifest tokens in him that declared
him to be an Angel, and no man: but the Sacramental bread has in it all
tokens of material bread, and no sensible token of the body of Christ,
therefore the comparison is nothing like. The water turned into wine, was
judged by the taste to be wine and not water. There can be no such judgment in
the Sacramental bread: for as material bread it tastes, and partaketh all
accidents: yea, it nourishes, and corrupts, which neither bare accidents,
nor ye body of Christ does or can do.

The authorities that Sander cites, to prove, that the Sacramental bread, is
called the body and flesh of Christ, do not deny that it is material bread:
yea, many of the old writers, expressly affirm, that it is so. Yet let us
consider his authorities. Ignatius, Ep. 2. ad Romans says. Panem Dei volo, quod
est caro Christi: I desire the bread of God, quod, which thing is the flesh of
Christ. Verily, Ignatius says no more here, then Zwinglius said, which was no
friend to transubstantiation. Secondly, Justinius says, Hic cibus, etc. this
meat is called with us the Eucharist, or thanksgiving: and after he says: We
take not these things as common bread and drink, but we have learned that the
meat which is consecrated by the words of prayer, taken of him, to be the
flesh and blood of Christ. He that denies the Sacrament to be common bread,
does not deny it to be natural bread. And Justinius interlaceth that which
Sander omitteth, (...). That meat, of which our blood and flesh, by
transmutation are nourished, we have learned to be the flesh and blood of yt
Jesus, that was incarnate. That which nourishes our flesh and blood, is
material bread, although it be not common bread. Thirdly, Hilarie says: Nos
vere etc. we truly take the word flesh, in our Lords meat. The same Hilarie
says afterward: vere sub mysterio, truly, under 2 mystery, we receive the
flesh of his body. Fourthly, Cyprian, lib. 2. Ep. 3. says, Christ offered
bread and wine, that is to say, his own body and blood. Here Sander cutteth
off ye beginning of Cyprians words, which manifestly prove material bread and
wine: Obtulit hoc idem quod Melchizedech obtulerat, id est, panem and vinu,
suum scilicet corpus and sanguine^: He offered the self same thing that
Melchizedek had offered, that is to say, bread and wine, namely his body and
blood. Speak Sander, and tell us, was it not material bread and wine which
Melchizedek brought forth? the selfsame thing, says Cyprian, offered Christ,
which yet was his body and blood, after a certain manner. After what manner you
may learn, In these words, you have not only the spiritual manner, after
which the bread and wine are called his body and blood, but also the same
bread and wine, to be made of corns and grapes, which I trow ca^ be none
other but material bread and wine. Fifthly, Irenaeus says it is not now common
bread, but the Eucharisty. lib. 4. C. 34. The same Irenaeus in the same place
says: that Eucharistia ex duabus rebus constant, terrena and coelesti, the
Sacrament consists of two things, an earthly thing, and an heavenly. Likewise
he says, yt of the bread and wine, being made the Eucharisty, auge^ur and
consistit carnis nostrae substantia, the substance of our flesh is increased
and consists. lib. 5. that is not of accidents, nor of the real body of
Christ. Sixthly, Ambrose de Sacr. lib. 5. calls our daiely bread,
supersubstantiall bread, and yet I ween, it be still natural food of the
body. But he says more. Non iste panis est qui vadit in corpus: sed illa panis
vitae aeternae qui animae nostrae substantiam fulcit: It is not the bread which
goes into the body, but that bread of ever lasting life, which holds up the
substance of our soul. I like this saying of Ambrose, or whosoever writ that
book, very well. The Sacrament is not that bread which goes into the body,
ergo the Sacrament is not the natural body of Christ, which the Papists
affirm to be a kind of bread, that goes into ye body. Seventhly, Gregory of
Nyssa says, in vita Mosis, panis est, etc. It is bread provided for us,
without seed, without plowing, without any other work of man. But he says
immediately before, that it is received with a pure and clean mind, and is an
heavenly meat, therefore a spiritual food, spiritually to be received, and
not bodily Eighthly, S. Augustine Tra. 26. in Io^n says. when would flesh
understand this thing, th^^ he called bread flesh? In deed the spiritual
manner of nourishing, is not possible to be understood of the flesh, but ye
fleshly transubstantiation may be understood of every fleshly man. Ninethly,
Isychius in Leuit. li. 6. C. 22. names the bread which S. Paul says, is
eaten unworthily, nutritorem substantiae nostrae intelligibilis, the nourisher
of our spiritual substance. He means, if it be worthily received, otherwise
it is damnation to him that eats unworthily. Lastly, Sedulius in Op. Pasc.
says of the bread which Christ gave to Judas. Panem cui tradidit ipse, Qui
panis tradendus erat. To whom he himself gave bread, which bread was to be
betrayed. A great miracle, if a Poet speak specially. But now directy against
transubstantiation, speak many doctors. Origin says in Mat. Cap. 15. The
sanctified meat, by that which it has material, goes into the belly, and is
cast forth into the draught. Likewise, the matter of the bread profits not,
etc. Theodoret Di^l. 1. says, Simbola, etc. The symboles or tokens which are
seen, he honored with the name of his body and blood, not changing the
nature, but adding grace to the nature. Likewise Dialog. 2. he says, Manent in
p^iori substantia, the bread and wine after sanctification, abide in their
former substance.

Gelasius, a bishop of Rome, cont. Eutich. writes of the bread and wine in the
Sacrament: Et tamen esse non definit substantia and natura panis and vini. The
substance and nature of the bread and wine ceasseth not to remain.

These sayings with diverse other, are direct against transubstantiation, and
therefore lewdly does Sander abuse the readers with a number of places of the
old writers, to prove it, of which, not one of them has a reasonable color,
when it is examined.

CAP. XII.
The presence of the body and blood of Christin his last supper, is Sander.
proved by the conference of holy scriptures taken out of the old testament.

In deed of scriptures he brings either vain allegories Fulke.
and fantastical figures of his own brain, or else shamefully racketh ye
sentences of the old testament, to make them prophecies of transubstantiation,
which were not once spoken of the Sacrament. And first he slandereth S. Paul to
have said, yt to the Jews al things chanced in figures, where he says of such
things, as came to pass in the wilderness: all these things happened to them,
as figures or examples, and are written for our instruction. And although Saint
Paul had so said, as he reports, yet it follows not, that he may draw
their figures whither he will. He begins with the figure of Abel, whom he
makes the first shepeheard, Priest, Martyr, and perpetual Virgin, in all
which he would have him to be a figure of Christ. Although that he was the
first shepeheard, it is not like, for it is not to be thought that Adam
altogether neglected the feeding of Cattle, before Abel took it in hand: no
more then it is like, that he occupied no tillage, before Cainefell unto it.
But that he calls Abel the first Priest, it is utterly false. For Adam was
the first Priest, and received or God the law of sacrificing, which he
taught unto his sons: except Sander think, that Adam lived so many years,
without exercise of religion, until Abel and Caine were made Priests. For
Caine is named to have offered sacrifice as soon as Abel. Whereby it is
probable, that neither of them both, was Priest, but Adam the head of the
family, to whom they brought their several oblations, unto that place, which
was called the presence of the Lord, from whence Caine was bannished after his
murder committed. Concerning Abels virginity, I will not contend, although if
I should follow the Jewish traditions, as Sander does in his allegorical
comparison in diverse points, I must say, he was a married man, having to wife
his sister Delbora. But to the comparison Sander says, that Abell first
offered himself under the shape of other things, and after went forth to be
offered in his own person, being traitorously slain. This is nothing else,
but a drousie dream of Sanders sleep^e head. The sacrifice of Abel was a
figure of the sacrifice of Christ's death, and not of his last supper. Neither
did he offer himself, under the shape of his satte lambs, but he offered his
lambs in sign, that God by the mediation of Christ's death, should accept him.
Neither did Abel go forth of purpose to be offered in his own person, when he
was murdered, as Christ did, neither was the death of Abel a sacrifice, whose
blood cried vengeance, whereas the blood of Christ's sacrifice cries mercy
Heb. 11. Wherefore this is nothing else but a gross abusing of the Scriptures,
to faigne such foolish figures which have no ground in the word of God, but
are such as every one will invent out of his own imagination. Even as yt jest
of Sander, yt Caine did bear a figure of the English communion, in which
nothing but a few bsse fruits of the earth are offered: when much rather, I
might say, that Cain did bear a figure of ye murdering church of Rome, which
has slain so many Abels, because her sacrifice of ye fruits of ye earth, is no
better accepted. But what should I trifle after so vain a ma ner? The second
figure is of Melchizedek, which in deed seemed plausible to many of the old
fathers. Against all which, I oppose the credit of the Apostle to ye Hebrews,
who omitting nothing that in Melchizedeks priesthood might be referred to
Christ, makes no mention of the sacrifice of bread and wine, which Melchizedek
brought forth of princely liberality, and not of priestly duty. And yet it is
a vain thing for the Papists to brag of Melchizedeks bread and wine, when they
in their sacrifice will acknowledge to remain, neither bread nor wine. But of al
yt ever I heard, it is a most impudent comparison, yt Sander makes of
Melchizedek consecrating Abraham by blessing of him, yt was really present, as
it were in his hands: And Christ consecrating his own body and blood present
in his hands at ye time of his blessing and consecrating, and tanteth the
Sacramentaries for acknowledging the one and denying the other. Although he
speak contrary to popery, which teaches the presence to be after
consecration, and not at the time of consecrating. But what bridle may hold in
the shameless fury of Sander?

The third figure is of the paschall lamb, which was a figure of Christ's
death, and so applied by S. John in that saying, you shall not break a bone of
him. Joan. 19. and S. Paul. 1. Cor. 5. and not a figure of the supper, from
which as it differs in sign, so it is all one in the thing signified. The
fourth is the prophecy and figure of Manna, which as the Apostle teaches 1.
Cor. 10 was the same spiritual meat, that we eat, and not a figure thereof,
but a sacrament of our spiritual feeding by the flesh of Christ, like as the
water of the rock, which was Christ, was a Sacrament of our spiritual
nourishment by the blood of Christ. Wherefore the parts of this comparison, as
they have been all answered before in the third book, so they are of no force to
prove ye real presence or transubstantiation, but the contrary, seeing the
difference of these two Sacraments, Manna and the Lords bread, is only in the
signs, and nothing at all in the virtue of the things signified, according to
S. Aug. rule. The fist figure is of the blood of the old Testament, whereunto ye
blood of Christ shed on the cross does answer, as the Apostle manifestly
teaches Heb. 9. therefore these words of the supper: This is the blood of the
new Testament, of necessity must be figurative, even as these which are of the
same sense: This cup is ye new Testament in my blood. For we may not so far
advance the Sacrament, that we abase the death of Christ, which is the only
Sacrifice for our sins. The sixth is the prophecy and figure of Job, which is
a manifest perverting of the scripture, from the true meaning: for either Job
complains of the cruelty of his servants, that would even eat his flesh in
his adversity; and speaks not of the love that his servants had to be joined
unto his flesh, as ye context of that place Job. 31. does evidently show; or
else he shows the complaint of his servants, that were so occupied in
hospitality, that they had no leisure to eat their meat, and therefore desired
to eat the meare that was provided for the stranger. Or if with Chrysostom. we
should understand their desire to be of eating of Jobs flesh, yet it perreineth
not to transubstantiation, seeing we may eat the flesh of Christ without eating
of the Sacrament. The seventh conference is of prophecies taken out of David
and Solomon, whereas neither of both speaks of the Sacrament, David says,
Psa. 22. Thou have prepared a table in my sight* against them who afflict me.
By which words, he shows how bountifully God had bestowed his benif^^^ upon
him, both in this life; and also with assurance of the (...) to come, without
any special regard unto the supper of Christ, or any Sacrament yt was of the
same signification unto him. The saying of Solomon, Pro. 9. I have an swered in
the beginning of this work, where it was placed by Sander. The 8. conference,
is another Prophecy of David, where he says, all that be fat upon earth, have
eaten and adored. Sander says, they have adored yt which they do eat, but
David says not so, Ps. 21. but that they shall worship God ye author of their
food, as it follows immediately: They shall all fall down etc. And whereas
Sander quoteth Aug. in Ps. 98. to justify the adoration of the blessed
Sacrament of ye altar, the footstool, wherein the fulness of ye godhead
corporally dwells: you shall understand yt Augustine utterly denies the
Lords supper to be yt body yt was crucified, but a Sacrament, which being
spiritually understood, shall quicken us. The last conference is of many
prophecies and figures, joined together, as he says, for breuities sake. The
first is of Noe being naked, after he was drunk, and laughed to scorn of his
son. So says Sander was Christ after he had drunk his own blood in his
supper, which he planted for him self in ye virgins womb, hanged, naked, and
laughed to scorn, not only of the Jews, but also of the Sacramentaries, for
so gross a deed, yt he drank his own blood, under ye form of wine. What shall
I say to this monstrous blasphemy, wherein he compares yt filthy drunkenness,
and shameless nakedness of Noe, to the holy mystery and passion of Christ? After
this he joins ye cakes, that Abraham set before ye Angels, as figures of yt
mystical cake which was to come in Christ's supper: but whereof then were ye
butter, milk, and calves flesh, figures? O madness more then folly: for now
wheresoever bread, corn, wine, vines, fruits of ye earth were named, all were
figures of the sacrament, wherein yet he says, is neither bread nor wine nor
substance of any earthly fruit. Isaac blessed Jacob wc corn and wine, saying
to Esau, what ca^ I do more to thee^ Jacob prophesied of the fat bread of Aser,
yt should give deinties to ye faithful kings of yt church. God promises as ye
highest reward, for keeping of his commandment, to bless the loaves of his
people, and to give abundance of bread and wine. If it be lawful for Sander on
this sort to play with the holy scriptures, he may prove what he list. And more
probably might we prove ye substance of bread and wine to remain in ye
Sacrament, of which the scripture speaks so often with so great commendation,
if we should reason after his manner. As for the meat of ye sacrifice, the she
we bread, ye priests Ioaues: they were in deed figures ofye spiritual feeding,
yt both they and we had and have of y^ flesh of Christ. But the curse of Elies
house, that his posterity should come and beg a morsel of bread, at the
successors of Sadoc, it is a gross prophanatio^ of Gods word to apply it to a
submission of the Priests of the Church, to obtain the Sacrament. And the
dissembling of David, before Achis, which came of infidelity, is blasphemous to
apply to our Savior Christ, and especially with such terms, as Sander uses,
At his last supper he driuel^d like a child, to their seeming, that be wise in
the world. he changed his countenance, and carried himself after a sort, in his
own hands, when holding and giving to be eaten, that whith seemed bread, he
doubted not to say, this is my body, etc. For Christ carrying him self after a
sort in his own hands, Augustine is cited in Ps. 33. who being deluded with
that fond translation, andferebatur in manibus suis, (which is neither
according to ye Hebrew text 1. Sam. 21. which says, he played the mad man in
their hands, nor according to the vulgar Latin, which says, and collabebatur
inter manus eorum, he fell down among their hands) troubles himself to find
how David as a figure of Christ, should be carried in his own hands, and at
length concludes that Christ, ipse se portabat quodammodo he carried himself
after a certain manner, when he said, This is my body. The meaning of
Augustine is, when he carried the Sacrament of his body. To this Sander joins,
the joy that David had by the fruit of corn and wine Ps. 4. where
contrariwise, he prefers ye light of Gods countenance before all temporal
benefits: but it is enough for Sander, that he names corn and wine. Likewise
the bread that strengthens, and the wine that comfort the heart of ye
spiritual man, Ps. 103. the meat that God gives to them that fear him: these
(if we believe Sander) were prophecies of the Sacrament, in which is neither
bread nor wine. But of all other, me think Sander should have held his peace,
of the Goodly chalice that makes Christians drunk, Ps. 22. seeing he will not
suffer Christians, so much as to quench their thirst of that chalice, much
less to be made drunk with it. Peradventure it is, because the Papists will
keep true Christians sober, that they will not suffer them to drink of that
goodly chalice that makes men drunk. O shameless hypocrites! My soul yrketh to
rehearse these gross mockeries of Gods word. Elias is fed from the air
with bread and flesh, and walks 40. days in the inward 3. Reg. 17. 3. Reg.
19.
strength of a piece of bread. Yet in the first there was bread and flesh,
which would make well for the Lutherans; in ye other, there was bread and
water, which would serve the turn of the Aquarians, if these places were
figures of the Sacrament. The wheaten corn Es. 62. which Hieronyme
interprets to be the corn of the Church, shall no more be given to her
enemies, and that vine wherein she has labored, shall no more be drunk of
strange children, the corn of the elect and the wine that ingendreth virgins,
as the vulgar text translateth, Zachary Cap. 9. If they perteine to the
Sacrament, do rather fight against transubstantiation then for it. As for the
bread in Jeremy 11. wherein the wodde is fastened, is a palpable error of ye
translator, as I have showed before. The clean Sacrifice of Malachie is to be
offered of every one of the faithful, and therefore is not the Popish
Sacrifice of the Mass. The bread of Angels was Manna, Psa. 77. which
spiritually was ye body of Christ, as ye Sacramental bread is to us. Last of
all Solomon says and repeteth often: No other thing to be good under the
sun, besides eating and drinking with gladness and mirth, where unto Sander
adds, that ye best thing under the sun, may be eaten and drunken, which
Solomon neither said nor meant, but yt amongst the troubles and vanities of the
world, nothing was better for a man, then quietly to enjoy those things, which
God gives, and to lead his life peaceably and justly. Eccle. 3. v. 12. Finally
where Sander concludes, that the custom of ye scripture, in commending so much
bread and wine, shows yt the body and blood of Christ should be given under
their forms: I say it may more probably be gathered to show, yt bread and wine
are appointed to be the seals of our spiritual feeding, with the body and blood
of Christ. For it is a strange manner of commending, to praise the substance for
ye only bare shows and accidents thereof. Although the scripture in most of
these places cited, intends in deed, neither the one conclusion, nor ye
other*

CAP. XIII.
These words of Christ's supper, Hoc facite, do not only signify, do Sander.
this: but much rather, Make this thing, whereof it follows, that the body of
Christ is commanded to be made.

Although Hoc facite, might signify nothing, but make Fulke.
this thing: yet it would not follow; that the body of Christ is commanded to
be made, but rather a Sacrament of his body and blood, which are two several
things, which, if he had commanded to be made, he would have said, Haec
facite, make these things, and not Hoc facite, make this thing. But when Sander
has prated his fill of ag^r^ and facere (...) and (...), the verbs facere and
(...) fignifie to do, which he cannot deny, and therefore will have the verb
to fignifie in this place, both to do and to make, which is most absurd. But
S. Paul puts the matte^ out of question, rehearsing the words of Christ
perteining to ye cup, says: This cup is the new Testament in my blood: Hoc
facite, do this thing as often as ye shall drink, for the remembrance of me.
And telling us what they should do, he adds a reason of yt saying: For as
often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, you show the Lords death until
he come. Behold, what it is to do this thing in remembrance of him. In eating
and drinking of this bread and cup, to preach the Lords death. Sander will
reply, that This is general to all the Church: but Christ saying Hoc facite,
speaks only to his Apostles and in them to all priests. I answer, Christ
speaks to his whole Church, neither can it be proved, that the apos^l^s only
were present. And yet it follows not, that every private man has authority
to minister the communion, seeing God has chosen special persons, for the
administration of all public actions in his Church.

As for the saying of David, memoriam fecit, etc. He has made a remembrance,
is to no purpose, for although he spoke of the sacrament as he does not, yet
there is great difference between making the body of Christ, and making a
remembrance of his marvelous works. But Sander will feign the consent of the
old fathers, to prove that Christ's body is made. I will not deny, but the
fathers sometime use so to speak, when they understand the sacrament, sign
and figure of Christ's body, and not as Sander does his real body to be made
of bread: yet none of them expounds hoc facite, to be of a making, as well
as of a doing. First he alleges the Liturgies of James, Clemens, Basil and
Chrysostom, although none of them is his, whose name it bears, yet are they
of some antiquity, and what say they? Fo^sooth there is a prayer in them, that
God would send his holy spirit upon them, and the holy gifts, which may
sanctify and make this bread the body of Christ. Here bread is made the
body of Christ. Very good, but by whom? by ye priest, or by ye holy ghost? If
by the holy ghost, then it is not by virtue of these words, Hoc facite, which
were not spoken to the holy ghost but to men. I omit, that this prayer in the
old Liturgies, is used after ye words of consecration rehearsed, by which is
given us to understand, that the bread is made the body of Christ, by the holy
ghost in the faithful, that receive the bread, and not as it lies on the
table. The like prayer he cites, out of Cyrillus of Jerusalem: That the holy
ghost would make the bread the body of Christ, and the wine the blood of
Christ, in Cate. mist. 5. But this is merueilous, that Sander says: he is
desired so to do, of the priest: who were not otherwise able to make so great
a mystery, if Christ had not commanded him to make this thing: But I reply,
if Christ had commanded the priest to make his body, what need he desire
another to make it? And in that ye holy ghost must make it, it is certain that
Christ commanded not the priest to make it. Out of Dionysius the counterfeit
Areopagite, he urges the words (...) and (...) to signify a making or
working of holy things, which may well stand with making and working of the
sacrament, although there be no making of Christ's hodie commanded. To
lustinus we answered before in the (...) circumstance. But Irenaeus has these
words. Quando mixtus calix etc. when the Chalice mixed with water, and the
bread being broken, takes the word of God, then the Eu^harist of the body
and blood of Christ is made. It is made, says Sander, Yea verily, but it is
one thing to say, ye Sacrament of Christ's body and blood is made, another
thing to say his natural body is made. But what is the Eucharist with you
Papists? the very body and blood of Christ. Then the sense of Irenaeus
words must be thi^: the very body and blood of Christ, of the very body
and blood of Christ is made: which were more then ridiculous.

Tertullian against Marcion says, lib. 4. Acceptum panem etc. The bread which
he had taken and distributed to his disciples, he made it his own body. Lo
says Sander, he made the bread his body. Yea sir, but within six words
following, he shows how bread was called his body: namely, because it was
a figure of his body. Ambrose de iis qui mysteriis init, says Cap. 9.
Sacramentum etc. This sacrament which thou receiuest, is made by the word of
Christ. And hoc, quod conficimus, corpus ex virgin est. This thing which we
make, is the body taken of the virgin. But let Ambrose expound himself in
the words following, soon after, vera vtique caro Christi quae crucifixa est,
quae sepulta est: vere ergo Carnis illius sacramentum est, etc. It was the true
flesh of Christ which was crucified, which was buried: wherefore it is truly a
Sacrament of that flesh. Our Lord Jesus himself ci^eth out, This is my body:
before the blessing of the heavenly words it is called another kind, after
consecration, the body of Christ is signified. He himself calls it his
blood, before consecratino it is called another thing, after consecration it
is called blood. Likewise when Hierom in Ep. ad Hell. says that Priests do
make the body of Christ with their holy mouth, he means the sacrament of
his body, as he says immediately after, that we are become Christians by
them, meaning by the ^acrament of baptism ministered by them.

Against Iouinian lib. 2. he says: that Christ offered wine in typo sanguinis
sui, in token of his blood, and the whole sacrament he calls mysterium, quod
in typo suae passi^nis expressit: the mystery which he expressed in the token
of h^^ passion.

Out of Chrysostom are cited diverse places, al which are rather against
Sanders making, then for it, as these: The priests make the oblation, which
Christ gave to his disciples. in 2. Tim. 2. He means the sacrament improperly
called of the old writers, an oblation, or sacrifice. Again: The sacraments
are begun and made perfect by the priest, de sacer. lib. 3. Again, Non homo
est qui corpus, etc. It is not a man which makes the body and blood of
Christ, but the same Christ, which was crucified for us etc. Yet Sander says,
Christ saying. Hoc facite, commanded men to make his body. Aug. Cont. Faust,
Manich. lib. 20. cap. 3. says that our bread and chalice is made mystical
unto us, not borne, made I say: Therefore hoc facite signifies make this
thing. I deny the argument, especially understanding this thing for the
natural body of Christ. The same Augustine contra Adimantum says: Our Lord
doubted not to say, This is my body, when he gave a sign of his body.
Wherefore if hoc facite be, make that thing, which Christ gave, it is make a
sign of his body. The rest of the authorities of Theophilact, Damascene,
Euthymius, Anselmus etc. I will not stand to rehearse, because they being late
writers, speak often more near unto the Popish heresies: And some of them
were rank papists: yet in this matter, for the signification of hoc facite,
make this thing, not one of them speaks directly, as Sander defends. But
that the old writers use often the word of making the body of Christ, and
the sacrament etc. It proves not that they understood facere in Christ's
words to make one substance of another, although by doing as Christ
commanded, such a body as he spoke of, and such a sacrament was made.

CAP. XIIII.
What these words do signify, For the remembrance of me: and that they much
help, to prove Christ's real presence, Sander.
under the forms of bread and wine.

To the objection that the remembrance of a man, differs Fulke.
from the man himself: Sander answers, yt Christ said not only, do this, but
also, make this thing, because facere signifies both to do and to make: and
the remembrance of Christ is the showing of his death, as S. Paul teaches by
fact and by making Christ's body under diverse kinds, to show ye separation of
the body from the soul, the breaking and eating of it in sign, shows the
breaking of it on ye cross etc. To this I reply, that facere can have but one
signification at one time, and seeing facere in commemorationem is expounded by
S. Paul (as Sand, also confesses) to show the Lords death, which is by doing
and not by making, except you mean, the making of ye sacrament, hoc facite is
still do this thing. In deed, ye very ministratio^ of the sacrament according
to Christ's in stitutio^ is a preaching of the Lords death: but it follows not
thereof, that the Lord is present, whom ye Apostle, by implication says to be
absent: for he adds, until he come, which were not properly said, if in
person he were present, but rather until he be seen, which is there present
invisible. To come, is to remove, from one place to another place, where ye
remouer was not before he came. But Sander says, the presence of the
benefactor, is the best mean to make his good deed remembered, as the scarre
in a man's face being seen, is the best remembrance of his fighting for his
friends defense. I have often showed the vanity of this kind of reasoning, by
which it should follow that Christ left us not the best token of remembrance
of his death, because he is not seen, with the print of his wounds. But we
must esteem, the best remembrance, according to his wisdom, that has
ordained it, who in all respects no doubt, has appoin^ed the best that might
be for confirmation of our says. Yet in Sanders example, or any that he can
devise, a remembrance will always differ from the thing remembered, as the
scarie and the fighting, are not all one: so the remembrance of Christ
crucified, and Christ crucified himself, are not all one. Neither must Sander
baffu^ us, with the remembrance of an action only, for we are to remember the
person with his benifites, in or for the remembrance of me, says Christ,
until he come, says Paul. That a thing may be present, which is not seen, as
to a blind man, Sander needed not to prove, but that a thing may be both
absent, and present, in the same substance, visibly or inuisibly, that is the
matter, which would require Sander to show his wit, in giving us either a
reason or an experience. But the real presence of Christ, says he, causes
the people to come with due preparation and mortification, which as Basil
affirms, is a piece of the remembrance, whereas in eating and drinking bread
and wine, Christ is so remembered, that sins be neither confessed, nor
amendment minded, nor faith exercised, nor charity used, as now a days in
England it is handled, by means of the new preachers. What fruitful
remembrance of Christ's death, the popish doctrine does work, we lament to
see the remanents, yet in diverse places, where the people are not taught, that
spend their time as they were wont to do in popery, when they had received
their maker, as they were taught to speak. Contrariwise, where true doctrine
and good discipline have prevailed, envy her self may see examples
sufficient, to confute the shameless slanders of Sander. As for the glorious
monument of the Mass, which Sander describes to show what remembrance of
Christ is made therein: he does well to compare it to a sepulcher, which has
outwardly goodly painting and carning, but inwardly is full of rotten bones and
corruption. As good a showing as yt and better too, may be made upon a stage
with puppets. For what doctrine is there in the mass for the comfort of an
afflicted conscience, but dumb shows and idle ceremonies* in exposition
whereof the popish doctors themselves cannot agree, in which if there were any
profitable doctrine, it were hid from the people, as it were with the
grauestone of an unknown tongue. But that which of all other is worst, what
remembrance of Christ's death and sacrifice call you that, which sacrilegiously
challenges unto it self that which is singular and proper to the death of
Christ? But Sander having once entered into the allegory of a sepulcher, cannot
so lightly leave it, but teaches, that Christ having ordained the sacrament
for a sepulcher, would not make it an hearse or sepulcher without his body
lying therein. To this I answer, that sepulchers are to lay in dead
carcases, but Christ is risen from death, and ascended into heaven, having left
his sacraments as monuments of him that was dead, but now lives eternally,
not as graves wherein his dead body still should remain. But Chrysostom is
charged to call Christ's body (...) a carcass, because it is present, after
the same rate, as it was dead in the sepulcher, not without life, but without
sensible moving as Epiphanius has noted.

I answer, he does impudently charge Chrysostom to render that reason, why
he calls Christ's body a carcass, in 1. Corint. Homil. 24. because he is
present without sensible moving. For there is no such thing in that homily,
although there be some excessive and hyperbolicall speeches, as that Christ
suffers to be broken in the Sacrament, which was not broken on the cross.
And even as false it is that he affirms of Epiphanius, for he says not
that Christ is without sensible moving. But speaking of the sacramental bread
Hoc ^st rotundae formae and insensibile, quantum ad potentiam. Et voluit per
gratiam dicere hoc meum est, hoc and hoc. This thing is of round shape, and
insensible, as concerning power. And yet by grace he would say: This is mine.
This and this. Epiph. Ancor.

But there follows a substantial reason, of the Martyrs, which have left
their bodies behind them for our comfort, or else some thing equivalent, as
Manna, ^n the tomb of Saint John, as the fable of Abdias shows: Therefore
Christ would not be inferior to them, in leaving his body. But Christ
himself tells us, that it is profitable for us, that he depart from the
world in his humanity, to prepare us a place in heaven, and to supply his
bodily presence, most comfortablie with the presence of his holy spirit. Joan.
16. It is most comfortable therefore for us, that Christ has carried his body
into heaven, and placed us in heaven with him, Ephe. 2. sending unto us his
holy spirit, with all profitable graces from heaven.

Origin is cited, Homi. 13 in Leuitic. Si respicias, etc. If thou look to that
remembrance whereof, our Lord said, Do this in the remembrance of me, thou
shall find, that this is the only remembrance which may make GOD merciful to
men. Mark (says Sander) this propitiatory kind of remembrance. Nay, mark
the treachery of Sander, that cutting off a sentence by the middle, applies
the conclusion to the latter part only, which of the author is meant of the
whole matter together. For Origin showing the insufficiency of the
shewebreade, to make propitiation thus writes. Sed si referantur haec ad
mysterii magnitudinem, inuenies commemorationem istam habere ingentis
repropitiationis effectum. Si rede^s ad illum panem qui de caelo descendit, and
dat huic mundo vitam: illum panem propositionis, quem proposuit Deus
propitiationem per fidem in sanguine eius: and si respicias ad illam
commemorationem, de qua dicit dominus, Hoc facite in meam commemorationem:
inuenies quod ista est commemoratio sola, quae propitium faciat hominibus deum.

But if these things (namely the ceremony of the show bread) be referred
to the greatness of the mystery, thou shall find that this commemoration
has the effect of great reconciliation. If thou return to that bread which
came down from heaven, and gives life to this world: I say that shewebread,
which God has set forth to be propitiation, through faith in his blood, and
if thou look unto that commemoration, of which our Lord says, do this for
the remembrance of me, thou shall find that this is the only commemoration
that makes God merciful to men. Now mark this propitiatory kind of
remembrance, and you shall find it to be neither the mass, nor the
communion, but the ceremony of shewebreade, no^ barely considered, but with
faith applied unto Christ whom it did signify, and exhibit even as the
sacrament of his supper does unto us. I say, mark Master Doctor Sander, you
that are so great a Grammarian, and consider whether Ista commemoratio in the
last sentence, be not the same that it is in the first. And mark, whether ille
and iste, That and this, can be referred to one and the same commemoration.

But Augustine or Fulgentius de fide ad Petrum, declares, how the sacrament is
a remembrance of Christ^ in rehearsal of which saying, Sander plays the same
part, that he did before, that is, he omitteth the one half of the
discourse, which makes altogether against transubstantiation. Firmissime ^ene
etc. Most steadfastly believe thou, and nothing doubt, that the only begotten
son, God the word, being made flesh, has offered himself for us, to be a
sacrifice and oblation of sweet savor unto GOD: to whom with the father and
the holy ghost, by the Patriarchs, Prophets, and priests in time of the old
testament, beasts were sacrificed: and to whom now that is in time of the new
testament, with the father and the holy Ghost, with whom he has one divinity,
the holy Catholic Church thoroughout the whole world, cease not to offer
the sacrifice of bread and wine, in faith and charity. For in those carnal
sacrifices, there was a figuring of the flesh of Christ, which he himself
being without sin, should offer for our sins, and of his blood which he
should shed for the remission of our sins, (now begins Sander.) But in
this sacrifice, there is tha^ks^iuing and a co^memoration of the flesh of
Christ which ^e offered for us, and of his blood which the same God ^id shed
for us. Therefore in those sacrifices, it was fi^uratiuely signified what
should be given us: But in this ^acrifice, it is evidently showed, what has
now been ^iuen us, in these sacrifices it was before hand showed, that the
son of God should be afterward killed for ^icked men: but in this he is
already showed to have ^eene already killed for wicked men. That Sander
o^itteth a sentence which is not material, I will not ^uarrell with him. But
now we must mark, says he, the ^ordes of Fulgentius, of the old sacrifices,
figurate signi^^cabatur, it was figuratively signified: by the new sacri^ice,
euidenter ostenditur, it is evidently showed. If we had ^ot Christ's body
present, the old shadows would show ^is death better the^ bread and wine, flesh
would show flesh and blood would show blood, and killing would show ^illing. In
deed it is good to mark the writers words. Shall we then skippe over the
authors words, which calls this new sacrifice, whereof he speaks so much
sacrificium panis and vini, the sacrifice of bread and wine? Therefore when he
says, In this sacrifice: I ask, what sacrifice he tells me, in the
sacrifice of bread and wine, is evidently showed, what is already given us?
You see Fulgentius means evident showing, otherwise then Sander does, which
thinks it cannot be by bread and wine. And as to Sanders reason, that flesh
shows flesh, more evidently then bread: I answer that Fulgentius compares
not so much the evidence of the signs, as the difference of the times, which
then was to come, now is past, concerning the passion of Christ. Although that
which is showed to be performed already, is more evidently showed, then that
which is darkely promised to be performed hereafter. And the doctrine of the
Gospel in preaching Christ's death, is a more clear and evident demonstration
of his benefits, then the doctrine of the sacrifices was.

But Sander compares the flesh of the old sacrifices, and the bread of the
Lords supper, as though it were none otherwise showed to be the remembrance
of Christ's death in the Church of Christ, then it is in their popish mass:
whereas Fulgentius speaks not of the bare ceremony of the Sacrament, but of
the Sacrament with the doctrine there unto belonging, which is tence times a
more evident showing of Christ's death then the old sacrifices were. Otherwise
he might say, that circumcision was a more evident showing of mortification,
and regeneration, then baptism, because that which was done in the member,
naturally made for generation, did more evidently show those mysteries, then
dipping or sprinkling of water. But as their ceremonies were more sensible
demonstrations, so the doctrine of our sacraments, is wonderfully more clear
and evident.

Finally, seeing this writer, entendeth to teach Peter the Deacon most
plainly: why does he call the sacrame^^ the sacrifice of bread and wine, if
there be no bread and wine in that holy office or service? for so he takes
the word Sacrifice, and not properly, as his whole exposition does show. For
if he had meant a popish real presence, why does he not once name any thing
sounding there to? if he had meant a propitiatory sacrifice, why does he so
manifestly distinguish it from the sacrifice of Christ, and place it only in
thanksgiving and remembrance of Christ crucified? Verily this place, whether
it was written by Augustine or Fulgentius, it is utter enemy to
transubstantiation, and the propitiatory sacrifice of the popish mass. But
what need I bring the fathers, one by one, says Sander, since the whole
second Council of Nice, doubted not to say* A worshipful Council, of
unlearned Idolaters: And what say they? Nemo sanctorum etc. None of the holy
Apostles, which are the trumpet of the holy Ghost, either of our glorious
fathers, has said our unbloody sacrifice, which is made in the remembrance of
Christ our Lord and God, his passion and of his whole conversation, to be an
image of that body. If this Council say true, that none of the Apostles have
so said, then Sander is condemned by this Council, for falsifying the
Scripture. Heb. 10. when under color of the Apostles words, he affirms the
sacrament not to be a shadow of things to come, but to be the image of the
thing it self. Lib. 3. Cap. 10. But that all these fathers do lie, when they
say none of our fathers, have said the sacrifice to be an image of his body,
it might be proved by diverse ancient witnesses: among which I will name
Ambrose, Offici. lib. 1. ca. 1. who speaking of the sacrament, which he calls
the sacrifice, wherein Christ is offered, says, Hic in imagine, ibi in
veritate, here in an image, there he is offered in truth, where as an
advocate he makes intercession with the father for us. In this saying, what
is the image, but the sacrament? and whereof is it an Image? of his body:
where the image is also perfectly distinguished from the truth. Also Theodoret
Dialog. calls the sacrament an image, opor^es imaginis esse exemplar
arche^ypum. The chief pattern must be an example of the image, meaning by the
pattern, Christ; by the image, the sacrament of his supper.

Finally to the authority of this second Nicen council, I oppose the
Ephesine Council, which determined against images, and affirmed the Sacrament
of the body and blood of Christ to be the only image of his passion, that is
left for Christian men to embrace.

The last Chapter of this book, being entitled by name against that reverend
father Master Nowels challenge, is so plentifully, and substantially confuted
by himself, against whom it was written, that I need not once to meddle with
it. Only I note that Sander urging Master Nowel to reply, promises a speedy
reioynder, yet Master Nowels book having been so many years abroad,
Sanders reioynder is not yet come to light.

The fifth Book.
To the Preface.
IN this fifth Book, he labors to pervert, what soever saint Paul has
written of the sacrament, to draw it to his real presence. And that he might
be more bold, without all shame to reject the scripture, he would have it to
be considered, that Augustine affirms Saint Paul to dispute (according to
the apostolic manner) more plainly, and rather to speak properly, then
figuratively. In deed Augustine affirms (as Sander says) that the Apostle
in these words, He that will not labor, let him not eat, speaks rather
properly, then figuratively: but that all his words of the sacrament, be
proper and none figurative, he neither said not thought. And yet he says,
that many things, and almost al things in the Aposto like writings, are after
that manner, de Oper. Monac. cap. 2. But Sander of mere fraud to deceive the
ignorant, left out those words, because he would have men think, that
Augustine speaks either peculiarly of the sacrament, or generally of every
word that is in the Apostles writing. Wherefore although the Apostle use more
commonly to speak properly, then figuratively: yet it follows not, that
speaking of the sacrament, which is afigure in his own nature, he should not
speak rather figuratively then properly: and yet God be thanked, he has
spoken so plainly, that all the transubstantiators in the world, shall not be
able to clear themselves from his authority.

CAP. I.
The real presence of Christ's body and blood, is proved by the (...)der.
blessing and communicating of Christ's blood, whereof saint P(...) speaks.

The cup is blessed, yt it might be the blood of Christ Fulke.
unto all ye worthy receivers of it, unto whom only it is y^ communicating of
the blood of Christ. But this proves no real prefence. Yes (says Sander) a
blessing made by words, works that which the words do signify: and
therefore, bring me no more (says he) those paltrie examples, I am a
(...)ore, I am a vine, the rock was Christ: etc. for none of these were spoken
by the way of blessing. Hear you not, how this Turkish dog blasphemeth the
words of holy scriptures and calls them paltrie examples? but let that go.
When blessing and words are joined (says he) we are certified, that those
words are not figurative, nor only tokens and bare signs: but working and
making that which is said, etc. This is ye maine post of Sanders building,
which if it be proved rotten, then his house stands upon a false ground. In
Genesis 49. blessing and words are joined together, and yet most part of the
words are figurative. Jacob in the name of God, and by his holy spirit,
blessing his son Judah, says: Judah is a lions whelpe* Likewise* Isachar is a
strong ass, Nephtali is an hynde let goe^ Joseph is a fruitful branche,
Benjamin is a ravening wolf.

The like figurative speeches are in the blessings of Moses the man of God,
Deuteronomy. Cap. 33. Therefore blessing or consecrating proves no real presence,
nor excludes figurative speeches. As for only tokens and bare signs, we never
acknowledge the Sacraments to be such, but effectual and working signs in
them that receive them worthily. But Ambrose is cited, to prove that the
blessing of God in the Sacrament, is able to change the nature of things: which
we confess: but Ambrose speaks not of transubstantiation, for in the same
place, D^ ijs qui mist. Cap. 9. he declares his meaning Iufficiently. Vera
vtique caro Christi, quae crucifixa est, quae sepu^ia est: Vere ergo carnis
illius sacramentum est Ipse clama^ Dominus Jesus, Hoc est corpus meum, etc. It
was the true flesh of Christ that was crucified, that was buried: therefore,
this is truly a Sacrament of that flesh. Our Lord Jesus himself cries out,
This is my body; before the blessing of the heavenly words it is called one
kind, after consecration, the body of Christ is signified. He himself calls
it his blood, before consecration it is called another thing, after
consecration it is called blood.

But now* concerning the word of communicating, Sander says that it shows
both the effect wrought by blessing, which is the presence of the blood of
Christ, and the final cause why it is made, verily to communicate unto us the
merits of Christ's death, where the said blood was shed for the remission of
sins. If the chalis after blessing; had no blood in it: how did it
communicate to us the blood of Christ? This is Sanders deep divinity. As
though the blood of Christ, is not communicated to us in baptism, for the
remission of sins, by the merits of Christ's death, where yet the blood of
Christ is not really present. But seeing the Apostle says, that the cup of
blessing which we bless, is the communicating of the blood of Christ, it
follows that the wicked, which have no fellowship with Christ, receive nor
the blood of Christ in the cup, and consequently, that the blood of Christ is
not really present. Yet Chrysostom giving the literal sense, (says Sander)
of those words, writes thus, Eorum autem huiusmodi est sententia, quod est in
calice, id est quod a latere fluxit, and illius sumus par^icipe^. Of these
words this is the meaning: The same which is in the chalice, is that which
flowed from the side, and thereof we are partakers. I answer, Chrysostom does
so give the literal sense, that he means the blood of Christ to be no
otherwise then sacramentally in the chalice: for in the same Hom. 24. in 1.
Cor. 10. he affirms, yt Christ suffers himself to be broken in the
Sacrament, which he suffered not on the cross: That we are the selfsame
body, that we receive. Finally, to show where we are partakers of Christ's
body, he says that by this Sacrament, we are made eagles, and fly up to
heaven, or rather above heaven, for where the dead body is, thither will the
eagles be gathered.

CAP. II.
The real presence is proved by the name of breaking and communicating.
Sander.


He brabbleth much, of breaking, forgetting that it is Fulke.
bread which Saint Paul says to be broken: but common bread (says he) cannot
have such virtue, yt Christ might be known thereby, as he was of the two
disciples, in the breaking of the bread which S. Augustine thinks to be the
communion. I answer, the Sacrament, although it be very bread, yet is it not
common bread, but consecrated, to be a seal of our spiritual feeding by the
body of Christ, and therefore as sufficient to testify our communication with
Christ, as water in baptism, the cleansing of our souls with his blood.

In handling the word of communicating, he brings in a distinction of (...)
and (...), out of Chrysostom, which is vain and to no purpose, seeing the
Apostle uses both the words for one. For when he had said, we are one bread,
and one body, being many, he gives a reason thereof: (...): For we all are
partakers of one bread. Now concerning the matter of communicating of Christ,
Sander says, it can not be by a bare sign and token. And we say even the
same, but by a Sacrament, wherein Christ's body and blood is not really
present, it may be. For else how are they that are baptized only, made members
of Christ, and have a true communicating of his body and blood? yea, how had
all the fathers before Christ's incarnation, this communicating of Christ's
body and blood? without which they were no members of Christ, the like I say of
raising of our bodies, not by a figure of Christ's body, but by the virtue of
his body it self, which virtue if it could not be communicated to our bodies,
otherwise then by real presence in the Sacrament, as Sander falsely dreameth,
that Irenaeus should mean, by what means should the resurrection of all them
be wrought which have not received the Sacrament? O shameless, and yet most
blockheaded kind of reasoning! As for Irenaeus, he proves the resurrection
of our bodies against the heretics, by that they are fed with the body and
blood of Christ, in the Sacrament, by their own confession. But he does not
hold it necessary, that who so ever i^ partaker of the resurrection of the
righteous, must receive the Sacrament, or the natural body of Christ, really
present in the Sacrament. For we have communication with God the father and
with Jesus Christ by faith, as S. Joan teaches, 1. Ioh. 1. in the Gospel
preached and received. And whereas Sander says, that S. Irenaeus never dreamed
of blood, that should be received from heaven: I demand what is the heavenly
part of the Sacrament? When Irenaeus affirms that it consists of two
things, an earthly thing, and an heavenly thing, lib. 4. Cap. 34. I suppose yt
the heavenly thing, can be nothing but the body and blood of Christ, which
seeing he affirms it to be a heavenly thing, verily it can not be contained in
an heavenly vessel, nor be received but from heaven.

CAP. III.
The presence of Christ in his supper, is proved by the one bread, ^ander.
which being received of us, makes all one body.

Nay, this union which is spiritual of us and Christ, and of us one with
another, inuincibly proves ye presence ^ulk.
of Christ to be spiritual and not carnal: for it is the spirit of God which
makes this union, and not the flesh of Christ, which is one of the terms to
be united, and not the mean of the union. For by the spirit of God, we are
as verily united unto ye body of Christ in baptism, as in the supper:
therefore the real presence is not necessary for this uniting. I pass over
how ignorantly Sander abuses ye example of fire converting all things into it
self, to show how Christ which is a consuming fire, turns us into his body,
whereas God in respect of his Justice, and not of his mercy, is in scripture
called a consuming fire. Where he says, the union can not be made by wheaten
bread, I agree with him: but wheaten bread and the fruit of the vine, received
according to Christ's institution, may testify that union unto us, as well as
elementall water in baptism, which is made by the spirit of God. So says
Cyprian, lib. 1. Ep. 6. ad Magnum: that Qua^do etc. when Christ calls bread
which is made of many grains, his bodi, he signifies our people which he
bare, to be united unto him; and when he calls wine, which is pressed out of
many grapes and bunches, and brought into one, his blood, he signifies
likewise our flock, coupled together by commixion of the multitude, that is
joined in one. Cyprian says, bread and wine made of grains and grapes, and
not the form of bread, which was made of grains, and is now no bread, as
(Sander says) does represent this union. Neither did any ancient writer say,
or think, that by the accidents and not by the substance of bread, and wine,
our conjunction is represented.

CAP. IIII.
The real presence is proved, by joining together all the former Sander.
words.

Now must we have a further taste of Sander his tedious Fulke.
Sophistry, in ioining the words together. The bread which we break, is the
communicating of Christ's body, because we being many, are one bread, and one
body, for we all partake of the one bread. Here bread being thrice named
(says he) is put to express one and the same mystery. But that is false:
for in the first and last place, bread is put for the earthly matter of the
mystery, or sacrament. Against this Sander replyeth, and says: that if we
once take the substance of common bread, to be the thing which is broken,
neither is that substance the communicating of Christ's body, nor we are all
one material bread.

I might likewise reason thus: if the bread that is broken, be the substance of
the body of Christ, neither is (...) the communicating of the body of Christ,
neither a^^ we the substance of the body of Christ: for the body of Christ
and the communicating thereof, differ as much, as the substance of a thing, and
the accidents of ye same. S. Paul affirms it to be the accident, ergo it is
not the ^^bstance. Wherefore, to avoid all cauilling: the bread which we
break, is the communicating of Christ's to^ie spiritually and sacramentally:
not really, corporally, and substantially. Against this, Sand^r rises up and
says, that if to be, is interpreted to signify, then in the next verse,
where it is said, we that are many, are one bread, and one body, we are said
to be the figure of one bread, because it is one verb and one nowne in both
places. A simple cause, as though one verb and one nowne in diverse places may
not be diversely taken. And yet we can not be called one bread, but
figuratively, that is like unto one loaf of bread, made one of many grains,
and one body, that is like unto one body, consisting of diverse members
spiritually united together. But Sander urges us further by the words of
breaking and partaking: if the bread broken be material bread (says he) we
partake of the material bread, and yet the bread whereof we partake, is by
Saint Paul named one, for seeing it is broken, it is not still one. I answer:
we partake all of one material bread, which is either one in lump, or
kind, to signify, that we do spiritually communicate with the only body
of Christ by faith. As for Sanders cavil, that the bread is not one still,
seeing it is broken, is an impudent Sophisme. For neither can Christ at one
time, and in one respect be called whole and broken. Do not they all eat of
one sheep, which eat of it after it is divided in parts? The law commanded
one sheep for every household, which was the same Sacrament in spiritual
signification and effect, that the one bread and cup is unto us. So we all eat
of one material bread, and are spiritually made one mystical bread and body,
not so many a^ eat the material bread, but so many as eat it worthily by
faith. Wherefore the virtue of coniunctio is not in that which is eaten with
the mouth, as Sander would have it seem, but in the mighty working of the
spirit of God, who not only in this Sacrament, but in all Sacraments of all
times, have wrought the same spiritual union, in all the faithful of all ages,
who al make one Church and one body, whereof Christ is the head, and every one
of the elect is a member.

CAP. V.
How we are one mystical body. Sande^


Sander makes two means of our conjunction in Fulke.
this mystical body, faith, and the Sacraments. but in very deed, the
spirit of God, is the only principal mean which works this incorporation in
Gods elect, sometimes, not only without the Sacraments, but also without
actual faith, as in infants which perteine to Gods election. Faith in men of
years, is an assurance of this conjunction: The Sacraments are a confirmation
of faith. Wherefore the bread which we break, is so a communicating of the
mystical body of Christ, as it is an undoubted seal of our faith, by which
we are assured of this communication, before we come to the communion: and
therefore no necessity of the bodily presence, under the form of bread. For
the bread that we break is none otherwise the body of Christ, then we are
made one body, and one bread. But we are made one bread and one body,
spiritually and sacramentally: therefore the bread is the body of Christ
spiritually and sacramentally. Sander asks, How could one bread and one
body be put to signify one thing, but that in deed bread and body are here
in substance the self same thing? I answer, if bread and body be the self
same thing, and the selfsame thing that the Sacrament is: then is not the
Sacrament the natural body of Christ, for we are not made the natural body
of Christ, but his mystical body, by ^^rtaking of this bread.

Sander replieth, that this union is in respect of the nan^rall body of
Christ, which I do not deny, but I affirm that the natural body of Christ is
communicated unto us by spiritual and heavenly working of his spirit, and not
by corporal mingling or joining of the same to our bodies: which also
Augustine in sermon. ad infantes a^^d Bedam, cited by Sander, does plainly
testify. Nulli est allquatenus, etc. No man ought by any means to doubt, but
that he is then made partaker of the body and blood of our Lord: when he is
made a member of Christ in baptism, neither is he alienated from the company
of yt bread and that cup, although before he eat ye bread and drink that
cup (being placed in the unity of Christ's body) he depart out of this world.
For he is not deprived of the partaking and benifite of that Sacrament: for so
much as himself has found that thing, which the Sacrament does signify,
whereas Christ said, except ye eat my flesh and drink my blood, ye shall not
have life in you. Out of this place, although it be directly against
transubstantiation, yet Sander is able to prove it. If the body of Christ
(says he) were not really under the form of bread, how could he that is
baptized, be partaker of the benifit of this Sacrament? was he made partaker of
bread and wine? No forsooth, but he is made in baptism partaker of the body
and blood of Christ, which is signified by that bread and cup. So says
Augustine, or who so ever was author of that sermon, and therefore the body of
Christ is none otherwise present, in the supper then in baptism.

But take away that body of Christ (says Sander) from the form of bread,
and there is no sign of unity in Christ: for every loaf betokens unity,
but not in Christ. Again, let the substance of bread remain, and signify
the mystical body of Christ, which is absent, the union of Christ and his
members is signified to be as far asunder, as heaven is distant from earth. I
answer, this is poor Sophistry, yet much used by Sander, disioyning things
yt ought to be joined together: beside yt this wise reason would prove
likewise, that baptism is no sign of perfect unity in Christ, because Christ
is not really present with the form of water, but the substance of water
remaining on earth, and ^he body of Christ to whom we are incorporate, is in
heaven. How be it we teach the presence of Christ in his mysteries, such
presence I say, as is meet for his glorious majesty, namely by his spirit,
which joins heaven and earth together, and makes our unity to be perfect,
although in nature and place we be never so far distant. And such presence
of Christ in his sacraments we acknowledge, as may stand with the truth of
his natural body, which if he have not like unto ours in all things, except
sin, and such infirmity as our body is subject unto through sin, in
vain, should we look for the redemption of our bodies by him, and the
conformation of them unto his glorious body.

The unity that saint Hilarie spoke of, we allow. lib. 8. de Trinit. If
Christ assumpted truly the flesh of our body, and we take truly under a
mystery, the flesh of his body, and by this we shall be one, because the
father is in him, and he in us: how is the unity of will affirmed, when the
natural property by the which Sacrament is a Sacrament of a perfect unity?

In this saying, Hilarie reprooueth the Arrians, which affirmed that the unity
of Christ with his father, was not an unity of nature and substance, but of
will only. But seeing the unity that we have with Christ, which is proved by
his taking of our flesh truly, and by giving his flesh truly unto us under a
mystery in ye Sacrament, to be an unity in substance, and not in will only,
it is absurd to say, that the unity of Christ and his father should be one lie
in will. Now let us see, what poison the Spider sucketh out of this wholesome
flower.

First he notes, that we truly take the flesh of Christ: I grant under a
mystery, as Hilarie says, so many as receive ye Sacrament worthily, for else
wicked men should be united to Christ, as he is to his father. Secondly, the
mystery with Sander, must be the form of bread, but that I deny, for the
form of bread is no secret, but a visible and natural thing. Wherefore, the
mystery under which, we truly take the flesh of Christ, must be that secret
and wonderful manner, by which Christ does communicate his flesh unto us.
Thirdly, he says, that word Propriety, does signify a person, because
Augustine says, Christ is a vine by similitude, non per proprie^atem, not by
property, where by property, Augustine means properly, and not a person.
Wherefore Hilarie means, that the natural property of incorporating yt
meat that is eaten in the Sacrament, is a Sacramento^ holy sign of a perfect
unity, such as is made between the meat and the eater, and not such an
agreement only, as is between friends, that are of one mind. Therefore Sander
does openly and violently falsify Hilarie, where he says, the natural
propriety of Christ by a Sacrament is a sacrament, interpreting property for
person. After he has thus abused Hilarie, he comes to Augustine, de ciuitate
Dei, lib. 10. Cap. 5. This is the Sacrifice of the Christians, we being many,
are one body in Christ: the which thing also the Church celebrateth in the
Sacrament of yt altar, known to the faithful: where it is showed to her, that
in that sacrifice, which he offers, her self is offered.

Here Sander makes a foolish Dialogisme, between Christ and his father
reproving him, that he has gotten such a goodly mystical body, of the bakers
making, etc. But Augustine speaks of an Eucharisticall sacrifice, offered in
the celebration of the Lords supper, by the Church, in which the Church her
self is offered in a mystery, or holy sign of our conjunction with Christ,
which is celebrated in the Sacrament. And so does Augustine interpret hemselfe
Cap. 5. Sacrificium ergo visibile inuisibilis sacrificij sacramentum, id est
sacrum sigr^^m. The visible sacrifice, is a sacrament: that is to say, an holy
sign of the invisible sacrifice: which invisible sacrifice, is by him
expounded to be mercy, and charity, and yelding up of our selves unto the
obedience ^f God, unto which the real presence of Christ is nei(...)er
necessary, nor at all required, seeing he has once (...)fered up a full
sacrifice of perpetual effect, for the re^emption of all the elect of God.

His allegory of building, as it is vain, and no argu^ent, but of Sanders
own authority, so I pass it over, (...) unworthy any answer. But I cannot
pass over that (...) ye conclusion of his fantastical building, he says, Once
(...)enie the flesh of Christ to be really present in the Sa(...)ament of the
altar, etc: and there is no reason, why we ^ould be called his mystical
body, or flesh of his flesh, and bone (...) his bone. By which saying, he
denies all the Patriarks (...) Prophets to be members of Christ, flesh of his
flesh, and bone of his bone. But we know, that by Christ's in^arnation and
communicating of his flesh and blood unto all his elect, by his spirit, they
with us, and we with them are all members of Christ: flesh of his flesh, and
^one of his bone, without that gross and fantastical presence in the
Sacrament: and this communication is sealed unto us, as well by baptism as by
the supper. Sander cites Irenaeus, Chrysostom, Cyrill and Theodoret, to
prove, that it is the natural flesh and bones of Christ, whereunto we are
joined: and further urging the similitude of marriage, whereunto our spiritual
conjunction is resembled, not more grossly then filthily, compares our
perfect unity with Christ, unto the act of generation in marriage, about
which matter he spends two or three leaves. Whereunto I answer, shortly,
that we do acknowledge, that we are truly united to the natural body and
blood of Christ, which he took of our nature, by such means as is common to
all the elect of God, which can be nothing else but his spirit, although ye
same be assured unto us by faith, and our faith therein effectually confirmed
by all the Sacraments of God, and especially, by the supper of our Lord, but
not only thereby.

As for the presence of the bodies to be joined, which Sander requires, is no
natural presence in one proper place, more of Christ's body coming down
from heaven into every one of our bodies, then of al our bodies coming from
all parts of the world into one. But the body of Christ keeping his own
proper place^ heaven, as Augustine affirms, by his spirit we are all
brought up unto him, as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 2. not ^e brought down unto
us. Finally where Hilarie lib. 8. de Trin. says, He has mixed the nature of
his flesh unto (...) under asacrament: he means not of any carr^ll manner
of mixture, but such as is, sub Sacramento under a sacrament and mystery, that
is by the visible sacrament, taught to be truly, but yet after a spiritual
manner, Likewise where Chrysostom says in Joan. 24. It is brought to pass by
the meat which Christ has given us, that we may be converted into that
flesh, not only by love but in deed. No Christian man can understand this
conversion that is made in deed or in the thing it self, to be carnal, but
only spiritual. For what madness were it to say, that we are turned into
the natural flesh of Christ, after a corporal manner? To conclude, Sander
cannot prove his fleshly presence, without manifest falsifying of Cyrillus
both in words and sense. For thus he cites him in Joan. lib. 10. cap. 15. iu
deed it is cap. 13. (...) mystica benedictio in no^is fiat, nonne corporallier
quoque facit communicatione carnis Christi? For as much as the mys(...)al
blessing is made in us, does it not make Christ to dwell in us corporally
through the communicating of Christ's flesh? Can the mystical blessing make
Christ dwell corporally in us, if it self have not Christ's flesh corporally
in it? But Cyrill says not that the mystical blessing is made in us, but the
virtue of the mystical blessing, which makes Christ to dwell corporally in
us. For thus he writes against the Arrians: Anfo^tesse putat ignotam nobis
mys(...) benedictionis vir(...)tem esse? Quae cum in nobis fiat, nonne
^^porali^er quoque facit communicatione carnis Christi, Christum in nobis
habitare? etc. Or else perchance does he think that the virtue of the mystical
benediction is unknown unto us? which when it is wrought in us, does it not
make Christ to dwell in us also corporally by communicating of the flesh of
Christ? It is therefore the virtue of the mystical blessing, and not the real
presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, that makes Christ ^o dwell in us
corporally, and by natural paticipation, ^s he says afterward. By which
terms, yet Cyrill does not understand, any corporal or natural manner of
conjunction, but a true and undoubted uniting of us to the nature and body of
Christ, which is performed by the virtue of his holy spirit, after a
wonderful and unspeakable manner.

But it is a dainty matter, that Sander upon the words of Saint Paul: ye
cannot be partakers of the table of our Lord, and of the table of Devils;
says, Our ^ewe brethren, granting the devils a real table, will ^ot allow
any such to Christ. What means our old enemy, thus to babble in his
instrument and spokesman Nicholas Sander? Do not we allow Christ a real and
visible table, whereon the visible sacrament is ministered? If he mean that
Christ is really present, at his table, as the devils are at their table, let
him advise himself, whether they that are partakers of ye devils table, are
incorporate to the devil, by eating the devil actually, into their bodies, or
by communicating with his idolatrous ceremonies: if only by the latter, what
need have we of his often urged real presence to be made partakers of the
Lords table, and to be incorporated unto him? When for a sacramental
conjunction the ceremony is sufficient, for a true incorporation the spirit of
God only brings it to pass, both with the sacraments, and without them, in
every one of Gods elect which is a member of Christ.

CPAP. VI.
The real presence is proved by the example which Saint Sander.
Paul uses concerning the Jews and Gentiles.

First, he would prove, that the Christians have a sacrifice, Fulke.
because Saint Paul uses the examples of the sacrifices of the Jews and
Gentiles: but he sees not the analogy. S. Paul co^pareth not the sacrifice of
the Christians with the sacrifice of the Jews and Gentiles, but y^ feast of
the sacrifice of the Christians, with the feasts of the sacrifices of the
Jews and Gentiles. Now the Lords supper, is the feast of the only sacrifice
of Christ, once offered by him, which makes us to communicate with his
sacrifice, if we receive it worthily, as the feasts of the Jewish and
idolatrous sacrifices, made the partakers communicate with their sacrifices,
and them to whom they are offered. And whereas the Apostle says, we have an
altar whereof they have no power to eat, that serve in the tabernacle: he
means yt the ceremonial Jews, can have no participation of the sacrifice of
Christ, except they renounce their Jewish observations. Or if you will
understand it of such sacrifices of praise, as the Apostle within few lines
after speaks; or of the Lords supper, which is a remembrance of Christ's only
sacrifice, as some have done, the cause of the real presence is never awhit
helped. Yes (says Sander) This then being the meat of our altar, it follows,
that this meat is no less present upon his holy table: then that which the
Jews or Idolaters did eat, was present a^ their sacrifices: but that which
they did partake, was really present, and received into their mouths.
Therefore, likewise Christ's flesh is really present, and received into our
mouths. I deny the minor or assumption of this syllogism. For the devils,
whereof the Gentiles did partake, were not really present in the meat which
they did eat, nor received into their mouths. The like I say of the altar of
the Jews, whereof they were partakers which did eat of the sacrifice. Wherefore
this argument may be rightly turned back upon Sanders neck. The devils and
the altar, whereof the Gentiles and Jews were partakers, were not really
present in the meat, nor received into their mouths: therefore the flesh of
Christ, whereof the Christrians are partakers, is not really present in the
bread, nor received into their mouths.

CAP. VII.
The real presence is proved by the kind of showing Christ's ^eath. Sander.


The showing of Christ's death, whereof S. Paul speaks (says Fulk.
^ander) is both by deed and word. The eating of Christ's bo(...)e, and
drinking his blood, proves that he was dead really: for a thing is not eaten
while it lives, wherea^ the figure of Christ's ^odie eaten, does show a
figurative death past. I answer, the ^nely eating proves not his death past:
for the Sacra^ent was eaten before he died, which that Theophylact might salve,
he says, that Christ sacrificed himself from that time wherein he delivered
his body to his disciples: which is all one, as if he said, that Christ died
more then once, directly contrary to the scripture. Heb. 9. But seeing in the
determination of God, and in respect of the effect of his death, he was the
lamb slain from the beginning of the world, the institution of the Sacrament
showed his death before he died, as well as after. But how the blood of Christ
was really separated from his body, before his passion, otherwise then in a
Sacrament, or mystery, let Sander tell, if he can. And where he says, a
figure eaten, can show but a figurative death past, it is utterly false: for
the figures of the law, showed not a figurative, but a real death to come.
And does not baptism, where is no real presence, show the Lords death,
burial, and resurrection truly past? But Sander will help the matter, by
false pointing a place of Ambrose in 1. Cor. 11. Quia enim morte Domini
liberati sumus: huius rei memores in edendo and potando, carnem and sanguinem
quae pro nobis oblata sunt significamus: Because we are delivered by the death
of our Lord, being mindful of this thing in eating and drinking, we signify
the flesh and blood which were offered for us. Which Sander thus englisheth:
Because we are made free, through the death of our Lord being mindful
thereof, we in eating and drinking flesh and blood, show the things that were
offered to death for us.

The example he brings out of Damascen, of them that defended the carrying of
dead men's bones, because they put them in remembrance of death, is frivolous,
and makes nothing to the purpose: for I will demand of Sander that urges so
egerly the real presence for showing of Christ's death: is the body of Christ
in the Sacrament dead or alive? if it be alive, as I am sure he will say, what
similitude has it with ye dead bones, and how does it show his death which
is eaten alive, except it be in the dead figures of bread and wine, which have
no life? If the death be represented only in outward shows, seeing the body
that is received is alive, what is become of Sanders divinity and Logike, yt
the figures or shows of a dead body cannot show but a figurative and
imagined death. As for the argument, a consequentibus, holds as well of the
Sacrament, as of the matter thereof, ye eat the Sacrament of Christ crucified,
ergo Christ is crucified. But Sander would separate all doctrine from the
Sacrament, and know how we should show him to have died, by only eating it.
I answer, by only eating of a living body, we could not know that he had
died: therefore doctrine of necessity must be joined with the outward action.

And further, where he would know, whether Christ did institute this
Sacrament, to show his death past in deed, or past(...) a bare shadow: I
answer, he instituted it before his death, and therefore not so much to show
the history of his death to come or past, as to show the virtue of his death,
by which his body was broken, and his blood shed, that it might be meat and
drink unto us. And when the Apostle says, we show the Lords death, he
means not only the bare story thereof, but the fruit and effect thereof:
wherefore Sander plays the fool egregiously, to babble so much of Christ's
death past in deed, or in shadows to come: For the old Sacraments, did not
only prophecy of an action to be done, but also did confirm the faith of the
godly, in the fruits and effects of the passion of Christ. Finally, Chrysostom
in 1. Cor. 24. speaks figuratively, where he says, when thou feast this
body set before thee, say with thy self: This body nailed and beaten, was
not overcome of death. This body, the sun seeing crucified, turned away his
beams, etc. but he expounds himself sufficiently in the same Homily, where
he says, we must be Eagles, and fly into heaven, where the body of Christ
that died for us, remains. In the same sense, that it is called the body of
Christ, he applies to the Sacrament such things as were proper to the body of
Christ. But as for transubstantiation, which the Papists would gather out of
this place, in many places he shows, that he acknowledges not, and ad
Caesarium monachum, he does expressly deny it.

CAP. VIII.
The real presence is proved by the illation which S. Paul makes Sander.
concerning the unworthy eating and dr(...)ing of evil men.

The illation proves no real pr(...)ce by any consequence Fulke.
in the world. He that dispitefully abuses, or negligently co^temneth ye
princes seal offered unto him, offends against the majesty and person of
the prince, and yet the majesty and person of the prince, is not really
present under the forms of parchement and wax. But Sander says, the
unworthy showing of Christ's death, is the unworthy eating. Who will grant
him, that showing of Christ's death, is nothing but eating of the Sacrament?
Neither does S. Paul confess (as Sander impudently affirms) that evil men
may have the body and blood of Christ in their mouths. He says: who so
eats this bread, and drinks this cup of the Lord unworthily, (for so much
as the same is honored with the names of the body and blood of Christ, is
guilty of the body and blood of Christ, which he despises in these
mysteries. But it is not bread and wine whereof S. Paul speaks, because he
does name it, This bread (says Sander) For seeing the Pronown This does show
a thing present to some sense or other. S. Paul being absent, could not shew^
any thing by any corporal action: then it remains, that the thing whereunto
(This) does point, is the body of Christ, whereof he spoke before. This
Grammatical Logike, is meet for Papisticall divinity. I think there was
never man, that set his pen to the paper, that wrote more impudently. What say
you, Master doctor Sander? Does the Pronowne This, always show a thing present
to some sense or other? To what sense is the body of Christ present, in that
thing, whereof it is said: This is my body? And does the absence of Saint
Paul hinder him to speak of bread in saying, This bread; and further him to
speak of Christ's natural body, in saying, this is my body. This learning,
Master Sander, passes my understanding. What said I, this learning? I know
not how to speak, seeing the pronowne This, does show a thing present to some
sense, or other, but the learning, showed in this. Tush, I must say in such
kind of reasoning, is an higher matter, then can be conceived by any sense,
wit, reason, or understanding. Neither is his sharpnes less in answering
objections, then in making of arguments. For if you object, that Christ meant
the sign of his body: he answers, that seeing Saint Paul named no sign, as
(This) can not point to that which was not named, so it must point only to the
thing named before, which was the body of Christ broken for us, therefore this
bread, means that body of Christ and none other substance. I blame not Master
Sander, if he will not have. (This) to point to a sign, which was not named,
seeing he will not have it point to bread, which with ye Pronown This, is named,
but to the body of Christ, which in another sentence was named. So that by this
bread, he does not mean this bread, but that body. But seeing he can allow, but
one substance present, and that body in the same truth is named, this bread:
what reason is there, that the thing which the word of God calls bread, and
al reason and every sense confirms to be bread, should not be natural
bread, but taken figuratively: and that which is by the word of God only,
called the body of Christ, all sense and reason reclaiming, that it should be
his natural body must nevertheless be his natural body, and by no means
must be thought to be taken figuratively?

CAP. IX
The real presence is proved, because unworthy receivers are Sander.
guilty of Christ's body and blood.

A man is guilty (says Sander) either for doing an evil Fulke.
deed, or leaving a good deed undone: or doing a good deed after an evil
manner, and after the last manner is he guilty, that receives unworthily. I
will not deal with his division, nor inquire whether every one that receives
unworthily, does a good deed after an evil manner. But to the purpose of the
real presence: his deed (says Sander) is eating, which thing he so really
does, that S. Paul affirms him to eat and drink damnation to him self.
Why so, Sander? is that which he eats and drinks really damnation? if it
be, then surely he eats nor drinks really the body and blood of Christ,
which are in an other predicament then damnation. But if to eat and drink
damnation, be spoken figuratively, where the sense is by eating to deserve
damnation, why may not eating and drinking of the body and blood of Christ, be
spoken figuratively, where the sense is by eating and drinking, to be assured
of salvation, wrought by the body and blood of Christ? But no man is guilty
(says Sander) for doing more then he actually does: therefore the unworthy
receiver actually does eat the body and blood of Christ, whereof he is
guilty. I deny the argument, which is a balde petition of ye principle, for the
unworthy receiver is guilty of the body and blood of Christ, not for eating
and drinking it, but for eatig this bread unworthily, and so contemning the
body of Christ, or not discerning the Lords body, as the Apostle says. The
antecedent is also false: for a man is guilty especially in the sight of God,
for his evil mind, purpose, affection, which often are more then actually he
does. As in ye similitude of abusing the Princes seal, which I used in the
Chapter last before. But Sander exclaimeth against the shameless
interpretation of heretics, which imagine that S. Paul said, he that eating by
mouth material bread at Christ's ^^^per, refuses to eat by faith the body of
Christ sitting in heaven (...) guilty of not eating Christ's body. Who ever
heard of such a (...)? Nay rather, who ever heard of such a lie? For, which of
y^ Sacramentaries (as you call them) does so interpret S. Paul? Although we
say, that he is guilty of Christ's body, which contemns the same in his
Sacrament: and either receives it negligently, or else refuses to receive it
contumeliously. For, not only the reprobates receive unworthily, but sometimes
also the elect, of whom the Apostle especially speaks, dissuading them from
receiving unworthily, whereby, as by other sins, they pro uoke God to punish
them, and deserve eternal damnation, if god should deal with them according to
their deserts. But to condemn a man for eating the body of Christ, who did
eat only the figure of it, seems great injustice to Sander. And yet the
scripture never says, that any man is condemned for eating the body of
Christ, but for eating the Sacrament unworthily, he is guilty of the body and
blood of Christ, whereof that is a Sacrament. Tush (says Sander) if it were so
meant, the talk of Saint Paul would no more hang together, then if it were
said: he yt touches unworthily the kings garment, is guilty of murdering
his person. I answer, first the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ is a
thing yt more near concerns Christ, then ye kings garment does concern the
king, and therefore the similitude is naught: but yet he yt with contempt touches
the kings garment, is guilty of contempt of the kings person. And he that of
malice, thrusts his weapon through the kings garment, might justly be
guilty of murdering his person: even so, and much rather, as the neglect or
contempt of the Lords sa crament is less or more, so much is the guiltines
against ye Lords person, although his body and blood be no more touched by the
contemners, then the kings person, by ye abusers of his garment, image, crown,
scepter, seal, or instrument. Sander after this, professes, that he is loath
to heap up in this place the manifold witnesses of the ancient fathers,
concerning that evil men eat Christ's body, whose words he has partly touched
before, li. 2. Cap 3. And I am as loath to repete, yt I have so often answered
un ^o him and others: therefore I will only note ye places, where (...) fathers
cited by Sander, are both rehearsed more at larg and fully answered. Namely,
Theodoret in 1. Cor. Cap. 11. ^llud autem, etc. In mine answer to D. Hesk li.
3: Ca. 52. Pri^osius, li. 3. Ca. 50 Sedulius, (...) Ca 49. S. Hierom in 1. Cor.
Cap. 11. ^i 3. Ca. 54, Chrysostom: in Math. Hom. 83. li. 3 Cap. 46. Augustine. de
baptismo cont. Donatist. li. 5 ca. 8. li 3. ca 48. As for Haymo and Theophylact
late writers, I will no^ stand upon their authorities. There remains only
Cy(...)l in Joan. li. 9. Ca. 19. upon these word^, Exiuit. conti(...), Judas
went out by and by after the supper, etc. which Sander cites thus: Timet
diabolus benedictioris virtutem, n^ s^intillam in animo cius accenderit. The
a^uell fears the virtue of the consecration or blessing, lest perhaps it
might have kindled a spark of grace, or of repentance in his mind. But the
words of Cyrill, howsoever it bath pleased M. Sander to mangle them, are thus:
Timet, vt credo, diabolus ne morando locus poenitentiae detur: and quasi a
temulentia mentem suam rectius cogitans homo cripiat, hac de causa festinat and
impellit. Nam etiam Iudam cum post panem omnino se parauerit, tum moram tum
benedictionis virtutem timens, ne scintillam in animo eius accenderit, ac inde
illuminauerit, and ad meliora retraxerit, magna praecipitem agit ecleritate.
The devil, as I think, fears, lest by tarying place might be given to
repentance, and the man thinking better, might deliver his mind, as it were
from dronkennes. For this cause he makes haste and drives forward. For with
great celeritie, he drives even Judas hedlong, when after the bread, he had
altogether prepared himself, fearing both the delaie, and the virtue of ye
blessing, least it has kindled a spark in his mind, and thereof has
lightened him, and drawn him to better things. This saying of Cyrillus does
no less differ in sense and understanding from Sanders slanderous report of
him, then it does in form and context of words, from that which Sander
affirms to be his saying. For Cyrill plainly caleth it bread which Judas had
received. Again it was the virtue of the blessing, and not ye presence of ye
body of Christ, which the devil feared. What is this for the real presence?

ACP. X.
The real presence is proved by the kind of discerning (...) Sander
Lords body.

First, he labors to prove that the fault of the Corinthians, Fulke.
was not malicious contempt of Christ, but such contempt as rises of
negligence and lack of discretion. The^ he reasons thus: because S. Paul
charge them to be guilty, not only of Christ's worship and name, but also
of his own body and blood, with which fault he never burdened any other
then the unworthy receivers, or the Jews that laid injurious hands upon
Christ at his death, it must needs be, that such a communicant receives
Christ's natural body. I answer, not only they are guilty of Christ's body
and blood, which receive the communion unworthily, and which laid violent
hands on Christ's person, but even they also, that crucify the son of GOD
again, of whom the Apostle speaks, Heb. 6. verse. 6. and corrupt the blood
of his Testament, by which they are sanctified wholly. Heb. 10. verse. 29.
Neither are they burdened with a greater fault, then they commit, which
unworthily receiving the pledge of Christ's presence, are said to offend
against Christ himself. But Sander urges the argument of discerning further:
because the Apostle bids them put a difference between Christ's body and
all other meats or creatures in the world, it is evident, that none other
mea^e or creature is present besides the body of Christ. I deny the argument,
which follows as this. He that despises circumcision, has broken the
covenant of God, as God says Genesis 17: ergo circumcision, is nothing but the
covenant of God, and not an outward seal and sign thereof. He that despises
Baptism, despises the blood of Christ, and the spirit of God, by which
baptism is sanctified: therefore the water of baptism is the blood of Christ
or the holy Ghost really. Wherefore he yt discerns not the Sacrament, which
is called, and to the worthy receiver is in(...)ede the body and blood of
Christ after a certain ma(...)r, from common meat, is guilty of the body
and (...)oud of Christ, and yet no necessity of real presence (...)ereby
enforced.

Last of all Chrysostom is cited in 1. Cor. Hom. 28. (...)at the receiver
need to consider nothing else, but (...)ho is set forth, and the greatness of
the things set (...)rth. Therefore (says Sander) it is not bread and
(...)ine that is set forth, but the body and blood of Christ. (...) answer the
body and blood of Christ is set forth, by (...)e visible creatures of bread
and wine. Neither did (...)hrysostome otherwise teach, in all his writings,
al^hough entreating of so high a mystery, he speaks many times figuratively
and hyperbollically. as Hom. 6. he says, The Church in which the sacraments
are ministered, is the place of Angels, the place of Archangels, the palace of
heaven, heaven it self. Nam and hic (...)oelum dubitas? Mensam istam vide,
cuius gratia constituta sit and quapropter. For do thou doubt that heaven is
here? behold this table, for whose cause and wherefore it is set.

CAP. XI.
No figure which is not in substance Christ's body, can make Sander.
any man by eating it negligently, guilty of Christ's natural body.

Sander confesses, that when a man by wilful contempt Fulke.
does break or defile ye kings image, it is reputed all one, as if he had
stricken the prince himself, not because the deed is one, but because his will
is uttered no less in abusing the sign, then if he had injuriously touched
the prince himself. But he says, this similitude is not like, because saint
Paul makes his argument rather upon the real fact it self, then upon the
will or mind of the dooer. I answer, there is no word in saint Paul, to
prove that he makes his argument upon the real fact, which is eating and
drinking, but upon eating and drinking unworthily, which is with a will and
mind not discerning the Lords body. Secondly Sander obiecteth that the Apostle
speaks not, of wilful contempt, but of negligent doing. I answer, the
argument holds as well or neglecting, as of contemning, yt which Ch(...)
commanded to be regarded, although it be a greater fault to contemn, then to
neglect.

Secondarily (says Sander) they yt say the sign, image, or figure of Christ's
body is abused, must show wherein yt figure does consist, and then he makes
a metaphysical discourse of figures and images, external and internal etc. But
I will plainly show him wherein the figure does consist: not that bread and wine
in any thing that the eye discerns, in form or shape, are like to Christ's
body and blood, but in the use and end of them, which is to nourish bodily,
as the body and blood of Christ broken and shed for us, is made spiritual
meat and drink to feed and nourish us spiritually, of which spiritual
feeding and nourishing, the bread and wine, being sanctified to that use, are
not a bare, naked or empty sign, Image, or figure, but a fuil perfect, and
effectual seal, confirmation and assurance to as many as receive y^ same
bread and wine, being now made so high a sacrament worthily. Neither is there
any other presence or Christ's natural body required therein the^ in baptism of
his body and blood, where unto we are incorporated thereby, then in any of the
sacraments of the old Testament, namely, then in Manna, or the shewbread: of
which Sander speaks. But it is a thing never heard of (says Sander) that
either Manna or the show bread unworthily eaten, or baptism unworthily taken
made any man guilty of Christ's own body and blood: therefore there is some
other substante under the forms of bread and wine, then was in Manna etc:
Although ye scripture says not in so many words, yt he that did eat Manna
unworthily, was guilty of y^ body of Christ, yet in effect it says the same,
and the same by necessary consequence, may be inferred. He that did eat the
same spiritual meat, yt we do, unworthily, was so guilty: the fathers did
eat the same spiritual meat unworthily, for God was not pleased ^ith them, (as
ye Apostole says) therefore they were guil(...)e of the body and blood of
Christ. If Sander will reply and say, it was not the same that we eat and
drink: First (...) Paul says expressly, the rock was Christ, of whom we
(...)te and drink. S. Augustine de vtilitate poenitentioe, cap. 2. ^aith
expressly, they did eat the same spiritual meat yt (...)ve do, for Manna
was Christ unto them. Cyrill in Joan. (...)b 3. cap. 34. says, that Christ by
the figure of Manna was given unto those old fathers. The like by Analogy, is
proved of all other sacraments. But Sander replyeth, the ^ewes must then have
prepared and examined themselves ^uerie day, which is not read of: who
doubts, but the Godly Jews so did, that received Christ by the figure of
Manna and the Rock? and it is read, yt they which did not receive those
sacraments worthily, were therefore overthrown in the wilderness. Why then
(says Sander) if it were so, it had required more perfection in the law, then
now is used for so much as we receive our maker perhaps but once a year, and
surely at the most but once a day, whereas they did eat Manna as often as
hunger provoked, for 40. years. The Law which is spiritual, requires more
perfection then any man can perform: but to argue what perfection is required
of us by that we use corruptly, is as gross a fault in reasoning, as theirs
was in unworthy receiving. The scripture requires oftener communicating then
once a year. In the primitive Church they received every day, and so often
they were to prepare and examine themselves. And what if I say, that every
day, although a man do not receive, he ought to use as great preparation and
examination of himself, as when he does receive? But we receive but once a
day, at ye most (says he,) verily they received oftener, because it was not
only a spiritual meat, but a bodily meat also necessary for the
maintenance of their lives, as our Sacrament is not, we may eat bread which
is not the Sacrament, so could not they at that time. How be it, when so ever
we come into the presence of God to pray, which we ought to do more then
once a day, I would know, what preparation or examination, is necessary for
them that receive the Sacrament (excepting the only relation of receiving) but
a Christian man is bound to use the same as precisely when he offers his
prayers unto God. I speak not (as Sander does) how irreverently men use to
pray, but how they ought to behave themselves in the sight of God.

CAP. XII.
The real presence of Christ's body is confirmed by the often repeating Sander.
of the name of flesh, body, blood, eating, drinking, and such like words.

And why is not the real presence of bread and wine Fulke.
proved by the often repeating the names of bread and cup, and the fruit of
the vine: as for eating and drinking, are more proper for bread and wine, then
for the body and blood of Christ, of which they cannot be said, but
figuratively: especially, seeing you hold, that the blood of Christ in the
cup, is not really separated from his body, how can you properly say, that
the blood of Christ is drunk, when only the body with the blood in it, is
swallowed down the throat? Saint Paul calls the Sacrament bread at the
least six times, after consecration. As for the often repetition of flesh and
blood, in the 6. of saint John, pertains nothing to the Lords supper. But
let us see master Sanders autorities, for this argument of repetition. First
Euthymius borrowing the saying out of Chrysostom, says: Hoc dixit, This he
said, confirming that he spoke not obscurely, or parabolically. Yea sir, but
Euthymius says otherwise, if it had pleased you to cite his saying whole: Caro
mea vere est cibus. Verus est cibus sieve aptissimus, vtpote animam qu^
propriissima hominis pars est nutriens. Et similiter de sanguine. Aut hoc dixit
confirmans quod no^ aenigmatice, neque parabolice loqueretur. My flesh is meat
in deed, it is true meat or most apt meat, as which nourishes the soul,
which is the most proper part of man. And likewise of the blood. Or else he
said this confirming that he spoke not obscurely or in parable. Chrysostom
in Joan. Hom. 46. Quid autem significat: caro mea vere est cibus, and sanguis
meus vere est potus? Aut quod is est verus cibus, qui saluat animam: aut ut eos
in praedictis confirmet, ne obscure locutum in parabolis arbitrarentur. What
means this: my flesh is meat in deed, and my blood is drink in deed?
Either that he is the true meat, that saves the soul: or else that he might
confirm them in that was said before, lest they should think that he had
spoken darkely in parables. By both these places, which are disjunctive
sentences, it is plain that the flesh and blood of Christ is meat to feed
the soul, which must needs be spiritually, because the soul cannot eat
carnally, and then you see how plain and without parable the speech of Christ
is to be taken.

Next these are cited Oecumenius in. 1. Cor. 11. Per hoc quod frequenter ait
(corporis and sanguinis domini) manifestat, quod non sit nudus homo qui
immolatur, sed ipse dominus and factor omnium: vt videlicet per haec ipsos
exterreat. By this yt he often says (of the body and blood of our Lord) he
shows that he which is offered, is not a bare man, but ye Lord himself, and
maker of all things: to the end verily that he might put them in a terror
by these things. This writer affirms nothing, but that the bread, and cup
is not the sacrament of a bare man, but of him that is both God and man:
therefore not the bare substance of bread (says Sander.) I confess, but a
Sacrament of the flesh and blood of the son God.

Thirdly he cites Saint Basil de Baptism. lib. 2. cap. 3. Vehementius simulque
horribilius etc. The Apostle sets forth and declares more vehemently, and
more fearfully, the condemnation, by repetition. What is this to the real
presence? But Augustine de opere Monachorum cap. 13. says: Neque enim etc. For
it is not said in one place or shortly, so that it may be drawn or perverted
into another meaning by the ouerthwarting of never so subtle a Sophist. But
what, I pray you? that me^ ought to work with their hands. Does not this make
much for the real presence, confirmed by often repeating of the names of body
and blood? when bread and cup etc. be as often repeated?

But to conclude, Cyrill in Joan. lib. 4. cap. 11. writes in the same sense
(says Sander) Non obdurescamus etc. By Master Sanders leave, I will repeat
the words of Cyrillus, a little more at large, that we may see in what sense
he writes. Quapropter saluator varia oratione, mo^^ aenigmatice atque obscure,
modo dilucide atque aperte candemrem Iudaeis proposuit, ^vt excusari nequeant,
si resilierint: sed mali male perdentur, tanquam manu propria in animam suam
gladium immittentes. Iterum igitur plane clamat: Ego sum panis qui de coelo
descendi. Illa figura imago vmbraque solum fuit. Audiatis hoc dilucide dictum:
Ego sum panis viuus: si quis manducauerit ex hoc pane, viuet in aeternum. Non
obdurese v^^^ igitur, toties veritatem a Christo audientes. Non est enin.
ambigendum, quin summa supplicia subiucri sint, qui saepius haec a Christo
iterata non capiunt. Wherefore our savior by diverse kinds of speech,
sometimes enigmatically and obscurely, sometimes clearly and plainly, has
set forth the same thing unto the Jews, so that they cannot be excused if
they start back: but being evil men, might be destroyed euilly, as they that
with their own hand thrust a sword into their own soul. Therefore he
cries out again plainly: I am the bread which came down from heaven. That
was a figure, image, and shadow only. Hear you this which is clearly
spoken: I am the living bread, if any man shall eat of this bread, he shall
live for ever. Therefore let us not harden our selves, hearing the truth so
often of Christ. For it is not to be doubted, but they shall suffer most extreme
pains, who receive not these things so often repeated of Christ.

Out of this place first I note, that sometimes Christ spoke in this Chapter
obscurely, and figuratively, contrary to that which Sander before would seem
to affirm out of Euthymius and Chrysostom. Secondly, that Cyrillus speaks
not of the words, whose repetition Sander urges, but of the matter of our
spiritual feeding by Christ only, often repeated in the sixte of John.
Thirdely that Cyrillus understands the matter of this Chapter to be all
one, contrary to that which Sander before has stoutly defended, that Christ
speaks not of the Sacrament, until he come to that saying, And the bread
which I will give, is my flesh.

Fourthly, that Cyrill affirms Christ to have been the bread of life which
was received of the godly Fathers, under the figure of Manna: And last of all,
that the words following, And the bread which I will give, is my flesh, which
I will give for the life of the world, Cyrill understands of the death of
Christ, and not of the sacrament, for which Sander straue so much in the third
Book.

The saying of Cyrillus upon the words of Christ: And the bread which I will
give, is my flesh, etc. is in the 12. Chapter of the same Book. Morior
inquit pro omnibus, vt per me ipsum omnes viuificem, and caro mea omnium
redemptio fiat: morietur enim mors morte mea, and simul mecum natura hominum
resurget. I dye says he for all men, that by my self I may give life to
all, and my flesh may be made a ransom of all: For death shall dye by my
death, and the nature of men shall rise again together with me. You may now
judge in what sense Cyrillus writes, and how far the sense of Sander is
from the meaning of Cyrillus.

The sixth Book.
To the Preface.
BEcause the adoration of the Sacrament does most of all convince the real
presence, Sander pretends that he has appointed this book severally to
prove that point, whereas in deed he labors for the most part to prove
the adoration by the presence, which is a beggarly craving of the principle,
or that which is in question.

CAP. I.
The adoration of Christ's body is proved out of the P^ph^* Da(...)id in the
21. Psalm. Sander.


The adoration of Christ's body, is no question between us, but whether the
sacrament is to be adored, yt Fulke.
thereby the real presence might be proved. The place of the Psalm 22. after
the Hebrews, is this, verse 26. I will pay my vows before them that fear
him. The poor or meek shall eat, and be satisfied, they shall praise the
Lord seeking him: your soul shall live for ever. All the ends of the earth
shall remember, and be converted unto the Lord. And all the families of the
Gentiles shall bow themselves before thee. Because the kingdom is the Lords,
and he has dominion among the Gentiles. All that be fat on the earth, shall
eat, and bow down themselves, before him they shall all fall down, which
descend into ye duste. In this prophetical Psalm Christ proseth three things,
that the faithful shall be sedde and nourished by him, that they shall praise
God and that they shall have eternal life. But for as much, as Christ
nourishes the faithful, otherwise then by the sacram^t, it is great violence
to draw this prophecy, only, or chiefly to the sacrament, as Sander does. As
for adoration of the sacrament, here is no color for it. Christ promises
plainly, that such as he has redeemed shall praise Iehoua, shall worship him,
fall down before him: but of worshipping the meat whereof they eat and are
satisfied, there is no mention in the world. I pass over his fantastical
application of the words of the Psalm, and meddle only with yt which is
pertinent to the question. But the kingdom of God requires an invisible
presence (says Sander) concerning the person of the king. But yet visible
concerning the forms of bread and wine, to the end his mebers may know where
to worship him. And must we have ye visible forms of bread and wine, that we
may know where to worship him? Why, do we not know, that he is ascended into
heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the father? shall we not worship
him sitting at the right hand of god in heaven? S. Paul wills us to seek
those things that are above, where Christ is, and not those things that are on
earth, because Christ is in heaven. Col. 3. But that this interpretation of the
Psalm, to be meant of the sacrament, is not of Sanders invention, we must
hear the judgment of the elder writers. And first he begins with Hierome
in Psalm. 21. Vota Christi: The vows of Christ are his nativity, and passion:
the vows of the church are good works: or else I will offer the mystery of my
body and blood, with them who celebrate those things in his fear. Although
this writer refer the text partly to the mystery of the body and blood of
Christ in the Sacrament, yet has he no word of adoration of the Sacrament:
but reserreth it altogether to God and Christ, beside that his exposition far
differs from Sanders explication. The like sayings he alleges out of
Augustine, Cassiodorus, Beda, and Euthymius, all which affirm this prophecy of
eating, to perteine to eating the body of Christ in the Sacrament, although not
only to it. But what say they to adoration of the Sacrament? Forsooth (says
Sander) manducauerunt and adorauerunt, are both referred to one thing, they
have eaten the Sacrament, therefore they have adored the Sacrament. I deny the
mayor: the text is plain, that they have adored, bowed, and fallen down to
God, and not to that which they have eaten. If I say, Sander has eaten and
given thanks: do I mean that he has given thanks to his meat, or to him that
gave him meat? This is a miserable argument. But S. Augustine does fortify
it. For he says upon that Psalm, Even the rich of the earth have eaten the
body of ye lowlines of their Lord, neither are they so filled as y^ poor, even
unto imitation, sed tamen adorauerunt, but yet they have adored. I hear that
they have worshipped, but I hear not that they have worshipped or adored the
Sacrament. And if you say they have worshipped or adored the body of their
Lords humility: how prove you, that they worshipped ye same really present in
the Sacrament? Or that the Sacrament may be called ye body of ye lords
humility? If this will not serve, Augustine is more plain in Ep. 120. ad
Honora^^m, ca. 27. Supra dictum est, etc. It was (...) before, the poor shall
eat and be filled. But here it is said, all ye rich of ye earth have eaten and
have adored. For they also are brought to the table of Christ. And they take of
his body and blood. But they adore only, and be not filled also, because they
follow not. For although they eat Christ the poor man, yet they disdain to be
poor. And again, because God has raised him from the dead, and has given
him a name which is above every name, yt in ye name of Jesus every knee should
be bowed, of things heavenly, earthly, and under ye earth. They also moved with
the fame of his highness, and with the glory of his name, (which glory is
spread round about in the Church) they come themselves to ye table, they eat
and adore, but yet they are not filled, because they do not hunger and thirst
af ter righteousness. All this while I hear adoring of Christ, but not of the
Sacrament, nor of the body of Christ really present in the Sacrament. I would
have al men that eat the Sacrament, not only to eat, but also adore and give
thanks, not to the Sacrament, but to him that spiritually feeds us by the
Sacrament. But ^eda expounds ye adoring thus: Adorabunt, quia cum quadam
exteriori veneratione accedent. They shall adore, because they shall come with a
certain outward reverence or worshipping. Although Beda lived in a corrupt time,
yet ye Sacrament in his time was not worshipped. Therefore, he speaks of a
certain outward reverence, yt men used in coming to the lords table, which is
used of all them that worship not the Sacrament. For if Beda had meant as
Sander would have him, he should not have said, a certain external
worshipping, but with all honor and worship, both inward and outward, which we
must use, when we come to worship Christ himself.

CAP. II.
The adoration of Christ's body is proved again out of the Prophet Sander.
David, Psalm. 98.

The Latin text is, Exaltate Dominu^ Deu^ nostrum, and (...) Fulke.
scabellum pedu^ eius, quoniam sanctu^ est. Exalt ye Lord our God, and worship
his footstool, because it is holy. Sander confesses, ye Hebrew reads:
because he is holy. So might he have confessed, yt the Hebrew reads: worship
at the stool of his feet, which is at ye arc, tabernacle, or temple which is
called by David. 1. Chr. Ca 28. the footstool of Gods feet. And yt the sense
of this verse is all one with y^ last verse of ye same Psalm, which even the
vulgar Latin interpreter reads thus: Exaltate Dominum Deum nostrum, and
adorate in monte sancto eius: quoniam sanctus Dominus Deus noster. Exalt ye ye
Lord our God, and worship in his holy mountain: because ye Lord our God is
holy. In both verses is one word of worshipping, the same preposition before ye
word, yt signifies his footstool, and yt word which signifies his hill or
mountain. Therefore ye Latin interpreter should not have said worship his foot
stool, but worship in or at his footstool, as he says, in or at his holy
hill. Wherefore, ye Prophet David in this place speaks nothing for
worshipping of the body of Christ any way, if his own words, rather then the
words of ye translator be considered. Wherefore the foundation of this worship
of the Sacrament, is utterly overthrown. But Sander says, that the Arc and
the temple being the footestoole of God, toward which, the Jews did pray, did
signify, that the flesh of Christ should be adored, not only in heaven, but
also in the Sacrament, which is the arc, temple, and vessel, containing the
self same substance of Manna, which sits at the right hand of God the
Father. Did I not tell you in ye preface, yt he would not prove the presence by
the adoration, but the adoration by the presence, which is all in question? who
shall grant yt the Sacrament is such an arc, temple, and vessel, as he
affirms? But many of the old fathers, understood the footestoose for the
body or flesh of Christ, affirming yt it was to be worshipped. To this I
answer, first, they were all deceived in their ground of scripture, that so
took the footestoole. Secondly, some of the^ affirming ye flesh of Christ is
to be worshipped, had no relation unto ye sacrament. Thirdly, they yt said it
was to be worshipped in ye sacrament, understood worshipping otherwise then ye
Pa pists teach and practice, namely, for reuerencing of Christ's flesh in the
mysteries, without any imagination of carnal presence. Hierom, the first
author cited by Sander, for this purpose in Psa. 98. says, There be many
opinions of the ^ootstole, what it should be. But here the Prophet means our
Lords body, wherein the majesty of the divine nature stands as it were on a
footstool.

This is spoken of the humanity of Christ, without any respect unto the
Sacrament, therefore it follows: Quid autem adorari debeat, etc. And that he
ought to be adored: the Apostles taught at his ascension, when they returned
unto Jerusalem worshipping. But also these things are to be referred to our
Lords cross and to his holy soul. The next is Ambrose de Spir. Sanct. lib.
3. Cap. 13. Per scabellum, etc. By the footstool, the earth is understood,
by the earth the flesh of Christ: which at this day also we adore in the
mysteries: which the Apostles as we have said before, did adore in our Lord
Jesus: for Christ is not divided, but one. Here (says Ambrose) the flesh of
Christ is adored in the mysteries: he says not that the mysteries are adored
as the flesh of Christ. Christ is honored or contemned in the poor, in his
Ministers, in Magistrates, in his word, in all his creatures: It follows not,
that Christ is really present in the poor, in his Ministers, in Magistrates, in
his word, in all his creatures. Neither can it be proved, that by mysteries,
Ambrose means only the Sacrament of Christ's supper. Again when he says,
we worship the flesh of Christ in the mysteries, which the Apostles
worshipped in Jesus Christ, it follows, that the mysteries and Jesus Christ
are diverse things, and not all one. But when the same Christ is worshipped in
the mysteries, that was worshipped in his proper person, it follows as
Ambrose says, that Christ is one and not divided. Thirdly, is cited
Augustine, in Psa. 98. who interpreting the footstool to be the flesh of
Christ, which he has given us to be eaten to salvation, says: Nemo autem
illam carnem manducat, nisi prius adorauerit, etc. And no man eats that
flesh, except he have first adored it, it is found out, how such a footstool
of our Lords may be adored, and that we should not only offend in adoring, but
we should sin in not adoring. Here Augustine says, the flesh of Christ must
be adored before it be eaten: and who doubts of that? For he that honors
not Christ come in the flesh, shall never be nourished by his flesh and
blood. But Augustine is so far of, to teach us that Christ's flesh is to be
adored, as really present in the Sacrament, that he does expressly deny, his
natural body and blood to be eaten and drunken, for thus he says to the
Capharnaites in the person of Christ: as even Sander reports: ye shall not
eat this body, which you see, nor drink that blood which they shall shed,
who shall crucify me. I have commended a certain Sacrament to you, being
understood spiritually it will make you live. Although it must needs be
celebrated visibly, it must be understood inuisibly. How think you Sander
auoydeth the force of this place? First he says, the last words must agree
with the first, and then both are true. Very well, he spoke before of a
spiritual manner of presence, and eating of Christ in the Sacrament, because
he now denies the corporal presence. Secondly he answers, that Augustine
speaks of the visible form, and not of the substance of the body of Christ,
which is invisible. O abominable impudence. Augustine says, you shall not eat
this body, nor drink that blood. Sander says: These words body and blood,
are taken for visible forms, and not for the substance. ^^r Christ took not
that greatness and quantity of flesh of his mother, wherein he walked: for his
greatness increased from the state of an infant, to the state of a perfect
man. But I pray thee Sander, if with shamefastness thou have not lost all thy
wit, tell me whether Christ was crucified in the state of an infant, or in the
state of a perfect man? Augustine denies the eating and drinking of that body
which was crucified, and that blood which was shed, when he was crucified,
which body also he demeth, that the Church has present upon earth. in Joan Tr.
50. Tsll me whether it was the visible form of blood which was shed on the
cross, or the very substance of his blood. If thou say it was the very
substance, which thou must say, except thou be a Marcionite or Manichee, then
it was the very substance of his blood, which Augustine denies to be drunken
in the Sacrament.

But Augustine (says Sander) was so fully persuaded, that the flesh of Christ
was to be adored under the form of bread, after consecration, that he
reaches the Christian people to adore it, not as common flesh, but as the
flesh of God, for whose sake we adore it. Cu^^d ^erram quamlibet, etc. when
thou bowest thy self, or fallest down before any earth look not upon is as
earth, but look upon that holy one whose footstool it is, which thou adorest,
for thou adorest for his sake. Now (says Sander) what is it to say, before any
earth? doubtless before any host consecrated, etc.

Doubtless this is a clearkly interpretation, that quae^ibet terra, any earth,
or, every earth, that a m^n does bow unto, is a consecrated host. Not only
the flesh of Christ is earth to be worshipped, but all Princes and
Magistrates are earth to be worshipped, in respect of whom Augustine says,
cum ad terram, etc. when thou bowest down to any earth, consider God and not
man, whom thou worshippest in that man, even as in worshipping the flesh of
Christ, we stay not in his flesh, but ascend unto his spirit: for thus his
words run, Numquid autem caro vi^ificat? What, does the flesh give life? Our
Lord himself has said, when he spoke of the commending of the same earth, It
is the spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing. Ideo and ad terram
qua^libe^ cum te incli^as, etc. Therefore also, when thou bowest, and castest
down thy self unto any earth whatsoever, behold it not as earth, but that
holy one whose footstool that is, which thou adorest, for thou adorest for his
sake: Therefore here also he has added: worship his footstool, because it
is holy, etc. The conjunction, also, which Sander has craftily suppressed,
declares, that Augustine speaks, not only of worshipping the flesh of
Christ, as the footstool of God, but also of worship given to any other
earth, which must wholly be referred to God. You see how inuincibly it is
proved, that catholic men in S. Augustines time, used to bow down and to
adore the Sacrament of the altar, as San(...)no no more untruly then
ridiculously does vaunt and (...)gge, upon the worshipping of any earth.

CAP. III.
It is proved out of the Prophets, that it can be no Idolatry to Sander.
(...)ship the body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament of the altar.

Sander first presupposes the body and blood of Christ Fulke.
(...) be really present in the Sacrament, and then he defen(...)h it is no
Idolatry to worship it. But this is contra(...) to his promise, for he
undertook to prove, the real (...)ence by the adoration, that is dew to the
Sacrament, (...)d not the adoration by the real presence. But it is a
^onderful absurdity with him, to say that it is Idolatry. (...) worship with
godly honor, the body and blood of christ in the Sacrament of the altar. First
because this say(...)g presupposes external Idols not to have been taken away
by (...)e coming of Christ: which is against the express word of God. If all
external Idols had been taken away, by the coming of Christ, the Apostles
would not so seriously have warned men to beware of all Idolatry, 1. Cor. 10.
of the pollutions of Idols, act. 15. 1. John. 5. etc. Secondly, it presupposes
(says he) that Idolatry should be maintained by Christians, by Public
doctrine and universal practice in open Churches, etc. Not by true Christians,
but by false Christians, the times of Antichrist, as was prophesied Apo. ^3.
and 9. Thirdly, it presupposes, that Christ gave occasion by his own word,
that Idolatry should be committed to bakers bread, etc. Christ gave none
occasion to worship bread, more then to worship a door, or a vine tree. Last
of all, it is a most foolish thing to say the Bishop of Rome was the cause of
that worshipping, and also to teach that he is Antichrist. Nothing more
agreeable to reason, then that Antichrist should set up an Idol, that he
himself by it might aspire to the greatest honor. But Antichrist (says
Sander) is an adversary, and sets himself against Christ, but the Pope
calls himself the vicar of Christ, and the servant of servants. Under the
color of these titles, he arrogateth to himself power and honor above Christ,
to give pardon in papers sealed with lead, a poena and culpa, when he teaches,
that the pardon yt Christ sealed with his blood, is only a culpa, from ye
fault, but not from ye punishment. And yet the Popein his Canon law, refuses
not to be called God above al Gods.

Secondly, Antichrist aduaunceth himself above all that i^ (...)shipped as God,
therefore he will not how to an external Id(...) comes of superstition and
pusillanimitie. I answer, (...) Pope although he stoop not very low to the
sacram^^^ of the Altar, which is carried before him on a pal(...), when he
himself is carried on men's sholders: yet he pretends a familiar kind of
reverence, not of super(...)on, but of subtlety and fraud, to cover his pride
by hypocrisy, that with deceit of unrighteousness, he may prevail in them that
perish. 2 Thessalonians. 2.

Thirdly, Antichrist shall show false signs and wonders to deceive wicked men
by. So has the Pope and his members do^ an infinite number, whereof the
Legends, and other lew^^ books are stuffed full. And even Pius Quintus late
Pope counterfeited casting out of devils.

Fourthly, Antichrist is advanced above all idols, th(...) shall set up no
idol but himself, therefore, if the Pope set (...) idol, he is not
antichrist. I answer, the Pope has set up (...) idols but to advance himself
above them all. For although he has set up the idolatry of ye Sacramens,
calling it god and man; yet what papist thinks it not (...) meritorious to
worship and kisle ye Popes feet at Ro^^, then to worship the sacrament daily
in his own pa(...) church? What right Papist trusts not more in a pa(...) of
the Popes, then in any thing yt he looks to receive from ye sacrament of ye
altar? and wherefore this and an hundred such like matters, but yt the Pope has
aduauced hims(...) above y^ idols, which he himself has made, and commanded
men to worship, not for Christ's honor, but for his own devilish advancement.
As for the profession of the Pope, to worship Christ in the Sacrament, in the
sign of the cross, in praying to his saints, by which Sand^r world discharge
him from antichristianitie, is nothing el^^ but hypocrisy in him, which has
no religion, as it has openly been proved by a number of them. John the (...).
being condemned for denying the immort(...) of the ^^ale: Other Popes of our
time, calling the Gospel a fable of Christ, requiring there pork in despite of
God, and openly blaspheming his majesty, etc.

As for the Godhead of Christ, and honor due to his ^anhoode in respect of the
unity of person, is nedelesse ^bo^ to prove the adoration of the Sacrament,
except ^s adunation to the sacrament, in one person be first ^ooued.

But Esaias says, Chap. 2. The Lord above shall be ^xalted in that day, and
Idols shall be utterly destroi^d. It is very true, where the Lord is exalted,
but that (...) not in all places of the world, neither ever was, but ^nely
where God has set up his true Church, which is ^is kingdom. Therefore all the
prophecies cited by ^ander: Ier. 30. Ez. 30. Mich. 1. Zoph. 2. Zac. 13. Psa. 9.
and an ^undreth more yt are of the abolishing of Idols and ido^atrie, are to be
understood abolishing the^ sro^ the true ^ingdom and Church of Christ, not out
of all the world, ^r out of the kingdom of Antichrist, and company of ^alse
Christians, as Sander would bear fools in hand. And I meruell, if any be so
foolish to be persuaded, that there can be no Idolatry, committed in
worshipping that for God and Christ, which is a mere creature. But Saint
Augustine writes: in lib. de divine. d^m. That it was forespoken of the
Prophets, yt the Gentiles should worship one God, the false Gods, whom they
worshipped before, being cast out. S. Aug. says truly of the Gentiles, they
are become true Christians. But were all the Gentiles such from the coming of
Christ unto S. Augustines time, which was 400. years? or be all the gentiles
such at this day? yea, were there not of the^ that were called Christians,
worshippers of Images in S. Augustines time? Does he not write De moribus
eccl. Cath. lib. 1. Chap. ^4. of false Christians: Nouimultos esse sepulchrorum
and picturarum adoratores, I know there are many of the^ which are
worshippers of sepulchers and pictures. See then if Sander have any shame to
cite Augustine, for his purpose, which is, yt no Idolatry can be committed
since Christ's time, especially of them that are called Christians. Beside
Augustine, he abuses the name of Athanasius de in^ar. verb. Vbi nominatur
etc. Where Christ or his faith is named, thence al Idolatry is driven, and y^
deceitful guiles of ye devil are detected and made open. Lo (says Sand, (...)
name of Christ puts away all Idolatry. Yea sir, where it (...) truly
professed and believed, not wheresoever it is ^ounded and heard with ye outward
ears. This therefore pro^^^ not ye contrary, but Papists worshippers of bread
and (...), yea of stocks and stones, be Idolaters, as well as ye barb^rous
people in the new Indies, where Christ and Christi^^ faith is named, but not
embraced nor believed, oftenti^^ of ye namers themselves. But Ie. in li. 2. in
Esa ca. 4. affirme^^ Post etc. after ye coming of Christ, al idols to have
hold^^ their peace. If Sand. were not a proud ass, which disd^^neth to learn,
I would teach him, yt Ierom speaks o^^ oracles and answers, which by ye
devil are given at diu^^ idols, al which, not only Iero^ a christian, but also
Pluta^^^ an heathen man, affirms from yt time to have ceased and not to have
spoken any more. But Hierom was neue^ (...) impudent to affirm, yt there could
be no idolatry co^m^^ted since ye time of Christ. Yet San. affirms, yt
lightly n^^ so much as any heretik, yet has professed to worship^^^ artificial
Idol, made with the hands of man. You may se, h^^ lightly this man is seen in ye
old writers, or else how impudently he disse^bleth yt which he knows. First
Sim^^ Magus accounted ye father of al heretics did set forth the Images of
himself and of Helena his harlot to be worshipped of his disciples, even as
the Images of Jupiter, Minerua, etc. were among the Gentiles. Epiphani^^ lib.
1. Tom. 2. praefat. and Augu. Haer. 1. Secondly Carp^crates made Images privily
of Jesus, and of Paul, and (...) Homer and of Pythagoras, and did offer incense
unto them and worship them. Epiph. and Aug. Lib. 6. Thirdly the Gnostikes had
Images painted in colors, and some of gold and silver and other matter, which
they said were the Images of Jesus made under Pontius Pilate when he lived
among men. Epiph. Haer. 27. Fourthly the Melchisedechians which were in Arabia
Petraea, Robam, and Edom, worshipped the Image of Moses, which they made. Epip.
contra Melch. Haer. 55. Finally the Collyridians committed Idolatry unto the
Virgin Marie. Epipha. cont. Collyrid. Haer. 79. Beside so many false
Christians as in S. Augustines time worshipped pictures and sepulchers. And to
omit them yt worshipped Images in France, who^ Gregory unto Serenus affirms
to have committed Idolatry, although he disallowed the breaking of the Images.

But Papists are not so insensible (says Sand.) to worship bread made with the
bakers hand. why not? as well as to worship metal, wood, and stone, in your
images. yet Chrysostom says, there were few cities left in his time, in
which Idolatry was used: and there is no city in Christendom where ye
sacrament, has not ben worshipped (says Sander) for so many hundredth years.
Yes sir, where the Waldenses were in Calabria, in France, Boemia, and other
places, your bread worship prevailed not. And God be thanked, there are now
many hundred cities, in which yt Idolatry is not openly committed, except it be
by stelth in corners, and so no doubt, but heathenishe Idolatry, was committed
in most cities in ye world in Chrysostomes time, considering what number there
were of heathen men, in all places. Therefore where Sander says, yt all
Christians for ever have worshipped the sacrament as yt very body and blod of
Christ, is utterly false, seeing it is not much above 300. years, since Pope
Honorius made ye decre of yt kind of worship, which Sand. defends: which
decree had been in vain, if al Christians for ever had worshipped it. But Sand.
at length asks, if there be no idolatry in Christendo^? he answers to much
of inward idolatry, but no outward idolatry at al. Inward idolatry he cou^teth,
covetousness and heresies: so was Luther ye first idolater of our age: the^
Zuinglius, the^ Calvin, and the sacramentarie english idol, ye vanity of which
assertion, to have cited, is abundanly to have confuted. He concludes, yt to
say yt the blessed sacrament of Christ is an Idol, seems necessary to employ,
that Christ instituted an Idol. This implicatio^ must come from such a senseles
Idol, as Sand, is, for otherwise they yt have eyes and see, and ears and
hear, can easily conceive, yt an holy sacrament instituted by god, by abuse of
Idolaters, may be turned into an Idol, as was the brazen serpent, and therefore
was broken by Ezechias. Neither did Christ give any occasion of Idolatry, by
his words in the supper, more then God did by his commandment in the
wilderness.

CAP. III.
The adoration of Christ's body in the sacramen(...) proved out of the new
Testament. Sander.


The Apostle says, the unworthy receiver, eats and drinks damnation, not
putting a difference between Fulk.
our Lords body, and other meats (says Sander.) And this difference is in
two points, the first in due preparation of our selves, which is required in
other sacraments to receive the grace of God, the second is, in respect of
the substance of the meat, that is received, which is to be honored and
adored. I answer, the earthly substance is not to be adored, the heavenly
substance is to be adored in heaven where it is really present, and not upon
the earth: and as well in Baptism, as in the supper. But Chrysostom in 1.
Cor. Hom. ^8. says, he eats unworthily: who considers not as it
behooves, the greatness of the things set forth, not weighing diligently the
greatness of the gift. He speaks not of the effect (says Sander,) but of the
substance of the Sacrament: because he says afterward: If thou do learn
diligently who is s(...) forth: thou need to account nothing else. I
answer that admit he speaks of the heavenly substance of the Sacrament,
that is Christ, yet he aduocheth no real presence of him under the forms of
bread and wine, for Christ is set forth in all his Sacraments, both of the
old Testament and the new. Christ washes us in baptism even as he feeds
us in his supper, and he purges us with his blood, as verily, as he feeds
us with his body and blood. Neither does Ambrose in 1. Cor. 11. mean any
other thing: when he says, We must judge that he is the Lord, whose blood we
drink in a mystery. For to drink the blood of Christ in a mystery, is to
drink it spiritually, by mean of a Sacrament, even as to be washed with the
blood of Christ in a mystery, is to be purged by the blood of Christ, by
mean of the Sacrament of Baptism. Wherefore the conclusion that Sander
infers, is false, and has ^o ground nor consequence, we must judge the
sub^^ance of this Sacrament, as the substance of him that ^s G^d, therefore we
must adore the substance of this ^acrament as God. For admit that I must adore
the bo^ie of Christ which is God, yet it follows not, that I ^ust adore it
under the visible forms of the bread and ^ine. For the body of Christ which
(as Irenae us says) ^s the heavenly part of this sacrament, is in heaven, and
^ot united to the bread and wine, or to the shapes of the^ ^n personal union,
more then the blood of Christ, or ^he holy Ghost unto the water in Baptism,
and yet I must ^dore the heavenly substance of the sacrament of Bap^isme, as
that which is God, or in personal union united ^o God, as is the humanity of
Jesus Christ our Savior. But Chrysostom says further, in 1. Cor. Hom. 24.
The very table is the strength of our soul, the sinews of the mind, the bond
of confidence, our foundation, hope, health, light, life. I answer, this is
nothing else, but the effect of our redemption, whereof we are assured, by
participation of that table. As for the heavenly substance, that it is in
heaven, Chrysostom sufficiently declares, when he affirms in the same
Homily, that we must become eagles, and flee into heaven, for where the dead
body is, thither will the eagles be gathered. Wherefore the adoration, that is
defended cannot be proved by the true substance of the sacrament considered,
but by the real presence and personal union thereof unto the outward
elements: which if Sander cannot show, he labors in vain, to tell us of
the true substance of the sacrament, which we confess to be the body and
blood of Christ, unto the worthy receiver: but not personally united to that
bread and wine, or the shapes of them. But now let us hear, what he has to
say, out of Saint Augustine, Epi. 118. ad Ianuarium: who answers the
question: Whether they do better, that receive the communion every day, or
they which at certain times only. Neuter eorum exhonorat etc. Neither of them
depriueth the body and blood of our Lord of honor, if each of them strive
who may honor best, the most healthful sacrament. For as well the Centurion as
Zacheus did honor our Savior in manner by contrary means: the one by
receiving him with joy into his house: the other by saying, Lord, I am not
worthy, that thou should enter under my roof. And as among the Jews,
Manna tasted to every man, according to his own will, in the mouth of the
faithful: even so it is to be judged, concerning the receiving of that
sacrament, into every Christians mouth. For both one man for honor sake, does
not take it every day: an other for honors sake, dares not to omit to take
it in any day: As Manna would no loothsomenes, so this meat will no contempt.
For the Apostle for that cause says, it to have been unworthily received of
them, Qui hoc non discernebant a caeteris cibis veneratione singulariter
debita, which did not discern this thing, from other meats by a veneration
singularly due. For straight, when he had said, he eats and drinks
damnation to himself: be said moreover, Not discerning our Lords body, the
which appears sufficiently in all that place in the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, if it be diligently marked. This place to Sander, seems
merueilous notable, for honor due to the sacrament. And who is he that thinks
the sacrament not to be honorable? Verily he that honoreth not the sacrament
of baptism, is an heretic: and yet he that adoreth the water of baptism as
the holy Ghost, or as the blood of Christ, is an idolater. But Sander has no
less then ten observations of this place, which for tediousness I will not
rehearse all, but only such as in which I dissent from him. In the fourth
observation he notes, that we must strive to honor the sacrament, whether by
this mean or that it skilleth not, so it be honored. If he understand of those
two means, of which Augustine speaks. I agree with him, if he mean that it
skilleth not by what means so ever we honor the sacrament, I say, he has no
such ground in Saint Augustine. In the fifth observation he says, If it were
in deed the substance of bread and wine, he would never exhort us to be so
careful, how to honor a mere creature, were it never so great a sign. I
answer, we honor not a mere creature, when we honor the sacrament, for his
sake that instituted the same: for we honor God, and yet the earthly substance
of the sacrament is indeed the substance of bread and wine. We honor not a
mere creature, when we honor a magistrate, and yet the magistrate, in substance
is a man. In ye ninth observation, he asks what is a veneration or
worshipping singularly due, but such a worship, of which sort there is but
one, and in the tenth he says, such a worshipping that only is, which is due
to God: who as he has no fellow in nature: so he has no partaker in honor. I
answer, the veneration, honor, worship, or reverence, due singularly to the
sacrament, is spoken of Augustine in comparison of all other meats, and not of
all other things in general. His words are, Which did not discern the
sacrament, from all other meats by a reverence singularly due to it, that is
to say, of all other meat, only the sacrament ought to have that reverence or
honor: Even so the water of baptism must be discerned from all other waters,
veneratione singulariter debita, by a veneration or reverence singularly due
unto it, being consecrated to the mystical washing away of our sins, and yet
no divine honor must be given to the water of baptism. Wherefore S. Augustine
means nothing less, then that the sacrament should be worshipped as God
and man, really present under those visible shapes of bread and wine, as Sander
impudently does slander him. But it is worthy to be remembered (says he) That
Augustine uses the word Sacramentum, for the substance of Christ's flesh
contained under the sign of bread. Who will grant this unto Sander? well, if
you will not grant it, he has reason to prove it. For Augustine (says he)
would never have granted, that either the substance of material bread, or the
form thereof, ought to be honored. For honor can be given to no unreasonable
creaturs. Is this that Sander, which defends the honoring of images? or else
be images reasonable creatures? But he cares not what he says, so he may
seem to say something, to the matter in hand.

In deed Augustine would never defend that diuice honor should be given to
the sacrament, but there is a kind of honor, which may be given, even unto
the unreasonable creatures, not in respect of themselves, but in respect of
him, to whom all honor, and glory is dew, if they be of him taken and
appointed to any honorable use.

Last of all, we must consider, what it should mean, that Augustine says, The
Sacrament may be honored by our absteining, sometimes from receiving it into
our mouths, whereas it is no honor to God, if we should any moment abstain
to feed on him by faith, and in spirit. Therefore it is a worthier kind of
substance, which is received in the sacrament, then the grace is which is the
effect of spiritual eating. For his grace cannot come, except we first be
made meet to receive it. But his body may come to our bodies, and so may
condemn us, before we are meet to receive it. To this frivolous collection I
answer, that there is no honor done to the Sacrament, by absteining from it,
but by humility, as the similitude of the Centurion declares, who counted
himself unworthy that the Lord should come under his roof. Again,
Augustine defends not the act of either of both parts, as good of it self,
but making that to be indifferent, he only defends their intent and meaning,
which was to yield due reverence to the Lords sacrament, the one by often
receiving, the other by humble intermission, least the offenses, should in
their weak nature, breed contempt of so high a mystery. For although we
ought continually to feed on Christ by faith, yet it is not necessary, nor
convenient, nor possible that the pledge and seal of this spiritual feeding,
should every moment be received. But only at such times, as the Church and
Elders thereof shall think expedient, for the renewing of our remembrance, and
confirming of our faith by the visible tokens of Christ's institution. So that
no worthier substance can be gathered to be received in the Sacrament, then
the grace of God. And where Sander says, that his grace cannot come, except
we be first made meet to (...) I answer, that we are not made meet to
receive the grace of God, but only by the grace of God preventing all
preparation of our own. As for his body coming into our bodies, when it is
proved out of the word of God, it shall be granted, but not before.

Finally, whereas he gathers it is the same substance of Christ, which is
received: of which ye Centurion said, I am not worthy yt thou should enter
under my roof: I answer, he may no more urge the substance of Christ, in the
one similitude of the Centurion, then he will allow me to urge it is not the same
substance, by the other similitude of Manna, which Augustine likewise uses. As
for the same words of the Centurion, used in the Lyturgie, ascribed to
Chrysostom in adoring the sacrament, I deny that any adoration is meant unto
the Sacrament, or that those words are spoken unto the Sacrament, but unto
Christ in heaven, whose Sacrament that is. What is said or done in the Mass
book, I neither know, nor care. That Origin Hom. 5. in diuersos, exhorts
them that receive the Sacrament, to use that speech of the Centurion, it
proves neither adoration, nor carnal manner of presence. For immediately
before, he has these words: Inerat and nunc dominus sub tectuns credentium,
duplici figura vel more. Nunc enim quando sancti and Deo acceptabiles
ecclesiarum antistites sub tectum tuum intrant, tunc ibidem per eos dominus
ingreditur. Et in sic existimas tanquam dominum suscipient. Et aliud: quando
sanctum cibum, etc. The Lord does now also enter under ye roof of the
faithful in a double figure or manner. For now when the holy and acceptable
to God, the rulers of the Churches, do enter under thy roof, then even there,
the Lord by them does enter. And think thou, even as receiving the Lord him
self. And again, when thou receiuest that holy and incorruptible meat etc.
Behold Origin says, Christ enters in a figure, and after such manner as he
enters by his ministers: of which entrance, he teaches man likewise to say,
Lord I am not worthy that thou should enter under my roof: therefore this
saying imports no substance of the natural body of Christ really present in
the sacrament.

CAP. V.
That the fathers of the first six hundredth years after Christ Sander.
did adore the body and blood of Christ in the sacrament of the Altar.

The first, which is Dionysius, falsely called ye Areopagite, Fulke.
could be no writer of ye first 600. years, whom neither Eusebius. nor
Hieronymus, nor Germadius, gatherers of all ecclesiastical writers, before
their time did know, Concerning his saying, I refer the reader to mine
answer to Heskins, lib. 2. cap. 47. As for Pachymeres cannot be elder then his
author Dionyse, on whom he writes his Paraphrasis. The next is Cyprian, which
lib. 2. Ep. 3. says, that our sacrifice is Christ: but Christ is to be adored
(says Sander:) ergo the sacrifice which is the Sacrament. I answer,
whatsoever after any manner is called Christ, is not to be adored. Whosoever
receives any of Christ's disciples, receives Christ: but he shall be an
Idolater, if he give divine honor to him, which is due only to the person of
Christ. The like answer I make to that Ambrose says, de ijs qui mist. cap. 9.
that Christ is in the Sacrament: To Ignatius, Ep. ad Romans calling the Sacrament
the bread of God, the heavenly bread, the bread of life: To Eusebius. lib. 10.
cap. 10. calling it a Sacrifice full of God, and the dreadful Sacrifices of
Christ's table: To Cyrillus, lib. 3. in Joan cap. 37. saying, that by the
mysteries we are made partakers of the divine nature. Neither do the sayings
of Cyrillus, nor Hilarious, lib. 4. cap. 18. prove a personal union of Christ
with the Sacrament, when they say it makes Christ to dwell in us corporally,
and by a natural participation: for they say not so simply, but under a
Sacrament, under a mystery: etc. that is, the Sacrament does assure us, that
we are truly made partakers of the body and blood of Christ, after an
heavenly and divine manner, and not only are joined to him in love and faith,
and will, but are made flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, by his
incarnation and holy spirit, uniting us unto him, in a mystical body, not in
a personal union: for if any thing which is truly the body of Christ, must be
adored with divine honor, the Church of God should be so adored, which is the
body of Christ, and so called in the Scripture.

Finally Hesychius calling the Sacrament the bread of life, and the mystical
loaves, which quicken us, etc. gave no divine honor unto it, as personally
united unto Christ, but as to an holy mystery, and seal of our spiritual
feeding and conjunction with Christ. For Hesychius affirms, that mystery to
be both bread and flesh, in Leuit. lib. 2. chap. 8. But Sander upon these
sayings, builds that the Fathers affirmed, that which was on the table, to
be the divine substance, yea the substance and nature of God which is to be
adored, and cannot be eaten corporally, but in the Sacrament. And yet no one
father, that he has cited, says any such thing. If Cyrill say, we are by
the mysteries made partakers of the divine nature: Saint Peter says by Gods
promises we are made partakers of the divine nature, 2. Pet. 1. Yet not of the
divine substance: And to say, the Godheade can be corporally eaten, in the
Sacrament, it is monstrous heresy. When Cyrillus says, Christ dwells in us
corporally, he says not by eating the Sacrament, we eat GOD or Christ
corporally, but the power of the mystical blessing makes Christ to dwell in
us corporally, by participation of the flesh of Christ.

But let us yet hear a more full witness, which is Chrysostom in 1. Cor.
Hom. 24. the place although it be fully answered by me against Heskins lib. 2.
cap. 45. yet because Sander makes so many observations upon it, I will set it
down again. Hoc corpus etc. The wise men reverenced this body in the manger:
and being men without good religion and barbarous, they worshipped it with
fear and much trembling after a long journey taken. Let us therefore who are
the citizens of heaven, at lest follow those barbarous men. For when they saw,
the manger and cottage, and not any of those things which thou now see:
they came with most great reverence and quaking. But thou see that thing, not
in the Manger, but in the Altar: not a woman which might hold it in her arms:
but the Priest present, and the holy ghost copiously spredde upon the sacrifice
which is set forth: Neither look thou barely upon the body, as they did:
but thou know the power of it, and all the order of dispensing things. And
thou art ignorant of none of these things, which were done by him, and thou
have been diligently instructed in all things. Let us be stirred up therefore,
let us quake, and let us profess openly a greater devotion, then those
barbarous men: lest if we come barely, and coldly, we ieoparde our head into a
more vehement fire. Out of this place Sander would have the real presence and
adoration of the sacrament proved. But this place proves neither of both.
For he speaks figuratively, of seeing the body of Christ, of seeing the holy
ghost spredde upon the Sacrifice, etc. which cannot be referred to the eyes of
the body, but must needs have a spiritual understanding. The body of Christ
is so present, as it may be seen, but it cannot be seen but spiritually,
therefore it is not present but spiritually. This is sufficient to show that
Chrysostom spoke not of the popish real presence, therefore not of their
manner of adoration. Now let us see what wise arguments Sander can pick out
of this place.

First we must note these comparisons: The Altar, the Manger, the Virgin, the
Priest, the Wisemen, the Christians, the adoration of the one and the other:
but this last comparison is forged, for Chrysostom requires our imitation of
the wise men, in coming to the Sacrament with reverence and trembling, with
earnest desire and affection, not in giving honor to the outward creatures,
but to him yt is seen by faith. Further, Sander charge him to say, it is ye
same body in both places, which Chrysostom. says not, although it be the same
body which is received spiritually in the Sacrament, with that which ye wise men
did worship: yet it follows not, yt the same real body is present upon the
altar before it be received, to be there worshipped. Sander urges
Chrysostomes words, vides in altari, thou see it on the altar. Lo it is upon
the altar, and not only comprehended by faith, but by the mean of the form
of bread it is seen. What say you, Sander? is the body of Christ seen? then is
he present visibly. It is a mad kind of corporal sight of his body which
is through the form of bread. You were wont to tell us, that a substance is
said to be seen, where the proper accidents thereof are seen. And are the
accidents of bread the signs now of the body of Christ? O new Philosophy and
Theology! but I pray you sir, if the body of Christ be not only comprehended by
faith, but also seen by mean of the form of bread: by what mean is the holy
ghost seen? whom Chrysostom likewise affirms to be seen as the body of
Christ is. Will you never be ashamed of those impudent shifts, in wresting the
holy scriptures, and sayings of the ancient fathers? As for the four reasons
that Christian men should rather worship the Sacrament, then the wise men did
Christ in the cottage, be in vain. For Chrysostom draws no example of their
worshipping, to worship that which is visibly seen in the Sacrament, or the
elements thereof, but of coming with reverence unto the body of Christ,
which is really in heaven, whereof we are made partakers after an heavenly and
spiritual manner in the Sacraments, not by bringing the body of Christ down
unto us, but by our ascending up unto him, as Chrysostom shows plainly, by
that long allegory of the Eagles, which he uses in the 24. Homily. Neither
does Chrysostom say, that as those ungodly barbarous men, did worship his
body in the manger, and hands of a woman, so we being godly and civil, must
worship it lying on the altar, or in the priests hands, in the form of
bread. But he exhorts by this example, his auditors, to come often, decently,
and with dew reverence and preparation, to the participation of the holy
mysteries, in which the same body of Christ (though after an other manner) is
seen and dispensed.

But Chrysostom says more plainly, Hom. 28. I will show thee that in the
earth, which is worthy of highest honor. Where can he show it (says Sander)
but on the altar, pointing to the host? Yes forsooth, he can show it to the
eyes of faith: for to the bodily eyes he can show nothing but bread and wine,
which is worthy of small honor. But yet it follows more plainly, As in the
palaces of Kings, not the walls, not the golden roof, but the Kings body
f^tting in the seat of majesty, is the worthiest thing of all: so is the body
of Christ the worthiest thing in heaven, which is now set forth to the earth,
to be seen. What could ye greatest Papist in Europ say more, quoth Sander?
Verily no Papist that is advised what he says, will say the body of Christ is
set forth on earth to be seen, but only by the eyes of faith: and so the Lord
of all things, is showed by preaching, by ministering of the Sacraments, but
not to be seen with eyes of the body, but with ye eyes of ye mind. Wherefore
seeing Christ is set forth to be seen on earth, which sight cannot be but by
faith, Chrysostom means of a spiritual sight, showing, and manner of
presence, and not of a bodily sight, showing, or manner of presence. Neither
do we invent any shifts, as Sander says, to avoid the adoration in
question, for it shall never be proved, that the Sacrament was adored in the
primitive Church, in such sort as it is worshipped and commanded by the
Papists. But beside Chrysostom, we must have a plain authority of
Theodoret, who disputing against an Eutychian, that denies the humanity of
Christ, reproves him by the example of the Sacrament, wherein two things are
found: (says Sander) but Theodoret says there are two natures and
substances, bread and wine, and the body and blood of Christ. Neque enim signa
mystica, for the mystical signs after sanctification, depart not out of their
nature. For they remain in the former substance, figure and form.

But now hear ye shameless gloss of Sander. In substance, because the forms
of bread and wine subsist, by the power of God, and have their being now by
them selves, as they had it before in the nature of bread and wine. So that in
substances is not in substance, but in accidents, whereupon it will follow in
Theodorets argument, that Christ has not now the substance of his humanity,
but the substance of accidents thereof. Secondly he says, The forms remain
in their former nature, because they nourish no less, then the substance of
bread it self would have done, if it had remained.

And is it the shapes or forms of bread and wine that nourished before, while
the substance remained? was it the former nature of the forms, to nourish? O
monster of impudency! If the substance and not the shapes did nourish, the
shapes now nourishing as this new Philosopher affirms, remain not in their
former nature, but have taken upon them a new nature, which no forms or
shapes being accidents ever had before. But hitherto Sander has done nothing,
but by intolerable impudence, sought to shift of the authority of Theodoret,
which is so plain and direct against transubstantiation.

Now follows the place for adoration, which he cites in Greek, for more
credit (...) etc. The mystical signs are understood to be those things,
which they are made, (...), and are believed and reverenced. Sander had rather
say, adored as being those things which they are believed to be.

Here can be no less, then real presence and adoration. And yet Theodoret
means neither of both in such sort as Sander would have him. The mystical
signs are spiritually the body and blood of Christ, so to be believed and so
to be esteemed, reverenced, honored, and adored, not by any actual conversion
of the elements into the body and blood of Christ, but by the grace of God
making the same spiritually, which the signs represent outwardly.

And so shall Theodoret expound himself, Dialogo primo, Qui enim etc. He which
called his natural body, wheat and bread, and names himself again a vine,
even he has honored the tokens that are seen, with the name of his body and
blood: not changing their nature, but adding grace unto the nature. And whereas
Sander concludes upon the place by him cited: Therefore worship is not given
to them as to images, which represent a thing absent: It follows immediately
after the words by him cited Dial. 2 Cenfer ergo imagine^ cum exemplari, and
videbis similitudine^. Oportet enim figura^ esse veritati simile^. Compare
therefore the image, with the pattern or sampler, and thou shall see the
similitude. For the figure must be like the truth. Theodoret calls the same
mystical signs, which are reverenced, the image, and the figure, which
represent the body of Christ, which is the principal sampler, whereof the
Sacrament is an image, and the truth, whereof the Sacrament is a figure. Se
you not what real presence he maintains? Who so will more at larg see
Theodoret cited and observed, he may read the 52. and 56. Chapiters of mine
answer to the third book of Doct. Heskins.

CAP. VI.
The adoration of the body and blood of Christ is proved by Sander.
the custom of the Priests and people of the first 600 years.

First he cites the liturgies of James, Clement, Basil, Fulke.
Chrysostom, all which bear conterfeit names, and yet say nothing to the
purpose. They report that the deacon said let us be attent with the fear of
God, and with reverence. What is this for adoration? we also charge men to come
with fear and reverence, to ye communion. Again, ye Priest said before ye
receiving of the communion, Sancta* sanctis, Holy things, are for holy men.
Sander laboreth to prove, that they spoke of the Sacrament, as though we
denied that the Sacramental! bread and wine were holy things, when they are
consecrated to be the body and bleud of Christ, to the worthy receivers.

But Chrysostom ad pop. Antioch. Hom. 61. upon the same says: Considera,
etc. Mark, I pray you, the kingly table is set before the Angels ministering at
the table, the king himself is present, and thou stand by idle. Thy
garments are foul, and thou carest not. But if they are clean, then adore and
receive. This adoration Sander would refer to the holy things, but he cannot
enforce it, we adore and communicate, yet we adore not the Sacrament.

Chrysostom in the same Homily says: that we eat him which sits above,
which is worshipped of Angels, etc. by which it is evident, that the presence
of Christ in the mysteries, is after a spiritual manner, not that he is bodily
present. As for the elevation, and the things praised with an hymn, that
Dionysius speaks, although they prove no adoration of the Sacrament, yet I
will not stand upon them, because it is clear that Dionysius was a writer out
of the compass of six hundredth years, that Sander has bound himself unto,
howsoever the Papists impudently would affirm, that he was Saint Paul's
scholar, whose writings were not heard of in the Church for six hundred
years after Christ. Next Dionysius the counterfeit Areepagite, follows Basil
de spiritu sancto. Cap 27. Inuocationis verba, etc. The words of invocation
used in the showing of the bread of the Eucharistie, and the cup of
blessing, which of the Saints have left in writing to us? In that place in
deed Basil defends ceremonies received by tradition, which are not contrary
to the word of God, among which he names the words of invocation, which
words Sander will have to be the order of saying Mass, and prayers, and yet
after refers to certain words, which the people answered, when the Priest
said, Holy things are for holy men. One is holy (said they) one is the
Lord, one Jesus Christ in the glory of GOD the father, with the holy Ghost,
Amen.

But these are words of declaration, who is holy, not of invocation. Wherefore
the words of invocation were some prayer that was made for the worthy
receiving of the mysteries, and not made to the mysteries, as Sander imagines.
And whereas upon the word (...), he would not only ground showing of the
mysteries, ready to be received, but also lifting up of them, it is a simple
argument, for (...) does not so properly (as he says) betoken a showing, by
lifting up, as to ordeine, to institute, to appoint, and so we need not
understand any showing, but an appointment, or ordering of the bread and cup
to be the Sacrament.

Passing over Maximus and Germanus, two late writers, concerning the showing
and elevation of the mysteries used in their time, I come to Eusebius
Emissenus, Hom. 5. in Pasc. Cum ad reuerendum altar salutari cibo potuq^, etc.
When thou come unto the reverend altar, to be refreshed with the wholesome
meat and drink: Look with faith, upon the holy body and blood of thy God,
honor it, wonder at it, touch it with thy mind, take it in the hand of thy
heart, and especially, receive it with an inward swallowing.

This place being altogether of spiritual beholding, honoring, and receiving,
yet is not Sander ashamed to cite it for carnal presence, and ad oration of
the Sacrament. But how I pray you? forsooth, he tells us where to have it:
on the altar. Nay sir, faith respects not things that are visible, therefore
not the altar, nor that is seen upon it, but him that is in heaven, which is
represented by that which is seen corporally.

Now, seeing the beholding must be with faith, and the receiving with the
hand of the heart, and inward swallowing: who will grant unto Sander, that
the honoring must be with outward reverence, to that which appears bread
and wine, but with inward and spiritual reverence, dew to Christ which is in
heaven?

But Sander has a quarrel against the English Homilies, for translating altar
the communion, and salutari cibo potuq^, spiritual meats. I think the writer
meant not to translate, but to give ye sense: but I know not what Sander meant
in translating this place, for that which Eusebius says, Cordis manusus^ipe,
to give none English at all, but leave it clean out. As for the saying of the
receivers, Lord, I am not worthy that thou should enter under my roof, it
has been showed already, how it was understood of Origin, and may be said
of them that never meant to adore the Sacrament.

And whereas Sander says, none other Lord enters under the roof of his
mouth, beside that bread: I marvel, whether he mean to teach us, that
tectum is Latin for the roof of a man's mouth, whereas we have always taken
it for the roof of an house. Christ is said to enter under the roof of our
house figuratively, when he dwells in us by faith spiritually. As for eating
under the roof of our mouth, it is a gross imagination unworthy of the
majesty of Christ.

The last author is Cyrillus of Jerusalem in Catech. Mystag. 5. who bids the
communicants, to take the king and the body of Christ in the hollow of the
right hand, saying, Amen, and to sanctify their eyes therewith, using all
diligence, that no crumme thereof perish or fall away. What needed that
precept (says he) if it were common bread?

Verily, I take it for a mere superstitious precept, although it were given to
young nouices, newly admitted to the communion: and yet it proves not the
Popish real presence, unless you think a leg or an arm falls off, if a
crumme be lost. What, when a mouse eats up all in the Pixe? And what can it
be but the substance of bread which has crummes, that may fall from it?

Cyrillus in the same place says: (...). For whatsoever thou shall leese, it
is manifest, that in it thou have lost as it were, part of thine own body.

I think you will not say, that the bread is changed into the bodies of the
communicants, that in leesing a crum, they leese a part of their bodies. He
means therefore a spiritual reverence to be given to the holy mysteries,
which was signified in careful keeping of the external figures. Well, after the
communion of the body, Cyrillus bids the people come to the chalice of
Christ's blood, bowing down, and saying in the manner of adoring and
worshipping, Amen. If he bad the people come to the chalice of Christ's blood,
he was no Papist, and though he bid them come bowing down, and saying in
worshipping. Amen: yet you find not that he bids them bow down to the
chalice, or to adore that which is in it, as you do. We come to the communion
with reverent gesture and bowing down, yet we adore not the Sacrament. But if
he meant adoring of the Sacrament, why did he not bid them bow down and
worship the bread, as well as the cup?

Finally, that Cyrillus acknowledged no transubstantiation, it is plain by his
words in the same book: where he shows yt after the ministers of ye church
are sanctified by the spiritual hymns that were song, they besought their
loving God to send his holy spirit upon the things that were set forth, and
to make that bread the body of Christ, and that wine the blood of Christ. Then
it follows, (...). For whatsoever the holy Ghost has touched or embraced,
that must needs be sanctified and changed. You see Cyrillus means no change
of substance, but such as is in all things that the holy Ghost comes unto.
Where it is said in the Acts, the Apostles returned adorantes, worshipping,
we may safely understand, that they returned worshipping of Christ, as well
as of the Father and the holy Ghost: but here is no like assurance, that the
Sacrament is to be worshipped, therefore adorantes is not of necessity or
congruitie to be referred unto it.

CAP. VII.
Thereall presence of Christ's body and blood under the forms Sander.
of bread and wine, is proved by the testimonies of the ancient.

The sayings of the doctors, because he has already Fulke.
alleged in every article and Chapter, he professes now briefly to show,
by what general Chapters a man may be undoubtedly assured of their belief and
doctrine. And first, because diverse of them allege the almighty power of God
to defend the verity of those words and deeds: I answer, that allegation
proves no real presence. For the almighty power of God is more considered in
feeding us with the body and blood of Christ, which is in heaven, then in
Popish transubstantiation. Yet Sander misunderstandeth Irenaeus, li. 4. ca. 34.
as he misquoteth lib. 5. for lib. 4. How can they be sure, the bread whereon
thanks are given to be the body of their Lord, and the cup of his blood, if
they say not him to be the son of the maker of the world? In these words
Irenaeus reasons not of the divine power of Christ, which the heretics
granted, but they denied him to be ye son of that God, which made ye world:
therefore, by the institution of the Sacrament in bread and wine, which are
creatures of the world, Irenaeus proves, that the father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, was the maker of the world, and not another just God, as the heretics
affirmed. Cyprian in deed in sermon. de coen. Dom. allegeth the omnipotency of
God for that wonderful conversion of the nature of common bread, to be made the
flesh of Christ: but he means not transubstantiation, but an alteration of
the use of the creature, to be a mean to feed spiritually with the flesh of
Christ, as by the whole discourse of that Sermon it may appear. Hilarie, li.
8. de Trin. alleges ye divinity of Christ, to prove the Sacrament to be
truly flesh and blood: which we grant, as he affirms under a mystery, and
after a spiritual manner. Finally, Basil in Reg. bre. q. 172. Ambros. de ijs
qui init. Cap 9. etc. Chrysostom. de sacerdot. lib. 3. Emissenus hom. 5. in Pasc.
Cyrillus in Joan. li. 4. cap. 13. and 14 places often cited and answered, do
all use the argument of omnipotency, but not to prove the Popish carnal or
real manner of presence, but to prove yt Christ does above the reach of man's
understanding, feed us truly with his flesh and blood, and as Damascene
says, by an inscrutable mean (for he had not learned transubstantiation,
though otherwise he were a corrupt writer, in diverse things) as he does
regenerate us in baptism.

The second general Chapter is, that no man requires credit to be given to a
figurative speech, but the fathers require credit to be given unto it, therefore
it is not figurative. I deny the major, for he that requires not all the
figurative speeches in ye scripture to be credited, in their true meaning, is
an heretic. If these words had been figurative (says Sander) we should have
been warned by the watch men of God to beware of them. Nay, to beware of
misunderstanding them, so we are directly by Augustine, De d^ct. Christ. lib.
3. Cap. 16. and by others. And who is so mad to deny these words of the
cup, to be figurative? This cup is the new Testament in my blood. Again,
there is neither Basil, Epiphanius, Cyrillus, Ambrosius, Chrysostom, Eusebius,
or any other that requires these words to be credited, but they also show,
that they are spiritually and mystically to be understood.

The third general Chapter is, that the fathers affirm the truth of
Christ's flesh, and his flesh to be ea^en truly in the Sacrament, therefore
his substance is really present in the Sacrament. I deny the argument, for it
is the true flesh of Christ, whereof we are truly made partakers, yet it
follows not, that the same should be bodily present, but we are fedd
therewith, and united thereto after a spiritual manner: the body of Christ
remaining locally in heaven, and no where else, a^ both the Scripture, our
creed, and the ancient fathers do tea^h us.

The fourth Chapter general is, that they which name ye (...) of Christ a
figure, a Sacrament, or remembrance, a ^^^ne, symbol, token, image, type (for
so many terms they have* although Sander list to rehear^e but ye three first)
do not exclude the substance of Christ's flesh: but show that it is present
under the sign of another thing, after a mys^icall and secret manner. I
answer, although they exclude not ^he substance of Christ's flesh, from his
supper, yet showing the bread and wine to be signs, tokens, and remembrantes,
they exclude the Popish real presence, under the accidents of bread and wine.
For signs and the things signified must needs be diverse, yea, opposite as
relatiues. As when Cyprian says: the divine substance has unspeakably infused
it self in the visible Sacrament, he means not the substance of Christ's
flesh, nor of his godhead, but the grace of God given to the visible
Sacrament. D^ Coen. Dom. And when Hilarie says: We take the flesh of his
body under a mystery, he means not, that the accidents of bread is a
mystery, but the whole dispensation of the Sacrament. Likewise, when Cyril of
Jerusalem says: under the figure of bread, the body is given: he means,
that bread is so a figure of the body, that as the figure is given outwardly,
so the body is received inwardly.

Augustine, de verb. Apost. sermon. 2. The body and blood of Christ shall then
be life to every man, if that thing which in the Sacrament is visibly received,
be in the truth it self eaten spiritually, etc. Behold (says Sander) there is
a thing in the sacrament, and so really it is there, that it is visibly
received. What a miracle Sander has found! but what thing is that which is
visibly received, bread and wine, or the body of Christ? It must needs be
the body of Christ (says he) under the form of bread, for nothing else is to
be eaten spiritually. And is the body of Christ present inuisibly, as all
Papists affirm, and yet received visibly? This is strange Logike. But why may
not the bread and wine be eaten and drunken spiritually, when they are by
faith understood to be the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, to feed
the soul as they are corporally digested into the body? be not our souls
washed spiritually by means of the water in baptism?

The fifth general head. He that alleges a cause why the flesh and blood is
not seen in the mysteries, presupposes (although an invisible) yet a most
real presence thereof. I answer the allegation of that cause, presupposes no
Popish real presence, but shows that presence to be spiritual and not
corporal: as Ambrose does plainly in ye place which is truncally alleged by
Sander, who takes only the tail thereof. De sacra. lib. 4. Cap. 4. Sed forte
duis, etc. But perhap^ thou say: I see not the show of blood: But yet it
has a similitude. For as thou have received the similitude of his death, so
thou drinkest the similitude of his precio^s blood. That there may be no horror
of raw blood, and yet that the price of our redemption may work. What argument
can be more plain then this, that which we drink is the similitude of his
blood, ergo it is not his real blood? As for Theophylact a late writer, I will
not stand upon his authority.

The sixth general head. They that acknowledge a chang of the substance of bread
into Christ's body, must needs mean a real presence of that body. I answer
none of the ancient fathers, acknowledged transubstantiation, but a change of
use, and not of substance in the bread and wine. The places which he cites of
Justinius, and Cyprian, I have satisfied before often times, namely Iustine,
against Hesk. lib. 2. Cap. 43. and Cyprian lib. 2. cap. 28. (...) are the
places which he quoteth, and be of antiquitye, in mine answer to Heskins,
Gregory Nyssen. in or. Cathechet. in the second book Cap. 51. Eusebius Emiss.
or. 5. in. Pasch. ibidem, also Euthymius ibidem. Isychius in Cap. 6. Leuit. the
same book Cap. 54. Ambros. de mist. init. lib. 2. Cap. 51.

The seventh general Chapter. All that affirm the external Sacrifice of
Christ's body and blood, must needs teach the real presence thereof. I
answer, none of the ancient fathers, teach the external Sacrifice, but of
thanksgiving and remembrance for the redemption by Christ's death. The places
of Dionysius and Eusebius Pamphili, which he notes, are answered against
Heskins lib. 1. Cap. 35. The council of Nice has been satisfied in this
book, lib. 2. Cap. 26.

The eight head, is the adoration lately confuted.

The ninth, that they affirm wicked men to receive ye Sacrament, for which he
sends us to his authorities cited, lib. 2. Ca. 7. and li. 5. Ca. 9. where
thou shall find ye confutation, as of the rest so quoted by him.

The tenth, that they teach our bodies to be nourished with Christ's flesh and
blood, li. 2. Ca. 5. li. 3. Ca. 15. and 16.

The 11. that they teach us to be naturally united to Christ, lib. 5. Cap. 5.

The 12. that they affirm Christ's body to be on the altar, in the hands, in
the mouths, and the blood to be in the cup. lib. 2. Cap. 5.

The 13. that they give it such names, as only may agree to the substance of
Christ, etc. for which he quoteth Cyprian de Coena Domini, answered by me
against Heskins, lib. 1. Cap. 29. And Chrysostom in 1. Cor. Hom. 24. answered
in the fourth Chapter of this book.

The 14. that they teach every man to receive the same substance in one
measure and equal portion, for which he quoteth lib. 1. Cap. what is the
supper, and lib. 4. Cap. 12.

The 15. that they use in showing how it is sanctified, the verbs of creating,
making, working, consecrating, representing, etc. for which he quoteth Cyprian
de Coen. Do. answered by me against Heskins. lib 2. Cap. 7. Also Hierome in
26. Matthew. answered against Heskins, lib. 1. Cap. 18.

The 16. that they spoke of it covertly, saying norun^ fideles, least the
infidels should mock at it, for which he cites Augustine and Chrysostom, is
a feeble argument, to prove the real presence, for other spoke openly, even to
Infidels, as Justinius and Tertullian.

The 17. that they have applied it to the helping of ye souls departed, as
being the very self substance that ransaked hell, is false, and not proved
out of Aug. lib. Conf. 9. Ca. 13. nor Cyprian, li. 1. Ep. 9. as I have showed
against Allen. li. 2. Cap. 9. and Cap. 7.

The 18. that they taught it to be the truth which has succeeded in place of
the old figures, for which he quoteth Augustine de Ciuitate Dei, li. 17. Cap.
20. where no such matter is, but that the sacrifice of the body and blood of
Christ is offered in bread and wine in steed of all the old sacrifices, and
delivered to the co^municants, by which he means a sacrifice of thanksgiving,
and not of propitiation.

The 19. that they used by the known truth thereof, to prove that Christ had
flesh and blood, for which he quoteth Irenaeus, lib. 4. Ca. ^4. answered by me
often times, and namely contra Hesk. li. 2. Cap. 49. And Theodoret in dialog,
which you shall find contra Hesk. li. 3. ca. 52. and 56.

The 20. that they have far preferred it before baptism, that no crumme
might be suffered to fall down: for which he quoteth Cyrill. Catech. Myste. 4.
answered in the Chapter next before.

The 21. that the catechumeni admitted to hear the preaching, might not sec
the Eucharistie, that no man might eat it except he were baptized, and kept the
commandment, and yet the catechumeni had a sanctified broad, which was a sign
of Christ. For the former part is cited Dionysins de Eccles. Hier. Cap. 3. for
the later, August. lib. 2. de peccat. merit. and remiss. Cap. 26.

To this I answer, that these ceremonies and observations partly frivolous,
partly superstitious, are too weak arguments to prove the matter in
question. So that in steed of the testimonies of the ancient fathers, we
have little beside quotations, and vain collections.

CAP. VIII.
The real presence of Christ's body is proved by the faith of the whole
Church of God, in all times and all ages. Sander.


To omit that curious question, what shall become of Fulke.
all our fathers that so long have believed th'e real presence: etc. it is a
great untruth, that Sander affirms Berengarius to have been the first that
preached and taught against the real presence. For the opinion of the real
presence was not taught before Antichrist was openly showed in the sea of Rome
in any place, nor immediately after commonly received, but in the seventh or
eight hundredth year, as superstition, idolatry, and false doctrine began to
increase, both in the East and West: it began to take strength, but yet not to
be fully confirmed, as it appears in the writings of Damaseene, the second
Council of Nice, and other writers since that time. Neither was the error
then unreproved, for the Council of Ephesians. 3. which condemned images, gave a
true understanding of the supper. Bertrame, whom Sander affirms to be but
suspected in his book De corpore and sanguine Domini, which is extant for
every man to read, plainly determines against the Popish real presence and
transubstantiation.

And whereas Sander offers a large scope, as he says, that we should name
one bishop in the whole earth, who before the time of Berengarius, reproved
the teachers of the real presence, as heretics: I can name none so
conveniently as Aelfricke, sometime Archbishop of Canterbury, with all the
Saxon bishops in his time, who set forth an Homily to be read on Easter day
unto the people, and allowed certain Epistles of the said Aelfricke, in which
is contained a plain and manifest denial of that bodily presence, for which
we strive, and an approbation of the only spiritual manner of presence,
which we teach.

If Sander will cavil, that although they so taught they reproved not the
teachers of the real presence as heretics I refer it to the judgment of
all indifferent men, how they would have accused any man that obstinately
should have maintained a doctrine contrary to their common belief and
consent. How the fathers of the primitive Church believed, concerning the
blessed Sacrament, and namely S. August. (whom Sander half suspecteth, and yet
says he is not against them, because his communion is not forsaken) it has been plentifully and often showed, and is not here to be repeted.

But Hilarie says, it is the profession of our Lord, and the faith of the
Church, that the Sacrament is truly the flesh and blood of Christ: therefore
there is no place left of doubting. Certainly we doubt not, but to the worthy
receiver, the Sacrament is the same which Christ affirms it to be, after a
spiritual manner: but we are out of doubt, that our Savior Christ reteining
the nature of his body, would not make the same insensible, impalpable,
incircumscriptible, etc. It is not therefore the presence, nor the real
presence rightly understood, but the bodily presence, which we deny, and no
man affirmed for six hundred years after Christ, except perhaps Marcus the
heretic, that changed the color of ye wine by enchantment, that it might be
thought that Christ had dropped his blood into his chalice, as Irenaeus
testifies, lib. 1. Cap. 9.

Likewise, we answer to Epiphanius, we believe the words of Christ to be
true, which by grace has given us bread and wine to be his body and blood
spiritually, even as the water of baptism to be regeneration, which similitude
Epiphanius uses, even as he does this of the supper, to show that we are
truly made according to the image of God, not by nature, but by grace. Epiph.
Anch.

But Sander has a pleasant similitude to show, that the Papists are not gone
from the Apostles, and ancient fathers, because a man living in these days,
should be unjustly charged with treason, for disobeying of William the
Conqueror, or being the son of him that disobeyed William the Conqueror,
when he answers, that he lived not under that king, and al his ancestors in
their days were obedient to such kings under whom they lived. A worshipful
similitude. But if William the Conqueror made a law, that whosoever
commits these things, or these things, shall be deemed a traitor, and it is
proved that thou have committed some of them, what will the former answer
avail thee? it is the doctrine, and not the persons of the Apostles and
ancient fathers, from which you are accused to have departed. But which of the
successors of the Apostles (says Sander) sent Berengarius to preach that
doctrine, whereof they held the contrary? I answer, so long as Berengarius
taught that doctrine, which the Apostles themselves commanded to be taught,
he needed no special commission from them yt were departed from the Apostles
doctrine, to reprove them, for he was sent of God, who opened his eyes to see
the truth, and their errors, that sitting in the chaires of the Apostles,
taught a doctrine contrary to the faith of the Apostles.

But Sander will at once prove that all citizens of ye house of God, through
the world, witnessed with one voice, and in one word, that they believed the
bodily presence. For the old custom was, at the words of consecration, and
at the time of the receiving the Sacrament, which was said to be the body and
blood of Christ, to say, Amen: that is, to affirm it was so. And this Sander
proves by many witnesses, which is needelesse: for we know it as well as
he. But this proves no carnal nor bodily manner of presence, except Sander
can prove, that it was told them, this to be the body and blood of Christ,
without any figure, really, corporally, present under the only shapes of bread
and wine, as they teach now. Yes (says Sander) a figurative speech sounds
otherwise, then we must think, whereto (Amen). must not be answered What shall
we then answer to these words of Christ, This cup is the new testament in
my blood? are not these the words of consecration also?

But what was meant by Amen, and what the Sacrament is, S. Augustine teaches
sermon. ad infantes: Si ergo vos estis corpus Christi and membra, mysterium
vestrum in men's a positum est: Mysterium Domini accipitis ad quod estis. Amen
respond^tis, and respondendo subscribitis. Audis ergo corpus Christi and
respondes, Amen. Esto membrum corporis Christi, vt verum sit Amen tuu^. etc.
Therefore if you be the body, receive the Lords mysteries, whereunto you are.
You answer Amen, and by so aunswering, you subscribe. Be thou a member of the
body of Christ, that thy Amen may be true. These words declare, that not the
real presence was aduouched by the word Amen, but the spiritual
participation of the mystical body of Christ by the faithful.

But Leo, Ser. 6. de Ieiu. 7. mensis says, Sic sacrae, etc, you ought so to
communicate of the holy table, that ye dout nothing at all, of the truth of
the body and blood of Christ, for that thing is taken in the mouth, which is
believed in faith. And Amen is in vain answered of them who dispute against
that which is received. In these sayings Sander urges, that it is received
with the mouth, as though Leo did mean, that whatsoever was believed in faith,
was received in the mouth, yet the word is are sumitur, it is received by the
mouth, which is not all one with, in the mouth. For the body of Christ may be
received by the mouth, as by an instrument that receaueth the visible sacrament
thereof, and yet the body is not received into the mouth. But Leo speaks
manifestly, against the Manichees, which denied that Christ had a true body:
exhorting Christians not to doubt thereof, for except they believed
faithfully, that Christ had a true body, they could not with their mouth
receive a sacrament of that body, which they believed not to be, nor truly
answer Amen, when they disputed against the truth of that body whereof the
visible sacrament was a sign, token, and argument, and so used by Tertullian,
against the Marcionites that likewise denied the verity of Christ's body.

Wherefore in this Chapter, Sander proves nothing less then in the title he
promises.

CAP. IX.
That no man possibly can be condemned, for believing the Sander.
body of Christ to be really present in the sacrament of the (...)ltar.

His title is of no man possibly, but his demonstration Fulk.
is a simple poor man persuaded chanceably so by his teachers upon color of
Christ's almighty power, and will pretended in promising, that he will give
his flesh and words, in saying; this is my body. As for them that are simply
deceived, they stand or fall to God, I will neither judge of their condemnation,
nor absolution. But such as obstinately defend, that error, contrary to their
own conscience, as a great number of the Papists, which pretend faith, and
seek nothing else but the overthrow of faith, and the glory of God, for as
much as that error employeth a denial of the truth of Christ's humanity, and
consequently the truth of the resurrection of our bodies, which must be made
like unto the glorious body of Christ, and infers manifest Idolatry in
worshipping that for GOD, which is a mere creature: I see not how they can
escape eternal damnation. As for their defense which Sander makes, is
frivolous. First of the almighty power of God, which is to do whatsoever he
will, and is agreeable to his glory, and not whatsoever we will imagine. He can
not therefore make his body to be in many places at once, or to be without
dimension of quantity, or to be invisible and intangible, because he has
determined of his will to the contrary in five hundredth places of scripture.
which testify of the truth of his humanity, like unto his brethren in all
points, without sin. Neither does it derogate from his omnipotency, that
he can not do contrary to his will, which were against his own glory.

It is no infirmity in God, that he cannot lie, that he cannot sin, that he
cannot deny himself, nor do contrary to his will and glory; but an argument
of his power, wisdom, and goodness.

And whereas Sander says, that Christ has determined his will in saying: The
bread which I will give, is my flesh, which I will give for ye life of the
world: I answer, he has determined no such will of giving his flesh in the
Sacrament by these words, but of giving his flesh to suffer death for the
redemption of the world, which is the bread whereof he speaks so often in
that Chapter to be eaten spiritually by faith, not only in the supper, but in
baptism, and without both ye sacraments, by faith only, which was eaten of
all the faithful before the incarnation of Christ, without the eating of which
bread of life, no mortal creature can be partaker of eternal life. Further,
where Sander says: that Christ said, This is my body, and gave his twelve
disciples twelve fragments or pieces, whereby he showed, that he made the
substance of his body present under ye forms of bread in diverse places etc: I
answer, he declared no will of multiplying his body in diverse places at one
time by such words or fact. For seeing he had so often before testified, ye
truth of his humanity, in so much yt he termed himself usually, the son of
man, and afterward offered his body to be touched and handled for trial of ye
truth of his resurrection: these words were not sufficient, to teach his
disciples, yt his natural body could at one time be visible and invisible,
tangible and intangible, in local situation and not in local situation, to be
whole in one place, and whole in many places, to have quantity actually of
length breadth, and thickenes, and to have no quantity, actually of length
breadth and thicknes: these contradictions I say being against nature, reason,
sense, his former doctrine, and the scriptures touching the truth of his
natural body, and his argument taken of the senses after his resu^rection,
could not be persuaded with only saying, This is my body, for as much as
they had heard him say many things in like phrase, where no like
understanding could be imagined, and the scripture speaking of the sacraments,
uses ordinarily to call them by the names of these things whereof they are
sacraments. Wherefore there is no doubt, but the disciples understood these
words figuratively, sacramentally, and spiritually. And concerning the
fragments and pieces whereof Sander speaks, he is a shamed to call them
fragments or pieces of bread, as Cyrillus does, of whom he borrowed the phrase,
lest he should acknowledge bread to be any part of the Sacrament. But what
declaration can he make of the will of Christ, concerning transubstantiation of
the bread into his body, which even the schoolmen affirm, cannot be proved
out of the scriptures? And seeing Sander in his fond Dialogisme, induces
Christ saying: that one of his works cannot be contrary to another: seeing his
ascension, abiding in heaven, and coming from thence to judgment, are
contrary to this imagined presence; and those articles are plainly and
manifestly set forth to be believed: how can these only four words, This is
my body, which may have another interpretation, agreeable to all the sayings
and works of God, make such a declaration of the will of Christ, as thereby
the truth of his humanity remaining after it was assumed of the deity and
the resurrection of our bodies depending thereupon, the ascension, abiding of
Christ in heaven, and his coming from thence to judgment: although in words
they be not denied, yet are and must be brought in doubt, question and
uncertainty? The other false bragges of this interpretation, universally
received and always taught and believed, I omit, with his shameless slanders
of Luthers life, and death, whereof the one has been sufficiently, and many
times confuted: the other is so well known, and to so many wise and godly,
with whom he lived and among whom he dyed, that next unto the authority of the
scriptures, no one thing more discovers the falsehood of the Papists, then
their impudent slanders and lies, maliciously devised against the true
professors of the Gospel.

The seventh Book.
To the Preface.
SAnder having finished the sixth book, supposed to have ended his labor, but
then came forth the B. of Salisburies reply unto Doctor Hardings book,
whereupon he was moved to answer that article, which concerned the real
presence. But because the words of both their books were too large to be
inserted in this his volume, he has chosen the pyth of either (as he
affirms) with such fidelity, as Master Jewel should find no fault with
him. For my part, I was likewise purposed to have omitted the answer of this
appendix, partly because Master Jewels defense of the Apology, being set
forth after this book of Sander, the chief matters are therein by Master
Jewel himself wayed and answered: partly, because Sander, brings no new
matter in this reply, but either such as he has brought in the six books
before: and partly because his chief and most general answer, is nothing,
but a begging of the whole matter in controversy, with an affirming and
denying, grounded upon his own authority. By means whereof in this one
article, he has noted iump 218 untruths: how well and justly, let the
readers of his book, and Master Jewels reply, be judges. As for me, I will
not examine them all, but only so many as touch the controversy, with any
show of argument, saving that in a few of the first, I will give the reader a
taste, that he may judge of the rest. And whereas he charge the Bishop
for setting one truth against another, for falsifying of autorities, for
misconstruing of their meaning etc: as the matters shall occur, I will not
fail to consider them.

CAP. I.
Master Jewel has not answered Doctor Harding well, touching Sander.
the words of Christ's supper in this article, Fol. 316. The people was not
taught in the first six hundredth years, to believe, that Christ's body is
really, substantially, corporally, carnally, or naturally in the Sacrament.

To give a taste (as I promised) of Sanders collection of untruths, I will
examine a few. Fulke.


The first untruth is noted to be this: Master Jewel said, Whether Christ's
body be corporally in the Sacrament, Harding answers not one word. Harding
had said, The terms really, substantially etc. are sound in the doctors,
treating of the true being of Christ's body in the Sacrament, Ergo (says
Sander) Master Jewel said not truly: for he proves afterward, Christ's
body to be in the Sacrament. Here the reason of this untruth is, the whole
matter in controversy, whether Harding have proved in deed that which he
intended.

The 2. untruth. Jewel says, in this matter he is able to allege nothing
for direct proof. Harding had said, Christian people have ever been so
taught, of that kind of presence, which is founded upon Christ's plain words:
Ergo says Sander, he was able to allege somewhat. But what, I pray you? That
Christian people were ever so taught: which is false, that this doctrine is
grounded upon Christ's words, which is false also. For what one doctor affirms
the presence according to the article? Harding says the three Evangelists and
Saint Paul: Ergo says Sander, there is ye third untruth: for M. Jewel has
words plainly written etc. But if these words prove the presence according to
the article, the controversy should be at an end.

The 4. untruth is, that M. Jewel says, Harding upon the words of the
institution, foundeth his carnal presence in such gross sort, really, and
fleshly in the Sacrament. Sander replieth it is less carnal, gross, and
fleshly, to have the substance of Christ's corporal flesh, in a spiritual
manner, really present under the form of bread, then to be in his mothers
womb, as Marcion, and Apelles counted it, or to make a lie, when he said,
take, eat, this etc: As though the granting of Christ's humanity, proved
the Popish presence, which is contrary to the truth of his humanity, or that
Christ might not say truly, the Sacrament to be his body, except it were
after that manner, his body. His presence in spiritual manner, we grant, but
we understand spiritual manner, to be otherwise then invisibly, for many
things may be so present, that they are not seen, and yet be not spiritually,
but corporally present.

The fifth untruth is, that M. Jewel says: Christ uses no leading to that
carnal presence.

Sander answers: The word This, leads the Apostles to that understanding,
as if I say, this is a Lion, it will follow under this visible form, that I
show, a Lion is substantially contained, etc. As right as a rams horn. If I
show a king or a strong man, I may say truly in some sense, This is a Lion.
For if I show one substance, and affirm another of it, the speech must needs
be either false, or figurative.

The sixth untruth, and a forged lie is, that Master Jewel says, D. Fisher
says, this sense cannot in any wise be gathered of the bare words of Christ.
Fishers words, as Sander reherseth them, are these: No man shall prove by the
bare words of the Gospel, that any priest in these days, does consecrate the
true body and blood of Christ. Again. No word is put whereby it may be
proved, that in our mass, the very presence of Christ's body and blood is
made. Judge indifferently of the words, what lie Jewel has forged. Although
Fisher meant, that by the interpretation of the fathers, and practice of the
Church, the understanding of the Gospel is more certainly obtained: then by
the bare words of the Gospel. But Fisher has other words: Non potest igitur
per illam scripturam probari, quod aut laicus aut sacerdos quoties id negotij
tentauerit, pari modo conficiet ex pane vinoque Christi corpus and sanguinem,
atque Christus ipse conficit, cum nec is^ud in scripturis contineatur: which M.
Jewel begins to english thus, It cannot therefore be proved by any
scripture. Here Sander plays the schoolmaster, and apposeth him. What cannot
be proved M. Jewel? give me the nominative case to the verb non potest, it
cannot, says Sander. What cannot? Whereupon is grounded the 7. untruth, when
Jewel says: Doct. Fisher says, the carnal presence cannot be proved neither
by these words (this is my body) nor by any other. But I put case Master
Jewel would answer your deep demand, in saying, that potest in this
place, is a verb impersonall, and therefore he can give it no nominative case
at all, but must english it thus, non potest it cannot. If you will ask him,
why he says then the carnal presence cannot be proved, as though presence
were the nominative case: he will answer you, he does not so construe, or
translate the Latin, but he infers that conclusion, upon Fishers words. No
word is put whereby it may be proved, that in our Mass the very presence of
Christ's body and blood is made. But your learning, will have the whole speech
following to be the nominative. I say, let it so be, if you will needs have
it so, yet Master Jewels conclusion is true: That Fisher affirms the carnal
presence cannot be proved to be made, either by lay man or Priest: ergo it
cannot be proved at all. Yet says Sander, How many enormous faults have
you committed here, master Jewel? First Harding affirmed these words, This
is my body, to teach a real presence: Fisher spoke of these words, Make this
thing, and not of these words, This is my body. This were an enormous fault,
if Fisher had not said, Non potest per vllam scripturam probari, it cannot be
proved by any scripture: but seeing he said so, this is an enormous,
slanderous, impudent, and foolish lie, and cavil of Sander. Secondly, Harding
spoke of the real presence, if any sacrament be made at al: Fisher, whether
any man had authority to make any Sacrament at all or no. When you can find
Hardings if, or condition, you shall be answered to Fishers whether or question.
Thirdly Harding spoke of Christ's words; Fisher of our doings. If the scripture
be not Christ's words, Fisher spoke only of our doings. 4 Fisher doubted not
but the words made the presence, but he asks the heretics how they can
prove it by the holy scriptures. Nay sir, he affirms precisely, that it
cannot be proved by the scripture. These are the four great enormous fault. I
trust after this taste, no man is desirous to examine the rest of Sanders
untruths, falsely fathered upon Master Jewel. Wherefore I will go from
henceforth only to the matter in controversy. Hitherto you hear not Master
Jewels article disproued. Videlicet, that the people were not taught, etc. as
in the beginning of the Chapter. The question, being not of the words, but of
the meaning, says Jewel, Christ meant not this to be his body really. Hereto
Sander alleges a place of Hilarie: lib. 8. de Trin. to prove, that Christ
lacked neither wisdom, nor utterance, to speak plainly of his Sacraments,
and mysteries: which is very true, for he spoke plainly, syncerely, and
truly, although he spoke figuratively. Neither did he speak otherwise then
he meant, seeing it is his body after a certain manner, as Augustine says.

But seeing here are three or four persons speaking: M. Jewel, M. Harding, M.
Sander, and my self: it shall not be amiss to bring their several speeches
in form of a Dialogue for briefness, as Sander gives me example.

Jewel. Christ was the Rock, but yet not really.


Sand. S. Paul spoke not these words with intent to make any sacrament, or
any other thing.


Fulke. S. Paul spoke these words of a Sacrament, made by God in the wilderness.


Sand. Two diverse natures in those words are named, which can not be one
substance. But this is my body names one substance.


Fulke. One substance is demonstrated, and another named. Moses might have said
truly, showing the rock to the people. This is Christ, or else S. Paul could
not have said truly, the rock was Christ.


Sand. It was not any one certain rock, whereof S. Paul spoke, for ye water
flowed out of two Rocks. Either of which did signify Christ, and they both are
only one Rock in meaning, and in substance figured: therefore Saint Paul
meant only of the spiritual Rock, which is Christ.


Fulke. Manna, which was the spiritual meat they did eat, rayned every day,
yet was it but one Christ in signification: therefore S. Paul meant only of
the spiritual Manna, which is Christ, and not of the corporal Manna which was
a sacrament of Christ: if this reason hold not of the spiritual meat, how
can it hold of the spiritual drink?


Jewel. Christ gave his disciples (as S. Augustine says) the figure of his
body and blood.


Sand. He did so: but he gave such a figure, as is also the substance of his
body, as himself being a figure of his fathers substance, is also the
selfsame substance with his father.


Fulke. As he gave a figure, he gave not the substance. Christ is the figure of
his fathers substance, as he is a person distinct by himself, and not his
father. Neither does Augustine mean, of such an unity in essence, as is
between God the father and the son, when he does plainly divide, sacramentum
and rem sacramenti, the Sacrament, and the thing or matter of the sacrament:
that is the figure, and the thing figured.


Sand. He gave a true and not a false sign, lib. 2. ca. 12. A miraculous, not
a common figure. lib. 2. cap. 13. A mystical, not an artificial figure lib. 5.
cap. 16. A divine, not a rhetorical figure. lib. 2. cap 14.


Fulke. These are answered in their proper places above cited.


Sand. He gave a figure of the new testament which has truth, and not which
betokens a thing absent from it, which August. declares in Psa. 39. The old
fathers did celebrate the figures of the thing to come. etc.


Fulke. Augustine in this place, and in many other makes this difference
between the sacrament of the old Testament, and of the new, yt theirs were of
Christ to come, once of Christ exhibited and already come, but of the real
presence he speaks no word. Ablata sunt signa promittentia etc. The promising
signs are taken away, because the truth that was promised, is exhibited. In
this body we are, of this body we are partakers. Speaking of the body of
Christ which was sacrificed once for all, in which we are after a mystical
manner included and are also partakers thereof, after a mystical manner, and
so were all that ever pleased GOD: not after a corporal manner, such as the
Papists imagine: wherefore Augustine says upon the same Psalm, alluding to
the celebration of the Sacrament, Sursum corda habcamus. Siresurrexistis cum
Christo, dicit fidelibus, corpus and sanguinem domini accipientibus dicit etc.
Let us have our hearts above. If ye be risen again with Christ, he speaks
to the faithful, he speaks to them which receive the body and blood of
our Lord, if you be risen again with Christ, savor of these things yt are
above, where Christ is sitting at the right hand of God, etc. Behold Augustine
teaches how to receive Christ truly, and not as he says elsewhere,
Sacramento tenus, as far as the sacrament, or outward sign only.


Sand. He gave a figure, but he spoke not a figure.


Fulke. Augustine affirms both proved li. 2. cap. 14.


Sand. The names of body and blood do usually signify a visible, corruptible
and mortal nature, which Augustine knowing, was a fraide lest children would
think that Christ had walked on the earth, none otherwise then in the shape of
bread: for that respect, he always teaches that the body of Christ in the
sacrament, is the sign and figure of Christ's visible body.


Fulke. Augustine feared no such matter de Trin. lib. 3. cap. 10. but only by
way of a similitude shows, that if children should never learn more of
Christ, then that the Sacrament should be showed them and told them, that it
is the body of Christ, and also if they should never see the shape of bread
but only in the celebration of the sacrament, they would imagine, that Christ
had appeared only in that shape: but this is impossible, therefore Augustine
could not fear it. And seeing he had no such fear, he had no such respect,
as Sander dreameth, as well concerning his fear, as concerning his respect.


Jew. Tertullian says: This is my body, that is to say, the figure of my body.


Sand. He means so as I said before of S. Augustine, and speaks against
the Marcionites which denied the truth of Christ's body.


Fulk. Tertullian proves, that Christ had a true body, because the sacrament
was a figure thereof: for a pha^tasme or a vain thing, can have no figure.
Wherefore Sander, and not Master Jewel, reasons like a Marcionite,
confounding the figure with the thing figured.


Sand. Tertullian speaking most literally of bread, as it was an old figure of
Christ's body, whereof in Jeremy it was said, Let us put the wood of the
cross into his bread, to wit upon his body, says: Christ then fulfilling
the old figures, made bread his body: if he did so, it could not tarry bread
any longer.


Fulk. This place of Tertullian is shamefully mangled both in words and sense.
Tertullian asks. But why did he call bread his body, and not rather a pepon
which Marcion accounted in steed of an heart, not understanding, that this was
an ancient figure of the body of Christ, saying by Jeremy: Against me have
they thought a thought, saying: Come, let us cast wood on his bread, that is,
the cross on his body. Therefore the lightener of antiquities, sufficiently
declared what he would have bread then to have signified, when he calls
bread his body. These words declare, wherefore Christ did appoint bread to
signify his body, in his supper: namely because it had been an ancient figure
of his body, in so much that it was called bread. But he made bread his body,
therefore it is not his body still. I answer, Tertullian shows how he made
it his body, when he expounds it by the name of the figure of his body.
Baptism being made regeneration, is still a washing with water. The rock when
it was made Christ, remained still a rock. etc.


Jew. After consecration, says Saint Ambrose, the body of Christ is signified.


Sand. S. Ambrose de mist. cap. (...). does speak of that signification, which
is made whiles the priest pronounces: Hoc est corpus meum, which words he
says, do work in the consecration, that which they signify: therefore they
work the body and blood of Christ.


Fulk. Fie for shame, Sander, when Ambrose says, Post consecrationem, after
consecration, will you say he speaks of the signification of the words
which as spoken in the time of the consecration? the words of Christ indeed
do work, as Ambrose says, and what work they, but that which is added to
the elements after consecration? namely a signification of the body of Christ.


Jew. It is a bondage and death of the soul says S. Augustine, to take the
sign in steed of the things signified.


Sand. Saint Augustine means of such kind of signs, when either the thing
which appears to be signified, is not at all true according to the letter,
or else, when the thing signified is absent in substance. etc.


Fulk. Saint Augustine de Doct. Chr. lib. 3. cap. 5. speaks expressly of
figurative speeches, when they are understood, as if they were proper: and cap
16. of the same book, giving a rule to know figurative speeches from proper,
he exemplifieth, the eating of the flesh of Christ, and drinking his blood,
to be a figurative speech. Wherefore you see master Jewels article of challenge
stands untouched, for any thing brought in this chapter: And that Sander can
yield no good cause why master Jewel has not fully answered Harding touching
the words of Christ's supper.


CAP. II.
Sand. That the supper of Christ is a naked and bare figure according to the
doctrine of the Sacramentaries.


Fulk. Sander will acknowledge nothing in the sacrament, whatsoever we teach,
protest, and believe, except we acknowledge his real presence, but a bare
figure.


Sand. S. Hilarie, and S. Cyrill teach, that the nature of signs or seals is
such, as sets forth y^ whole form of the kind of thing, printed in them
and have no less in them, then those things whence they are sealed.


Fulk. Such a seal we believe the Lords supper to be of Christ's death and our
redemption.


Jew. He must mount on high, says Chrysostom whosoever will reach to that body.


San. Accedere is to come to, and not to reach He spoke of coming to the
visible table.


Fulk. He spoke of coming to the visible table, so as we might attain to ye
body of Christ, which is in heaven, and for yt cause he said, we must be eagles
in this life. Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. Ho. 24.


Sand. He says, Ipsa mensa, The very table is our salvation, and life. And
again: This mystery makes yt while^ we be in this life, earth may be heaven
to us.


Fulk. As earth is heaven to us, and the table salvation, so is the sacrament
the body of Christ.


Jew. Send up thy faith (says Augu.) and thou have taken him.


Sand. The place is abused. See lib. 2. cap. 29.


Fulk. And see the answer there.


Jew. The bread yt we receive with our bodily mouths, is an eathly thing, and
therefore a figure, as the water in baptism.


Sand. The water in baptism is no figure, but ye figure is ye word coming to
the water. As the water in baptism is no figure, when ye words are absent, so
bread could not be a figure any longer, when the words are fully past.


Fulk Master Jewel speaks of ye water whereunto ye word is come, which as it
remains no sacrament, after the use of baptism, no more does ye bread out of
the use of receiving. That consecration consists in the only words, This is
my body, it is false: For Christ's words are more, Take, eat, etc.


Jew. The body of Christ is y^ thing it self, and no figure.


Sand. The body of Christ under ye form of bread, is it self both ye thing,
and also a figure of y^ mystical unity of the Church. So S. Hilary teaches.
The natural property by a sacrament, is a sacrament of perfect unity. See
libr. 5. Chap. 5.


Fulk. The natural property is not the personal substance, or proper nature of
Christ. See ye answer as above.


Jew. In respect of the body, we have no regard to the figure, whereunto S.
Bernarde alluding says: The sealing ring is nothing worth: it is the
inheritance I sought for.


Sand. What a desperate custom is it for you, to allege always ye fathers
of the last 900. years, whom you have already condemned?


Fulk. What a devilish custom is it for you, always to lie and slander?


Sand. S. Bernard says, the body and blood it self to be the sign: Vt
securi suis etc. That you may be without fear, you have the inuestiture of
our Lords sacrament, his precious body and blood.


Fulk. You falsify Bernards words in translation, and pervert his meaning: Vt
securi suis sacramenti dominici corporis and sanguinis preciosi inuestituram
habetis. That you may be without fear, you have the inuestitute of the
sacrament of the body of our Lord, and of his precious blood. The sacrament
is the inuestiture as the ring, and not the body of Christ. If the body of
Christ were the ring of the inuestiture, Bernard would not have said, the
ring is nothing worth. Yet the sacrament as a seal puts us in assurance of
the inheritance, and not bate bread, as Sander bableth.


CAP. III.
Sand. That Christ's body is received by mouth, and not by faith only.


Jew. The body of Christ is to be eaten by faith only, and none otherwise.


Sand. You are the mainteiner of a blasphemous heresy, and affirm the same
which the Arrians did.


Fulk. Master Jewel is more free from Arrianisme, then you from Eutychianisme.


Sand. Christ said after bread taken, etc. Take, eat, this is my body, but he
spoke of eating by mouth, and not by faith alone, and the thing eaten to be
his own body: therefore his body is not eaten by faith only, but by mouth also.


Fulke. That which was to be eaten with mouth, was bread in nature, and his
body in mystery, which body was to be eaten by faith, and not by mouth, as the
bread was to be eaten by mouth and not by faith.


Sander. All that was eaten by mouth or by faith, at Christ's supper, came from
Christ: but all that he is written to have given, came from his hands:
therefore either his body was not eaten by faith at all, or his body came then
from his own hands. Answer the Gospel, master Jewel, or else blaspheme no
more.


Fulke. I deny your minor. For it is written: The spirit it is, that gives
life, the flesh profits nothing. Ioh. 6. Life, remission or sins,
participation of his death etc. were given, but not all, nor at all, by his
hands, but by his divine spirit.


Sander The fathers teach, that we eat Christ's body by our mouths, and not
die faith only.


Fulke. They teach, we eat the Sacrament, which is so called, and which after
a certain manner is the body of Christ, but not absolutely.


Sander. S. Cyprian says of evil men. Ser. de lap. 5. Plus modo, they sin
now more against our Lord, with their hands and mouth, then when they denied
our Lord.


Fulke. They sin against our Lord in receiving the Sacrament unworthily, more
then in denying, because denying was of weakness, this other of hypocrisy.


Sander. Cyprian says, the sin is inuading and doing violence to our Lords
body and blood.


Fulke. That is to the Sacrament thereof, for our Lords body is impassible.


Sander. Chrysostom witnesses, us to take in our hands, in our mouths, to
touch, to eat, to receive into us Christ's flesh: is all this done by faith
only?


Fulke. Chrysostom witnesses we see, All the people to be made red, with the
blood of Christ. Is that otherwise then by faith? Desacerd. lib. 3. He says
Christ i^ broken in the Sacrament, which he was not on the cross. Is that done
really? in 1. Cor. Hom. 24.


Sander. Pope Leo writes thus of the matter, ye ought so to communicate, that
ye doubt nothing, etc.


Fulke. Pope Leo is answered lib. 5. Cap. 8.


Sander. Cyril against the Arrian lib. 10. Cap. 13. shows us to eat Christ
corporally.


Fulke. You slander Cyril, he says the virtue of the mystical blessing,
makes Christ to dwell in us corporally, by participation of the flesh of
Christ, and not by faith and love only.


Jewel. Christ's body is meat of the mind, not of the belly, says S. Cyprian.


Sander. I find no such words in Cyprian, but whosoever spoke them, it will
follow, that the meat he speaks of, is not material bread.


Fulke. If you find not the words in Cyprian, you may find them in Gregory,
who by error of the printer, is called Cyprian, and you may find the sense in
Cyprian: we sharpen not our teeth, nor prepare our belly, but with sincere
faith, we break the holy bread. You find in ser. de coena Dom. That the body
of Christ is not material bread, we agree with you, and ever did.


Jewel. Believe and thou have eaten, says S. Augustine of Christ's blessed
body.


Sander. These words are not offacramental eating, but of spiritual eating.


Fulke. He says, vt quid paras dentes and* ventrem? to what end do thou
prepare thy teeth and belly? believe and thou have eaten. Therefore he shows,
that Christ is not received by mouth and belly, but by faith only.


Jewel. It is better to use the word figure, than the words really,
corporally.


Sander. It is better to use the words body, blood, flesh, which are the
words of scripture, than the word Figure, which is used of the fathers only.


Fulk. Master Jewel compares not the word figure, with the words of
scripture, but with the words really, corporally, used neither in scripture,
nor in the fathers.


CAP. IIII.
Sander. Master Jewel has not replied well, touching the sixth Chapter of
Saint John, but has abused as well the Gospel, as diverse authorities of the
fathers.


Harding. The promise of giving the flesh which Christ would give for life of
the world, being only performed in the supper, proves the very same
substance to be in the Sacrament of the supper, which was offered upon the
cross, for the life of the world.


Jewel. Master Harding supposes no man to eat the flesh of Christ, but only
in the Sacrament.


Sander. He denies not, but that Christ's flesh may be eaten spiritually, both
by faith and by baptism, but not really, save only in the supper.


Fulke. If Christ speak there only of his gift in the supper, then all are
void of life eternal that receive not the supper: Except ye eat, etc.


Jewel. The words be plain and general, unless ye eat the flesh of the
son of man, ye shall have no life in you.


Sander He says, ye shall not have life in you.


Fulke. A diversity without a difference.


Sander. He means of him who having discretion, to prove himself, refuses
to receive the Sacrament of Christ's supper.


Fulke. This is a gloss of your own discretion, and not the meaning of
Christ's words, who denies life to all them, that are not fed with his
flesh and blood.


Jewel. Seeing Christian children receive not the Sacrament, by Master Hading
it will follow, they have no life.


Sander. It will follow they have not in themselves, the flesh of life, as
Cyrillus ^aith, in their bodies, but it is an untrue sequel, to say, they have
no life at all: for they have spiritual life in baptism.


Fulke. They could have no life in baptism, if they were not fed with the
flesh and blood of Christ, without which, there is no life at all* whatsoever
it please Sander to gloss.


Jewel. S. Ambrose says, Christ gives this bread to all men daily, and at all
times.


Sander. He may mean of the gift which is in spirit, or which is daily ready
in the Sacrament.


Fulke. He does mean, that the bread is not given only in the Sacrament,
which is not given to all men, nor at all times.


Jewel. S. Augustine says: They eat Christ's body not only in the Sacrament,
but also in very deed. Behold not only in the Sacrament.


Sander. S. Augustine speaks of the mystical body, which is the company of
the elect, and the holy Church of God, not of the natural body, which sits
at the right hand of God.


Fulke. Augustine says, qui ergo est, etc. He then that is in the unity of
his body, that is in the couiunction of Christian members (the Sacrament of
which body, the faithful communicating are accustomed to receive from the
altar) he is to be said truly to eat ye body of Christ and to drink the
blood of Christ. De ciui. Dei. li. 21. Cap. 25. In the same Chapter he
apposeth, Sacramento tenus and reuera manducare corpus Christi, to eat the
body of Christ as far as the Sacrament, and to eat the body of Christ in very
deed. Ergo they that eat the Sacrament only, eat not the body of Christ in
very deed. Therefore Christ's gift is not only in the Sacrament.


Jewel. The fathers of the old law, received the self same body, that is now
received of the faithful. Aug. de vtil. p^n. Cap. 1.


Sander. Augustine says, the self same spiritual meat, that is Christ by
faith, but not the same corporal meat, which is the body of Christ, Tract.
11. in Joan.


Fulke. Augustine says not, that the body of Christ is our corporal meat, but
that which answers in proportion to Manna, as a corporal meat, namely bread
and wine. Tract. 26.


Sander. But Tract. 11. he says, Quid est Manna? what it Manna? I am, says
Christ, the living bread that came down from heaven.


Fulke. It follows immediately, Manna accipiunt fideles, the faithful
receive Manna: therefore he means not Manna in this place for the corporal
meat, but for the body of Christ, which is spiritual meat.


Sander. But he says further: It is known what God had rained from heaven.
And know not the Catechumeni what Christians take? Let them blush because they
know not. Let them pass over by the red sea. Let them eat Manna, that even
as they have believed in the name of Jesus, so Jesus may commit him self to
them. Therefore, Jesus is eaten bodily of us after baptism.


Fulke I deny the argument, except Manna be Jesus bodily. If Manna be
spiritually taken, then Jesus is eaten in the Sacrament as he was in Manna,
which Sander confesses to be only spiritually.


Sander. But Catechumeni might so eat Christ, that is spiritually.


Fulke. They might not eat Christ in the Sacrament, before they were baptized,
and therefore they were ignorant of that mystery.


Jewel. Every faithful man is made partaker of the body and blood of Christ
in baptism, whiles he finds that unity which is signified by the Sacrament:
Therefore, the faithful eat Christ's body otherwise then in the Sacrament.
Apud Bedam, 1. Cor. 10.


Sander. They are not partakers really, but only in the Sacrament of the
supper, in which, if the body were not really present, he that is baptized,
should not at all be partaker of the Sacrament of Christ's supper, because he
is not partaker of bread and wine, but only is made a member of that mystical
body, which in the Sacrament is signified.


Fulke. Beda knew no such distinction of really and spiritually. Neither does
he say, they are partakers of the Sacrament of the supper, but of the body
and blood of Christ in baptism: wherefore I know not whereof Sander dreameth.


Sander. Augustine says of heretics and schismatikes, de ciuit. Dei, lib. 21.
Cap. 25. They are not in that bond of peace which is expressed in that
sacrament. The bond of peace expressed, is not the wheaten corns molded in one
loaf, but the body of Christ present really under the forms of bread and wine.


Fulke. Alack poor sophistry. Christ is the bond of peace, but the bond of
peace is expressed in the external Sacrament of bread and wine. Although the
wheaten corns are not the bond of peace expressed, yet the bond of peace is
expressed by the wheaten corns, etc.


Sander. Look in my 5. book, Cap 5.


Fulke. Look there for an answer.


CAP. V.
Sander. Master Jewel has not replied well, touching the Capernaites.


Harding. If Christ in S. John had spoken tropically, the Jews and disciples,
who were used to figures, would not have said: This is an hard saying.


Jewel. His reason hangs thus: The Capernaites understood not Christ: ergo
his body is really in the Sacrament.


Sander. No sir, They understood Christ to speak without parables, and
Christ's words pertain to ye sacrament, therefore his body is really in the
Sacrament. They understood what Christ promised, but they believed it to be
either not possible, or not convenient.


Fulke. The mayor and minor of your misshapen syllogism, are both false.
Augustine in Ps. 33. Exhorruerunt sermonem, etc. They were afraid of his
speech, and not understanding, they thought our Lord Jesus Christ had spoken
some hard thing, etc.


Sander. S. Augustine says, they understood not, because they believed not.
in Joan. Tr. 27.


Fulke. What though infidelity were ye cause of their not understanding, yet
he says, Non intellige^do scandalizati sunt, By not understanding, they were
offended: ergo you said falsely, they understood what he promised. And much
less understood they the mean how it should be performed.


Jewel. He said, The bread which I will give etc. of spiritual eating: It is
the spirit that quickens. Understand ye my words spiritually, says
Augustine.


Sander. See in my third book, Cap. 19. and 20.


Fulke. See the answer in the same places.


Jewel. Ye shall not eat, says S Augustine (with your bodily mouth) this body
that you see, etc. I give you a certain Sacrament.


Sander. Of this place I have spoken at large, lib. 6. Cap. 2. and lib. 3. Cap.
14.


Fulk. And I have sufficiently answered in ye same places.


Sander. Beside this great dissimulation of S. Augustines meaning, Master Jewel
has false translations.


Fulke. Sander heth foolish quarrels: master Jewel gives the sense faithfully.


Jewel. We have a spiritual mouth, taste, eyes, ears, as Basil, Leo, Origin,
Tertullian say, Christ is to be digested by faith, he is the bread of the
mind, not of the belly, to believe in him, that is to eat the living bread:
therefore Christ's meaning is spiritual and not real.


Sander. The fondest kind of reasoning in ye world. Christ is eaten both
spiritually and bodily.


Fulke. Al these fathers mean only spiritual eating, excluding all other
carnal and grosser manners of eatings.


Sander. Does not Tertullian say, The flesh is fed with the body and blood
of Christ, to the end the scule may be made fatt of God?


Fulke. Tertullian speaks manifestly of the external Sacraments, which have
the name of the things signified, as of ye signs of baptism, impositio^ of
hands. etc.


Jewel. Chrysostom will not suffer this evasion: who says, to understand
carnally, is to understand plainly, as the things be uttered, and to think
upon nothing else.


Sander. We understand not so. For we seeing the form of bread, think upon
the body of Christ.


Fulke. But what did the Capernaites see, whose understanding you defend? And
what other thing do you understand, then is uttered in the words?


Jewel. S. Augustine says: The saying of Christ is a figure or manner of
speech, commanding us to be partakers of Christ's passion.


Sander. The speech is figurative, not in the substance to be eaten, but in the
manner of eating: therefore when Christ had consecrated bread into his body,
that speech was not figurative, because the manner of eating was determined
under the forms of bread and wine.


Fulk. Saint Augustine has stopped that starting hole, expounding ye meaning
of that figurative speech, not of eating Christ under the form of bread, but
of communicating with the passion of Christ, which is represented by the
Sacrament, and is performed without the Sacrament. So you fail, both in your
substance and manner of eating.


Sander. Of the whole saying of Augustine, I have entreated more fully, lib. 3.
Cap. 14.


Fulke. And I have answered more fully.


Jewel. Tertullian says: The Capernaits thought his speech was hard, and
intolerable, as though he had determined to give them his flesh verily, and in
deed to be eaten (with their mouths) therein says Tertullian stood their
error.


Sander. The word ve(...) does not show that they took it to be eaten in
substance, but that they thought they should eat it carnally, they thought not
of eating under the form of bread.


Fulke. Not only the word vere, must needs show they thought the substance
of his flesh should be eaten verily, but also the argument of Tertullian
does plainly prove it. For he answers the objection of them that denied the
resurrection of the flesh, because of ye Angelike perfection, whereunto the
children of the resurrection shall be changed: showing that the perfection shall
not be through virtue of the flesh, but through the incorruption which the
flesh shall put on. Using a similitude of the flesh of Christ, which of it self
does profit nothing, but by virtue of the spirit, which makes it able to
give life. Wherefore the error of the Capernaits was, in that they imagined the
substance of Christ's flesh should be eaten bodily, which Tertullian affirmed
should be eaten spiritually, and by faith of his word only. As for the
authority of Lyra which follows, is not worth the contention.


CAP. VI.
Sander. Master Jewel has not conferred the supper with the sixth of S. John,
as it ought to be.


Jewel. Christ in S. John speaking of spiritual eating faith, made no mention
of any figure: But in his supper he added an outward Sacrament to the same
spiritual eating, which the fathers often call a figure.


Sander. If spiritual eating by faith be only spoken of, why says he dabo I
will give, when spiritual eating was already given?


Fulke. Because he would continue his giving, as he had done before, and
accomplish his passion, by which his flesh was made meat.


Sander. The perfourmance does expound the promise, especially when he says:
this is, etc.


Fulke. Here is no new promise, but a continuance of the old, of spiritual
eating by faith.


Sander. The fathers, who call Christ's supper a figure, must needs mean such
a figure as was promised.


Fulke. There was no figure promised in the sixth of John: therefore they mean
another thing then was there promised or spoken of.


Jewel. Master Harding puts no difference between things perteining
severally to the body and the spirit. Origin. in Cantic.


Sander. Origin does speak of them, who reading yt book would perhaps apply ye
names of love there used, carnally.


Fulke. Prolog. in Cantic. he speaks of diverse meat of the inward man, and
of the outward man. The meat of the outward man, is agreeable to his nature,
bodily and earthly. The meat of the inward man, is the bread which came down
from heaven, etc.


Sander You have set forth the book of canticles in the vulgar tongue,
contrary to Origens judgment, to be read of every wanton boy or girl.


Fulke. As though that book was not in the vulgar tongue in his time, when it
was in the Greek tongue. Beside that he says, the little ones can take no
great hurt if they read it, although it be meat for perfect men.


Jewel. The bread is a figure.


Sander. Before consecration, S. Ambrose confesses it to be a figure, but not
after the words are said over it.


Fulke. He confesses it to be bread before, and to be called the body of
Christ after consecration, and that the body of Christ is signified thereby. De
mist. Cap. 9. Yea he calls it a figure of the body and blood of Christ: De
Sacram lib. 4 Cap. 5. For it can be no figure of Christ before consecration.
Touching Damascen, and Rabanus Maurus, I will not strive, because they are both
later wnters then 600. years, although the later be clear against this piece
of Popery, the other not clearly for it.


Jewel. The Sacrament (says Augustine) is received from the Lords table: Of
some unto life, of some unto destruction: The thing it self whereof it is a
Sacrament (yt is the body of Christ) is received of every man to life, and of
no man unto destruction, whosoever be partakers of it.


Sander. Here is a heap of falsehood and lies.


Fulke. Here is an impudent cauillation.


Sander. The thing of the Sacrament, is not the body of Christ sitting in
heaven, but the company of Saints, and the unity of the body and blood of
Christ, not his natural body, but his mystical body the church. Therefore, he
says not simply: The Sacrament, but the Sacrament of this thing, that is to
say, of the body and blood of Christ, which five words, M. Jewel has left out.


Fulke. These five words help you as much as five eggs, whereof four be
rotten. For Augustine by them understands the flesh and blood, which Christ
promised to give, which if it be not the same body which sits in heaven,
that body which sits in heaven is not given (by his judgment) in the
Sacrament. For thus he writes upon these words of Christ, He that eats my
flesh, and drinks my blood, has life everlasting: Therefore he has not this
life, which eats not this bread nor drinks this blood. For temporal life
men may have without it, but eternal they cannot have at all. Therefore, he
that eats not his flesh, nor drinks his blood, has not life in himself:
and he that eats his flesh and drinks his blood, has life eternal. And
that he says, everlasting life, answers to both: it is not so in this meat
which we take for sustentation of the life of this body: for he which takes
it not, shall not live: and yet he shall not live which shall take it. For it
may be, that by old age or sickness, or some chance, many which shall take
it, may die: but in-this meat and drink, that is, in ye body and blood of our
Lord, it is not so, for both he which takes it not, has not life: and he
which takes it, has life, and yt verily eternal. Therefore he will have this
meat and drink understood to be ye fellowship of his body and his members,
which is ye holy church in his saints, and faithful ones predestined and
called, and justified, and glorified. Whereof ye first is already done, yt is
predestination, ye second and third is both done and is a doing, and shall be
done, ye is, calling and justification: but ye fourth is now in hope, and
shall be in deed, yt is glorification. The Sacrament of this thing, yt is, of ye
unity of ye body and blood of Christ, in some places daily, in some places by
certain distance of days, is prepared in ye Lords table, to some unto life,
to some unto destruction. But the thing it self, whereof also it is a Sacrament,
is to every man unto life, to no man unto destruction, whosoever shall be
partaker of it.

You have therefore gained thus much by your cauilling: that neither the flesh
and blood of Christ, promised in the sixth of John, nor the thing of the
Sacrament is the body of Christ which sits in heaven, but the participation
of his mystical body, and the fellowship or communion of his body, and the
members thereof, which is the assurance of eternal life. But where you say,
the Sacrament is that natural body of Christ which sits in heaven, you say
beside your book: for neither Augustine, nor any ancient father did ever say,
that the Sacrament of the body of Christ was the body of Christ, otherwise
then after a certain manner of speaking, as Augustine says.


Sander. The material bread was prepared by the Baker, ergo the Sacrament
prepared in the table, is the body of Christ.


Fulke. I deny the argument. The Baker prepares not the Sacrament, although
he prepare some part of ye earthly matter that is required unto it, more then
the sexton prepares the sacrament of baptism, by pouring of water into the
font.


CAP: VII.
Sander. Master Jewel has not disputed well, touching the omnipotency of
Christ, in promising the gift of (...) flesh.


Harding. Christ, by showing his divine power, whereby he will ascend into
heaven, confounds the unbelief of the Capernaites, touching the promised
substance of his body.


Jewel. When ye see Christ ascend whole, ye shall see, that he gives not his
body in such sort, as you imagine. His grace is not wasted by morsels, says
S. Augustine, vs^^g Christ's ascension to prove, that there is no su^^ gross
presence in the Sacrament.


Sander. He is not present to be wasted, but yet he is really eaten.


Fulke. S. Augustines place shows, that Christ reasoned not of his
omnipotency or divine power, but of the absence of his humanity by his
ascension, and that the thing which he promises to be eaten, is not his
natural flesh to be bitten in their mouths, but his grace to be received by
faith in their hearts.


Jewel. This table is the table for Eagles, and not for Iayes, says
Chrysostom.


Sander. I have answered your iangling of Iayes in my 2. book. Cap. 27.


Fulke. And I have confuted your babbling of Eagles in the same place.


Jewel. Saint Hierome says, Let us go up with the Lord (into heaven) into
that great parlour, and receive of him above, the cup of the new testament.


Sander. He says not into heaven, but into the great parlour, which is the
kingdom of the Church.


Fulke. But by the great parlour, into which Christ is ascended, he means
heaven, where the kingdom of the Church is, and not the earth, where the
Church is a stranger: the word heaven is added in Master Jewel for
explication, and not as part of Ieromes words.


Sander. Chrysostom interprets, the parlour for the Church, in Matthew. Hom.
38.


Fulke. Chrysostom was no interpreter of Jerome. In allegories, every man has
his own invention.


Sander. Christ gives his body and blood, he is the feastmaker and the
feast, he gave that Moses could not give.


Fulke. All is performed in the great parlour, which is heaven. We must
receive of him above the cup of the new testament.


Jewel. Cyrillus says: Our Sacrament avouches not the eating of a man,
leaving the minds of the faithful in ungodly manner to gross or fleshly
cogitations.


Sander. Cyrillus against Nestorius, denies the Sacrament to be the eating of
a bare man, not assumpted into God. I have spoken more, lib. 2. Cap. 25.


Fulke. Cyrillus denies the Sacrament to be (...) the eating of a man, and not
only the eating of such a man, as Nestorius blasphemed Christ to be, See lib.
2. Cap. 25.


Sander. Cyril says, that Christ sets before us the assumpted flesh of the
son man.


Fulke. Yea, but not in the Sacrament only, but as it was eaten of the fathers.
Ad Theod. de rect. fide.


Sander. He says moreover, the word is not able to be eaten. What, M. Jewel?
not by faith? yes verily, but not by mouth, but according to the dispe^satio^
of ye vnio^.


Fulke. God the word is not able to be eaten by faith, but in respect of the
dispensatiue union. Cyril speaks not of eating by mouth: for the properties
of both natures remain to be seen of us by innumerable reasons, as it
follows immediately. Grant eating of his flesh by mouth, and the property
of the humane nature is clean overthrown. Your charging of master Jewel with
the blasphemies of Nestorius deserves none answer.


Jewel. The old fathers, Chrysostom, Augustine, Leo, acknowledge Gods
omnipotency in baptism, yet is not Christ really there. Therefore it was vain
labor to allege his omnipotency for the real presence.


Sander. Baptism has no promise to be the flesh of Christ, therefore you have
lost your labor.


Fulke. Baptism has promise to wash us in ye blood of Christ, to incorporate
us into Christ, to make us partakers of his death, burial, and resurrection,
Romans 6. and yet no real presence required, no, not of the holy ghost,
otherwise than by effectual grace, working our regeneration and new birth.
Yea, Christ does wash us in baptism. Ep. 5.


CAP. VIII.
Sander. Whether the Catholics or Sacramentaries expound more improperly or
inconueniently, ye words belonging to Christ's supper.


Harding. Because these places report, that Christ gave at his supper his very
body, the fathers say, it is really in the Sacrament.


Jewel. A thing is taken to make proof, which is doubtfll, and the antecedent
is unproven.


Sander. Said not Christ, take, eat, this is my body?


Fulke. This proves not, that he gave it in your sense. But where do the
fathers say, it is really present in the Sacrament?


Jewel. The fathers call the Sacrament a figure, a token, a sign, an image,
etc. Therefore Christ's words may be taken with a metaphor, trope, or figure.


Sander. It stands well together to be a sign and the truth: As Christ is
the image of God, and yet God also.


Fulke. It is impossible to be a sign and the thing signified. Neither is
Christ God the Father, of whom he is the image, although he be God.


Jewel. Even Duns saw, that following the bare letter, we must needs say, yt
the bread it self is Christ's body.


Sander. The place is not quoted, therefore it is doubtful: for no man believes
you.


Fulke. Look in the fourth book upon the sentences. The same affirms O^kam,
Quodlibet 4. quest. 30. Contrariu^ illius non habetur ex canone Bibliae. etc.
The contrary of that opinion, that bread should remain, is not had out of the
canon of the Bible, etc.


Jewel. So the words stand, This (BREAD) is my body. Sander. where stand they
so? in your gospel, but not in ours.


Fulke. A foolish cavil the word, bread, is added for explication, and by
parenthesis showed not to be of ye text.


Jewel. They say (this) meant not bread, but one certain thing in general.


Sander. I have showed how it is taken, lib. 4. Ca. 4. 5. and 6. Neither does
it signify in general, but that which is contained under the form of bread.


Fulke. Who could tell, that you would renounce indiuidium vagum? and what is
contained but bread, before ye words of consecration be all spoken? Jewel. Est,
they expound, erit, it shall be. Sander. you delight in falshod. Christ chose
this word est, because it signifies a most present being of a thing: for God
works in a moment.


Fulke. Then the words make not the body of Christ, as all other Papists
say. For the words cannot be uttered in a moment.


Jewel. Erit, they expound the substance of this uncertain general, one
thing that shall be changed.


Sander. These interpretations be false.


Fulke. They be the interpretations of all Papists except Sander, who also
says, That which was bread before he spoke, was his body at the end of his
speech. But what was it in the mean time, while he was in speaking, and
said, est it is?


Jewel. It is given, they expound, it shall be given.


Sander. We expound it of ye present vnblody sacrifice.


Fulke. Harding, against whom master Jewel writes, expounds it of the
passion. Neither can it be both, as you say, but is in deed meant of the
passion only, but yet figuratively: seeing Christ said of his blood which is
shed, which cannot be understood of your unbloody sacrifice, nor of ye bloody
sacrifice of Christ, without a figure.


Jewel. Do ye this, ye expound, sacrifice ye this.


Sander. Nay sir, we control your false translation: for Hoc facite is make
this my body. Of the making of the sacrificed substance, I have spoken. li. 4.
Cap. 13.


Fulke. Sander controlleth the greatest Papists that ever were before him, in
his newfound translation.


Jewel. This bread, they expound, this yt was bread.


Sander. You should name the place.


Fulke. A weak answer: the place is 1. Cor. 11.


Jewel. These verbs: He took, he blessed, he brake, he gave, stand together
and rule one case.


Sander. They stand together in order of writing, but not in order of doing.


Fulke. They rule a case, according to the order of writing, and not after the
order of doing.


Sander. If the words of consecration were spoken before the breaking, what
wonder ye, if the thing yt was taken, being changed, we change ye construction
of verbes?


Fulke. If the holy ghost have set it down otherwise, you shall have much to
do to prove it: if any thing be changed, you must give us another accusative
case, then panem, and not change the construction of verbes.


Jewel. He took bread, he blessed it away.


Sand. He changed it into a better thing.


Fulke. By blessing? or by saying, This is my body?


Sand. God bless me from such a man, who scoffeth at the holy mysteries.


Fulke. Nay, he derideth your bald interpretations.


Jewel. He brake the Accidents.


Sand. That is true.


Fulke. Accidents cannot be broken, except the substance whereof they be
accidents, be broken.


Jewel. He gave his body.


Sand. We believe it to be a meeter gift, then to give common bread.


Fulke. Who says he gave common bread?


Jewel. Upon these few words of Christ, thus many figures and more, they have
imagined.


Sand. They be not all the words of Christ, but some are the words of the
Evangelists. The words of Christ are all proper, but you have many more figures
and absurdities.


Fulke. They be all the words of God, and if ye words of Christ be all proper,
what need so improper expositions of them? But now let us hear no less the^
41. figures and absurdities, maintained by Protestants.


Sand. First, you join together, this bread.


Fulke. In translation we do not, but in sense we may, when Saint Paul says
of that which is the body of Christ, this bread.


Sand. 2. You have done it against the Gospel, for Hoc is the newter gender,
panis the masculine.


Fulke. We have not done it against the Epistle, following saint Paul, who I
hope, was no enemy of the Gospel.


Sand. 3 You have irerated the same fault, in joining hic to vinum.


Fulke. We join it none otherwise then Saint Paul joined, This cup.


Sand. 4. You have divided the pronowne hoc from the body and blood, with
which substantives only it may agree.


Fulke. Hoc is an adjective in the newter gender taken substantiuely.


Sand. 5. You expound the pronowne, sometime for bread, sometime for body,
as when you make the laying to be words of promise.


Fulke. It is still bread: for Christ promises by that sacrament of bread, to
give his body.


Sander. 6. You expound est for significat, when it stands not between two
several natures.


Fulke. The body of Christ and bread which is demonstrated by hoc, are two
several natures.


Sand. 7. You take ye same verb est properly referring i^ to the body of
Christ, which in every man's heart you consecrate by preaching these words,
This is my body, as Calvin teaches.


Fulke. You belie Calvin, and prate you wot not what. The verb changes not
his signification, for the bread signifies Christ, which is spiritually given
to us.


Sand. 8. Some other will have the verb est to stand properly, and the bread
to be a sign.


Fulke. A fond cavil, all comes to one reckoning, the bread, is a sign, and
the bread signifies.


Sand. 9. In the words of the cup, in Saint Luke ye supply the verb est,
and then cast it out again as superfluous.


Fulke. A lewd cavil, answered lib. 4. circumstance 26.


Sander. 10 The nowne body you take properly, when you take est for significat:
and 11. improperly, when est is taken properly.


Fulke. Childish trifling, where matter is all one. see lib. 4. Circumst. 18.


Sand. 12 You expound ye relative quod which, so as it cannot agree with the
antecede^t, and the verb following.


Fulke. Boys play, answered lib. 4. circumst. 18.


Sand. 13 Datur, you expound dabitur.


Fulke. So does Harding, and so it must be, as I have showed in this chapter.


Sand. 14 You expound facere to do only, and not to make.


Fulke. One verb can have but one signification at one time.


Sand. 15 You expound hoc for hic or ita in your homilye, do thus.


Fulke. Take your action against the Printer.


Sand. 16 In mean commemorationem, you english, in the remembrance of me, which
should be, for the remembrance of me.


Fulke. A knot in a rush.


Sand. 17 When you have expounded est for significat, in the consecration of
the blood, hic remains without a substantive.


Fulke. A babble, answered lib. 4. circumst. 23.


Sand. 18 In these words, this cup is the new testament in my blood, you
take the nowne blood for the sign of blood, and so the new testament
established by the figure of blood.


Fulke. Ye fable, we take it properly, and these words to be a true exposition
of these words, This is my blood.


Sand. 19 If you take blood properly in these words, it must also be proper in
these, This is my blood.


Fulke. That follows not.


Sand. 20 The construction of these words, This cup is shed for you, proves
that which is in the cup to be shed, which you say is wine.


Fulke. This cauil is answered lib. 4. circumst. 26. and 27.


Sand. 21 In Christ's words: The bread which I will give is my flesh, you
expound I have given, and I do give.


Fulke. Yea, I will give, as I have done, and do.


Sand. 22 In Saint Paul (The bread which we break, is the communicating
etc.) you expound signifies the communicating. As though the Jews figures,
did not the same, and yet there S. Paul distincteth our sacraments from theirs.


Fulke. And how can bread be the communicating of the body of Christ, but as
the Jews Sacraments were the same? Saint Paul shows what our sacraments
have like with theirs, and the ceremonies of the Gentiles also, and not what
difference there is. You are well studied in Saint Paul.


Sand. 23. The cup of blessing, you will have to be a cup of wine, as though
ye blessing wrought nothing in it.


Fulke. As though blessing can work nothing but transubstantiation.


Sand. 24. You make Christ give thanks to his father, in beginning the state
of the new testament, in better words then deed, for his words are, This is my
body, yet you will have him to offer no body at all to his father in that
thanksgiving.


Fulke. Where learned you that the beginning of the state of the new
testament, was at the institution of the supper? Belike baptism pertained not
to the state of the new testament. Secondly, how prove you that, This is my
body, are words of thanksgiving or oblation to god?


Sand. 25. You teach Christ to be an instituter of shadows, and to give to our
mouths, less then Moses, for Manna was better then common bread.


Fulke. Sacraments be no shadows: Neither did Moses give Manna, but God for
ought that I know. And it is most convenient, that the signs of the new
testament, should be less glorious then of the old, because the doctrine is
more clear.


Sand. 26. Ye expound to be guilty of Christ's body and blood for eating, that
is to say, for not eating or refusing to eat. For you teach evil men not to
eat the body of Christ.


Fulke. For we expound guilty for eating, to be guilty for eating the
Sacrament unworthily, that is in some irreverently or negligently, in some
conte^ptuously refusing that Christ does offer thereby.


Sand. 27. You will not have Christ's supper to be an external sacrifice, and
to be worse then Jewish and Idolaters altars and tables, who both did
sacrifice, and S. Paul compares Christ's table with theirs.


Fulk We will have no more sacrifices, but the only and once offered sacrifice
of Christ's death for our redemption. The repetition of sacrifice, shows an
imperfection in it, and not a betternes. Saint Paul compares Christ's table
with the altar and table of devils, not in sacrifice, but in causing the
partakers to communicate with their altars, and tables, which shows what the
communicating of Christ's table is, and overthrows your carnal presence.


Sand. 28. You expound the showing of Christ's death by a figure, whereby you
show him not to be truly dead.


Fulk. You show it by eating him alive, whereby there is no argument of his
death. We show it by preaching joined to the visible element, without which it
is lame, dead, and imperfect.


Sand. 29 Ye expound the not making difference, etc. in such sort, that he
will not have the body present wherein difference is to be made.


Fulk. As though difference of the kings person and authority can not be made
but in the kings presence.


Sand. 30 Ye deny our union with Christ's flesh, by corporal participation,
which S. Paul teaches by example of Adam and Eve being two in one flesh.


Fulk. Our corporal participation, is by his incarnation, which is applied
unto us by faith, through his spirit uniting us unto him, and testified in the
supper.


Sand. 31 Whereas Christ is so much more excellent then Angels, by how much he
has a more excellent name, you regard not the name body and blood given to
the mysteries, but affirm them to be as they were before etc.


Fulk. The Apostle reasons not because Christ has a better name, but because
he has it by inheritance, for else the Angels are named the sons of God, and
princes are called Gods. You have not sought Christ in the scriptures, but the
confirmation of your heresy. Again, we so much regard the name of body and
blood given to the mysteries, that we believe them to be the same, that they
are called after a spiritual manner, although they have not yt name by
inheritance but by grace, affirming in the elements, a great alteration from
that they were before, not in substance, but in use and effect.


Sand. 32 No promise in the scriptures, can be found made to him, that eats
and drinks material bread and wine, but to him that receives the body and
blood of Christ. Therefore you affirm bread to be eaten and wine to be
dronken in the supper, beside the word of God.


Fulk. The promise is made in scripture, to him that eats and drinks bread
and wine according to Christ's institution, although not for eating bread and
drinking wine only. This reason would prove that water is used without the
word of God in baptism, because no promise is made to him that is washed in
water, but to him that is washed according to Christ's institution.


Sand. 33 Although David prophesied of eating and adoring, you will grant no
meat to be externally adored.


Fulk. David never prophesied of adoring the sacrament.


Sand. 34 Notwithstanding the Prophets teach, that all external idolatry is
taken away by the coming of Christ, you say idolatry is committed in
worshipping the sacrament.


Fulk. The Prophets teach not that idolatry external, shall be taken away by
the coming of Christ, but among true Christians, which do renounce all
worshipping of idols.


Sand. 35 Christ came to save and feed the whole man^ why deny you the food of
life to our bodies?


Fulk. We affirm, that Christ feeds body and soul unto eternal life,
without the sacrament, and with it, although the food of life be not received
at the mouth like other meats, nor swallowed and disgested as they are.


Sand. 36 If in the supper we seed on Christ by faith alone, why is it called
a supper, more then baptism, where also we must feed on Christ by faith?


Fulke. Because it is the proper sacrament of our spiritual feeding, like as
baptism is of our regeneration, and yet the blood of Christ does cleanse our
sins in the supper, as we eat the body of Christ in baptism.


Sand. 37 Seeing a figure may be the truth it self, whereof it is a figure,
why should you rather detracte this honor from Christ's sacrament, then give
the same unto it?


Fulk. A figure can never be yt which it figureth in ye same respect: As Christ
is the figure of his father, so is he not his father, as he is the figure of
his fathers substance, so is he not his fathers substance, but consubstantiall
with his father; for though he be the same essence, yet he is an other
person: beside that we may not say the sacraments are all that they may be,
but that which God will have them to be. You may demand the like reason of
Baptism, why ye water is not the blood of Christ but a figure of it.


Sand. 38 Christ being equal with his father, made promise of the same flesh
which his father had given. Why deny you the gift of Christ to be as real as
his father gave him real flesh?


Fulk. We deny not, but he has given the same real flesh, although not to be
present really in the Sacrament.


Sand. 39 How teach you the words of Christ which are spirit and life, to be
notwithstanding figurative, and consequently dead and void of all life and
strength?


Fulk. How dare you affirm, any of Christ's words, of which many are
figurative, to be dead and void of life and strength? Are not those
figurative words, I am the bread that came down from heaven: This cup is the
new testament?


Sand. 40 Because the word of God would be meat of man in respect of the
body, he took flesh and said, Take eat, etc: yet you make him still to be
the meat of the mind, whereby we are excluded from having God corporally in
us, through the flesh of Christ.


Fulk. The word became not flesh, either only or principally to be given in
the sacrament: but he could not have been meat, unto man, except he had taken
flesh, which flesh he communicates unto us, through his spirit by faith, to
feedboth body and mind, yet not to be received into the body, as bodily meats,
but being received of the mind, to nourishe the whole man.


Sand. 41 To conclude, whereas ye find flesh, body, blood, joined with
eating, drinking, taking, partaking, giving, breaking, distributing,
communicating, dijudicating, ye expound al these words figuratively. As though
God by so often repeting had not strengthened the common and proper
signification of them.


Fulk. You say untruly of all these words, and whereas you find bread, cup,
the fruit of the vine, so often repeted, you understand all figuratinely to
maintain your gross understanding, or rather your gainefull idolatry, for
which you care not to err against grammar, rhetorike Logike, Philosophy,
divinity, faith, truth, nature, sense, knowledge, and conscience.


Jew. If in these words, Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, ye
follow the letter, it kills. Origin Hom. 7. in Leuit.


Sand. He that takes them as Christ by his fact did expound them, does
follow the spirit and not the letter.


Fulk. Ye assume for granted, that which is all the controversy. It is not
only the letter, to understand the words of eating by piece meal, but of
eating his flesh by mouth carnally, as other meats are eaten, although
covered from the eyes and taste, as men eat pills wrapped in a wafer cake.


CAP. IX.
Sand. A notable place of S. Augustine corrupted by master Jewel.


Jew. Saint Augustine says, the sacrament of Christ's body, after a certain
phrase or manner, or trope or figure of speaking, is the body of Christ.


Sand. Secundum que^dam modum, is not meant after a certain manner of
tropicall or figurative speech, but in the sacrament, in the thing it self, in
the substance thereof, wherein the likeness is and not in the form.


Fulk. Saint Augustines words being set down more at large, then Sander cites
them, who leaves out the foremost part, let the reader judge, whether he mean
of a manner of speech which is figurative and tropicall, or of a manner of
being which is significatiue. Ep. 23. Bonifacio, Nempe saepe ita loquimur etc.
Verily, oftentimes we SPEAK so, that we SAY Easter drawing near, to morrow
or the next day is the passion of our Lord, whereas he has suffered so many
years past, and that passion was promised but once in all. Verily, on the
sunday it self, we SAY this day our Lord arose again, notwithstanding there
are so many years since he arose. Why, is no man so foolish to reprove us so
SPEAKING as if we had lied? but because we CALL these days according to the
similitude of the days, in which those things were done, that it is SAID,
the day it self, which is not the day it self, but in revolution of time like
it: that it is SAID to be done on yt day, because of the celebration of the
sacrament (or mystery) which was not done that day, but long before. Was not
Christ once offered in himself, and yet in a sacrament? not only at every
solemnity of Easter, but every day he is offered for the people. Neither
surely does he lie, who being demanded, shall answer, that he is offered. For
if the sacraments had not a certain likeness of those things, whereof they are
sacraments, they were not at all sacraments. Out of this likeness also, for the
most part they take their names. Therefore as after a certain manner ye
sacrament of the body of Christ is the body of Christ, the sacrament of the
blood of Christ is the blood of Christ so the sacrament of faith is faith.
The whole discourse being of phrases and manners of speech, that are
figurative, and this example of the Lords supper being brought as one of them:
judge whether S. Augustine (...) corrupted by master Jewel. Even the Canon law
written (as it should seem) before the heresy of carnal presence prevailed,
does so understand this place of Augustine. de Con. Did. 2. ca. Hoc est.
Sicut ergo coelestis panis, etc. Therefore as the heavenly bread, which is the
flesh of Christ, (yt is, says the gloss, the heavenly sacrament which truly
represents the flesh of Christ) after his manner, is called the body of
Christ (the sense is, says the gloss, it is called, that is, it fignifieth
the body of Christ) whereas indeed it is the sacrament of the body of Christ,
namely of that body which being visible; which being palpable was put on the
cross, and the very immolation of his flesh which is done by the hands of
the priest, is called the passion, death, crucifying of Christ, not in the
truth of the thing, but in a signifying mystery: so the sacrament of faith,
which is understood to be baptism, is faith. Let this exposition of Augustine
be conferred with that which Sander makes, and ^ee which is more Catholic.


CAP. X.
Sand. The signification of aduerbes discussed.


Hard. By these words really, substantially, etc. The fathers meant only a
truth of being and not a mean of being after carnal, or natural wise.


Jew. All aduerbs taken of nownes, signify evermore a quality, and never the
substance.


Sand. An aduerbe has his name, because it is joined to the verb, and it does
make plain and fill up the signification thereof, which if it signify a
substance, the aduerbe does make it to signify the same substance more
perfectly. As, Your God is verily the God of Gods. This man was verily the
son of God.


Fulk. The aduerb verily touches not the substance, but the manner of truth,
which is a quality.


Sand. Christ walked corporally upon the water, that is, in truth of a man's
body, but not in any such accustomed manner, as other men's bodies are wont to
walk.


Fulk. Yes verily, he walked upon ye water, as other men walked on the dry
land, giving strength to the water to bear him, not changing the nature of
his body otherwise then the nature of Peter's body was changed, who walked
likewise on the water.


Sand. The manner of the walking, did exceed the manner of a mere natural
body.


Fulk. The^ belike Peter had not a mere natural body.


Hard. When the fathers teach Christ to be in us carnally, corporally, or
naturally, (for all these terms, Saint Hilarie, and S. Cyril have) then they
mean, that Christ is in us, by the true substance of his flesh, and not in
such manner, as common flesh is wont to be any where.


Jewel. The fathers mean, that Christ is in us after a corporal, carnal, and
natural manner, and not in substance.


Fulke. Yea after some kind of corporal etc. manner, that is truly, soundly,
and not shadowedly, effectually, etc. not after every corporal, carnal, or
natural manner.


Sand. The qualities of the body and blood of Christ cannot be in us without
the substance of his body and blood.


Fulke. But the general qualities of a body, of flesh, etc. may be in us, as
in their subject, without the proper subject of Christ's body and blood.


Sand. S. Hilarie says: Christ has the father in him, according to the spirit
naturally. Has Christ a quality, and not the whole true substance?


Fulk. The question is not what he has, but what he has by force of the
aduerbe naturally, which is not of force to give him the whole substance, but
signify yt he has it after the manner of nature, which is truly.


Sand. Hilarie says, he tarieth in us naturally.


Fulk. That is truly, which is some manner of natural being.


Sand. He says further: he is in us himself by flesh.


Fulk. Which he took of us, and does again give unto us.


Sand. And again, Naturally, according to the flesh, we live by him, that is
to say, we have obtained the nature of his flesh.


Fulk. I ask no better interpreter then Hilarie him self. Whosoever lives by
him, has obtained the nature of his flesh, which is able to give life, but
many live by him which has not received the supper, therefore Hilarie speaks
not of giving the substance of his flesh in the supper, as Sander
understands, but of giving the nature of his flesh, which is power of life,
confirmed to us by the sacraments of his supper and baptism.


CAP. XI.
Sand. Of the first author of the Sacramentarie heresy.


Hard. Berengarius began first openly to show the Sacramentarie heresy,
touching the verity of Christ's body in the sacrament.


Jew. Before, master Harding said, the Messalians were the first fathers of
this heresy, and so his tales hang not together.


Sand. The Messalians began privily, by general disgracing the sacrament:
Berengarius began openly, by special denying the virtue thereof.


Fulk. The Messalians spoke as openly as Berengarius, and he that utterly
denies the sacrament to be of any virtue, takes away the special virtue also:
wherefore Hardings tales agree not: but that is a small matter.


Jew. Ioannes Scotus and Bertram, maintained the same doctrine before
Be^^ngarius.


Sand. If they barked in corners, at any ceremony, (which is not evident to
us) yet they maintained it not. For then they had been condemned of heresy, and
by them you have gained little more then 200. years.


Fulke. They preached and wrote openly, the one of them dedicating his book to
the Emperor, which is extant: the other condemned in the Council of Vercells
holden against Berengarius. But while they lived, their doctrine therein was
not controlled. Two hundredth years is small gain to us, which count from the
beginning, but it is great loss to you, that build upon antiquity, not
regarding how it came from the beginning.


Jewel. It shall be necessary to open Berengarius judgment.


Sand. It is enough, you are at a stay, and can bring your faith no higher
then Ioannes Scotus and Berengarius.


Fulke. We begin at Christ, and bring down the continuance of our faith
herein, for 600. years and more, which you cannot impugn.


Jewel. This is the enforced recantation of Berengarius. I believe that the
body of our Lord Jesus Christ, sensibly and in very deed, is touched with
the hand of the Priest, and broken and rent, and ground with ye teeth of the
faithful.


Sand. You have Englished the words very spightfully, you have added Rent, of
your own head. Atteri does signify to be broken in pieces, or to be wasted,
which may be done without grinding.


Fulk. What great spite is in Rent, more then in Broken? and why should alteri
signify to be broken, when we had the word broken before? and what honesty is
it for you to say, ye body of Christ may be wasted with the teeth? Finally, when
you have dentibus halteri. I marvel why you dare not say, ground, except it
be, yt you teach ye people to swallow the cake, and not to grind it with their
teeth.


Jewel. The very gloss says: unless you warely understand these words of
Berengarius, you will fall into a greater heresy then ever he held any.


Sand. The gloss tells you, that al touching breaking, or washing, is to be
referred to the forms of bread and wine.


Fulke. Then the confession of Berengarius was false, that the body is touched,
broken, grinded with teeth.


Jewel. These fathers redress the less error by the greater.


Sand. They teach him to speak as Chrysostom has spoken, in Joan. Hom. 45.
Non se etc: Christ permits himself not only to be seen, to them that
desire, but also to be touched, and to be eaten, and their teeth to be fastened
in his flesh, and all men to be filled with desire of him.


Fulke. Chrysostom speaks figuratively, except you will say it is a proper
speech, that Christ is seen in the Sacrament. These fathers abhor all
figurative speeches in this case, and it is nothing like, that a recantation of
a figurative understanding, should be expressed by figurative words.


Jewel. That M. Harding calls the catholic faith, is in deed a catholic
error.


Sand. No error can be catholic: because Christ said, Hell gates shall not
prevail against the Church, and it is a city built upon an hill.


Fulke. And yet all nations are made drunk with the fury of the wine of the
whore of Babylons fornication. Wherefore an error may be catholic, although
not simply, yet in comparison of the small number that at sometime do embrace
the truth.


CAP. XII.
Sand. Of Christ's glorified body, and the place of S. Hierome expounded.


Hard. The body which was before the death thereof thrall and frail, is now
spiritual.


Jewel. To what end alleges Master Harding the spiritual state of Christ's
body? Enriches said it was changed into the very substance of God, which
heresy is like Master Hardings, if it be not the same.


Sand. The defense of the real presence, is directly against that heresy.


Fulke. To grant the flesh of Christ in word and to deny the essential
properties thereof, is to come as near to that heresy as can be.


Sand. The ancient fathers proved, that as the Sacrament of the altar consisted
of two things, the sign or form of bread, and of the body of Christ, so
Christ consists of two natures, the one divine, the other humane. Wherefore
you denying the presence, agree with the Arrians, Valentinians, etc.


Fulke. The ancient fathers, never made the form or accidents of bread, but
bread it self, to be the sign, or one part of the sacrament, representing ye
body of Christ, and the thing signified, they made like to the godheade,
whereby they understood not the natural body of Christ, but the effect of
his death.


Hard. S. Hierome showing two ways of understanding Christ's flesh, one
spiritual (as it is verily meat) an other as it was crucified, declares the
manner of eating it only, to differ from the manner of it being crucified, the
substance being all one.


Jewel. He speaks neither of the Sacrament, nor of any real presence.


Sand. He means both.


Fulk. He can mean neither of both, seeing he distinguishes that divine and
spiritual flesh, which is meat in deed unto eternal life, from that flesh
which was crucified, which if it were meat in the same sense, that it was
crucified, that is in the natural substance: S. Hieroms distinction should not
be of that flesh which etc. and that flesh which etc. but of ye effects and
affects of ye same flesh. Wherefore when he says, the flesh of Christ is two
ways to be understood, he means of this word, The flesh of Christ, and not
of the diverse manners of presence thereof in the sacrament, and on the cross.


Jewel. S. Hierom says: of this oblatio^ which is merueilously made in the
remembrance of Christ, it is lawful to eat, but of yt oblatio^ which Christ
offered upon ye altar of the cross, according to it self, it is lawful for no
man to eat, that is to say, in gross and fleshly manner. These words show a
difference between the sacrifice made in the remembrance of Christ, and ye
very sacrifice in deed etc.


Sand. The difference is so great, that the thing offered is all one, and that
which is crucified and eaten, is the same in substance, but not in manner of
presence.


Fulke. The difference is so great, as must needs be between a sacrifice once
offered and never to be repeted, and the memorial of the same. The same
substance that was crucified, is eaten, but not by means of any bodily
presence, but by a spiritual kind or manner of eating by faith.


Sand. What marvelous making can you find in the bread and wine, except they
be made the body and blood of Christ?


Fulke. It is a merueilous thing, that the elements of bread and wine are made
to the worthy receiver in earth, the communication of the body and blood of
Christ sitting in heaven.


Jewel. If a man take it fleshly, says Chrysostom in Joan. Hom. 47, he
gains nothing.


Sand. It follows immediately: What say we then? is not flesh, flesh? He
understands fleshly, that deuiseth a gross and fleshly manner of eating, but
not he, yt says the flesh must be eaten, if the manner be divine and
spiritual, as in our sacrament.


Fulke. The manner you teach is gross and carnal, for spiritual eating we
confess, which is not only in the sacrament.


Jewel. It is a figure or form of speech (says S. Augustine) willing us to
be partakers of Christ's passion.


Sand. You are taken M. Jewel. For seeing you say, we eat Christ in the supper
only by faith, and we must be partakers of the passion Christ by faith at
lest: how says S. Hierome, we may not eat that oblation which Christ offered
on the cross according to it self, may we not be leeue in him? etc.


Fulke. In the sacrament we eat bread, which is the oblation merueilously
made in the remembrance of Christ, we eat not that, which was sacrificed on ye
cross in the real substance thereof, but by faith applying unto us the
fruits and effects of his passion.


Jewel. S. Hierome calls the eating of the divine and spiritual flesh of
Christ, ye remembering yt he died for us.


Sander. Then ye oblation it self is eaten of us, which he offered on the
cross, according to it self.


Fulke. What mad man would say, the oblation it self, and the remembrance
thereof to be all one?


Jewel. Clemens Alexandrinus says: there is a fleshly blood, wherewith we are
redeemed, and a spiritual, wherewith we are anointed. And this is to drink the
blood of Christ, to be partaker of his immortality: As Christ's blood is not
really present to anoint us, so it is not really present to nourish us.


Sander. Clemens speaks of the effect of Christ's blood: Hierom of the
carnal blood it self.


Fulke. A monstrous shift, when Hierom distinguishes in express words, the
spiritual and divine blood, by which we are nourished, from the carnal
blood that was shed with the spear, by which we are redeemed: Wherefore he
speaks of the effect and fruit as well as Clemens.


Sander. That S. Hierom speaks of the Sacrament, it is proved, because he
cites such words out of S. John, as all the fathers, reasons, scriptures,
prove to appertain by way of promise to the supper, as I have proved in
twenty Chapiters together of my third book.


Fulke. His citing of words out of the sixth of Saint John, prove no more,
then drinking of the blood of Christ, etc. in Clemens that he speaks of the
Sacrament. Your twenty Chapters are answered in as many by me.


Jewel. Saint Augustine says: Judas betrayed Christ carnal, thou have
betrayed Christ spiritual. For in thy fury, thou betrayest the holy gospel,
to be burned with wicked fire. These words of Clement and Augustine, agreeing
so near in sense and phrase with the words of Hierom, may stand for
sufficient exposition to the same.


Sander. Augustine takes Christ spiritual another way, clean diverse from
Clement, or Saint Hierome. The name of spiritual, may be taken as many ways,
at spiritus, which is for God, the holy ghost, Christ, Angels, wind, gifts
spiritual, the soul, the imagination, breath, anger, or punishment, and many
other ways.


Fulke. So many ways of taking as you know, yet you cannot tell any other,
then as Clemens and Hierom take it, for that which has not the substance, but
ye grace and effect of Christ.


Sander. That which you bring out of Athanasius, apperteineth to the
Capernaits, and to no man else.


Fulke. Yes, to as many as err grossly, like the Capernaites, as you Papists
doc.


Harding. The fathers used the words really, substantially, etc. to put away
al doubt, of ye being of Christ's very body in the holy mysteries.


Jewel. He diuineth what they mean, before they speak.


Sander. Nay, because he is sure of their words, he expounds their mind.


Fulke. He is so sure of their words, that he knows not where they are
written, nor you neither. Being so often called for, and so much bragged of,
bring them out for shame.


CAP. XIII.
Sander. A place of Chrysostom expounded.


Jewel. Chrysostom says in the same homily, If Christ died not, whose sign
and token is this sacrifice? therefore he may be also charged with the
sacramentarie quarrel.


Sander. You prove a sign here, but not that ye truth is absent from the
sign.


Fulke. The Sacrament is a sign: ergo, not the thing signified, a relatis.


Sander. The sacrifice of the new testament, is ye body of Christ, this is the
sacrifice of the new testament, therefore it is the body of Christ.


Fulke. The Sacrament is not the sacrifice propitiatory of the new Testament,
but the passion of Christ. The Sacrament is a spiritual Sacrifice of
thanksgiving, as prayer, alms, preaching, unto which is no real presence
required. Your syllogism is all of particulars, make the mayor universal, and
the error is soon espied. Every Sacrifice of the new Testament, is the body
of Christ.


Sander. Chrysostom there says, that Marcion, Valentinus, Manichaeus, (who
denied Christ's real flesh and death) are confounded by these mysteries. How
can that be, if the true flesh of Christ be not contained in them?


Fulke. Very well, as Tertullian frames his argument from the figure, to the
thing figured. The Sacrament could not be a figure of Christ's body, except
Christ had a body in deed. For a void thing, that is a phantasme, can have
no figure.


Sander. Chrysostom says: it is evident by these mysteries, that Christ is
already sacrificed, which cannot be true, if his real flesh be not present,
of which point I have spoken in my fifth book, Cap. 1.


Fulke. And in the same place, I have answered the vanity of your argument.


Jewel. Master Harding knows, that Chrysostom speaks generally of all
other mysteries, for it follows: Even so in baptism, the water is a thing
sensible, the regeneration is a thing spiritual: wherefore, if M. Harding will
force his real presence in the one Sacrament, he must likewise force the same
in the other.


Sander. D. Harding brought that place only to show, that the body of Christ
is not visibly present.


Fulke. The place proves, that the body of Christ is none otherwise present,
then regeneration in baptism.


Sander. In baptism, the grace of regeneration which is given, is contained
and given, when the word comes to the water.


Fulke. The water is no subject, for the grace of God, and yet Chrysostom, says,
not ye grace, but regeneration it self. Nothing is borne again, but the party
baptized, therefore regeneration is not contained in the element or action of
baptism.


CAP. XIIII.
Sander. The difference between baptism and our Lords supper.


Jewel. Forasmuch as these two Sacraments be both of like force: I will touch,
what the fathers think of gods working in baptism. The fathers in the Council
of Nice, bid us think, that the water is full of heavenly fire etc. Basil, the
kingdom of heaven is set open, Chrysostom, God himself in baptism by his
invisible power, holds thy head. Ambrose, In the water is the grace of
Christ, and the presence of the Trinity. Bernard, Let us be washed in his
blood. etc. By force of which words M. Hard. may prove, yt the power of God,
the heavenly fire, ye grace and blood of Christ, is really present in baptism.


Sander. Nothing is really present that is affirmed of a Sacrament, except it
be signified present, in the words instituted by Christ, which make the
Sacrament, or of necessity be inferred upon them.


Fulke. Neither is all that really present, which is affirmed of a Sacrament,
that is signified present, in the words instituted by Christ, which make the
Sacrament: As Christ said, This is my body, so he said, This cup is the
new Testament in my blood: yet it follows not, that the new Testament is
really present in the cup, no nor in the blood of Christ, which he shedd for
us, but is confirmed by it, and signified by the other.


Sander. Baptism and the Eucharist has many differences the one from the
other.


Fulke. If they had no differences, they should be all one, yet have they not
so many as you make. But in the matter in question, they have like force, to
unite us to Christ, and assure us of eternal life, which none can have but
they that eat the flesh and drink the blood of Christ: or else, what
becomes of them that are baptized, and not admitted to the communion?


CAP. XV.
Sander. M. Jewel replyeth not well, touching the authority alleged out of the
Nicen Council.


Harding We behold (says the Council of Nice) the lamb of God (...), put or
laid on that holy table, and we receive his precious body and blood, (...)
verily and in deed, which is to say, really.


Jewel. (...) is not found in the Greek, nor in Tunstall, but devised by M.
Harding.


Sander. It is found in the acts of the Council, that are not all printed,
but they are extant in diverse Libraries.


Fulke. You name none, where we should find them, to try your truth and the
antiquity of those coppies.


Sander. In many Latin printed books, it is translated s^^m, situated or put.


Fulke. The question is not what some Latin coppies have, but what is the
original Greek.


Jewel. Must (...), which signifies to be set or placed, needs sound a real
presence?


Sander. Can you have a capon set and placed upon your table, which is not
really present?


Fulke. A fit comparison, between a capon and the lamb of God.


Jewel. Christ dwells in our heart by faith, and yet not really.


Sander. The lamb of God is not said to be on the holy table, by faith, but
to be set or laid there.


Fulke. How can the Council say, We behold it set there, but by faith?


Jewel. S. Hierom says: as often as we enter into the sepulcher, we see our
Savior lying in his shroode, yet he lay not there really.


Sander. But he lay there once really. How could the Council say, we
behold the lamb of God placed upon the holy table, which neither now, nor at
any time was really there?


Fulke. By faith: as we behold him in his ministers, and in baptism, washing
our sins with his blood, where he is not really present, nor ever was, after
that manner.


Jewel. In the Council of Chalcedon, it is demanded, in what scripture lie
these two natures of Christ, it is the same word (...), yet they lie not
really in the scriptures.


Sander. The heretic asked for very material and real words.


Fulke. If the natures may be said figuratively to lie, where the words are
found: why may not the lamb of God be said to lie, where the bread and wine,
which are signs of him, do lie?


Jewel. That word signifies a natural situation of place, and order of
parts: such as D. Harding in the next article, says Christ's body has not in
the sacrament.


Sander. It has such situation as the form of bread requires.


Fulke. Then the form of bread is situated, and not the body of Christ, or
the lamb of God, which you might as well urge to be taken in his proper sense,
for a natural lamb, as (...) to be laid.


Jewel. The Council is plain, that we consider not basely the bread and wine
that is set before us.


Sander. He considers them basely, who says, they remain still in earthly
substance.


Fulke. He considers them not at all, who says, they are no part of the
Sacrament.


Jewel. It is said, lift up your hearts: so that there is nothing in the
action to be considered, but only Christ.


Sander. I have spoken of this matter at large, lib. 2. Cap. 24. of Eagles,
Cap. 27.


Fulke. And there I have briefly answered.


Jewel. S. Ambrose says: it is better seen, that is not seen.


Sander. Therefore, the body of Christ is better seen, then bread and wine.


Fulke. Who doubts of that?


Jewel. For the same cause S. Augustine says: In Sacraments we must consider
not what they be, but what they represent. For they are tokens of things, being
one thing, and signifying another.


Sander. As they be tokens, they be one thing, and signify another: and
therefore the substance of Christ's body, is not his death or passion, or the
unity of his Church, which thing under the form of bread it does signify,
but it is another manner of thing, to wit, a body immortal, impassible, etc.


Fulke. If S. Augustine had believed ye Sacrament to be the immortal body of
Christ, he would never have said, In Sacraments, we must not consider what they
be, but always what they signify, Con. Max. lib. 3. Cap 22.


Jewel. Touching our beholding of Christ in ye Sacrament. S. Aug. says: It
works such motions in us, as if we saw our Lord himself present upon the
cross.


Sander. S. Aug. speaks of the solemnity of Easter, which was kept by
preaching and showing some image of Christ, and by creeping to the cross.


Fulke. He speaks generally of signs; as for images and creeping to the
cross, is a most impudent lie.


Jewel. This is that Eusebius writes, that the body might be worshipped by a
mystery, and that everlasting sacrifice should live in remembrance, and be
present in grace for ever: in this spiritual sort, and not fleshly, Christ is
laid present upon the altar.


Sander. You leave out that he says, the oblation of the redemption should be
everlasting, by which words Eusebius declares, that the Sacrament is such a
mystery, as offers us that continual redemption, which Christ has
purchased for us.


Fulke. Eusebius declares no such matter, but a memorial of the everlasting
and one only sacrifice, quod semel offerebatur in pretium, which was but once
offered for a price or redemption.


Sander. The same Eusebius says: the invisible priest turns the visible
creatures with his word, into the substance of his body and blood.


Fulke. So he says, that man is by the workmanship of the heavenly mercy made
the body of Christ in baptism: wherefore he speaks not of Popish
transubstantiation, but of a spiritual mutation, such as is in baptism.


Jewel. S. Augustine says: you are upon the table, you are in the cup. As the
people is laid upon the table, so and none otherwise, the council of Nice
says, the lamb of God is laid upon the table.


Sander. What, Master Jewel? is the table turned into us, as Eusebius says,
the visible creatures are turned, etc?


Fulke. Even such a conversion is of the bread into his body, as is of the
table and cup into us, namely spiritual. For without some kind of
conversion, it were not possible, that we should be on the table, and in the
cup.


Sander. We should not be there, if our head Jesus Christ were not under the
form of bread and wine, where in we are signified: but of this more, lib. 5.
Cap 5.


Fulke. As we are there, so is our head Jesus Christ, and none otherwise.


Jewel. The Greek word (...), verily, by D. Hardings judgment sounds no
less then really: But these two words, truly and fleshly, have sundry
meanings and in the sense that Christ spoke unto the Jews, the one does
utterly exclude the other.


Sander. If you take fleshly, for the substance of flesh, is is all one in
speaking, to say truly and fleshly: but as concerning the corruptible
qualities of flesh, it is not all one.


Fulke. The spiritual sense of eating Christ's flesh truly, in which he spoke
to the Jews, does utterly exclude the Popish sense of eating the substance of
his flesh.


Jewel. He that eats most spiritually, eats most truly: as Christ is the
true vine, the true Manna: and we are verily one bread, and the Apostles
verily the heavens. And these are the Paschall feasts, wherein verily the
lamb is slain.


Sander. In comparison of bodily eating alone, spiritual eating is more true,
and of a better sort: but a thing both eaten in body and spirit, is far more
truly eaten both ways, then by one way alone.


Fulke. Master Jewel has well proved, that ye word Truly, may well exclude
fleshly, bodily, really. As for the bodily eating, is the matter in question,
therefore, not to be brought in argument.


Sander. When the name of any thing affirmed of Christ, apperteineth to the
true nature of his manhod, which he has assumpted, it is to be verified of him
not only by a metaphore but in very deed, therefore he is man in deed, offered
in deed, killed in deed, buried in deed, eaten in deed.


Fulke. For a man to be eaten in the shape of bread, apperteineth not to ye
true nature of his manhood, which he has assumpted, therefore it is not to be
verified of him, but only by a metaphor, or figurative speech, by your own
rule.


Jewel. S. Augustine utterly remoueth the natural office of the body: what
preparest thou thy teeth? believe, and thou have eaten. Believing in him, is the
eating of the bread of life.


Sander. S. Augustine spoke these words, to the faithless Jews of Capernaum:
and not to Catholics.


Fulke. If Jews become faithful, what differ they from Catholics? why should
they have another manner of eating Christ, then other Catholics?


Sander. S. Augustine confesses us to receive Christ by mouth also, Hominem
Iesum Christum, etc. We do receive with a faithful heart and mouth, the man
Jesus Christ, giving his flesh unto us to be eaten, and his blood to be drunk,
although it may seem more horrible, to eat man's flesh then to kill it, and to
drink man's blood, then to shed it. Therefore his meaning is not to remove
utterly the natural office of the body, as Master Jewel most impudently says.


Fulk. He remoueth not the natural office of the body from eating the
Sacrament, but from eating the natural body of Christ. And most horrible is the
impudence of Master Sander, which dissembleth that S. Augustine in the place by
him cited, speaks of figurative sayings contra aduers. leg. and proph. lib.
2. Cap. 9. Immediately before the words by him rehearsed, comparing our eating
of Christ's flesh, with Christ being one flesh with his Church, and
immediately after the words aforesaied concluding that figurative sayings must
not be contemned. Sicut duos, etc. Even as we do know Christ and his
Church, to be two in one flesh, without any obscenity against the will of these
men: Even as we receive with faithful heart and mouth, the mediator of God and
man, the man Jesus Christ, etc. Atque in omnibus. And in all the holy
scriptures, if any thing which is spoken or done figuratively, be expounded
according to the rule of sound faith, of any matters or words, which are
contained in the holy scriptures, let not that exposition be taken
contemptuously.


Sander. Said he not, for the honor of so great a Sacrament, it pleased the
holy ghost, that our Lords body should enter into the mouth of a Christian
before other meats, and yet is the office of the body removed, and that
utterly removed?


Fulke. Said he not before, it was a figurative speech, to eat the flesh of
Christ, and to drink his blood? and is it then a great merueile, if the
Sacrament be called by the name of ye thing whereof it is a Sacrament? For the
question is not in that Ep. 118. Whether the body of Christ should be
preferred before other things, but whether ye Sacrament should be received
fasting, or after meat.

The rest of your chat, concerning the council of 8. Cardinals, compared with
the conference Wittenberg, I pass over, as containing no argument touching the
matters in question.


CAP. XVI.
Sander. Whether Christ's body dwell really in our (...), by his na(...)itie.


Jewel. Four special means there be, by every of which, Christ's body
dwells in our bodies, not by imagination, but really, substantially,
naturally, fleshly, and in deed.


Sander. You had been better to have subscribed four times, than to have made
an assertion so vain as this.


Fulke. The assertion is of the phrase, or manner o speaking, against which you
cauil^ most vainly.


Jewel. Christ's body by his nativity, whereby he embraces us, dwells in
our bodies really, substantially, etc.


Sander. If you had said by his incarnation, he dwells naturaly in us, or we
in him, that saying might have a true sense: but to say that his body dwells
in our bodies, not only naturally, but also really, etc. it seems to me very
hard.


Fulke. His nativity imports his incarnation. And what mean you by,
naturally, but in the truth and real substance of his body, after a natural
manner?


Sander. Christ took not the common general substance of all mankind, but
only the whole particular nature of man.


Fulke. Sander fights against his own shadow, for here is no man that
says against him: and so through the whole Chapter. Whereas Master Jewel
defends the phrase of speaking, Christ's body dwells really, etc. in our
bodies, which in some sense is true: Sander answers it is not true in every
sense. And he dwells not only by his birth, whereas Master Jewel affirms
three other ways by which Christ may be said so to dwell in us.


Sander. One thing I must put you in mind of. You defend that Christ's natural
body may not be in many places at once, but you say now, that his body by his
nativity, dwells really, etc. in our bodies, which dwell in mani places,
therefore you are against your own doctrine.


Fulke. So long as there be no greater contrariety, in Master Jewels doctrine,
it is safe enough. This is miserable sophistry, more worthy to be hissed at
among boys, ^hen to be answered of learned men.

I think there is no cobbler in Cambridge or Oxforde, but he could wind
himself out of this fallacia. To dwell in all men by participation of common
nature, is one thing, and one whole body, to be whole in ten thousand
places, is another thing.


CAP. XVII.
Sander. Whether Christ's body dwell in our bodies by faith, really or no.


Fulke. The question should be whether this manner of speech in some sense may
not be justified.


Sander. Master Jewels phrase defends Joan of Kents heresy.


Fulke. If he had said, the virgin Mary conceived Christ by faith in her
heart more happily, then carnally in her womb: In affirming the one, he had
not denied ye other, and yet he had said nothing but the truth. Did not whole
Christ dwell in the godly by faith, before his incarnation? Did they not eat
and drink the body and blood of Christ by faith, before his body was
conceived in the virgins womb? If these sayings be true, the other phrase
according to this sense may be defended.


CAP. XVIII.
Sander. The contradiction of M. Jewel concerning Christ really dwelling in us
by faith, and not really dwelling in us by faith.


Fulke. If the word, really, may be taken in diverse senses, what
contradiction is there? when he says, Christ dwells in us really by faith:
the word really, is made opposite to imaginatiuely, figuredly, or
phantastically, and signifies Christ in deed is communicated unto us by the
effects of his incarnation, death, passion, resurrection, etc. Where he says:
Christ is not really and fleshly placed in our hearts by faith: the word
(really) is opposite to faith, which is a substance of things to be hoped for,
which are not actually present, and signifies that the natural substance of
Christ's flesh, lies not locally in the substance of our hearts. According to
these two significations, what contradiction is there? but that you are
disposed to cauil.


CAP. XIX.
Sander. Whether Christ dwells really in our bodies by baptism, or no.


Fulke. This saying may be justified in the affirmative, as well as that he
dwells really in our bodies by ye Sacrament of his supper. The diverse
understanding of ye word really, makes all the controversy in this matter: M.
Jewel takes it in one sense, M. Sander in another: Not ignorantly mistaking,
but wilfully and maliciously deprauing M. Jewels meaning, which is that Christ
in deed, not phantastically or imaginatiuely, but truly after a wonderful
manner, has joined us both body and soul unto himself by baptism.


CAP. XX.
Sander. Whether Christ dwells really in our bodies by the Sacrament of the
altar, or no.


Fulke. Even as really as he dwells by baptism, and none otherwise.


Sander. He promises to declare yt Christ dwells four ways in our body
really, and when he comes to the fourth way, he spends all his strength to
declare yt Christ's body is not really dwelling in our bodies.


Fulke. I pity your beggarly sophistry, grounded upon the diverse taking of
the word, really.


CAP. XXI.
Sander. That Christ's body is proved to be really in the Sacrament, by S.
Chrysostomes words.


Harding. By this Sacrament (says Chrysostom) Christ reduces us, as it were
into one lump with himself: and that not by faith only, but he makes us his
own body in deed, Re ipsa, which is no other to say, then really.


Jewel. This place would have stand M. Harding in better steed, if
Chrysostom had said: Christ mingleth his body with the Sacrament, and drives
himself and it into one lump.


Sander. M. Jewel marketh not, that Sacrament to be of it self the real body
of Christ under the forms of bread, and wine, therefore to say Christ is
mingled with ye sacrament, were to say, Christ is mingled with himself.


Fulke. Sanders best argument, is the whole matter in question: alas poor
wretched beggar.


Jewel. Neither will M. Harding say, that Christ mingleth himself with us,
simply, and without figure: whereof it follows yt much less it is so in the
Sacrament.


Sander. He means, that Christ's own body is joined to ours simply without
any figure of Rhetorike or Grammar, but not without a mystical figure.


Fulke. If he mean, yt he mingleth himself with (...) into one lump, without al
figure of Rhetorik, then without all figure simply, we are one lump with him,
as a lump of dough is one. As for our wonderful conjunction with him, it is not
that which is the figure, but the mingling into one lump, which are the words
of Chrysostom.


Jewel. It is a hot kind of speech, such as Chrysostom was much delighted with.
It is a speech far passing the common sense and course of truth.


Sander. I thought you would bring it to a figure of speech, but he taught it
for a truth, as we shall see anon.


Fulke. As though an hyperbolical speech, may not be true in any sense, because
it is not true in the common sense.


Jewel. Himself thought it necessary to correct and qualify ye rigor of the
same speech, by these words, vt ita dicam, which is as it were, or, if I may be
bold so to say.


Sander. In other places he uses the term of mingling, without correction.


Fulke. But in the same sense that he uses it now, with correction.


Sander. The correction must be referred to ye similitude or metaphor of a lump
of dough, whereunto he alludeth.


Fulke. You are welcome home to a figurative speech.


Sander. What if he use no such correction or qualifying? for, as the edition
of Parise does witness, his Greek words are (...) seipsum miscet nobis, he
mingleth himself with us.


Fulke. If no other edition witness for the Latin translation, let the
translator answer for himself.

But his words being (...), are most aptly translated in Latin subigit seipsum
nobiscum, he kneadeth himself with us, which if it be not a figurative speech,
I report me to you.


Jewel. In such phrase Anacletus says: the power of the holy ghost is mingled
with the oil.


Sander. Pope Anacletus, whose Epistle you esteem, as much as your shoe sole,
names not olcum, oil, but holy chrisme.


Fulke. And is not your chrisme, oil? Although the Epistle be counterfeite,
and not worth a shoe latchet, yet the phrase is used in it by him whosoever
fained it, and by you allowed in another sense then by transubstantiation.


Jewel. Alexander says, the passion of Christ must be mingled with the oblations
of the Sacraments.


Sander. The world goes hard with his note book, when he flies to these
decretall Epistles, for the proof of any thing, especially for Latin phrases.


Fulke. And why may not your own suborned witnesses be examined, to see if
they can depose any thing against your own selves, that have set up such
knights of the post, as those decretall Epistles are, whom you your self
flout for their Latin phrases, which in deed can scarce keep themselves
within the bonds of congruitie? Master Jewel has plentifully displayed their
forgerie, so that he fears not any mention of Mass, or chrisme, to be found
in them.


Jewel. Nyssenus says, Saint Stephen was mingled with the grace of the holy
ghost.


Sander. That saying proves that the grace of the holy ghost, was really in
S. Stephen, as Christ's body i^ really mingled with our bodies.


Fulke. It might likewise prove, that S. Stephen was really in the gifts of
the holy ghost, for if you take grace for the favor of God, it was not really
in Stephen, but in the holy ghost himself. If the one be absured, so is the
other, except it be taken figuratively.


Jewel. Chrysostom meant that we should consider that wonderful conjunction
which is between Christ and us, even in one person.


Sander. He confesses more then we ask, for we are not one person with Christ.


Fulke. Not as he is one of the three persons in trinity, nor as his humanity
assumpted into the deity, makes one person with his death, but as he is our
head and the Church his body, which is the fulness of him that fills all in
all things. Where Sander confesses the matter, it is folly to strive for the
phrase.


Jewel. Leo says: the body of him that is regenerat, is made the flesh of him
that was crucified.


Sander. Pope Leo speaks of his mystical flesh.


Fulke. B. Leo speaks of his natural flesh, but by a spiritual and
mystical kind of making, such as our regeneration is.


Jewel. S. Augustine says: we are made Christ, etc. and both he and we are
one whole man.


Sander. He says not, one whole man, but ye whole man.


Fulke. What number is man, Master Doctor, the singular or the plural?


Sander. He speaks of a mystical body of diverse members, made up, and
perfected into a whole collegiat body. But Chrysostom speaks of Christ's
joining himself to every faithful man.


Fulke. Sander understands not the mystical body of Christ, which compares
it to a collegiat body or civil corporation, with which it has small
similitude. The scripture compares it to a natural body, receiving life and
sense from the head, Christ's joining of himself to every one of us, makes us
all one body in him.


Jew. As we are by baptism made Christ's flesh and Christ, in the same sense
Chrysostom says, we are made one lump with Christ, and Christ has tempered
and mingled himself with us.


Sand. The union is made, not only by faith, but by the thing it self, which
is neither water, bread nor wine, nor faith, but only the real substance of
Christ's body and blood.


Fulk. That is not the question, but of the manner of the mingling, whether it
be corporal or spiritual.


Sand. Chrysostom names changing, sacrifice, hand, mouth, tongue, seeing,
touching, eating, having within us, therefore the manner of mingling must be
corporal.


Fulk. Chrysostom names the hand breaking the flesh in pieces, the mouth
filled with spiritual fire, the tongue made red with this wonderful blood,
as you your self confess, therefore he speaks not properly, but
figuratively of these instruments of the body which outwardly receive the
sacrement of so high and holy a conjunction, the manner of working whereof is
wonderful, and not done with hands, mouth, tongue, etc. of men.


Sand. Prove that where Christ dwells by faith, that such dwelling is made
by the thing it self, and not by faith only.


Fulk. The word is be come flesh, and dwelled in us, being verily Immanuel, God
with us, therefore by the thing it self, and not by faith only, he dwells
with all the faithful.


Sand. Prove that we are made Christ's flesh in baptism by the body of
Christ, for else the union of the sacrament will be more real.


Fulk. By baptism, we are buried with Christ unto death, etc. And what
purges us in baptism, but the blood of Christ, which purges us from all
^innes?


San. Prove either that we are united to faith it self, and unto baptism it
self, or else the union made in this sacrament, will far pass the joining
which is in the other.


Fulk. We are neither united to faith, baptism, or to the Lords supper, but
to Christ, by faith, and by the sacraments.


Sand. Here we are united to the same body, wherewith we are fed, and which
we see, and touch, but there we be not united to the water, wherewith we
are washed.


Fulk. Neither are you here united to any thing, that you see, or touch,
except you will be united to bread and wine, or to the accidents of them,
which only you hold remain to be seen and touched. In baptism we are united
to Christ, whom we put on, with whom we die, are buried, and rise again,
being washed with his blood in our souls, as our bodies are washed with
clean water.


Sand. You say that we are made Christ by baptism: but prove that Christ is
there delivered in sensible things, to your hands, to your mouth, to your
tongue, so that you may have him within you, as it is done in the supper. These
phrases you must prove to be verified by faith, and baptism, if you will have
as real a joining made by faith or by baptism, as is made by the sacrament of
the altar.


Fulk. Saint Augustine says, we are made Christ. The phrases that
Chrysostom uses, alluding to the external manner of participation of that
sacrament, which is by hand, mouth, and tongue, are not necessary to prove,
that the union made by the one sacrament, is as real as by the other, when
there be phrases of equal force, as the phrases of ingraffing putting on,
dying, and being buried with him, washed with his blood, etc.


Jew. As the breaking of this bread is the partaking of the body of our Lord,
even so the bread of idols, is the partaking of Devils: and if we eat one
bread with idolaters, we are made one body with them. Primasius in 1. Cor. 10.


Sand. You falsify the words of Saint Paul, that which he spoke of the
substance of bread, you assign to the action of breaking.


Fulke. You slander him, for although he use the term of breaking of bread,
yet be assigns not the communication to the action of breaking, but to the
thing that is broken, as in the other part of the similitude you might see, if
malice had not made you blind. Even so the bread of idols, etc.


Sand. Primasius took not the name of bread materially, for wheaten bread,
but for all kind of meat and drink, which the idolaters used: therefore he
meant the bread which we break is no material bread, but a kind of meat
which Christ has prepared for us.


Fulk. Primasius took bread materially, for wheaten bread, although not only
for wheaten bread: Therefore he took the bread which we break for wheaten
bread, for what else is broken? Again, the argument is naught, he took bread
of idolaters generally for all meats by synecdoche the figure: Therefore he
takes the bread of Christians specially for one kind of meat, which is no
bread at all.

But how answer you Primasius, saying there is the same union between devils
or idols, and them that eat their bread, which is between the body of Christ
and Christians, which eat the bread which is broken?

The participation of the one, cannot be bodily, ergo not the other.


CAP. XXII.
Sand. It is proved, that S. Hilarie thought the body of Christ to be really in
the sacrament.


Hard. If the word be verily made flesh, and we receive verily, the word being
flesh in our Lords meat, how he is to be thought not to dwell in us naturally,
who both has taken the nature of our flesh now inseparable to himself, in
that he is borne man, and also has mingled the nature of his own flesh, to
the nature of euerlastingnes, under the sacrament of his flesh, to be received
of us in the communion. Hill. de Trin. lib. 8.


Jew. Master Harding has not hitherto found, that Christ's body is naturally
or corporally in ye sacrament.


Sand. You use many shifts, whereof this is the last, which I will now
declare against your dissembling assertion.


Fulk. Belike then D. Harding had not found that you are feign to seek for him.


Jew. Against the Arrians, Hilarious reasoned thus, Christ is really joined unto
ye father, as unto us, but Christ is joined to us by nature, therefore Christ
is joined to God the father by nature. That Christ is joined to us by nature,
he proves it thus: We are joined to Christ by faith, that is by the nature of
one faith, and that is to say, naturally.


Sand. He falsifieth S. Hilarie, for he has not the word naturally.


Fulk. You slander him most impudently, for he does expound the words of
Hilarie, Per vnius fidei naturam, by the nature of one faith, to be all one, as
if he had said, naturally.


Sand. S. Hilaries intent, is only to show that faithful men are one among
themselves by nature of faith, and not how Christ is joined to us by that
faith, which he has not at al, for he answers the argument of the Arrians
grounded upon that place, Act. 4. of the multitude of the believers, there was
one soul and one heart.


Fulk. As though there could be any unity of the belieuers among
themselves, but as they are al joined in one by Christ, and Christ to the^:
who^ blasphemously Sander affirms to have had no faith from the instant of
his incarnation, because his soul was illuminated with the vision of God, to
whose nature it was joined in one person and where clear vision is, there is
no faith says Sander. Not considering, that Christ did voluntarily, empty him
self, of all such pretogatiues of his godheade, as might hinder him to have
experience of all our infirmities, except sin. And therefore S. Luke
testifies yt Jesus incresed in wisdom, and stature, and favor with God and
men. But where such clear vision is, as Sand. imagines, there is no increase
of wisdom and gods gifts. And concerning faith: read ye 22. Psalm. which is a
prophecy of Christ, professing his constant faith, in so much that he was
therefore derided of the wicked, which said, he trusted in God, let him
deliver him etc. Yea the Apostle to ye Hebrews proves the humanity of
Christ, by this Psalm. 16. (where the prophet speaks in ye person of Christ) I
will put my trust in him, that is in God: yet Sander says, he never had faith,
but more then faith. As though a greater and a more perfect faith were not
faith.


Jewel. Likewise he says, we are joined unto Christ by ye regeneration of one
nature, and again: we are joined to Christ by the nature of one baptism:
hereof he concludes, therefore are we naturally joined to him.


Sand. S. Hilarie has not the term naturally, of our conjunction unto Christ
by baptism, which term D. Harding has found to appertain to the sacrament.


Fulke. A simple quarrel, to make such outcries of the term naturally, when
Hilarie has terms in all reasonable men's judgments, equivalent, concluding
that all Christians are one, not only by will, but also by nature, Because they
are clothed with one Christ, by the nature of one baptism. And where I pray
you, has either Harding or you found yt Christ's body is in y^ sacrament
naturally, according to M. Jewels challenge? will you never leave this beggarly
sophistry? Harding has found this term to appertain to the sacrament: ergo
he has answered M. Jewels challenge.


Jewel. Thus it appears by S. Hilarie, we may have Christ naturally within
us, by three other sundry means: and therefore not only (as M. Harding
holds) by receiving of the sacrament, Like as Christ is naturally corporally,
and carnally in us by faith, by regeneration, and by baptism: even so and none
otherwise, he is in us, by the sacrament of his body.


Sand. It is not confessed, that Christ is in us naturally, etc.


Fulke. But it is proved, that by nature we are one with him: But that Christ
should be corporally in our bodies, Hilarie says neither of faith, baptism,
nor of the supper.


Sand. You distinguish regeneration from baptism, as though baptism were not
the sacrament that did regenerate.


Fulke. He that distinguishes the cause from the effect, as you make it, or
the sign from ye thing signified, as Hilarie means, deserves no reproof in
wisemens judgment.


Sand. If Christ be none otherwise in us by the sacrament of his body then by
faith or baptism, why do you make it a several way from the other before
named?


Fulke. Because all these 4. several ways, may notwithstanding agree in one
spiritual manner of conjunction, which has no need of your Popish real
presence.


Sand. The unity of Christ's birth, suffices not to prove that Christ is one
with us, for that unity of nature, might be thought to pertain no more to the
good then to the evil.


Fulke. There is farther required, the virtue of Christ's spirit, to make that
natural unity effectual, to give us eternal life: this uniting virtue is
testified by the sacrament.


Sand. S. Hilarie does us to understand, that in the sacrament, we take the
word, made flesh, and so verily take it, as the word was verily made flesh.


Fulk. He expounds himself, saying we take it verily under a mystery, under
a sacrament, which mystery is not the form bread and wine, for that is an
open and sensible thing.


Jewel. That we verily and undoubtedly receive Christ's body in the
sacrament, it is neither denied, nor in question.


Sand. You said before, that Christ in his supper added an outward sacrament
to the spiritual eating, named in S. John, which sacrament you said was
commonly called a figure, and again you said, the bread is a figure, this is
confuse and contrary doctrine.


Fulke. This is wretched wrangling. An outward sacrament which is a figure,
added to spiritual eating, takes not away spiritual eating, but helps our
faith in spiritual eating.


Sand. You confessed before, that the sacrament is received with ye mou^^, and
now you confess that Christ's body is received in the sacrament, therefore
Christ's body is received with the mouth.


Fulke. Your minor should be: the sacrament is Christ's body, which in your
sense is not yet confessed, otherwise your syllogism is as good as this,
Baptism is received on the outside of the body: the holy ghost is received in
baptism: therefore the holyghost is received on the outside of the body.


Sand. The aduerbe verily in this place does signify naturally, really, and
substantially. For as the word is made flesh really, so we take really the
word being flesh in our Lords meat. The word was not made flesh only by our
faith, but in truth of his substance. Therefore we take the word being flesh
not by our faith only, but in truth of his substance.


Fulk. The aduerbe verily in this place, signifies truly, according to ye
thing, but not that according to ye manner of the thing, in all points we take
the flesh of Christ in the Lords meat, as the same was incarnate in the
Virgins womb, but as Hilarie himself says afterward: Vere sub mysterio, We
receive the flesh of his body truly, under a mystery, which excludes
naturally, or a natural manner of receiving. We eat Christ as truly, as he
was made man, and borne of ye Virgin Mary, but not in ye same manner: we eat
him not sensibly, visibly, palpablie, in length, breadth, and thickness as he
was made flesh, but under a mystery or sacrament of his flesh, which is
communicated unto us after a spiritual manner. And where you say the word was
not made flesh, only by our faith, therefore we take his flesh not by faith
only. Neither is the antecedent true, nor the conclusion right. For Christ was
not made flesh only by our faith, nor by our faith at all. For our faith was
no mean of his incarnation. Where upon I might as rightly conclude: The word
was not made flesh by our faith at all: therefore we take not the word being
made flesh by faith at all. This argument is as good upon the aduerbe verily,
used by S. Hilarie, as that which you make.


Jewel. It is the bread of the heart, hunger thou within, thirst thou within.


Sand. As Christ by taking real flesh, is much the better bread of ye heart,
and hungered within: so it is extreme madness to think that Christ's body
given under the form of bread, is therefore less hungered within, or less
food of the heart.


Fulke. If Christ had not taken real flesh, to his divine nature, he could not
have been the food of eternal life to us, but there is no such necessity of
giving his body in the form of bread, therefore the similitude is unlike.


Jewel. The thing that is received in spirit, is received in deed.


Sand. Spiritual receiving is good and true, when it shouldreth not out real
receiving.


Fulke. If real receiving be receiving in deed, spiritual receiving
shouldreth not out real receiving.


Jewel. It is an holy mystery, and an heavenly action forcing our minds up to
heaven, and there teaching us to eat the body of Christ, not outwardly by the
service of our bodies.


Sand. Is not vere sumimus, spoken of taking by the service of our bodies?


Fulke. As concerning the outward sacrament, but not concerning the body of
Christ.


Sand. Christ has mingled that nature of his flesh to the nature of
euerlastingnesse under a sacrament of his flesh, to be communicated unto us,
which you pass over in Hilarie, as you were utterly blind. The nature of
Christ's flesh is I trow, real, It is communicated unto us under a sacrament
which is received by the mouth: therefore the nature of Christ's flesh is
received by our bodies, and not by faith alone.


Fulke. And is the real flesh of Christ mingled with his divinity? what can
follow thereof, but confusion of the natures? If that be heretical, then the
nature of his flesh mingled with the nature of his euerlastingnesse, is not his
real flesh, nor his real divinity, but the natural property, as he terms
it afterward, of his divine flesh, which is communicated unto us under a
sacrament. As for your rotten reason, that whatsoever is received under the
sacrament, is received by the mouth, because the sacrament is received with the
mouth, is confuted before.


Jewel. The truth hereof stands not in any real presence, but as Hilarious
says, in a mystery, which is a sacrament.


Sand. Hilarious said, we receive verily the flesh of his body under a
mystery, you report him to say, in a mystery. Is that no false dealing?


Fulke. It is all one before God, and al wise and honest men.


Sand. Well, we receive Christ verily under the sacrament, and that sacrament
is by your confession also outward, and commonly called a figure: therefore we
verily receive the flesh of Christ's body, under an outward figure, which is
the figure of bread, although you mean the substance of bread.


Fulke. There is both an outward sacrament, and an inward mystery. S. Hilarie
speaks of the whole dispe^sation of the sacrament, which is both outward and
inward, and not of the sign of bread only, or principally. M. Jewel never
confessed that the outward figure of bread, although in some sense it be called
a sacrament, yet that it is the whole sacrament.


Jewel. Our regeneration in Baptism, in a certain bodily sort, teaches us
the purgation of the mind, as Diony sius says: so it is in the Sacrament of
Christ's body.


Sand. Saint Augustine says: that must be eaten in the truth it self
spiritually, which is visibly taken in the sacrament, and not one thing
outwardly taken, and another thing inwardly, as M. Jewel would have it. De
verb. Apost. Ser. 2.


Fulk Are you such a bussarde, that you cannot see the opposition between
eating in a Sacrament, and ea^ing in truth visibly and spiritually? I trow the
real substance of Christ's body is notvisibly eaten in the sacrament, but the
bread which is so called, because it is a sacrament thereof.


Jewel. Although Christ be not bodily present, yet that does not hinder the
substance of the mystery.


Sand. The substance of the mystery, must needs be hindered where it is absent.


Fulke. Christ is not absent, although not bodily present.


Sand. The substance of the mystery, is the natural substance of Christ under
the Sacrament. Therefore Saint Hilarie says: The natural property by the
sacrament is the sacrament of the perfect unity. The natural property is the
natural substance, for so S. Hilarie uses the word proprietas, very much for
the substance and personal being of God.


Fulke. So often that you can bring none example, but li. 5. cap. 5. you fetch
your example our of Augustine.


Sand. These words can have none other literal meaning, but this: The substance
of Christ, through the form of bread, wherein unity is figured, is the
sacrament of perfect unity.


Fulke. Lib. 5. Cap. 5. you shall find another literal sense more agreeable
to the mind and purpose of Hilarie.


Sand. S. Hilarie says: There is no place to doubt of the truth of flesh and
blood. For now both by the profession of our Lord himself, and ^by our
faith, it is flesh in deed, and blood in deed. Answer I pray you M. Jewel,
what is flesh in deed? what is the nominative case to est? I know none other,
beside the word sacramentum etc.


Fulk. The more foolish Priest you. For caro, the flesh of Christ, and the
blood of Christ, of whose truth we ought not to doubt, is by his profession and
our faith, flesh in deed, and blood in deed.


Sand. It is meant by S. Hilarie, of an outward thing, for he says
immediately, haec accepta these things taken and drunken, do bring to pass,
that both we may be in Christ, and Christ in us.


Fulke. You that could construe so pretily before, do now forget your concords,
for haec accepta, will not agree with sacramentum in number, that should have
b^^^ the nominative case to est. And what can these things being taken, have
relation unto, but to the flesh and blood of Christ, which immediately before
was avouched to be flesh and blood truly? which being received, makes Christ
to dwell in us, and us in Christ. The outward thing that is received, brings
not to pass, that Christ dwells in them that receive it. Wherefore the flesh
and blood of Christ are received inwardly, and not outwardly.


Sand. He says further: Christ himself is in us by his flesh: not by the
mean of bread and wine.


Fulk. Who says otherwise?


Sand. And afterward he is believed to be in us by the mystery of the
sacraments, ipso in nobis naturaliter permanente, himself tarying naturally in
us.


Fulke. This cannot be after the popish understanding, by which Christ tarieth
no longer in us, then ye forms of bread and wine remain uncorrupted.


Sand. He concludes against the third argument of the Arrians: Si ergo nos
etc. If then we live naturally, according to the flesh by him, that is to say
having obtained the nature of his flesh, how can he but have the father
naturally in himself, according to ye spirit, seeing he lives for ye father?
By which it appears, yt as ye substance of God the father is really in the
person of Christ: So S. Hilarie meant, that Christ's natural substance by means
of ye sacrament received, is within our own persons.


Fulke. Then Hilarie should mean, that Christ is naturally in none, but such
as receive that sacrament, and that none live naturally according to ye flesh
by Christ, but they that receive the communion: which is false. Therefore he
means that Christ's flesh is truly united to us by virtue of his spirit,
which is testified in the sacrament, and not that the sacrament received, is
the only mean, but the seal of our faith, which apprehe^deth the working of
Gods spirit in this merueilous conjunction above the reach of man's reason.


Sand. But Hilarie says: By the Sacrament of flesh and blood, the propriety
of natural communion is granted.


Fulke. We say and believe the same, but not only by the sacrament of the
supper, but without it also.


Sand. And again: by the same tarying carnally, to wit in truth of flesh, in
us.


Fulke. But yet after a spiritual manner, according to which (...), being once
entered into us, he never departs from us, as in the popish sense he does,
when the shapes of bread and wine are corrupted.


Sand. Last of all, the mystery of true and natural unity, is to be
preached in eo nobis corporaliter and inseparabiliter vnitis: We being united
in him corporally and inseparably.


Fulke. This cannot be restrained to the supper, seeing he is corporally and
inseparably united to all his members, of which many never received the
communion. And that which you teach men to receive in the communion, is not
vnseparablie united to them, for it departs as soon as the bread and wine
by heat of the stomach, are putrified according to all your schoolemens
opinions. Wherefore there is no cause, why Master Jewel should dissemble
this point, which makes wholly against your understanding of Christ present,
naturally, corpo(...)lly, really. etc.


Jew. Those words, that Christ corporally, earnally, and naturally is within
us, in their own rigor seem very hard.


Sand. They must needs seem hard to him that believes not.


Fulk. Master Jewel believes them in such sense, as they were spoken and meant
by Hilarie, and not as you wrest them.


Jew. Hilarious said: we are one with God the father, and the son, not only by
adoption or consent of mind, but also by nature, which according to the letter,
cannot be true.


Sand. It is a most impudent lie forged upon S. Hilarie, that we are one with
God ye father by nature, or with God the son in his divine nature.


Fulk. You are mad through malice, no man charge S. Hilarie but with the
phrase of speech, by which it is manifest, he took the words nature and
naturally, otherwise then you, as appears even by that his general rule: Qui
per eandem etc. Those yt by the same thing are one, they are one by nature, and
not by will only.


Jew. The fathers have been feign to expound, and to mollify such violent and
excessive kinds of speech.


Sand. Now you show your self in your colors, you think the fathers do not
speak well, for violent speeches be no good speeches, and excessive speeches
be not literally true.


Fulk. Sometime the fathers speak neither well nor truly. But these violent
and excessive speeches, are well enough and good speeches, if they be well and
rightly understood.

And what if hyperbolicall speeches be not literally true, are they therefore
false in the right meaning of the speakers? Metaphors be not literally true,
will you therefore say, that whatsoever is spoken by a Metaphor, is spoken
untruly? This paltrie is but to mock, selye unlearned Papists, of whom you
have exhibition, for such as know what figures of Rhetorike mean, would
think you worthy to wear a cockescombe, thus to dispute of true and false,
out of Rhetorical figures. (...)

more then of manna literally.


Sand. Master Jewel is mad, he is blind, full of extreme malice.


Fulk. Railing, in steed of words proouing, that Nyssen speaks of the
sacrament, or of Christ's natural dwelling in us.


Jew. The purpose of Gregory Nyssen, was only to speak of Christ's birth.


Sand. His purpose was to speak of manna, which did both signify the birth of
Christ, and the sacrament of the altar.


Fulk. What word have you to prove, that he spoke of it, as it does signify
the sacrament of the altar?


Jew. In like manner of speech Saint Hierome says: The wheat whereof the
heavenly bread is made, is that of which our Lord said, my flesh is meat in
deed.


Sand. The speech of S. Hierome, is of the sacrament, therefore the speech of
Nyssenus, which you confess to be like.


Fulk. It is not like in scope and purpose, but in the phrase speaking of
wheat.


Jew. And to this purpose, says Amphilochius: unless Christ had been borne
carnally, thou had not been borne spiritually.


Sand. I know not to what purpose he speaks it, but that Christ's birth is
necessary to our salvation, and because, if that birth had not gone before, we
could not have eaten that body in the sacrament.


Fulk. You might have inferred eating spiritually, a^ well as borne spiritually.


Jew. As Nyssen says, Christ is made our bread: so he says, he becomes
strong meat unto the perfect, herbs unto the weak, etc.


Sand. He may be bread, herbs, and milk in the sacrament, and without it, but
he is bread, herbs, and milk, to us in our mouths (as manna was to the
Jews) only in the sacrament.


Fulk. Where have you in Nyssen your, But he is etc. in our mouth? Is he any of
this bodily?


Jewel. Gregory Nyssen holds, that we receive Christ's body otherwise
then in the Sacrament, for he says: whosoever has abundantly drunk of the
Apostles springs, has already received whole Christ.


Sander. You miss of your proof, you should prove, that he receives Christ's
body, and you prove yt he receives Christ. Gregory spoke of his divine
nature, which may be received in our heart, and yet not his body in our body.


Fulke. I pray you sir, is not whole Christ, both the divinity and the
humanity?


Sander. If the eating of Christ prove his birth, it will follow, that as he is
borne really, so much more, he is eaten really: if he were only eaten by
faith: thence we could conclude no more but a birth by faith.


Fulke. You may as well conclude, if he be eaten only under the form of
bread, he was borne only under the form of bread, such strength is an D.
Hardings argument.


CAP. XXIIII.
Sander. That M. Jewel has not well answered, the places of S. Cyrillus.


Harding. Cyrillus says: when the mystical blessing is become to be in us,
does it not cause Christ to dwell in us corporally, by receiving of Christ's
body in ye communion? The same thing he says in diverse other places.


Jewel. Cyrillus expounds himself: natural union is nothing else, but a true
union. We are by nature the children of anger, that is in deed and truly.


Sander. He says not (it is nothing else) but, ss naturale^: If we call it a
natural union, we shall call it a true union.


Fulke. M. Jewel says not generally, that natural is nothing but true, but
with Cyril in these speeches, it is nothing but true, as he expounds himself.


Sander. That which you said of Saint Augustine, Corporaliter, non vmbraliter,
sed vere and solid: I could not find it upon the 67. Psalm.


Fulke. Then you sought it very negligently: for there it is written, upon the
16. verse of that Psalm, in these words, In ipso quippe inhabitat omnis
pl^nitudo diuinitatis* non vmbraliter, tanquam in templo a rege Salomone facto,
sed corporaliter, id est solid atque veraciter. For in him dwells all the
fullness of the divinity, not shadowedly, as in the temple made by king
Solomon, but corporally, that is to say, soundly and truly. This exposition of
the word, corporally, pleased you not, and therefore you could not find it:
for, if you had red over little more then half the discourse upon the Psalm,
you must needs have found it.


Sander. Says not Cyrill, that the mystical blessing makes him to dwell
corporally in us?


Fulke. He says, the virtue of the mystical blessing, when it is wrought in
us, makes him to dwell also corporally in us.


Jewel. Saint Paul says: The heathens are become concorporall, and partakers
of the promise in Jesus Christ.


Sander. The word corporal signifies no more, but that the Jews and Gentiles
are of one fellowship, but the means of making them one, remain
notwithstanding to be declared.


Fulke. They are declared by S. Paul to be, In Christ, by the Gospel.


Jewel. By the words corporally and naturally, a full perfect spiritual
conjunction is meant, excluding all manner of fantasies.


Sander. Is not that conjunction which is by faith and sincere love (whereof
Cyrill says, we are not only joined thereby, but quoque also corporally) a
full perfect spiritual conjunction?


Fulke. It is not full and perfect by faith and love, except we be spiritually
fed with the body and blod of Christ.


Sander. If corporally be nothing else to say, but truly and without
imagination: How construe you these words of S. Paul: All the fulness of the
Godhead dwells corporally in Christ?


Fulke. I construe them, as S. Augustine does in Psa. 67. before said, which
place you list not to find. And I pray you do you construe corporally so, that
you understand the godhead to be a body, as in your next argument a coniugatis.


Sander. How can you avoid ye yoke, the dependence, the mutual respect that is
between body and bodily? if bodily be truly, then corpus with M. Jewel, is
latin for truth.


Fulke. The yoke is avoided, when the aduerb signifies only a similitude unto
that which is meant by the Nowne: as spiritualiter enforces not the presence
of a spirit, but after the similitude or manner of a spirit. So angelice
viuere, vento^eiactare, regaliter epulari, To live like an Angel, To boast
vainly like the wind, To feast like a king. etc. As for corpus, although it be
not Latin for truth, yet to signify truth, sometime it is not hard to
find in the scripture. S. Paul says, The Jewish feasts are vmbra futurorum,
corpus autem Christi, the shadow of things to come, but the body is of
Christ: what is the sense of body here, but truth? As for Sanders fear;
least Christ's natural body might so be transformed into a truth of faith or
charity, or bones without flesh, or skin without flesh or bones, is vain
and foolish: yea, spiteful and malicious: for, if body, and bodily, be
sometimes taken for truth, and truly, according to the circumstance of the
place, it will not follow, that those words should always be so taken, where
the text openly reclaimeth.


Jewel. Otherwise there must needs follow this great inconvenience, that our
body must be in like manner cor porally, naturally, and fleshly in Christ's
body. For Hilarious says, We also are naturally in him. And Cyrillus, We are
corporally in Christ.


Sander. It is most true, during the time of the conjunction.


Fulke. The time of the conjunction is perpetual, for Hilarie says, We are
inseparably united in him, lib. (...). Teach your Papists, that the body of
Christ is none owise in their mouth and body, then they are in ye body of
Christ, and you may whistle for your Popish real presence.


Jewel. That we be thus in Christ, requires not any corporal being.


Sander. That were a fine being, M. Jewel, that Christ's body should be in us
corporally, yet the being should not be corporal.


Fulke. This is a fine wit M. Sander, being demanded of an horsmill, to answer
of a milhorse. M. Jewel would know, whether any corporal being is required,
that we, I say we, should be in Christ corporally. You answer of Christ's
being in us, because you cannot avoid the absurdity of our being in Christ
corporally, after your corporal and carnal understanding.


Jewel. It requires not any local being.


Sander. It is a local being, in respect that the substance of Christ
occupies the same place, under the form of bread, which the substance of
bread did occupy before.


Fulke. That is a fine place for a man of perfect stature. But why answer you
of Christ's being in the Sacrament, when M. Jewel speaks of our being in
Christ corporally? I perceive your infirmity: you cannot hear on that side.


Jewel. Christ fitting in heaven, is here in us, not by a natural, but by a
spiritual mean of being.


Sander. The being of Christ in us by his spirit, is also natural, concerning
the nature of his godhed, which is every where.


Fulke. Still you take chalk for cheese. We enquire of the being of his
humanity, whether it may be naturally sitting in heaven, and here with us.


Jewel. Saint Augustine says: After that Christ is ascended, he is in us by
his spirit. And S. Basil, and again S. Augustine says the like in diverse
places. And Christ spoke in S. Paul, etc.


Sander. Shall one truth always displace another with you. These be sowters
arguments, Christ is God, therefore he is not man: he is in heaven, ergo he is
not in earth, etc.


Fulke. Saint Augustine, by his ascension, and presence by his spirit,
concludes the absence of his humanity from the earth. Ascendit in Coelum, and
non est hic, he has ascended into heaven, and he is not here, In Joan. Tr. 50.
This is no sowters argument, except Saint Augustine be a sowter, in fine Master
Sanders deintie judgment.


Jewel. This conjunction is spiritual, and therefore needs not, neither the
circumstance of place, nor corporal presence.


Sander. The conjunction is spiritual, but the manner of working it, is brought
to pass, by the corporal substance of Christ.


Fulke. The corporal substance needs not to come unto us, that a spiritual
conjunction may be made between Christ and us: the spirit of God, is the
only necessary mean to make a spiritual conjunction.


Jewel. The conjunction that is between Christ and us, neither does mingle
persons, nor unite substances: but it does knit our affects together, and
join our wills, says S. Cyprian.


Sander. S. Cyprian means, we are not made consubstantiall to the Trinity.


Fulke. He denies the corporal manner of uniting of substances, namely of the
substance of our bodies, with the substance of the body of Christ.


Jewel. The conjunction because it is spiritual, true, full, and perfect, is
expressed by this term, corporal.


Sander. As though, God, because he is spiritual, true, full and perfect, he
might therefore be called corporal.


Fulke. As though, that which is in somethings, is necessary to be in all
things, and yet the Godhead, which is spiritually, truly, fully, and perfectly
in Christ, is said to be in him corporally, Col. 2.


Sander. Who ever heard of such vanity? because it is spiritual, it is termed
corporal.


Fulke. Who ever heard vainer sophistry, then that which divides things to be
joined together? Master Jewel adds true, full and perfect.


Jewel. Corporal conjunction remoueth all mane^ light and accidental joining.


Sander. If all accidental joining be removed, only substantial joining
remains. A substantial joining requires the substances to be present that
are joined together.


Fulke. The substances that are joined together after a spiritual manner,
need no local presence of the substances to be joined, whom the spirit of
Christ can couple, though they be in place distant, with an inseparable union.


Jewel. It is utterly untrue, that we have Christ corporally within us, only
by receiving the Sacrament.


Sander. Never a father by you named, says as you do, and therefore you
speak of your own head.


Fulke. All the fathers that say Christ dwells in us corporally, speak
generally of all the members of the Church, of which many have not received the
Sacrament, therefore it is not by the Sacrament only.


Sander. Seeing we cannot have him corporally in us, without his body be
within us, and yet none other thing is his body, beside that which is
delivered at his supper, by that mean only he may be corporally in us.


Fulke. Never a father by you named, either says, or means, that any of
your two propositions are true, therefore your conclusion is of your own head.


Jewel. By Master Hardings construction, the child is damned, who dies
without receiving the Sacrament of Christ's body.


Sander. No Catholic does teach so. Baptism sussiceth until a man come to
years of discretion.


Fulke. Ergo, Baptism makes Christ to dwell in us corporally.


Jewel. Without natural participation of Christ's flesh, there is no
salvation.


Sander. If it be so, it is you that teach the damnation of all those that
receive not the Eucharistie.


Fulk. It is so, because Christ says. Except ye eat the flesh of the son of
man, and drink his blood, etc. and because it is so, and yet all are not
damned that receive not the Eucharist. This natural participation, and eating
of the flesh of Christ, is not only in the Eucharist.


Jewel. S. Chrysostom says: In the Sacrament of baptism, we are made flesh
of Christ's flesh, and bone of his bones.


Sander. These words you have not in Chrysostom.


Fulke. You cavil at the form of words, (whereupon M. Jewel stands not)
when you cannot avoid the matter.


Sander. He says, they that are partakers of the mysteries, can tell how they
are formed properly and lawfully out of him.


Fulke. That they are alike formed out of Christ in both the Sacraments, it
overthrows your corporal presence in the one only.


Sander. Moreover, he gives another sense, expounding ex ipso, for secundum
ipsum.


Fulke. That takes not away the force of his authority in the former sense.


Sander. He shows, that we are taken out of Christ's side, as Eua out of Adam.


Fulke. If that be by baptism it proves M. Jewels proposition, that we are
flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones.


Sander. Although it were in him, yet is it to no purpose: for it is one thing
to be made of the flesh of Christ, which may be meant of his mystical flesh,
another thing to partake his flesh naturally. We are made of his flesh by
spiritual means.


Fulke. What can it be, to partake naturally his flesh, if it be not to become
flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones? you say, we may be made of his
flesh, by spiritual means: what may we be made of the matter of his flesh?
Chrysostom tells you flesh and bones: yea, of his mystical flesh. What, are
we made mystical flesh? then verily we must be made mystical bones also.
This is a mistie exposition of so clear a matter.


Sander. The reason why certain places of Scripture are interpreted, sometime
of baptism, sometime of Christ's supper, is, because in the old time, in
many countries, the Sacrament of Christ's body, was given straight after
baptism.


Fulke. A wise reason, why they should make that common to both the
Sacraments, which was proper to one. They were not ministered so neete in time,
but they could discern what was common, what was peculiar to either of them.


Jewel. Master Harding is not yet able to find, that Christ's body is either
corporally received into our bodies, or corporally present in the Sacrament.


Sander. It is you that are not able to find it: for D. Harding has found
it, and I have showed it in Chrysostom, S. Hilarie, Gregory Nyssen.


Fulke. Let the readers judge what you have found, but vain cauillations:
for, neither the words, nor ye matters, you have showed.


Sander. So would I show it at large out of Cyrillus, but that partly the
book is grown already too great: partly, a marvelous number of places do
prove both Christ's body to be corporally received into our bodies, and to be
corporally present in the Sacrament.


Fulk. So would I answer you sufficiently, for any thing you can bring out of
Cyrillus, but that I have answered already in many places throughout this
book to all that ever you can gather, and scrape to make a show of any such
matter, which were mere tediousness here to repeat.


Harding. The Catholic fathers since Berengarius time have used the terms
really, substantially, etc. to exclude metaphors and figures, and to confess a
most supernatural union with Christ, by mean of his natural flesh, really
though not locally present.


Jewel. These doctors lived with in these 300. years, and are such as Master
Harding thought not worth the naming.


Sander. He named none, because your impudent proclamation, bound him to the
time.


Fulke. He was not so bound to the time, but he might have named, if any had
been of greater antiquity then 300. years.


Sander. Damascen says the bread, wine and water is supernaturally changed
into ye body, and blood of Christ. Theophilact says, the bread is with secret
words changed into our Lords flesh, and these are above 700. years old,
speaking of transubstantiation.


Fulke. Neither of both uses the terms really, substantially, etc. which is
the matter in question. And although they use the terms of changing and
transformation, yet neither of both acknowledged transubstantiation, nor the
Church of the Grecians, whereof they were members unto this day, does
acknowledge it.


Sander. Haymo, Remigius, Pascasius, Lanfrancus, Iuo, Guimundus, Anselmus,
Rupertus, Algerus were all learned men, and all above 300. years old.


Fulke. Yet you show not where any of them, although most of them were great
enemies of Berengarius, did use the terms really, substantially, etc.


Sander. Bernard whom you have often alleged, writes in ser. de sanct.
Martyr. Even to this day, the same flesh is exhibited to us, which the Apostles
had seen in his manhood, but yet spiritually forsouth, not carnally. For there
is no cause why we should say, ye apparition, which was made to the fathers of
the old Testament, either that presence of his flesh, which was exhibited to
the Apostles, to be denied in these our days. For to them who faithfully
consider the matter it shall be clear, yt neither of both lacks. For the true
substance of the flesh it self is present, now also to us no doubt verily,
but that it is so in the Sacrament.


Fulke. This testimony affirms, ye presence of Christ's flesh spiritually,
which we grant, and denies the term carn^lly, which is one of the terms in
question.


Jewel. Their doctrine is without comfort. They hold that the body of Christ
remains no longer in our bodies, but only until the forms of bread and
wine begin to alter.


Sander. It is not without comfort: seeing a merueilous commodity by this
touching rises to our spirit and soul: as to those whom Christ healed by
touching.


Fulke. They were as well healed whom he touched not, but only cured by his
word. But what is become of that mingling of Christ's flesh with ours, and his
inseparable dwelling corporally in us, out of Chrysostom, Hilarious and
Cyrillus, Cap. 21. 22. and 23. of this book? if Christ's body tarry no longer
with us, where is the hope of resurrection, if the quickening* flesh of Christ
be not still in us?


Sander. Moreover I have often said: our conjunction with Christ in this
Sacrament, is like the carnal copulation between the wife and husband, where
twain are in one flesh, yet tarry not always corporally joined together.


Fulke. You have often made a shameless, beastly, and filthy comparison,
between so high a mystery, and so gross and carnal copulation.


Jewel. Some others say, that so soon as our teeth touch the bread,
streightwaies Christ's body is taken up into heaven. The words be these:
Certum est quod quam cito species dentibus teruntur, tam cito in coelum rapitur
corpus Christi.


Sander. The greatest flower of your garland lies in glosses and phrases.


Fulke. The best grace you have, is in railing and sl^ndering.


Sander. You have falsely translated the gloss, you have englished teruntur
touched, and species bread. In Berengarius confession, you could term it by
the word, grinded.


Fulke. So he could do now, if he had purposed rather to translate, then to
show that writers opinion: which according to the custom of Papists now*
which grind not, but swallowe down, there what ye call species, (for shapes I
cannot name it, because other things of greater moment then shapes are in it)
must be understood of touching with teeth, and not of grinding, where no
grinding is: and yet if it were grinded with teeth, that grinding follows so
near the touching, that there is small difference of time between them.


Jewel. Here a man may say unto M. Harding, as he did before to the Arrian
heretic.


Sander. He spoke against the heretic by the authority of Cyrillus, which
taught us to be corporally joined by natural participasion to Christ, as
branches are joined to the vine, and not by faith only.


Fulke. And even so may he speak against Master Harding, by the authority of
Hilarious; which says against the Arrians, that we are corporally and
inseparably united in Christ, which is contrary to this popish doctrine of
Christ's departing from us.


Sander. Bring, if you can, M. Jewel, a saying of above a thousand years old,
by which D. Hardings doctrine may be accused of heresy.


Fulke. He has brought in his two books written against D. Harding, more them
five hundred such sayings.


Jewel. Comes Christ to us from heaven, and by and by forsakes us?


Sander. His body comes not down from heaven, but the bread is changed into
his body, as at his incarnation he came not from heaven, by forsaking his
glory, but by assumpting flesh of the virgin.


Fulke. His godhead which fills all places, needed no local ascending or
descending. Therefore, it is ill compared with his body, which is
circumscriptible, except you will become an Eutychian, and vbiquist.


Sander. As after his resurrection, he ascended into heaven, so after the
communion, the forms of bread and wine, being consumed, Christ ceasseth to be
corporally with us.


Fulke. A wise similitude. The consuming of the forms of bread and wine is
compared to the resurrection: the ceassing of his being corporally with us, to
his ascension: But how comes this ceassing? by a new transubstantiation of
the body and blood of Christ into bread and wine? or Christ forsaking the
forms, by a new (...) of substance unto them? or else are the forms left
empty both of their own substance and of the substance of Christ? Against
this ceassing of Christ to be corporally with us: Hilarie says, in eo nobis
corporali^er and inseparabiliter vnitis: We are united to him, not only
corporally, but also inseparably.


Jewel. Or, that we eat Christ, and yet receive him not, or have him not? or
that he enters not, etc.


Sander. Who teaches the contrary, but that your own shadow troubles you?


Fulk. Those popish doctors, that teach that the body of Christ is ravished
into heaven, as soon as the species are grinded with the teeth.


Jewel. He says this presence is known to God only, then it follows.
Master Harding knows it not.


Sand. He says not this presence, but the manner of this pres(...) why do you
falsify his words?


Fulke. Would any man think, the manner of the presence should be unknown
to him, which affirms it is reallie, substantially, corporally, carnally,
sensibly? etc.


Jewel. So this article is concluded with an ignoramus.


Sand. Not so, because the question is not of the manner of Christ's presence,
but of his real presence, though the manner be unknown.


Fulke. Nay, the question is not of the real presence, which we always
confess, but of the manner of presence, whether it be spiritually, or
corporally.


Sand. A non credimus is a worse fault, then an ignoramus.


Fulke. It is no fault not to believe, that which scripture does not teach.


Jewel. The old fathers never left us in such doubts.


Sand. S. Cyrillus wills us to give strong faith to the mysteries, but to
leave the way and knowledge of his work unto God. The first part ye have
broken.


Fulke. The first part we have not broken, for we believe the mysteries to be
the same that Christ says they are, but you have broken the last part,
because you add really, substa^tially, corporally, etc. which you have not
learned of Christ.


Jewel. Emissenus says: Christ is present by his grace.


Sand. You have put a false nominative case, it is victima, the oblation which
is present in grace.


Fulke. And what is the substance of that eternal sacrifice, but Christ? for
the action you confess to be utterly past.


Jewel. Saint Augustine says: Christ is present in us by his spirit.


Sand. That is true, when he is in us by his flesh.


Fulk. It is his spirit that makes his flesh present, to us after a wonderful
manner.


Jewel. You shall not eat this body that you see: it is a certain sacrament
that I deliver you.


Sand. The words of S. Augustine are, I have commended or set forth.


Fulke. To commend or set forth, is to deliver in doctrine.


Sand. That which was commended at Capernaum, was only the same flesh which
dyed for us, therefore that flesh must be delivered, not in a visible manner,
but yet in truth of giving, by body and taking by body.


Fulke. That giving and taking by body, Saint Au gustine denies, in the
person of Christ: ye shall not eat this body that ye see, nor drink that
blood which shall be shed: It is a sacrament or mystery which I have
commended unto you, which being sp(...)itually understood, shall quicken you.


Sand. In deed M. Jewel, Christ delivered his flesh as well at Capernaum, as
at his supper by your doctrine. But not so by the doctrine of the Gospel.


Fulke. The Gospel says: (...), except ye do eat the flesh of the son of
man, and do drink his blood, (...) you have not now, life in you. Christ
speaks in the present temps. But how could they eat his flesh and drink
his blood, that they might have life, except he did then deliver his flesh, as
well as at his supper? For many of the^ might die before ye institution of his
supper. Again he says, (...) etc. he which does eat my flesh, and which does
drink my blood, (...) has now life everlasting, and I will raise him up in
the last day. For my flesh is verily meat, and my blood is verily drink.
How was it verily meat and drink, when he spoke, if no man might eat and
drink it, before his supper? Again, He which does eat my flesh, and which
does drink my blood, does abide in me, and I in him. How can this be
verified in the present temps, so often repeted, except Christ did at that
present time deliver his flesh and blood to be eaten of all that believed
and offered the same to all that heard him? wherefore the doctrine of the
Gospel, is agreeable to that which master Jewel teaches, and directlye
contrary to master Sanders doctrine, that Christ delivered not his flesh and
blood to be eaten and dronken before his supper, but only promised them at
Capernaum.


Jew. Thus the holy fathers say Christ is present, not corporally.


Sand. Both S. Cyrill and S. Hilarie have the word corporally concerning the
sacrament.


Fulk. But neither of both says, that Christ is present in the sacrament
corporally.


I(...) Not carnally.


S(...) S. Hilarie has the word carnally.


Fulk. You play mockeholiday. S. Hilarie says not, That Christ is present in
the sacrament carnally.


Jew. No(...)rally.


Sand. S. ^^larie has the term naturally, diverse times, and S. Cyrill
calls it natural partaking, and natural union.


Fulk. Neither the one, nor the other, ever said, that Christ is in the
sacrament naturally. Touching the natural participation and union, it has
been showed how it may be without Christ being present, naturally, in the
sacrament.


Jew. But as in a sacrament, by his spirit and by his grace.


Sand. Here appears what stuff you have fed the reader withal in your
whole book. For partly you deny a truth, which is that Christ is not
corporally present, against the express word of God, and the fathers, as I
have showed.


Fulk. And yet neither the express word of God, nor any of the fathers, have
this sentence: Christ is corporally present in the sacrament, or any thing
equivalent to it.


Sand. Partly you prove, that your heresy by an other truth which rather
establishes then hinders the real presence. For Christ cannot be better
present in spirit and grace, then if he be present in his flesh.


Fulk. The presence of Christ by his spirit and grace, excludes your heresy
of presence corporally, and he is better present by spirit and grace, whereby
he tarieth in us for ever, then by your imagined presence of his body, in which
you confess him to tarry but a short time, no not in them that receive the
sacrament most worthily.

Your conclusion being for ye most part, but a repetition of such cauils,
slanders, and railings, as you have used throughout the book, deserves no
several answer: partly because the greatest part of them are answered
already, and partly because both they and the rest, contain nothing but
general accusations, without any special argument to prove them.

As for that you make bost that you have pr(...) every one of your books:
whether I have, (a(...)ough briefly, yet sufficiently confuted or no) I commit
to the judgment of indifferent readers.


GOD BE PRAISED.

