A RETENTIVE, TO STAY GOOD CHRISTIANS, IN TRVE FAITH and religion, against the
motives of Richard Bristow.

ALSO A DISCOVERY OF THE DAVNGEROVS ROCK OF THE POPISH Church; commended by
Nicholas Sander D. of Divinity.

Done by William Fulke Doctor of divinity, and Master of Pembroke hall in
Cambridge.



Imprinted at London by Thomas Vautroullier for George Bishop. 1580.

A CATALOGVE OF ALL SVCH POPISH BOOKS EITHER AVNSVVERED, or to be answered,
which beeinge written in the English tongue from beyond the seas, or secretly
dispersed here in England have come to our hands, since the beginning of the
Queens Majesty's reign.
1 HArding against the Apology of the English Church, answered by M. Jewel,
Bishop of Sarum. 2 Harding against M. Jewels challenge, answered by M.
Jewel. 3 Hardings reioynder to M. Jewel, answered by M. Edward Deering. 4
Coals quarrels against M. Jewel, answered by M. Jewel. 5 Rastels return of
untruths answered by M. Jewel. 6 Rastel against M. Jewels challenge, answered
by William Fulke. 7 Dorman against M. Jewel, answered by M. Nowel. 8 Dormans
disproofe of M. Nowels reproof, answered by M. Nowell. 9 The man of Chester
answered by M. Pilkington Bishop of Duresme. 10 Sanders on the Sacrament in
part answered by M. Nowell. 11 Fecknams Scruples, answered by M. Horn B. of
Winchester. 12 Fecknams Apology, answered by W. Fulke. 13 Fecknams objections
against M. Goughes sermon, answered by M. Gough and M. Lawrence Tomson. 14
Stapletons counterblast, answered by M. Bridges. 15 Marshall his defense of the
cross, answered by M. Caulfehill. 16 Fowlers Psalter, answered by M.
Sampson. 17 An infamous libell or letter (incerto authore) against the teachers
of Gods divine providence and predestination, answered by Robert Crowley. 18
Allens defense of Purgatory, answered by W. Fulke. 19 Heskins Parleament
repealed by W. Fulke. 20 An offer of a Catholickque, to a learned Protestant,
answered by W. Fulke. 21 Hosius of Gods express word translated into English,
answered by W. Fulke. 22 Sanders rock of the popish church, undermined by W.
Fulke. 23 Sanders defense of Images answered by W. Fulk. 24 Marshals reply to
Caulfhill, answered by W. Fulk. 25 Shaclockes pearl, answered by M. Hartwell.
26 The hatchet of heresies, answered by M. Bartlet. 27 M. Euans answered by
him self. 28 A defense of the private Mass, answered (by conjecture) by M.
Cooper Bishop of Lincoln. 29 Certain assertions tending to maintain the
Church of Rome to be the true and Catholic Church, confuted by John Knewstub.
30 Bristowes motives and demands, answered by W. Fulke. 31 Stapletons
fortress of the faith, answered by W. Fulke.


These Popish treatises ensuing for the most part are in aunsvvering, and those
which are not (by Gods assistance as time will serve) shall receive their
several replies. If the Papists know any not here reckoned, let them be
brought to light, and they shall be examined.

1 Sanders, upon the Lords supper, partly vnaunswered. 2 Allens defense of
Priests authority to remitte sins, and of the Churches meaning concerning
indulgences. 3 Stapletons return of untruths. 4 Rastells reply. 5 Vaux his
Catechism. 6 Canisius his Catechism translated. 7 Frarins oration translated.
8 John de Albynnes discourse against heresies, en^^^hed, with an offer of a
Catholic to a learned Protestant: which offer is answered under the name of
Ristons articles, by W. Fulke. 9 Gregor. Martins treatise of schism. 10
Points of the Sacrament.


A REASONABLE REQVEST AND PROTESTATION OF W. Fulke to all learned Papists.
FOrasmuch as there is no end of writing books (as the wise man says) and
that the truth of arguments is best discerned when it is brought unto the
judgment of Logic, which is the art of reasoning: If any of the learned
Papists will reply against these, and other mine aunsweres, I require that (as
well for their own ease, as that I may have time to peruse them, and the
readers no impediment, but that they may clearly judge of them,) they will
leave of all vain discourses, and needelesse questions, and only conclude the
controversies of religion that are between us, in the strict form of Logical
arguments. If to this reasonable request they refuse to yield, I protest
before God and the world, that they show them selves thereby to be enemies of
the truth, that they fly the light, and dare not abide the trial.

Faults escaped. The first number signifies the page, the last the number of
the lines.
Page 12. lin. 1. Homousian r. Homousion 13. 10. last r. least 15. 8. Arrius r.
AErius 15. 14. your r. there 15. 18. wherefore r. whereof 15. 27. recited r.
revived 20. 26. Iudaea r. India 27. 27. virtute r. vnitate 30. 24. commanded
r. commended 34. 32. other r. either 36. 33. hear r. how 40. 14.
circumstituantur r. circumstipantur 40. 37 audient r. audirent 42. 23. cere r.
cura 44. 10. condemned r. conte^ned 44. 36. ca^c r. con 45. 18. true r. four
48. 37. Marcellus r. Marcellinus 55. 19. How r. Now 58. 15. persvvadeth r.
presupposes 67. 38. r. in a manner depend 68. 11. resisting r. receiving 68.
28. and r. an 73. 1^. quaeque r. quoque 79. 29. Ripanu^ r. Riparium 80. 35.
Babicas r. Babilas 80. 38. for r. to 81. 7. troubles r. tombs 81. 16. Reg r.
^. Reg. 13. 81. 17. laws r. bones 82. 30. verity r. unity 87. 10. cont^et r.
co^teret 88. 2. sending r. studying 88. 33. (...) 88. 36. (...) 89. 14. v 11.
r. 14. 90. 36. nor r. are 90. 38. r. were not better applied 92. 37. ber. 2.
r. ver. 21. 25. learning r. hearing 95. 14. r. if by mass 95. 25. consecrated
r. unconsecrated 96. 34. that the churches of the Britans were of another
form then those of the Romans 96. 35. Niua r. Ninia 99. 18. names r. nonus
100. 19. serves r. seems 100. 30. austerity r. authority 103. 9.
apostolical r. apostaticall 107. 21. all our 111. 11. save r. serve 112. 38.
truly r. fondly 116. 7. shall r. should 117. 36. Bzia r. Bizari 120. 23. not r.
out 127. 2. man r. may 123. 5. rehearsed r. released 131. 23. do not well r.
do well.

Out of the discovery of the rock.
Page 140. Lin. 25. if read that. 141. 28. or r. etc. 144. 24. fuit r. sint.
150. 14. received r. recited. 20. r. these two. 155. l. vlt. Rhetianus r.
Rhetitius. 158. 2. controversy r. conversion. 159. 5. many r. men. 163. 31.
vilant r. vigilant. 165. 26. this r. these. 167. 4 not r. as. l. vlt. r. which
ma y. 173. 30. confirmed r. considered. 176. 24. godliness r. lordlines. 177.
34. that r. this. true r. two. 189. 6. when r. whom. l. 12. put out praise
204. 30. instituteth r. intituleth. 208. 35. offered r. before made. 228. 7.
vnee r. ounce. 232. 11. r that it. l. 15. Caebastinus r. Caelestinus. 233. 5.
generally r. general. 236. 13. austerity r. authority. 256. 1. and r. no. 250.
32. fostered r. fastened. 247. 3. idio r. ideo. 272. 32. that r. the. 260. 3.
petram r. Petru^. 276. 6. den r. doom. 279. 3. deforme r. defame. 280. 14.
uncertainly r. irreverently. l. 38. with r. which. 281. 4. challeng r.
calling. 297. 17. Barbarita r. Borberitae. 314. 13. Cyrians r. Collyridianes.

A RETENTIVE TO STAY GOOD CHRISTIANS IN THE TRVETH OF THE GOSPEL, WRITTEN BY W
Fulke against the Motives of R. Bristow, and by him directed to his friends of
the Popish Church.
AMong such English papists, as have written within these twenty years,
against the religion of God now mainteyned by public authority in this
Realm, some have showed great wit, some much readinge, some flowing
eloquence, some all these indifferently: but among them all, none has showed
less wit, learning, or good utterance, then this Richard Bristow. So much
the more do I meruell, when I hear that many Papists make so great account
of his witless and senseless writings. But it fares with them, as with
little children, to whom new trifles seem always most worthy to be played
with all. And verily I had thought of all other, least to have dealt against this
peuish prater, both because he brings no new matter, but such as in other of
his cote, was with more coullor of truth set forth before, and also for that
I had already made answer to Ryshtons challenge, which as I take it, is that
table of the Church, which Bristowe confesses to contain all his demaundes,
which demaundes are almost all contained in his motives. But my friends
requiring me not only to answer this, but all other writings also of the
papists, what soever they have set forth in the english tongue since the
happy reign of our sovereign Lady, I have condescended to confute even that
which deserves no confutation, and somewhat the rather, because Bristow would
have this alone to be a sufficient motive unto popery, that we having
nothing to gainesay most of their popish books, have not dared, (I use his
own words) once to go about the aunswering of most of the said Catholics
books. But are feign to get them forbidden by proclamation, although
ourselves have provoked confidently the Catholics to write them. Whervppon
also he notes that Jewels challenge is turned into proclamations, how rightly
or truly, he that has but half an eye may see. His preface to the reader,
containing never an argument or motive which is not repeated either in the
treatise it self of motives, or in the demaundes, I will pass over, and come
to the first motive, gathering the principal contents out of his own table,
as I have done with the rest.

Name of Catholics. The very name of Catholics a certain mark of right
Catholics. Jewel vnwars testifies the Roman Bristow.
religion to be Catholic. La^rence Hu^fr^is Trojan horse, his pseudocatholic^.
Luthers conscience the Catholic Church to be against him. Ponta^us erred not
whose history Humfrey himself unawares confirms. For Catholics (says he)
were present as lookers on and earnest defenders. What then ^ but none such
were moderators save only lay Lords and unlearned heretics. ergo. The first
motive is the 6. demand. In which he would prove the very name of
Catholics, to who^ Fulke.
soever it is given, to be a certain mark of right Catholics, to be known as
readely, easily, and certainly by that name, as such a city is known by the
name of London, and such a country by the name of England. If ever he learned
any logike at Oxforde, he left it behind him, or else lost it by the way when
he ran over the sea. For if all things may be known by the name whereby
they are commonly called, nothing bears a false name, all Idols are true
gods and saints, al dead carcales be living men. Yea all heretics which are
commonly called Christians in respect of Jews and Turks, be true Christians.
But we must bring him a company of men, commonly known by the name of
Catholics, which proved heretics. Forsooth the Arrians among themselves were
commonly called bv the name of Catholics and so reputed and taken, when the
true Catholics were called homousians and heretics, yea all heretics among
the Pagans were commonly known by the name of Christians, which ^ think is
as glorious a name as the name of Catholics. Yet Augustine (says ^ee) makes
much of the name of Catholics. Cont. ^^. Fund. c. 4. T^net me postremo, etc.
Last of all the very name of the Catholic Church does hold me, which not
without cause, amongst so many heresies, this Church alone has so obtained,
that whereas all heretics would have themselves to be called Catholics, yet
to a stranger which asks where men meet at the Catholic Church, none of
the heretics dare show either their minster or house. But let us see how
Augustine and Bristow agree. Augustine makes this name, the last motive,
Bristowe the first. Augustine joins it with many things, Bristowe makes it
alone to be a sufficient motive. Augustine in the next sentence after
confesses the plain demonstration of the truth, wheresoever it may be
showed, to be preferred before al those motives of Universality, miracles,
consent, succession and name of Catholics, by which he says that he might be
held in the Catholke Church, although he grounded no argument upon that
wisdom, which the Maniches would not acknowledge to be in the catholic
church, his words are these: Apud vos autem vbi nihil horum est quod me inuitet
ac teneat, sola personat veritatiae pollicitatio qu^e quidens sutam manifesta
monstratur, vt in dubium venire non possit, praeponenda est omnibus illis rebus
quibus in Catholica ten^or. Among you Maniches (says he) where there is none
of these things which might allure and hold me, the only promisle of truth
does sound, whith truth if it be showed so manifest that it cannot come in
doubt, it is to be preferred before al those things, by which I am held in the
Catholic Church. This is Augustines judgment of such simple motives, which
with the truth, may help to confirm it, but are not worth a straw when they
are alleged against the truth. Wherefore seeing we make so plain demonstration
of the truth out of Gods word, that no man can doubt of it, but such as will
follow the bare name of Catholic, contrary to the Catholic doctrine of the
scriptures: against all such vain motives, we may be bold to oppose the
truth it self. What a mockery is this that he says? that an^eretike in
Germany, being asked where the Catholic Church is, will point to ^^^^ popish
Church. Admit this to be so, does this prove the Massing Church to be the
Catholic Church? In France if you ask a Papist which is ye reformed Church?
he will point you to the place where the congregation of true Christians use to
assemble. Does the Papist therefore acknowledge, the Church of protestants to
be in deed the reformed Church? I^ he do not, the name of Catholics
proves no more on the one side, the^ the name of reformed Christians on the
other side, that either is such in deed as of the vulgar and ignorant people
they are called. But why are Protestants and all here^ikes desirous to be
called Catholics? but that they which in deed have the name, are also in
deed evermore true Catholics, and so the name alone sufficient to move any
man. Who ever heard such an ass b^aye? as though there were no difference,
whether they have the name rightfully or wrongfully, truly or falsely. In all
the East Church, who are called Catholics, but the Grecians? Which for many
hundredth years, have been separated from the Communion of the Latins, and of
them are compted for heretics and Schimatikes. But Augustine de vera rel. Cap.
7. writes more plainly for the name of Catholic. Tenenda est nobis Christiana
etc. We must hold the Christian religion, and the company of that Church,
which is Catholic and called Catholic, not only of her own but also of her
enemies. For will they nill they, the heretics also and Schismatikes them
selves, when they talk not with their own, but with strangers, they call the
Catholic Church nothing but the Catholic Church. For they can not else be
understood, except they discern her by that name, by which she is called
of the whole world. This therefore (quoth Bristow) is proved, they to be
Catholics that Catholics are called When as Augustine says, we must hold yt
church which both is catholic, and is so called. Bristowe the Papist, is
called by the name of a City in England, theresore Bristowe the Papist is in
deed a city in England. This therefore is proved, that to be Bristow that
Bristow is called. But how proves he, that they be called Catholics? The
world forsooth bears them witness. For beside some ignorant fellow in
Germany, that calls them so, or rather not meaning to brable in the streat.
yealdeth to that term, not because he thinks them to be so, but because
he knows the Papist which asks for the Catholic Church, seeks not the
Catholic Church in deed, but the Popish Church falsely called Catholic:
beside I say some tankarde bearer boy or gyrle, that has m^de such a unswere
to Bristowe as he traveled in Germany, he asks when in printed books they
be called Catholics, whether the reader knows not who is meaned? Yes
verily, if the books be written by papists o^ such as take neither part. But
he would ^now further why we m^ke name the^, and call them Cacolikes or
Cartholikes. I suppose whosoever mocketh them, it is because they falsely
^surpe that name, which they are not wo^thie to bear, and not because they be
such, and the name evil: yet again he asks why Luther i^ Germany did cause
the Creed to be turned. I believe the Christian Church, and not, I believe the
Catholic Church. Mine answer is, I believe that Bristowe belyeth Luther, for
any such change of the creed, although he might well expound the true
Catholic Church by the name of the true Christian Church. But Jewel confirms
the name of Catholic to be theirs, or else what means he to entitle his
reply, Against the Roman religion which of late has been accounted Catholic.
Alas poor Bristow, have thou no better reason to prove the Popish Church to be
Catholic, but that Jewel says it has been accounted Catholic, and proves
that it has been falsely accounted so? Yes sir, not he only, but also Pope
Humfrey in his Legend of sains Jewel, confesses us to be Catholics, where he
says that Pontacus erred, when he wrote that only lay men neither learned nor
Catholics, were moderators in the disputation at Westminster. Why Bristow, are
you not ashamed to take the name of the lord your god the Pope in vain? And
because Pontacus complains that catholics were not moderators, does Humfrey
therefore acknowledge papists to be Catholics? yea forsooth, he does so, and
also confirms the story of Pontacus, when he says, Catholics were present,
but in the next word he expounds what catholics, namely papists. And some
of the^ were also moderators, at the least wise one, namely D. Heath then
occupying the place of the Bishop of York, therefore not only lay Lords, and
unlearned heretics, as this lewd losel and unlearned dogbolt and traiterous
papist (I am bold with him, because he is so malepert with the learned and
godly nobility of England) most slanderously and maliciously affirms were
only moderators of that disputation, but some of ye Popish faction were not
only present but presidents of that action, beside all the rest of the popish
prelates, which then were of the Parliament, for information whereof that
conference was appointed. But Humfrey says moreover, that the chief cause of
all evils, and as it were the Trojan horse within the walls of the Church,
has been hitherto a Catholic defection from the holy scripture, and
especially your papistrie. Therefore (says Bristow) he acknowledges us to be
Catholics. In deed you be catholic (that is to say universal reuolters from
ye holy scriptures) if that title please you, rejoice of it and spare not. You
be Catholic heretics, that is, heretics not in one or two articles of
religion, but in all in as much as you deny the office of Christ upon which
is grounded all Christia^itie. The name of Catholic of it self is indifferent
to good and evil, even as the name of universal is: therefore in our Creed we
say not simply, I believe the Catholic Church, but the holy Catholic Church.
And therefore D Humfrey in calling you pseudocatholici, false Catholics,
shows what Catholics he means you to be, not members of the holy Catholic
Church of godly Christiss, but pillars of the false and counterfeit Church of
malignant herenkes, And whereas you say, you have heard Humfrey in his fond
and unlearned lectures at Oxford call them pseudocatholi^i, ^home Faustus the
Maniche did entwite for honoring the memory of Martyrs, first you take upon
you like the sow to entwite Minerua as it is in ye latin proverb, which might
better be borne withal, in a man of such learning and art as you show, if you
did not also slander and belie him, as the devil does all the saints of God.
For although I never heard any of his lecturs: yet I dare affirm, he never
accounted Augustine and ^^^^ godly Catholics of his time for false Catholics,
although he could not allow of all that Augustine has written and
mainteyned. Wherefore it is clear he calls not Augustine and the Catholics
of his time, but you Papists of our time, false Catholics: and showed that to
you did truly agree, that which Faustus did falsely charge ye true Catholics
with all, yt is, the turning of Idols into Martirs. For Faustus did slander,
and not as you tra^slateit, only entwite the true Catholics for worshipping
the Martirs, as ^^^^ pagans worshipped their Idols. Calumniat^^nobis Faustus
etc. Faustus does slander us (says Augustine) Again: Non ta^ me mouetut hic
Calumniae respondeam etc. He does not so much move me that I should here
answer his slander, as that I might show, yt Faustus him self through desire
of slandering, would swerve even from the vanities of Maniche. The last
authorite for the name of Catholic in the 6. demand is the words of a serving
man belike, that said to one M. Culpeper which died at Paris, lying on his death
bed, In any case renounce the Catholic faith, which whether it were said so,
or howsoever it were meant, I think the party that so spoke, had as much
wisdom as Bristow shows wit, in alleging his saying for proof of the name
of Catholics, to be rightly given to them. The fantastical trance of yt same
gentleman which saw his good angel gloriously appearing to him, and assuring
him that he was in the right way, which his gostly father could not do,
although it were not forged, yet can make no prejudice against the undoubted
word of God, which condemns that way of papistrie, for the broad way that
leads to destruction. You have heard what invincible reasons Bristow
imagines yt he has brought to prove the papists to be right Catholics.
First because they call themselves so. Secondly because ignorant persons give
them that name. And last of all because some learned men call the^ false
Catholics, counterfeit Catholics, Catholic heretics. But as the Judge of the
conference that was between the true Catholics and the Donatistes said to the
Donatistes, when they challenged unto the^ the name of Catholics, so answer I
to the papists, illos quan^o magis se esse Catholicos dicerent, tanto magis
iam causa^ ipsam remotis nugarum interposuionibus agere debere, in qua probare
possent se potius esse Catholicos, that the more they vant themselves to be
Catholics, yt more they ought all delays being removed, now to go to the cause
it self, in which they might prove that they are Catholics in deed, rather
then we.

The second motive is the seventh demand.
Name of Heretics, that very name a certain mark of very Bristow.
Heretics. Luthers conscience his side to be Heretics. If the very name of
Heretics were a certain mark of Heretics, the Christians in the Apostles
time Fulke.
should be very Heretics, for they were so called. yea (says Bristow) of
the blind and unbelieving Jews, and so are we called by the blind and
unbelieving Papists: so were all true Catholics always by all Heretics,
which is so strange to Bristow, that he would have us bring an Example of any
Christians that ever called any people Heretics, which proved not Heretics
indeed. You may see his reading is very great, which thinks no exception
may be brought out of any History, or writings of the Fathers, for this
matter. I will send him to that imperfect work upon S. Mathewes Gospel,
written by an Arriane, yet among Papists commonly taken for Chrysostom, wherein
the Author calls and counts the true Christians Heretics, which defends
the Godhead of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost to be equal, in Cap.
23. Hom. 45. Consequenter and ^aercticis dicitur hoc. consequently this is said
to the Heretics. And least you should doubt whom he calls Heretics, it
follows immediately: Quando enim vides haereticos tres per omnia aequales
dicentes eiusdem esse substantiae, eiusdem esse authoritatis, sine principio
omnes hos aliqua part distantes a se, non mireris: implent enim mensuram
patrum suorum Gentilium, quoniam and illi similiter multos deos colebant. For
when thou see the Heretics, saying, that there be three in all things equal
of the same substance, and of the same authority, all these being without
beginning, yet differing in some respect one from another, marvel not: for
they fulfill the measure of their fathers the heathen men, for they did
likewise worship many Gods. By this one example in stead of many, it is clear,
that the Arrians did as commonly call the true Christians heretics, as the
true Christians called the^ so. But if Bristow cauil, yt the Arrians were not
Christians. I answer, they were as good Christians as the Papists, who only
almost call us heretics, even as we do likewise call them. And it were a
shameless begging of the principle, to require that we should account Papists
for true Christians, when the question is whether they be heretics or no. But
it is a fine quarrel yt he piketh against our tra^slations of the Bible, where
we call Hereticum a man that is author of Sects, as though we feared to call
him an Heretic, least men should think the Apostle spoke against us. Nay
Bristow, they yt so translate, would have Englishmen to understand when S.
Paul calls an Heretic, that they might acknowledge the Pope to be an
Archheretike, because he is an author of so many Sects, contrary to the word of
God. Neither did ye Author of the Apollogie mean, that men should less avoid
Heresies, accounted by S. Paul among ye works of the flesh. Gala. 5. where he
alleged that S. Paul's doctrine was called Heresy of the Jews, Act. 24. or
that they should not think ill of the^, which are adjudged Heretics by true
Christians, but that they should no more regard yt slanderous and malicious
railing of the Papists, than the Apostles did of the Jews, who were not much
worse tha^ the Papists, and in some things were more tolerable. Last of all,
where Luther confesses, that the members of the true Church were commonly
called Heretics, his conscience did not accuse him, yt his side were Heretics,
for he was able to put a difference between him that by heretics is called an
Heretic, and him yt is so in deed, although Bristow, either for his blockish
wit can not, or for his spiteful malice will not conceive it.

The third motive is the eight Demand.
Name of Protestants, Nicolaites, Papists, a name of late put on us by
Heretics. Rechabites, Christians, and Catholics are all Bristowe.
one. S. Hieroms motive name, as of Protestants, Homousians: Name of
Franciscanes. etc. Whosoever in respect of ye doctrine which they profess
Fulk. e
(says Bristow) have a new name made of some ma^s name, or otherwise taken up,
whereby they term themselves, and are commonly termed and known thereby,
undoubtedly are heretics. Therefore Lutherans, Caluinistes, Precisians,
Puritanes, unspotted brethren are heretics, even as the Nicolaitanes were. I
deny ye conclusion. For there are none of us that term our selves Lutheranes,
Caluinistes, Precisianes, Puritanes, unspotted brethren etc. The name of
Protestants, if any do use, is not in respect of the doctrine we profess,
but in respect of a protestation made against the decree of Spire in Germany.
Neither is it otherwise acknowledged of us, then the name of Nazatites, was of
the Apostles, the names of Homousians, Caesarians, and Caecilianists, was of
the Christians in the time of the heresies of Arrius and Macedonius, Eunomius,
Donatus etc. Paul was accused by Tertullus Act. 24. to be a chief Captain of
the heresy of the Nazarites, whereunto he answered: This ^ confess, that
according to that way which they call heresy, do I worship the God of my
Fathers. That heretic which did write the imperfect work upon S. Matthewes
Gospel, which goes under the name of S. Chrysostom, in Cap. ^4. Hom. 48. thus
writes of ^^^^ true Christians. Hresis Homoousianorum, no^ solum Christi
eccl^siae aduersatur, sed and omnibus haeresibus non similiter sapientibus. The
heresy of the Homousians, is not only adversary to the Church of Christ, but
also to all other heresies that be not of their mind. Here note, that the
Arrians did give a new name to the true Christians, in respect of their
doctrine whereof they were not ashamed. For Homousians signifies them, that
acknowledged the Father and the Son to be of the same substance. And over
this note also: that the Arrian heretic did brag as much of the name of the
Church then, as the Popish heretics do now. Basil in his Epist. 73.
testifies the same of the Arrians. Cterum and Nicaenam fidem calumniantur,
nosque Homousiastas probrose vocant, propterea quod in ea fide fill um Dei
vnigenitu^ cum Deo ac patre Homousion confitemur. Moreover, they slander the
faith of the Nicen Counsel, and call us reprochfully Homoousians, because that
in that faith we confess the only begotten son of God to be of the same
substance with the Father.

But Bristow says, it is a rule that the ancient Fathers always gave the
people to know Heretics thereby if they had any such name. Hieronyme Aduers.
Luciferia^. says, Sicubi audieris, etc. If any where thou hear, the^ which
are said to be of Christ, to be termed not of our Lord Jesus Christ, but of
some other, as Massionites, Valentinians, Montenses, Camputes, know thou, that
they are not the Church of Christ, but the Sinagog of Antichrist. But he
belyeth Hierome, for he gives not the name only as a sufficient note, but
before the words by Bristow cited, he writes, In illa esse ecclesia
permanendum, quae ab apostolis fundata, vsque ad diem hanc durat. We must tarry
in that Church, which being founded by the Apostles, continues unto this day.
And immediately after Bristowes pretended rule. Ex hoc enim ipso quod postea
constituti sunt, eos se esse iudicant, quos futuros apostolus praenunciauit.
For even by this, that they are set afterward, they show themselves to be the
same, whom the Apostle foreshewed to come. By these words it is evident, that
Hieronymes rule runs not only upon the name, howsoever it begins, but
of the late spring of Heretics, whose doctrine being not founded by the
Apostles has a later beginning after them. The names of Franciscanes,
Dominicanes, Benedictines etc. which certain sects of Papists give unto
themselves, Bristow says, they have not for any special doctrine brought in
by their Patrones, and therefore they be no names of Heretics. But I reply,
that beside that diverse of these ^ectes distent in points of doctrine, as the
Dominicanes and Franciscanes about Original si^ne. And to omit the ^uelphes
and Gibellines, dissenting about the authority of the Pope and the Emperor,
the greatest question in Popery, even those sects of Benedictines, Augustines,
Dominicanes etc. did al take their names, either of that man, or that order,
which they held to be the perfection of Religion, consisting not in keeping
the commandments of God, as Bristowe like a wise man affirms, which all
Christian men ought to endeavor, but in keeping the traditions and
constitutions of men, standing in garments, in meats, in gesture, in
ceremonies, and outward obseruatio^s. wherefore they can not so lightly be
acquitted of Heresy, even by Hieronymies own rule, and last of all by the
example of the name of Rechabites, who had their name of their family, and not
of any Sect in perfection. The name of Papists (says Bristow) is lately put
upon us by heretics, the like say we of the names of Lutheranes, etc. put upon
us by them. The saying of Augustine, De vtilitate credendi, Cap. 7. touches us
not, that Heretics dare not deny their names by which they are called, for
we utterly deny all names by which we are called, in respect of our Religion,
to be drawn from men, and answer only to the name of Christians. And as for
the name of Catholics, which Bristow makes all one with the name of
Christians, being added to the name of Christians to distinguish true
Christians from Heretics, which are counterfeit Christians, we do embrace it:
but if from this right meaning of the name, it be drawn to signifye a
people, which by only glorying in that name, despise al true Christianity
grounded upon the holy and divine Scriptures, as Bristow seems to make it,
then is it no better tha^ a name of Heretics, and so the name of Catholics,
boasted of by them that refuse to be members of ye holy Catholic Church,
turns to their own reproach, even as the name of the Apostolikes was to them,
which bragged of the name of the Apostles, but were indeed no true followers
of ye Apostles, no more than the Papists be true Catholics.

In the eight Demand, he would know why we call them not Gregorians, or
Leonians, of some one Pope, but Papists of the general name of the Pope. I
answer, because they maintain not one heresy only of one man, but a general
heresy and Apostasy from Christ, whereof the Pope is ye head, whom no more
foolishly then falsely Bristowe says to have been always since the Apostles
time. If he press us, that we make not dangerous, to acknowledge the name of
Protestants, I confess, yt when nothing is understood by that name, but men
which profess that true doctrine which we do, we greatly strive not for the
name. S. Paul him self openly acknowledged yt he was a Phause, when nothing
was vnderstood^ by the name but one that believed the resurrection of the dead,
although yt term of Pharisee was otherwise the name of a sect of heretics,
which maintained many damnable errors, from which the Apostle was most free.
Last of all Augustine in Breui. Coll. cum Donatist. Coll 3. dici counts all
these three motives of the name of Catholoques. Heretics, and Protestants, to
be but dilatorie shifts of the Heretics, not sound arguments of the Christian
Catholics. Vbi cognitor cum dixisset, hoc Catholi^i probare debebuat, ortus
est iteru moratorius conflictus, de Catholico nomine and Donatistarum and
Caecilianistaris. When the Judge or Commissioner had said: This the Catholics
ought to prove: there arose again a dilatorie conflict about the name of
Catholic, and of the Donatistes, and of the Caecilianistes. The Donatistes
which were heretics, challenged to them selves the name of Catholics, as the
Papists do against us, the true Christians they called Heretics and
Caecilianistes, as the Papists call us. Heretics, Protestants. Lutherans,
etc. but these were but dilatorie devises of Heretics, to avoid the true
trial, which as the Catholics in the forenamed conference confessed, was only
by ye Scriptures.

The 4. motive is the 38. demand.
Old heresies. Arrians again alive in Protestants. Protistants be Pelagians,
in denying Baptism to be necessary for the Bristow.
salvation of Infants. Her etiques are not Christians. Whatsoever was heresy
in times past (says Bristow) Fulke.
is heresy now also, some opinions holden by the Protestants, were heresy in
times past, Ergo, they be heresies now also, so Protestants be Heretics, and
no Christian, but almost Apostataes. But I deny that any opinion holden by us,
was ever Heresy. Yes says Bristow, the denying of prayer and oblation for the
dead was accounted heresy in A^rius, both by Epiphanius and Augustinus. True
it is, they both following the error of their times, account it for an error
in A^rius, but it does not follow, that because they accounted it so, that it
was so in deed, seeing neither of them both does prove it to be an error by the
authority of the holy Scriptures, but by the corrupt usage of their Churches,
which had turned thanksgiving for the dead, into prayers and oblation for the
dead And yet the same Epiphanius denies fasting and alms to be profitable to
the dead, wherefore the Papists do now hold the contrary. Contra Melchisedec
sumus Haer. 53. He accounts the having of the images of Christ and the
Apostles, one of the heresies of the Gnostikes, Haer. 27. and many such like
things which the Papists defend for Catholic. The like does Augustine,
wherefore let Bristow advise him self whether it be a good argument.
Epiphanius and Augustine accounted prayer for the dead to be an error, Ergo,
it was an heresy in deed. For an other example of old heresies by us recyted
he brings in, That cruel heresy of theirs, against the necessity of
childrens baptism, wherein they agree with the Pelagians, through which they
suffer many thousand poor souls to perish, which can not help them selves,
while they promise them both life everlasting, and the kingdom of heaven
without baptism, whereas the Pelagians promised life everlasting only. Who
would think, that this slanderous heretic had lived so long in England as
he did before he became fugitive, which lies so impude^tly without all color
or show of truth? Was there ever any of us heard to preach of baptism, as
not necessary for infa^ts, if they might obtain it according to the
institution of Christ. But contrariwise, that it is a cruel error of the
Papists, which conde^neth infants, who being prevented by death, can not
obtain the outward Sacrament: yet has this error Augustine and Cypriane to
uphold it. But if Augustine and Cypriane never erred, no not about the
doctrine of the Sacraments, then let their authority defend the Papists. But
when Cypriane denied the Baptism of Heretics to be any thing auayleable, how
many thousand souls both of young and old did he condemn? And when Augustine
with Pope Innocent holds the communion to be as necessary for the salvation
of Infants as Baptism: how many hundred thousand souls does he condemn, or
the Papists destroy, which deny the communion unto them? Cyprian lib. 1. Epi.
6. Magno. Augustine. Contra duas Epist. Pelagi. lib. 2. Cap. 4. where he
accuses the Pelagians, as well for affirming the Communion not to be
necessary for Infants, as for houlding, that Baptism was not needful for
them.

In the 38. Demand he charge us with denying prescript fasting days, which
is fall, when they be prescribed by the Church of God, and not usurped of
superstition and opinion of merit.

He charge us further with denying of Free Will, and quoteth in the margent
August Tom. 6. De fide co^tra Manichaeus, Cap. 9 and 10. where in deed
Augustine against the Manichees affirms the Free Will of man, but in his
retractations he shows, that even then he understood it of the state of Man
before his fall, and therefore the Pelagians, which were maynteyners of Free
Will to remain in man since the fall of Adam, did slaunderouslie vsurp those
his sayings against him and the truth, even as the Papists do now. Cum autem de
libera voluntate recte faciendi loquimur, de illa scilicet in quae homo factus
est loquimur. Ecce tam long antequam Pelagiana haeresis extitisse^^sic
disputanimus: velut iam contra illos disputaremus. Whenever we speak of the
Free Will of man to do well, we speak of that Will, in which man was made.
Behold so long before the Pelagian heresy arose, we have disputed eue^ so, as
though we had disputed against them. Retract. lib. 1. cap. 9. Now judge whether
if Papists or we, be more like to the Pelagians. He charge us moreover, to
hold against the merit of single life, quoting Aug. haer. 82. with Iouiaian,
which is false, for as Augustine understands by merit worthiness or
excellency, we acknowledge that the state of virginity is more excellent then
of matrimony, in such respects as the Apostle prefers it. 1. Cor. 7.

Last of all he charge us, with holding against the vow of single life,
quoting Aug. Retract lib. 2. c. 22. where there is no word of any vow, and
much less of vowing a single life, in them that can not live an honest and
chaste life without marriage. There is mention of certain sanctimoniales holy
and devout women, of whose chastity was no suspicion, which leaving their
purpose of virginity, were persuaded by Iouinian to marie. Not we therefore,
have revived any old heresy, but the Papists have continued many old errors,
revived many old heresies, of the Pharisees, P^^^gians, Anthropomorphites, and
added many new of their own, such as were never he^^d of in the primitive
Church, for six hundred years after Christ, as has often been showed at large.

The 4. and 5. motives are included in the 10. demand.
Miracles dogmatica^^, a mark of true doctrine for the sacrifice Bristow.
of the Mass, for purgatory. Devils expelled with a Mass by a Priest of S.
Augustines, who was of our religion. S. Bid of our religion. Mass said for
the dead oftentimes to redemption both of body and soul. The saerament of the
altar sticked by the Jews bleedeth. M^rkes and m^nasteries. Visions for our
religion. An English woman miraculously cured of late by the blessed
sacrament. Holy water. Mass confirmed by miracles in Afrike, England and
Brabant. Bristow divides miracles into dogmaticall and personal. Fulke.
Of the first sort he sets this conclusion. Whosoever have at any time set
them selves against, any doctrine confirmed by miracle, they have been against
the truth. There can to this no instans be given: our doctrine which they
resist has been confirmed by miracles, therefore plain it is that they are
enemies of the truth.

Do you hear this shameless beast, say, there can be no instans given against
his proposition? When ye Lord himself gives an express law, against a false
prophet, which shows signs or miracles. Deuteronomy. 13. Did not Iannes and Iambres
which resisted moses, work miracles: does not our Savior Christ prophecy that
many false christ's and false prophets should arise and work such great signs
and miracles, as (if it were possible, the very elect should be deceived.
Matthew. 24. Does not S. Paul prophecy, that the coming of Antichrist shall be
according to the working of Satan, in all power and lying signs and miracles,
and therefore no marvel if Bristow brag, that he can fill whole volumes with
them? But miracles are not the trial, but the confirmation of doctrine, which
must be tried only by the Scriptures of God: without the authority whereof,
no miracles ought to move us to give credit, and much less any miracles may
move us to believe any doctrine which is against it. But yet let us consider of
such miracles as Bristow rehearses.

First for the sacrifice of the Mass, and for purgatory. August. de ciuit. Dei
lib. 22. cap. 8. writes, that in a Ferme house of one Hesperius, was great
hurt and trouble by evil spirits, which at the prayers of a certain Priest or
elder of Augustines Chutch, was stayed and ceased. There is no word of devils
expelled with a Mass, or with the sacrifice of ye Mass. That which in
Bristowes ear sounds that way, is Perre ^it vnus, etc. One went thither, he
offered there the sacrifice of the body of Christ, praying with all his power,
that the same vexation might cease: But Augustine by offering the sacrifice of
Christ's body, means nothing, but ministering of the communion, as that holy
action was then figuratively called, but yet nether the Mass, nor the
sacrifice thereof, was at that time invented, as I have often and plentifully
showed else where, and namely against Heskins lib. ^. cap. 22. That he names
the sacrifice of the body of Christ, it is not sufficient to prove him of
Bristowes religion, greater cause have we to challenge him to be of our
religion, when he calls the sacrament the sign of the body of Christ, and
says, that Christ will not give us that body which was borne of the virgin,
and crucified etc. contra Adimant. In Ioann tract. ^0. cap. 12.

From Augustine he passes to a tale reported in Bedes history of a captive,
whose chains were loosed at such time, as his brother which was a Monk and
Priest said mass for him, by which report, Bid says, many were moved to
pray, give alms or offer the sacrifice of the holy oblation for the delivery
of their friends which were departed out of this world a sorry motive without
the authority of Gods word, which albeit it was credited of Bid, as diverse
other fables were, yet may we doubt of the truth of it, and although it were
true that such a feate was wrought, yet it can not establish a doctrine
contrary to the holy Scriptures. And notwithstanding that Bid living in a
corrupttime, holds many errors of Papistrie, yet I have showed against
Stapletons sortresse, that he holds not all, not many of the chiefest.

After this miracle of Bid, he begins the story of our country woman,
which having played the harlot in London, and running over into Flanders to
seek the knave that got her with child, was made lame with childbearing, so
that one leg was shorter then an other by more then half a foot, says
Bristow. But after often shrift, and other holy exercises of Popery, in time
of a mass, she was restored to health by the sacrament of miracle. I doubt not
but the masters of Bridewell (near which place she dwelled sometime) which
have done as great cures as that, could have healed her of her lamenes,
without the sacrament of miracle. In rehearsal of this doggetricke miracle, he
interlaceth an other as monstrous a lie as this. That the pixe being stolen
by a Jew, and the cakes sticked in despite among the Jews, did bleed
abundantly, that a drunken woman a Jew borne, and christened, being admonished
by an Angel in a vision, restored that pixe with three hosts in it to her
gostly father, from whom they were translated to S. Gudulaes church in
Bruxells, where they are kept until this day, from the year of our Lord 1369.
which is more then 200. years ago. The like fable they have at the Monastery
of Billets in Paris, where they have a cruse full of the miraculous blood,
which issued out of the mass cake so sticked by the Jews: which are even as
great miracles, as the blood of Ha^les was in England. For if the Papists durst
for their credit, commit those miraculous hosts and blood unto indifferent
vewe and custody, where no fraud might be used, I durst adventure my life,
(which is almost all that I have to leese) that within less then two years,
they shall either be found to consist of a counterfeit matter that is
perdurable, or else they shall putrefie and rotten which they would bear us in
hand, have continued more then two hundredth years: In the demand and in the
next motive m^^tio^ is made of miracles wrought in Ind^a and by Pius quintus
the Pope at Rome which either are lies, or iuggling casts of counterfeating
coseners. But if they or their Pope have any such power, as they brag of, why
come they not in the face of their aduersa^^es, and challenge them, as Helias
did the Priests of Baal, and in open sight of their enemies show their mighty
miracles: and not prate of wonders done in the Indes, of which they may lie,
where there is none to controlle them, or wrought, among them selves, where we
can judge nothing of them, but counterfeating and cosening, with which
practices they have been taken and t^ied too often, to gain any credit with
any that have any wisdom in them.

The 6. motive.
Miracles personal, a mark of true Doctors. S. Barnarde Bristow.
of our religion with what miracles he confirmed images, churches, the real
presence, transubste ^ati^n, sacrifice of the mass, praying for the dead,
praying to Sain^tes, and man^ other articles. Miracles for and by holy bread
and for the sign of the cross. The sign of the cross works miracles.
Excommunication of Pius v to be feared, who by his prayers and signing of the
cross, did cast devils out of five women. Bristowes principle against which
there can be no ^ulke.
instance, is this. Whatsoever persons at any time since Christ's ascension
have had the grace of miracles, they were the ministers of Christ, I say not
always just and holy: but always preachers of his truth: and consequently,
whosoever set themselves against such persons they were against Christ and
against the truth. In the last chapter before, I have brought instance, both
out of the Law and the Gospel, of salse Prophets and false Christ's, which
should work great miracles, and yet preach against God and Christ. Wherefore
this conclusion is utterly false.

Bristow replieth, they are lying signs, such as were wrought by Iannes and
Iambres, and shall be wrought by Antichrist, not able to abide the trial, so say
I of all Popish miracles, either they are feigned, or ^ls they are
counterfaited, or if any wondrous thing be done, it is according to the
working of Satan as the Apostle teaches us. 2 Thessalonians. 2. So did Marcus the
heretic make strange appearaunces in the sacrement of Christ's blood, as
witnesses Iren. cus lib. 1. cap. 9. Tertullian affirms, the holy Ghost the
comforter to be in the M^^tanistes, by acknowledging of the promised graces lib
de amma cap. de inferis. Where also he makes mention of prayer for the dead
confirmed by a miracle among the Montanists. Augustine speaks of Paulus and
Donatus, that wrought miracles to confirm the heresy of the Donatistes. de
vnitat. eccles. Soz^menus lib. 1. cap. 14 reports that Eutychianus a Nouatian
heretic, was notable in working of miracles. Wherefore if the fables written of
Frauncis, Dominike, Becket, etc. were true, yet are not they by such miracles
proved true preachers.

But S. Bernard was of our religion says Bristow. In deed he maintained many
of your opinions, yet not all nor the chiefest, for he believed that a man might
be saved s^la fide by faith only Ep. 77. But he was an enemy to the Henricians
which burned images, destroyed Churches and were against all such points of
Popery, as the title mentions: and these heretics he overcame, not only by
preaching, but by miracles (says Bristow) as he testifies himself Ep. 241.
The truth (says he) was made manifest non s^lum in sermon sed etiam in
virtute: not only by preaching but also by working as does Bristow translate,
whereas he should say, not only by speech but also by power, so that of miracle
there is no mention. Yet Godfrie the Monk, that was his discisciple, writteth
of miracles wrought by bread, sanctified with the sign of the cross. etc:
But Godfries writing we hold for no Gospel. Neither know we the contrary,
but some Godf^ie Gods foe, which hued long after Bernarde, might feign those
books in the name of one of his disciples that lived in his time, for the
number of miracles rehearsed in them, fine pass the number of the miracles
recorded by the Evangelists of our Savior Christ. And that you may know from
what spirit those books proceeded, you shall understand, that the same
Godfrie lib. 1. cap. 3. extolleth the wisdom of Barnard above all the
Scriptures. Vicbatur sane Scripturis tam liber^e commodeque, v^ non tam sequi
illas quam praecedere crederetur, and ducere ipse quo vellet, auctorem earum
ducem spiritum sequens. He used in deed the Scriptures so freely and fitly
that he might be thought not so much to follow them, as to go before them, and
to lead them whither he would, following the spirit, the author of them as a
guide. Again he says of him. Nam and confessus est aliquando sibi meditanti
velora^ti, sacram omnem velut subse positam and expositan^ apparuisse
Scripturam. For he confessed sometimes while he studied or prayed, that all the
holy Scripture appeared to him, as placed under him and expounded. But Bernard
him self as appears by his wrytings, abhorred from that blasphemous
confession: Again those epitaphes, which were written at his burial, commend
Bernard highly for his learning and virtue, but of miracles they speak not,
which they would not have omitted, if they had been so many as this Godfrie
writes.

The excommunication of Pius quintus, we fear no more then we believe his
miracle, how soever that pageant was devised, which comes too late to
persuade us, that the Pope can work miracles. For it had been more in season
for Leo the 10, or Clemens the seventh, if they or any of these had received
such power, to have showed it in general council, or assembly of the states
against Luther and his followers, then now that Antichrist is in so great part
consumed by the spirit of the Lords mouth, to think to establish his throne
by lying signs and wonders which few of the Papists do in their consciences
think to be other then counterfaited and forged.

The 8. motive is the 12. demand.
Visions a mark of true doctrine and Doctors. Christ to be believed for
visions. S. Augustine was of our religion and Bristow.
brought thereto by God. Believing the real presens of Christ in the sacrament
of the altar which is to be worshipped with religion, saying mass for the
dead. Prayer for the dead used always. S. Gregory was of our religion. Mass
said every day. Prayer for the dead confirmed by a vision serving for our
religion, prophecies for our religion. Why Protestants deny not all the
Scriptures. Visions for our religion. The communion book burned in a vision.
The communion in a vision received by a black dog. The service of
Protestants to be refrained. S. Cyprian of our religion. Of visions we have
the same rule, that of miracles such as are of God s^rue to confirm that
doctrine which Fulke.
is delivered in the holy Scriptures. such were the visions showed unto the
Apostles and holy men. But if any vision seemed to bring in any doctrine that
was not con^eyned in the Scriptures, both the vision was to be known for a
deuil^h illusion, and the dreamer of that vision commanded to be slain. But
how will Brist^w prove, that S. Augustine was of his religion? even by that
wise argument, that he ^seth so often, because he held some one error common
with them, although he were contrary to them in the whole substance of
religion. For thus he reasons. S. Augustine was of the same religion that his
moth^r Monica was, who saw in a vision that he should be converted to the
Catholic faith when he was a Manichee: But Monica was of our religion, because
^he believed the real prefence, and worshipped so that blessed sa^rament with
religion, and making of it God him self.

But how proves he that she so believed and worshipped? She knew says he that
from the al^ar was minis^^ed and dispensed victima sancta etc. that holy
sacrifice where by was stricken out that hand writing that was again^ us. Au.
lib. cont. 9. ^ap. 13. A strange conclusion. She acknowledged the ministration
of the sacrament to be a dispensation or communication of the sacrifice of
Christ's death, which every Protestant does, therefore she believed the real
presence. But how did she worship the sacrament, and make God him self of it?
Mary (S. Augustine says) Ad vn^m etc. To the sacrame^s of which our price, thy
handmay de ^ved her soul with the bond of faith. What word is here of
worshipping, or making the sacrament God him self? Yes says Bristow: for
Augustine says in other places, we must tie our souls to God alone, whereof
religion is so named, wherefore she tying her soul to the sactament, makes
the sacrament God him self. A substantial reason I promise you, by which you
may as well prou^ that she worshipped baptism and made God him self ofit, for
there is no doubt, but unto baptism (which is also the sacrament of our price)
she tied her soul with the band of faith, and so has every faithful
Protestant. For the sacraments by faith, are certain pledges of our
con^unction with God through Christ. Into whose death we are ingraffed by
baptism, as we are fed with his body and blood in the supper.

The place of Augustine is corruptly cited by Bristow, who has cut of both the
head and the foot of it, which is this. Ad vnum Deumtendentes, and ei vni
religantes an^mas nostras, vnde religio dicta credit^r, omni superstitione
careamus. Having respect to one God and tying our souls to him only, whereof
religion is thought to be called, let us be void of all superstition. For
Monica had respect only to God, when she tied her soul by faith unto the
seal of Gods promises. And she was void of superstition, when she cleaued to
none other ceremonye of conjunction with God, but only to that, which was
ordained of God him self for that purpose. But how proves Bristow, that
prayer for the dead was used always, or that Mass was said for the dead.
Because that in the corrupt time of Augustine, prayer was used for the dead,
and in the prayers used at the celebration of the communion, remembrance was
made of the dead. This is a strange kind of reasoning: that was used sometime,
therefore it was used always. But how long it was used, and how it was taken
up, I have showed in mine answer to Allins book of Purgatory.

Now comes S. Gregory to be of Bristowes religion. I will not deny but in
many errors and superstitions Gregory agrees with the Papists, but yet not in
all, nor in some of the chiefest. The visions he rehearses for prayer for ye
dead, if they were not feigned dreams, they were illusio^s of ye devil, because
they serve to maintain that doctrine, which is contrary to the Scriptures,
which teach that after death follows judgment immediately, so that no prayers
can prevail. Heb. 9. 26. But prophecyes are for Bristowes religion. How so I
pray you? The conversion of Augustine and the death of Cassius were foretold
in vision. If both those were granted to be true visions, your religion were
never the better, except the conversion of the one, and the death of the other
be your religion. But admitting the dream of Monica to be a true vision, how
prove you that the Chapeline of Cassius did not feign his vision after his
master was dead?

But the dream of Judas Machabaeus who saw the Prophet Jeremy pray for the
people, is recorded in the Canonical Scripture it self (says Bristow) 2.
Match. 15. chap. which Scripture the Protestants reject, because it makes
against them, as they would do all the rest, but that they think they have
inverted shifts good enough to blind the world. What reverence we bear to
the holy Scriptures of God, he him self, our own conscience, and the whole
world can testify. And the reiection of such books as were not written by the
spirit of God, does approve the same. Beside the authority of the ancient
Church, both of the Jews and Gentills which never received the same books
into the canon, we have often made manifest demonstration, that they proceeded
not from the spirit of God. Wherefore the Papists making them of equal
credit with the word of God, incur the curse of God, which is unto all them
that either add or take away any thing from his holy word.

But the Papists are not destitute of visions in these days, for Bristow
knows a Protestant who has confessed that he saw in a dream, the communion
book out of many hands cast into a fire, and yet the man continues a
Protestant. Verily he does as a good Christian should do, that not only with
no vain dreams, but nether with visions of Angels from heaven he will be
moved to condemn that doctrine which he knows assuredly to be agreeable to
the holy Scriptures. But there was a Papist in London, which came to ye Church
against his conscience, and saw a foul black dog take the communion ever
more, at the naughty ministers hands, as he offered it to the communicants,
which stroke the Papist so at the heart, that he went home and dyed upon it.
This deuilish illusion, or mela^cholike persuasion of a deuilish dogged Papist,
thinks Bristow able to condemn the holy ministration of the Lords supper,
warranted by ^^^^ Scriptures according to Christ's institution? As for the
extaticall and fantastical dream of master Allington, tending (as I
remember) to maintain Idolatry, wise men regard as much as such fantasies
deserve, after which, if we should shape our religion, we should alter as
often as any man's fond humor or foolish conceit ministers new visions and
strange apparitions. But I ma^uell among so many visions, that Bristow
omitteth, the famous vision of Elizeus Hall that came from Manchester to
London, with a book of his cold prophecyes, to convert the Queen and the
Realm to Papistrie. Well (says Bristow) you scorn at our visions and
dreams, yet was S. Cyprian of our religion: Because he defends some visions
and dreams which were seen in his time, which were not to mainteyne any thing
contrary to the Scripture, but that which was agreeable to the same. A poor
reason, why he should be of your religion. And yet it is all the reason that
you bring. But for our judgment of miracles, of visions and dreams to be
motives in controversies of the Church, you shall hear Augustines sentence, De
(...) Ecclesiae cap. 16. against the Donatistes. Remo^is ergo omnibus talib^s,
Eccl^siam suam demonstrent, sipossunt, non in sermonibus and rumoribus Asrorum,
non in concilys Episcoporum suorum, non in literis quorumlibet d. sp^tatorum,
non in signis and prodigijs falla^ibus, quia etiam contra ista verbo Domini
praeparati and cauti redd^^i sumus, sed in praes^ripio legis, in Prophetarum
praedictis, in Psalmorum cantibus, in ipsius pastoris vocibus, in
Euangelistaru'^ pr^edicationibus and laboribus, hoc est in omnibus canonic^s
sanctorum librorum auctoritatibus. Wherefore setting aside all such matters,
let them show forth the Church to be theirs, if they can, not in the speeches
and rumors of Africanes, not in the counsels of their Bishops, not in the
writings of all manner of discoursers, not in deceyueable signs and wonders,
because that even against those things, we are prepared and made warye by the
word of our Lord: but in the prescript of the law, in the predictions of the
Prophets, in the songs of the Psalms, in the voices of the sheepeherd him
self, in the preachings and labors of the Evangelists, that is to say in all
the canonical authorities of the holy books 3. And again in the same
chapter, and sic ^stendat and non dicat, verum est quia ego hoc dico, aut quia
hoc dixit ille collegameus, aut illi collegaemei, aut illi Episcopi vel
Clerici, vel Laici nostri, aut ide^ verum est quia illa and illa mirabilia
fecit Donatus, vel Pontius, aut quilibet alius, aut quia homines ad memorias
mortuorum nostrorum orant and exaudiuntur, aut quia illa and illa ibi
contingunt, aut quia ille frater nofler, aut illa soror nostra, tale visum
vigilan^ vidit, veltale visum dormiens somniauit. Remoueantur ista vel figmenta
mendacium hominum, velportenta fallacium spirituum, aut enim non sunt vera,
quae di^un^tr, aut sihaereticorum aliqua mira facta sunt, magis cauere debemus.
And let him so show it, that he say not, it is true because I say this, or
because this said that companion of mine, or those companions of mine, or those
our Bishops or Clerks or laymen: or therefore it is true, because Donatus or
Pontius or any other has done these or those miracles, or because men pray at
the memories of our martyrs and are heard, or because these are those things
do happen there, or because that our brother or that ou rsister saw such a
vision waking, or dreamed such a vision sleping. Let these things be removed
which either are the faynings of lying men, or else the wonders of deceyuing
spirits, for either they are not true that are said to be, or if any miracles
are done by heretics, we ought the more to take heed of them. And yet again
he writes in the same book and chapter. Sed vtrumipsecclesiam teneant, non
nisi diumarum s^ripturarum Canontcis libris ostcudant, quia nee nos propterea
dicimus nobis credere oportere, quod in ecclesia Christi sumus, quia ipsam quam
tenemus co^^niendauit Mileuitanus Optatus, vel Mediolanensis Ambrosius, vel
alij innumerabiles nostrae co^munionis Episcopi, aut quia nostrorum collegarum
concilijs ipsa predicata est, aut quia per totum orbem in locis sanctis quae
frequentat nostra communio tanta mirabilia, vel exauditionum vel sanitatum
fiunt, ita vt latentia per tot annos corpora martyrum (quod possunt a multis
interrogantes audire) Ambrosio fuerint reuelata, and ad ipsa corpora Caecus
mult^rum annorum, ciuitati Mediolanensi notissi^nus oculos lume^que receperit,
aut quia ille So^nium vidit, and ille spiritu assumptus audiuit, sieve ne iniret
in partem Donati, s^ue vt recederet a part Donati. Quaecunque talia in
Catholica fiunt, ideo sunt approba^da, quia in Catholica fiunt: non ideo ipsa
manifestatur Catholica quia hae: in eafiunt. Ipse Dominus Jesus cum
resurrexisset a mortuis, and discipulorum oculis videndum manibusque tangendum
corpus suum offerret: nequid tamen fallaciae se pati arbitrarentur, magis eos
testimonijs Legis and Prophetarum and Psalmorum confirmandos esse i^dicauit
ostendens, ca de se impleta, quae fuerant tanto ante praedicta. Sic and
ecclesiam suam co^mendauit dicens praedicari in nomine suo poenitentiam and
remissionem peccatorum per omnes gentes, inciptentibus ab Jerusalem. Hoc in
Lege and Prophetis and Psalmis esse s^riptum ipse testatus est, hoc eius ore
commendatum tenemus. Haec sunt causae nostrae documenta, haec fundamenta, haec
firmame^ta. But whether they hold the church or no, let them show none
otherwise, but by the Canonical books of the holy Scriptures: Because that
neither we do say, that therefore men must believe us, that we are in the Church
of Christ, because Optatus of Mileuitum or Ambrose of Millain, or innumerable
other Bishops of our communion, have commended this Church which we hold, or
because it is commanded in the councels of our fellow Bishops, or because that
in the holy places which our comunion does frequent throughout the world, so
gteat miracles are done either of hearing men's prayers or of healings, so that
the bodies of martyrs which have been hidden for so many years, (which which
thing if they will ask they may hear of many) were revealed unto Ambrose, and
that at the same bodies a man which had been blind many years, very well known
to the city of Millain, received his eyes and sight: or because this man saw a
dream, or that man being taken up in spirit did hear, either that he should
not enter into the faction of Donatus, or that he should depart from Donatus
side. Whatsoever of such things are done in the Catholic church, they are
therefore to be approved because they are done in the Catholic church, but the
church is not thereby proved Catholic, because such things are done in it. Our
lord Jesus himself, when he had risen from the dead, and offered his body to be
seen with the eyes, and touched with the hands of his disciples, yet least
they should think they suffered any illusion, he judged that they were rather
to be confirmed with the testimonies of the law and the prophets, and the
Psalms, showing that those things were fulfilled of him, which were so long
before prophesied. So also he commended his church, saying, that repentance and
forgenenes of sins must be preached in his name through out all nations,
beginning at Jerusalem. This he him self testifies to be written in the law
and the prophets, and the psalms, this we hold being comm^nded to it by his
own mouth. These be profes of our cause, these be our foundations, and these
be our strong arguments.

These things I have set down more at large, out of Augustine, because they
are not only a stop unto these motives of miracles, and visions, but in a
manner to all the rest that follow.

The 8. motive is the 4. demand.
Scriptures denied by the Protestants, what scriptures they deny, praying for
the dead confirmed by scripture, and pray or of Bristow.
saints for us, faith only aganst the scripture. Real presence of Christ in
the sacrament confirmed by scripture. No scripture, is against the Catholics
but all is for them.

Whosoever have taught doctrine (says Bristow) so plainly repugnant to the
holy Scriptures, that for maintenance Fulke.
thereof they were feign to deny books of the holy Scriptures, or to say the
Scriptures to have been falsified and corrupted, they were heretics: and such
are the Protestants, therefore they are heretics: How prove you the
Protestants to be such? Marie says Bristow first they deny the Canonical
most certain Scripture of the Machabees, for none other cause, but that it is
plain against their heresies, maynteyning prayer for the dead and prayer of
Saints for us. This is a loud lie, for we show many causes, why we reject
that profane writing of Iasons abridger, beside the authority of the Jewish
church before Christ, and the primitive church after Christ as I have declared
against the second book of Allens defense cap. 3. But in defense of the book
of Machabees to be Canonical, Bristow wilsay as S. Augustine said to certain
that denied a testimony of the book of wisdom de praedest. Non debuit. They
should not reject the saying of the book of wisdom which in the church of
Christ has deserved so long a rue of years to be recited in the step of the
readers of the church of Christ and with worship of divine authority to be
heard of all Christians from the Bishops to the lowest sort of lay men etc.
And again. Et Etiam temporibus etc. Even the notable interpreters that were
next to the Apostles times, when they brought forth that book for witness,
believed that they brought nothing but a divine testimony.

Touching this defense, first I ask of Bristow, how he can prove that the
book of Machabees, has had such continuance of credit? Secondly how this
saying of Augustine concerning the book of wisdom, can be true when Hierome
plainly rejects it, as not Canonical praefat. in Proverb. Thirdly I demand
how Bristow can defend his mayor, if we admit this saying of Augustine to be
true, for not Pelagius as Allen says expressly, nor any Pelagians as Bristow
seems to mean, but such as defended the Catholic faith against Pelagius,
rejected this saying of the book of Wisdom, which book also we refuse,
although not for that saying and what one article of our doctrine does that
book impugn? nay rather there is testimonies therein manifest aga^^st Images,
against Purgatory and merits, yet can not we therefore allow the writings of
Ph^lo a ^ew since Christ's time, for the canonical Scripture of Solomon, whose
title it sal^ly bears.

But to proceed, Luther denies the Epistic of S. James, because it is against
his heresy of instfication by faith only. We allow not Luther, neither did
he allow him self therein, for he retracteth it afterward. Yet is not Eusebius
counted an heretic which utterly rejects that Epistle. Lib. 2. cap. 23.

But to go on, Beza does say, that S. Lukes Gospel is falsified, because it
mainteyneth the real presence of Christ in the sacramet, where he says, Hic
est calix this is the chalice, which is shed for you. This is an impudent
slander, which I have answered against Sau^ders rock of the church, in his
ninthe mark of an Antichristian, where it is handled at large, and thither I
refer the Reader. To conclude, Bristow says, no Scriptures is against the
Catholics but all for them, because they must obediently receive and believe
all Scriptures canonical. But what obedience and belief they attribute to the
canonical Scriptures, it is plain by this, that they dare not abide the
trial by them, but fly from them to traditions as Bristow does even in the
next motive, as though the Scriptures inspired of God were not sufficient both
to teach all truth, and to confute all errors.

In the demand this moti^e is handled somewhat otherwise, for there we are
examined, whether in the conference of Carthage Augustine and his fellows did
not prove by Scripture, that a visible Church should begin at Jerusalem
which should continue visibly to the end of the world. I answer, they proved
sufficiently, that the preaching of the gospel beginning at Jerusalem, should
gather the Church out of all parts of the world, and therefore the faction of
Donatus, which begone in Africa and was not to be found but in a corner of
Africa, could not be the Church of Christ. But of a visible Church to continue
visibly in manner as Bristow demands, there was no controversy in that
conference, and therefore no proof thereof brought out of the Scriptures.

The 9. motive is the 29 demand.
Traditions most certain. The Apostles were of our religion. Bristow.
S. Augustine, S. Chrysostom, S. Hierome, S. Cypriane. fasting days, lent,
mass for the dead prayer for the dead confirmed by the Apostles traditions,
water mingling mith the wine in the chalice. The Mass made by S. Paul. S.
Paul of our religion. The true Church (says Bristow) has always had
traditions Fulke.
beside the Scripture, and what company soever was feign to cry for only
Scriptures, and to deny most certain traditions of the Apostles, their
doctrine was heresy and they heretics. To prove that the church had always
traditions beside Scripture, he brings in the sayings of S. Paul 1. Cor. 11.
2 Thessalonians. 3. before the Scripture was all written, when it was necessary for
the Church to have much of the doctrine delivered only by preaching, yet had
they no doctrine of faith, but such as was confirmed by scriptures of the old
testament, as is manifest 2. Pet. ^, But for the certaintye of popish
traditions, what proof has he? First Basil de sp. sancto cap. 27. says
Dogmata etc. Matters of doctrine which are kept and preached in the church, we
have partly by doctrine committed to writing, partly by tradition of the
Apostles, which are of like force unto godliness etc. But the same Basil writes
contrary to him self and agreeable to the truth, (...). Whatsoever is beside
the holy Scripture, in that it is not of faith, is sin. And (...). he
requires even new planted Christians to be instructed in the holy Scriptures,
both for their full persuasion in godliness, and also (...). that they be not
acquainted with men's traditions. Furthermore (says Bristow) Augustine,
Epiphanius and the Protestants them selves, condemn Heluidius for an heretic,
for denying the perpetual virginity of Marye the mother of Christ, contrary
to the Churches tradition. Nay rather for troubling ye church with contention
about that, in which he has no ground out of the Scriptures. Now let us see
how they are proved to be heretics, that refuse traditions of the Apostles,
and are feign to cry for only Scriptures. First that Maximinus the Arrian did
so, ergo whosoever does so is an heretic, according to Bristowes logike. And
yet he belyeth Maximinus, for he refused not traditions of the Apostles, but
such words as were beside the Scripture, meaning Homousion and such like
terms, which were the^ newly used, but yet contained no new doctrine, but
even that which always was approved according to the Scriptures. The same
thing did the decree of the heretical Emperor Constantius forbid, and not
traditions of the Apostles, of which was no controversy, between the true
Christians and the Arrians. But that the Scriptures only are of sufficient
authority to confute heresies, Augustine declares even against the same
Maximinus lib. 3. cap. 14. Sed nun^ nec ego Niccnum etc. But now must not I
bring forth the council of Nice, nor thou the counsel of Ariminum, to make any
prejudice, but by the authority of Scriptures not being proper to either, but
common witnesses to us both, let matter contend with matter, cause with cause,
reason with reason. Likewise he and his fellow Bishops said unto the Donatists
in the conference of Carthage. Si tantummodo id qu. crerctur qu^ vel rbi esset
Ecclesia, nihil se acturos publicis gestis, sed scripturarum diuinarum
tantummodo testimonijs. If this only were the question, which or where the
Church were, that they would plead nothing at all by public acts of men,
but only by the testimonies of the holy Scriptures. Yet says Bristow, the
Apostles were of our religion, because Chrysostom says Ad pop. Antioch. that
it was decreed by the Apostles, that in the dreadful mysteries a remembrance
should be made of the dead. This says Bristow, was mass for the dead. How
prayers for the dead came in and how at length sacrifice of the mass was
applied unto the dead, I have showed sufficiently against Allen lib. 2. ca. 5.
If we should admit all things to be ordained of the Apostles, which some of
the old writers do ascribe to their traditions, we should receive many
things that even the Papists them selves do not observe. As that it is a
wicked thing to fast on So^day, or to pray kneling, that oblations are to be
made for men's birth days, etc. which with diverse other superstitions
Tertullian fathereth upon the tradition of the Apostles, as well as oblation for
the dead. De coron. null. hearing therefore such manifest untruths are fathered
upon the Apostles tradition by most ancient writers, what certainty can we
have of their tradition, without their own writing. Again S. Hierom says it
was a tradition of the Apostles, to fast 40 days in the year. If this be
true, then is the popish story false, that makes Telesphorus Bishop of Rome
author of that lenten fast. Eusebius shows the great diversity of fasting
before Easter li. 5, cap. 26. saying that some fasted but 1 day, some 2 days,
some more, some 40 hours of day and night, this diversity proves ^^^^ Hierom
untruly ascribes yt tradition to the Apostles, which should have been kept
uniformly, if it had any institution of the Apostles. Cyprian says it was our
Lords tradition, that the wine in the communion should be mingled with water.
But the Scripture says not so, S. Paul wc delivered that wc he received of
Christ, says not so. And yet Cypria^ co^te^deth principally for the use of
wine in the cup against the watery heretics that used only water. It is a
common thing with the ancient writers, to defend every ceremony mhich was
used in their time, by tradition of the Apostles. But the chief matter is the
mass, which says Bristow S. Paul one of our religion made. I marvel whether
Bristow writes this for fools to believe, or for wise men to laughe at. When
they them selves make Gregory or Scholasticus, or I can not tell whom, auctor
of the canon, and when they write how every piece was added by what Pope, what
impudence is it to say, that S. Paul made the Mass, and to call Augustine to
witness that which he good man, did never think of, and much less write.
Whose words Bristow has mangled and falsified. for thus he cites them Ep.
118. cap 6. Totum illum agendi ordinem, quem uniuersum per orbem seruat
Ecclesia, ab ipso ordinatum esse. That by him was ordained this order of doing,
which through the whole world the Church does keep in doing of Mass. The
words of Augustine speaking of receiving the communion, fasting, or before all
other meats, are these, upon the words of S. Paul. Caetera cum venero
ordinabo. Vnde intelligi datur, quia multum erat vt in epistola totum illum
agendi ordinem insinuaret, quem universa per orbem seruat Ecclesia, ab ipso
ordinatum esse, quod nulla morum diuersitate variatur. Other things will I set
in order when I come. Whereby it is given us to be understood because it was
much, that in an epistle he should set forth that whole order of doing, which
the whole Church throughout the world does observe, that this thing was
ordained by him, which is varied by no diversity of manners, understanding the
custom of receiving the communion fasting, which he said before was generally
observed in all places. But of ordeyning the mass there is no title You see
now how ^^^^ Apostles and especially S. Paul is of Bristowes religion, beside
Chrysosto^, Hierom and Cyp^ia^.

The 10 and 11 motives are confusely conte^ned in the 34 demand.
The Courches judgment is always infallible. When by Bristow.
Jewel the Church of God dyed. Donatistes and Luciferians alive again in
Protestants. S. Augustine and S. Hierome were of our religion. Protestants in
their own conscience be against the Church which is everlasting and visible.
No scripture against the Catholics but all for them. Christ to be loved for the
authority of his Church, for which there be playner prophecyes then for Christ
him self. Although we should grant the Churches judgment Fulke.
to be always infallible, yet would we never grant the popish churches
authority which falls so manifestly from the word of God, and thereby
shows her self to be the malignant Church, and Synagogue of Satan. That the
Church of Christ has always ben from ye beginning, and shall continue unto the
end of the world, we all confess and defend. Wherefore it is an impudent
slander of Bristow, to say that by Jewel the Church dyed within six hundredth
years after Christ. And that the Donatistes and Luciferians are revived in
Protestants. For we nether say, that the Church is perished out of all places,
except Africa, as the Donatistes, nor that it is become a stews with the
Luciferians. But the Papists are more like to the Donatistes, which say the
Church is perished out of all parts of the world except Europe, and in steed
of the Church they defend a stews and sincke of all dolatrie, superstition
and ungodliness. Therefore Augustine and Hierom be not of Bristowes religion,
for condemning those heretics to whom Bristow and his Papists are more like
then the Protestants.

Nether do Protestants in their conscience think the Church of Christ to be
against them, because Castalio an Anabaptist translateth Ecclesiae the Church
into reipublicae the common wealth, or because many use the name of
congregation, which is the true signification of this word Ecclesia, as no man
will deny that is not past all shame. That the Church is everlasting and
visible to them that have such eyes as the Church is, that is spiritual, we
never deny. But that it is visible to the world always, that shall never be
proved. That no Scripture is against the Catholics we grant, but that many
Scriptures are against the Papists, it has been more then a thousand times
proved. That the church gives testimony to Christ and that the prophecies of
the churches everlasting continuance are plain and evident, It is no question
between us. But that the synagoge of Romish Papists is the church of Christ, to
who^ such credit or reverence is to be given, that I say, if Bristow would
burst for anger, against the Protestants, he shall never be able to prove.

The 11. motive.
The practice or custom of the church of God. S. Paul and S. Augustine of our
religion. Exorcisme and exufflation in baptism. Bristow.
Pelagians alive again in Protestants. Baptism necessary for salvation of
children. Change of religion never made by us. Altares and prayer for the dead
used always. Real presence of Christ in the Sacrament. Pilgrimage relics of
Saints. S. Hierom of our religion. Miracles for relics. Churches confirmed by
miracles. What an impudent attempt is change of religion. Of the churches
practice and custom I say, even as of the churches judgment, that how much
soever it be to be esteemed, yet is not the Popish church the Catholic church
of Christ but an apostasy and schism from it. Neither is it sufficient for
Bristow to say, ye Popish church practices many things that the au^cie^t
church of Christ practiced, therefore it is the true church of Christ, except he
can prove, that the Popish churchteacheth and practices all and nothing else
but that which the ancient church of Christ did teach and practice. Instead
whereof Bristow can allege nothing, but certain spots and wrinkles of the
elder church, which the Popish church does embrace, having almost nothing else
like unto it. But let us see how substantially he proves out of S. Paul and
S. Augustine, that the churches custom and practice is an infallible rule of
truth. First S. Paul (says he) 1. Cor. 11. after many reasons for the
vncomelines of wome^s going bareheaded recoyleth to this invincible forte. Si
quis etc. But if any man seem to be contentious: we have no such custom (for
women to pray uncovered) nor the church of God. See how this impudent ass, to
stablish his ground of custom, is not ashamed to falsify the words of holy
Scripture. S. Paul says, if any man seem to be desirous of contention, we have
no such custom, nor the churches of God, whereby he means plainly, that it
is not the custom of the Apostles, nor of the church of God, to be contentious
about such small matters of external behavior. May we hereof infer, that
whatsoever the church at any time has used, is allowable, and to be used
always? S. Aug. Ep. 118. Ian. is cited by Bristow but corruptly. Si quid tota
per orbe^ frequentat ecclesia hoc quia it a ^aciendu^ sit disputare
insole^tissimae insaniae est. If ye whole church do use any thing, only to call
it in question whether that thing should be so don, is a poinct of most proud
or most strange madness. But Augustine is not so general, for his words are,
siquid horu^, if any of these things, speaking of ceremonial observations, as
of receiving the communion fasting etc. be universally used of all the church,
when it is not contrary to the word of God, it were madness to strive about it.
For in the first place, Augustine sets the auctority of Gods word, and
secondly the custom of the universal church being not contrary to Gods word,
and last of all, the customs of particular churches, which are varied according
to the diversities of co^tries and nations. Now for these matters in
co^trouersy between us, I answer, as Augustine does to the question of
Ianuarius, immediately after the words cited by Bristow. Sed neque hoc neque
illud est in eo quod tu queris. But neither is this nor that, in the question
that thou propoundest: that is neither the practice of the universal church,
nor the auctority of the Scriptures, serves to decide this question but it is
the third kind. So say I to Bristow, nether the auctority of the holy
Scriptures, nor the practice of the universal church, can be showed for these
things, which thou defe^dest, but they are of a third kind, that is contrary to
the word of God and the practice of the most ancient Primitive church But
Augustine (says Bristow) proves that infants are borne in sin against the
Pelagians, which are revived in Protestants, by the customs and practice of
the church, which was to baptize the^ for remission of sins. And this
practice he called the weight of truth, and a most plain bigness of truth. The
slander, that Pelagia^s are alive in Protestants, by denying children to be
borne in sin, I will no more esteem, then the barking of a dog against the
moon. But where he says, that Augustine by the only practice of the church,
co^uinceth the Pelagians calling the practice po^dus veritatis etc: it is a
shameless lie, for his words are in the same Epist. 105. Circunsti^antur enim
and di^inarum auctoritate lectionu^, and antiquitus tradito and retc^to firmo
Ecclesiae ritu in baptismate paruulorum. For they are compassed about, both by
the authority of the divine readings, and also by the steadfast practice of the
church, delivered of old and retained in the baptism of infants. But he urges
them with exorcisme and exsufflation, which were there used in the church: I
confess, but their meaning by exufflatio^ and exorcisme, he defends out of
the Scriptures. And who can blame Augustine, if after he have mightily confuted
the Pelagians out of the Scriptures, to show the nouelty of their heresy, he
alleged the perpetual practice of the church, which she always had and
always shall have in praying for the conversion of infidels, and for the
perseuera^ce of the faithful in goodness. This is all one (says Bristow) as if
we should reason against these heretics out of private men's beads and out of
the public prayers which are in the portuse or Breuiary, or in the missall and
such like books. The devil it is, except Bristow can prove, that such beads
and prayers, were ever used in the church. For Augustine says de bono
persevere. ca. 22 Atque vtinam tardi cord, and infirmi qui non possunt, velnon
dum possunt Scriptur as vel earum expositiones intelligere, sic audrient vel
non audirent in hac quaestione disputationes nostras, vt magis intuer entur
orationes suas, quas semper habuit and habebit ecclesia ab exordijs suis, donec
finiatur hoc seculum. And I would they that are dull of heart and weak, which
can not, or as yet can not, understand the Scriptures or the expositions of
them, would so hear or not hear our disputations in this question, that they
would rather consider their own prayers, which the church always has had and
shall have, from her beginning until this world be ended. You see plainly, that
Augustine joins to the auctority of the holy Scriptures, the perpetual
practice of the church which has continued from the beginning and shall
remain unto the end. Which seeing it can not be showed for Popery, the
argument of the practice of the church serves not for Popery. Bristowe
proceeds and passes over the example of Christian women, which killed them
selves, rather then they would have their bodies abused, yet notwithstanding by
the churches judgment were honored as martyrs To which I answer, the church
considered their mind which was good, and not the fact which was evil. At
last he comes to affirm that the Popish church never made any change of
religion. Which is a shameless assertion, although he say that none of his
adversaries is able to charge them with any alteration since Augustines time.
For to omit the whole scope of doctrine, clean perverted, I will observe
only the practice of the church in Augustines time, about the Lords supper. In
that time the lay people did receive the communion in both kinds and one
thousand years almost after, which of late the Papists have altered. In
Augustines time, the communion was given to infantes which the Papists do not
observe, therefore they can not brag of perpetual practice and deny all
change in religion made by them. But Bristow not content with this vain
brag, will go farther and show that whatsoever they have used sith S.
Augustines time, was observed even so in all that time that passed between S.
Paul and S. Augustine. Is not this a master of impudence, to promise that
which all the world of learned men does know to be impossible to be performed,
and whereof the promiser himself, can bring no proof at all but his bare
word. For he begins with exorcisme and exsufflation, which as it was used
in Augustines time unnecessarily, so it appears by Cyprian, that was long
before him, that it was used for the casting out of the devil in them whose
bodies he did sensibly possess. lib. 3. cap. 7. ad Magnum. Of the sacrifice of
the Mass, worshipping of the Sacrament, and oblation for the dead, as Bristow
refers the reader to his fifth and seventh motives so do I to mine aunsweres
unto the same. Concerning the use of the altar, how truly he says, I refer
the reader to mine answer of D. Heskins lib. 3. cap. 31. The other fond
reason of the practice of the church, that children were taught to believe the
real presence of Christ in the Sacrament, for which he cites Aug. de Tim.
lib. 3. cap. 10. which the poor man borrowed out of Allens book of Purgatory,
is discussed and answered in my confutation of the same treatise lib. 2 cap. 9.
Then follows going on pilgrimage, to holy places, worshipping of relics,
prayer unto Saints, used (as he says) in Augustines time. For worshipping of
relics and praying to Saints, he cites Aug de c^re pro mor. Who concludes
that to be buried at some memory of the martyrs does in this poynct only
avail the dead, that the affection of supplication commending him also to the
patronage of the martyr may be increased. That this was no perpetual practice
of the church to desire the intercession of Saints, it is manifest by this,
that Augustine him self dare affirm nothing certainly, whether or how the
Saints may hear our prayers. Affirming that this question passes the power
of his understanding cap. 16. But by the name of memory, Bristow will
understand relic, because it is sometime so used, which is no strong
argument. But admit it were so, how can he prove, either that practice to
have been continued from S. Paul to S. Augustine or the same opinion of
relics to have been in Augustines time, which is maintained in the Popish
church? that there was superstitious peregrinatio^ unto Jerusalem etc. used in
S. Hieroms time, it is as true as that the same was reproved of him Ep. ad
Paul. If God showed any miracles at the dead bodies of the Martyrs, to
confirm that religion for which they suffered against the Gentiles it follows
not that the relics of dead Saints are to be worshipped, kissed, saught unto
by pilgrimage etc, but most absurd is it, that Bristow would have Hierome by
often entering into the Cryptos or vaultes of churches at Rome, to signify
that he went a Pilgrimage. Hierome was not so gross, to accounte walking about
the City to be a Preregrination. But what is so leaden or blockishe, which
these doltish Papists will not avouch for the mainteinaunce of their trompery.
Last of all he charge the Protestants, with an impudent attempt, in making
such an universal change of the whole face of Religion, which none of the
old Heretics did before the^. That we are like to none of the old Heretics,
we like our selves never the worse, but as concerning the universal change,
it was necessary in reformation where there was an universal Apostacy. For any
alteration that we have made, the Papists dare not affirm for shame, that we
have brought any thing into the Church which ought not to be used by the word
of God: neither are they able to prove that we have omitted anything, which by
the holy scripture is necessaryly required. To conclude, you see that the
practice of the church, except it be perpetual, even from the first beginning,
is no Motive by Augustines judgment, and that Bristowe though he has bragged
much thereof, for some superstitions used of old, yet he has brought nothing,
to prove that they have been from the beginning.

The 12. Motive is the 28. demand.
Sea apostolic. The communion of the Bishop of Rome Bristow.
to be kept of all Christians. The Romain Church is the Catholic Church. Saint
Augustine of our religion. Such as are condemned by the Sea Ap^stolike are
holden for Heretics. Pelagians alive again in Protestants. Emperors and
other peers of our Religion, as also their first conversion. S. Theodoret,
Chrisostom, and Hierome of our Religion. Antichrists side against the Pope.
Protestants do decay and shall come to nothing. Whosoever (says Bristow) at
any time were for their doing or teaching condemned by the definitive sentence
of Fulke.
the Sea Apostolic, and stubbernly condemned the same, they were Scismatikes
or heretics. And contrariwise, all Catholic men have kept them selves in the
unity of that sea, and if for any cause they were out of it, laboring to be
reconciled again, or if they had been but suspected, never ceasing until
they had made their purgation. Moreover he says, there can none example be
alleged to the contrary, but innumerable for it. It is not denied, but the
Church and Sea of Rome, while it continued in true catholic Religion, was much
reverenced every where, so far at least as the Roman empire did extend. But
when any Bishop of that sea, went out of the way, either in scisme or herefie,
they were not followed but resisted, and condemned. For Example, When Victor
bishop of Rome like a proud scismatike, did take upon him to excommunicate all
the Churches of the East, for celebration of Easter, they did not only
contemn his censure, but many Bishops also did sharply rebuke him, as Irenaeus
Bishop of Lions: and other. Euse. li. 5. ca. 25. When Liberius bishop of Rome
relented unto the Arrians, he was forsaken of the true Christians, and
accounted an Heretic. Hier. in Catal. When Bonifacius, Zosimus and Celestinus,
Bishops of Rome, would challenge appellations out of Africa, contrary to the
decrees out of the councels of Africa, by counterfaiting a Canon of the Nicene
council, they were resisted by all the Bishops of Africa, and the treachery
discovered. Caic. Aphric. ad. celest. To these examples add Pope Honorius,
condemned in the general council of Constantinople the sixth, for a
Monothelite. Even the popish council of Constans, deposed three Popes. But now
let us see Bristowes wise examples. The Pelagians (which he says, but shows
not how) are alive in Protestants, were condemned by the Apostolic Sea as
witnesses Augustine. Episto. 106. And this judgment of the Catholic Church,
the Emperor Honorius confirmed as testifies Possidonius and Augustine. What
then? Ergo Saint Augustine and the Emperors were of our Religion. If the
Pelagians had been condemned by the authority of the Bishop of Rome,
without conviction out of the holy Scriptures, the Example had been to some
purpose. But when their heresy was both by Preaching, writing, disputing and
Council declared to be contrary to the word of God, then if the Bishop of
Rome subscrybed to his condemnation, as one of the true Patriarchs of the
Church within the Roman Empire, what does this advance the singularity of
his Sea? For examples of Catholics purging them selves, First he names
Chrysostom in his Epistle to Innocentius the sixth of Rome, but sets down
none of his words, as in deed there is no such matter in that Epistle, only
he shows how injuriously he was handled by the barbarous Soldiers. His
next example is: Theodoretus Bishop of Cyrus, who being unjustly deposed,
appealed to Leo Bishop of Rome, which considering of his case indifferently,
consented to his restitution in the council of Chalcedon. But that Theodoret
would not have accounted him self an Heretic or scismatike, although he had
been condemned by Leo, it is plain by these words. Vestra^ enim expecto
sententiam. etc. For I expect your sentence, and if you command me to stand
unto that which has been judged against me, I will stand unto, it neither
will I trouble any man hereafter about it, but will expect the judgment of
our God and Savior, which cannot be altered. These words declare, that
Theodoret although the Bishop of Rome also should be deceived to confirm his
deprivation, by his sentence, yet he would not think him self to be an
heretic, but quietly weight for the judgment of God, which could not be
deceived, as the judgment of man was. Wherefore Theodoret was far from
acknowledging those popish principles. That the Pope can not err, that his
judgment is all one with the judgment of God. Although the mystery of
iniquity in the Bishop of Romes prerogative, had by that time wrought very
high. The submission of Hierome to Pope Damasus, you shall find answered in
my confutation of Saunders rock cap. 15. where you shall see how the Church of
Rome was called Catholic, while it was so in deed, and how Antichrists side
was against the Bishop of Rome, namely so long as the Bishop of Rome was on
Christ's side. Whether Protestants in England have decayed and Papists
increased, as Bristow braggeth, for these 16. years, let wise men judge.
Although want of severe discipline has caused many to remain obstinate, and
some perhaps that were of no religion, to fall to Popery, yet for the number,
it is altogether false, that Bristow so confidently affirms.

The 13. motive is the 27. demand.
Counsels. The Apostles were of our religion. Parliament religion. The
council of Trent. Counsels. S. Augustines Bristow.
motive. Whosoever has been condemned by any council (says Bristow)
general or provincial confirmed by the sea Apostolic, Fulke.
They were heretics, nether can there against this be brought any exception. I
will bring such exceptions, as Bristow for both his ears dare not affirm the
parties so condemned, to be heretics. Liberius Bishop of Rome, was first a
good Catholic, so far that for refusing to satisfy the Emperor
Constantius, which required him to subscribe to the unjust deprivation of
Athanasius, he was carried into banishment, and one Felix a good Catholic also,
yet by faction of the Arrians, was chosen Bishop of Rome in his place. But
afterward, Liberius solicited and persuaded by one Fortunatianus as S. Hierome
witnesses in catal. and through wearines of his banishment as Marianus Scotus
testifies, subscribed to the heresy of Arrius, and returned to Rome like a
Conqueror. For whose return and deprivation of Felix, Constantius gathered a
council, which was confirmed by Liberius, as testifies Pope Damasus in his
pontifical. Constantius Augustus fecit concilium cum haereticis simul etiam
cum Vrsacio and Valente, and eiecit Felicem de Episcopa^^s qui erat Catholicus,
and reuocauit Liberium. Constantius the Emperor held a council with the
heretics and also with Vrsacius and Valens, and did cast out Felix which was a
Catholic out of his bishoprike, and called back Liberius. And again:
Ingressus Liberius in vrbem Romam 4. nonas Augusti, c^nsensit Constantio
haeretico, non tamen rebaptizatus est, sed consensum praebuit. Liberius after
he entered into the city of Rome the 4. of the nones of August, he consented to
Constantius the heretic, but yet he was not rebaptized, but he gave his
consent. Let Bristow advise him self, which of the Popes he dare call
heretic. If he condemn Felix and justify Liberius, then has he S. Hierome
against him and Pope Damasus, which can not err. Another exception I will
bring of Pope Honorius the first, condemned and accursed for an heretic by
the general council of Constantinople the sixth, confirmed by Pope Leo the 2.
and that not generally but by special words, pariterque anathematizamus noui
erroris inuentores etc. nec non and Honorium qui hanc apostolicam Ecclesiam non
aposiolicae traditionis doctrina lustrauit, sed profana praedicatione
immaculatam fidem subuertere conatus est. And likewise we accurse the inuentors
of the new error etc: and also Honorius which did not lighten this apostolic
Church, with doctrine of Apostolic tradition but by profane preaching went
about to overthrow the undefiled faith. The same Pope Honorius is condemned in
the second council of Nice confirmed also by the Pope Adrian. Notwithstanding
all this, I would Bristow were so hardy on his head, to grant that Honorius
was an heretic. I might join to these, three Popes condemned by the council
of Constance, confirmed by Pope John 23. One of the three. also the
condemnation of Pope Eugenius by the council of Basil, confirmed by Pope
Nicolas and Felix. But the other are sufficient exceptions against Bristowes
false principle. Now whatsoever he prateth of auctority of councelles, is to no
purpose. For we acknowledge how necessary synods are for the church of Christ,
with the Apostles, whom the fond man boasts to be of their religion, because
they held a council. Not considering how they determined the controversy,
only by auctority of the holy Scriptures, as it is manifest Act. 15. And what
council soever follows that rule, we gladly embrace, and that is the cause,
why the parliament joins, the four first general counsels with the
Scriptures, in trial of heresy, not that those councels are of equal
auctority with the word of God, but in that they agree with the same, in
condemning the heresies of Arrius, Macedonius, Nestorius and Eutiches. That
proud scoff of Parliament religion, bewraieth the stomach of a Vauntparler,
and not the spirit of a divine or good subject. Popery was also confirmed by
Parliament in Queen Maryes time, therefore it was Parliament Religion. But
where as he would compare the last rablement of Trent, in all points with
those ancient holy Councels, he does even as much as if he would go about to
prove an Ape to be a man. But I may not omit that in showing the necessity of
the Popes confirmation of Councels, out of Annianus Marcellus, Lib. 15. He
helps the matter with falsifying the writer, sor he delivers his words
thus, auctoritate qua poti^res atern^e ^^^^ Episcopi, with the authority in
which the Bishops of the eternal city are better whereas the word is
po^iuntur, by that authority which the Bishops of Rome have or do enjoy. But
if we shall believe Marcellinus an heathen writer. Liberius Bishop of Rome, was
of the same mind in condemnation of Athanasius, that the rest of the Bishops
were, which proceeded against him, but that he thought it not reason, to
subscribe to his condemnation before he had seen and heard him. For thus Ammon
writes. Hunc per subs^riptionem abiicere sede sacerd^tali, par^a sentiens
c^eteris iubente principe, Liberius monitus perseucranter renitebatur, nec
visum hominem nec auditum damnare nefas vltimum s^epe exclamans, aperte
s^ilicet recalcitrans imperatoris arbitrio. Id enim ille Athanasio scmper
infesius, li^et s^iret impletum, tamen auctoritate q^^a potiuntur aetern^e
vrbis Episcopi firmari d^siderio nitebat^r ardente. This man (speaking of
Athanasius condemned before by a Synod of Bishops) Liberius being of the same
opinion with the rest, warned by the Princes commandment, did stiffly refuse
by subscription to cast out of his priestly seat, crying out often times, that
it was extreme wickedness, to condemn a man being nether heard nor seen, so
openly kicking against the Emperors pleasure. Who although he which being
always an enemy to Athanasius, knew that it was already fulfilled, yet he
labored with earnest desire, to have it confirmed by the authority which the
Bishops of the eternal city have. There can nothing else be gathered of this,
but that Constantius, knowing Athanasius to be deprived by a council of
Bishops of the East, would have Liberius Bishop of Rome, to consent to his
condemnation, because Athanasius was one of the four Patriarchs, and was not
to be condemned, but by the rest of the Patriarchs. Not that it was then
thought, that all councels were insufficient, except they had the Popes
confirmation, as Bristow does dream.

But Bristow says, the Protestants regard no counsels, because they suffer
Lewys Euans in a naughtye book to call the council of Chalcedon a blasphemous,
proud, sacrilegious Antichristian Council. This Lewys Euans while he was a
Papist, and did write from Louayne in defense of Papistrye, was accounted of
you a learned man, a sober man, a godly man, but now that God in great mercy,
has opened his eyes to see and acknowledge the light of the Gospel, you rail
on him and slander him at your pleasure. For if you had been able to justify
your reproach, you would have noted in which of his books, seeinge he has
written many, and in what leaf and line he had written so irreverently of that
Council. Howsoever it be, he is able to answer you him self: Although if he
have erred in the name or judgment of that council, it were small reason to
charge all the Protestants in England, with one private man's error.

The last is, that Counsels were S. Augustines motive, because he writes,
that even provincial Counsels, must give place without all doubt to general
Counsels. De bapt. cont. D^n. lib. 2. cap. 3. but what writes Augustine
immediately after? Ipsaque plenaria saepe priora posterioribus emendari cum
aliquo experimento rerum aperitur quod cla^sum erat, and cognoscitur quod
latebat sine vllo trpo sacrilegae superbiae, sine inflata ceruice arrogantiae,
s^ne vlla contentione liutdae inuidiae, cum sancta humilitate, cum pace
Catholica, cum charitate Christiana. Who knows not, says Augustine. That
even general Counsels are often times, the former corrected by the later,
when by any trial of things, that is opened which before was shut, and that
is known which before was hid, without any swellinge of sacrilegious pride,
without any swellinge stubbernes of arrogance, without any contention of
spightfull envy, with holy humility, with Catholic peace, with christian
charity. What say you Saint Augustine? have general Counsels often erred,
that the former were corrected by the later? If you maintain this saying, you
shall be no longer of Bristowes religion.

The 14. motive is the 26 demand.
The fathers. Pelagians alive in Protestants. The fathers. Bristow.
S. Augustines motive. Protestants be ashamed of their fathers. Of what
religion and authority the fathers were. L. Humfries opinion of Jewels
challenge of the fathers, and of the Saints in the Calender. Bristow would
have it considered whether ever any Catholic man in matters of faith, did
obstinately refuse to Fulke.
believe the old fathers consenting in one and agreeing together, but only
such as were heretics. I answer Bristow plays the captious, and yet
foolish Sophister. For in this first demand, he seems to understand all
the old fathers consenting together, but in the rest of the chapter he
plainly speaks, but of some of the old writers: now there is great
difference between all and some. For we deny nothing that all the old fathers
did consent upon, although we deny some thing that some of the old fathers
did allow. For example, we deny prayers for the dead, which some of the old
writers did allow. But if Bristow would break his head in pieces with
study, he shall never be able to prove, that all the old writers did
maintain prayer for the dead, the like I say of prayer unto Saints, and of
some prerogative of the Bishop of Rome over other Bishops, of some ceremonies
etc: which being the dregs of a great quantity of good liquor contained in
the vessels of diverse of the old writers, and yet of the later sort of
them, the Papists have only sucked out, letting all the good liquor to run
beside them. And like impudent dogs yolpe and bark against us, that the
fathers are all of their side, and contrary to us: with as good reason, as one
that has gotten the excrementes of a man, should boast boast that he has the
same man in possession. I think the reader can not but laughe, when he reads
it so often noted by Bristow. Pelagians alive in Protestants. When of all old
heresies we are further from none, nor Papists nearer to any, then to the
heresy of the Pelagians. But why troe ye are Pelagians alive in Protestants?
Because Augustine writing against Julian the Pelagian lib. 1. cap. 2. says of
the fathers, Qu^d credunt credo etc. That which they believe I believe also. I
hold that they hold, I teach that they teach, I preach that they preach, and
lib. 2. quos opor^ct etc. Christian people ought to prefe^re the ancient holy
truth, before your profane novelties and chose rather to stick to them then to
you. And are Pelagians alive in Protestants, because Augustine rec^iueth the
old writers, that were agreeable to the scriptures? Did not the Pelagians
allege the authority of the old writers also? L^b cont. Iul cap. 2. and 3, But
what should I contend about that, which is so clear in Augustine. De baptism
c^nt D^nat^si. cap. 2. Quis autem nesciat ^anctam scripturam canonicam tam r^t.
ris quam noui testa^^^^, ^ertis s^is terminis contineri? camque omnibus
postericribus Episcop^rum literis it a praeponi, vt de ill a omnino dubitari
and d. s ep^ari non p^ss^t, vtrum verum vel vtrum rectu^s^ qui^qu^^ in ea
s^riptum esse constiterit: Ep s^^porum autem literas que post confi^matum
can^nem vel script^e sunt vel s^ri^untur, and per serm^nem forte sapientiorem
cuiuslibet in care periti r^s, and per alioru^n Epis^^porum grauiorem
auctoritatem doct^orumque prudentiam, and per con^ilia li^ere repreh^ndi si
quid in ^is forte a veritate deuiatum est, and i^sa concilia etc. Who knows
not, that the holy canonical scripture both of the old and new testament, is
contained in their certain bands: and that the same is so preferred before all
later writings of Bishops, that of it there can be no doubt or question at all,
whether that be true or right, whatsoever is known to be written therein. But
as for the writings of Bishops, which since the canon is confirmed have been
written, or b^ now in writing, that by some speech perhaps more wise of any
man that is more skillfull in that matter, and by the more grave authority of
other Bishops, and wisdom of them that are better learned, and by counsels
they may be reprehended, if any thing perhaps in them is gone a straye from
the truth, and that eu^n those counsels which are held in every region and
province, without all controversy do give place to the authority of general
councels which are made out of all the Christian world, and that even the
general counsels are often times corrected the former by the later etc. as in
the 13. motive. By which saying you may plainly see, how the old fathers were
S. Augustines motive, even none otherwise, then they are our retentiue, to
stay us in Christian truth, which they write agreeable to the holy
Scriptures, and therefore it is an impudent slander of Bristowe both where he
says, that in our preachinge and writing we think it not necessary to
allege the t^stimonies of the old fathers, and also that in familiar talk
among our selves we are not afearde plainly to confess, that the fathers all
were Papists.

As vain a cavil it is, that the Protestants are ashamed of their fathers:
When we acknowledge no fathers, unto whose judgment we will stand absolutely
in all controversies, but the Prophets and the Apostles and God him self, by
whose spirit they did write. As for Simon Magus, Eunomus, and such old
heretics we detest, more then the Papists do. But AErius, Vigilantius, and
Iouinian were plainly of our opinion, and of them we are ashamed. And do you
Papists believe nothing common with AErius, Vigilantius, Iouinian? Do you in
no point hold that which Arius, Macedonius, Eutyches did hold? Do you
maintain no opinion which was taught by Mahomet him self? you will answer,
that there never was heresy, but it h^lde and taught many articles of truth,
which if you hold as they did, you are not therefore their children, in such
articles wherein they were heretics. Even so we answer you of AErius,
Vigilantius, Iouinian, we are not ashamed to believe any truth which they held,
their errors we leave unto them selves. But I know you will replye, that among
the errors of AErius, the denial of prayers to profit the dead was one
accounted by Epiphanius and Augustine. Then it is your part to show, what
arguments out of the holy Scripture they bring to prove this opinion to be an
error. Otherwise their authority alone, is not sufficient to make it a truth.
Vigigilantius is baighted only by Hierome, of other learned men in his time, he
was counted a godly man, and a learned. As for Iouinian, we take not his part,
if in all respects he made marriage equal with virginity, which in some
respect the Apostle prefers. But we must see of what religion and
authority, the fathers were. First says Bristow you may perceive by Jewels
challenge, that for Purgatory, prayer for the dead and to Saints, merit of
good works etc. there is something contained in the old fathers which lived
within 600. years after Christ, because he durst not make his challenge of
these articles, but of the Mass, the Pope, the eucharistie etc. But I pray you
Bristow, are not these greater matters among you, then the other?

If therefore you be not able to prove your greatest mysteries of antiquity,
out of any one father for so many ages, what great matter is it, if you have
them favorable in a few articles of less moment? But Bristow with wayght of
reason will bear us down, that all the fathers are on their side wholly, and
against us in all poynctes of our controversy. And this is his reason: who are
driven to mayteyne the fathers credit and authority, Papists or Protestants?
Not Protestants verily, but Papists, ergo the fathers be all for Papists and
against Protestants. A mighty reason of main force. Dioscorus and Eutyches
in the council of Chalcedon boasted of the authority of the holy fathers,
and stood much in defense of their creditte therefore the fathers were wholly
on their side.

But let us hear L. Humfreys opinion out of his book of B. Jewels life, of
Jewels challenge, of the fathers and of the Saints in the calender. Nay
rather let us hear Bristow yelping like a little curre against so great a
lion. First he snatcheth pieces of his sentences gnawne from the rest, and then
squeleth out as though he had heard some marvelous strange soundes. D.
Humfrey says, Jewel gave the Papists too large a scope, when not content to
have beaten them down with the authority of the holy Scriptures, he made his
challenge upon the testimony of the fathers, and that so many hundredth years
after Christ. And herein he was injurious to him self, that refusing that
mean by which he might more easily and more straightly have maynteyned his
cause, after a manner he spoiled him self and the church. This is his opinion
of Master Jewels challenge. How follows his opinion of the fathers and of
the Saints in the calender. This thing (says D. Humfrey) he did not with his
will, but yet he did it not without a cause, that he might strike you through
with the testimony of your fathers, as it were with your own sword. For it
had been manly for a Christian man to say. Thus says the Lord. It had been
sufficient to have laid against you. Your doctrine is contrary to the
Scripture. For it is the question of men possessed with devils to say: What
have we to do with thee Jesus thou son of David? But it is an interrogation
of the Saynctes. What have we to do with our fathers with flesh and blood?
You hear by these words, what a dangerous opinion he holds of the fathers
and of the Saynctes in the calender, namely that the fathers are no farther to
be followed, then they followed the holy Scriptures, and that the Saints
either living or dead, whether they be in the calender or no, deny their
fathers as flesh and blood if they be in any respect an hinderance for them
to obey the will of their father in heaven.

These are the perilous opinions, that Bristow brableth against falsifying his
words by ommission and dep^auing his meaning by false surmising.

But Bristow has yet an other reason to prove the fathers to be in all
poinctes of their side. If in all poinctes (says he) they be not with the
Protestants, then undoubtedly in all poynctes they be with us. And what is the
reason of this monstrous conclusion? There was never but one true religion. As
though none can be of true religion but such as erreth in nothing. But who
would spend incke and paper to confute such vain reasonings.

The 15. motive contains the 15. 16. and 20. demaundes.
Martyrs. S. Stephen of our religion. Pilgrimage. Churches Bristow.
confirmed by vision. M^racles for relics and for necessity of childrens
baptis^ne. Confirming of children, the custom and practice of Gods church.
Foxes martyrs. Mirac^es for our martyrs. Al martyrs that ever suffered fot the
testimony of true Fulke.
religion, since Abel, were numbered of one true church, even of the same that
we are. But Bristow would bind us to the Saints in the calender, termed by L.
Humfrey Sa^ct^li, which term yea and a worse, might serve a number of the^.
Notwithstanding so many of those cale^ddred and canonized Saints as be
Saints in heaven and not firebrands in hell, were of that church which is
builded upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ being
the head corner stone. And therefore it is a foolish request, that we should
name any one of the^, which was of our faith. But it is a pleasant pastime, to
hear how Bristow proves S. Stephen to be of his religion. It is manifest
(says he) that he is of the religion of the rest of the martyrs, meaning
Papists, because it is proved, that he as well as they, had heard and helped
the^, which prayed to them, which worshipped their relics, and went a
pilgrimage to their churches, and he specially revealing by vision, the place
where his relics were hidden with the relics of S. Gamaliel, and S.
Nicodemus: unto one Lucian, a Priest of ^erusalem, which wrote in Greek the
history of his invention. To this invention, I answer, that it is an invention
of the devil, either by means of him that counterfaited the vision, or by
sending a strong illusion, and so ^ say generally of all such miracles and
visions, as are alleged, to prove any doctrine contrary to the holy
Scriptures. As for the vanity of this epistell of Lucian, it be wrayeth it
self in that he makes Gamaliel the Pharizee, so great a Saint, who for any
thing that we can read in the holy Scripture, was never a Christian. S. Paul
in the 22. of the Acts, appealeth to the knowledge of the Jews, that he was
brought up in Iudaisme, under Gamaliel, which if after he had been converted to
Christianity it should have been greatly suspected that S. Paul had been
noselled up by him, and not converted by a vision from heaven, as his intent
was to show.

From this counterfeit stuff of Lucians epistell, he sends us to the new
found sermons of Augustine, to whom he would get credit, by Augustines own
report, De ciuit. 22. ca. 8. but in vain, for Augustine speaks not of any
such sermons, but only, when report of a miracle was brought unto him, that he
went unto the church and spoke a few things of the matter. And touching all
such miracles as he reports of Stephen, his conclusion is this, God was
glorified by them, and the faith for which Stephen died, was magnified. But of
worshipping of relics, pilgrimage etc. there is no mention, and yet that
chapter of miracles, as Ludouicus Viues does confess, is notably corrupted, as
appeared to him, by ancient copies. The conclusion was, Quid erat in cordibus
exultantium nisi fides Christi, pro qua Stephani sanguis fusus est? What was in
the hearts of them that reioysed, but the faith of Christ, for which the blood
of Stephen was shed?

The miracle which Bristow reports out of the 38. Sermon. in diuus and 96. in
noua editione to prove the necessity of baptism for infants and the practice
of the church for confirmation of children, and praying to S. Stephen is an
impudent fiction, as appears manifestly by this, that he calls a sucking
babe Catechumenu, one that was instructed in Christian religion, which could
not possibly be, before he was of years of capacity. Secondly the infants
ofChristian parents, in Augustins time, were baptized as soon as they were
borne, and tarried not until they were Catechumeni, that is enstructed. Thirdly
the woman in this fable, praying to S. Stephen, persuades him to know the
purpose of her heart, which the word of God affirms to be known only to God.
As impudent as the deviser of that fable was, is Bristow, who cites out of
Augustine De ^nitat. eccles. cap. 16. a few words rent a sunder from the rest,
concerning miracles, which the whole discourse, shows to be plainly against
him, as you may read in this answer in the 8. motive of visions. After this
follows a comparison of Foxes martyrs, with the Popish martyrs, Videlicet the
good Earl of Northumberlande, Story, Feltons, Nortons, VVodhouse, Plomtree,
and so many hundrethes of the Northern men, all rebels and traitors, yet
(says he) approved by miracles undoubted, but what miracles, he shows not.
To these he adds Fisher, More, the Charterhouse monks etc. whose cause being
sufficiently discussed by M. Fox, I refer to the judgment of indifferent
readers. But this I can not omit that the traitorous Papist, flau^dereth our
state, not only for public execution of open rebels and errant traitors, but
also with privy murdering, by poisoning, whipping, and famishing. From all
suspicion of which wicked practices, God be praised, the states that are
professors of the Go^pell, have always been as free, as the Papists both by
story and living testimony may be proved guilty of the^. And where he
specially charge that learned and reverend Father M. Elmer now Bishop of
London, with this deuilishe practice, notinge these words in the margent, Let
Elmer remember his Tragedy of the Scottishfriere at Lincoln. As I know not
what color he has for so great and heinous a slander, so I nothing doubt,
but that the same is utterly false and untrue, as a thousand more slanders and
lies, Wherein the Papists, as Children of the Father of lies have so great
delight. To conclude, seeing not the pain, but the cause makes a martyr,
whosoever have suffered for treason and rebellion, may well be accounted Martirs
of the Popisn Church, but the church of Christ condemns such for enemies of
Christ's kingdom and inheritours of eternal destructi^, except they repent and
obtain mercy for their horrible wickedness. And seeing patient suffering is by
Bristows own confession, a gift of God, unto all true Martirs, such as were
manifestly void of patience, can be no true Martirs, as were most of these
rebels and traitors, and Story by name. Who for all his glorious tale, in the
time of his most deserved execution by quartering, was so impatie^t that he did
not only rore and cry like a helhounde, but also struck the executioner doing
his office, and resisted as long as strength did serve him, being kept down
by three or four men, until he was dead. O patient martyr of the popish
church. In the 15. and 16. demand, he asks us whether we have not read in
Chrysostom, Augustine, and others, that they used this argument to prove the
divinity of Christ, that he has advanced his servants to such honor, that
they are prayed unto, and their graves honored of kings and Emperors, and that
miracles are wrought by the reliqus of their Saints, I answer we read so^e
such thing, although not altogether as Bristow reports, nor to yt end. But
what if among a great number of forcible aguments, they used also some such
persuasions? should their reasoning be a prejudice to the truth of God reveled
out of the Scriptures: whereunto if those holy man had had as great regard as
they wish other men to have in their writing, and not suffered them selves to
be carried away with common plausible errors, they should easily have espied
that they gained not so much in resoning so against the Painims, as they gave
occasion of superstition among the Christians.

And to answer the xx. demand, we are content to be tried by that doctrine
for which the ancient Martyrs Irenaeus, Cyprian, Laurens etc. suffered
persecution and Martyrdom, which was for no point of Popery but true
christianity, yet will we not be tried by all points of doctrine which they
did hold, for that it is certain, some of them had their errors which the
Papists them selves do not hold, as Irenaeus is charged by Eusebius. l. b. 3.
cap 39, to be a follower of the Chiliastes. Cyprian did openly in a council,
maintain rebaptising of them which were baptized by Heretics. Again we
resuse not the trial of that docttine for which the Christians were persecuted
by the Arrians in Africa, notwithstanding the term of Missa used by Victor
that writes that Story, by which term in that time, not the popish Mass
(which then was not made, either in matter or form) but the celebration of the
Communion and memory of the sacrifice of Christ, commonly called in deed, but
improperly a sacrifice, yet will we not be tried by all that they hold, for
diverse errors of prayer for the dead and to the dead, were then received,
neithet will the Papists be tried by that Religion they held in all points.
For then were Bishops married. Lib. 2. and, 3. Then the Prayers were in the
vulgar tongue, and all the people sunge Himnes together, lib. 2. There is no
reason therefore that the Papists should call us to such a trial as they dare
not abide them selves.

The 16. motive is the 30. Demand.
Their own Doctors. The dis^orde of Protestants. Luther Bristow.
^ondemneth our Pretestantes. Carolstadians, Zwinglians, and Caluinists. Luther
corrupts the Scripture to help his heresy of the bread to be Christ's
body. The head of the church to be a Layman is against the Magdeburgenses and
Calvin. The prophecy fulfilled in the accord of the Protestants and
Puritants Parliament religion. The inconstancy of Protestants. What an
impudent attempt is change of religion. True Christianity by Luther is under
the Popedom. The discord of our own Doctors: Bristowe would have to be a
Motive against us. As though it were not Fulke.
as great a motive against them, whose Doctors dissent as much as ours. To omit
all other controversies, when will they be agreed whether the Pope be above
the Council or the Council above the Pope. In which discention they have not
only Doctor against Doctor, but also Council against Council, and Pope
against Pope, and Cardinal against Cardinal, as Constance and Basil against
Ferraria and Florence. Nicolaus and Felix with their Cardinals, against,
Eugenius and and his Cardinals. But now let us see what discord he finds in
our Doctors. Luther condemns the Protestants, Car^^stadians, Zw^nglians and
Caluinistes in the cause of the Sacrament, The more was his immoderate heat
and bitter zeal to be blamed, and their Christian modesty to be commended,
which notwitstanding his overmuch vehemence in maintayning his error, yet
accepted him always as a brother. The corruption of the Scripture wherewith he
charge Luther, is a slander of his own, for Luther altered no words of
Scripture, but declared his understanding of them, when he said, Take bread and
eat ^his is my body. And this is the only discord that he can prove between
the professors of the truth For it is a mere sophistry of the ambiguitie of
the word head of the Church, that makes that show of contrariety between
the Magdeburgenses, Calvin, and us, who in sense and meaning thereof, do
perfectly agree as I have often showed. And Bristowe cannot altogether deny
where he derideth the Parliament Religion, and inconstancy of Protestants for
changing the title of head into governor, and then expounding the government
by iniunction. Whereas in neither of both titles was any other meaning of the
godly sort in the time of King Henry, King Edward or her Majesty, then is
contained in that exposition. In deed Stephen Gardener (as Calvin reports)
at Ratisbone, abused the title of supreme head, not more wickedly the^ absurdly
to defend all Papistrie, which the^ was not abolished by king Henry. And
against that gross error of Gardener writes Calvin and not against our
understanding of that title. But the Apology prophecieth that shortly the
Lutherans and Zwinglians should be accorded, which is fulfilled in the accord
of the Protestants and Puritanes, who in the demand he says do abhor the
title of supremacy, If I knew whom he did mean by Puritanes, I might
aunsweare him the better, but seeing he makes Protestants and Puritanes
members of a division, If he reckon the Puritanes for such as be no
Protestants, let them aunsweare for them selves. If he calls them Puritanes
which desire to have the Church thoroughly reformed, there is no such dissension
between them, but that they all agree in the Articles of Faith, maintain
brotherly concord one with an other, notwithstanding in diversity of opinions
concerning the matters and manner of reformation. But what an impudent attempt
is change of Religion, he will show us out of Luther, which writing against
the Anabaptists Anno 1528. affirms that much Christianity, and true
Christianity is under the Popedom. If change of Religion be so impudent an
attempt, why were the Papists finding Religion quietly establyshed by law,
so impudent in Queen Maryes time, not only to attempt but also to bring to
pass in deed an alteration of Religion. But the Popish Religion was true
Christianity by Luthers confession. I answer, Luther did mean nothing less
by that confession, then to defend any part of Popery to be Christianity,
but writing against the Anabaptists which would have all things abolyshed
which the Papists used, he shows that such parts and Articles of
Christianity, which in general confession and acknowledging of the authority
of the Scriptures, the Papists have common with us, are not therefore to be
rejected, because of them they have been abused. Otherwise it is a poor Mo^iue
unto Popery, that Luther by these or any other words did ever minister unto
you.

The 17. Motive is the 11. Demand.
The Catholic faith in England mightily planted and lightly Bristow.
changed. S. Augustine the Apostle of Englishmen of what Religion and
authority. Miracles for our whole Religion. Saint Bid of our Religion. His
story to be read of Englishmen. Images and Crosses confirmed by miracle.
Prophecyes and visions for our Religion. The Catholic Faith was purely planted
in this Fulke.
Island by the Apostles even in the reign of Tiberius, as restineth Gildas,
six hundredth years before Augustine came from Rome, bringing in deed with
him the principal grounds of Christianity, and with all, much Monkish
superstition. But that the Religion of Papis^rie differs in as many points
from that which Augustine planted, as Augustines does from ours, I have
proved abundantly, in aunsweare to Stapletons Fortress, and breefely in the
Table of differences. And in such points wherein we differ from Augustine, I
have proved that Augustine differed from the Apostles. As for his Miracles
affirmed by the Saxons, and denied by the Briton writers, shall still remain
in controversy for me. As also his prophecy so termed by the Saxons, which
the Britons affi^me to be a threatening of cruelty, which he himself procured
to be executed on the poor Students and ^^ergie of Bangor.

In the demand, Bristow would know of us whether the Britains by Eleutherius
were converted to one faith, and the Saxons by Gregory and Augustine unto an
other. But I have showed before that the Britanes were not converted by
Elutherius, although perhaps the Church, which was more then an hundredth years
of age in his time, might by him of charity be confirmed in truth, or
admonished to beware of such heretics as then troubled the Church abroad. But
I deny that Eleutherius maynteyned all that superstition, which Augustine
brought in. And I affirm that ^^^^ Britons church in Augustines time, differed
in more things then in the celebration of Easter, from the Romish Church, as I
have showed in that confutation of Stapleton, even by testimony of Bid him
self: Although I will not deny, but there might be some corruption even among
the Britayns also, as there were that maynteyned the heresy of the Pelagians.
Wherefore into that Catholic faith, which was first mightily planted in this
land by the Apostles of Christ, and not of Gregory, through the most weighty
arguments taken of the auctority of the holy Scriptures, is this realm by the
great mercy of God, returned, from the schi^me and heresy of Antichrist, and
so I hope shall remain, even until the second coming of Christ.

The 18. motive is the 3. demand.
Going out. S. Optatus motive. The churches practice is always infallible. The
unity and constancy of the Bishops Bristow.
of England. Protestants do decay and shall come to nothing. We like Optatus
Motive well, for going out of the Fulke.
Church into any other faction. But it may not be drawn contrary to his
meaning against those which go out of Babylon into Jerusalem. He says, We
must see who has remained in the root with the whole world. Verily not the
Papists, which are departed from the doctrine of the Apostles which is the
root of the Church, by them planted in all the world. We must see who is
gone forth. which Bristow does rightly refer to that saying of Saint Paul.
Discedent quidam a fide, Some shall depart from the Faith. But who are those?
They that teach the doctrine of deuilles, forbidding to marrye and commanding
to abstain from meats. Now whether Papists or protestants be such, let the
world judge. Optatus will have it farther considered, Who is set in an other
Chair that was not before? Verily none so manifestly as the Pope, who sits
in a Chair, that none of the Apostles, nor Apostolic men, for many hundredth
years after Christ did know.

Again, Who has set an Altar against the Altar? who but the Papists,
which have erected the Sacrifice of the Mass, to overthrow the Altar of the
cross of Christ? Finally, Who has made an ordination, the other before
ordained, being whole and sound. Quis ordinationem fecerit saluo altero
ordinato. Which Bristow has falsely translated thus. Who has placed Bishops
there, where others were placed before which are yet alive. As though it were a
fault, to put out false Bishops, and to supply the rooms with true
Bishops, where as Optatus means of Heretics, which are gone from true
Bishops, and set up Heretics in schism, the true Bishops still
remaining as the Papists did in Queen Maryes time, until they had burned
up almost all.

As for the unity and constancy of the popish deposed Prelates, which he
commends, is sufficiently known to the world, which although they were all
save one obstinate in the beginning of her Majesty's raygne, because they hoped
by traiterous practices, foolish prophecies, and deuilish coniuration, to see
an alteration shortly, as well for religion, as also for the whole state of the
common wealth, and withal had experience of the mercifulnes and compassion of
the Kings of Israel, so that they were not in fear of their lives, or any
great hazard of their goods, yet had they all or the most part of them (such
was their good constancy) revolted from popery, and sworn against the Pope, in
the raygne of King Henrye and King Edward. As for the decay of Protestants
and professors of the truth of Gods word, which the cold prophet foreseeth, by
some traiterous devise, whispered among his pewfellowes at Louayne or Dowaye,
it shall have such success and event by Gods grace, as hitherto the like
treasonable practices have obtained, which always, (Gods holy name be praised
therefore) has turned to the confusion of Popery and the further spreading of
the light of the Gospel.

In the demand, he urges us to show when the Romans went out of the truth,
f^rsaking any company of Christians then living. This has been often showed,
that the Romans though not all at once, yet by little and little, even as the
mystery of iniquity got strength, which began to work in the Apostles time,
have departed from the communion of other Christians. The first storye that
makes notable mention, is Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 25. of Victor which did cut him
self from all the Churches of the East about a ceremonye, since which time,
the Roman Bishops, by little and little, have departed until they made a
general apostasy and defection, from the universal Church, condemning all
the Christians in the world, except such as held of their particular
schismatic and heretical Church of Rome.

The 19. motive is the 4. demand.
Risinge afterward. Saint Ireneus and Tertullians motive. Bristow.
He spends much labor in vain, to prove that Fulke.
the first religion is the only true religion, and that all sects that arise
after, are false, which we grant most willingly with Irenaeus, Tertullian, and
the Scripture it self. But he has not one word to prove, that our religion
is of a later spring, then the Apostles, and therefore like an ass, he flies
to their common stable, saying that Luther lived but yesterdaye, as though
Luther were the first author of our religion. Which if it be not as ancient
as Christ and the Apostles, might easiely be confuted by the doctrine of Christ
and the Apostles, contained in the holy Scriptures.

The 20. motive is the 5. demand.
Beginning with wondringe and gaynesaying of Christians Bristow.
then in unity, which is Saint Irenaeus motive. Our religion of Christ
revealed in the flesh, began with wondering and gaynesaying of Scribes, and
Pharisees, Fulke.
as it is manifest by the historye of the Gospel, Mark 1. yet was not the
doctrine of Christ new or strange, but newely begone to be restored, which
was by them corrupted, so is the same now wondered at, and gaynesayde by their
successors, the Papists, but of true Christians it is nether wondered at, nor
gaynesayde, contrariwise the heresy of Papists, in many points was wondered
at and gaynesayde by true Christians, which Bristowe says, we can not prove
to be in any one. For example, I will name one of the chiefest articles which
they hold, namely, the Popes supremacye, upon which all the rest in

Eusebius testifyeth, that when Victor Bishop of Rome, which was the first
that challe^ged any supremacy took upon him to excommunicate the Churches and
Bishops of Asia, about the celebration of Easter: His presumption was wondered
at and gainesayde, not only by those Churches and their Bishops, but even by
others near hand, as by Irenaeus Bishop of Lions in France, which sharply
reproved him therefore, more the^ two hundredth years after, when Zozimus and
other Romish Prelates made claim to a kind of supremacy, in resisting appeal
out of Africa, and for that purpose, had counterfaited a decree of the Nic^ne
council: They were wondered at and gainesaid by the whole council of Carthage.
The like might I show, for worshipying of Images, the real presence
transubstatiation etc. But where he says that all heresies were wondered at
and gainesaide, immediately after they arose, it cannot be proved. Nor that all
was Heresy that was gainesaide by them that were in unity.

For the baptism of Heretics was gainesaide by Saint Cyprian and all the
Bishops of Africa, yet was it none heresy, that Infants might be sauedwith
out receiving of the communion, was gainesaid by Innocentius Bishop of Rome,
and by S. Augustine and by all the church, that was at unity against the
Pelagians. August, contra duas epistolas Pelag. ad Bonifacium. lib. 2. Cap 4.
Yet was not that opinion then held by the Pelagians otherwise horrible
Heretics and heresy, but that which the Bishop of Roms and the rest of the
known visible church did hold, was an er^or whereby you may see, how truly
the commandment of Christ unto Peter, to confirm his Brethren after his
conversion does give the Bishop of Rome' power never to be deceived. nor to
fall into error. And that the Church may be the pillar and stay of truth,
although the chief members thereof, and generally all that are known to be
members thereof may be taken in some particular error.

The 21. Motive is the 42. demand.
Unsent. Orders. Protestants allow better of our orders the^ of their own.
Bristow.
Whereas Bristowe charge us to be unsent, it is nothing else, but a popish
slander and petition of principle, Fulke.
for we are called and sent ordinarily by the Church and elders of the same, to
preach the word of God and to minister the Sacraments. Neither are we ordained
by a lay Prince, as he like a lewd Papist does slander both our Christian
Prince and us. And although the Prince by letters Patents has sent some to
preach and visit the Churches of her dominions, yet she has done it by
authority of the word of God and by example of godly Princes, Iosaphat and
other 2. Chro. 17. not taking upon het to execute any ecclesiastical function,
but according to her kingly authority in causes ecclesiastical.

And where Bristowe says we allow better of their popish orders, then of our
own, secking as much as we can possible, to be consecrated by one of their
orders, except it be some such proud hypocrite as Bristowe is, that so judges
and seeks, it is a most abominable lie. For withal our heart, we abhor,
defy, detest and spit at your stinking greasy antichristian orders. Neither
does our Church receive any of your execrable, ordering to minister in the
Church before they have solemnly by oath renounced your Antichriste, and
publicly as well professed to embrace all true religion, as Protested that in
their conscienses they defy all papistry and other heresies. Although many
godly men wish, yet a more severe discipline in examining and receiving such
as come our of your heresy, to serve in the Church of God.

The 22. motive is the 43. demand.
Suceession. S. Optatus motive. The Church is everlasting and visible. S.
Hieroms and S. Augustines motive. the Church everlasting. Bristow.
The communion of the B. of Rome, to be kept of all Christians. Succession in
the sea Apostolic. Tertullians and Augustines motives. That the Church is
everlasting, Bristow need not have taken such pains to prove, and that this
continuance Fulke.
is preserved by succession, is also to be confessed. But yt this succession is
visible, and limited to any one sea of bishops, it is false. For even as he him
self says it is necessary that all Adams children to be come of Adam by a
continual pedigree of fathers and grandfathers and other progenitors, even
until his time, and yet no one of Adams children can deduce this pedigree by
naming of all his progenitors from Adam unto his time so there is no doubt, but
the Church has had a perpetual succession in the world, from ye beginning
thereof, until this day, although she can not name a particular succession of
persons in any one place, for all ages that are past. But even as by the
Scriptures we are taught, that Adam is our natural father, although we can not
name all our au^cestors that have been between us and him: right so by the
Scriptures we are taught, that the Church is our heavenly mother, although we
can not frame such tables of succession as the Papists require us to show,
which they can not perform them selves. For although they can name a number of
Bishops, whereof some have taught at Rome, some have sitten and slept in their
chayer at Rome, and some at Auynion, some have played the devil therein, an
hundredth of the last being no more like to a score of the first in doctrine
and life, then God, whose children the first were, is like the devil whose
derlings the last were: yet what is this to show a succession of their Church.
And how does this prove them to be the true Church: can not the Church of
Constantinople and other Churches in Greece, do the like unto this day? Yet
do the Papists count all them for heretics and scismatikes. Whatsoever
therefore Optatus, Hierom, Augustine, Tertullian, or any other have written of
succession of Bishops in the Apostolic sees, they mean so large and so far
forth as they continue in succession of Apostolic doctrine. Otherwise would
not Hierom have embraced Arrianisme, because it was received by Liberius who
sat in the Apostolic see of Rome, and could name his predecessors from
Peter. Nor Optatus have received Eutychianisme, because it was defended by
Dioscorus, which satte in the Euangelisticall see of Alexandria, and could
name his predecessors from S. Mark the disciple of S. Peter. Nether would
Augustine have consented to Arrianisme, because it was mayntayned by Eulalius
and Euzoius, Bishops of the Apostolic see of Antioche, although they were
able to show their succession by many Bishops, even unto S. Peter him self,
who planted his chayer at Antioche, by all Papists confession seven years
before he came to Rome. You see therefore how far the motive of succession
may draw or drive any man to have regard unto it, even as long, as there is
succession of doctrine, as well as of place and person, and not longer, nor
further.

The 23. motive is the 44. demand.
Apostolic Church. The Communion of the Bishop of Rome to be kept of all
Christians. Apostolic Church is the Roman Bristow.
Church. Apostolic Church as the Roman is S. Augustines motive. Succession of
the Bishops of Rome, the motive of Optatus, S. Augustine and S. Irenaeus. This
motive in effect, is all one with the former, and in a manner so confessed by
Bristow him self. But thus he tak^th his principle of their singing in the
Mass, and our saying in the communion, of the creed, in which we confess
that we believe one only Catholic and Apostolic Church. This one Catholic
Church says Bristow is our Church that is Apostolic, because it agrees with
the faith of the Church of Rome, which is the sea of an Apostle, holding on to
this day by succession, and to which was written an Epistle by an Apostle. I
answer, it is not the popish Roman Church, because that Church is departed
from the universal Church of Christ, planted by the Apostles through out the
world, and holds not on in succession of the doctrine of the Apostle, which
did write that epistle to the Romans. But Bristowes wise reasoning, is to be
noted. S. Peter was an Apostle. That is true. he was the first Bishop of Rome.
It is a great doubt, whether he ever came at Rome, and it is out of doubt by
the Scriptures, that he tarried not there so long as the histories affirm, and
last it is false that he was a Bishop of a particular Church, which was an
Apostle over all the world, and specially over the circumcision. There is a
city in the world named Rome. And that city by the Scripture is the seat of
Antichrist and the whore of Babylon. Apoc. 17. verse. 18. S. Paul's epistle to
the Romans is extant. and even that epistle will prove the Church of Rome at
this day, to be not apostolical but apostatical, as in many articles, so in
the article of justification. Romans 3. verse. 28. Are not those causes why a
Church is called Apostolic, says Bristow? No verily but only because it
holds and mayntayneth the Apostolic doctrine, which if it do in all
necessary articles, then is it Apostolic, and has succession and plantation
of the Apostles, or else not, although it be gathered in such cities in which
the Apostles have preached, planted, and to whom they have written. But
Tertullian does so define Apostolic Churches, says Bristow. I say it is
untrue, for Tertullian against new heretics, sends us not to the emptye
chayres of the Apostles, which had written to such cities, but unto the the
testimony of their doctrine, received from the Apostles, and continued until
that time.

So he sends them that are in Achaia, to Corinthe. such as are in Macedonia
to Philippi, those that are in Asia to Ephesus, and them which be near Italy
to Rome, from whence they of Africa had their authority, not by excellency of
that Church above other Apostolic Churches, but by nearenes of place: Therefore
he says, Proxima est tibi Achaia? habes Corinthum. Si non long es a
Macedonia, habes Philippos. Si potes in Asiam tendere, habes Ephesum, si autem
Italiae adieceris, habes Romam, vnde nobis quaeque auctoritas presto est
statuta. Is Achaia nearest unto thee? thou have Corinthe. If thou be not far
from Macedonia, thou have Philippi. If thou can go into Asia, thou have
Ephesus. If thoulye near to Italy, thou have the Church of Rome from whence
unto us also (in Africa) authority is settled nearer at hand. Tertul. de
praeser. But Bristow says that the ancient fathers when there were many
Apostolic Churches standing, they did principally and singularly direct men
always to the Church of Rome. This you see to be false, by the place of
Tertullian last ci^ed. But that they did more often direct men to the testimony
of the Church of Rome, it was for that by means of the Imperial city, it was
more notorious and best known. Otherwise it is a very lie of Bristow, where he
says, that when the fathers name the Apostolic church, they do mean the
Roman church by excellency, as the Poet signifies Vergil and the Philosopher
Aristotle. A like lie it is, that no Church remains in the world founded by
any of the Apostles, but only Rome. For many Churches remain to this day,
that were planted by the Apostle Paul, who from Jerusalem to Illyricum filled
all the contryes with the doctrine of the Gospel: of which many unto this day
continue in profession of Christianity, beside all the Churches of India and
AEthiopia, which were also planted by the Apostles Thomas and other. The more
beastly is the blundering of this Bristow, who dreameth, that the council of
Constantinople the 1. which made this confession by the Apostolic Church, did
not only mean the Roman Church, but also none other but the Roman Church.

As though that council could not distinguish the Catholic Apostolic Church,
dispersed over all ^^^^ face of the earth, from the particular Apostolic
Church of Rome, which was but a member therereof: when the same council gave
the like privileges of honor to the Church of Constantinople, which the Church
of Rome had, reserving but the senioritie to ye Church of Rome. And being
called to a council at Rome by the Princes letters, procured by Damasus Bishop
of Rome, and other Bishops of Italy and the West, they refused to come, as
having already by the Emperor of the East being gathered to Constantinople,
^oncluded what they thought good to be decreed, Histor. trip. lib. 9, cap. 13.
And in their epistle written to their fellow ministers Damasus, Ambrose etc.
gathered in council at Rome, wherein they excused their refusal to come, they
call the Church of Antiochia, seniorem and vere apostolicam Ecclesiam, the
elder, and truly an Apostolic Church. The church of Jerusalem they call the
mother of all Churches. Ep. Council. Constanti. Hist. trip. lib. 9. cap. 14.
Nether was it ever in their mind, to make the particular Church of Rome, the
only Apostolic Church of the world, but only a principal member consenting
with the same. The succession of bishops of Rome alleged by Irenaeus,
Tertullian, Augustine, Optatus does nothing in the world defend the popish
bishops in their succession unto this day, for so much as they succeed not in
doctrine, as well as in place. Nether do we make any leap from Luther unto
the Apostles, but proving our doctrine to be the doctrine of the Apostles, we
doubt no more of perpetual succession thereof, then knowing our selves to be
descended from Adam, we doubt whether we have had a line all descent of
progenitors unto this time, that I may use Bristowes own example, to declare
that numbering of Bishops is no more necessary in the one, the^ showing our
pedegrie in the other. Seeing the question is not how many men, and in what
places were professed this doctrine, but whether it be the same which ^^^^
Apostles taught: but that can not better be proved, then by the writings of
^^^^ Apostles.

The places cited by Bristow for succession out of Irenaeus Tertullian Optatus,
Augustine you shall sinde answered in my confutation of Stapletons fortres
part. 2. cap. 1. and of Sanders rock cap. 15. where also is answered the place
of S. Luke cap. 22. of Christ praying that Peter's faith might not fail.

The 24. motive ^^ the 45. demand.
The Romans never changed their religion. S. Bid of our Bristow.
religion, the R^maine church his motive, Protestants be of many old heresies.
The Apostles were of our religion. Prayer for the dead used always. If the
Romans had not changed their religion since Fulke.
their faith was commended by the Apostle, there should be no controversy
between us and them. And if Bristow ca^ prove by the Apostles writing that he
is of their religion, or that they were of the Popish religion the strife is at
an end. How far B^de was of your religion, I have showed in the answer to
Stapletons fortress. But he urges us to show, what Pope changed their
religion, what tumults rising in the world thereon, what Doctors withstoode
it, what councils accu^sed etc. which he says they can show in all innouatio^s
both great and sinal, that ever by heretics were attempted. What an impudent
liar is this Bristow to brag of that, which at this day is impossible to be
don, by any man living in the world. For of so many heretics as are rehearsed
by Epiphanius and Augustine, not the one half of the^ can be so showed as
Bristow like a blind bayard boasts they can do. But if we say the change
was not made al at once we must show when every piece was altered, as they do of
our doctrine, of old taught by many old heretics, AErius denying prayer for the
dead etc. Whereof many are slau^ders and lies, the rest if we can not defend by
Scriptures let them be taken for heresies. To the purpose, we have often showed
and are ready daily to show, the beginning of many of their heresies, and
errors, as of the Popes supremacy in Victor, of prayer for the dead in the
Montanists, of their crossing in the Valentinians, of images in the Gnos^ikes
and Carpocratians, and so of a great many other errors, which are contrary to
the holy Scriptures, by which we first reprove them of falsehood, and as stories
serve us, we open their beginnings. And whereas Bristow without all shame,
affirms that prayer for the dead was used always, and cites Irenaeus among
other for his auctor he shows nothing but impudency matched with his heresy,
for there is no word in Ireneus, to prove that prayer for the dead was used of
any godly man of his time.

Tertullian a Montanist is the first that makes any mention of prayers for the
dead, and only in such books as he wrote when he was an heretic. Whereas
Augustine says Ep. 119. That ye church of God nether app^oueth, nor keeps
secret, nor does such things as be against the faith, and good manners, it is
to be understood of such things, as the church knows to be against the
faith. For of some things the church may be ignorant, as Augustine confesses
in his retractations lib. 2. cap. 18. Vbicunque in his libris commemoraui
ecclesiam non habentem maculam aut ruga^ non sic accipiendum est, quasi iam
sit, sed quae praeparatur vt sit, quando apparebit etiam gloriosa. nunc enim
propter quasdam ignorantias and infirmitates me^brorum su^rum, habet vnde
qu^tidie tota dicat: Dimitte nobis d^bita nostra. Wheresoever in those books I
have made mention of ye church, not having spot or wrinckle, it is not to be
taken, as though she were so now, but which is prepared that ^he may be when
she shall appear also glorious: For now because of certain ignorances and
infirmities of her members, even the whole church has cause to say every day,
forgive us our trespasses. Notwithstanding the watchmen therefore prophesied by
Esaias, continually giving warning upon the walls against the invasion of open
enemies, and blasphemous heretics, yet many hypocrites have crept into the
church secretly, and under show of piety, have showed many errors and
superstitions, while the mystery of miquity wrough^ the full manifestation and
Apostasy of Antichrist. In the demand Bristow denies that any Pope did
err, although I have showed both out of stories, S. Hierom, the Pope Damasus,
and the general councels, the contrary. But admitting they did err, yet
(says he) they erred not in such matters as the Protestants do now charge
the Pope and Romans withal. Whereto I answer, that against that blasphemous
principle of theirs, that the Pope can not err, we first bring in those
examples of Popes, that were heretics and for their time altered religion like
heretics in such matte^s as we both confess to be errors. Then this being
obtained, that the Pope is not privileged from error, the matters in
controversy wherewith we charge the Pope, are to be examined only by the
authority of the holy Scriptures and thereby to be decided.

The 25. motive is the 9. demand.
The conversion of Heathen nations. Caluines Legates in Bristow.
India. The discord of Protestants. Jesuits Friars preaching in India.
Miracles for our whole religion. The Apostles were of our religion. The church
is everlasting and visible. All nations that were at the first converted to the
true faith of Christ were converted by the Apostles, whose Fulke.
faith and doctrine we hold, and will prove by their writings that we hold
none other. As for the argument of ^ryers preaching in India and miracles
wrought so fa. re hence, with such great conversion of the Indians unto Popery,
if it were true, yet proves it no more then the preaching and miracles of the
false Apostles Phil. 1. and the conversion of the Goths and Vandalls Crepides
etc. by the Arrians and other nations by Nestorius etc. does prove those false
Apostles to be true Apostles, or the heresies of the Arrians etc. to be true
doctrine. Wherefore not the Papists, but the Apostles of Christ, were his
witnesses, unto the uttermost places of the earth. But of this matter of
c^nuersion, and all things contained, you may read somewhat more at large in
mine answer to Stapletons fortress, where the same is handled. part. 1. cap.
16. and 17.

The 26. Motive is the 18. 13. and 14. demand.
By what religion has Idolatry been destroyed. Prophecies for our religion.
Protestants be possessed with devils. Bristow.
Churches confirmed by miracles. Devils expelled by relics. Devils are in
heretics. S. Hierome of our religion. The martyrs of our religion. Vigilantius
alive again in Protestants. S. Augustine and Chrysostom of our religion. The
honor and virtue of Saints relics. S. Augustines motive for which Christ is
to be believed. Our religion an invincible motive to forsake idols and believe
in Christ, who is to be believed for the virtue of the sign of his cross,
which working miracles, was the motive of Lactantius. The real presence of
Christ in the sacrament. The cross and the mass confirmed by S. Bernard, in
Italy. S. Cyprian of our religion. The Jews religion changed into ours by
Christ etc. In this motive is much babbling, but no matter at all. Fulke.
The sum of that he would prove is this. That Popery is not idolatry, as we
charge it because by Popery Idolatry has been destroyed. Although this
argument is naught, because one kind of Idolatry may destroy an other, yet it
is falsely affirmed, that Popery has destroyed all idolatry. That Popery has
destroyed idolatry: Bristow will prove by three examples, the one of the
relics of Saints, and the honor of them, the other of the sign of the
cross and the honorthereof, and the last by the real presence in the
Sacrament, which he calls his Lord and his God. But our Lord and God is in
heaven according to the Psalm. 115. The destruction of idolatry by Christ in
deed was prophesied therefore the Pope setting up and mainteyning as gross
idolatry almost as ever was any of the Paganes, shows him self to be a
very Antichrist. But to the purpose Hierom lib. 28. in Isa. cap. 65. says
that the heretics in France were possessed with the devil which could not
abide the might and whips of the holy ashes. If he spoke this against
Vigila^tius, and other godly men, which reproved the immoderate honoring of
relics and other superstitions, he spoke of his own judgment, and not of
the judgment of the church. For he only of all writers of his time, counted
Vigilantius an heretic as he did Ruffinus also, which yet is taken for as good
a Catholic as he. It is known how he taunteth and scoffeth at Augustine.
Wherefore his censure is not sufficient to make Vigilantius opinion heresy,
nor them heretics which were of his judgment. But admit this judgment of
Hierom to be sound, yet was not the honor and estimation of relics which he
defends, against Vigilantius the same, which is in Popery, but much
differing there from. For thus he writes ad R^panum contr. Vigilant. Nos autem
non dico martyrum reliquias, sed ne solemn quidem and ^unam, non Angelos non
Archangelos non Cherubin, non Seraphim, and omne nomen quod nominatur and in
pr^esenti saeculo and in futuro colimus and adoramus, ne seruiamus potius
creaturae qua^ creatori qui est benedictus in saecula. But we worship and
adore. I say not the relics of the martyrs, but not the sun and the moon,
not the Angels not Archangels, not Cherubin, not Seraphim, and every name that
is named both in this world, and in the world to come least we should serve the
creaturerather then the creator which is blessed for ever.

By this you may see that the honor they gave to relics was but a reverent
estimation of them, for Christ's sake, whose servant the Martyrs were, and a
less honor then they gave to the Sun and the Moon, as is manifest by his
gradation, and consequently no religious worship. As the Papists use and
maintain of the relics, not of Saynctes, but oftentimes of devils
incarnate, of beasts and all manner of feigned bables. Nether is there any thing
more monstrous in popery, then their shameless fayning of infinite relics.
That Augustine writes that devils were tormented and expelled, at the memories
or burialls of the martyrs, where sometimes idols were worshipped, it proves
that idols were destroyed by Popery. For if God wrought miracles at such
places, where the bodies of his Martyrs slept to confirm the faith, for which
they died, does this make any thing for Popery? But the same Augustine to the
Maudaurenses that were Pagans, and other heathen men uses the argument of the
greater honor and reverence done by Kings and Emperors at the tombs and
memories of the Saints and Martyrs, and of miracles wrought at the same
places, to show the power of Christ to the confusion of idolatry. This we
grant, but how does Popery overthrow Idolatry? There reverence although in
so^e respects superstitious, was far from popish Idolatry, of worshipping of
Saints, Images, bones, etc, as we have showed even now out of Hierom the most
eger defender of those uses and abuses in his time: The miracles approved none
other doctrine, then the ma^tyrs died for, who died for none other doctrine,
but such as is contained in the holy Scriptures, in which Popery has no
ground. The like I say of the story of the body of Babycas the martyr, in
presence whereof, the oracle of Apollo could not speak. But Chrysostom to draw
m^n from all kind of idolatry, sent them from relics. In Genesis Hom. 15, Nay
he sent them to the churches and houses of prayer, and to the graves of the
martyrs not to worship them, as Papists do, but by such things to receive
blessing and to keep them selves from being enta^gled with the snares of the
devil, while they be put in mind of the virtue of the martyrs, to follow their
godly conversation. And albeit there were some superstition in that regard of
martyrs troubles and memories, as in that age there was, yet does it not
follow, there was all Popery, nor such gross idolatry as Papists do commit
with their counterfeit rehques. Finally the miracles wroght by God at the dead
bodies of the Saints, might well be used by Augustine, Chrysostom, and Theodoret
against the Ge^tills, asan argument to overthrow their idolatry, even as the
example of the miracles wrought by God at the dead body of Elizeus against the
idolatrous Israelits Reg. but it follows not thereof, that idols should be
made of their laws, by worshipping them as the Papists do. For ye bones of
Elizeus were not for that miracle taken out of his grave and shined in gold,
divided into many churches worshipped, licked, and kissed, as the Popish guise
is. The same answer I make concerning miracles wrought by God with the sign
of the cross, which was the motive of Lactantius. I say they prove not that
the sign of the cross should be worshipped, no more then the miracles wrought
by God, with the brazen serpent, were any cause why the Israelits should
worship the brazen serpent. Reg.

And as touching the blessed Sacrament, which Bristow blasphemously calls his
Lord and God, although the real presence and transsubstantiation were
granted, forasmuch as the Papists the^ selves affirm the Sacrament to consist
of accidents as the sign, but no accide^ts are God or in God: If any miracles
were wrought by God at the celebration thereof, as Augustine and Cyprian seem
to avouch, yet neither is the real presence proved by those miracles, nor they
tried to be Papists, for writing of such miracles, of which if any man will see
more, let him resort to mine answer unto Heskins lib. 1. cap. 24. and lib.
3. cap. 42.

Unto the story of S. Bernards life we give no credit, as to a counterfeit
fable, and as little to the report of M. Points, i^ his book of the real
presence testifying the casting out of many devils, by virtue of the same
sacrament. Finally it is alltogeather false, that he says, the Jews religion
was chaynged by Christ into Popery. For the sacrifice of Christ's death,
against which the sacrifice of the Popish mass is blasphemous, has taken away
all sacrifices and ceremonies of the law. Heb. 9. Concerning the Altar which
Christians have, whereof they have no power to ca^e which serve the Tabernacle,
Heb. 13. mine answer is against Heskins. lib. 3. cap. 60. where that text and
argument is handeled of purpose.

The 27. motive is the 35. demand.
Unity of the church a motive to believe in Christ. The discord Bristow.
of Protestants, the inconstancy of Protestants. Our Savior Christ prays
that his disciples may be Fulke.
one in God and him their redeemer. And this unity all Protestants retain,
notwithstanding diversity of opinion in one article, and any contention about
ceremonies. Even as the Apostles were one, in one God and Christ, although
there was variaunce about Circumcision and ceremonies. Ciprian and Cornelius,
the Romayne church and the church of Carthage, were at unity in Christ,
although the one of them erred in the sacrament of baptism. So were Hierome,
and Augustine, allthough they mayneteyned contrary opinions about Peter's
dissembling and translation of the Scripture. From this verily I except such
schi^inaties, as delight in contencion, which have always been against the
true church. As for the unity of the Papists, seeing it is not in the doctrine
of Christ, it proves no more, that they are those for whom Christ prayed, then
the unity of the Mahometistes which for these thousand years, have kept
greater unity then the Papists, whose church has been rent a sunder into so
many heads as there have been Popes at once, and that very often and for many
years together there have been Pope against Pope, counsel against counsel,
Doctors against Doctors, orders against orders, Canonists against Divines,
disse^ting in articles of faith, as of the Popes supremacy, of original sin,
of transubstantiation etc. Wherefore Christian unity, is as untruly denied unto
us, as falsely challenged unto them whatsoever he prateth of Lutherans,
Zwinglians, Caluinists, Protestants and Puritans.

The 28. and 29. motives are contained in the 34. demand.
Judges infallible in cases of controversy. The churches Bristow.
judgment is always infallible. Obedience of Catholics to their superiors
both ecclesiastical and temperall. Trinitaries. Bristrow braggeth that their
church has judges infallible in cases of controversy, and ours has not. But
Fulke.
who be their judges? The Pope or the general council? Whether soever of
these be, nether is irrefragable. For both have been controlled and found fault
withal, as I have showed before, and they them selves are together by the
ears, whether of these is irrefragable, because the council has deposed the
Pope, and the Pope has not obeyed the council, as it is manifest between
Eugenius the 4. and the council of Basil. How infallible the churches
judgment is and always has been, it serves not the Romish synagogue, until
she prove her doctrine to be agreeable to the Scriptures, which seeing she
neither can do, nor dare abide the trial of them, she shows plainly, that
she is not the church of Christ. As for the authority of synodes such as that
of the Apostles was, which determined the controversy by auctority of the holy
Scriptures, Protestants do gladly acknowledge, how necessary it is for the
church to decide controversies and do willingly submit them selves thereto. The
subjection of Papists to their indges, does no more prove their religion to be
true, then the obedience of the Mahometistes to their superiors, both in cases
of religion, and of the common wealth, does justify their sect to be the
religion of God. What Trinitaries and other sectaries be in Polonia, or
elsewhere, that will not submit themselves to any auctority, as they are no part
of our church, so we have no cause to excuse or defend them. In the demand,
Bristow complains of an unlearned Christian, which has been suffered to
write a vain libell against the auctority of the church of God, which is a
vain lie, for there is no true Christian learned or unlearned, which will hold
against the church of God, so long as she is directed by the word of God, as
the true church is in all matters necessary unto salvation. But perhaps the
unlearned Christian has challenged the church of Rome to approve her doctrine
by auctority of Gods word. Which because the Papists dare not attempt, Bristow
requires I can not tell what approbation and privilege of the said libell, to
show a bad shift better then none at all, why they will not answer it. For
Popish libells that are but cast abroad in writing, we require no approbation
nor privilege, and dare not the Papists confute a printed libell before it
have approbation and privilege?

The 29. motive.
Protestants them selves take things upon our churches credit. The churches
auctority. S. Augustines motive. What Br^s^ow.
Sor. pture the Protestants deny. Although we did receive such things, as he
reherseth upon their churches credit, it follows not, that theirs Fulke.
is the true church, for we receive nothing from them, without dew exammation.
The Scriptures we receive not, upon the only credit of the Popish church, but
upon the credit of ye universal church of Christ. The creedes, articles of
doctrine, terms of person trinity, consubstantiality, Sacraments etc. we
receive, because they be consonant to the Scriptures, and not because the
church of Rome tell^th ^s they be true. As for the authority of the church,
which he says was S. Augustines motive, to believe the Gospel, was not a
single or sole motive, but a commotiue or an argument that with other arguments
did move him, for the says not moueret but commoueret: and so it is with us.
Provided always that the Popish church be no taken for that Catholic or
universal church. What then (says Bristow) was it the Protestants church
whereof Augustine meant? or can you hold laughter when the question is asked? No
verily, for when the Protestants church, that it is now so called in this age,
like as it was called the Homousians church in Augustines time, is a member of
the Catholic universal church of Christ, and so proved by the holy
Scriptures, it is a ridiculous thing to doubt whether it were the popish church
which is but an heretical assembly, departed from the universal church long
since Augustines departure out of this life. But Bristow will prove, that the
church at whose commanndement Augustine believed the Gospel, was not the
Protestants church, because that church commanded him to believe the books of
Toby, Judith. VVisdome, Ecclesiasticus, and the Machabees to be
canonicallscripture, which the church of Protestants does deny. But what it
Augustine were deceived? to think he heard the voice of the Catholic church
when he did not, shall the Protestants church be condemned? S. Hierome who if
the church of Rome were the Catholic church, was more like to hear her voice,
because he was a Priest of the church of Rome, tells us a clean contrary
tale. For thus he writes, In praefat. in Prouerbia. Sicut ergo Judith, and
Tobiae, and Machabaeorum libros legit quidem ecclesia, sed eos inter Canonicas
scripturas non recipit: sic and haec duo volumina leg at ad aedificationem
plebis, non ad auctoritatem ecclesiasticorum dogmatum confirmandam. Therefore as
the Church in dead reads the books of Judith and Tobias and of the
Macchabees, but yet she receives them not among the Canonical scriptures, so
she may read these two Books (speaking of the book of Wisdom and
Ecclesiasticus) for the edifying of the common people, but not for confirming
the authority of Ecclesiastical doctrine. Does the Church of Protestants
judge otherwise of these Books, then that Church which thus instructed
Hierome? What then? I must say as Bristowe does, S. Hierome and the Catholic
Church in his time of our Religion. The Church of Rome now is of an other
judgment, then the Church of Rome was then, ergo it is not now that it was
then. But whereas Bristowe charge us to to deny, or at least to leave
indifferent the Canticles of Solomon. The Epistle to the Hebrews, The Epistles
of Saint James, S Peter, S. John, Saint Jude, with the Apocalips, it is a
devilish slander, as God knows and the wo^ld can bear us witness.

The 30. Motive is the 36. and 37. demaud.
Storehouse of the Scriptures. Tht Jews Religion changed into ours by Christ.
The Churches learning and wisdom. The Church store. S. Irenaeus motive.
Bristowe,
Bristowe demands whether the Popish Church receiving the Scriptures of the
old and new Testament Fulke.
from Christ, has not kept them faithfully without adding, minishing, or
corrupting. I answer no, for the Popish church receives none of Christ, but
the catholic church of Christ. Again the popish Church has added whole books
to the canon which the chuch of the Jews never received, nor the universal
Church of Christ. But those Books (says Bristow) has the Protestants church
robbed us of, wc are allowed by approved Councels. You heard in the last motive
Hieromes judgment of those books, whereunto agrees the counsel of Laodi^ea
cap. 59. Augustine receives the boks of Macchabees but with condition of
sobriety in the reader or hearer. Aug^ consec. ^pist. Gaudent. cap. 13. Last
of all the popish church, either of fraud or negligence, has corrupted an
exceeding great number of textes of the scripture in her vulgar latin
translation, wc she receueth as only authentical. The very first promise of the
gospel is corrupted and falsyfied. For whereas the truth is Ipsum contret caput
^^^^, the same seed shall broose thine head, the popish translation has Ipsa
the same woman. Gen 3. Whereas he says, the Protestants church for this 100.
years (as we confess our selves) occupied no bible, nor had any thing to do
with the scriptures, he lies out of al measure, for the church of Christ has
always had the scriptures, and in every nation where it was, it had the^ in
their mother tongue. How many Bibles are yet extant written in parchme^t. 3 or
4. hundredth years past in the English tongue, beside other in the Saxon
language. The like are to be proved to have been in all places where the Churches
were gathered as in France, Italy, Bohemia. etc. Finally, whatsoever he bableth
of their Church to be the store house of the Scriptures and truth, the like
may be said of the greek Church which they condemn as schismatic and
heretical, therefore this storehouse is no Motive, to prove the Romish
Sinagogue to be the church of God. In the 37. demand he asks whether as well
Protestants as other, do not condemn the old writers errors and other
heresies of Heretics which made great show of scriptures by the rule of ye
popish churchs faith. I answer, the Protestants out of the scriptures, do and
can disprove such show of scriptures made by masters of error, and are no more
moved by the popish churches authority, then the Apostles were moved by
authority of the Jewish Synagogue, to reprove all the gross Idolatry and
snperstition of the Gentiles. Therefore the popish Church is not Depositorium
Dives, that rich storehouse of truth, which was S. Ireneus motive.

The 31. motive is the 41. demand.
Sending and teaching of all divine truth. Caluins errors about the trinity.
The ignorance of Protestants. Such was Jew elr ignorance also, that Christ
is a priest according to Bristow.
his Godhead. Universities of Heretics, and Catholics. Degrees taken in
Universities of Heretics are ad nihillated. The ignorance of Protestants, the
cause partly why there be so many Atheistes in England. The Churches learning,
wisdom, and continuance. S. Augustines Motive. This Motive contains nothing
but an immederate arrogant brag of their studying and teaching of Fulke.
truth, with the great learning of their Doctors and Universities: and a
proud disdamefull vpbraiding of our Doctors and universities, of much
ignorance and lack of learning. Which comparison if it had been uttered by a
man of excellent learning, had been the less odious, but being made by such
a blind Baiarde and blockheadded ass, as is this Bristowe, it is most
intolerable. Caluiue (says he) through ignorance, erred about the Trinity,
saying, That Gods Son is (...) that is God of him self, whereby it follows
ineuitably that there be two Gods. For this slanderous and foolish cavil, he
cites Institut. lib. 1. cap. 13. Number. 23. etc. where is no such word nor
matter, but a confutation of Heretics, that denied the very essens of the
deity of Christ, he cyteth also Geneb. de trinit. lib. 1. pa. 43. Where if the
word (...) be used, as I know not whether it be, yet undoubtedly no such thing
is meant thereby as Bristow bableth. For (...) may signify him that is very
God himself, although begotten of God the father, eue^ as Gregory Nazianzene
in his Book of the holy Ghost, or De theologia lib. 5. calls the holy Ghost
(...) the Lord himself, whereof it follows not that there be two or three
Lords, or that the holy ghost proceeds not from the father and the son.
Likewise he calls him (...). Light it self and Life: that is very light and
very life, and yet he denies not that he is light, proceeding from light.
Wherefore this is an unlearned cauil against Calvin, who more sou^dly,
substantially and learnedly has written of the blessed trinity, then all the
Dunces, Aquines, Alberts, and the whole rablement of Scholemen, of whom
Bristow so vainly does brag, were ever able to attain unto, who with their
sophistry and barbarousnes have rather darkened, then set forth the clear
light of those most excellent and divine mysteries. The like impudent cauil, he
brings against M. Jewel, whom no man I think without laughter can read, to
be charged with ignorance by blu^dering Bristow, for affirmiug Christ to be a
priest according to his deity, who^e the Apostle expressly says, by his
eternal spirit to have offered himself. Heb. 9. ve. 11. As for the comparisons
between the Universities of Papists and ours, how vain it is, all that be
learned and of indifferent judgment can testify. And concerning degrees and
civil titles of dignity taken in our universities, being nothing else but
test^monies of their learning which receive them, we think them better being
confirmed by the Princes authority, from whom all cidignities even by civil
law are derived, then such as are either given or confirmed by the Popes leaden
Bulls. The Atheists and other vnreligious minds in England, are not nourished
by the ignorance of the Protestants, but detested by their godly and learned
judgment. But if where there be most Atheists there is greatest ignorance,
then even in Italy and at Rome under the Popes nose, where be most Atheists of
any regio^ almost in the world, is greatest ignorance. Where open blasphemies
are as common, yea oftentimes in the Popes mouth, as the praises of God are
among true christians. What trau^ller in Italy is ignorant of this, whether he
be protestant, Papist, or Newter. Last of all, if the Chuches wisdom,
learning, and continuance, was S. Augustines motive, the folly, barbarousnes,
and late shining of the popish Church, is a motive to make us think that it is
not the church of Christ. For Bristowes brags are not sufficient to carry away
all credit of learning to popish doctors and Universities, whose orders and
readings he does the rather commend to be so excellent, that men wc knew him of
late, with perjury to have taken degrees in Philosophy, should not marvel
that he is so sudenly transformed into so great a doctor of divinity, eue^ by
once hearing the cause of Divinity, which he supposes none of our doctors
knows what it means, such a goodly matter is (...) whereby a man makes
most account of that he has learned last. But albeit the question be not of
learning but of truth, yet if it would please the Papists to try the learning
of our doctors and Universities, under indifferent judges, I doubt not but they
should be found equal unto theirs, that I say not in many things they should
be found superior.

The 32. motive is the 22. demand.
Aunuall celebrating of Christ's mysteries. The churches Bristowe
service is to be embraced. Christ is to be believed for the scriptures of the
old testament as they be understood in the church. Ember days or Enper days,
whichy our blind Apostles do boldly say to have been the Popes leman. The
Martirs were of our religion. Saints days laid down by protestants as our
Ladies days, S. Laurence day, the assumption of our Lady. The Churches and
serui^e of heretics to be r^frained in pain of damnation. Against
communi^ating with them. An admonition to priests that say the now service.
Heretics are idolaters, and heresies are idols. The year of Iubely 1575.
Pilgrimage. The sermons of Heretics not to be heard, their books not to be
read. Christ to be believed for the virtue of the sign of his Cross, which
workesh miracles. Visions for our religion. The Annual celebration of Christ's
mysteries, by dumb ceremonies and readings not understood of the Fulke.
ignorant people, although there were no heresy in the popish service nor no
sufficient motives to embrace the popish synagogue as the church of Christ, if
the Scriptures and the figures of the law, better applied, then they be in all
the lump of the popish solemnities, they would procure small credit to our
Savior Christ: but rather the scorning and derision of Turks, Jews, and
Pagans. As for the blind comme^taries of the Jews, out of which he magineth we
have all our understanding of the old testament, how little we trust in
prophecyes of Christ, may be seen in the written commentaries of Calvin,
Musculus, and such other. The names of a great number of the solemn feasts,
(as Bristow says) does argue in deed the Papists either to have invented the^,
or to have abused them, as Candelmas, Corpus Christi day etc, but that the same
were invented by that ancient Church, wc celebrated the nativity,
resurrection, ascension of Christ and cat is utterly untrue. For your own
Durand testifies, that many of them were of late Popes institution, wc were of
another faction, but no: of the church of Christ. How vain a brag it is, that
the martyrs were of the Papists religion, because they keep holy their days,
I leave to be answered with childrens laughture.

But it is a great offense I ween, that Protestants have put down most of the
Saints days, and namely S. Lawrence his day, and all our Ladies days,
assumption and all. If a man should ask you wherefore you keep not S.
Abraham's day, considering he was the father of the faithful, nor S. Esayes
etc: what could you answer? As for the Ladies days wc he complains to be put
down by us, namely the feasts of her conception, natiuitye, visitation and
assumption, the Church could be without some of the^ more then 12 hundredth
years. For Vrbanus the 6. instituted the feast of the visitation of some
called the new found Lady day about the year of Christ 1380. as the very
popish service of that day confesses in the first lesson. The feast of the
nativity, is not much elder as both the lessons and Durand do acknowledge,
which affirms that one Fulbertus a Bishop Cardinal made part of the service.
That the feast of the assumption can not be very ancient, it appears not
only by the barbarous hymns in the popish Church that day, but also by the
lessons taken out of Bid, by which it is manifest, that the Church could be
without that goodly solemnity, more th^n 700. years after Christ, as a great
number of other festiuities which borrow their lessons out of Bid, do show
sufficiently, that the popish service is nether so ancient nor so universal,
as the Papists most impudently do affirm. As for the feast of the conception
of the Virgin Marye, is not full one hundredth year old, being decreed by
Sixtus the 4. in great despite of the Dominike Friars, which did both preach
and wright against it.

Wherefore there is no such intolerable fault assuredly committed, in omitting
such festiuities, as Bristow cries out, nether we lack proper days of our
Lady, as he says, whereby he bewrays the gross Idolatry of Papists,
which are not content to honor our Savior Christ in his Saints, but the
Saints must have proper days dedicated to their honor alone, and utterly
separated from the honor of Christ. For it satisfies not Bristow, that we
keep holy the annunciation and purification of Mary, because the one of them
says he, is the conception, the other the presentation of Christ. But Papists
keep her nativity, visitation, conception, and assumption, which are the
proper days of our Lady. I pass over that he affirms the assumption of her
body as a certain truth, which the very popish lessons song on that
festiuitie, leave in doubt, and incline rather to the contrary opinion, that
the was assumpted only in soul. Likewise that he calls her the Lady of
Saints and Angels, which title the holy Scriptures do not only not give unto
her, but plainly deny. For there is but one Lord Ephesians. 4. both of men and of
Angels, which does not only exclude all other Lords of the masculine gender,
but much more all Ladies, and generally surmounteth all principality, power,
Lordship, and every name that is named, both in this world and in the world to
come. Ephesians, 1. 2. The Virgin Mary is therefore no Lady of Saints and Angels,
but a fellow servant of God with them. Luke 1 48. Apoc. 22. 9. What excellency
soever she has of Gods gift, more then any of them. That we keep no
solemnity of S. Lawrens, it is not for any contempt of his holiness, nor for
any worship of John Baptist and the Apostles, that we solemnize their memories.
But therein the Church uses her liberty as in things indifferent. Whereas
Bristow doubts not that if any of us would once be present at the reverent
solemn doing of the popish Catholic service, especially at Christmas, Easter
or such like time, but it would melt our st^ny hearts with joy, etc. He
bewrays many points of follye at once. For first many thousands of us, have
been present, and with grief of heart have seen and beheld the doing of those
Idolatrous solemnities. Secondly he declares, how he him self is carried away
with piping, singing, sensing, and swinging in copes etc, so that he can not
discern the true worship of God, which is in spirit and verity, from the
carnal and counterfeit solemnities of Idolatry and superstition. Last of all,
how childishly does he refer all Catholic solemnity to the vain pomp used
only in great and Cathedral Churches, when a thousand pa^^shes beside in the
poor country towns, have all their trashe so beggarly and rudely set forth,
that the Papists them selves laughe them to scorn. The rest of this motive is
spent in dissuading Papists from learning our service, or sermons, or reading
of our books, by which it is plain, that he so much mistrusteth his cause,
that he dare not once permit his disciples to inquire of it, or to hear any
thing that may be said to the contrary. As for popish priests that say the
new (as he terms it) service, I would they would follow his council to
say it no more. That it is not lawful for Christians to communicate with
heretics, or Idolaters, it is a plain case: But it shall never be proved that
they be heretics, which teach nothing but the doctrine of holy Scripture, or
that they are Idolaters, which are ready to give their lives rather then to
worship Idols. But the year of Iubely is a great motive for great fools to
embrace popery, which Iubely Pope Boniface the 8. did first institute in the
veare of our Lord 1300 by apish or rather deuelish imitation of the fathers of
the old testament for filthy lukers sake, beside the horrible blashemye of full
remission of sins granted by the Pope in that year, which is denied to be
given by the death of Christ. As for the Iubely, which Bristow speaks of anno
1575. is of a later institution ordained to be kept every 25. year, because it
was to long for the Pope to tarry until the hundredth and 50. year, as Boniface
appointed. This is the antiquity of that Iubely pardon, and pilgrimage.

The miracle which S. Augustine reports of Innocentia that was warned in her
dream, to desire the first woman which she did meet, returning from baptism
at Easter, to sign her breast with the sign of the cross, on which was a
canker, for cure of which she had long prayed unto God: declares in deed the
virtue of Christ, which can use all means to work health where it pleases
him, but nothing at all makes for popery. For if it has pleased God at any
^yme to work wonders by the sign of the cross, it follows not thereof
either that the sign of the cross has any virtue in it, more then that hemme
of Christ's garment had, by which a woman also was healed, or else that an
ordinary ceremonye is to be made of signing with the cross, more then of
touching the hemme of any garment.

In the 22. demand he asks whether in the most ancient service of the
primitive Church, there was not always prayer for the dead and to Saynctes,
the ceremonies used by Papists in baptism etc. I answer, no. Cyprian whom
he quoteth Ep. 66. speaks not of prayer for the dead in any place, but of
oblation for the falling a sleep that is thanks giving for the departure of
the dead, and naming them in the prayers of the Church which dyed in the faith
of Christ, and in obedience of the Church.

In the time of Eusebius that error of praying for the dead was in deed
received in many places of the Church, which began first among the
Montanists. The ceremonies of exuf^lation and exorcisme were not idly used in
the primitive Church, as they are of the Papists, but when the persons to be
baptized were sensibly possessed with devils as appears in Cyprian lib. 3.
Ep. 7. ad Magnum.

Likewise where he demand th whether we read at any time when Mass did first
come into the Churches. I answer if by Mass he means that popish form of
sacrificing, which they use and call Mass, we read of every part of it when
and by what Pope it came in. By Mass he means the doctrine of the carnal
presence, transubstantiation, adoration of the sacrament and making it a
sacrifice propitiatory for the quick and the dead, I answer that we read
all these heresies to have crept into the Church of Rome, since the first six
hundredth years. And as for the substance of the canon, being contrary to the
doctrine of the Apostles, is easy to be proved that it came not from the
Apostles, beside that some of them ascribe it to Gregory, and Gregory him self
to Scholasticus, so that being of some antiquity it conteyneth in it, matter
repugnant even unto the popish heresies. For first it calls the consecrated
bread and wine the sacrifices, and offers them for the whole Church.
Secondly after consecration it calls the Sacrament Panem sanctum vit^e
aeternae, and calicem salutis aeternae, holy bread of eternal life, and
cup of eternal health, of the gifts of God, and prays God to accept it as
the sacrifice of Abell.

Thirdly the priest prays that God will command ^^^^ same to be carried by an
Angellinto his high alter etc.

Fourthly he prays for all them that have received the same sacrament with
him which can not stand with a private Mass.

Finally, that it came not evidently of the Apostles, as Bristow impudently
affirms, it may be evidently seen by this, that diverse Saints are named
in it, which lived more then two hundredth years after the Apostles as Cosmus
Damiaius etc. And that we are able to find more fault with it then with Gloria
Patri, Te Deum etc. it is plentifully declared by many volumes, and namely by
Bishop of Sarum in his sermon and defense of the same against Harding.

The 33. motive is the 21. demand.
Ecclesiastical monuments and livings. Churches the work of the Catholics.
Universities of heretics and Catholics. Protestants be usurpers of other men's
livings. Although a great number of churches, that are now Bristow.
standing were builded by Papists, and for Popery, yet not all. For the
chiefest and most ancient Cathedral churches, were neither builded by
Papists, nor for Popery, but by Christian Princes and for the use of Christian
Fulke.
religion. Of such churches writes Eusebius. in vita Constable. lib. 30. and Hist.
Eccl. lib. 10. cap. 4. where was but one table or altar, which was remoueable
and made of bords placed in the midest of the Church. contrary to the popish
fashion which has many Altars, and all against walls or pillars, and the
chiefest against the farthest wall, most commonly. It is a fond reason of
Bristowe that they were built for Popery, because they are builte in length to
the East, or in form of a Cross. For many are built round, and those with
cross Isles, are most unmeet for mass at the high Altar, which they that sit
in the cross Yles cannot see. Likewise Bid, whom Bristowe in the demand
without shame does quote for the contrary, testifies that the churches of the
Romans. lib. 3. Cap. 4. speaking of Niua, one that was brought up at Rome,
which at a place called Candida casa now Whiterne: Made a Church of stone of an
other facion, then the Britans were wont to build. These are ye words of Bid
of Stapletons translation. And concerning the founding of Ecclesiastical
livings and Universities, we know that the first dotation of Churches, was by
Christian Princes, what if superstition has added any thing to them? Nether
the building of Churches, not the founding of livings and Universities, does
prove the builders or founders to be of good religion, not yet condemn the
users of such Churches, livings and Universities, of usurping or sacrilege.
The idolatrous Church of Pantheon at Rome, was turned into Maria rotunda.
Gregory councelled Augustine to convert the Idolatrous Churches of the Saxons,
to the use of Christian religion. Beda lib. 1. cap. 30. The University of
Athens, founded by hea^hen Philosophers, was after frequented by Christian
scholars as testifies Gregory Nazianzene in Monod. And if we believe our
English stories, ye livings of the Idolatrous Flamines and Arch Flamines was
converted to the mayntenancs of the Bishops and ArchBishops.

The 34. motive is the 23. demand.
Heretics are apes of the Catholics. The Churches learning Bristow.
and wisdom. The Communion book an apish imitation of our Mass book. The
manner of Apes is to counterfeit and follow visible Fulke.
actions, without any meaning or profit. Such imitation have we none, but the
apish Church of Rome, is full of such following of the gestures of Christ, in
their mass and other ceremonies. Yea they counterfeit the voice of Pilate and
Judas in reading the gospel on Palm Sunday. They play the apes of the
Primitive Church, in coniuring the devil in baptism. Yea they be the apes of
Aaron and the leuitical Priests, in their robes, sensing, and sacrificing. The
very Pagans they follow in ceremonies and festiuities, as their own Durand
confesses. In whose Rationale diuinorum, you may see the learning and wisdom
of the popish Church, for all their mischievous mysteries.

As for us, we imitate nothing that they do, to get commendation by similitude
of their doings, but rather we abhor whatsoever has but a show of popery, if
we use any thing rightly, which is abused of them, we are not therefore apes of
them, but they apes of the ancient fathers, whose doctrine we do truly
follow, as they vainly imitate and in imitation falsely pervert their
examples. That the communion book is an apish imitation of the mass book, is
a most shameless lie. For what similitude has our ministration of the
communion, with their mass, any more, then our doctrine with theirs? If any
thing in ceremonies or discipline have been tolerated not altogether purged
from all similitude of popish actions, by yelding unto the infirmity of the
weaker sort: yet is the Church of God perfect in her self, and needs not to
borrow of any sect any thing, for her perfect furniture in doctrine,
ceremonies, or discipline, but has absolute rules to direct her in any of
these expressed in the holy Scriptures.

For the division of parishes, the holding of Counsels, excommunication,
suspension, public solemnising of marriage with the laws of the same,
punishing of heretics by, death, etc. are all manifestly proved out of the
Scriptures. Probat of testaments and such like matters pertayne to the civil
law. And whereas Bristow says, we could not tell that we should use
baptisinge of men, more then washinge of feet, or this less then that, or one
to be a sacrament and not the other, except we had been taught by the popish
Church, it is a great falshoode. For although we might allege the judgment
of the most ancient Church of Christ, which did not accept that action of
Christ as a sacraments yet the words of our Savior Christ are manifest, which
does not institute a sacrament or visible sign of the invisible grace of God
given unto us, but only gives us an example thereby of service able humility
one to an other. Joan. 13. 12. Wherefore no more in this then in any other
matter do we take any light, out of the books and doings of those owls, that
fly in the darkness of men's traditions, but only out of the law of God which
is a light unto our steps, and a lantern unto our feet, that we need not
like apes counterfeit external toys as they do, but being followers of God
as wellbeloued children, we may walk in love as Christ has loved us, and so
fa^re to follow the steps of other men, as we see plainly that they have
followed Christ.

The 35. motive is the 25. demand.
States of perfection. Monks and Monasteries. Parliament Bristow.
religion. We confess that we have no states of perfection in Fulke.
this life among us, which to affirm in any mortal man is blasphemye against
the blood of Christ. As for Monks and Friars names, Eremites, etc: none were
farther from a Christian or honest life then they, as the world knows
sufficientlye. And therefore by law they and their Monasteries were justly
subverted. As for the solitarye men of the ancient times, dwelling by them
selves, or in the desert places called M^nach^, Anchoritae or Eremit^e, these
popish orders, of whose subversion Bristow complayneth, were no more like unto
them, then Apes and Monkeyes are to men and women.

The communitye of goods that was in the Church of the Apostles. Act. 4. was
none other, then such as is and ought to be among all true Christians. which
was not as Bristowe ignorauntlye and impudently affirms, to live without
propriety of goods, having all things in an Anabaptisticall community, but
that they accounted nothing of that they possessed to be their own, when the
necessity of their brethren required the use thereof. Act. 4. 32. and 34. And
Act. 5. 4. Peter affirms that both the land and the price thereof was in the
proprietye of Ananias, so that he might have retained either his land or the
whole price thereof, but that he was an hypocrite and would bear the Church
in hand, that he had brought the whole price, when he withdrewe a part
thereof. As for Virgins although there be fewer amongst us, that boast of
that profession, yet are there more both men and women which freely keep their
purpose of virginity, then were among those popish vowed cloystralls.

The 36. motive is the 46. demand.
The state of our predecessors. Prayer for the dead, the ground of building
Christian monuments. Universities of heretics Bristow.
and Catholics, Protestants be ashamed of their fathers. The demand serves
to be contrary to the motive, Fulke.
for in the motive he confesses, that we will not condemn our ancestors that
have dyed these many hundred years in popish ignorance, nor the ancient
doctors which have held some errors which the Papists do hold, but in the
demand he asks, if all these are damned in hell, if not, then theirs is the
true Church, and those errors are truth. I answer we deal not with
condemnation of men, for lack of two causes, which make a Judge, the one
austeritie, the other is knowledge. Concerning the first, it pertayneth only
to Christ, to be the Judge of the quick and the dead, whose office we dare
not usurp, otherwise then he has commanded us, to pronounce sentence out of
his word: concerning the latter, we take not upon us to know either the faith
or repentance of them that dyed before our time, and therefore we commit their
judgment to God. But generally we are taught by the Scriptures, that such as
hold the only foundation which is Jesus Christ, in a true faith, shall be
saved although they build upon this foundation chafe, straw, wood, etc. 1.
Cor. 3. And therefore we doubt not but S. Augustine, Chrysostom, Hierom,
Gregory, Bernard, and many thowsands, even in the time of great blindness,
holding the same only foundation, may be saved, notwithstanding the chafe and
stubble of a few errors which the former sort did hold, or a number of errors
and superstitions wherewith the later sort were defiled. As for Fraunces and
Dominike such late leaders of the locustes, we rather think they are returned
into the bottomless pit from whence they came, then that they be Saints in
heaven. But if we excuse the rest by ignorance, Bristow asks why we condemn
not Augustine, which was not ignorant of our doctrine, because he condemned it
for most wicked heresy in Aerius, Iouinian and Vigilantius, who although they
be our fathers, he says we are ashamed to bless their memory. First
concerning Iouinian, although he held an heresy, in not preferring virginity
before marriage in some respect, yet have we nothing to do with him, for we
hold not that opinion, which if we did yet were it no damnable heresy. Touching
AErius he is condemned of Augustine for an Arrian, his opinion of prayer for
the dead although it were not liked of Augustine, yet does he in no place
condemn it for most wicked heresy, as Bristow calls it, but that he did
allow prayer for the dead, it was an error of ignorance, even in S.
Augustine, as that he thought the communion necessary for infants. Cont. duas
ep. Pelag. lib. 2. cap. 4. As for Vigilantius I find him not reckened either by
Epiphanius or Augustine for an heretic, or for one that erred in doctrine,
although Hierom did write so bitterly against him, who likewise did write
against Augustine and Ruffinus, yet are nether of both accounted for heretics.
And AErius as he held some truth with us against prayer for the dead, so
held he also much popish superstition and error, for like the order of
Carthusians, they of his sect admitted none to their fellowship, but such as
professed continence, and so renounced the world, that they possessed nothing
in proper. As testifies Epiphanius and Augustine. And Philaster affirms,
that they absteyned also from cating of flesh. So that all things considered,
Aerius mainteyned the doctrine of the Papists, as much as of the Protestants.
That our preachers in pulpits, praise God for the founders of colleges and
schools, of learning, by name, what makes this for allowance of their
religion. God is to be praised for such benefits as he has bestowed upon his
church or any members thereof, even by Turks and Heathen men. Wherefore this is
a very slow motive unto Popery. For whether the founders were good or evil
men, and what intent soever they had, their benefits are now used to the glory
of God, and therefore God for them and their benefits is greatly to be praised.

The 37. motive has never a demand that I can aptly refer unto it.
The only known and undoubted mother of Christ's children Bristow.
for a thousand years together. The church is everlasting and visible. The
Popish church has not only been ye only known Fulke.
church and undoubted mother of Christ's children for these thousand years.
First because it is not of so many years continuance, the mystery of
iniquity having not been in highest degree of wickedness before the council
of Constance, where notwithstanding the institution of Christ and the practice
of the primitive church, the communion of the Lords blood was taken from the
people. Secondly the Popish church was never acknowledged by all the true
children of Christ's church, for their mother, which was a steppemother and a
persecuter of them. Thirdly the Popish church was never ye only reputed church
or mother of Christ's children, of all them that profess Christianity for the
churches of the East, as great and as large as she was in the West, would
never so account the Popish steppedame of Rome, but did separate them selves
from her communion. Fourthly the Catholic church of Christ's members dispersed
over all the world, under the tyranny both of the Turk and the Pope, have in
all times protested, that ye Romish Apostolical synagoge, is the whore of
Babylon and see of Antichrist.

The places of Mich. 4. and Esa 61. which he cites to prove that the church
must be always visible, you shall find answered with many other in mine
overthrow of Stapletons fortres lib. 1. cap. 13. And whereas Bristow confesses,
that a mist may hide an hill that is never so high, from some wicked sighted men
that are without it, but never from them that are within it, no merua^le if the
spiritual church of Christ, being lifted up above the top of all hills, not in
worldly glory, but even unto heavenly dignity, has long remained hid from
them, that have no spiritual eyes at all. But Bristow thinks it strange,
that a mist should continue a thousand years together. Then I ask him what
has hindered the greatest part of all the world, seduced by Mahometistrie
and Gentilitie that for these thousand years they have not seen the height of
the Popish church. If he say not a mist about their church but a blindness in
the others eyes to be the cause, the same I answer for the Catholic
dispersed church of Christ, which the Papists pretend that this thousand
years they could not see. Although as I have often said, Papistry is not half
so old in the greatest heresies and absurdities, which now she maynteyneth.

The 38. motive is the 24. demand also the 48. and the 17.
Celebration and operation of Christ's death. The sacrifice of Bristow. the
mass. Priest^oode. Where Christ works. Only fayt^. Exorcising of devils.
In the Popish churchis no celebration, but a derogation of the merit of
Christ's death, by the blasphemous Fulke.
sacrifice of the mass. But Bristow in the 24. demand, asks us whether we
be content to try religion by the Priesthood that has been from; the
beginning of Christ's church. I answer that we must first consent of the name
of Priest and Priesthood, whereof also in the same demand he cauilleth, that
we have changed the name and therefore have changed the order. The name I say
of Priesthood and Priest must be considered, either according to the Etymology
and deriuation, or else according to the present use thereof. And according to
the deriuation, we confess yt this word Priest, coming of the greek word
Presbyteros signifies the same o^der, which is instituted by God, like as the
word Bishop c^mming of Episcopus, for which if any man use the name of Elder
and superintendent, he varieth nothing in the world, from the signification of
Presbyter and Episcopus, and much less sets up a new order as Bristow most
vainly does cavil. For in that sense, we abhor not the name of Priest and
Bishop. But when according to the present use, this word Priest is taken for
him which in greek is called (...) and in Latin Sacerdos that is one appointed
to offer a special sacrifice for which our English tongue has none other word
but Priest as Bristow does well confess: In this sense we deny that we have
any special Priesthood or Priests among us but the only Priesthood and high
Priest our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and the general Priesthood that is
common to all the Saynctes of God. Apoc. 16. But in the former sense, we have
the same office of Bishop, Elder or Priest which being ordained by the holy
Ghost, has continewed in the church until this time. But this will Bristowe
disprove, by two reasons. First that ancient Bishops and Priests were made
by Bishops and Priests, and not by Kings and Queens: secondly they were
made to offer sacrifice, and even for the dead. Concerning the first it is
true that the ancient Priests were so ordained, but it is a most impudent
slander, that we are made Bishops or Priests by Kings or Queens. For the
world knows we are ordained by the Bishops and Elders of the church and
not by the Prince. But that the ancient Bishops and Elders of the church
since Christ, were ordained to offer sacrifice for the quick and the dead, it
is utterly false. For albeit the ancient writers improperly used the names of
Priest and sacrifice, yet did they never mean to set up a new Priesthood or
sacrifice, to overthrow the only true Priesthode and sacrifice of Christ's
death as in many places of their writings most manifestly does appear, but
only they did continue a memory of the sacrifice of Christ's death in the
celebration of the Lords supper Chris. ad Heb. cap. 10. Hom. 17. and a
sacrifice of praise and thankesgeuing August. De ciuit. Dei. lib. 10. cap 6.
Hoc est sacrificium Christianorum multi vnum corpus sumus in Christo: quod
etiam Sacramento altaris fidelibus noto frequentat ecclesia, vbi ei
demonstratur quod in ea oblatione quam off^rt ipsa offeratur. This (says
Augustine speaking of the sacrifice of thankesgeuing) is the sacrifice of
Christians, we being many are one body in Christ, which thing also the church
frequenteth in the Sacrament of the altar well known to the faithful, where
it is showed unto her, that in the same oblation which she offers, she her
self is offered. Likewise cap. 20. speaking of the sacrifice of Christ's death
he says. Per hoc and Sacerdos est, ipse offerens, ipse and oblatio. Cuius rei
sacramentum quotidianum esse voluit ecclesiae sacrificium, cum ipsius corporis
ipse sit caput, and ipsius capitis ipsa sit corpus, tam ipsa per ipsum quam
ipse per ipsam suetus offerri. By this also he is a Priest, he him self
offering and he him self being the oblation. Of which thing he would have the
daily sacrifice of the church to be a Sacrament, seeing that of her being his
body he is the head, and of him being her head she is the body, as well she
by him, as he by her, being accustomed to be offered. So that the error of
praying for the dead which prevailed within three hundredth years after
Christ, was at the first, without blasphemy of sacrificing the body of Christ
for the quick and the dead. In this four and twenty demand Bristowe as
keth further whether in the ancient Church there were not Subdeacons,
Acolytes, Exorcistes, door keepers etc. I answer there were such offices,
appointed for aid of diverse parts of the ministry, whereof the Papists
reteyne only the names, without any exercise of the offices. And the offices
were such for the most part, as were proper for the time of persecution, and
as they had no instruction of the word of God but were ordained by the Church,
so by the Church they are thought unnecessary. In the forty eight demand
which is a part of this motive, he asks whether their Church only has not
grace in her Sacraments, merit in her workers, force in her word, power in
her teaching, her children the saddest sort of people, men of best order in
families, towns, and cities, etc. I answer, the Popish Church has no
Sacraments but such as she falsely usurps, namely the Sacrament of baptism,
which as Augustine says against the Donatistes, may be given out of the true
Church, but has no virtue or grace but in the true Church. As for merit of
works is blasphemous against the mercy of God. Vnde mihi tantum meriti est
(says Ambrose Ad virgin. exhort.) cui indulgentia pro coronaest. Whence
should I have so great merit seeing mercy is my crown. And touching force
of her word and power of her teaching, if there were not greater terror of
her tyranny and allurement in her worldly glory she should have fewer
partakers. For except the efficacy of error which God has sent for the
punishment of the unbelieving world, she has no power of the word of God,
nor of his holy spirit, to convert the hearts of men to Christ, but external
intisements like Mermaydes songs, to seduce men to their destruction. And as
for her Children the Papists, although some be more modest then the rest, as
there be even among the Turks and Heathen, none ate more light, vain,
disordered, proud, proud, deceitful, covetous, worldly, luxurious,
malicious, and cruel, not only at Rome, and abroad, where they be in their
ruff, but even here in England, where they have not all their will. I except
a few, which being deceived, not of malice but of ignorance, God in time may
bring to the knowledge of the truth, if they be not dissemblers and seek by
all means to absent themselves from it.

Furthermore how e maliciously he slaundereth the Church of God let God
himself revenge, where he says, we have no preaching of Penance, no grace
in sacraments, nothing but sin in good works, although they be done in
Christ. No power to bring under Devils, no blessing, no comfort, yea that
all followers be they never so wicked and flagitious, have they only faith
and no doubt, they shall be saved. And yet the forgetful Liar confesses
afterward, that we affirm that true faith cannot be without true and
perfect doctrine, nor without good works.

But what Faith do you preach or teach (says Bristowe) Not that Christian
faith which is contained in the Articles of our Creed, but a special Faith,
or an vudoubted persuasion that he is predestinate. How soever therefore it
be that Bristowe is disposed for to lie and rail, they that either hear our
Sermons or read our Books of Justification by Faith only, do know that we
teach none other Faith by which a man may be justified, but even that Faith,
which is only contained in the Articles of our Creed. The very first word
whereof I believe, teaches not the implicit faith of the papists, but a
special and singular faith and trust that every Christian man must have in
God the father and in Jesus Christ, which was conceived, borne, dead, risen
again, etc. for us, and in the holy Ghost, by whom the virtue of Christ's
conception, natiuirie, suffering, death, resurrection, and assention, is
communicated to us, being members of the Catholic church, in which we receive
forgiveness of sins, and thereby being made righteous, we receive the
reward of righteousness, which is the resurrection unto glory, and the life
everlasting, which was prepared for us before the world was made, which faith
no blasphemous heretics can have, that deny any of these Articles, what
persuasion soever they have, wc faith the Papists have not, which never put
their trustin God by Jesus Christ, but in their own works etc, nor yet have
any certainty of their salvation, whereas all they that truly put their trust
in God, shall not be confounded. From which faith the Papists are so far,
that they think it not convenient that the people should know and rehearse the
articles of the Creed in the mother tongue, although now of late, they have
set forth English cathechismes, as Apes of the true Church, not that their
Disciples might have more knowledge, seeing they hold that ignorance is the
mother of Devotion, but that they see they cannot though for shame they would
conceal this knowledge from them. And when they cannot hinder them of the
knoweledge of the Articles of faith, how I pray you do they teach them to
believe them? Even with an historical faith, which is none others then such as
the devil believes, namely that there is one God, that Jesus Christ was
borne, crucyfied, ascended into Heaven etc.

In the 17. Demand he asks us whether we read not that the Christians of
the Primitive church, had an ordinary power and office to cast out devils,
which we acknowledge that we have not, but the Papists have. To this I
answer, that in the Primitive church were diverse gifts of healing, casting
out of Devils and working of miracles, which were temporal, and are long since
ceased to be ordinary, and therefore we do in deed confess that we have no
such ordinary power. Neither do we believe that the papists have any such, what
iugling or counterfaiting of miracles soever is among them, their forgery has
to often been tried to their shame.

To conclude, our Church has Christ and his spirit, and therefore all graces
and blessings whatsoever Christ has promised to be perpetual in the same, to
the salvation of his elect and the glory of his name.

The 39. motive is in part contained in the 48. demand.
Teaching the narrow way, and living after it. Who be Bristow. now followers
of Protestants. Why there be so many ^itheisti in England. England beware of
destruction. The doctrine of Purgatory and satisfaction of Gods Fulke.
wrath by works of our own or of other men's. The doctrine of pardons, the
doctrine of Grace given by sacraments, Exopere operato. The sacrifice of the
mass etc. are doctrines that teach the broad way leading unto destruction,
while they bring men into security and confidence in vain helps. And that is
the cause that Papists and Popes themselves of all other have been and are the
most wicked. The number of Atheists that are in England are not made, but
discerned by the preaching of the Gospel. And yet neither are there so many nor
so impudent professors of Atheism in England, as there be in Italy and even
in Rome it self. Where the Pope has been condemned in general council for
an Atheist, as John the 23. in the council of Consta^s. Where Pope Leo
counts the Gospel for a fable of Christ. Pope July will eat hogs flesh
in despite of God.

The sins I confess of England are great, and such as call to God for
vengeance without hearty repentance, and the greatest sin is ingratitude in
the multitude, refusing sincerly to embrace the Gospel, and in other
hypocrisy which abusing the name of the Gospel, have an outward show of
godliness, but deny the power thereof. Yet is there both in the state (which
Bristowe most traitorously does slander) and in the Church of England, yea in
the Realm of England, more sincerity, fidelity, honesty, Charity,
humility, Chastity, and godlinesses, and less Athesme, infidelity,
cruelty, pride, ryote, whoredom, swearing and fo^swearing, Covetousness,
sacrilege, and all manner of wickedness, more I say of virtue and less of
vice in England at this time, then is or has been at any time with in those
five hundred years in Rome or Italy. So that if a Book were made as Bristow
seems to threaten of the behavior of the worst and most counterfaite
Protestants in England, yet shall it never be found so vile and abominable
as are the lives of the most of the Popes themselves, set forth not by
Protestants in our days, but by all popish stories before we were borne.

The 40. motive has no special demand aunsvvering to it. Bristow.

Obedient subjects. In what Church is Christianity of all laws which was
Saint Augustines Motive. Obedience of the Catholics to their superiors both
ecclesiastieall and temporal Protestants be malignours of higher powers.
Fulke.
If this Motive had been set forth before the Rebellion in the North, or if
so many trayterouse practices from Rome hadd not been openly discovered
peradventure Bristowe might have moved some mountains by it.

But now Quis tulerit Gracchum de seditioue loquent^m? Who can abide the
Papists to brag of Obedience? Yet both the civil Law and the common Law
of England are made to serve popish Religion, if we will believe Bristowe.
God be thanked they both serve the Church of God not only in England, but
in all other Realms and states that have embraced the Gospel, the civil and
municipall Laws, without any alteration of the state, save for the advancement
of Gods glory.

But Protestants he says, be Maligners of the higher powers, such as Saint
Jude calls contemners of Lordeshippe, and blasphemers of Majesty. Or else
the Papists be such in that blasphemouse Bull, for which Felton was hanged, in
which are so vile opprobrious and contumelious slanders of our Prince, that for
her honor and my duties sake, I will not vouchsafe to name them.

He obiecteth unto us Knoxes Book against the regement of women, which was
but his private opinion and condemned of all our Church, and of the Church of
Geneua also. He obiecteth the civil wars in France, in which the Kings
themselves have always in public instruments discharged the Protestants of
all disloyalty, and acknowledged that whatsoever they did in taking Arms,
they did it in the service of them and of their Realm. As for the murdering of
great Personages, Wasting of Cities and Countries etc. the world knows
whether party is chargeable with the crime. And to seek no farther proves of
the traiterous and disobedient hearts of all wicked and pernitiouse Papistes^,
Bristow him self confesses in this motive, that they be duly discharged from
subjection and the Prince from dominion by the sovereign authority of the
common Paster of Religion.

But where in the Devils name, has your sovereign Pastor and Prelate of Rome,
such authority? From Peter? Did Peter discharge the subjects of Nero from
subjection, or Nero from his government, although he were a most wicked
persecutor of the Church, or rather does he not command all persons to obey
him. 1. Pet, 2. 14. and 17. O traiterous hypocrites, which have made all whole,
when you pray for the Princes conversion, so deposed by your Pope. The Lord our
God defend our sovereign, as well from your prayers as from your practices.
Another argument of your obedience, you show, where you say, that of
Catholics, thoroughly discharged of their fealtic, yet for common humanity,
for their accustomed use, for their continual and (as it were) natural
institution, the prince is better obeyed and scrued, then of the Protestants,
which in heart are in a manner all Puritants. Note here that Papists profess
them selves to be subjects of courtesy, not of duty, of custom, not of
conscience, of natural institution, not of the law of God. Our Lord and
savior send her majesty few such subjects and servants.

The 41. motive is the 19. demand.
The Church to which Princes do homage. Bristow.
The true Catholic church of Christ, is that church of which it was
prophesied, that Kings and Queens Fulke.
should be the nurse thereof, and as obedient children do homage thereto, as
to the mother of all the faithful. To this church the old and first
Christianed Emperors, Constantius, Iouianus, Theodosius, Valentinianus etc.
submitted them selves as obedient children. To this church at this day many
Kings and Queens do homage, and are nurses thereof, as the Princes of
England, Scotland, Denmark, Sueuon, Saxony. But Bristow obiecteth against us,
yt our Princes are not taught obedience to the Church, but truly seduced by
the title of head and supreme governors of the Church. To this I answer
that this title of headshippe and governance of particular Churches, is none
other, but such as they may and ought to hold, with their obedience unto the
universal Church. Yea their government is such, as therein they serve God and
the Church, in compelling by law and authority, all persons to do their
duties as well in religion, as in civil affairs: Not an antichristian
tyranny, such as the Pope usurps to be Lords over our faith, and to make
Articles of Religion at their pleasure, but to provide that all things may be
done according to the word of God.

But Bristow replyeth that it was not the Popish church unto whom Constantine
and the rest of the Christian Emperors yielded up the imperial City of
Rome, with all the country of Italy. What an impudent lie this is, may easily
be known of all them, which have read the historyes which testify that the
Emperors of Constantinople received possession in Rome and Italy until the
time of Charles the great, which was made Emperor by the Pope. In the demand
Bristowe asks if the first Christian Emperonrs, Constantinus, Theodosius,
were not in all points of the popish Religion? I answer that although they
were infected with a few errors, as prayer for the dead etc, yet in the
substance of Christian Religion, they believed the same that we believe of
Justification by faith, only of the virtue of Christ's sacrifice once offered
for all, of the authority of the holy Scriptures, and were enemies to the
Papists in their chief Principle, of the Popes supremacy, the carnal
presence, transubstantiation, private Mass, Communion in one kind, Images,
Prayers in unknown language, and many other.

As for the license that Bristowe would have us procure for them, to appear
with us before the Queens highness, to dispute whether the first Christian
Emperors were not altogether Papists? is nothing else but a popish brag,
which if it were procured they would delude the whole purpose with such
Cauillations, as they did in the Conference offered unto them at Westminster,
in the first year of her Majesty's reign: where after they had heard our
side once read their Book, they were so discouraged, that they durst abide no
more trial, but shamefully and obstiantely clean gave over the conference.

The 42. motive is part of the 47. demand.
The Parliament Church and Religion. Saint Peter excluded Bristowe,
out of England by Parliament. Yea Christ, Peter and Paul and other Apostles
excluded out of England by Parliament. The Apostles were of our Religion. How
Saint Augustine should be used in England by the Parliament law if he were
there living. Of what Religion and authority the Fathers are. Succession.
Protestants contrary to them salues. We must consider (says Bristowe) what
Church Fulke.
that is, where Laws be made to charge Peter if he were living, to give up
his commission received of Christ, and to take another of the King or Queen,
and to charge him and his fellow Apostles to leave the true service which they
had received, and to minister after an other sort, as the Paliament law
prescribes.

To this I answer, we will be tried by the writings of Peter and his fellow
Apostles, that the Parliament law for Religion and service of God, concernig
the substance thereof urges not Peter to change his commission, nor to use
any other service then they them selves have taught us to use. If Augustine
were alive and in England, he was a man of such modesty and love of the
truth, that seeing the same plainly revealed out of the holy Scriptures, he
would retracte his error of Prayer for the dead, as when he lived he
retracted and set forth many things, wherein he found that he had
erred. As for the fine of an hundred Marks, he would not have left nor been
deprived of his Byshoprike and imprisoned for saying of the popish Mass, for
he never said any in his life, but was an utter enemy to the chief points
thereof, allowing nothing thereof but prayer for the dead at the celebration of
the Lords supper.

And for as our Savior Jesus Christ, the King of all Kings and Lord of all
Lords, and the only ruler of Heaven and earth, do you think that he will
not complain that he only by Parliament law is acknoweledged to be the
head of his universal Church, and so continually present therewith by his
holy spirit, that he need no viear general of a mortal manne, which can
occupye but one place, although he were never so diligent and painful to
discharge his duty in that behalf.

For his divine and spiritual authority, is not excluded under the name of
foreign power, as Bristowe not more slanderously then ridiculously affirms.
Yet he pleases him self so much in so great folly and madness, that he
says, Christ could not claim to be head of his Church, except he should
claim to be the natural King of England, and to have said unto Pylate, My
kingdom is of this world and thy master Caesar does me wrong. As though the
King of England, by title of his royal power, clayming to be the chief
Servant or deputy of Christ, in governing his Church according to his
word, did exclude the soueraignitie of Christ which he has over his Church
and elect, wheresoever they are upon the face of the earth.

But the Protestants (says Bristowe) are contrary to them selves while they
say that our Prince is King of France as well as of England and Ireland and yet
say not that he is he^de of the Church of France, but only of the Church of
England and Irelande. And is Bristowe such a profound Logitian that he cannot
distinguishe a King in right only, from a King in actual government. If our
Prince had as good possession of the gonernmente of France, as he has title
of right to have it, he shall be governor of the Church of France, as well
as of the Church of England and Ireland. That he says we have been from
hence at the Apostles going so long a journey without any footing, in the way,
it is a foolish cauel for we have often showed succession of doctune, even
from the Apostles from whom it is received.

The 43. Motive is part of the 47. demand.
Communion of Saints. Christendom shut out of England by Parliament. Councels.
Saint Paul might not write Pristow.
ad Anglos for the Pa^l^ament. The Church of England is not so straythened or
pinched within the lymites of one Kingdombut that Fulke.
she believes and inioyeth the communion of all the Saints of God, as a
member of the universal church of Christ. And therefore I meruail what color
Bristowe has for those slanders: that one Christian man in England in
spiritual affairs is a stranger to another, that general Councels have no
authority in it, that Saint Paul or all the Apostles if they were living
might not write to the Englishmen as well as to the Romans, Galathians,
Corinthians etc. that Christ without the consent of the King and the
Parliament might not dispose his own Church. These vain and impossible
suppositions, could not come but from a gross and foolish invention of one
that lacks arguments to prove his cause. The laws are made according to
that which is, namely the truth, set forth in the holy Scriptures, not
according to that which every fool will fondly suppose or imagine.

The 44. Motive is the 49. demand.
The Church that all Chrsstes enemies fight against. England Bristowe
joins with Christ's enemies against Christendom. What Religion the Iowes
impunge as the Religion of Christ. Christ is to be believed for converting of
Emperors and powers from their Idols to serve his servants. The Church is
everlasting and visible. Saint Augustines motive. Emperors turned from their
Idols and praying at Peeters sepulcher, and the Christianity of humane laws.
Saint Augustine of our Religion, Protestants be of many old heresies. The
popish Church was not persecuted by the heathen Emperous, but the Catholic
church of Christ, Fulke.
The popish Church is not of so great antiquity, that she had then any show
in the world, although the mystery of iniquity did then work and even in
the Apostles time. The Heathens, Turks and Jews, do no more hate the popish
church; then they do the church of God which is in England. The wars against
the Turk be at this day maintained by the states of Germany, which are of our
religion as well as by the Papists, That there is no public aid sent against
the Turk out of England, it is not in any allowaunce of Turkish religion but
because the state sees it not necessary neither was there any public aid
sent an hundredth years be ore the reuolte from Papistrie. And yet even in the
Queens majesty's reign, there has gone aid out of England against Soliman
which died at the siege of Segesto, where diverse noble Gentlemen of England
goinge on their own charges as Bizia testifies wan more true glory then they
that 2. or 3. hundred years before upon a superstitious vow were signed with
the cross to fight against the Saracens, for the possession of the earthly
Jerusalem. How often shall I answer, that the first christian Emperors were
not converted from Idolatry to Christianity by the popish Church, but the
later Christian Emperors, by her have been perverted from the true worship of
God, unto Idolatry. That the Emperors being converted from Idolatry, did pray
at Peter the fishermans sepulcher (as Augustine says) it shows the virtue of
ye Gospel of Christ that had made so great alteration in them, but nothing at
all proves the authority or any error of the popish Church, for Augustine
says not that they prayed unto Peter, but at the sepulcher of Peter, meaning
in the Church that was builded upon the place, that was supposed to be the
burial of Peter. The laws that those Emperors made against Idolaters, may
well serve against the Papists, wc are as gross in all kinds of Idolatry as
the Gentills for the most part were. Finally it was not ye popish Church, but
the Church of Christ, that suppressed the heresies of the Arrians, Sabellians,
Nestorians etc. But Iouinian did let out of hell Priests and Nuns marriage,
which gate not the Church of Protestants, but our Church (says Bristow) has
stopped. The Church that striued against Iouinian, was nether for marriage of
Priests, of whom many thowsands were married in that time, yea and a thowsande
years after, nor yet for marriage of such as had vowed virginity, and could
not contain, when both Epiphanius the hatchet of heresies, and Hierome that
greatest adversary of Iouinian, agree that they ought to marye. Epiph. cont.
Apostolicoshaer. 61. Hierom ad Demetriadem.

Nether were Epiphanius, Philaster, and Augustine, which disalow the opinion of
Aerius, concerning prayers for the dead, members of the popish church, for this
one error which they held, seeing they hold the principal substance of
religion against the Papists, and agreeable to the word of God. That Bristow
says in the demand, We count Turks, Jews, and very Atheistes for our
friends and all that be not Papists, it is a most detestable slander. The
Anabaptists burned in Smithfield were no Papists, the blasphemer of Christ
lately burned at Norwiche was no Papist, whose sharp execution shows, that
heretics, blasphemers, and Atheistes, when they are discovered, find no
friendship at the hands of Christ's Church, but such as they deserve. Finally
the Eastern Church, which of long time has been separated from the Romish
communion, has as great enemies of the Turks, heathen and Jews, as the
Popish Church has, yet will not the Papists allow it for the Catholic Church.

The 45. motive conteyneth the 31. 32. and 33. and 40. demaundes.
Ever visible and Catholic. Vniuersalitic. Antiquity. Consent. Bristowe
Protestants were never before this time. They are ashamed of their fathers.
Hus was not a Protestant. VVicklefe was not a Protestant. VVicklefe condemned
by Melancthon. Prophecy for our religion. No Scripture against the Catholics
but all for them. Here is nothing but the old popish brag of universality,
antiquity, and consent, which is as easily denied Fulke.
as it is always alleged without proof. Saving that in the demaundes, they
are sundered, as though every one of them without the other two, were a
sufficient trial of truth, which nether Vincentius nor Optatus, nor Augustine,
nor any that used this argument did ever mean. But that is truth, which being
most ancient, has at all times, of all true Christians, by general consent
been received. But this can not be proved of any one error of poperye. For if
any of these three be omitted, the argument is of no force to prove truth. All
nations by general consent embraced Idolatry. yet was the true worship of God
which was known only in Iurye the more ancient. The worship of Jupiter was
more ancient, then the honor of Christ showed in the flesh, and more
universally received, but not of the true worshippers of God. As for general
counsels, which in the demand of consent, he says to be all against the
Protestants, he is not able to show one approved general council, that was
held within six hundredth years after Christ, that decreed any thing contrary
to that which we believe in any point. But confessing that in many ages some
there have been in some points of our opinion, yet he says we can show no
lyneall succession, but leap from Luther to Christ, without any record of our
religion in all the mean time, having no monument of such Church nether in
leaf or line of service book: As one that loves antiquities well, I would
feign see, what leaves the Papists can show of their service books, to prove
a lyneall desc^nt from Christ to Pope Gregory the 13 when Bristow swears
perdie, to agree in all points with Pope Leo the tenth, which was in Luthers
time, some of their service being made by Thomas Aquinas, some by Fulbertus,
some taken out of Beda, some out of Gregory, some out of Augustine, some out of
Hieronyme, some out of John Chrysostom, and of Ambrose, and the eldest I think
not of Origin: which argues nether antiquity nor universality to stand with
the popish service as for lyneall succession from Christ, it is impossible for
them to show.

But Bristow will prove, that we were never before this time. For as for AErius,
he knows we are ashamed of him. But he will prove that nether Hus, nor
Wicklefe were Protestants. Because they held some opinions, that we do not. By
the same reason he may prove, that the fathers of the councels of Constance and
Basil were no Papists, because they took upon them to depose Popes and decreed
that the council was above the Pope, which most Papists at this day dare not
affirm. AEneas Syluius does slander Wicklefe and Hus, that for every mortal
sin a Magistrate should lose his office, for their Apologies are extant to be
seen to the contrary.

But Luther (says he) denies that he was an Hussite, affirming that Hus was
not of his opinion. Although he had been in all points of his opinion, as he
was in the chief, yet might Luther justly deny the name of a man, which is
proper to sectaries as Franciscanes, Dominicanes etc, and not to Christians.
Yet Wicklefe (says he) is condemned by Melanthon. How I pray you? First that
he found many errors in him, by which judgment might be made of his spirit.
If Wicklefe living in a time of so great blindness and darkness, could not see
the truth in all matters, it was no marvel, and that he had errors, he shows
that he was a man, even as the best writers of the Church since the Apostles
time, which might be deceived: But as we condemn not Augustine, Hierom,
Chrysostom, Cyprian, and other ancient writers, because we know rhey erred in
some things, no more have we just cause to cond emne Wicklefe for some errors
which it is not unlike, but he did hold, yea but Melanthon charge Wicklefe
(says he) to be altogether ignorant of the righteousness of faith, which is
the foundation of religion. I will rather think that Melanthon was ignorant
of Wicklefes opinion, as one which had not seen but few of his works. In
which as perhaps he might use the terms of merit and deserving, then commonly
used in his time, yet that he had not the same meaning in them, but did well
understand and hold the righteousness which is of faith, I can plainly prove
by his own writings in diverse places. As upon the Heb. 10. he says: Since
Christ is God and man, satisfaction for the sin that he made thus freely, is
better then any other that man or Angel might make. The same man in nowmber
that sinned in Adam our first fadir, the same man in nowmber made asseeth by
the second Adam Christ. And since he is more of virtue then the first Adam might
be, and his pain is much more then sinful lust of the first Adam, who
should have conscience here, that ne this sin is clansid all orst. And since
our Jesus is very God that never man forfete this mede, he is a sufficient
medicine for all sinners that been contrite, for Christ is ever and every
where, and in all such souls by grace, and so he clanseth more cleanely then
any body or figure may cleanse, and herefore as Poule says, Christ is mediator
of the new law, etc. Again upon 2. Cor. 3. Sees man's thinking among his
works, seems most in his power, and yet his thought mote come of God, much
more each other work of man etc. Thus should we put of pride and wholly
trusten in Jesus Christ, for he that may not think of him self, may do naught
of him self, but all our sufficiency is of God by the mean of Jesus Christ.
Likewise upon the 8. to the Romans. Since God susteyneth man and moves him and
helps him for to travel, how had it not come of grace, and thus reward of
this travel mote needs all come of grace. These places and many other show
that Wicklefe was not ignorant of the righteousness of faith. It seems
therefore that Melancthon had seen only the articles which his adversaries had
gathered against him, and not his own writings and discourses.

The prophecyes, which Bristow boasts to be for their religion, be of Ieremye
and Esaias, for the perpetual continuance of the true Church of Christ, but
seeing it is proved that the popish Church has not been from the beginning,
those prophecyes appertain not unto her. How the Church is visible, is showed
in the 37. motive whereunto I add, that while the Papists glory of a visible
Church on earth, Jerusalem that is above, and therefore not subject to the eyes
of earthly men, but of such whose conuetsation is in heaven, is the mother of
us all. Finally if Bristow could as truly prove, as he does boldly say, that
no Scripture is against them, but all for them, he should have no Protestants
to be his adversaries, who more accept of the authority of the holy
Scriptures, then of all other motives in the world.

The 46. motive is the 39. demand.
Where grew the Protestants seed before our time. The church has rehearsed
wednesday fast long sithence. A Bishop Bristow.
is above a Priest. The Saints were of our religion. Baptism necessary for
salvation of children. Anabaptists. Why there be so many Atheistes in England.
Trinitaries. Such seeds of our doctrine (says Bristowe) as have grown before
this time, did always grow in evil Fulke.
ground, namely in heretics as denial of prayer for the dead in Aerius, who
beside that error was an Arrian. He charge us also with denying the
ordinary fast of the church, but that is false. For we hold that the fast
which is appointed by the church, ought to be observed, although we hold that
no man is bound to the blasphemous, superstitious, and counterfeit fast of the
Popish synagogue. In that time in which Aerius lived, there were other times of
fasting appointed, then such as the Popish church observes. But the
wedsnesday fast (says Bristowe) the church has released. In what general
council good Sir: are you able to show: likewise of other times of fast named
in Epiphanius? if you be not able to show this where is either your
universality, antiquity, or succession in doctrine and discipline, without
interruption.

More the^ this (says he) Aerius did hold, that a Bishop and a Priest be
equal, which also the Protestants do mainteyne. In preaching the word and
ministering the Sacraments. S. Hierom Euagrio is of the same opinion that they
are equal likewise in Epistad Titum. cap. 1. showing that a Bishop is
preferred before a Priest magis ecclesiae consuetudine quam dispositionis
dominicae veritate rather by custom of the church to avoid schisms, then by
truth of the Lords disposition. Furthermore one of the Protestants seeds is,
that we must not pray to Saints, but this was held of certain heretics in S.
Bernardes time who were called Apostolici and were also Anabaptists, denying
the baptism of infantes. The conclusion is, that these opinions can not be
good, because they are found in some heretics. And the contrary opinion must
needs be true, because they are found in some holy men, as in S. Athanasius,
Epiphanius, Augustine. etc. Although these opinions are but few in comparison
of so many articles of religion, in which we dissent from the Papists, which
if they could be found in heretics, we should soon hear of them: yet what
Logike is in this conclusion of Bristow, you shall see by examples of the like,
and even of the same heretics. Aerius, as Augustine reports out of
Philastre, did also receive into his fellowship none but such as wete
continent, and had so renounced the world, that they possessed nothing in
common, likewise they abstayned from flesh. The very same does Bernarde report
of the heretics called Apostolic, that they rereuerenced marriage, and
abstayned from all flesh and whitemeates. In canti. ser. 66. This diuelishe
seed prophesied before to be the note of Antichristian hypocrites, grew in
many heretics before the time of the Papists, and not these only, but many
other also. Worshipping of Images in Carpocratians Ep. 1. lib. 1. T. 2. prefat.
contr. Gnostic. 27. 29.

The superstitious estimacion of the cross in the Valentinians Epiph. Ho. 31.
Transubstantiation of the wine into blood in Marcus and the Marcosians Ire^aeus
lib. 1 cap. 9. Prayer for the dead in the Montanistes. Tert. de Monon. and de
Anima. etc. Invocation of Angels in the Caianites and many other Popish
plants were first sown by the devil in elder heretics. And yet were this no
good argument to confute these opinions or errors, because they are found in
heretics, except they were found to be contrary to the word of God. All is no
heresy, whatsoever an heretic has affirmed, for there was never heretic,
but affirmed much truth, neither is all truth that is affirmed by every Saint
and holy man, for not one of the ancient writers but is acknowledged to have
affirmed some untruth. Only the holy Scripture ought to have this pre-eminence,
as Augustine says, that it may judge of all sayings and writings, it self
being judged of none, because it is the word of God which can not err or be
deceived. Cont. Crescon. gram. lib. 2. cap. ^^. But Bristowe has Scripture to
prove that he which denies prayer for the dead, being found among the Arrians
and Anabaptists, can not choose but be bound in bundells with them and cast
into the fire. Mat. 13. In deed he that is an Arrian or Anabaptist shall not
escape for denying prayer for the dead. But the Angels that are the reapers,
are not so unskillful, but that they can discern true Christians denying the
abuse of prayers for the dead, which the Scripture does not admit, from
blasphemous heretics, among a great number of falsehoodes affirming some truth.

But it is a sore matter, that he says, The very worst sort of heretics of
this time, as the Anabaptists, Trinitaries, yea the very Epicures and
Atheistes, were first Protestants, ye such they be and will seem to be still.
He had spoken more truly, if he had said they were first Papists. But what
heretics and Atheistes would seem to be, it is no dishonor to our cause,
seeing all hypocrites would seem to be true Christians. That only Papists are
troubled in our country, and all other sects tolerated and mainteyned the
public execution and punishment of Anabaptists and other blasphemous sects
as the Family of Love etc. does plainly prove to be false, and Bristow to be a
shameless slaunderer.

The 47. motive is the 50. demand.
Sure to continue. The church is everlasting and visible. Bristow.
Protestants do decay and shall come to nothing. The churches continuance. S.
Augustines motive. England beware destruction. Luther was a false Prophet. I
need not to show, how often and how vainly Bristowe repeateth one thing, to
make a great number of motives. The everlasting continuance of the true church
has been seven times at least before alleged. But neither is it proved that
the Popish church is that true church, nor yet that any sect or company which
shall continewe to the end of the world is the Catholic church of Christ.
For although Antichrist is and shall be more and more consumed with the breath
of the Lords mouth, which is his holy word yet shall he not be altogether
abolished until the end of the world. Yea at the end of the world, as our
Savior Christ says, faith shall be very scant, and hard to be found, and
iniquity shall have the upper hand. Therefore there shall be a great church
of malignant hypocrytes even to the end of the world. It is true therefore,
that Christ's church is sure to continewe but not whatsoever sect shall
continue, is thereby proved to be Christ's true church. How vain his brag
is, that Protestants do decay: and shall come to nothing, by their daily
increase in all parts of the world, God be thanked may be seen to all men.
Likewise how true it is, which he affirms that Papists do increase, and to
such numbers even in England that there are more Papists now, then when the
Gospel was first preached, (notwithstanding so many years preaching of us
and large silence of them) who living in England can be ignorant? I confess
there are too many obstinate Papists in England whom none of Bristowes
motives, has either moved unto Popery, or confirmed therein, but only great
tolleration and lenity which is used in these times. But if such severity
were used now, as in times past, the Pope should not have many confessors in
England to glory of. And to say the truth, what one of these Papists, dare
profess what he thinks of the Popes authority, because the law is somewhat
sharp in that point. If the like law were of hearing mass we should have as
few suffer for mass as for the supremacy. But to return to our motive S.
Augustine does well to send Honoratus the Manichee to follow that way of
Catholic doctrine which from Christ him self by the Apopostles is descended
unto us, and from hence to posterity shall descend. De vtilit. cred. cap. 8.
But that it is not the way of all Popish doctrine which never came from Christ,
nor his Apostles, nor the most ancient church. And if the tradition be
uncertain, how shall we know what came from Christ and his Apostles, but that
which we find in the Gospel of Christ and the Epistles of his Apostles.

But the same Augustine (says Bristow) bids the simple Donatistes to
Number the Priests even from the very seat of Peter, and in that order of
fathers see, who to whom succeeded. That same is the rock which the proud
gates of Hell do not overcome P. S. contra Donatistas. Augustine speaks of
the Catholic church, which was the vine, whereof the Church of Rome at that
time was but a growing branch. For a little before he says, Scitis Catholica
quid sit, and quid sit precisum a vite. You know what the Catholic church is,
and what is that which is cut of from the vine. But if Bristowe should urge
the seat of Peter to be called of Augustine the rock, Augustine in his
retractations confesses that he oftentimes has expounded the rock to be
Christ, and so will not abide by that former exposition Retract. lib. 1. cap.
21. Neither did Augustine ever mean that the sea of Peter at Rome was a rock
in such sort, that none that ever should sit there, could err, for he him
self, with the rest of the fathers of the council of Carthage withstood ye
Bishop of Rome, claiming jurisdiction in Africa by coullour of a cou^terfet
decree of the council of Nice. Conc. Carth. 6. cap. 4. Council. ^^phr Ep. ad
Celest. what should I here repeat Pope Honorius condemned for an heretic,
not only in the general council of Constantinople the 6. but also in the
Idolatrous counsel of Nice the 2. and John the 23. condemned for an Atheist in
the council of Gonstance. If the gates of hell prevailed not manifestly
against that seat, yea and so many other Bishops thereof, whom they them
selves confess to be damned in hell for their wicked life: we need not
greatly be affrayed of the gates of hell. Yea (says Bristow) It has been
impugned ten thousand times more then any other, but all in vain, frustra
circumlatrantibus haereticis says S. Augustine. In vain is the barking of
heretics all about it. De vtil cred. cap. 17. But the place of Augustine which
he cites, is of the Church of Christ and not of Peter's seat, round about the
which, the heretics have barked in vain. For even in that seat, but yet out
of the Church, Liberius had barked Arrianisme, Marcellus gentilisme, and after
his time Honorius barked with the Monothelits as his epistle which remained
after his death declared. Vigilius also by his epistle was proved to bark Euty
chianisme, Liberat. cap. 22. John the 23. barked with the Sadduces against the
resurrection of the dead, cont. Constanti. sect. 11. The sea of Rome therefore
is no more the rock against which the gates of hell shall not prevail, then
the sea of Canterbury or London. But says Bristowe who can say that there
shall be always a Bishop of Canterburye or London? Verily, no more can any
man say, that there shall always be a Bishop of Rome. And whosoever says,
that there has been always since Peter a Bishop of Rome, shall lie most
impudently. For the Sea has often ly^n void, not only for a short^ time,
while a new Bishop might be chosen: but many years together. Again the Sea
has been translated from Rome to Auinion, and the Popes Court kept there for
threescore years together by which it is manifest both that the City of Rome
ha^h not been the perpetual See of Peter's successors, and that Peter's
successors have erred in removing their Court from that City, which Peter
chose to be head of the world and Constantine gave (as they say) to be the
head of the church, which might have forborne so great a gift like as Peter
also might have spared his travel in removing his see from Antioch to Rome, if
they could have foreseen that the Popes court might have been kept as well in
France, as in Italy, at Auinion as at Rome.

But Luther is charged to be a false Prophet, for that he says in his book
against King Henry, That he was sure that he had his doctrines from heaven.
That his doctrine should stand and the Pope should fall. That God should see
whether first be weary and fail, the Pope or Luther. The note of a false
Prophet in Deu. 18 is to give a sign which does not follow, and so has Luther
done says Bristow. For Zwinglius has overcome Luther and Calvin Zwinglius
and the Puritans the Protestants in England. To this I answer, that Luther
does not take upon him to foreshew things to come by any special revelation,
but only affirms that his doctrine in as much as it is agreeable to the word
of God, is from heaven, and shall continewe, whereas the Popes doctrine being
the doctrine of the devil shall come to naught. And in this victory, (if he
please so to term it) has not the Pope lost by preuayling of Zwinglius and
Calvin. And was that opinion of Luther which they have impugned, I mean of
the carnal presence Luthers or the Popes? But whereas ye slanderous hypocrite,
would make men think, that Calvin has opposed himself against the doctrine
of Zwinglius, the consent of the churches of Heluetia with them of Sabaudia being
publicly set forth to the world, does openly testify the contrary. Also the
contention of those whom he calls Puritanes in England, is not so great, nor
about so great matters, that any such division is to be feared, which might
cause desolation of the kingdom. Add hereunto that Bristow said in the 40.
motive, that the Protestants of England be in a manner all in heart Puritanes,
whereby he confesses against him self, that there can be no deadly contention
between them, that in heart are all one.

The 48. motive.
How to make plain demonstration that the heretics have no evidence and that
we have all. Who be wresters of the Scriptures. Bristow.
The inconstancy of the Protestants: The understanding of the Scriptures is in
the church. This wise demonstration is a plain declaration, that Fulke.
he which made it, knows not what a demonstration means, but such as it is,
let us see what is in it.

First he would have it proponed by a Catholic, to his friend that is in
heretic, to be considered, seeing al these motives beginning with holy
Scripture, approved traditions etc. be for them and agai st us, what is the
cause that we cry so shamelesly and deceitfully the Gospel, the word of the
Lord, the touchstone of Gods book? And least we should say, that he
begins with a false supposed and shameful begging of the principle, he will
prove that all these evidences are for them, and so must the heretic that you
will deal withal be made in the beginning to confess, Yea Sir, but how will
you drive him to this confession? Forsooth says Bristow, they all confess it
many ways indirectly. First in that they use not the same evidences them
selves, in their declarations. Secondly in that they admit no evidence but only
Scripture. To the first I answer they use as much of this evidence, as is good
and agreeable to the holy Scripture. To the second I say, that if only Scripture
be on our side it is more then all the rest against the Scripture, and again
if only Scripture be on ourside, then all the motives be not on their side, for
Scripture is one of them, the 8. in the motives the first in the demaundes. But
the Papist must make his friend say as much directly or else say expressly to
every one of them whether he will be tried by them. As a friend to the
presones, though an enemy to the errors of such Papists as are curarable. I
have said expressly and particularly to every one of them, sheweing whether
it be a true and proper note of the church, and if it be, that it belongs to
us and not to them. Although Bristow say, that this way we know full well that
they shall have the victory flying therefore evermore to our weak and false
castle of only Scripture. That the scripture only is our castle, we do gladly
admit, but that the same is a most strong true and impugnable castle, none
but a blasphemous heretic will deny. But you must (says Bristow) still labor
to get them (and if you can) with their consent, out of the castle into the
plain fields aforesaid, to make them grant expressly that there in your
hands they can not stand. Nay Bristow you must beat us from our castle if
you can, for we will never consent to go out of it for defense, except it be
to offer you the advantage, not in the plain fields as you call it, but among
your petty piles and small holds. And so we have done often. So did that
reverend father the Bishop of Salisburie, in that noble challenge wherein
you were shamefullie foiled in your own ground and many of your fortes beaten
about your ears. But you do not well to teach your scholars to seek a
gentle adversary to fight withal, which must first of all be willing to lay
down his sword and shield and then you are good enough for him with your
manly motives with which when you have treandled him about like a tenis ball,
you send him back again to his castle of only Scripture, to see whether
they will bear him out in his opinions. For example, is not this Scripture
manifest enough on your side and against us? This is my body. This is my blood?
Mat. 26. Verily even as plain as this. They did all eat the same spiritual
meat. They all drunk of the rock that followed the^ and ye rock was Christ.
1. Cor. 10. They are both one manner of speaking, and both of one matter.
Therefore they have both one meaning. The second example is. By works a man is
justified and not by faith only Iac. 2. And this is also Scripture, knowing
that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by faith of Jesus
Christ G^lat. 2. And again by grace you are saved through faith (and that not
of your selves it is the gift of God) not of works least any man should
boast. The later being in manner of speaking contrary to the former text do
plainly show, that these two Apostles, speak not both of one kind of faith
or justification. But that James speaks of a dead faith as his words are
plain Verse. 17. and of justification before men. Paul of a living faith and
of justification in the sight of God. The third example is out of James 5.
Where I must first note, that Bristow in translation does manifestly corrupt
and falsefie the Scripture. The Latin is, Infirmatur quis in vobis? If any
amongst you be daungerously sick let him send for the Priests of the church
and they to pray over him anealing him with oil in the name of our Lord etc.
First Bristow adds this word daungerously of his own head, which is neither
in the Greek nor vulgar Latin text, to draw the text of James violently, to
their popish greasing which they use only when a man is desperately sick, and
past hope of recovery in their judgment. Whereas James speaks generally, of
any kind of sickness, wherewith any of the faithful were molested. Secondly
Bristowe leaves out the words following, which are these and the prayer of
faith shall save the sick person and the Lord shall restore him or raise him
up, the Latin is alle^iabit shall ease him, which words declare, that the
Apostle speaks not of a perpe^uall Sacrament of the church, but of a
ceremony used by them that had a special gift of healing the sick in the
primitive Church which ceremony must needs cease, with the gift except it
be among apes, that practice outward gesture and actions, without effect. The
other two examples out of the 2. of Machabees the one of praying for the dead,
the other of Jeremy praying for the people, are no parts of the castle of
Canonical Scripture, and therefore with other errors in the same books I
omit them. The last example is out of Genesis 48. The saying of Jacob the
Patriarch of Joseph's two children. God who has fed me from my youth even to
this day: The Angel who has delivered me out of all adversities, bless these
children which is (says Bristow) as if one would say, God and our Lady bless
them. Nay rather God by Jesus Christ bless them, for what other Angel but
Christ the Angel of the great council was the deliverer of Jacob, which when
he wrestled with him in a vision and mystery Genesis 32. he doubted not to call
God. Even the same Angel which led the children of Israel through the
wilderness, who^ S. Paul 1. Cor. 10. calls Christ, who was not an Angel by
nature but by office, and in that as the Mediator he was sent to deliver the
people before he came in the flesh. But if we should understand, the Angel of
whom Jacob speaks, for so^e private Angel, appointed of God to protect him,
yet is it not as if one would say now God and our Lady bless the^. For that
God uses the ministry of Angels to defend and prosper his servant, but not
the ministry of Saints in heaven, for any such purpose that we can learn by
the holy Scriptures. Jacob might therefore pray yt God would send his Angel to
protect those children, even as he had done for him. As for that vain brag
that all Scripture from the beginning of Genesis to the end of the Apocalipse
is for the^ and against us, is nothing else but a false alarm, as though he
would on all sides assalt our castle of only Scriptures, whereas he purposes
nothing less. But this can not be borne, that he says some places of
Scripture be so plain against us, that we can not answer them but by
plucking the pen of the holy Ghost out of his hand that wrote the^ meaning that
we deny the auctority of such books as be not Canonical the Machabees
especially. But this he says can not be. For either they are proved mu^ncibly
to be of the holy Ghostes indighting, or no Scripture at all is proved to be
such as you may remember the common saying of S. Augustine. Ego Euangelio non
crederem etc. I should not believe the Gospel it self unless the Catholic
Churches authority did compel. What shall I say to this impudent blasphemer
that allows none other trial of holy Scripture but the authority of the
Church, because Augustine supposing that he were an Heathen, Again (says he
would not believe the Gospel except the authority of the Church, with other
things did move him: his word is Commoueret which Bristowe not so
ignorauntly as impudently translateth did comp^l mec. But the Catholic Church
(says Bristow) has received these books of equal authority with the rest.
Indeed the Synagogue of Antichrist in the Tridentine council has so
decreede. But the Catholic Church of Christ did never receive them, as I have
showed out of Hicronime. praef in Proverb and others whereto I may add the
judgment of Origin out of Eusebhist: lib. 6. cap. 18. tran. Russ. with the
council o Laodicea. Can. 59.

Mark the plainness of this demonstration, when the question and
controversy is, whether they or we be the chuch. All scriptur is for them and
against us because the church that is, they have thus and thus decrede, No
meruail therefore if Bristow appeal to the judgment of indifferent me^, that al
our prating of ye scriptures is nothing else but as S. Peter says of S. Paul's
Epistles) our wresting and writhing of them by our own vnlearnednes and
unstableness, from the Catholic Churches unity and universality to the scisme
and piece of Luther, and from thence to Calvin etc For the Church is the
settled and immovable rock, against which there is no scripture no truth but
all for it.

This is good a demonstration, as if a man should say to a vessel tossed in the
broad sea with wind and waves, that in the haven there is great rest and
security, but not show what course they should keep to come thither. We by
the only true lodestone Pharos, and heavenly Cynosura of the holy scriptures
(we praise his holy name therefore) have found the most happy haven of the
holy Catholic Church of Christ, and by his help have cast out the Anchor of
Faith so surely fixed not in the sand, but in the Haven it self, that all the
Cables of popish motives, or blasts of Devilish doctrines shall not be able to
stir our ship from thence: which course God grant them to keep, who
laboring in the sea of doubtfulnes, ride not wilfully among the rocks of
Romish pride, nor be obstinately set on the sands of men's traditions, but seek
truth in humility to Gods glory and their safety.

Besides these motives there are two demands which I cannot aptely reduce to any
of the Motives, namely the second which he terms the building of the Church,
and the last which he calls Apostasy. In the former demand he asks us
whether we have not read this argument used by Chrysostom against the Painims
and Jews, that Christ is God, because his Church having but a small
beginning, and many strong enemies, to withstand the building thereof, yet
could or can never be suppressed, but contrariwise of a little spark has set
all the world on fire etc. I answer, we have read this argument, and allow of
it. Then says Bristowe, How has it been these many hundredth years quite
suppressed, yea and in Chrisostomes time no Church at all I answer that since
it was first set up, it was never for one hour quite suppressed, although by
Antichriste these many hundred years it has been greatly oppressed. And in
Chrysostomes time the Church did openly florishe, although infected with some
errors, yet holding strongly the only tradition Jesus Christ, which church was
a member of the same universal Church, whereof our Church at this day is a
part, with which Church in Chrysostoms time, the popish church in that it
disse^teth from us, has nothing common except one or two errors, having the
whole substance of doctrine contrary unto it: wherefore that argument standing,
the popish church is nothing underpropped thereby: which though it had a small
beginning, as the sect of Mahomet, yet grew it by sufferance of God, without
great withstanding of strong enemies, yea God sending the effecacy of error,
that it might prevail and yet has not increased over all ^he world, but is
for the most part contained in one part of Europa deminishing where it is
punished as in Germany, Sauoy, Denmark, Swetia and England, growing only
where it is either mayntained by tyranny or tolerated by lenity.

And now to the last demand of Apostasy, wherewith he charge us. First for
changing the Priesthood, whereupon must ensue a change of the law. so this I
answer, we have changed no priesthood, instituted by God, but retain that
eldership and ministry ordained by our Savior Christ. Contrariwise the Pope
has changed Sacerdotium (which Bristowe confesses to be no other thing then
presbiteratum) which is the ministration of the Gospel yet commonly called both
of him and us Priesthood, that Sacrificing priesthood I say wc the Apostle He.
7. affirm^th to be everlasting and proper to the person of our Savior Christ,
has the Pope translated unto his shaueli gs, and set them up to offer that
Sacrifice which Christ only could offer, and by once offering found eternal
redemption: yea the Priesthood of Melchisedech which the Lord by an oath
confirmed only to our savior Christ. Psalm. 100. He has made common to all
his Massemongers, Therefore the Pope has manifestly made an Apostasy from the
law of Christ.

The second argument by which Bristow would charge us with Apostasy is, for
receiving not one or two, but so many old heresies, besides as he is bold to
say a thousand more of their own invention. This being affirmed without all
show of proof. It shall suffice to deny and turn over unto him and his
fellows.

The third argument is for taking from Christian men, so many arguments of
Christ's divinity, as the invincible continuance and authority of his
Church. The honor and virtue of crosses and relics miracles, exorcismes,
unity, Sacrifice etc. I answer so many of these as are good and sufficient
arguments, we hold still, the insufficient arguments do rather disfornish
then arm the Christians faith, which we have so strongly fortified with
arguments out of the holy scriptures that all the power of darkness cannot
prevail against it,

The fourth argument is, for leaving nothing vndenyed, not Fathers, not
Councels, not Traditions, not Scriptures, nor (the only witness of all
canonical Scriptures) the Churches institution, and departing from the Fathers
of all ages since Christ's time, agreeing with no Christian time, nor none with
them. For denying of canonical Scriptures, it is an impudent slander, as for
Fathers, Councelles, Traditions, Churches authority, we affirm or deny, as
they agree or dissagree with the truth of the holy scriptures, the only
certain witness of the will of God revealed unto men, which we think more
reasonable then the Papists do, which deny, fathers, Councels, Traditions,
yea the authority of the holy Scriptures, and submit all unto the i^dgement of
their Church, now when then the controversy is, whether they be the Church of
God, or of the Devil: whereas the Scriptures are of both parts confessed to
be the word of God in general terms, although in comparison of the
authority of their Church, Piggius calls the holy Scripture a nose of Wax,
and a dumb judge. Eccius terms the written gospel a black Gospel and an
inkish divinity. Hosius says, that this commandment of Christ, Drink ye
all of this, being understood does appertain unto lay men, contrary to
their Churches determination, is the express word of the Devil. And for
departing from the faith of the Fathers etc. I answer it is false, there is
but one true Faith of all true Christians, in all times from which we will
never depart, although we have departed from some erroneous opinions of some
fathers, which because they are contrary to the word of God, by hearing
whereof Faith comes, they deserve not the name of Faith.

Finally, whereas he says, the authority of the Church is the only witness
of all canonical Scriptures, it is untrue. For although he should mean not
the popish Sinagogue, butthe true catholic church of Christ, yet is it not the
only witness of the Scriptures. For even the Jewish Synagogue, is witness of
the old testament, and many sects of heresies of all the scripture, beside
that the spirit of God is the chief and principal witness of all, which
speaks so evidently in allthe canonical scripture, that if all me^ on earth
should refuse to give credit unto them, yet his majesty alone is sufficient
to get credit unto them, especially with all those whom he teaches inwardly
in heart, as he speaks sensibly to their ears.

The last argument is, That in place of all Religion and goodness which they
have removed, devising a new Gospel of their foresaid only vain faith, which
teaches all sins and all heresies to presume of salvation. What can be more
impudent or false then this slander, seeing God and the world knows, that
we teach none other Faith but the faith of the Gospel, which works by love,
and promises remission of sins and salvation to none, but such as earnestly
repent, and are willing to remove all heresy, and to embrace all true
Christian Religion and goodness.

God be praised.
A DISCOVERY OF THE DAVNGEROVS ROCK OF THE POPISH CHVRCH, lately commended by
Nicholas Sanders D. in divinity, at which the Catholic Church of Christ has
been in peril of shipwreck these many hundredth years, By W. Fulke D. in
divinity.
THE eternal rock of the universal Church, Christ was the rock, an other
foundation no Saunder.
man is able to put. 1. Cor. 3. and 10.

The temporal rock of the Militant Church: Thou art Peter and upon this rock
I will build my Church. Mat. 16.

SPaule speaks manifestly 1. Cor. 3. of building of the Church Militant, and
Christ Fulke.
Mat. 16. speaks of an eternal rock, against the which the gates of hell
shall not prevail. Therefore your distinction of eternal and temporal,
universal and militant, which is the foundation of all your rotten rock is an
impudent and blasphemous falsehood.

Of the continuance of your temporal rock, it is in vain to contend when
your rock is nothing else but an heap of sand and dunge whereon your popish
Church is builded.

To the right worshipful M. Doctor Parker bearing the Saunder. name of the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and to all other Protestants in the Realm of
England, Nicolas Sander wishes perfect faith and charity in our Lord,
declaring in this preface, that the Catholics (whom they call Papists) do
pass the Protestants, in all manner of signs or marks of Christ's true
Church. Concerning the omission of titles accustomed to be given to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, for which you excuse your self, I think M. D.
Parker while he lived, did not much esteem them given to him by any man, and
least of all looked to receive them at such men's hands as you are: but
touching the religion and church, whereof he was a minister, I will answer you
in his behalf and of all other ministers and members thereof, that no excuse
will serve you, upon so slender reasons as you bring, to condemn the same of
schism and heresy, nor to defend that Synagogue of Satan, whereof you profess
your self to be a Champion, to be the undefiled Church and spouse of Christ.
For think you M. Sanders, that we will more mislike the Church of Christ
persecuted by the hypocritical cruelty of Antichrist for the space of 5. or.
6. hundredth years before our age, then we do the same, persecuted by the
furious rage of Heathenish tyrants, for 300. years after the first planting
of the same among the Gentills. And think you if we are now to learn, that
all that glory and bright shining of Christ's Church promised by the Prophets,
is spiritual and not carnal, heavenly and not earthly, eternal and not
transitory? Or that we know not your synagogue to be the very contrary kingdom
and sea of Antichrist, even by that outward glory, and glistering pomp of open
show, that you boast of, according to the prophecy of Christ in the
revelation? Apoc. 13. and 17. And as for the city built upon an hill, whereof
you have never done babbling, by the plain context of the Gospel, is not the
whole Church, but every true pastor and minister thereof, who are also the
light of the world, the salt of the earth, and a candle set on a candlestick,
to give light, not hiden under a bushel to be unprofitable. Mat. 5. And Christ
has always been with his Church, although the Church of Rome be departed from
him, and he both lives and reigns for ever, over the house of Jacob, though
he be persecuted in his members by the whore of Babylon, and his name is great
among the Gentilles, from the Sun rising to the going down thereof,
notwithstanding that all nations have drunk of the cup of her fornications.
The prophecyes of Gods spirit do not one of them overthrow the other, but the
one shows how the other is to be understood. And whereas you say our Church
has been under a bushel before these fifty years, because no history
makes mention of any congregation professing our faith in any towns or places
of diverse co^tryes at once, I answer this is as true as all your doctrine
beside. For all ancient histories that write of the state of the primitive
Church, make mention of the same faith which we profess. And although toward
the revelation of Antichrist, the purity of the faith began to be polluted,
yet the substance thereof continued, until by Antichrist, that great defection
and apostasy was made, whereof the Apostle prophecyeth 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. And yet
even in the time of that a postasie, many histories make mention, of the
continuance of our faith and Church in diverse contryes in Europe, namely
England, France, Italy, or although under cruel persecution and tyranny,
beside great nations of the East, which never submitted them selves to the
Church of Rome, and yet retained the substance of Christian faith and
profession, though not without particular errors and superstition. Wherefore
although they that were blind, or far of from the Church of Christ, could not
see her glory, although she had been set upon never so high an hill, no more
then a city built upon the Alps, can be seen in England, yet they that had
spiritual eyes, and by Gods grace drew near unto his Church, did in the most
obscure times, (as the world esteems them,) see the clear beauty of her
light, and the glory of the Lords hill, lifted up above all the hills in the
world. Esa. 2.

The heathen tyrants, thought by their cruel persecution, that they had
utterly rooted out the name and nation of Christians from the face of the
earth. Nero gloried that he had purged the world of the superstition of Christ,
as appears in an old inscription, in a picture of stone. Neroni ^l. Caes.
Aug. Pontif. Max. ob prouin. latromb. and hijs qui nouam generi hum.
superstitionem inculcar. purgatam. To Nero Claudius Caesar Augustus the
greatest Prelate, for that he has purged the province of thieves, and them
that brought in a new superstition to mankind. Likewise another like pillar
there is of Diocletian and Maximian, in these words. Diocletian. Iouius
Maximi. Herculeus Caes. Augu. Amplificato per Orientem and Occident. nup. Romans
and nomme Christianorum deleto quiremp. euertebant. Diocletianus Iouius and
Maximianus Herculeus Caesaris Augusti, having amplified the Empire of Rome,
both in the East and West, and utterly destroyed the name of Christians, which
did overthrow the common wealth, Another like there is of Diocletian alone.
Diocletian. Caes. Aug. Galerio in Orient adoptat. superstitione Christi vbique
deleta and cultu Deorum propagato. Diocletianus Caesar Augustus, having adopted
Galerius in the East, and in all places utterly destroyed the superstition of
Christ, and set forth the worship of the Gods. By these inscriptions and
glorious titles you see, that the heathenish tyrants, persuaded them selves,
that they had utterly defaced the religion of Christ, and destroyed his Church
out of the world. what marvel then, if Antichrist and his adherents, which to
the cruelty of the former tyrants have added most detestable hypocrisy, have
thought that they had so wholly subverted the true religion of Christ and his
true Church, that the name either of Church or religion, might not seem to have
remained in the world, but that of the Romish Antichrist. But as Nero the
Pontif. Maximus of Rome, with Diocletiane and the rest were deceived in their
time, so their successors in place, office, and wickedness, the Popes of Rome
are likewise disapoynted of their cruel purpose.

But M. Sander glories that in all marks and signs of the true Church, the
popish Church does excel ours. But first of all, that which is the only true
mark and trial of the Church, namely the word of God, he denies to be a
sufficient mark of the true Church, yet had he before confessed the Church to
be the pillar and stay of truth. 1. Tim. 3. but the rule of truth (if we believe
our Savior Christ) is the word of God John. 17. 17. therefore the word of God
is the only true trial and mark of the Church.

But let us consider his reasons, by which he would persuade us that ye word
of God is not the chief mark whereby the true Church of God may be known.
First he says the mark whereby an other thing is known, ought it self to be
most exactly known, whereas we are not agreed what Gods word is. Note this
reason of his, by which he takes away all authority and use from the word of
God, not only thereby to discern the true Church, but also to teach us any
other thing that is needful for us to know. But why I pray you are we not
agreed what is Gods word? Forsooth because some call only the written letter
and the meaning thereof Gods word, other think many things are Gods word
which are not expressly written, but delivered by tradition from the Apostles,
and by the holy Ghost, which has written his laws in our hearts: of this
later sort be the Papists, but they are easily confuted. For this principle
must needs stand immovable, that Gods spirit is never contrary to him self.
Therefore seeing the spirit of God has pronounced of the Scriptures, that
they are able to make the man of God perfect prepared to all good works. 2.
Tim. 3. 16. it is certain that God has revealed nothing by tradition, for our
instruction, which is not contained in his word written, much less any thing
that is contrary to his doctrine delivered in the holy Scriptures.

His second reason is, that we are not agreed upon the written word of God,
because the Protestants do not admit so many books of the old testament as
the Catholics do. I answer, the Protestants do admit as many as the
Catholic Church ever did or does at this day. His third reason is, that the
meaning of those books which we are agreed upon, is altogether in question
between us, therefore that can be no mark of the church, which it self is not
known. I answer, although heretics which are overthrown in their own
conscience, will acknowledge no meaning to be true but their own, yet are
there many principles in the Scriptures so plain, as they are granted by both
parts, or else can not without shame be denied of our adversaries, out of which
plain certain and immutable principles, all matters in controversy may be
proved and the same church also discerned, which is the very cause, why the
Papists dare not abide the trial by the Scriptues, but fly to traditions,
even as their forefathers the ancient Valentinian heretics, of whom Irenaeus
writes lib. 3. cap. 2. Cum ex Scripturis arguuntur, in accusationem
conuertuntur ipsaru^ Scripturam, quasi non recte habeant, neque fuit ex
auctoritate, quia vary sunt dictae, and quia non possit ab his
inueniriveritas, qui nesciant traditionem, non enim per literas traditam sed
per viuam vocem. When they are convinced out of the Scriptures, then fall they
to accusing of the Scriptures them selves as though they were not right: nor of
sufficient authority, because they are spoken doubtfully, and that the truth
cannot be found of them which know not the tradition, for that was not
delivered by letters, but by word of mouth. Thus much Ireneus of the old
Heretics, and what his judgment was of the meaning of the Scripture which M.
Sand. makes so ambiguous, he declares lib. 2. cap. 35. Vniuersae scripturae
and Propheticae and Euangelicae in aperto, and sine ambiguitat, and similiter
ab omnibus audiri possunt etc. The whole Scriptures both of the Prophets, and
of the Gospells, are open and without ambiguitie, and may be heard of all me^
alike. This speaks Irenaeus not of every text of Scripture, but of the whole
doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, which is so plain and easy to be
found in the Scriptures, that no man can miss thereof, that seeks not of
purpose to be deceived, as he says cap. 67. of the same book.

But M. Sander is content for disputation sake to admit 1.
Gods word for a mark of the true Church, and will prove that it is first with
the Papists.

For if by Gods word we mean the written letter of the Bible, they are before
us, because we have none assured copies thereof, which we received not of them,
for since that day in which S. Peter and S. Paul delivered Gods word to the
Romans, the Church of Rome has always kept it without leesing or corrupting.

I answer we mean not by Gods word the written letter only, but receiving
and obeying the true and plain sense thereof to be the mark of the Church.
Again I deny, that we had any assured copies of the old and new testament of
the popish Church, but the one of the Jews in Hebrew, the other of the Greek
Church in Greek. And whereas he talks of a certain day in which S. Peter
and S. Paul delivered the Scripture to the Romans, it sauoreth altogether of
a popish fable, finally how the Romish Church in these last days has kept the
Scripture from corruption, although I could show by an hundredth examples, yet
this one shall suffice for all, the very first promise of the Gospel, that is
in the Scripture. Genesis 3. that the seed of the woman should break the
serpents head, the popish Church has either wilfully corrupted, or
negligently suffered to be depraved, thus, ipsa conteret caput iuum, she shall
break thine head, referring that to the woman which God speaks expressly
to the seed of the woman.

The second mark is, that the Papists acknowledge more of the Bible then we
do, by the books of Toby, 2.
Iudeth, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus and of the Machabees. I answer in that you
add unto the word of God, it is a certain argument, that you are not the true
Church of Christ, for the true Church of Christ has ever accounted those
books for apocryphal, witness hereof Hieronym praef. in proverb. Sicut ergo
Judith and Tobiae and Machabaeorum libros legit quidem Ecclesia, sed eos inter
Canonicas Scripturas non recipit: sic and haec duo volumina legate ad
aedificationem plebis, non ad auctoritate^ Ecclesiasticoru^ dogmatum
confirmandam. Therefore as the Church does in deed read the books of Judith,
Tobias, and of the Machabees, but she receives them not among the canonical
Scriptures: so she may read these two books (meaning the book of Wisdom and
Ecclesiasticus) for the edifying of the people, but not to confirm the
authority of Ecclesiastical opinions. Nether is Augustine de doct. Christ.
lib. 2. cap. 8. (who^ M. Sander quoteth) of any other judgment, but
prescribes rules how the canonical Scriptures are to be known. And cont.
Gaudent. epist. lib. 2. cap. 23. he confesse^h plainly that the book of
Machabees is not accounted of the Jews as the law, the Prophets and the
Psalms, which our Savior Christ admits as his witnesses: yet it is
received of the Church, if it be read or heard soberly. Whereby it is manifest,
that the Church in his time received it not absolutely, as part of the
Canonical Scripture, but under condition of a sober reader or hearer. As for
the decree ascribed to Gelasius, it has no sufficient credit of antiquity,
and much less the late councels of Florence and Trent, which he quoteth.
Beside that the same decree of Gelasius admitting but one book of Esdras,
excludes the Canonical book of Nehemias, and receives but one book of the
Machabees which will do the Papists but small pleasure.

The third mark, the popish Church receives not 3.
only the hebrew text of the old testament, and the greek of the new, but also
the greek translation of the septuaginta, and the common Latin translation,
to be of full authority, whereas we give small credit to those translations,
except they agree with the first Hebrew and Greek copies. Therefore the
Papists have Gods word in more authenticke tongues and copies then we have. I
answer, The Tridentine council allows none for authentical, but the common
Latin translation, that is the worst of all: but in that the popish Church
admits differing translations from the original truth of the Hebrew and
Greek text, to be of full authority with the truth, it appears plainly
that she is not the Church of Christ: which either wilfully confounds error
with truth, or else lacks the spirit of discretion to know the one from the
other. And for more authentike copies it is impudently said, that the Papists
do receive, for we receive not only all these which he names, but also the
most ancient Chaldee Paraphrastes, and the Syrian text of the new testament,
yea the Arabicall text of the whole Bible, beside, all vulgar translations of
English, French, Dutch, Italian, Spanish, which the Papists can not abide. All
those, I say, we receive as authentical copies for Christian men to use: but
so that the trial of all translations be made, by the original truth of the
Heb^ue and Greek texts: in which tongue, the old and new Testament were
first written.

Fourthly, the Papists do translate and expound 4.
Gods word in all manner of tongues, better then we, because they have not
only internal vocation, but also external vocation and commission from the
Apostles, by lyneall succession of Bishops and Priests: whereas we have no
commission, but from the common wealth which has none authority to make
Priests etc: and yet how shall they preach if they be not sent? Romans 10. I
answer concerning translations of the word of God into all tongues I never saw
any, nether is there any translation to be showed of any Papist, into any
vulgar tongue.

And as for the external calling of the Papists, I say it is not from any
lawful succession of the Apostles and ancient Church, whose faith and
doctrine they do not follow in their interpretations, for if lyneall succession
of Priests and Bishops could make interpretations good, the doctrine of
Arius, Nestorius, Macedonius, and many other heretics, whose external calling
was according to the lyneall and ordinary succession of Bishops and Priests,
might be auctorised for Catholic. Yea the Papists might not refuse whatsoever
Luther, Bucer, Cranmer, and other have taught, which had the same lyneall
succession that M. Sander does now brag of. And as for our external
calling, he says falsely it is of the common weal etc, whereas it is of the
Church, and therefore ordinarye and lawful, and the saying of S. Paul whom he
cites Romans the tenth is of the inward calling and sending by God, whereof our
doctrine agreeable with the Scripture and our whole intent to set forth the
glory of God is a sufficient proof, the one to satisfy men, the other to
answer our own conscience.

Fifthly he says it is no perfection at all on our side, 5.
that we read Gods word to the people in our Church service in the vulgar
tongue, for thereby we lack the use of the better tongues, as of the Greek
and Latin. O master of impudency, what use is there of the Greek and Latin
tongues, to be read to the people that understand them not? And why are those
the better tongues? he says they were sanctified on Christ's cross for all
holy uses, and especially to serve God in the time of sacrifice. But how were
they sanctified I pray you? For sooth, because Pilate wrote the title in
Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, that it might be understood of all nations for
what crime he was condemned. And is Pilate now become a sanctifier of tongues
for Gods service? is the malicious scorn of an heathen tyrant, a
sanctification of these tongues? O brazen foreheads of shameless Papists. But
hear more yet of this impudent stuff.

This sanctification was the cause, that the Apostles in the East and West
delivered these tongues alone as holy, learned and honorable, not regarding the
infinite multitude of profane and barbarous tongues, whereof it came, that the
East Church was called the Greek Church, and the West the Latin Church. But
the Scripture, Acts the second, does teach us, that the holy Ghost has
sanctified all tongues of all nations to the praising of God, and that the
Apostles delivered the magnifical praises of God, in all languages. Act. 2. 11.
And although the Greek and Latin tongues, were most used, and most commonly
understood in the Roman Empire, yet the Church of Christ was enlarged farther
then ever the Roman Empire extended in Persia, Armenia, AEthiopia, India etc.
where there was no knowledge, either of the Greek or Latin tongues. And even in
the Romain Empire those nations, to whom the Latin and Greek tongues were
not vulgar, used their Church service in other tongues. Hieronym. in epitaphio
Paulae ad Eustochium tells, that at the solemn funerals of Paul: every
nation that was present, did singe their Psalms in order in their own
language. Hebraeo, Graeco, Latino, Syroque sermon Psalmi in ordine
personabant. In the Hebrew, Greek, Latin and Syrian speech, the Psalms were
song in order. But seeing Master Sander allows none other sanctification of
the tongues, but Pilates title on the cross, how is the Hebrew tongue which
was one of the three, and the most principal, as the first tongue of the
world, and for the excellencye thereof called the holy tongue, how is that I
say, shut out from Church service, why was there not an Hebrew service
established by the Apostles as well as the Greek and Latin? But yet he
brings another argument to prove that it is lawful to read service to the
people in a tongue wc they understand not, by the example of Christ, who in
time of his sacrifice, did recite the beginning of the 21 Psalm, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me, in ye Hebrew tongue, which he knew the people
did not understand, and did not interpret the same in the vulgar tongue. Good
Lord into what foollishnes does satan carry their minds, that wilfully strive
against the truth? For what reason is this? Christ in his private prayer, that
concerned his own person, spoke with a tou^g that was not commonly understood,
therefore the ordinary public service ought to be in a strange tongue. Christ
compassed about with his enemies, and none within the hearing of him but the
virgin Mary, and John the Evangelist ^^^^ loved him or regarded him spoke
Hebrew, therefore the Priest in the church, must speak Latin or Greek. But
when M. Sand. has played with this argument as long as he can, his antecedent
is utterly false, for Christ resited not that text of the Psalm in the
Hebrew, but in the Syrian tongue, which was the vulgar tongue understood and
spoken of all the people, as is manifestly proved by the word Sabac^tani
reported by both the Evangelists. Mat. 27. Mark. 15. Which is of the Syrian
tongue, whereas the Hebrew text is Hazabtani, as I report me to all that can
but read two tounges Hebrew and Syrian. And whereas the malicious Helhou^ds
said he called for Elias, it was not because they understood him not, but
because they most dispightfully mocked his most vehement prayer, taking
occasion of the like sound of the name of God and of Elias, as scornful
deriders use to do.

Sixthly, lest the Protestants should pass the Papists in any one jot, they
have the use of the vulgar tongues in Dalmatia, Assyria, and AEthiopia, which
acknowledge the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome. This is a loud lie, for
neither the church of Dalmatians, Moscouites, Armenians, Assirians,
AEthiopia^s, nor any other of those East nations, that retain the name of
Christ, did ever acknowledge the Popes supremacy. I know they have feigned
Fables of Letters sent from Preto Ioannes and such like, which are mere
forgeryes upon the submission of some one poor wanderer, that has come out
of those countries. But M. Sand. will show the cause, why all Nations are not
suffered likewise to use their vulgar tounges in their service. First he says
vulgar tounges cause barbarousnesse, for the Preachers of those Countries
understand not the Latin and Greek tounges by this means. What an absurd
reason this is, experience does show. For when or where was greater ignorance
in the Clergy, then there, and at such time as the Latin service was used?
How many in all England understood or could read the Greek tongue within
these sixty or eighty years? I speak nothing of the Hebrew tongue.
Contrariwise what age was ever more full of lyberall knowledge in all Sciences,
and learned tounges, then this is even in England, France, and Germany, where
service is used in the vulgar tou^ge? The^fore the use of thevulgar tou^ge in
Church Service is not the cause of barbarousnesse.

The second reason is, that necessity inforceth the Apostolic See to
tolerate these Nations in their vulgar tounges, because they know none other,
but Protestants by schism are fallen from Latin to English, that is from
better to worse, and therefore not to be tolerated. But indeed the necessity
is, because they will not receive your Latin tongue, and our schism is from
Antichriste to be joined with Christ, from whose doctrine the Church of Rome
by horrible schism is departed, for what the doctrine of Christ is concerning
Public Prayers in a tongue that is not understood, his Apostle Saint Paul
has abundauntly taught us, the 1. Corinthes the 14. Chapter. Finally we
defend that our natural Engli^he tongue, is better to edi^ie English men,
then your balde Latin tou^ge that you use in your popish service is for any
use of any man learned or unlearned.

Seventhly the Papists do not only consider the written letter, but also the
plain meaning of every proposition and as the words do sound, so do they
understand them. And heerof he brings many examples. To this I answer, that
if they understand all propositions, as well figurative as plain and proper
speeches as the words do sound, they make monstrous interpretations, as if
they understand this proposition the rock was Christ as the words sound, they
make a new transubstantiation of the stone into Christ, or this: This cup is
the new Testament, if their interpretation be none other then the sound of
the word does give, they make the new Testament to be nothing but a drinking
vessel. But to discuss his examples, the first is this text. Matthew. 26.

This is my body, why says he is this which Christ poynteth to, denied to be
his body. I answer, it is affirmed to be 1
his body in that sense that he spoke and otherwise then he meant, it is denied
to be his body.

Again James says Cap. 2. A man is justified of works and not of faith
only. Why then are works denyde to justify, or 2
only faith taught to justify. I answer works are not denied to justify
before men, and only faith is taught to justify before God. Romans 3.

The doers of the law shall be justified. Romans 2. Why then 3
teach you the law not to be able to be done. Because the Apostle says, that
of the works of the law none shall be justified before God. Romans 3. 20. for if
the works of the law could be done, by any man perfectly as the law
requires, he should be justified by the^ as the text affirms

By the obedience of one, that is Christ, many shall be 4
made righteous. Romans 5. Why then are we denied to be really righteous, and
said to be righteous by imputation only? Because the obedience of Christ is
not really our obedience, but by imputatio^ of God through faith.

The love of God is spread in our hearts by the holy ghost, which is given us.
Romans 5. This is more then a bare imputing 5
of righteousness to us, yea Sir, but this is not our justification, but an
effect thereof, for he said immediately before that being justified by faith
we have peace with God.

Whose sins ye forgive they shall be forgiven them. Ioh. 20 6
Why then are Bishops and Priests denied to forgive sins. We grant that
true Bishops and elders have authority to forgive sins in Gods name, but not
absolutely.

He that is great among you, let him be made as the younger. 7
Luke 22. Why then deny you that one was greater among the Apostles, and is
still among the Bishops their successors. One was not greater among the Apostles
in authority, for their greatness was to be the greatest servant and to take
the most pains, and to be most humble. Mat. 18

Thou art Peter or a rock, and upon this Rock I will build 8
my Church Mat. 16, Why is the militant Church denied to be built vponS. Peter
and his suceessors in that chair and office.? The Church is affirmed to be
built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, and so upon Peter as
one of the^, in which office he has no successors.

Keep the traditions which ye have learned, either by word or by an Epistle.
1. Thessa. 2. Why then are traditions 9
so despised that the name cannot be suffered in the English Bible. It may and
is suffered in that sense, which the holy Ghost uses it, but not to bring in
prayer for the dead or any thing contrary to the scripture, under the name of
traditions Apostolic. For the Apostle speaks only of the doctrine which he
delivered to them, either by preaching or by Epistle, which is none other, then
is contained in the holy Seriptures. For of other traditions pretended to be of
the Apostles, he bids them take heed in the same Chapter. verse. 2.

He that joins his Virgin in marriage does well and he 10
that does not join her does better. Why make you marriage as good as
virginity? For such as have the gift of continence we grant virginity is
better in such respects as the Apostle teaches,

Vow eye and render your vows unto God. Psalm. 75. If 11
thou will be perfect go and sell all things which thou haste and give them to
the poor and follow me. Mat. 19. There are Eunuchs which have gelded them
selves for the kingdom of Heaven. Obey your Rulers, and be subject unto them?
Why the^ are the vows of poverty, of chastity and obedience, counted
unlawful, or men constrained not to perform the^. The first text pertains to
the old Testament, The second is a singular trial to that one place. The third
we grant in them to whom it is given, the fourth we never made question about
it, but al these are evil fauouredly patched together, to prove the vow of
Monkery lawful, which is superstitious for want of Gods commandment,
blasphemous for the opinion of merit, impossible for the frailty of many men's
nature. As for compulsion there is none used, for no man is compelled to be
rich, unchaste or disobedient.

Do ye the worthy fruits of penance, Luc. 3. Why the^ 12
is satisfaction and penance desptsed with you? This text is, Do ye the
fruits worthy of repentance. We honor the fruits worthy of true repentance,
and exhort all men to bring them forth, but popish satisfaction has nothing
like to them. For we believe that God does freely forgive the penitent for
Christ's sake.

The husband and wife being two in one flesh, is a great 13
. sacrament or mystery in Christ, and in the church. Ephe. 5. Why is then the
marriage of faithful persons denied to be a sacrament. If you understand a
sacrament generally, for every mystery, we may grant you it is a sacrament,
but if you understand a sacrament specially for an outward sign of Gods
favor and grace or a seal of our justification it is none. For if it were it
should be necessary for all men to receive it, again it has the institution
of God before the fall of man, therefore can be no sacrament of ye new
Testament to testify our restitution. Your common translation turns the
Greek word (...) which is a holy secret, oftentime Sacramentum, yet I know you
would be ashamed to confess so many sacraments of the popish church, as
there be mysteries which he calls sacraments as Ephe. 3. the preaching of
the gospel to the Gentiles he calls Sacramentum. 1. Tim. 3. So he calls
the incarnation of Christ sacramentum pietatis. And are you not ashamed to
delude ignorant men, with the ambiguous name of a Sacrament.

Work your salvation with fear and trembling Phi. 2. Why then are you so
presumptuous, as even by faith to assure your 14
. selves of you salvation? because it follows immediately that it is God which
works in us both to will and to perform according to his good will, for it is
no presumtion to assure our selves that the promises of God are true. And he
may welfeare, which is assured to be saved, for faith does not exclude but
plant in us the fear of God, though not a servile fear. As for ye deep
secrets of Gods predestination, we take not upon us to know them, otherwise
then they be revealed by his word. Finally, where you ask whether faith be
not an ordinary gift in the Church, I answer you with the Apostle, that all men
which are in the outward face of the Church, and participate the Sacraments,
have not faith. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2.

The 8. mark of the Church if not only the plain 8
. understanding of any one sentence, but also the circumstance of the place,
and the conference of Gods word be necessary, the Papists have used it in
every question. For proof hereof M. Sanders refers us to his treatise of the
supper of the Lord lib. 4. and to his book of Images cap. 2. and 11. and in
this book to the ca. 2. and 4. I answer you make a light show, for a fashion,
but you nether consider the circumstances rightly, nor make any true collation
of one place with another, as is proved by the answers of these books:
Therefore your Academical conclusion is false, heretical and blasphemous, that
the only word of God, being never so well handled, is no sufficient mark to
show the truth. When Christ says, Sanctify them in thy truth, Thy word is the
truth. Joan. 17. 17.

The 9. M. Sander says: the heads of the Church, the 9
. councels, the Bishops and the ancient fathers must be Judges whether we do
well apply the Scriptures or no? as whether S. Peter be the rock which M. Jewel
denies, and he proves by 16 doctors afterward cap. 4. of wc proof we shall
consider God willing in due place. But whereas M. Sander quoteth Aug. cont.
Julian. lib. 2. for his rule of Judges: I say, he has no such rule in that
book, only Augustine does convince the arguments of the Pelagians of nouelty,
by the judgment of Iren. Cyprianus, Rheuanus, Ambrosius etc. and other, which
lived before their time, and therefore were no partial judges, so do we
convince the Popish heresies, and their arguments of novelty, not only by the
manifest word of God, but also by the testimony of the most ancient fathers,
although we may not admit all that they did write to be true, even as the same
Augustine being pressed with the authority of Ambrose, Chrysostom, and
Cyprian by the Donatists and Pelagians, provoke from them only to the
Scriptures. de not. and gra^cap. 61. de unit. eccl. cap. 16. cont. Crescon.
lib. 2. cap. 31. de gratia Christ. cap. 43. That the allegation of the fathers
suffiseth not of it self, we agree with Master Sander, but that there is any
other trial of the truth the^ Scripture, we will never grant, seeing God has
therein delivered his whole doctrine, whatsoever is necessary for us to believe
that we may be saved. Ioh. 20. 31.

But the Papists for the tenth mark join tradition and practice of Gods
church, which can never deceive ama^. We 10
. think says Chrysostom the tradition of the church to be worthy of belief.
Is it a tradition? ask no further. But how shall we prove it to be a
tradition of the church. The Valentinians (as I showed before out of Irenaeus)
denied the Scriptures to be sufficient, without knowledge of the tradition.
Therefore to discern the tradition of ^^^^ church from the tradition of the
heretics, we have none other trial but by the Scriptures. Therefore
Chrysostom says in 2. Cor. Ho. 3. that S. Paul did write the same things
which he told them before in preaching. As for the universal practice either
of the Popes supremacy, or of the sacrifice of the mass which he braggeth of,
shall never be proved, but the contrary.

The eleventh mark is the auctority of general cou^cells confirming the
truth, and condemning heretics, and 11
. such he makes the late council of Trent to be. But we deny that
Conciliabulum, of a few Popish hypocrites, to be a general council, in which
no man should have a definitive voice, but they that were accused of heresy
and whereof, he that is most of all charged with heresy, that is the Pope, is
made the supreme judge, wherefore the Papists have no lawful general council
on their side, although general counsels as he confesses, are no sufficient
trial of the true church, both because they may be hindered many ways, and
also because they may err, as did the conncells of Arimine, and Ephesus.

In respect of these considerations, he makes the twelfth mark to be the
supremacy of the Pope, whichis 12
. wholly theirs for trial whereof, this book following was written. But for
proof that Christ has appointed such a judge, over all, he cites Joan. 21.
that Christ commanded Peter to feed his sheep, as though that perteyned not
to every one of the Apostles, as much as to Peter. Also Lu. 22. that Christ
having prayed that Peter's faith might not fail, commanded him when he was
converted from his fall, to confirm his brethren, which pertains only to the
person of Peter, and can not with any cable ropes be drawn to the Bishop of
Rome, or any successor of Peter, for it concerns his singular, full, comfort
and duty, in respect of his fall and Gods mercy, except that according to
analogy, it may be applied to any man, that is so raised after his fall, and so
that precept confirm thy brethren, gives no special commandment to the
Pope, but to every. man whom God has mercifully converted as he did Peter.

With the twelfth mark M. Sander would have ended, but that the Protestants,
affirm the lawful preaching 13
. of Gods word, and the lawful administration of the Sacraments to be a mark
whereby they will be tried. But seeing lawful preaching and ministering must be
tried by Gods word, M. Sander first asks what we call Gods word? and
secondly he asks if he have not proved it to be more with the^ the^ with us,
whatsoever it be? It is like this Popish academicall Atheist, has proved Gods
word to be on his side, ^^^^ will not have it certainly known what Gods word is.
After this he will prove the Papists to be most lawful preachers, because they
are likest to the Apostles, in converting many nations, within these 900.
years, when he says no man alive could once hear us peep. As though
controversy of nations would argue a true church. By which reasons not only
the Protestants may now prove them selves to be most like the Apostles in
converting so many nations of Europe, but also the Arians, and most of all, the
Mahumetists, might prove them selves the true church. It is not therefore
conversion of nations, but conversion of the^ to the true doctrine of the
Apostles, which makes us like the Apopostles: and the Papists, Arians, and
Mahometists most unlike unto them. And where he says, that no sound of ours
was heard in 900. years space by any man alive: to see how impude^tly he
lies, read Flaccius Illyricus in catalogo testium veritatis, and you shall see
in all ages, what momuments are extant of some few, whom God reserved from that
general Apostasy of Antichrist. Read also the acts and monumentes set forth
by M. Fox, and you shall see the same most plentif^lly. He will prove their
administration of the Sacraments to be more lawful then ours, because they have
five more then we. But I answer because they have five more then the word of
God allows, or the primitive church acknowledges: and in the administration
of the other they have either altogether perverted the institution, as in the
Lords supper: or shamefully corrupted it with superstition, as in baptism:
they are not the church of Christ, but the church of Antichrist.

When we allege the persecution of the Romish Antichrist, to be the cause that
our church, has not flourished 13
in outward peace, and to be a mark also of the truth of our congregation,
what masters (says D. Sanders) Antichrists persecution shall dure but three
years, and an half, and is the Pope Antichrist, who has dured these 900.
years? But good M. Doctor determiner, how prove you that Antichrists
persecution shall dure but three and an half, of such years as the Pope has
dured 900. you quote Dan. 7. Apoc. 13. you might by as good reason say it shall
dure but three days and an half Apoc. 11. 9. will you take upon you so
precisely to determine of the mystical number which is sometime called 3.
years and an half, sometime 42. months, sometime 1260. days, sometime 3. days
and an half, sometime a time and times and half a time, al which make half a
Prophetical week, and signify a time determined of God, but not plainly
revealed to many.

Secondly you ask, how it could be the true church, against wc Antichrist so
long prevailed, that no man could tell whether any such were in ye earth: when
hell gates shall not prevail against ye true church? I answer, if you can not
put a difference between impugning and prevailing: you will have much to do to
defend your Romish church to be the true church, against the Turks the^
selves, who have possessed a great part of ^^^^ ground, wc you say perteined
once to your church. But herin appears the mark of the true church, against
wc the gates of hell have not prevailed, that although Satan was let loose, the
whore of Babylon dronken with the blood of her members, her two witnesses
slain, she her self driven into the wilderness, her seed persecuted
wheresoever they were dispersed, yet she is restored in the sight of the world,
her witnesses raised from death to life, the devil is vanquished, ye purple
whore of Babylon is fallen, and Antechrist shall at length be thrown into the
lake with the devil and his Angels. This is the Lords work and it is
marvelous in our eyes.

If either persecution, or not failing in persecution, be a mark of the
church, it is more in the Papists the^ in the 15
. Protestants, for persecution he will prove that they be persecuted by us, as
the mother by ye child, which departs from her obedience, as Agar and Ismael
from Sara. But I answer, we are departed from Agar, under whom we were in
bondage to Sara by whom we are made children of the heavenly Jerusalem: and
even as Agar departed from Sara, so did the synagoge of Rome from the Catholic
church of Christ. For not failing in persecution, experience teaches in all
countries, wc have received the Gospel, how small punishme^ty greatest number
of Papists will abide, for their Popish profession: whereas so many thousands
Go^s Saints being most cruelly murdered by ye popish church, the church of
Christ is not diminished but increased thereby, even as Cyprian says the blood
of the martyrs is the seed of church.

If antiquity be a mark, it is proved to be on the Papists side by this
reason. The church is all one, the later part of the church for 900. years
last past is on the Papists side therefore the former part also. But this
reason standing upon a shameful begging of that which is questioned, is soon
turned upon your owne^ neck. The church is in all but one, but the beginning
of the church makes not for you, therefore that which you say is the later
part of the church, being contrary to that former, is no part of the church, so
that by this reason, you shall neither have antiquity or any part of the
church.

But if you appeal to particular examples (says M. Sander) I say the
Christians in the primitive church, did 2
. communicate under one kind at Emaus, and at Jerusalem. And I say M. Sander,
if he would burst him self with study, shall never prove it. He quoteth Aug. de
consen. Euang. lib. 3. cap. 25. whose opinion was that Christ gave the
sacrament at Emaus, but of communion in one kind, 3
. he never once dreamed.

He says the Christians did set up images in the honor of Christ, quoting Eus.
lib. 7. cap. 14. whereas Eusebius speaks of heathen men, that of heathenish
custom did set up images and not of Christians.

Dionysius although he be ancient, yet he wrote not 4
: in the time of Eusebius, Hieronymus or Gennadius, and so was known for no
writer in ye Church for 500. years after Christ, Wherefore I will not stand
about his errors and ceremonies, which yet for the most part are as unlike
the popish ceremonies, as they are to ours.

Although we have no certainty of the writings of Ignatius which are extant,
yet is there nothing in them that favors the Papists religion. He names a a
sacrifice which could not be offered without the Bishop, that cannot be the
Mass, which every head geprieste may say, ad Symrn. He would have the Emperor
obey the Bishop (says M. Sand.) ad Phil. But this proves the Epistle to be
counterfaite, for there was no Christian Emperor when Ignatius lived.
(Although in divine matters the Christian Emperor ought to obey the Bishop, or
rather Gods word which ye Bishop preaches.) Also he speaks of Virgins that
had consecrated them selves to God: and who speaks against them, which having
the gift of continency do keep virginity? In the same Epistle: He affirms
both Peter and Paul to have been married, and will not condemn the marriage of
church ministers.

He commends the lent fast ad Antioch. Choose M. Sander, whether your
decretals lie of Thelesphorus that invented the lent fast, or that this is a
counterfeit Epistle of Ignatius. In the Epistle ad Phil. Where he commends
the 40. days fast, the Wednesday and the Friday fast he says farther.
Quicunque dominicum aut sabbathum non ieiunauerit praet^r vnum sabbathum pas^ae
ipse est Christi interfector: Whosoever shall not fast the Lords day or sabbat
beside one sabbat of Easter he is a murderer of Christ. If this be true
antiquity: why does the church of Rome omit fast on Sunday: if it be
counterfeit? why is not M. Sander ashamed to allege it?

Justinius witnesses that water was mingled with the wine. 5
. Yea but it was to alay the strength of the wine, not that it was necessary
for the Sacrament, though afterward it grew to a superstitious observation. He
says further, the Deacons carried the consecrated mysieries to them that were
absent which Calvin reputeth for an abuse. If they carried the bread and the
wine as the Sacrament, it was an abuse not to be warranted by Gods word. But
seeing the Deacons office was to minister to the poor: I think rather they
carried it as the alms of the church, to such as were needy.

What Pius decreed we find in no writer of credit. As 6
. for the Popes law it is no good evidence, having a busnel of dross and
counterfeit dregs to one grain of good and true antiquity. In deed Eusebius
restisieth, that Victor Bishop of Rome did excommunicate the Bishops of Asia,
about the celebration of Easter, but he testifies also, that Victor was
sharply rebuked by diverse other godly Bishops, namely by Irenaeus of Lions and
Polycrates of Ephesus for so doing. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 25.

Tertullian says all doctrine is false and lying that agrees not with some
Apostolic church. And such is the doctrine, that the church of Rome holds,
which agrees with no Apostolic church, no not with the ancient Apostolic
church of Rome. But our doctrine agrees with all the Apostolic churches that
ever were, planted in the earth and continued in the doctrine of the Apostles.

Tertullian a Montanist, speaks in deed of oblatio^s for the dead, but they
were none other, then such as 7
. they offered for the birth days, and that was tha^kesgeuing. He speaks of
prayer for the dead, which he received of Montanus the heretic. The stations
he speaks of were no gaddings, but standings. The visitation of Jerusalem is
denied to no man that will take the pains to go thither, nether was it ever
like to Popish pilgrimage, which is to run a whoring after Idols.

We confess with S. Cyprian, that the bread in the Sacrament is changed, not
in shape but in nature, to be 8
. the flesh of Christ understanding nature for property, and the flesh of
Christ to be received spiritually.

In public offenses we would have confession to be made publicly, before the
Elders of the church, as Cyprian would them that fell in persecution, but of
Popish auricular confession, he never spoke one word. We acknowledge the
forgiveness of sins by the ministers, to be ratified by God, not binding Gods
judgment to it but it to Gods judgment. We grant that temporal punishment
for satisfaction of the church ought to be appointed unto public offenders,
which may be released upon their hearty repentance, and is no more like to
Popish pardons, the^ the stews and market of Rome is like the church of God.

The rest which he huddleth up together, I will answer 9
. as briefly. S. James his chair was esteemed, but as a monument of antiquity
and no holiness put in it. Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 15. The solemn dedicating of
churches was no more like Popish hallowing of churches, then Christian
preaching and praying is like to con^uration. Eusebius. lib. 9 ^a. 10. The
straight life of heremites was as like the Popish heremites that dwelt at every
good towns end, where the other dwelled in the wilderness, as the city and the
desolat wilderness are alike Ruff. li. 11. c. 4. Driving of devils by holy
water, was no ordinary ceremony, but a miracle once wrought by the Bishop of
Apamea, who when the temple of Jupiter could not be burned with fire, that was
set unto it, after he had prayed, caused water signed with the cross to be
sprinkled on the altar, which being done, the devils being driven away, the
temple was set on fire and burned: Theodor. lib. 5. c. 29. The auctority of
unwritten traditions is so defended by Basil, de sp. sanct. 27. that he
affirme^h whatsoever is not of the holy Scriptures, is sin. Mor. diff. 80.

Prayer to Saints, as the dregs of that time, I leave to be sucked up of the
Papists. Repentance but no Popish sacrament of penance, is commended by S.
Ambrose. The name of the mass is not in Ambrose Ep. 33. for missa^ facere
signifies to let go, or let pass, not to say mass, ye name of sacrifice
signifies a sacrifice of tha^kesgiuing.

The Canon of the Popish mass is not in Ambrose, but the form of celebration
of the communion in his time de Sacr. li. 4. ca. 5. and 6. Chrysostom recites
the text of S. James only to prove that God forgiueth sins at the prayers of
the Elders, not speaking of the ceremony of extreme unction, used by the
Papists and de Sacer. li. 3.

Hyeronym ad Vilant. allows not the superstitious use of burning candells in
the day time. That he will not allow Bishops to beget children, it shows his
errors, condemned by the Nicene council, by the persuasion of Paphnutius:
Socr. li. 1. cap. 11. Hieronyme speaks not of a certain number of prayers,
to confirm the use of your beads, but of a certain number of the verses of
the holy Scripture to be learned as a talk to the Lord. ad Furtan.

That he which has had two wives could not be a Priest in Hieronymus time yt
was a little of that chafe, wc afterward overwhelmed ye good corn in the
church of Rome. Hierom affirms that he, as helper, unto the writing of
Damasus Bishop of the city of Rome, did answer the synodicall consultation
that came from the East and the West. What is this to any purpose of the
Papists? Not only the Bishop of Rome was consulted, nor he always, except the
matter concerned the whole church, when no member should be left vnconsulted,
and not made priuye.

Finally that Augustine says, that the fire by which some shall be saved after
this life, is more grievous then any pain of this life. Psalm. 37, he says the
contrary de fide ad Laurent. cap 68 where he denies that text of scripture to
be understood of punishment after this life: and saves the whole matter of
purgatory may be enquired of, as a matter uncertain. The like De octo Dulcity
quest. 91. and cont. Pelag. Hypog. lib. 5. he knows heaven and hell, and
utterly d^nyeth the third place to be found in the scriptures. By which it
appears, that this error of purgatory was but very young in Augustines time.
And now you see what antiquity he can boast of, for when he has wrested and
wrong all that he can, scarce two or three errors have any shadow of antiquity,
and those not in the greatest matters, whereas the whole substance of the
doctrine of faith in God, justification by Christ, the true worship of God, the
virtue of Christ's death, the infirmity of man, the right use of the
sacraments the auctority of the holy scriptures, and a number more of such
principal heads of Christian learning, in which we differ from them, he is as
silent as a stone.

The 17. mark, is the name of Catholics, which 17
. M. Jewel confesses to have been of late given to the Papists, which among
other things, stayed S. August. in the right faith, as he confesses Cont.
epist. Manich. lib. 4. But seeing the name of Catholics was falsely given to
you, which are now ryghtlye called by the name of your archeheretike the pope,
papists, the only name of Catholics, which was given to you by your selves,
to shadow your heresies, cannot prove you to be Christians, or your church to
be Catholic, especially seeing you lack the truth which Augustine in the same
place, confesses to be more worth then either succession, antiquity, the name
of Catholic, or any other thing else.

The eyghteenth mark is the succession of Priests, and Bishops, even from the
seat of Peter unto Pius the fifth in whose time this book of M. Sander was
written, which mark is approved by Augustine, by Irenaeus, by Tertullian, by
Optatus and by Hieronym, as he says, being one of the most evident of all
other, but therein he belyeth all these fathers whom he cites, who never
alleged the bare succession of place and persons, but joined with the
continuance of doctrine, received from the Apostles, against new and late
sprung up heresies. Augustine shall speak for the rest, who after he has
alleged unto the Donatistes, the successions of Bishops from Peter in the
unity of the Catholic church, among which was never a Donatist, the judgment
of the Bishop of Rome in absoluing of Cecilianus, and many such like reasons,
whereunto he thinks the Donatistes should yield, yet in the end, he adds
these words. Quamquam nos non tam de istis documentis presumamus, quam de
Scripturis sanctis. Although we do not so much presume of this documents as of
the holy Scriptures.

These eighteen marks M. Sander will have to be more richly seen in them,
then in the Protestants, but what marks they are, and how they are to be
found in their church, I have briefly showed. But now he comes to a general
challenge to prove that we have nothing which they lack, and we lack many
things which they have. First they have a justifying faith as well as we, but
not justifying alone, but with charity, which is the life of faith. But
charity is a fruict of a living and unfeigned faith, not the life thereof. 1.
Tim. 1. 5. the effect not the cause, and we hold with Saynct Paul that a man
is justified by faith without the works of the law. Romans 3. for charity is
no instrument to apprehend the mercy of God, but faith only, therefore faith
only does justify. We are justified gratis, steely by his grace. Romans 3. 24.
therefore nothing can come in account of justification before God, but only
faith. which seeing ye Papists have not, they have not a justifying faith.

We have two Sacraments, and they have seven, but seeing they have five more
then Christ instituted, and have perverted the one, and polluted the other,
they have but one Sacrament at the most, and that horribly profaned, I mean
baptism. We have an inward priesthood (he says) to offer up Christ in our
hearts, and they offer him both in hearts and hands. But our spiritual
priesthood is not to offer up Christ, but spiritual sacrifices acceptable by
Christ 1. Pet. 2. 5. Heb. 13. 15. and they are horrible blasphemers, that take
upon them to offer up Christ, whom none could offer but him self by his
eternal spirit. Heb. 9. 14.

He says, that the Papists believe as well as we, that Christ by one
sacrifice paid our raunsom for ever, when they show it to the eye in the
eblation of their Mass, then the which nothing can be more contrary to the
only sacrifice of Christ once offered and never to be repeated, because he
found eternal redemption thereby. Heb. 10. 14. 9. 12. and 25. etc.

He adds that they believe Christ to be the head of the Church, and show it
by a real figure of one head, in earth, meaning the Pope, whom now he makes
a figurative head, as though Christ were not present with his Church, or that
his Church were a monster with two heads.

As lay men receive the communion in both kinds with us, so they d^e with
them in Austria by the Popes dispensation, as though Christ's commandment and
institution were not sufficient without the Popes dispensation. Wherein also he
affirms a monstrous absurdity, that the Sacrament was not instituted in two
kinds, to be so received, but by an unbloody sacrifice, to show the nature of
his bloody sacrifice in which his soul and blood was separated from his body
and flesh, and yet he says the body and flesh of Christ, is not well contained
in the cup, as his blood in the paten, with the body and form of bread, and
no separation of the one from the other, and no more contained or distributed
by both, then by one alone. Which saying is to be received with whoopes and
hisses, of all men that have their five wits.

They have marriage (he says) in greater price then we, because they teach it
to be a sacrament, but we find it not instituted by Christ to be a sacrament of
the new testament, therefore we receive it as an holy ordinance, containing also
a great mystery, but yet no sacrament. But if it be an holy sacrament, why do
you think it unmeet for ministers of the Church? and why does your Pope
Syricius, or rather some counterfeating Canonist in his name, call holy
matrimony a living in the flesh, such as can not please God. But although
marriage be honorable in all men (you say) it is not so in them that have
gelded them selves for the kingdom of heaven, who have no more possibility to
marye, then a gelded man to ^eget children. You were best then to tell the
Apostle that his saying was too general, for he should have excepted them
that so gelded themselves. But S. Paul says, notwithstanding your
impossibility, if a virgin do marye, she does not sin. 1. Cor. 8. 28. You
will reply he speaks of them that have not vowed, and how prove you that
Christ speaks of them that have vowed, longer then God would give them grace
to live chaste, which he affirms to be a peculiar gift, and not in the power
of every man. Mat. 19. 12. But what if your popish geldings, by neying at every
man's wife, and by tombling in all beds, where they are not kept out by force,
prove them selves to be stone horses, are they still in the number of those,
that having gelded them selves for the kingdom of heaven, may not possibly
marye, and yet nether we will nor can possibly live chaste? But omitting these
things, which they have as well as we, now he comes to those things, which
we lack, and yet many of them are very necessary: as insufflations, that is
blowing upon exorcismes, that is coniuring: holy oil in baptism, chrisme in
Bishopping, external priesthood, sacrifice, altars, censing, lights, and so
forth a large rablement of popish errors and superstitious ceremonies. And that
we say falsely, in saying these are naught, he proves by S. Paul's saying to
the Galathians, praeterquam quod accepistis, beside that you have received. for
once (says he) we have received those things of our ancestors, as if S.
Paul had not spoken of the Gospel, but of beggarly ceremonies, which because
they are an other Gospel, and way of salvation, brought in by the Pope, then
S. Paul delivered to the Galathians: we hold the Pope and the^ justly
accursed. But we justify them (says he) by the word of God not written I am
sure, but by your counterfeit word of traditions, and as you say by books of
ancient fathers, and yet not by books of the most ancient fathers: in whom
is little or nothing at all of such dross and chafe, among a great deal of
good corn.

But seeing we made no new religion in those and such like things (says he)
but keep the old: humility, obedience, and unity is our fault, if we have
any O fautles hypocrites, if the older truth had never been revealed unto you,
against your old heresies, your faults had been the less. but now your
darkness being convinced of the light, your pride, rebellion, and schism from
Christ and his Church, is and appears most heinous and manifest.

Now seeing M. Sander dare not encounter with us in this very point of our
contention, he sayneth an Idol of an adversary, to show his manhood upon,
before his friends, that they may praise him for a worthy champion. He
imagines that we reply, that Luther and Calvin did so change popish religion,
as Christ and his Apostles did change the Jewish religion, and then he lays
on lode, that Luther and Caluines authority is not like to Christ's, whereas
we make no such comparison: but affirm, that these godly preachers were sent
of God, so to reveal and discover the idolatry and corruptions, mayntayned in
the Church, as Elias, Elizeus, Oseas and the other Prophets, were sent to
restore and reform the true worship of God, corrupted and decayed among the
Israelites, reproving and reforming all things according to the infallible
rule of Gods word. And whereas he trifleth of the continuance of the sacrifice
of Christ, according to the order of Melchisedech, I say it is horrible
blasphemy, to make any successors unto Christ in ^^^^ priesthood, which the
holy Ghost says, he has (...), such as passes not from him by succession to
others, because he lives for ever. And whereas he quoteth Irenaeus lib. 4.
cap. 32. and Augustine. in Psalm. 33. de ciui. Dei lib. 17. cap. 20. cont. adu.
leg. lib. 1. cap. 18. read the places who will, and he shall find, that these
fathers speak not at all, of any propiciatory sacrifice of Christ's very body
and blood in the sacrament, but of the sacrifice of thanks giving, which the
Church throughout all the world does offer to God, in the celebration of the
holy mysteries, for their redemption by the death of Christ. But it is
sufficient for blind and obstinate Papists, to see the books margent painted
with quotations of doctors, by them which peradventure never turned the books
them selves, but borrowed their quotations of other men.

But M. Sander says, whereas we pretend that Luther and Calvin do all things
according to Gods word, they are the more to be abhorred, not only because the
one is contrary to the other, but also because they pretend to have their
doings figured and prophesied in the Gospel, whereas there is but one Christ,
which has been borne and dyed but once, therefore these men have no power to
abrogate the Mass, or to take away the key of ancient religion. To their
dissension, I answer it is not in many points, but in one and that not of the
greatest weight as for their pretense of their doings, to be figured or
prophetied in the Gospel, it is a dream of M. Sanders drousie head, for they
make none such, but they show the abuses of the Romish church, by the doctrine
of Gods word, and by the same they show the way to reform them and this, to
the glory of Christ, who dyed but once, they abrogate the Mass, by which it
should follow, if it were of any force, that he should dye often, for without
death and sheding of blood, there is no sacrifice for remission of sins. Heb.
9. 22. and 26.

If we deny the Mass to be that, they say it is, he answers: that as he
does not read, that the Jewish priests did err concerning the substance of
their public sacrifice. So is it less possible, that the universal church of
Christ should err in that public act, wherein Christ is sacrificed. Here is a
wise argument, having neither head nor foot, nor any joint to hang together.
For whatsoever M. Sander reads, we read that Vrias the high Priest, made an
heathenish altar in the Temple, at the commandment of the king Achas, and
offered sacrifice thereon, 2. Reg. 16. We read also in Josephus, that Caiaphas
and diverse other of ye high Priests were Saduces, which could not but err in
the substance of their public sacrifice, when they believed not the
resurrection. Seeing the end of their sacrifices was, to signify ye eternal
red^ption by Christ. Now to the second part of the argument, I say the
universal church did not err, though the schismatic synagogue of Rome
departed from Christ's institution. But M. Sa^der chafeth us away, with this
double negative, no no masters, Antechrists you may be, christ you cannot be.
Gods curse light on him, that would have any other Christ the^ Jesus the son
of God and Mary, which sits at the right hand of his father in heaven. But
it is your Antechrist of Rome, that usurps not only the office, but also
receives the name of Christ and God, of his Antechristia^ Canonists, wc I know
you will not deny, though your face be of brass, because ^^^^ boks may be
showed to any ma^y list to se the^.

After his large excursion, he returns to D. Parker whom he would advise to
revolt to the popish church, but he (God be thanked) having ended his days in
the catholic church of Christ on earth, is now receued into the fellowship of
the tryumphant church in heaven. I pass over how maliciously he ^ayleth
against the blessed martyr Tho. Cranmer, for defense of whose learning and
godliness, I refer the reader to his story faithfully set forth by M. Fox. All
other Archbishops of Canterbury he says from Augustine sent thither by Gregory
were of their popish profession. Of a great number it is as he says, but not
of all. For the opinion of the carnal presence of Christ in the sacrament, was
not received in the Church of England, for two or three hu^dereth years after
Augustines arriual, as that Homely which that reverend father Matthew late
Archbishop of Canterbury, caused to be translated and imprinted, does
manifestly declare.

And whereas he s^orneth at the persecuted congregation of Wickleue, Husse,
and the poor men of Lions, boasting of the external pomp and visar of glory
that was in the Romish Church, I have sufficiently aunsweared before, that
both the apostasy of the church of Antichrist and the persecution of the
church of Christ was so described and proficied before, that neither the one
nor the other should trouble any man's conscience, with the straungens thereof, so
long as the truth of the little flock and the falshod of the revolted
multitude, are manifestly tried by the authority of the scriptures.

The conclusion of all his Preface is, that which was the cause of this
treatise that there never lacked a chief Bishop in Saint Peeters chair,
whose supremacy being granted all other controversies be superfluous. Yea
verily all Scriptures, Doctors, and Councelles be needless, where there is
such a person always at hand, who cannot err in any thing that he commands
men to believe or do. And contrariswise if there be any necessary use of
scriptures, doctors, councils, Learning, Tounges etc. there is no such chief
Bishop on Earth. But what say you M. Sander, did there never lack a Pope to
sit in Peter's Chair? Was that See never void many days, many months, and
many years together? And when there was two Popes or three Popes at once and
that oftentimes, who sat in Peter's Chair? You will say one of them: but which
you cannot tell. Whose voice should the people obey as Christ's vicar? The one
cursed, the other absolved: the one commannded, the other forbadde. Is not all
your bragging of Peter's chair, and unity, thereby proved to be nothing else
but a mere mockery?

The Lord Jesus confound Antichrist with the breath of his mouth, and with
his glorious appearance, and defend his Church in truth and holiness, for
ever and ever. Amen.

The first Chapter.
THE state of the Question concerning the supremacy of Saint Peter and of the
Bishops of Rome after Sander.
him. Upon our denial of the supremacy of the Pope, and of S. Peter, he says
we deny all primacie and Fulke.
chief government in the Church. Whereupon he rayseth three questions to
entreat of.

Whether it be against the word of God, that there 1.
should be in his Church any primacie or chief authority?

Whether S. Peter had the same primacie or no? 2.


Whether the Bishop of Rome had it after S. Peter. 3.


To which we answer with distinction of the words primacie and Church, that
we affirm, there is a spiritual and eternal primacy of the universal
Church, which is proper only to our Savior Christ, which never was given to
Peter, nor to any mortal man. Likewise we arffime that in particular Churches,
there is and must be a primacie of order, which is temporal according to the
disposition of the Church. And such primacie in the College of the Apostles
might Peter have for sometime, but that he had it not always, it appears in
the council of the Apostlesin the 15. of the Acts of which James in a manner
by all writers consent, was President and Primate: and upon the controversy
being thoroughly debated, pronounced the definitive sentence (...) etc
according to which the synodall Epistle to the Churches of Antiochia, Syria,
and Cilicia, was written in the name of the Apostles, Elders and brethren.

But concerning S. Peter, M. Sander moves new questions. First whereas Christ
promised that Simon should be called Cephas or Peter, which is a stone or
Rock. Ioh. I. and afterward performed his promise, when he chose him to be an
Apostle, Mar. 3. Luke 6. And thirdly when Simon confessed his godhead, the
reason of the promise was declared that he would build his Church upon that
Rock: the question is, whether Peter himself be that Rock, upon which Christ
would build his Church, or Christ himself, or the faith and confession of
peter.

M. Sander the spokesman for the Papists, passing over the second question,
that is whether Christ himself whom Peter confessed, by this rock, denies
the faith or confession of Peeter to be the perfect sense of that promise,
affirming the Rock on which the Church is builded to be S. Peter, not barely
confirmed, but in respect of the promise past, the present confession, and the
authority of feeding Christ's Sheep given him after his resurrection, of
which four conditions the Protestants (he says) do lack no less then
three. But what do the Papists lack, when in there sense they exclude the rock
Christ, the only foundation, then the which none other can be laid. 1. Cor.
10. 4. 1. Cor. 3. 11. by any wise builder of the Church. Yet seeing M. Sand. is
so desirous to have Peter to be the stone whereof Christ speaks, laying
first Jesus Christ to be the head corner stone, I will franckly yield unto him,
that which he could never win by force, that Christ saying to Peter, thou art
Peter, and upon this Rock or stone will I build my Church, means even Peter
him self upon whom he would build his Church, but so that he makes not Peter
a singular Rock or stone to bear the whole building, (for then he should put
him self out of place) but one of the pr^ncipall stones of the foundation,
even as all the Apostles and Prophets were, for so the holy Ghost speaks,
Ephe. 2. verse. 20. being builded upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ being the head corner stone in whom all the building
being compacted, grows unto an holy temple unto the Lord.

Now let us consider, whether any singular authority was committed to peter,
when he was willed to feed the sheep of Christ. M. Sand. says yea, because
it was said to him alone, feed my sheep, and no particular flock named, it
must needs be meant the whole flock. Mark these maine pillars of the popish
Rock. Christ said only to Peter, come after me Satan, for thou art an offense
to me etc. Therefore Peter only was an enemy of Christ. If the Pope must
needs have the one text as peculiar to him, let him take the other also.
Again Peter himself says to the elders, feed as much as in you lies the
flock of Christ 1. Peter. 5. Here is no particular slocke named, therefore
he means the whole universal flock. But he urges farther, that as Peter
loved Christ more then the rest, so he did feed the flock of Christ above all
other pastors. But if laboring in preaching the gospel, be the feeding of
Christ's flock, not Peter, but Paul labored more then he, and all the rest of
the Apostles. 1. Cor. 15. The answer of the Protestants to his demand, Why
Peter alone in presence of other Apostles was commanded thrice to feed the
sheep, that by thrice confession and iniunction to feed, he might abolishe
the shame of his thrice denying, and know that he was restored to his
Apostleship, from which he deserved to be deprived) M. Sand. likes not for
three causes. First he says, he had not lost his Apostleship, because his
fault was not externally proved, nor confessed in judgment, nor stubbernly
defended etc. as though Christ which knew and foretold his infirmity before
he fell, had need of external proves, or a Commissaries court to deprive
Peter of his office, O blockish reason. Although neither Calvin nor Beza do
affirm, that he was altogether excluded from his office, by his fault, but
that he deserved so to be, and therefore had need especially to be confirmed
by our Savior Christ more then the rest as his offense was more shameful then
of any of the other. Therefore the second reason that he brings of his
restitution, if he had lost it is superfluous. Ioh. 20 For he was none
otherwise restored then the rest were, but at this time especially confirmed,
as his special case required.

His last reason is, that admit Peter had not been restored before this time,
yet now he was restored to a greater authority, then any other Apostle had
receued at any time, and whereas we reply that all the Apostles were equal by
testimony of Cyprian and Hieromes, he aunsweareth by distinction, forsooth
that they were equal in Apostleship, and yet Peter was chief of the Apostles,
and an ordinary chief shepherd or high ^^yshop, wherein they were all
inferiors to him, and ^^ee was their Primate and their head, and this
distinction he promises to prove exactly hereafter. In the mean time it is a
monstrous Paradox, that all the Apostles should be equal with Peter in
Apostleshipp, and yet Peter be the chief of the Apostles. He that can prove
inequality to be where he grants equallitie to be, and in the same
respect, is a strange Logition. Finally where as some men granting Peter to
be the rock, deny the honor to his successors, he will prove that the Bishop
of Rome and none other, has all that authority which Peter sometime had, and
consequently that the Protestants come nearer to the nature and condition of
Antichrist, then any pope of Rome ever did or can do.

The second Chapter.
THat there is a certain primacie of spiritual government in the church of
Christ (though not properly a Lordlynesse Sander.
or heathenish dominion) And in what sort this E^clesiasticall primacie
differs from the Lordly government ofseculer princes, and how it is practiced
by the Bishop of Rome. Also the Apostles strife concerning superiority is
declared. That there ^as one greater among the Apostles to be a ruler and as a
minister do not repugne. The pre-eminence of Priests above Kings. A King can
not be supreme governor in all Ecclesiastical causes, because by right and
law he can not practice all Ecclesiastical causes. The high Priest is
preferred before the King, by Gods law. The evil life of a Bishop takes not
away his authority. The differences between the Bishop of Rome and temporal
Princes. That Moses was a Priest. THe Ecclesiastical government of the Church
is a Fulke.
ministry, or service, by the authority of Christ and his Apostle Peter: and
therefore neither properly nor improperly a Godliness or Hethenish dominion, but
altogether as unlike to it, as our Savior Christ the pattern of all true
ministers, was unlike to an earthly Lord or an Heathen Prince. But whereas M.
Sander in the first sentence of this chapter says (That no man properly can
the Lord among the Christians where all are servant indifferently, under the
obedience of one true Lord and Master Jesus Christ.) he shows him self not
only to be a Papist, ^ut also an Anabaptist. For the common service that we
o^^e unto Christ hinders not, but that a Christian man ^ay be Lord and King
over his fellow servant and thren in Christ, as properly as ever he might be
before the incarnation of Christ: who says himself that his kingdom is not
of this world: who himself was obedient and taught obedience both to God and
Caesar, to each in things that belonged to them: and that dominion which he
forbids unto his Apostles, like to the princes of the nations. Luc. 22.
Matthew. 20. and which S. Peter forbids the elders of the church. 1. Pet. 5.
is not prohibited to all Christians, but to the ministers of the Church only
in respect of their ministry. And yet that there ought to be a government of
the church, and some kind of primacy also, it is cleerer by the scriptures,
then that it need any proof, especially such slender proves as M. San.
brings, and namely where he cites this text, Feed my sheep, to signify
that Peter should give every man his dew portion and just measure of victuals
in convenient time: which thing neither Peter did, nether was he able to do.
And much less any man in succession to him, which is not equal in gifts with
him. And therefore the example of a stuarde, who may provide for a competent
number of one family, is fondly applied to make one Steward over all the
world, beside him that is almighty. For although the Apostles were not
lymited to any certain congregation, but were general Ambassadors into all
parts of the world: yet were they not appointed to give to every man his dew
portion, but to appoint Pastors in every Church and town for that purpose.
Tit. 1. Acts 14. verse. 23, and they them selves to proceed in matters
pertaining to their general Commission.

And therefore although M. Sander in applying these words of Ieronime Cont.
Luciferanos, which he calls, Exortem quandam and eminentem potestatem. A
certain peerless and high power. And of Cyprian lib. 1. Ep. 3. Of one
priest in the Church for that time etc. True. Every several Pastor, or as he
terms them parrishe priest, deals more honestly then other Papists that
draw the same testimonies, as proper to the Popes sovereign auctority, yet in
that he argues, that the like should be in the whole church militant, which is
in every parish, it is out of all compass of reason. For that which is
possible in the one, is altogether impossible in the other. And the argument
is no better, then if we should say, there is one steward in every College, or
great house: therefore there is is one steward over all the world. And whereas
he would prove his matter good, by that S. Mat. cap. 10. rehearsing the names
of the Apostles, calls Peter the first: it is to childish and frivolous. For
in every number, one or other must be the first and it seems that Peter was
first called to the office of Apostleship: therefore his primacy was of order
and not of auctority. Nether is he always first named, for Gal. 3. 9. where
the question is, of the dignity of the Apostles, James is named before Cephas,
or Peter as he was indeed elected to be the principal minister at Jerusalem,
by consent of most ancient writers, neither does it follow, that because the
high Priest of the old law was called Princeps populi, A prince of the people,
therefore Peter was made prince of all Christian men. For neither was the high
Priest alone called the prince of the people, as M. S. seems to say: neither
had Peter by those words (feed my shope) any auctority committed unto him,
more then to the rest of the Apostles. As for the name of Lord, or term of
dominion, sometime given by ecclesiastical writers to the Bishop or his
government, we strive not about it, so there be no such dominion by him
excercised, as Christ and his Apostles forbids, and as we see to be usurped
and practiced by the Pope of Rome, and his clergy, howsoever M. Sander in
terms of distinction, would seem to shadow it. But he will show out one of
these places which we allege, as if it did utterly forbid all superiority
among the Disciples, luc. 22 that the ecclesiastical primacy is clearly
establyshed and confirmed.

First he says most untruly, that we deny all superiority among the Discyples
of Christ as though we denied all gouernmente among Christians, except he
do childishly understand the Disciples of Christ for Ministers
ecclesiastical only: and yet we deny not all superiority among them, but
that kind of primacie which the Pope claymeth, and tyrannically usurps.
Secondly he makes a long preamble before he come to the matter, that
although the Apostles did diverse times strive for the primacie, as in the way
to Capharnaum Mark. 9 upon the request of Zebedees wife. Mark. 10. and after
his last supper Luke 22. yet Christ never denied, that there should be one
greater among them, and often signified, that the same should be S. Peter,
especially when he said, thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my
Church. If you demand why they strove for supremacy, when he had determined
it, he yields a substantial reason: because while Christ lived upon Earth,
it was in his free choice to have appointed it otherwise, until at the last in
the 21. of John, he said unto him, Simon thou son of Iona. etc. By these it
appears, that M. Sander confesses that no text of Scripture proves the
supremacy of Peter more directly and plainly then this of John 21. which when
every Child sees how little force it has to prove it, you may easily judge
that the Papists them selves against their own consciences, do enforce all
other Textes uttered before to establishe it. And namely this of Luke 22. in
which he says, that Christ taking up the strife that was among his Apostles
about the primacie, ended his talk at last with Simon Peter, showing him to
be that one that was greater then the rest.

What Ass if he could speak with man's voice, would reason thus? that because
Christ converting his speech from exhorting all his Apostles to admonish
Peter of his special danger he stood in by his infirmity: signified that
Peter was greater then all the Apostles. But we must hear him compare these
words of Christ. Luke 22. with the words of S. Matthew and Mark in other
places, which he says the Magdeburgen. cent. does huddle up, as they were
alone, whereas they differ much.

The words of Christ Mat. 20. and Mar. 10. are these: Whosoever among you will
be greater, let him be your seruitor. And whosoever among you will be first,
shall be your servant. In Saint Luke 22. He that is greater among you, let
him be made as the younger: and he that is chief, as he that ministereth. M.
Sander will have great difference to be in these sayings. First generally that
the former sentence speaks not of the greatness among ecclesiastical
officers, but all Christians, which is utterly false, because this kind of
greatness is prescribed unto them to whom external dominion is forbidden, But
that is not to all men, but unto the Apostles only and their successors:
therefore this kind of greatness, is proper only unto them. For he speaks not
of greatness by humility only, but of greatness without foreign dominion and
worldly dignity, and joined with service, which is peculier to the ministry
ecclesiastical. Secondly he makes six frivolous differences, which either
are false or else make no diversity in the sense of the places.

The first, Matthew and Mark speak of any man. Who soever, S. Luke of one man,
which by the article (...) is pointed out. If the article (...) do always
point one certain man, it is somewhat that M. Sand. says, but If, ten
thousand times and more, (as every man meanly learned in the Greek tongue does
know) it signifies not one certain man: then is this a fond difference.

The second, the other speak of a desire to be great, Who so would be great,
S. Luke of the effect already present, he that is greater. But the the words of
S. Matthew. 18. ver. 4. overthrow this difference, with the former: for there
(...) the greateste, is taken for any one that shall humble himself, as a
Child, and not for one made primate of the Church.

The third difference is, that the letter speak of him that would be (...)
great. S. Luke of him that is (...) greater, by which is mente the greatest of
all after the Greek phrase. But that (...) in the others signifies the
greatest according to the Hebrew phrase, it is manifest by the word used by
both, which call him also (...) the first or chiefest of all. Therefore these
three differences are not worth three chippes.

The fourth, S. Matthew calls him that would be great (...) a servant. S.
Luke gives no name of service to him that is greater, but he is willed to be
you^ger or underling. Yet S. Luke in another place. Cap. 9. verse. 48. calls
him (...) the least which shall be the greatest. But what fond quarrelling is
this? Does not the Pope call himself servant of the servants of God by which
he acknowledges that the greatest service belongs to him that claims the
greatest dignity. though indeed, he yield no service, but usurps all
tyranny. Is M. Sander now ashamed of that service: that the Pope by solemn
title has so long professed? As for a preeminence of order, we deny not but
it was among the Apostles, and must be in every several company: although it
be not necessary, that it should be perpetual in one man, but as every Church
shall ordain: but a primacy of authority over all the Church, we utterly deny
that ever it was granted to Peeter or any man by our Savior Christ. M. Sand.
cites Ambrose in Luke 22. to prove it Qui lapsus es etc. Thou which did
slide before thou did weep, after thou haste wept, art set upright, that
thou shouldesirule others, who before had not ruled thy self. Lo (says
he) Peter did rule others. A great myrracle, but does it follow, that either he
ruled al me^, or that he ruled his equals the Apostles, of whom the same
Ambrose says, De spiritu Sancto lib. 2. cap. 12. Nec Paulus inferior Petro
quamuis is ecclesiae fundamentum and hic sapiens architectus s^iens vestigia
credentium fundare populorum. Neither was Paul inferior to Peter although he
was the foundation of the church, and Paul a wise builder, knowing how to
found the steps of the people believing. And again in his book de incarnatione
Domini ca. 4. Hic inquam vbi audiuit vos ^utem quid me dicitis? Statim loci non
immemor sui Primatum egit. Primatum confessionis vtique, non honoris, primatum
fidei non ordinis. This Peter I say, when he heard, but what do you say that
I am? immediately not forgetting his place, executed his primacie. Verily the
primacie of confession not of honor, the primacie of faith not of degree. By
these places of Ambrose it appears, what government and primacie was granted
to Peter, and how he exercised the same.

The fifth difference, is that the other Evangelists say absolutely let him be a
minister and a seruau^^t, in S. Luke it is said, with a great moderation, let
him be made as the younger and as he that ministers. If this be a good
argument, to prove that the ministry is more truly a greatness then a
ministry: the Arrians may deny by the like, that Christ is more truly a man
then the son of God: because Saint John says: we saw his glory as the
glory of the only begotten son of God: O beastly absurdity: and yet he
says: if any man say, that there was not one certain man greater among the
Apostles, who might be as the younger, it is plain contradiction to Christ and
he is Antechrist. But where on Gods name says Christ, that there is one
certain man greater among the Apostles?

The last and the least difference is, that the greater man is evidently named
a little after, when Christ says to S. Peter, Simon Simon behold Satan has
desired to sift you as it were wheat, but I have prayed for thee, that thy
faith shall not fail. And thou being once converted confirm thy brethren.
Master Sander asks what other thing it is for Peter to confirm his
brethren, but to practice and exercise his greatness over them? for every one
that confirms is greater, then they which are confirmed. Who ever did read
such impudent assertions? Peter's faith was confirmed by Marie Magdalen:
therefore she was greater then Peter. Paul was confirmed by Ananias, therefore
he was greater then Paul. Aquila and Priscilla confirmed Apollo: therefore they
were greater then he. To conclude if (...) in S. Luke 22. do necessarily prove
that there was one certain man among them greatest: the^ (...) in the 9. of
Luke 48. does prove that there was one least among them. He that is least among
you al (says our Savior Christ) even he shall be the greatest. And least M.
Sander should renew his difference of (...), it may please him to understand,
that the contention was among the Apostles, (...) which should be the greater
or greatest of them. Which question our Savior Christ does not decide, if M.
Sanders difference of (...) and (...) in this place may stand. Wherefore
hitherto Peter has found no supremacy, and much less the Pope by
prerogative of his chair, who can not be said to sit in Peter's chair, except
he taught Peter's doctrine, which if he did teach as he does ye contrary, yet
Peter's auctority could no more be derived to him, then the auctority of Moses
to every one of ye Scribes and Pharizees wc did sit in Moses chair.

He cites Ambrose to prove, that there is a prelacie or preferrement in the
church, because he forbids contention thereabout, as though there could not
be a prelacy or preferreme^t of every Bishop over his church but there must be
one Bishop over all the church. The like he alleges out of Bid, which
speaks expressly of all the teachers of the church, and not of one Pope over
all. The conclusion of his disputation is, that the ecclesiastical primacy does
in all points resemble (as much as it possible may) the primacy of Christ, and
therefore he that denies the primacie among the Apostles to be a true primacy
in his kind is blasphemous against Christ him self. Nay rather, he that
communicates with any man, that which is peculiar to our Savior Christ, that
he only should, be as S. Paul speaks of him (...) himself the primate in all things Col. 1. 18. which is ye head of his body, which is, the church is
found a manifest blasphemer of our Savior Christ. But that they wc excel among
ye Apostles, and their successors the Bishops, may be humble and yet great
after the example of our Savior Christ is no question at all. But that any
has such greatness in authority, as our Savior Christ has cuer his whole
Church, is the thing we deny. If Gregory affirm that Peter by Gods
commission had the primacie of the holy church, and was grown in power above
the rest: it is no marvel, seeing he was so nere to the open manifestation of
Antechrist, which succeeded him the next save one: whose tyranny began to
increase long before Gregory's time: yet was he in his pretended primacie more
modest, then any that followed him to this day: Utterly refusing and condemning
as profane, proud and blasphemous against Christ, the title of universal
Bishop: which Ihon of Constantinople did usurp, and other Bishops would
have given to him.

And whereas M. Sander frames an objection of our part, that no man can be
both a minister and a governor: therefore no ecclesiastical minister can be a
governor, he plays with his own shadow. For we deny not but a minister of
the church which is a servant, is also a governor. But we affirm that his
government is spiritual, not worldly: unlike to the earthly government of this
world, even as the kingdom of Christ is not of this world. But it follows
not, because that every Bishop and shepherd is a governor: therefore there
must be one Bishop and shepherd governor of them all, other then our Savior
Christ the arch or head shepherd and Bishop of our souls. 1. Pet. 5. 4. and 1.
Pet. 2. 25 M. Sander commends ye saying of Leo B. of Rome to Anastasius B. of
Thessalonica. Qui se etc. He that knows him seife to be set over some men,
let him not disdain to have some man preferred before him. But he proceeds:
sed obedientiam quam exigit etiam ipse dependat. But such obedience as he
requires of other, let him yield himself. By this saying it appears, that
although Leo take much upon him, as to hear the controversies ye can not be
determined by the Metropolitans, yet he acknowledges, that in equity, he was
b^^^^d to yield that obedience to others, which he required of others, if he
him self were in fault.

But M. Sander makes an other objection for us, on this manner. The Princes of
the Gentiles, do also serve their subjects in conseruing peace, keeping out
their enemies etc. but the clergy must be altogether unlike to temporal
governors: therefore there must be no primacie or government among them,
although it be joined with service. Once again I say, we make no such
objection, but we answer the Anabaptists that so object, that the government
of the clergy, as it differs in matter which is spiritual, so also it
differs in form and manner from the regiment temporal, wc is with outward
pomp of glory and with the material sword: and this with all humility and with
the sword of the spirit. Contrariwise M. Sander answers this objection so as
he both strengthens the hands of the Anabaptists, and shows him self
little to differ from their opinion. First therefore he says that Christ
forbids his Apostles and Bishops such a dominion, as is used among the
Princes of the earth, not altogether such as ought to be among them. But that
he speaks not of tyrannical dominion, it appears by the title of (...)
benefactors, which their subjects did give them, for their bountifulnes
toward them in preserving them from enemies, in peace and wealth. Secondly he
says, that although the King be never so good, yet it is not the Kingly, but
the Priestly power, which God chose from the beginning to rule his people
withal. And although Kings serve Gods eternal purpose, and they are commanded
to be obeyed, yet the making of Kings over Gods own people at the first came
not of God by way of his merciful election, but by way of his angry
permission. What Anabaptist could speak more heretically or seditiously
against the lawful auctority of Kings and Princes? But let us see his reason.
Nemrod he says, was the first King we read of: which either by force usurped,
or was advanced by evil men. I answer: if Nemrod was the first that usurped
authority as a tyrant: yet was he not the first that exercised Kingly
auctority lawfully nether was he ruler over Gods people. But what will h^ouy of
Melchisedech, King of Salem, was not he elected of God at the first, both to be
a King and a figure of the King of Kings, who should not have had that dignity,
if it had not been of it self both lawful and godly? Secondly he says God
was angry with his people for asking a King, when they had a Priest to rule
them. I answer, he was not angry for their asking of a King, but for
refusing of a Prince ordained by him, which was Samuel a Leuite in deed, of
the family of Cohath, but no Priest of the family of Aaron. For in his days
were high Priests, Eli, Achitob, Achimelech. But after the days of Eli, which
was both high Priest and Judge. Samuel was ordained Prince or Judge of the
people, having authority above Achitob or Achimelech the high Priests in his
time, which were sufficient to decide the controversy of the supremacy, if M.
Sander, would give place to the Scriptures. But who can discharge him of
Anabaptistrie, where he deny eth the making of a King to be Gods institution,
affirming it to be, the fact and consent of men allowed in deed by God, when
the Apostle expressly says, it is Gods ordinance Romans 13? And where he says
that Abel, Noe, Abraham, were directly from God chosen to be Priests as Aaron,
he says most untruly, for they had in their family, the principality of
civil government as directly, as they had the Priesthood. But neither of both
in such sort, as Aaron had the Priesthood: in whom the one was distincted
from the other. And of Abraham it is testified that he was a Prince ordained of
God Genesis 23. 6. He sets forth the excellency of Priests by their auctority
in making Christ's body, with their holy mouth, as Hierom speaks. But that
proves not the supremacy of one Priest above al men, nor of one Priest above
an other. As for the ordeining of Peter to be general shepherd, and high
Bishop of the whole flock, by commanding him to feed his sheep: when he
can conclude it out of that Scripture, in any lawful form of argument, we
will yield unto it. But this is intolerable impudency, that pretending to
show how much the Pope is more excellent then any king, he asks to what
Christian king did Christ ever say? As my father sent me I send thee. as
though Christ had ever said so to Peter in singular, and not to all his
Apostles in general. As my father sent me, so I send you. Joan. 20. Concerning
the rock that he would build his Church upon, and the feeding of Christ's
sheep, and lambs: we shall have more proper place to examine afterward, what
supremacy they give to the Pope or to Peter either. His farther rauing against
the dignity of kings, who list to see, let him turn to the 57. page of his
book, cap. 2. And yet I can not omit that he says, that the pomp of a king
is most contrary of all other degrees to the profession of Christian faith: and
makes worldly pomp as unmeet for a king as for a Bishop. But the Scripture
(he says) never calls any king head of the Church, nether do we call any
King head of the Church, but only Christ: but in every particular Church,
the Scripture allows the king to be the chief Magistrate, not only in
governing the common wealth, but also in making godly laws for the furtherance
of religion, having all sorts of men as well Ecclesiastical as civil,
subject unto him, to be governed by him, and punished also, not only for
civil offenses, but also for heresy, and neglect of their duties in matters
pertaining to the religion of God. For although many civil Magistrates at the
first, were enemies of the Gospel: yet was it prophesied, that kings should be
nursing fathers and Queens nursing mothers unto the Church. Es. 49. Again it
is an impudent and gross lie, when he says that God was angry because the
government of the high Priest was rejected, and a kingly government called for.
For they rejected not ye government of the high Priest, but of Samuel ye Judge:
who was no high Priest, although he was a Prophet, nether was there ever any
high Priest Judge but only Eli.

But if all supremacy be forbidd^n over the whole Church militant (says M.
Sander) it is forbidden likewise, that there should be any superior in any one
part of the Church. And this he proves by a jolly rule of Logic. For the
parts (according to their degree) are of the same nature whereof the whole is.
O subtle reason by which I will likewise conclude, there may not be one
scholemaister for all the children of the world: therefore there may not be
one schoolmaster for one town in all the world. There can not be one
Physician for all the world: therefore there may not be a Physician for every
city: yea there can not be one Priest for all the Churches in the world:
therefore there may not be a Priest in every parish. Again he reasons thus:
If a king be supreme head over his own Christian Realm. it must be by that
power which he either had before his christianity or beside it. For by his
christianity it is not possible, that he should have greater power then the
Apostles had. I answer: the kings supremacy is perfectly distinct from any
power the Apostles had. For although he have authority over Ecclesiastical
persons, and in causes Ecclesiastical, according to Gods word: yet is he no
Ecclesiastical officer, but a civil Magistrate, having chief authority in
all causes, not absolute to do what he will, but only what God commands
him: namely to provide by laws, that God may be truly worshipped, and all
offenses against his religion may be punished. And whereas M. Sander infers,
that an Ethnike Prince or Turk may be supreme head of our Church, we utterly
deny to any such the name of an head, which can not be a member, but even an
Ethnicke Prince or a Turk may be chief Magistrate over the faithful, and
make laws for the mayntenance of Christian religion, as an hypocrite Christian
may. They are also to be obeyed in all things that are not contrary to God.
Nabuchadnezer, Darius, Cyrus, Artaxerxes, which were heathen Princes, made
godly laws for the true worship of God and furtherance of his people: as in
the prophecy of Daniel, the books of Ezra and Nehemiah, it is manifest. S,
Paul appealed to Nero the Emperor. Eusebius testifies lib. 7. cap. 24 that
the Christians in a matter of a Bishopps election, and for a Bishops house,
were directed by the decree of Aurelianus an heathen Emperor. And this
notwithstanding, the Church is always under the sovereign authority of
Christ, and the spiritual government of her several pastors and teachers,
when Christ ascending into heaven, ordained for her edification and unity, and
not one Pope over all. Ephesians. 4. 13.

But now he will enter one degree farther, and suppose, that a king may be as
good as it is possible for any mortal man to be, or as any Bishop and Priest
is, yet he can nether baptize, consecrate, forgive sins, praise,
excommunicate, bless, nor be Judge of doctrine by his kingly authority. If he
can do none of those: he can not be supreme governor in all Ecclesiastical
causes. I deny this argument. For his supremacy is not to do those things,
or any of them, but to provide and command, that they may be done as they
ought to be. But he rises up again and says, that whosoever has sovereign
authority, either in civil matters or Ecclesiastical, he may in his own
person execute any of those things, which any of his inferiors may do. So he
says, the king if he will, may be Judge in Westminster hall, shrieue and
constable, yea he may play the tailor, master Carpenter or tanner. It is
marvel he says not that he may be both a king and subject. Likewise the
primate, (he might as well say the Pope) may help a Priest to Mass, carry the
cross in procession, dig a grave, etc. I deny this rule to hold in all
things. For there are some things, that the Prince may not do for lack of
knowledge, and some things for lack of calling, and yet he may command both
to be done. For controversies of law he may not decyde, except he have
knowledge of the law, nor minister Physic, except he have knowledge in
physic, yet he may command both Lawyers and Physicians to do according to
their knowledge, likewise to preach, baptize, etc. he may not, because he
lacks calling, for none may do those things lawfully, but he that has a
special calling, but he may command those things to be done, and to be well
done, according to Gods law, whereof he ought not to be ignorant, and for that
purpose is especially commanded to study in the book of Gods law, that not
only in matters concerning his own person, but in matters concerning Gods
honor, he may cause all men to do their duty. Deuteronomy. 17. 18. So did David,
Solomon, Iehosaphat, Ezechias, Josias, command the Priests to offer up the
sacrifices and to do their duty, which it was not lawful for their kings
to execute.

And is it so strange a matter, that a popish king may not command his
Chaplayne to say Mass, or to say his Mass reverently, and orderly as the
laws of popery do require? if he may command over tho e matters, which yet
he may not do him self, let M. Sander see how his rule holds, that
whosoever has authority in any matters, may do all things him self, which
any of his inferiors may do, or which he may command to be done, whereupon
he concludes, that the king has no right or supreme power at all in
Ecclesiastical causes, (unless it be committed to him from the Bishop) so
that a king if he be a Bishops commissary, may do that by M. Sanders
exception, wc nether by commandment of God, nor his kingly power he has
authority to do.

Another argument he brings as good as this, that the lesser authority does
not comprehend the greater, and therefore M Horn must answer him, whether to
preach, baptize, forgive sins etc. be greater or lesser ministry then the
kings authority. If it be greater: then it can not be comprehended in the
kings authority, which is lesser. What that reverend father the Bishop of
Winchester has answered, it may be seen in his book against M. Feckenham.
But to talk with you M. Sander, what if I grant, that the Ecclesiastical
ministry, is not comprehended in the kings authority? will you thereupon
infer, that the kings authority is not to command the ministers of the
Church in these matters, to do their duties according to the word of God? In
deed you conclude so, but your argument is naught. For the king is Gods
Lieuetenant, to see both the Church and the common wealth to be well ordered.
And the same thing may be greater and lesser then another in diverse respects.
As in authority of commanding, the king is greater then the Physician: in
knowledge and practice of physic, the king is less then the Physician. So in
authority of commanding the prince is greater then the minister: but in
authority of ministration he is less, and no inconvenience in the world, to
the dignity of other estate or calling.

The Bishop of Winchesters examples, M. Sander says are evil applied. For they
only show what was done, and not what ought to have been done: and so for many
circumstances are subject to much wrangling. 1. For either he was no good
Prince which meddled with disposing of holy matters, 2. or in that deed he was
not good. 3. or he did it by commission from a Prophet or an high Priest, 4. or
he was deceived by flatterers, 5. or he was enforced by necessity. But all
these quarells notwithstanding, the examples of Scripture are so many, and so
plain, that M. Sanders ^^angling can not obscure them. David a good Prince,
did well in appoynting the Leuits and Priests to their several offices, and
forbidding the Leuits to carry the arc and the vessels thereof without any
commission from Priest or Prophet, but only by the word of God, not deceived
by flatterers, nor enforced by necessity, 1. Chron. 23. 25. Solomon did the
like about the temple. He deposed Abiathar the high Priest, and set Zadoc in
his room. 1. Reg. 2. 27. and 35. And such are ye examples of all the godly
kings of Judah. which being commended in the Scripture, are not uncertain,
deceitful, or unknown in their circumstances: but much more certain arguments
for the authority of Princes in Ecclesiastical matters, then this text wc he
cites (Feed my sheep) to forbid them. But here he will ask whether a
Christian king be Peter's sheep or no? I answer by propriety no but a sheep of
Christ's as Peter is. Nevertheless, admit Peter to be a sheepeheard, and the
king to be his sheep, what then? forsooth it is against the law of nature,
for a sheep to rule his sheepeheard. I grant in those things in which the
one is sheepeheard, and the other a sheep. But I ask of him, is not a king
also in some respect called in Scripture a sheepeheard? if he doubt, Esa. 44.
28. and Iere. 23. 4. may resolve him, and is not Peter and Paul in this
respect also sheep? If he deny it: let the Apostles speak for them selves:
let every soul be subject, etc. Romans 13. If now I should reason that it is
against the law of nature, that the sheep should rule his sheepeheard: I am
sure he would answer with making a diversity of respects. You may then see
what a wise argument he has made, that may be turned back on his own head
Wherefore here is no such impossibility as he infers, but that a King in
some respect of ecclesiastical government may be above his own pastor, as in
other respect he is under him.

M. Sander will go forward for all this, and puts case that a Bishop
should come to a Christian King, as Ambrose did Ep. 33. to the Emperor
Valentinian offering his body and goods to his pleasure, but the thing which
the Emperor unlawfully required, he would not yield unto, what could the
Emperor do to him? He could not excommunicate him. And if he imprisoned him
or put him to death: he did but as Nero or the Turk might do. Therefore if
the King be never so much Christened, he has no power over the Bishops soul.
If it were possible for the Pope to require an unlawful thing: I might put the
like case of his holiness. What if a Christian man should come to him etc. he
might excommunicate him as Cayphas did all that confessed Christ: he might
imprison him, as Annas did the Apostles: he might command him to be smiten as
Pashur did Jeremy, and Ananias Paul etc. Therefore if he were never so much a
Pope, he has no power over a Christian man's soul. Mark the pith of M. Sand.
arguments.

But if Auxentius the Heretic should have come to the Emperor, had the
Emperor none authority to call a synod to inquire of his heresy, and he
being found an heretic, to have condemned him therefore? In these doings he
had done as Constantine about Arius, and Donatus, and not as Nero with Peter
and Paul. But Ambrose his authority is cited Ep. 32. Sivel scripturarum
seriem etc. If we call to mind either the process of holy Scriptures, or the
ancient times, who can deny, but that in a cause of faith, in a cause I say
of faith, Bishops are wont to judge of Emperors, not Emperors of Bishops.

And who says the contrary, but that in causes of faith, the Emperor is
ordinarily to be instructed of the Bishops, and not the Bishops of the
Emperor? Or that the Prince has absolute authority in matters of religion,
to do what he will, when we say that in all things he mnst follow the
direction of Gods word, the knowledge whereof, especially in difficult
matters, he is to receive of the Ministers of the Church, as of the Lawyers the
knowledge of law, although he be bownd to see justice executed.

But M. Sander will know how a king shall correct or depose a Bishop. I
answer, if his crime be apparent, even as Solomon deposed Abiather, if it be
doubtful, by order of judgment and trial according, of civil Judges, if it
be a civil crime, and Ecclesiastical if it be heresy that he is accused of,
if he can not be condemned upon just trial, he is to be absolved, if this will
not satisfy the king, he has no farther lawful authority by any supremacy,
and if he proceed further, he exercises tyranny. And Augustine does justly
complain of the importunity of the Donatists, which when the cause had been
decyded by certain Bishops, deputed by the Emperor, they would never be
satisfied, but still appealed to the Emperor, and accused the Bishops that
were appointed their Judges before the earthly king. M. Sander urges that word
vehemently, that he calls Constantine an earthly king, and yet he is so
blind, that he will not see, that the same earthly king, which assigned those
Bishops to be Judges, was still acknowledged of all parts, to be the supreme
governor, Ep. 48.

But omitting the words of men, he will prove the dig nitie of high Priests
above faithful Princes, by the authority of God in the old Testament. Leuit.
4. Because there God assigns a sacrifice for the sin of every degree of
men, according to their dignity. And first begins with the high Priest,
next whom is the whole people, third the Prince, and last of all every private
man. There is no doubt but the high Priest, as he was an image and figure of
Christ, was chief in dignity. Although in other respects he was inferior to
the Prince, as Aaron was to Moses, Achitob or Achimelech to Samuel, Abiather
and Zadoc to David and Solomon. The like is confessed of every minister of the
Gospel, and therefore the authority of Philo and Theodoretus which he uses
in this point, might have been spared. And yet may a wicked minister be deposed
by a godly Prince. Abiathar in the temple, at the altar, in the holiest place,
and sacrificing, was greater then Solomon, yet was he justly deposed by Salomo^
for his treason.

Master Sander charge us to affi^me, that the evil life of a Bishop, takes
away his authority, wc he denies to be so, as long as the Church does
tolerate and permit them in their places, whereupon he concludes, that
though the Bishop of Rome have never so much abused his office, yet he can not
leese his primacye. In deed the abuse of the man, takes not away the
authority of the office, but if the office be perverted from the right use,
and degenerated into an heathenish tyranny, as the Bishop of Romes place has
been many hundredth years, the name of a Bishop only and that scarsely
remaining, we justly affirm that such dignity as that sea had by consent of
men, it has clean lost, by abuse of their authority.

Moreover he says, it has no coullour of truth, that we affirm the Pope to
govern, not as a Pastor, but to bear a soueraintie, as Princes of the world,
and that he will show by six differences, which he will consider in order.

First no man succeeds in that chayer, by right of 1.
inheritance. The like I may say of the Germane Emperor, therefore this is no
difference.

Secondly it is not obtained by right of battle, invasion 2.
or otherwise, but by election. So is the Emperor at this day, only by
election. And if Master Sanders be not to impudent, he will not deny, but there
has been bickering and intruding by force, into that chair, and that is worse
entering, by symony, murder, treason and deuilish sorcery.

The third, nether child, nor woman, nor Infidel, 3.
nor Catechumeni can be chosen Bishop of Rome. No more can any such be chosen
Emperor by the golden bull and law of the election. And yet seeing boys are
made Cardinals, which be electours of the Pope, and elegible, there is none
impossibility, but a boy may be chosen Pope, as well as a woman has been
Pope, Ione I mean. John the 23. was condemned in the council of Constans for
an Infidel, which denied the immortality of the soul.

The fourth, the election of the Bishop of Rome as of 4.
all other Bishops, pertayneth only to Ecclesiastical persons, a king may be
chosen by the people without the Clergy. To this I say, that the Bishop of
Rome was wont to be chosen as well by the people as by the Clergy. And so is
the Emperor chosen by as many Bishops as civil Princes, except in case of
equality of voices. Nether is the Clergy ever excluded in any lawful
election of any king where he is made by election.

The fifth, to omit the Bishop of Romes temporal dominion, 5.
which he confesses to be but accessory to his Bishoprike, in his
Ecclesiastical government, he uses not that force and power which worldly
Princes do. He compels none, no not ye Jews in Rome to baptism. No more
does the Emperor. But what means uses he to depose kings, and absolve their
subjects from their oath of obedience, where he judges them for heretics, how
makes he wars and sets all the world in an uproar, to defend his usurped
dignity and false doctrine? Does he not by force compel Christians to his
filthy Idolatrye, or else cruelly murdereth and tormenteth them?

The 6. the Bishop of Rome (as Bishop) never punishes them with the material
sword, which forsake his 6.
Church, No, but as Antichrist and a tyrant he imprisoneth them, hangs them,
drowneth them, burns them, not as a Bishop says M. Sander, but as a
temporal Prince and Lord, as Moses being one of the Priests of our Lord was
also master of civil government. Behold, this deuisor of differences at
length makes him a civil Prince and temporal Lord, from whom he had labored
by so many differences to distingush before. But now lest you should espy his
impudent conclusion, he draws into a new controversy, whether Moses were a
Priest. And first he will prove that Moses was a Priest, by the Scripture Psalm.
98. Where it is said, Moses and Aaron in sacerdotibus eius. If he will not
allow the Hebrew word Cohanim to signify Princes, as it does, in diverse
other places, yet says not the Psalm that Moses and Aaron were both Priests,
but that among his Priests they were such as called upon his name, and were
heard, and Samuel who follow^th in the same verse, confessed now by Master
Sander to be a Leuit, forgetting that before he made him high Priest. But
farther to prove that Moses was a Priest, he cites Augustine, Ieronym, Gregor.
Naz. Dionys. and Philo, but all to small purpose for his cause.

It must needs be confessed, that Moses as all the Patriarchs before him, in
their families, was a Priest, before the distinction of the two offices was
made, when Aaron and his posterity only were choosen ^to be Priests.

After which time he was no longer a Priest, nether did he any thing as a
Priest, but as a Prophet, and as a Prince. But admit, he were both a Prince and
a Priest, yet he commanded Aaron as a Prince and not as a Priest. For Aaron
was high Priest, and therefore could have no Priest above him. By which it is
inferred, that the office of a Prince is to command the high Priest, and so
was it always practiced by all godly Princes. But Master Sander returning to
his last and least difference, affirms that the Bishop of Rome never
condemns any man for herefie or schism to corporal death in his own
person, nor teaches that they may be condemned of other Ecclesiastical
persons. But who understands not this mockery? for as well it may be said,
the King never hangs any man in his own person, therefore none are executed
by his authority, as the Pope never condemns any to death in his own
person, therefore he persuades not his religion with fire and sword. But will
the Pope and the Bishop, that are so mylde and gentle, suffer them whom they
condemn for heresy to escape their hands, before they have delivered them to
death? O cruel and shameless hypocrites.

Nevertheless Master Sander says, they have power over men's souls by that
which our Savior said to Peter. To the I will give the keys of the kingdom
of heaven. etc. which words are deryued to the Bishop of Rome, by means of
the chair of S. Peter. A strange kind of deriuation never touched in the
Scripture, to which words the said Bishop refers all his power, where as
worldly Princes appeal to the law of the Gospel nether in getting, nor
governing, nor establishing their dominion and power. Mark well this English
Anabaptist. Is not this the law of the Gospel?

There is no power but of God, and the powers that be are ordained of God. Romans
13. 1. for getting of deminion and power. And is not this the law of the
Gospel for their governing? that governors are sent of God for the punishment
of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well. 1. Pet. 2. verse. 14.

And for the establyshing of their dominion, is not this the law of the Gospel,
give unto Caesar the things that belong to Caesar. Matthew 22. verse 21. And
again, we must be subject of necessity, not only for fear but even for
conscience Romans 13. verse. 5.

As for the Popes piety and lenity, wherewith he rules, when all the world
sees how proudely and tyrannical yhe behaueth him self, it were folly to
spend many words about it. As for his gentle terms of sons and brethren,
wherewith he saluteth Princes, and Bishops, and the servant of the servants
of God, which he calls him self: be simple and short clokes to hide his
horrible presumption and tyranny, wherewith he not only most sha^efully
reuileth most Christian Princes, as it appears in that traiterous Bull, which
came from him against our most gracious sovereign Lady, but also takes upon
him to depose them from their estate royal, usurping to him felfe the name of
holiness, of head of the Church etc. of Christ, of God him self, and
calls Princes his vassalles. etc. of which blasphemies his Cannon Laws are
stuffed full. And therefore it is too far in the day, for M. Sander to make
us think there is no difference between white and black, Pride and Humility,
Gentleness and Cruelty, Holiness and hypocrisy, faith and falshode, vice
and virtue.

The third Chapter.
OF the diverse senses which are in the holy Scripture, and namely about these
words (upon this Rock Sander.
I will build my Church) and which is the most literal and proper sense of
them. TO contend about the diversity of senses, it were Fulke.
to take up a new controversy. I admit that which Master Sander
confesses, the lyter all sense only to be of force to convince the adversary.
And the literal sense not to be always according to the grammatical sound
of the words, but according to the most plain meaning of the speaker. As
when Christ says to Peter, ^o thee I will give the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, he means not material Keys of Iron, but authority in the Kingdom
of Heaven, as Keys are delivered by the Master to his Stuard, but not as
keys of a city are delivered, which betoken the giving of possession of that
City to be governed by him which receives the Keys (as Master Sander says)
For that was no part of Christ's meaning, to resign the government of his
Church to Peter, for such giving of Keys is of the subjects to their
Superior, but to make him one of the Stuardes of his great house, to open and
shut, according to his apoyntment. Otherwise, only Christ has the key of
David, which opens and no man shuts, and shuts and no man opens
Apocalips 3. verse 7.

Likewise when he says: Thou art Peter, I confess and agree with Master
Sander, that the lyterall sense is not, thou art a natural stone, but thou art
that toward my Church, which a stone is toward the house that is builded
upon that stone. But so that Peter is not the only foundation, nor the Corner
stone, which is only Christ, but one of the twelve stones of the foundation,
as it may more plainly appear in the Apocalips the 21. Chapter and the 14.
verse.

Furthermore I confess, that what soever by necessary conclusion may be
gathered, of any true literal sense, is of equal authority in the word of
God, with that wc is expressed in plain words. As the consubstantialitie of
Christ with God the Father, the blessed trinity, and such like, But whereas M.
Sand. ioygneth to these, not only the perpetual virginity of the virgin
Mary, which is not certainly, though probably to be gathered, but also
transubstantiation, the sacrifice of the Mass, and Purgatory, against which
the sense of the scripture is manifest, I will not admit them for examples.

But to come to his purpose, he finds in the ancient Fathers, four diverse
senses of these words (upon this Rock I will build my Church) whereof three
he rejects, as imperfect which have ancient writers, as he confesses for
their Authors, the last he has no ancient writer to defend.

The first, that Christ is that Rock on whom the Church is builded, which
Augustine holds.

The second, that every Disciple of Christ is the rock, which is Origens
opinion.

The third, that Peter's faith or confeffion is the rock, which is Chrysostoms
judgment.

The fourth, which is his own, and therefore he calls it the perfect sense,
is, that Peter concerning his office in Gods Church, through the promise of
Christ which is past, and the faithful confession of his Godhead, which is
presently made, and the power of feeding his Sheep, which then was to come, is
this Rock upon which the Church is builte. Here I wish the reader to note,
that the Papiste rejects three senses of three several ancient writers, and
makes the fourth him self, that you may see, with what equity they exclaim
against us, if upon never so good ground, we depart from the interpretation
of the ancient Fathers. But now let us see what reasons he has to confute
these three Doctors oppinions as insufficient interpretations.

First he says, If Augustines sense were true, all the three other should
be void, In deed his own sense, understanding Peter to be a singular Rock,
more then the other Apostles is made void thereby, as it is false. But the
other two may stand very well well with Augustines meaning, for he means
not Christ barely, but Christ whom Peter and every true Disciple of Faith
confesses, to be the rock of the Church, Neither does the word thou, hinder
this sense. Seeing Augustine understands Peter to be a denominatiue a Petra,
of the stone, nor the word, I will build, for notwithstanding he had
begunn to build his Church before, yet he would build still, and that more
magnificall then before.

The sense of Origin he rejects, as not literal upon which I will not
stand.

The sense of Chrysostom he refuses, saying, the Faith of Peter is not the
only Rock, whereupon the Church shall be builded, for then it had been
buylte upon the Faith of John Baptiste before this time. A pythy argument, as
though there is any more then one Faith Ephesians 4. verse 5. which is the
same in Peter and in John, and in all the other Apostles, the same I say in
kind, not in number. Neither did Chrysostom mean, that the singular Faith
of Peter were the Rock of the Church, but the same one Faith and confession
embraced of every member thereof.

That he says I will build, whereas he had already begun to build, and
did then presently build, What inconvenience is it but in a quarrellers mind.
He speaks of the Future tenses, to signify the great amplyfication of his
Church which he would make by the preaching of the Apostles.

But of all senses Master Saunder lyketh his own best, asperfect and
containing all the other therein. For first says he, if Peter be the Rock,
then Christ that made him is much more, as the geeuer and author of his
power. But I deny that Christ did give the same that he is him self, that is,
to be the only singular founda^ion, Rock, and corner stone of his Church.

Secondly he says, if Peter in respect of his confession be a Rock, then his
confession is a Rock. But then say I, they that make the same confession are
as much a Rock as he.

Thirdely he says, if Peter being captain Disciple of all that ever were, be
a Rock, then all other Disciples that are contained in him as in ye chief, may
also be this Rock. Who had thought Peter had been such an universal thing to
contain al disciples in him? Does not this contain manifest blasphemy? to
make all Disciples contained in Peter, which are contained only in Christ,
as the members in their mystirall body, whereof he, only is chief head,
Sovereign, Captain, or what other name of superiority can be devised.

But now that he has made such a monstrous iumbling of three opinions in
one, he is not ashamed to charge Master Jewel, for leaving the most literal
sense, and mingling three, opinions of these four in one, as though his sense
which is farthest of from the meaning of Christ, were the only or most
literal sense. But seeing he wishes Master Jewel or any of us to discuss
the meaning of Christ particulerly with all circumstaunces, for my part
considering all circumstaunces, I think the most simple and plain meaning of
Christ is, that Peter it a Rock or stone, upon which the Church is builded,
but none otherwise, then every one of the Apostles is, Ephe, 2. and 20. verse,
and in the Apocalips the 21. chapter and 14. verse. Of which M. Sander also
confesses every one to be a Rock in his kind.

But now let us see the five circumstaunces, by which Master Saunder will
prove Peter for to be such a Rock, as none of all the rest of the Apostles
is but he.

The first, Christ promised Simon before he confessed, that he should be
called Peter, which was the first cause of being the Rock John I. Admit
this to be a promise, and not an imposition of a name, in respect of the
gifts of fortitude and constancy where with he would endue him, this proves
him not to be a singular rock.

The second, he was named Peter before he confessed, which was the performaunce
of the promise. Mark. 3. I dout not but that he had confessed Christ before he
was made an Apostle, although he had not made that solemn confession expressed
in Matthew 16. Wherefore this circumstaunce is a frivolous argument. And his
brother Andrewe which first brought him to Christ, confessed Jesus to be the
Messiah before Peter was come to Christ.

The third, when he had confessed the Godheade of Christ which was the fru^ct
of the gift and of the promise, Christ pronounced him to be such a rock,
whereupon he would build his church, which was the reward of his confession.

But all the Apostles made the same confession, therefore the same reward was
given to all, that they should every one be a rock or stone, on which the
church should be builded.

The fourth, Christ prayed that Peter's faith might not fail, which was the
warrant of the perpetuity of his strong confession Luc. 22. Christ prayed for
all his Apostles Joan. 17. the special prayer for Peter, was in respect of his
greater weakness, when he was left to him self.

The last, to show what strength Peter should give, to his brethren after his
conversion, Christ bad him feed his lambs, whereby he was made such a rock,
whereby he should stay up his church, by teaching and ruling ye faithful, as
whose voice the sheep should be bound to hear in pain of damnation. First I
answer, that the strength or confirmation which he should give to his
brethren, was not all one, with his feeding of the lambs, but was used to the
strengthening of his weak brethren, the rest of the Apostles whom after his
marvelous conversion, he did mightily confirm, though in his fall he was
showed to be the weakest of all. Then I say, the feeding of the sheep of
Christ, was committed to him with the rest of the Apostles, in which he had no
prerogative of authority given, but an earnest charge, to show his greater
love, by greater diligence in his office. So that hitherto Peter is none
otherwise a rock, then every one of the Apostles is.

The fourth Chapter.
Diverse reasons are alleged to prove (chiefly by the circumstance and
conference of holy Scripture) that these Sander.
words (thou art Peter and upon this rock I will build my church) have this
literal meaning, upon thee o Peter, being first made a rock, to thend thou
should stoutely confess the faith, and so confessing it, I will build my
church: the promise to be caelled Peter, was the first cause. Why the church
was built upon him, the Protestants can not tell: which is the first literal
sense, of these words, upon this rock will I build my church.

FIrst it is to be remembered, that M. Sa^der in the chapter before, rejecting
the interpretation of three of the Fulke.
greatest Doctors of the church, Origin, Augustine, and Chrysostom, not only is
bound in equity, to give us the same liberty which he takes him self, but
also to confess, that these three principal doctors, following other senses,
then his, were ignorant of that which he and all other Papists, make to be the
chief article of Christian faith, namely of the supremacy of Peter, when they
acknowledged not Peter to be the rock whereupon Christ would build his church,
and therefore would never have subscribed to his book, which he instituteth the
rock of the church. But now to the argument of this chapter. Chrysostomis
cited to prove, that, where Christ says to Peter, thou art Simon the son of
Iona, thou shall be called Cepha, which is by intepretation Peter, a new name
is promised to Simon, in Joan. Hom. 18. Honorifice etc. Christ does forespeake
honorably of him. For the certain foretelling of things to come, is the work
only of the immortal God. It is to be noted, that Christ did not foretell at
this first meeting all things which should come to pass afterward to him.
For he did not call him Peter, neither did he say, upon this rock will I
build my church. But he said, thou shall be called Cephas. For that was both
of more power, and also of more authority. There is nothing in this sentence,
but that we may willingly admit, Peter was not yet instructed that he might be
one of the twelve foundations of the church, as he was afterward. And that
Chrysostom judged no singular thing to be granted, by that saying of Christ
Mat. 16. to Peter, appears, by his words in Euang. Ioann. Praef. Where he
applies the same to Ihon. Tonitrui enim filius est Christo dilectissimus,
columna omniu^ quae in orb sunt ceclesiarum, qui caeli claues habet. For the
son of thunder is most beloved of Christ, being a pillar of all the churches
which are in the world, which has the keys of heaven. Neither does Cyrillus,
whom he cites, make any thing for his purpose. In Joan. lib. 2. cap. 12. Nec
Simon etc. And he tells before hand that his name shall be Peter and not now
Simon: by the very word signifying, that he would build his church on him as on
a rock and most sure stone. These are the words of Cyrillus, but that he
means not his person, but his faith, he shows manifestly in his book de
Trinit. lib. 4. speaking upon the text of Math. 16. the ground of M. Sanders
book. Peiram opinor per agnominationem nihil aliud, quam inconcussam and
firmissimam discipuli fidem vocauit, in qua ecclesia Christi it a firmata and
fundata esset, vt non laberetur. I think he called a rock, by denomination
nothing else but the most immovable and steadfast faith of that disciple, on
which the church of Christ should be so established and founded, that it should
not fall. Here is an other principal Doctor joining with Chrysostom, against
M. Sander, who affirms, that the rock is nothing else, but Peter's faith.
After these he names. Theophylact and Euthymius two late writers, but he
cites nothing out of them presently. But after showing the force of Gods
promise to be effectual, to work al means necessary for the performaunce of
it, he cites out of Euthymius in Luc 6. that it was like, that in Ioh. 1.
Christ promised that Simon should be called Peter, and in Luke 6 called him
Peter. All this needed not, we doubt not but Simon was called Peter. Yea but
Cyrillus says in Joan. lib. 12. cap. 64. that he being Prince and head, first
cried out saying, thou art Christ the son etc. Therefore he was head before
his confession, by promise and name. I will not here say, how contrary M.
Sander is to him self, which in the cap. 3. said, that his supremacy was
granted to him as a reward of his confession. But I will answer Cyrillus by
him self, in Joan. lib. 4. cap. 28 that Peter was Ordine mayor, superior in
order, to avoid confusion, not in degee, dignity or authority. And whereas
M. Sander urges so vehemently, that the name of Peter was not given for his
confession, but was singular to him by promise, so that it belonged literally
to no Prophet, Apostle nor disciple but only to him, and his successors, it is
a most fond and friuolus matter, for the name of Bonarges, was specially given
to the sons of Zebedee, in respect of their excellent gifts, and at the same
time that the name of Peter was given to Simon, which secing it pertains not
to their successors, which have not the same gifts, no more does the name and
dignity of Peter perteine to any that sit in his chair, if ever he had any
fixed chair among the Gentiles, which by Gods ordinance, was appointed to be
the principal Apostle of the Jews. Moreover where he laboreth tooth and
nailc, to prove, that these words (upon this rock I will build my church) are
to be referred to Peter, as I said before, I will grant even as much. But
that Peter by these words, was made a singular rock more then all the
Apostles, upon which the whole church is builded, I utterly deny, neither shall
he be ever able to prove it. For it is an impudent lie, that only Peter at
this time, had this high revelation, to acknowledge Christ to be the son of
God. For he answered in the name of all the rest, who believed the same which
he in their name confessed. Did not Andrewe before Peter acknowledge him to be
the Messiah? Did not Nathaniel which was none of the Apostles, acknowledge him
to be the son of God and the King of Israel. Joan. 1. 49.

But he reasons substantially, when he says thou only art the rock, because
thou alone had this name etc. promised, thou alone had it given, thou alone
did confess me and to thee alone I say thou art Peter. As though a man may
not have a name, whose signification is common to many. Solomon alone was
promised to be called and was called Iedidiah, that is the beloved of God,
shall we therefore reason that Solomon only was beloved of God, as for that he
only confessed, I have showed before, that it is false, for Christ saying,
thou art Peter, means not to say thou only art a rock, but thou well
aunswerest thy name, which signifies a rock or stone, and I will in deed use
thee as a rock or stone, to build my church upon, yet not meaning the person,
but the office and doctrine of his Apostleship.

But now has M. Sander no less then 21. reasons, to prove that Peter is the
rock, here spoken of, wc although they may for the most part be easily
avoided, yet I will grant that Peter is one of the twelve stones, whereupon
the church is builded, but not the only stone.

Therefore his first four arguments, I deny 1. Simon is alone promised to be
called Peter, 2. he alone is called Peter, 3. Christ speaks to him alone,
saying. And I say to thee etc. 4. Christ says of him alone, thou art Peter,
therefore Simon alone is the rock of the church, let him prove the consequence
if he can. The next 5. which prove that these words are to be referred to
Peter, although that they be not very strong, yet I grant the words may be
aptly referred to Peter, the reasons are 1. upon the pronoune. The 2 the word
rock of which Peter is named, 3. the conference of the^ together, 4. the word
I will build, 5. the word my church.

The 10, Argument I deny, that Christ. (by saying to Peter, Feed my Lambs,
feed my sheep) made him the head stone of Gods militant Church next unto
Christ.

The eleventh, that Peter is showed to be the Rock spoken of, by giving of the
Keys, I confess: ebut seeing the keys are given to all the Apostles, this
proves Peter to be none otherwise a Rock, then every one of them, That John
receued the Keys I showed even now out of Chysostome.

The twelfth, that the property of a Rock in constant withstanding of
tempests, agrees with Peter, I grant and so it does to the rest of the
Apostles, for whom Christ prayed as he did for Peter, who also strengthened
and confirmed their brethren as Peter did.

The 13. I confess that hell gates shall not prevail against the Church, nor
against any member thereof, which is a small reason to make Peter supreme
head thereof.

The 14. which is the authorities of those doctors that teach Peter to be the
rock whom he names when he cites their sayings, or quoteth their places, I
will severally consider.

The 15. their reason also when I see them, to derive Peter's authority to his
successors, I will waighe likewise.

The 16. the practice of 1500. years I deny.

The 17. I deny that all general counsels, or any general council for 600.
years after Christ, acknowledged Peter to be the rock in that sense, the
Papists do now.

The 18. if the confession of Peter be the rock, yet it is none inconvenience,
that the church should be builded thereon, which began to be builded on the
same confession offered by John Baptist.

The 19. though you confound the diverse senses given by the fathers in your
fourth sense, yet that proves not your sense to be true.

The 20. seeing the Apostles are certain foundatio^s and rocks upon which the
church is builded, I confess that Peter must needs be one, but that he was
the most principal rock in respect of his name Peter, which is a stone, I say
it follows no more then that Solomon was best of al men beloved of God,
because of that name Iedidiah, which signifies beloved of God.

The 21. that all the Protestants do not agree in the interpretation of these
words (upon this rock I will build my church) it proves not your
exposition, to be true, for neither do all the old Doctors, nor yet the new
Papists agree in one, and the same interpretation of this text. And oftentimes
it may inuincibly be proved, that an heresy has no ground out of such a
text of Scripture, although the true and natural sense thereof can not be
found at all.

The fifth Chapter.
IT is proved out of the ancient fathers, that S. Peter is this Sander.
rock, whereupon the church was promised to be builded, otherwise then M.
Jewel affirms. THat Peter was a rock or stone, upon which the Fulke.
church was builded, is granted of us, but that he alone was a rock for the
whole church to be builded upon, we deny, and M. Jewel rightly affirms, that
the old Catholic fathers have written and pronounced not any mortal man as
Peter was, but Christ him self the son of God, to be this rock, whereon yt
whole church is builded. But M. Sander will prove (if he can) out of the old
writers, that not only Christ is the chief rock, but Peter also is an other
rock, so that the church by his doctrine, is builded upon two rocks, and this
he will show, 1. by their words, 2. their reasons, 3. and by the same places
which M. Jewel alleges for the contrary opinion.

The decretal epistles of Anacletus, Pius, Fabianus, etc. which in his own
conscience he knows to be forged, he omitteth, and begins with Tertullian
De praescrip. aduers. haeres. Latuit aliquid Petrum aedisica^dae ecclesiae
Petram dictum? Was any thing hid from Peter which was called a rock of the
church which was to be builded? This is granted that he was a rock or stone,
whereon the church is builded, and the same Tertullian in his book de
pudicitia says, of this whole text, that this was conferred to Peter
Personally, and pertains to none other, but such as he was, namely an Apostle
or Prophet.

Secundum enim Petri personam spiritualibus potestas ista conueniet, aut
Apostolo aut Prophetae. For according to the person of Peter, this power shall
belong to spiritual men either to an Apostle or to a Prophet. Where is then the
succession of the B. of Bome?

But Hippolytus says: Princeps Petrus, fideipetra. Peter is chief, a rock of
faith. He means a strong preacher of faith not a rock whereon faith is
builded.

Origenes in Exodus Ho. 5. calls S. Peter Magnum illud etc. That great
foundation and most sound rock, whereupon Christ has builded his church. But
let Origenes expound him self in Math. cap. 16. Si autem super vnum illum
Petrum arbitraris vniuersam ecclesiam aedisicari a deo, quid dicis de Iacobo
and Ioanne filus tonitrui, velde singulis Apostolis? Vere ergo ad Petrum quidem
dictum est. Tues Petrus and super hanepetram edifi^abo ecclesiam meam, and
pertae inferorum non praeualeb^nt ei: tamen omnibus Apostolis and omnibus
quibus q, perfectis fidelibus dictum videtur, quoniam omnes sunt Petrus and
petrae, and in omnibus aedificata est ecclesia Christi, and aduersus nullum
ecrum qui tales sunt, portae preualent inferorum. But if thou think the whole
church is builded by God upon that one man Peter, what say thou of James and
John, the sons of thunder, or of every one of the Apostles? Therefore it was
in deed truly said unto Peter. Thou art Peter and upon this rock I will
build my church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it, yet it
seems that it was spoken also to all the Apostles, and to all the perfect
faithful because they are all Peter and stones, and on them all, the church of
Christ is builded, and against none of them which are such, the gates of hell
shall prevail. By this you see how Origin is none of his, how so ever he
abuse his name.

Next he cites Cyprian lib. 1. Ep. 3. and lib. 4. Ep. 9 which says that the
church was builded upon Peter. Which we confess as upon one of the foundation
stones, but the same Cyprian De simplicitate praelatorum says. Hoc erant
vtique and caeters Apostoli quod fuit Petrus, pari consortio praediti and
honoris and potestatis, sed exordium ab vnitate proficiscinur, vt ecclesia vna
monstretur. The rest of the Apostles were even the same thing that Peter was,
endued with equal fellowship both of honor and authority, but the beginning
proceeds from one, that the church might be showed to be one. This speaks
Cyprian upon the very text now in discussing.

Consequently he cites Hilarie lib 6. de trinit. Petrus etc. Peter lies under
the building of the church and in ca. Math. 16. O in nuncupatione etc. O happy
foundation of the church in having the new name pronounced, and o rock worthy
of the building of that church, which should dissolve the laws of hell. But
the same Hilarie says of Christ, de trinit. lib. 2. Vna haec est foelix fidei
petra, Petri ore confessa, tu es filius Dei viui. This is that only happy
rock of faith, confessed by the mouth of Peter, thou art the son of the
living God. And again, lib. 6. Super hanc igitur confessionis petram ecclesiae
aedificatio est. Upon this rock of confession is the building of the church.
And again. Haec fides ecelesiae fundamentum est, per hanc fidem infirmae
aduersus eam sunt portae inferorum. Haec fides regni caelestis habet claues
etc. This faith is the foundation of the church, by this faith the gates of
hell are of no force against it. This faith has the keys of the kingdom of
heaven etc. Therefore not the person of Peter is the rock, for all the church
to be built upon.

S. Ambrose has the next place, whom he cites Scr. 66. Si ergo etc. If Peter
then be a rock upon which the church is builded, he does well to heal first
the feet, that even as he does conteyne the foundation of faith in the church,
so in the man he may confirm the foundation of his members.

Of the authority of this Sermon I will not dispute, it shall suf^ice that
Ambrose in Ps. 38. says. Quod Petro dicitur, Apost^lis di^itur, non p^testatem
vsurpamus, sed serui^^s ^mperio. That which is said to Peter, is said to the
Apostles, we usurp not power, but we serve under commaund^ment. By this saying
of Ambrose, Peter is so a rock and foundation, as the other Apostles are, and
not a rock to bear all the building him self.

S. Basil is alleged in Conc^de paenit. Petrus petra est etc. Peter is a rock
through Christ the rock. For Jesus gives his own dignities, he is a rock
and makes a rock. This proves not Peter to be the only rock of the
militant church, as M. Sander would make him.

After him he cites Hierom in 16. Math. AEdificabo ecclesiam mean super te, I
will build my church upon thee. Behold says M. Sander the church promised to be
built upon a mortal man. If he say true, Christ says in vain that flesh and
blood made him not Peter. But the same Hieronyme interprets that power there
given, to Peter, to perteyne to every Bishop and Priest, as much as to Peter.
And contra Ioninian lib. 1. he writes. At dicis super Petrum fundatur
ecclesia, licet id ipsum in alio loco super omnes Apostol^s fiat, and cuncti
^laues regni cael^rum accipiant, and ex aequo super eos ecclesiae fortitudo
s^lidetur: tamen propterea inter du^decim vnus eligitur vt capite co^stituto
seisinatis tollatur occasio: But thou say the church is founded upon Peter,
although in an other place the same is done upon al ^^^^ Apostles, and they al
received the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and the strength of the church is
grounded equally upon the^, yet for this cause, one is chosen among the twelve,
that the head being appointed, occasion of division might be taken away. You
see now that Peter is no more a rock or fundation, then the rest, neither has
any more authority of the keys then the rest, al^hough by his judgment, he
was chosen to be the chief or first in order to avoid strife, not in dignity
or auctority. Chrysostom is cited ex Var. in Math. Hom 27. Princeps etc. Peter
Prince of the Apostles, upon whom Christ sounded the church, a very
immovable rock and a strong confession. M. Sander would have us note, that
Peter is called confession, that when he says the church is builded upon faith
and confession, we might understand no man's says and confession, but Peter's.
As though all the Apostles had not the same faith and made not the same
confession. But notwithstanding that Chrysostom does often acknowledge Peter to
be the Prince of the Apostles, yet he wills us, to consider that his
principallity was not of auctority but of order. Iam and ill^d considera, quam
and Petrus agit omma excommuni dis^ipulorum sententi^, nihil auctoritate sua,
nihil cum imperio. Now also consider this, how even Peter does all things by
the common decree of the disciples, nothing by his own auctority, nothing by
commandment. Ex. Act. Ho. 3. Also in 2. ad Gal. he does not only asfirme that
Paul was equal in honor with Peter, but also that all the rest were of equal
dignity. Iamque se caeteris honor parem ostendit, nec se reliquis illis, sed
ipsi summo comparat, declarans quod herum vnusquis q, parem sortitus sit
dignitate^. And now Paul shows him self equal in honor with the rest,
neither does he compare him self with the rest, but even with the highest
himself, declaring that every one of the^ has obtained equal dignity. Now
follows, Epiphanius in Anchor. Ipse dominus etc. The Lord himself did
constitute him chief of the Apostles, a sure rock upon which the church of
God is built, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it: now the
gates of hell are heresies and auctors of heresies, for by all means faith in
him was established which received the keye of heaven. That Peter was chief of
ye Apostles in order, we strive not, that he was a sure rock we grant, but
that he alone was the rock of the church we deny. The same Epiphanius
acknowledges the Bishop of Rome to be fellow minister with every Bishop, and
no better, and therefore setting forth the epistle of Marcellus to Julius
Bishop of Rome, he gives this superscriptio^. Beatissimo co^ministro Iulio,
Marcellus in Domino gaudium. To his most blessed fellow minister Julius,
Marcellus wishes joy in the Lord.

The place of Cyrillus which follows, I have set down, and answered iu
the chapter before.

After him Theodoretus alleges Psellus. In Petro etc. In Peter the prince of
the Apostles, our Lord in the Gospells has promised that he will build his
Church. Damasc^n and Euthymius later writers are alleged to the like effect,
all which prove nothing but that Peter is a rock, which we confess as every
one of the Apostles is.

The^ follows Augustine in his retractations, which leaves it to the choice
of the reader, whether he will understand Peter figuring the person of the
Church, to be the rock spoken of by Christ, or Christ who^ he confessed. But
that Peter as Bishop of Rome, should be the rock he says nothing. Again
leaving it to the readers choice, he shows he had no such persuasion of the
rock of the Church, as M. Sander teaches.

After him Prosper Aquitanicus, and Leo with Gregory two Bishops of Rome, say
nothing but that Peter was a rock, which we grant without controversy.

Last of all the council of Chalcedon is cited. Act. 3.

Petrus Apostolus est petra and crepido Ecclesiae. Peter the Apostle is a rock
and a shore of the Church, which M. Sander translateth the top of the
Church. In deed the legates of the Bishop of Rome uttered such words, which may
be well understood as all the rest of the fathers, that Peter was one of the
twelve foundations of the Church. But that the council acknowledged not the
Bishop of Rome to have such authority as is pretended, appears by the 16.
action of the Chalcedon council, where notwithstanding the B. of Romes Legates
reclaymed, and Leo him self refused to consent, yet by the whole council it
was determined that the Archbishop of Constantinople should have equal
authority with the Archbishop of Rome in the East, only the title of
prioritie or senioritie reserved to the Bishop of Rome.

To conclude, M, Jewel said truly, for all M. Sanders vain and
childishinsulting and impudent railing, yt no mortal man, but Christ only is
the rock and foundation of the Church, albeit that Peter and all the Apostles
in respect of their office, and doctrine, were foundation stones whereon the
Church was builded, Jesus Christ being the corner stone and only one general
foundation.

The sixth chapter.
THe diverse reasons which the fathers bring to declare why Sander.
S. Peter was this rock, do evidently show that he was most literally this
rock, whereupon Christ would build his Church. How Peter bears the person of
the Church. THat he was a stone or rock, whereon the Church is Fulke
builded, has been often granted, but that he only was such a stone is still
denied. First Basil aduersus Euno. lib. 2. is cited, with his reason Petrus
etc. Peter received the building of the Church upon him self, for the
excellencye of his faith. I answer, so did the other Apostles for the
excellencye of their faith, for continuance whereof, Christ prayed as well as
for Peter's faith. John. 17.

The 2. Hilarie de trinit. lib. 6. says Supereminentem etc. Peter by
confession of his blessed faith, deserved an exceeding glory. And so did the
rest of the Apostles by their confession of their blessed faith, obtain an
exceeding or passing glory, vltra humanae infirmitatis modu^, beyond ye measure
of man's infirmity, wc words also Hilary has, left you should think he
prefers Peter in authority before ye other Apostles. For Peter's faith and
confession he did before interpret to be the rock of the Church, wc because
it was common to all the Apostles, he makes their authority equal. Vos o
sancti and beati viri, ob sidei vestrae merituns claues regni caelorum sortiti,
and ligandi aique soluendi in caelo and in terra ius adepti. O you holy and
blessed men, which for the worthiness of your faith have obtained the keys of
the kingdom of heaven, and have attained to authority to bind and loose in
heaven and in earth. And if you urge that Peter spoke, when all the rest held
their peace: yet is that primacye but of order, not of authority for they all
believed as Peter confessed, and Peter confessed in the name of all the rest.

The 3. Cyprian ad Iubaianum: Ecclesia quae est vna etc. The Church which is
one, is founded by our Lords voice, upon one which has received the keys of
it. This reason (says he) can bear but one such rock, for if there were more
rocks at once, there should be more churches But it is reason, that Cyprian
should expound him self, which by founding means the beginning of the
foundation, as he says, de simplicitate pr elat. Loquitur Dominus ad Petrum
etc. The Lord speaks to Peter. I say to thee (says he) that thou art Peter,
and upon this rock I will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it. To thee will I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven,
and whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth, shall be bound in heaven: and
whatsoever thou shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. And to the
same after his resurrection, he says: Feed my sheep. And although he gives
to all his Apostles after his resurrection equal power, and says, as my
father has sent me, so also do I send you, receive the holy Ghost. Whose
sins you forgive they shall be forgiven, and whose sins you retain they
shall be retained: yet that he might show the unity, by his authority, he
disposed the beginning of the same unity, beginning at one. For verily the
rest of the Apostles, were even the same thing that Peter was, endued with
equal fellowship both of honor and of power: but the beginning proceeds from
unity, that the Church might be showed to be one. Thus far Cyprian. By which
we see that there is but one beginning, yet all the Apostles are equal. This
unity of beginning of building, Tertullian also lib. de pudic. shows to have
been in Peter, when he was the first that preached after the ascension of
Christ.

The 4. Augustine Hom. de pastoribus, Dominus etc. Our Lord has commended
unity in Peter him self: there were many Apostles, and it is say d^ to one,
feed my sheep. Here he will have Peter to represent Christ, the only good
shepeheard: although the words importe no such thing, but only a mystery of
unity, which is but friuolously gathered by the author of that book, or
homely, untruly ascubed to S. Augustine: where yet he will not have Peter to be
the head, but to bear a figure of the body of Christ, which is the Church.
Whereupon his words follow soon after. Na n and ipsum Petrum cui commendauit
oues suas, quasi alter alteri vnum se^um facere volebat, vt sic ei oues
commendaret, vt esset ille caput, ille figuram corporis portaret, id est
Ecclesiae, and tanquam s^onsus and sponsa essent duo in carne vna. For he would
make even Peter to whom he commended his sheep, as one to another, one with
him self, that he might so commend his sheep to him, that he him self might
be the head, and Peter might bear the figure of his body, that is, of his
Church, and so they might be as the bridegroom and his spouse, two in one
flesh. These words show how vain M. Sanders collection is for Peter's headship,
beside that he cites the words otherwise then they are in the author, even as
his note book served him.

The 5. reason is uttered by Hierome aduersus Iouinianum lib. 1. aunswering the
objection of Iouinian, and intending to prove that John the virgin was as
excellent as Peter the married man. At dicis, etc. But thou say, the Church is
built upon Peter: Albeit the self same thing in another place, be done upon
all the Aposiles, and all do receive the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and
the strength of the Church be grounded equally upon them, yet therefore one is
chosen among twelve, that a head being made, the occasion of schism may be
taken away. Here he would have three things to be noted. First that the
Church is so built upon Peter the rock, that in the same place where it is
built upon Peter, the like is not done upon the other Apostles. But seeing he
him self before urged the future tence, I will build, this collection is
false. Christ promises that he will build his Church upon Peter, but when he
builds, he uses all the Apostles as well as Peter.

Secondly that the church is equally built upon all the Apostles, therefore not
more on Peter then on the rest.

Thirdly that one is chosen head to avoid schism.

But if all be equal, he as keth how one may be head? I answer, even as the
foreman of the Jury in some respects is chief, and yet they are all equal.
But he answers they are equal in authority, as Apostles, but not as
Bishops. But seeing the office of every Apostle is above the office of every
Bishop, it will follow, that every Apostle as Apostle, is above Peter as
Bishop of Rome, which were a perilous matter for Master Sander to admit.
Howbeit concerning this distinction of his, more is to be said in a more proper
place. In the mean time, he urges, that Peter was chosen of Christ to be
head, to avoid strife and schism, which reason seeing it holds always,
there ought always one head to be chosen, to be a head and perpetual rock,
by succession. I answer the reason of avoiding schisms, may gain so much,
that in every Church, such as the first of the Apostles was, such an head for
such purpose may be chosen, but it will not enforce one head being a mortal
man, over all the Church, which no one man can keep in unity, and how
convenient the headship of the Romish Church is to avoid schisms, let so many
schisms as have been made even for the attayning of the same headship, bear
witness. Whereof one continued 39 years.

As for Leo Bishop of Rome, it is well known, he was too much addicte to
maintain the dignity of his Sea, and yet he was far from the tyranny which
the later bishops usurped and practiced under pretense of Peter's supremacy.
His words ate cited in Ann. ass. ser. 3. Super hoc Saxum etc. Upon this stone,
this soundnes and strength, I will build an everlasting temple, and the hight
of my Church, which is to reach to Heaven, shall rise in the strength of this
Rock. A great extolling of Peter, usual to the Bishops of Rome, but yet no
more is said of him then may be truly faide upon every one of the Apostles.

The 6. reason is uttered by Augustine. Ep. 165. Petro totins ecclesiae
figuram. etc. Our Lord said to Peter bearing the figure of the whole Church.
upon this rock I will build my church. And again in Joan Tr. 124. Ecclesiae
etc. Peter the Apostle by a generality that was figured, did bear the person
of the Church, by reason of the primacie of his Apostleship. Here he makes
much ado about his primacie, by reason whereof he bears the figure of all
the Church, willing to infer that because he was primate of the Apostles,
and in respect of his primacy represented the whole Church, therefore he was
sovereign ruler and general officer of the whole militant Church. But it
follows not, that every one which is made an attorney or Proxei to receive a
thing for a whole comminaltie, is thereby made general ruler of all that
comminaltie.

The Papists them selves in the Council of Basil discharge us of this
conclusion, where they agree to the sentence of John Patriarch of Antiochia
which cites Augustine to witness that Peter received the Keys as minister of
the Church.

And Augustine writes De Agone Christ. cap. 30 Non enim siae causa inter omnes
Apostolos huius ecclesiae Catholicae personam sustinet Petrus, Huic enim
ecclesie clauis regni caelorum datae sunt. Et cum ei dicitur ad omnes di^itur,
A^nas me, Pasce oues meas. For not without cause among all the Apostles,
Peeter sustaineth the person of this Catholic Church. For to this Church the
Keys of the kindome of Heaven are given. And when it is said unto him, it is
said to all. Do thou love me? feed my sheep. By this sentence it is
plain, that Christ after Augustines mind, preferred not Peter in power
before all the rest, but to receive equal power with the rest, he made him
as it were the Attornye of the rest. So that all these reasons duly
considered, the sayings of the Doctors which affirm Peter to be a rock or
stone, on which the Church is builded, do not prove that he was an only
foundation of the whole Church, but with the rest of the apostles, he was one
and the first of the twelve stones, whereon the Church was founded, and that
in respect of his office and doctrine, not of his person, as he wasa mortal man.

The seventh Chapter.
THE authorities alleged by M. I^well, to prove that Sander.
Peter was not this Rock, prove against him self that Peter was this Rock,
although they prove that there was an other kind of Rock also beside him,
which thing we deny not. THE first authority is Gregorius Nyssenus in loc.
vet. test. Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will Fulke.
build my church. He means the confession of Christ. For he had said before:
Thou art Christ the son of the living God. M. S. replieth that it is neither
said, that Peter was not this Rock: nor that Christ was this rock. But that the
confession of Peter was the Rock, which he grants, and therefore Peter much
rather must be the rock. For his confession which comes from his soul and
heart, as from a fountain or spring, is greater then the act of confession.
First I deny his Argument: because Peter's confession came neither from his
soul nor heart, but from God, which revealed the truth unto him, as Christ
says. Flesh and blood etc. Secondly I say, Gregory means by Peter's
confession, him which Peter confessed, namely Christ which is the only Rock
of the Church, whereon the whole Church is builded, as his words do sound,
for he had said before: Thou art Christ etc.

But M. Sander reasoning like a learned Clarke, finds fault with M. Jewels
argument, comparing it to this: There comes eloquence from a man but he is
not eloquent: Peter's confession is the Rock, therefore Peter is not the Rock.
Would a man think that a Doctor in Diuitie, should either be so ignorant in
the Art of reasoning, or so impudent in perverting a good reason, that a very
Child might reprove, either the one or the other? I appeal to Logicians,
whether this reason of M. Jewels: The Rock comes from Peter by confession,
Ergo, Peter is not the Rock: be like this argument Eloquence comes from
Cicero, therefore Cicero is not Eloquence, and not as M. Sand. infers: Ergo,
Cicero is not Eloquent. But he has another Example. A man's Oration is
eloquent. therefore the man him self is eloquent: So Peter's conf^ssion is the
Rock, therefore Peter h^^selfe is the Rock. I deny the resemblance, for there
is resembled the Adjective in the one, and the substantive in the other. But
thus he should compare them, Tuilyes defense of Mylo is an eloquent oration:
therefore Tully is an eloquent Oration, which reasoning is no more absurd,
then this of M. Sand. Peter's confession is the Rock, therefore Peter is the
Rock. Contrariwise you may reason: Peter's confession was the Rock, therefore
Peter was Rockey or stony.

The second authority is Hilarie. Haec vna est etc. This is that only
blessed rock of Faith that Peter confessed with his mouth. M. Sander caueleth,
that this is not spoken upon the words said to Peter, but vp^on the words
spoken by Peter. But beside that the whole context of the place is against him,
both in that, lib. 2. De trinit. and also lib. 6. Super hanc confessionis
Petram ecclesiae edifi^ato est, upon this Rock of confession is the building of
the Church, which M. Sand. would avoid by bringing in of two rocks, Christ and
Peter: the particle exclusive shuts him clean out of the doors, for
Hillarie says not, that Christ is a Rock, but that he is the only Rock.
Therefore this is but one Rock and one building, and not as M. Sand. says two
Rocks and two buildings, for as well he might say two Churches. Now where
Hilarie upon Matthew acknowledges Peter to be a rock and foundation of the
Church, it is answered before, that he was one of the xii. foundations spoken
of Apoc. 21. in a far other meaning then Christ is the only Rock.

The 3. authority is, Cyrillus Dial, 4. de trini. The rock is nothing else,
but the strong and assured faith of the disciple. This says M. S. is that I
would have, for this disciple was S. Peter, and the rock here spoken of is
nothing else, but S. Peter's faith, therefore it is not Christ. Nay rather the
rock is nothing but S. Peter's faith, therefore it is not his person and so no
mortal man. For those words, nothing but Peter's faith, do not exclude Christ
because faith cannot be without necessary relation unto Christ, but they
exclude the person of Peter as a mortal man, because flesh and blood revealed
not this confession unto him, but the Heavenly father.

The 4. authorite is Chrysostom. Upon this Rock, that is, upon this faith and
this confession I will build my church. M. San. says, he that believed and
confessed was Peter and not Christ, ergo the rock is Peter and not Christ.
Although this argument have no consequence in the world, yet to admit that it
does follow, I will reply thus, but he that believed and confessed was not
Peter only, therefore Peter only was not this rock.

The 5. is Aug. de verbis dom. Christ was the rock upon which foundation
Peter him self was also builte. M. San. asks if one Rock may not be built
upon anonother, as Peter upon Christ? yes verily, but Peter none otherwise then
the rest of the Apostles, who were all foundation stones, laid upon the great
corner stone or only foundation Rock Jesus Christ.

S. Augustine again adds in Christ's person. I will not build my self upon
thee, but I will build thee upon me. M San. following the allegory of building
confesses that Christ is the first and greatest stone, upon which by all
proportion, the second stone that should be laid, must be greatest that can
be gotten next the first. If this be so, it is marvel the Angel which showed
unto John the building of the heavenly Jerusalem, showed him not this second
stone by it self, but the xij. stones lying equally one by an other upon the
maine foundation. Apo. 21. whereby we see that M. Sand. utters nothing but
the visions of his own head.

The 6. is Origines in 4. sentence in 16. Mat. He is ^^^^ rock whosoever is the
disciple of Christ. M. S. reciteththis sense as not literal, and seeing Peter is
a disciple, and the first, he will prove Peter next to christ, to be ye chief
rock. In deed according to this sense it must needs be, that Peter is one
principal rock, among so many thousand rocks, but because he is named first in
the Catalogue of the Apostles, it is a sorry reason to make him so to excel,
that he is one rock that bears all the rest. But M. Jewel is frantike in M.
San opinion, that denying any mortal man to be this rock, now proves every
mortal man that is Christ's disciple to be this Rock. Nay rather M. Sand. is
brainsick, that cannot understand this reason, every Christian is such a rock
as Peter was, therefore Peter in being a rock was not made Pope or head of the
universal church. Origines proceeds, upon such a rock all ecclesiastical
learning is built. But S. Peter is such a Rock, (says Master Sander) ergo
upon him all ecclesiastical learning is built. Who would wish such an
adversary as M. Jewel is, who proves altogether against him self? Nay who can
bear such an impudent caueler that finds a knot in a rush; For your
conclusion is granted (M. Sand. that all ecclesiastical learning is builte
upon S. Peter, but so it is builte upon every true Disciple of Christ by
Origens judgment.

Again Origin says: If thou think that the whole Church is built only upon
Peter, what then will thou say of John the son of thonder, and of every of
the Apostles? First M. Sand. charge the Bishop for leaving out in English
this word Illum, so that he should have said, upon that Peter, whereby he
accuses him to deny, that Peter is a Rock, which is an impudente lie.
Secondly when this authority does utterly overthrow his whole building of the
popish rock, he can say nothing, but that John was a mortal man, and so were
all the Apostles as well as Peter, therefore M. Jewel said not truly, that the
old sathers have written, not any mortal man, but Christ himself to be this
Rock, when John and all the Apostles be rocks. As though there were no
difference between the only foundation and rock of the whole Church, which is
Christ, and all the other stones that are built upon it.

Last of all Origin says: Shall we dare to say, that the gates of hell shall
not prevail only against Peter? or are the keys of the kingdom of heaven
given only to Peter? M. Sander answers, It is enough that the gates of hell
shall least of all prevail against Peter, he has chiefly the keys of heaven.
But what reason has he for this impudent assertion? Peter of all the Apostles
first confessed in the name of the whole Church. Admit this were true, as it
can never be proved, that this was the first time that any of the Apostles
confessed Christ: yet no primacy of superiority is hereby gained. if the
sentence as Origin expounded it, perteyneth to every faithful disciple: What
advantage M. Sander has taken of the Bishops allegations, let the readers
judge.

The eight chapter.
THe conclusion of the former discourse, and the order of the other which
follows. Sander.
THe conclusion consists of 7. poynctes. In the first Fulke.
he repeateth what he would have men think, he has gained in his former
discourse concerning Peter to be the Rock of the Church where on it is builte.

In the second for continuance of the building promised, there must be always
some mortal man, which being made the same Rock by election, and afterward
by revelation, should make the same confession, whenever he is demanded,
or consulted in matters of Religion. If this were true there were no necessity
of the holy Scriptures, neither yet of Synodes and Councelles, if one Pope were
abe to resolve all the demaundes moved by all men of the world.

In the third he says, if there must be some such one Rock, it is not
possible it should be any other but the Bishop of Rome: First, because he
alone has been the first and chief in all assemblyes. Secondly, he only
sits in Peter's Chair. Thirdly, and the consent of the world has taken him
so, ever indeed, but by the adversaries confession above a thousand years.
But God be thanked, the Church has no need of any such Rock, neither is any
such taught. Ephe. the fourth, where the order of the building thereof, and of
all necessary builders of Faith and doctrine are fully set forth. And the
three reasons are all false, in manner and form as they are universally set
down, as in their proper places shall be showed.

In the the fourth he gloryeth, that he has chosen to prove that point which
of all other is most hard. That all the Apostles were not the same thing that
Peter was. And first he will ask in what Gpspell or holy Scripture it is
written, that every other Apostle was the same Rock, which Saint Mathewe
testifyeth Saint Peter to have been. I answer, not only by necessary
collection out of many places of Scripture, which he him self acknowledges
to be the literal sense, as well as that which follows the sound of words,
it is proved, but also in plain words of Saint Paul Ephe. the second, verse.
20. Where the Church is builded upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ being the head corner stone. And Apo. 21 verse. 14.
Where the twelve precious stones, the foundations of the wall of the City,
had on them the names of the xij. Apostles of the Lamb.

The 5. is either thus or nothing at all, for it is not noted in him as the
other be. If Cyprian or Hierome were alleged for this equallitie, it were
sufficient for him to say, they were no Evangelists. For he shows it written:
thou shall be called Cephas and thou art Peter. You see these men that brag
of the Doctors, will be holden by them, as long as they list.

The 6. whereas all holy Scriptures is on the popish Catholics side, he
lamenteth the unhappiness of these days, in wc men altogether unlearned in
them, by the bare naming of Gods word, have among Pedlers won their spurs,
and among the ignorant have gotten the opinion of knowledge. As truly as
none but Pedles and ignorant men embrace this doctrine which we teach, so
truly all Scriptures be on M. Sand. side. Among so many Princes, noble men,
and excellent learned men as at this day acknowledge this doctrine to be the
truth: M. Sanders head was very sleepy, when he could see none, but Pedlers
and ignorant persons.

The seventh he will take upon him to show, by what means Saint Peter
excelled the other Apostles, and shows in what order he will proceed, which
seeing it is contained word for word in the titles of the seven Chapters next
following, I though it needelesse here to rehearse.

The ninthe Chapter.
THat Saint Peter passes far the other Aposlles in Sander.
some kind of ecclesiastical dignity. THat S. Peter had some excellent
gieftes, peradventure more then some of the Apostles, that he had great
dignity among the Apostles, may easily be granted, but that he had auctority
over them, such as the Pope claymeth over all Bishops, is of us utterly denied.

Neitherd oeth any one, nor all together, of M. Sa^ders 34. arguments, prove
that he had one jot of auctority over his brethren.

1 He was first in order of nombring of the twelve Apostles.

2 He was promised to be called Cephas, before the twelve were chosen.

3. He was named Peter at the time of the choice, ergo he had the Popes
authority over them. Who would grant the consequence of these arguments? Let
us see what the other be.

4 It was said to him alone, thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build
my Church. I deny that it was said to him alone, for all the Apostles were
likewise rocks, upon which he would build his Church. The like I say of the
5. that the keys of the kingdom of heaven were promised to him alone, for
every one of the Apostles received the^ as well as he, being or dained with equal
power of binding and losing, of remit ing and retayning sins. Mat. 18. 18,
Joan. 20. 23. Notwithstanding the words at one time were spoken to Peter
alone, yet did they give him no singular auctority.

The 6 Christ paid tribute for Peter, as under head of his family. ergo he was
greater then the rest, A fond argument. This Didrachma was paid for every man
in the City where he dwelt, and because Peter had a house and a family in the
City, Christ paid for him with whom he lodged, and him selse. But if you
draw it into an allegory. These absurdities will follow.

First, that Christ makes his Church and splrituall kingedome subject to
tribute, yea, to Moses law, by which that kind of tribute was due.

Secondly you divide Christ's church into two householdes, Didrachma was to be
paid, for the head or first borne of every house. And you show your
ignorance in referring this payment to Number. 3. which was only for the first
borne, whereas this was for all men. And for the first borne was dew five
siccles, whereof every one was half an Vnee of Silver at the least, whereas
Didrachma containing but two Drachmaes. whereof every one was equal with the
Roman penny could be but xvj. pence at the most of our money.

It is a strong argument, that the payment of trybute which argues subjection,
should make Peter so great a Lord, that he should be out of all subjection,
which if Chrysostom had considered, he would not have grounded Peter's
primacie upon so friuolus an Argument.

The seventh, Christ preached out of Saint Peter's Bote, to show that in his
Chair, his doctrine should always be steadfastly professed. An Argument to be
answered either with laughing or hissing.

The 8. Though all the Apostles were to be sifted, yet Peter's Faith alone is
prayed for. This is utterly false, for Christ prayed for all his Apostles
faith. Ioh. 17. if specially for Peter, it was in respect of his greater
danger, and not in respect of his greater dignity.

The 9. Peter first entered into the Sepulcher, ergo he was made pope. He
entered for farther confirmation of his Faith concerning Christ's resurrection,
this may be imputed to diligence but not to dignity.

10, The Angel says, Tell his Disciples and Peter, naming him severally
because of his shameful fall, he had more need of comfort.

The 11. Ambrese thinks Peter was the first man that saw him. Nay rather the
Soldiers which kept the grave saw him before Peter, and the women also, which
would give them dignity above Peter, if first seeing were a matter to argue
dignity. or auctority of the seer.

The 12. only S. Peter walked on the Sea, that signifies the world to be his
jurisdiction. As he walked by Faith, so by weakness of faith he began to
sink. And the Sea that he walked on, was but a lake or mere, and therefore
cannot well signify the whole world, beside, the argument is as sure as if it
were bound with a straw.

13 S. Peter is showed to have loved Christ more then the rest, and is alone
commanded to feed his sheep. He had good cause to love him more, because
greater sins were forgiven him, but it is false, that he only was commanded
to feed Christ's sheep, for all the Apostles were likewise commanded.

14 It is saido to Peter, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands and follow thou
me, by which a particular kind of death on the cross is prophesied. A
violent death, but no particular kind of death is showed by these words. And
although it were, yet Peter in being Crucified, was made no greater then
Andrewe, who was crucified also, if the stories of both be true,

15 Peter aunsweared always for the Apostles, ergo he was chief. No more
then the foreman of the Iewrye, although it is not true, that he always
aunsweared for the rest, for sometime Thomas, sometime Philip, sometime Judas
aunsweared. John. 14.

16 Peter pronounced, Judas Iscariot deposed. That was by special instinct of
the holy Ghost, and by no ordinary authority.

17 After the sending of the holy Ghost, Peter above all the rest, first
taught the faith. Chrysostom and Cyrill says, he did it by the consent of all
the rest, who all stood up together with him, although one spoke to avoid
confusion, when the Apology was made to answer the slanderous scoffers. But
before that, they taught every one a like.

18 The multitude converted, said to Peter and to the other Apostles, but to
Peter by name: What shall we do. If this prove any thing, it proves the
equallitie of the Apostles, that having heard one man preach they demand not of
him alone, but of all the rest with him, what they shall do?

19 Peter made answer for all, that they should repent and be baptized. It
was good reason seeing he made the apology for all.

20 Peter did the first miracle after the coming of the holy Ghost and by
healing the lames feet showed mystically, that he was the rock to establishe
the feet of other. I answer, John healed him as much as Peter, by Peter's
own confession Act. 3. 12. and the lame man's acknowledging the benefit to be
received equally from both, in holding Peter and John.

21 Peter confessed Christ first not only before private me^, but at the seat
of judgment. Act. 4. It is false that Peter confessed Christ first before
private men, and at the seat of judgment, he confesses equally with Ihon.

22 Peter alone gave sentence with fulness of power upon Ananias and Saphyra.
Not by ordinary power, but by special revelation, and direction of the holy
Ghost, whatsoever Gregory a partial judge in this case does gather.

23 Peter was so famous above the rest, that his shadow was sought, to heal
the diseased. This was a singular and personal gift, which the Pope has not,
therefore it pertains nothing to him.

24 Peter did excommunicate and enjoin penance to Simon Magus the first
heretic. Peter denounced Gods judgment against him, but not by way of
excommunication, and yet the argument is naught, as all the rest are, though
the antecedents were granted.

25 Peter was the first that raised a dead body to life, namely Tabitha after
Christ's asce^tio^. This is neither proved to be true, neither if it were,
should Peter thereby have greater authority, then his fellow Apostles which
likewise raised the dead and peradventure before Peter, although S. Luke make
no mention of them.

26 Peter had first by vision that the Gentiles were called to believe in
Christ. This is false for Paul had that in vision before him. Act. 9. and. 26.
17.

27 God chose that the Gentiles should first of all hear the word of the
Gospel by Peter's mouth, and should belecue. Acts. 15. This is false, for
Peter says not, first of all, but of old time. And the Eunuche of AEthiopia,
was baptized by Philippe before Cornclius of Peter.

28 Prayer was made for Peter, by the church, which was not so earnestly made
for any other Apostle that we read of. Their earnest prayer for Peter, is set
forth to show that God at their prayer delivered Peter, not that Peter was
thereby showed to be greater in authority.

29 Paul and Barnabas came to Jerusalem to the Apostles to fitch a solution
from Peter. Act. 15. as Theodoret notes. But S. Luke notes, that they came to
all the Apostes and Elders at Jerusalem, and not to Peter only, nor for his
solution, but for the solution of the council.

30 In the council Act. 15. Peter did not only speak first but also gave the
determinate sentence. Both the parts of this proposition are false, for Saint
Luke testifies, there was great disputation before Saint Peter spoke, also
Sayncte James as President of the council, gave the definitive sentence,
according to whose words, the synodicall Epistle, was written in the name of
all the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem.

31 Saint Paul came to Jerusalem to see Peter as Chrysostom says because
he was primus first or chief? But Saint Paul him self affirms in the same
place, and diverse other, that he was equal with Peter, and the highest
Apostles. Galathians 2. 8. 2. Corinthians 12. 11.

32 Peter was either alone or first and chiefest in the greatest affairs of
the church. The greatest affair of the church was the preaching unto the
Gentiles in which Peter was neither alone, nor first, nor chiefest. But Paul
chiefest. Gal. 2.

33 Peter was sent to Rome to occupy with his chair the mother church of the
Roman province and chief city of the world, and there vanquished Simon
Magus the head of heretics. etc. All this is uncertain being not found in
the Scriptures, but those stories which report it, convinced by Scriptures, to
be false in diverse circumstaunces.

34 Peter's chair and succession has been acknowledged of all ancient fathers
etc. Although the sea of Rome appointed for the scate of Antechrist, has of
old been very ambitious, yet it is a fable, that has been acknowledged by
all ancient fathers to have the authority, which the Bishops thereof, have
claymed. For Irenaeus rebuked Victor, for usurping. All the Bishops of Africa
in council, withstoode Innocentius, Zozimus, Bonifacius, and Caebastinus,
alleging for their authority a counterfaite decree of the council of Nic^,
as we have showed before in the first treatise, the like may be said of the
counsels of Chalcedon, of Constantinople, the 5. etc. which withstoode the
Bishop of Romes authority in such cases as he pretended prerogative.

To conclude, neither any one, nor altogether of these 34. reasons, prove Peter
to be greater in auctority, then the rest of the Apostles, and much less the
Bishop of Rome to be greater then Bishops of other seats.

The tenth Chapter.
THat the Apostles beside the prerogative of their Apostleshippe, Sander.
had also the authority to be particular Bishops, which thing their name
also did signify in the old time.

ALthough the Apostles had all such authority, as every Fulke.
particular Bishop has, yet had they not two offices, but one Apostleship. No
more then a King although he have all authority that every Constable has, is
thereby both a King and a Constable, but a King only. Neither does their
staying or as he calls it residence, in some particular city, prove that the
Apostles either were or might be Bishops, that is give over their generally
charge and take upon them a particular, or still reteyning their general
charge, to exercise the office of a Bishop any longer, then until the
church was perfectly gathered, where they remained. For although the holy
Ghost distinguished their universal charge into several parts, to avoid
confusion, as in making Peter chief Apostle of the circumcision, and Paul of
the Gentiles, yet were they not thereby made Bishops. And although the
consent of writers is, that James was Bishop of Jerusalem, yet following the
course of the Scriptures, we must hold that Iamesby decree of the holy Ghost,
was appointed to stay there, not as a Bishop, but as an Apostle for the
conversion of the Jews, which not only out of all Jury, but out of all
parts of the world, came thither ordinarily to worship. Of S. Peter's sitting
at Antioch as Bishop, we find nothing in the Scriptures, and less of his
removing to Rome. But we find that when Peter came to Antioche, Paul
withstoode him to his face, and reproved him openly, which he might not well
have done, if Peter had been supreme head of the church, and in his own see
as M. Sander does fantasy.

Where he alleges the text and Episcopatum eius accipiat alter, and let an
other take his Bishoprike, to prove that Judas and so the Apostles were
Bishops, it is too childish and fond an argument, seeing the Greek word,
which S. Luke uses and the Hebrew word which the Prophet uses, signifies
generally a charge or office, and not such a particular office of a Bishop,
as now we speak of.

He cites farther Theodorete in 3. cap. 1. ad Tim. to prove yt the name of an
Apostle in the primitive church did signify such a Bishop. But how greatly
Theodoret was deceived, appears by this, that he cites for proof Philip. 2.
Epaphroditus to be the Apostle of the Philippensians, because S. Paul says of
him Epaphroditus your Apostle, and my helper: whereas he means that he was
their messenger, using the word (...) in the general signification for a
messenger, and not for the name of such an officer as an Apostle or Bishop.
He names also Titus and Timotheus which in the Scripture, are never called
Apostles, likewise the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem, which were in deed
the true Apostles of Christ's immediate sending, and not Bishops ordained by
men. And whereas Hierome says, that all Bishops be successors of the
Apostles, he means manifestly in authority, within their several charges,
and not that the Apostles were Bishops. Likewise where Augustine says, that
the Bishops were made in steed of the Apostles, it rather proves that the
Apostles, were no Bishops, for then if the Apostles were Bishops, he should
say, Bishops were made in steed of Bishops.

The last reason is, that if the office of Bishops had not been distinct in
the Apostles, from their Apostleship, that office would have ceased with the
Apostleshippe, for the whole being taken away no part can remain, except it
had an other ground to stand in, beside the Apostleshippe, as the Bishoppely
power had. In deed if the Apostleshippe had ceased before Bishops had been
ordained, Bishoplike power would have ceased with it: but seeing the Apostles
ordained Bishops and Elders in every congregation, to continue to the worlds
end, the Bishops office has not ceased, though the office of the Apostles
is expired. Wherefore seeing neither by Scripture, reason, nor Doctors, this
distinction of offices in the Apostles, can be proved, when Peter is called
head, Prince, chief, first, Capteyne of the Apostles by Cyrill, or any
ancient writer, we must understand, as Ambrose teaches a primacie of
confession or faith, not of honor or degree de incar. dom cap. 4.

The 11. chapter.
HOw far S. Peter did either excel or was equal with the Sander.
Apostles in their Apostolic office. Where in diverse objections are
answered, which seem to make against S. Peter's supremacy.

But that necessity enforces him, M. Sander thinks Fulke.
it sin of curiosity to inquire of that equality or inequality of the
Apostles, where as it should suffice us to follow the present state of the
universal Church practiced in our time. As though the universal Church of any
time, did ever acknowledge the Pope to be supreme head, although a great part
of the world has of long time so taken him. He thinks it out of
contronersie, that S. Peter was the first of the Apostles as S. Matthew says,
primus, the first, Simon which is called Peter. And he is not content that he
was first in the order of numbering, but he will have him first in dignity,
because he is always named first. But that is nether true, nor a good reason
if it were true, because he is named first, therefore he is of greatest
dignity. But Gal. 2. 9 James and Cephas and John are said to have been
pillars of the Church, and yet Paul equal with them. Although if we granted
greatest dignity to Peter, yet thereupon did not follow greatest authority. For
these three Apostles last named, were of greatest dignity among the Apostles,
yet not of greater authority then the rest. And although the ancient fathers
of the word primus, have derived the name of primatus, or primacy, yet have
they also expressed, wherein this primacie does consist, namely not in
authority but in order, nether does those names Prince, chief, head, top,
guide, mouth, greatest of the Apostles, used by some of them, signify his
authority over them, but his dignity amongst them.

But if you ask him wherein Peter was chief? He answers ^^^^ question is
curious. For in ye nature and order of the apostleship, every Apostle was
equal with all his fellows, and so is every Bishop Priest, King, Duke, Knight
with every one of his degree. If this be as he says, then was Peter chief,
nether as Apostle nor Bishop. But there may be another thing (says he)
coincident to some degree of men, not necessary for the being, but for their
well being. One therefore was set over the Apostles, for unities sake, and to
avoid schisms as Cyprian and Hierom write in places before cited. This must
needs be a primacy of order and not of authority, for among men of equal
authority, as he confesses the Apostles were, one may be chosen as the
President or Primate, to avoid confusion, the austeritie remaining equal to
every one, but one can not be preferred in authority to remain still equal
with his fellows in authority.

But whereas Optatus lib. 2. de schism. Don. and Leo ad A^astas. Ep. 82. are
cited to prove that the same primacie which Peter some time (but yet not
always) had among the Apostles, should be retained in succession of his chair
to maintain unity among all men, it has no ground in the holy Scriptures,
and yet those good men were far from imagining such an absolute power of
Peter's successor, as M. Sander defends in the Pope, although some times he
do handle it so nicely, as it might seem to be a thing of nothing, wherein
the Pope is above his fellow Bishops, where I said, that Peter had not always
the primacie of order among the Apostles, it is proved, both by the 15. of the
Acts, where James was President of the council, and Gal. 2. not only where
James is named before Peter, but also where Peter abstayned and separated him
self, after certain came from James, fearing them of the circumcifion, left
he should have been evil thought of, as he was before for keeping company with
Cornelius. and in diverse other places of the Acts of the Apostles.

But M. Sander will add another truth, to the former doctrine of Peter's
primacie, namely that seeing the Apostles needed no head, because they were
not in danger of error, the head was appointed over them for an example of the
Church afterward, when that personal privilege of the Apostles ceased to be
in their successors. But how will he prove that the privilege of not erring,
has continued in Peter's successors, more then in the successors of all the
Apostles. Forsooth because Christ prayed that Peter's faith might not fail,
that he might confirm his brethren. I have often showed that he prayed for the
perseverance of all his Apostles, and the cause of his special prayer for
Peter, was proper to Peter's person, therefore can not be drawn to his
successors. And what madness is it, to defend that the Pope can not err? when
Pope Honorius was condemned for an heretic both by the 6. Council of
Constantinople, and by the decree of Leo 2. Bishop of Rome confirming the same
council. Act. 18. Ep. Leon. 2. ad Constant.

But M. Sander concludes, to answer the argument of the equality of the
Apostles, that Paul was equal with Peter in Apostleship: but by the
appointment and will of Christ, Peter was head, to show that his Church having
one Pastor in it above the rest, is one, as a kingdom one, by having one king
in it. Howbeit we sinde the will of God for the supremacy and headship of
Christ, over all his Church, to make it one, in the holy Scriptures, when of
Peter's headship or supremacy there is never a word And Paul says, that he
was nothing inferior to the highest Apostles, 2. Cor. 2. if nothing
absolutely, then was not Peter his superior in any respect.

That Paul reprehended Peter, M. Sander says, he might do it by equality of
his Apostleship. If that be so, why may not every Bishop reprehende the Pope by
equality of Bishoprike. If you grant they may, then have you so many Canones
against you, as you can never save their authority and abide by your
confession. But this fault you say, with Tertullian, was of conversation, not
of preaching, that Peter might not seem to have erred in doctrine. Nevertheless
it can not be excused, but Peter also erred in doctrine. Not in the general
doctrine of the abolishing of the law, or of Christian liberty, but of
bearing too much with the Jews, in prejudice of the Gentiles, whom he compelled
to Iudaisme, and in derogation of the truth of Paul's doctrine, which
dissimulation he entered not into, for any worldely respect, but because he was
d^ceyued in opinion, thinking that in that case he ought so to have done,
before he being reprehended by Paul, saw the inconvenience, and then myldely
yielded to the correction. But in this humble submission says Master Sanders,
Peter proved him self to be the head of all the Apostles, seeing Christ had
said, he that is greater among you let him be as the lesser. In deed^ he
showed herein such greatness, as Christ commends, but no headeship or
authority over his brethren. Cyprian ad Quintum, says he, did not judge this
reproving of Peter, to be an argument against his supremacy, but a witness of
his humility, but he gives us this much to understand, that if he had
challenged primacie, he had taken upon him arrogantly, his words are these.

Nannec Petrus quem primum Dominus elegit, etc. For nether did Peter, whom our
Lord chose the first, and upon whom he builded his Church, when Paul did
strive with him about circumcision afterward, challenge any thing insolently,
or take upon him arrogantly, to say that he had the primacie, and that he ought
rather to have been obeyed of Nouices and aftercommers: nether did he despise
Paul, for that he was before a persecutor of the Church, but he did admit
the counsel of truth. The like says Augustine for his humility, but as a
later writer more pregnant for his primacye. De bap. cont. Don. lib. 2. cap. 1.
In Scripturis etc. We have learned in the holy Scriptures, that Peter the
Apostle, in whom the primacie of the Apostles in so excellent grace has the
pre-eminence, when he used to d^e otherwise then the truth required about
circum^sion, was corrected of Paul who was admitted after him to be an
Apostle. In this saying the primacye is of time and order, not of dignity and
authority. But Gregory much later then Augustiue, grants to Peter, not
only a primacie, b^t also a maioritie, in Ezech. Him. 18. Quatenus, etc. That
he who was chief in the top of the Apostleship, should be chief also in
humility. And again, E^ce a minore, etc. Behold Peter is reproved of his
lesser, and he disdayneth not to be reproved. Nether does he call to mind,
that he first was called to the Apostleship. These words make Peter greater
none otherwise, then that he was first called to the Apostleship, which argues
small authority over his iuniours.

Hereupon he takes occasion to inueye against the pride of Luther, Zwinglius,
Calvin etc. and their bitter dissentions, showing how far they are unlike to
the Apostles. It is not to be doubted, that they were many degrees inferior to
the virtue and holmes of the Apostles, but yet as well in humility as all
other virtues, if they come not nearer to them, then the Pope, and his pompous
Clergy, let God and all indifferent men be Judges.

Moreover where as it is objected against the supremacy of Peter, that the
Apostles sent him to lay hands upon those whom Philip the Deacon had baptized:
he answers, that proves no more their equality, then when the Canones of a
Cathedral Church do chose their Deane or Bishop, to go about business of the
chapter, it proves the Deane and Bishop to be inferior to the Canons. But by
his favor, where the Deane or Bishop are sent about business, it argues the
Bishop and Deane in respect of those business, to be inferior to the whole
chapter, as Peter and John were to the whole College of the Apostles, though
the Bishop or Deane in other respects, be superior to the Canons, and Peter and
John were equal to every one of the Apostles.

Wherefore M. Sanders conclusion is upon a false supposition, that Peter had
authority to depose the Apostles, if they had fallen as Judas did, therefore
the Pope has the like over Bishops. For nether had Peter any singular
authority to depose any of his fellow Apostles, no more then he had to chose
one in place of Mathias, nor the Bishop of Rome over other Bishops ever had of
right, but by concession, election, or usurpation.

The 12. chapter.
THat S. Peter's prerogative above the other Apostles, is most manifestly seen^
by his chief Bishoply power. How Sander.
Christ loved Peter above others.

M. Sander fantasying that he has proved Peter superior Fulke.
to the Apostles, not in their Apostleship, but in his Byshoply degree, does
yet again distinguish the order and office of a Bishop from the authority and
jurisdiction of the same. And in order and office he confesses that all
Byshopps of the world, are equal as Hierome says, ad Euagrium, and Cyprian
De vnitate eccles^e, but not in authority. But seeing he rehearses the
testimony of Hierome imperfectly, I will set it down at large, that you may
see whether it will bear his distinction. He writes against a custom of the
Church of Rome, by which the Deacons were preferred abooue the Priests, whom
he proves by the Scripture to be equal with Bishops, except only in
ordaining. Quid enim facit exempta ordinatione Episcopus etc. For what does a
Bishop excepting ordination which a Priest or Elder does not? Neither is it to
be thought, that there is one church of the city of Rome and an other of the
whole world. Both France, and Britayn, and Africa, and Persia, and the East,
and India, and all barbarous nations, worship one Christ, observe one rule of
truth. If authority be sought, the world is greater then a city. Wheresoever
a Bishop be either at Rome, or at Eugubium, or at Constantinople, or at
Rhegium, or at Alexandria, or at Tunis, he is of the same worthiness and of the
same Priesthood. Power of riches and baseness of poverty make not the Bishop
higher or inferior. But they are all successors of the Apostles. And lest you
should think he speaks only of equality in order and office, and not in
authority. He does in an other place show that the authority of every Priest
is equal with every Bishop by Gods disposition, and that the excelling of one
Bishop above other Priests, came only by custom. In Titum cap. 1. Sieut ergo
presbyteri sciunt se ex Ecclesiae consuetudine, ei qui sibi praepositus fuerit,
esse subiectos: it a Episcopi nouerint, se magis consuctudine, quam
dispositionis Dominicae veritate, presbyteris esse maieres. Therefore as
Priests do know, that by custom of the Church, they are subject to him that is
set over them: so let Bishops know, that they are greater then Priests, rather
by custom then by truth of the Lords appointment. If the authority then and
jurisdiction of Bishops depends upon custo^, and not upon gods appointment,
Peter was not by our lords appointment preferred in bishoplik authority before
the rest of ye Apostles, nor the Bishop of Rome, before other Bishops and
Priests, but only by custom. as Hierom says. S. Cyprians words also infer
the same. Episcopatus vnus est, cuius a singulis in solidum pars tenetur. The
Bishops office is one, whereof every man does partake the Bishops office wholly.
Now if authority and jurisdiction do pertayne to the Bishops office, every
Bishop has it wholly, as (to follow M. Sanders example) whatsoever is incident
to the nature or kind of a man, is equally in every man.

But now the greatest matter rests, to prove how S. Peter had more committed
to his charge then the rest of the Apostles, and that he takes on him to
prove, by this reason. Peter loved Christ more then all the rest of the
Apostles, therefore he gave him greater authority in feeding his sheep, then
to the rest, But I deny the argument. For Peter loved Christ more then the
rest, because Christ had forgiven him greater sin^es, then to the rest, Luc. 7.
47. In consideration whereof, he required greater diligence in doing his
office, but gave him not a greater charge or authority.

Now where M. Sander reasons, that Peter loved Christ most, because Christ
first loved him most, and Christ loved him most, because he would make him
governor of his Church, it is a shameful petition or begging of that which is
in question. For the nearest cause of Peter's greater love, was the greater
mercy which he found, which mercy proceeding from the love of God as the first
and infinite cause, can have no higher, superior, or former cause. But Peter in
respect of greater love showed to him, in that greater sin was forgiven him,
was bound to show greater love toward Christ, which he required to be showed
in feeding his sheep, yet this proves not, that greater authority was given
him, or that he did feed more then all men. For S. Paul says truly of him
self, I have labored more then they all, 1. Cor. 15. 10. whereby it appears,
that Peter as a man, was not equal with Christ in the effect of excellent
love, which was in him in comparable. And whereas M. Sander talks so much of
his commission of feeding, I say these words feed my sheep etc. be not words
of a new commission, but words of exhortation, that he show exceeding
diligence in the commission equally delivered to all the Apostles: As my father
has sent me, so I send you. Joan. 20 21.

But the ancient fathers expound it so, that it might seem to be a singular
commission to Peter. It can not be denied but diverse of the ancient fathers,
otherwise godly and learned, were deceived in opinion of Peter's prerogative,
which appears not in the Scriptures, but was challenged by the Bishops of
Rome, which seemed to have a show of some benefit of unity to the Church, so
long as the Empire continued at Rome, and the Bishops of that ^^ie retained the
substance of Catholic religion: yet did they never imagine, that such
blasphemous and tyrannical authority, yea such false and heretical doctrine,
as afterward was mayntayned under the pretense of that prerogative, should or
ought to have been defended thereby. But let us see what M. Sander can say,
out of the aun^ient writers. August in Hom. de past. cap. 13. writes: Dominus
etc. Our Lord has commended unity in Peter him self. There were many
Apostles, and it is said to one, feed my sheep. God forbid there should now
lack good pastors, but all good pastors are in one, they are one. This makes
nothing for Peter's authority over the rest, but only the author supposes the
unity of all Pastors to be allegorically signified, in that Christ speaks
that to one, which is common to all good sheepeheardes, namely to feed his
sheep. And again de sanct hom. 24 In vno Petro etc. The unity of all pastors
was figured in one Peter. So might it well be without giving Peter authority
over all Pastors. Chrysostom is the next: lib. 2. de sacerdotio. who says that
Christ did ask whether Peter loved him, not to teach us yt Peter loved him,
but to inform us quanti sibi curae sit gregis huius praefectura. how great
care he takes of the government of this flock. Here he would have us mark,
that Chrysostom calls it a rule and government of the flock, which Christ
intends. Yea sir, we see it very well, but you would make us blind, if we
could not see, that Chrysostom speaks not of a general rule, granted to
Peter only, but of the government of every Church by every Pastor. And
therefore you dance naked in a net, when you allege the words following
absolutely, as though they pertayned to Peter only. Petrum Christus
auctoritate praeditum esse voluit, etc. whereas Chrysostom speaking to every
Priest, and showing how careful he ought to be in his office, in respect of his
high calling and the excellent dignity thereof, says: Etiam ne nune nobisium
contendes fraudemistam tibi non been ac foeliciter cessisse, quiper eam
vniuersis Dei optimi maximi bonis administrandis sis praeficiendus,
quu^praesertim ea agas, quecu^ Petrus ageret, illu^ Christus auctoritate
preditu^ esse voluit, ac reliquos item Apostolos longe^ praecellere. Will thou
then still contend with us, that this fraud has not happened well and luckely
to thee, which by it, art to be made ouerseer of all the goods of God
almightye, especially when thou do those things, which when Peter did,
Christ would have him to be endued with authority, and also far to excel the
other Apostles. Here M. Sander will have us note 3. things, 1, Peter's
authority, 2. passing the Apostles, 3. far passing. We mark them all, that
they are directly overthrowing M. Sanders rock of the popish Church. For they
declare, that Peter in doing those things, was endued with authority, and
far passed the other Apostles, even as every Priest (to who^ Chrysostom
speaks) when he does the same things, is endued with the same authority,
and far passes all other men. So that here is none other authority, nor
excelle^ce of Peter then such as is common to all ministers in executing their
charge, and was common to all the Apostles when they did the same things that
Peter did. For Chrysostom proves to Basil, that he did him no hurt, when by
policy he caused him to be called to the ministry against his will, seeing
that thereby he was made partaker of the reward of the faithful and wise
servant, and equal in authority with Peter, if of love toward Christ he
would diligently feed his flock. So that Leo had no just cause to say that
in respect of any greater authority, Peter had a special care of feeding the
sheep committed to him. but rather in respect that he had greater cause to
love Christ, which had so mercifully forgiven him so shameful a fall.

But Arnobius is a less partial witness then Leo a Bishop of Rome, and he upon
the Psalm. 138. writes thus. Nullus Apostolorum nomen etc. None of the Apostles
received the name of a Pastor. For our Lord Jesus Christ alone said. I am the
good pastor, and again my sheep follow me. Therefore this holy name, and the
power of this name, after his resurrection he granted to Peter repenting. And
he that was thryse denied, gave to his denyer, that power which he had alone.
Arnobius (says he) notes none of the Apostles ever to have had the name of a
pastor given to him by Christ, beside S. Peter alone. But I demand of M. S.
where he has in Arnobius this word ever? For he says, yt Peter had this name
after ye resurrection wc none of ye Apostles had before. He writes against the
Nouatians wc denied help to such as repented after baptism, proving by
example of Peter, that they are to be received, seeing Christ gave him greater
dignity after his repentance, then he had before his fall. But that Peter had
greater authority the^ the rest of the Apostles he never thought or said. M.
Sander cutteth of both the head and the tail. In this discourse lest the
meaning of Arnobius might appear, for thus he writes: Dicis cert^ baptizatis
non debere poenitentibus subueniri Ecce Apostolo poenitenti succurritur, qui
est Episcoporum Episcopus, and mai^r gradus additur ploranti, quam sublatus est
deneganti. Quod vt doceam, illud est endo, quod nullus Apostoloru^ nomen
Pasioris accepit. etc. In deed thou say that such as repent being baptized
ought not to be helped. Behold the Apostle repenting is helped, which is a
Bishop of Bishops, and a greater degree is restored to him weeping then was
taken from him denying. Which that I may teach, this I show, that none of the
Apostles received the name of a sheepeheard, etc. Again in the end following
the words before cited by M. Sander he says, vt non s^lum recuperasse quod
amiserat, probaretur, verum etiam and multo amplius poenitendo, quam negand^
perdiderat acquisisse. He gave his denyer that power which before his
resurrection he alone had: That he might be proved not only to have recovered
that which he lost, but also to have gotten much more by repenting, then he
lost by denying. This speaks Arnobius of the general authority which Peter
had over all the Church, as every Apostle had likewise, and was a Bishop and
ouerseer of Bishops as well as Peter, and a Pastor of the universal Church,
which thing Arnobius never did deny. These therefore be M. Sanders arguments,
none of the Apostles had the name of a Pastor before Christ's resurrection,
ergo they never had it. Peter was called to greater dignity after his fall
then he had before, ergo he was greater then his fellow Apostles. Again Peter
was a Bishop or an ouerseer of Bishops, ergo he was Bishop over the Apostles.

Next Arnobius is cited Ambrose in 24. Luc. Who first aid, that Peter was every
where, either alone or first And the^ upon these words, Peter do thou love
me, says: Dominus interrogat etc. Our Lord asked net to learn, but to teach
who^ he being to be l^fted up into heaven, did leave to us as the Vicare of
his love. For so thou have ^^. Simon thou son of John, do thou l^ue me?
Yea Lord thou know that I love thee. Jesus says to him, feed my lambs.
Peter being privy of a good conscience, does testify his own affection, not
taken for the time, but already well known to God. For who else were able to
profess this thing of him self. And because he alone amongst all professes,
he is preferred before all. M. Sander omitteth the conclusion. Mayor enim
omnibus charitas. For the greatest of all is Chari^ie.

So Peter is hereby declared to have the greateste love, but not to have the
greatest authority. M. Sander urges that he is the Vicar of Christ's love and
pastoral office. The one indeed Ambrose says, the other Sander says but is
not able to prove: no not by that which follows in the same place of Ambrose,
that Peter had committed to him to feed, not only the Lambs with milk, as
at the first, nor yet the little sheep, as at the second time, but the
sheep, to the end that he being more perfect, might govern the more
perfect. For every one of the Apostles had the same charge to feed the
sheep of Christ, and not the Lambs or little sheep only. Neither does the
word of government help him. For every Apostle had the like government over
the whole flock wc Peter has, and there is an ordinary government in every
particular church, 1. Co. 12. wc proves not the governors to be rulers one
over another, wherefore this collection is not only vain, but also ridiculus,
that Peter should have authority to govern Patriarchs, Archbishops and
Bishops as well as Parish priests, because he must feed ye sheep of Christ, I
will not here stand to discus how properly ye distinction of lambs little sheep
and sheep, is observed by Ambrose, but taking it according as he distinguishes
it, yet here is nothing given to Peter but primacie of love, or as else where
he says of order, but of authority singular, he^re is nothing at al. And that
his conclusion declares sufficiently Et idio quasi perfecto in omnibus, quem
caro iamreue^ are non posset a gloria passionis, corona decernitur. And
therefore a crown is decreed to him as to one perfect in all things whom the
flesh could not call back from the glory of suffering. This conclusion M. S.
(as his manner is) has left out, by which it is apparent, that Ambrose
infers no singularity of authority in Peter, as more perfet the^ the rest
of the Apostles, but as perfect in such degree, as the rest of the Apostles
which were likewise prepared to martyrdo^, were equal with him therein. The
testimony of Bernard a late w^iter, though he were no flatterer, yet I receive
not, as of one which was deceived with the common error of his time.

But in sign that Peter was general Shepherd, says M. San. it is not read
that he was ordained bishop of any other then of Christ, yet did he with two
other Apostles ordain S. James bishop of Jerusalem as Eus. lib. 2. cap. ^
writes. There is no dout but James was acknowl^dged by the Apostles to be
appointed by the holy ghost to remain at Jerusalem, though not as a
p^rticuler bishop, but as an Apostle of the whole Church. But as we read not
that Peter was made Bishop by any man, so we read not that he was made Bishop
by Christ.

Yet Ar^obius in Psa. 138. says he was made a Bishop of Bishops. Ecce Apostolo
p. enitenti succurritur qui est episcoporum episcopus. Behold the Apostle
being penitent is succored, which is a Bishop of Bishops. He asks if any
thing could be spoken more plainly? yes verily, you had need of plainer
speeches then this, to prove that he was bishop of the Apostles. For admit
that he was an ouerseer of particular bishops, as the word (...) does signi^ie,
yet it follows not that he was ^n ouerseer or Bishop of the Apostles. In
which sense Clemens also (if the Epistle were not counterfaite) might justly
call James a Bishop of Bishops, and not as M. Sand. aunsweareth that he was an
Archbishop of inferior Bishops, but an Apostle ouerseer of particular Bishops.

That Cyprian ad Quintum says: Neque quisquam etc Neither does any of us make
him selse a Bishop of Bishops. He aunsweareth that although no man may make
himself, yet Christ may make a man Bishop of Byshopes, but where finds he
that Christ makes the Pope a Bishop of Bishops? How Peter might be called
a Bishop of Bishops, I have showed before But the Council of Carth. 3. Cap.
26. forbids that the Bishop of Rome, or any other Primate should be called
the Prince of Priests, or highest Priest, or by any such like name, but only
the Bishop of the first seat.

Yet Optatus feared nor to write thus, lib. 7. de schism. of S. Peter. Preferri
apostolis omnibus meruit etc. He deserved to be preferred before all the
Apostles, and he alone received the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven to be
communicated unto the rest. Ma^ster Sander confessing and truly, that the
Apostles took the Keys belonging to their Apostolic office immediately of
Christ, says they received the Keys of their Byshoplike office of Peter. But
what lock was there, that they could not open and shut by their Aopstolike Key?
When Christ says, Whatsoever you bind or loose, and whose sins soever you
forgive or retain, which was the power of their Apostolic Keys? If the
Apostolic Keys were so sufficient, what need they any Byshoplike Keys? Into
these absurdities both he and Optatus do follow, whiles the one will urge a
prerogative of Peter, the other will forge a Byshoplike office in the Apostles,
whereof the Scripture gives us no instruction.

As for Leo and Gregorye Bishops of Rome, although they were not come to the
full pride of Antichrist, yet the mystery of iniquity having wrought in that
seat, near five or six hundredth years before them, and then greatly
increased, they were so deceived with the long continuance of error, that
they thought the dignity of Peter was much more over the rest of his fellow
Apostles, then the holy Scriptures of God, (against which no continuance of
error cann prescribe) does either allow or bear with all. Wherefore although
he have some show out of the old writers, yet has he nothing directly to
prove that Peter did excel the other Apostles in Byshoplike authority, and
out of the word of God no one ^ote or title, that Peter as a Bishop excelled
the other Apostles, not as Apostles, but as Bishops.

The 13 Chapter.
THat the pastoral and chief Bishops authority of Saint Sander.
Peter, was an ordinary authority, and there fore it must go for ever unto
his successors, where as the Apostolic authority being extraordinary has no
successors in it. The Church never lacked a visible rock.

THat ye office of Apostles, which had general charge to preach over the whole
world, is ceased with the Fulke.
Apostles lives, it is in deed granted of us: but that their Apostolic
authority was extraordinary, or that all their authority is so determined,
that it has no successors in it, we do utterly deny. For the same authority
of preaching, of ministering the Sacraments, of binding and loosing, which the
Apostles had is perpetual in the Church, in the Bishops and elders, which are
all successors of the Apostles. And if the Apostolic authority, has no
successors in it, what means the Pope almost in every Bull and decretall
Epistle, to brag so much of the Apostolic authority, and to ground all things
Apostolica Authoritate by the Apostolic authority. By which it is evident,
that M. Sand. new distinction of Apostolic and Byshoplike authority in the
Apostles, is not acknowledged by the Popes them selves, but inverted lately by
such as he is, to have a starting hole, to seem to avoid such arguments and
authorites, as prove all the Apostles equal in authority.

But let us us see what reasons he has to prove, that S. Peter's Pastoral
authority was ordinary, and must go to his successors, more then the
Pastoral authority of every Apostle. First S. Peter being but one man was not
able to preach to all men at once, nor to govern nations newely converted, the
refore he had twelve companions adjoined to him.

But the world being converted, it is easy for the Pope without such
fellows, to govern all the faithful, by help of many inferior officers. As
though the Church had not inferior officers in the Apostles time. If S. Peter
then was not able to rule, wc had such great gifts muchlesse the Pope, which
is nothing comparable with him in gifts, and is often a wicked man and an here
tike is able to govern all the Church, for he has not so great an help of
the conversion of the world, as he has a want of Peter's gracious gifts,
meet for such a government.

Secondly he would have us mark, the peculiar names of a Rock, of a pastor, and
of a confirmer of his brethren, which are given by Christ to S. Peter alone,
which argue that Peter's supremacy must necessarily continue for ever. But who
will grant to M. S. that Christ gave these peculier names to Peter alone,
indeed that which is me^t by the names is ordinary and perpetual in the Church.
Peter was a Rock, not his person, but his doctrine that remains still in the
Church, he was a shephearde and confirmer of his brethren, and there be now
many shepherds and confirmers of their brethren.

Thirdly he says the Church never wanted a visible rock on the earth, beside
the eternal Rock Christ: who in this life might be so strongly fastened in
the Faith of Christ the great Rock, that he (though not for his own sake,
yet for the Churches sake) might be able to stay up all other small stones,
which joined unto him, until Christ came in the flesh, who likewise appointed
Saint Peter and his successors to be this ordinary rock, as Adam Enos Henoch,
Noe, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Aaron and his successors, who sat in the
chair of Moses until the coming of Christ. Against this I say, that the
church militant on earth, has her foundation in heaven, and not on earth,
therefore the church has not a visible rock in earth. Again it is not true,
that some one, has always been this visible rock on earth. For who was
greater Abraham or Melchisedech? out of all controversy Melchisedech, then was
not Abraham the only rock. After the death of Jacob and the twelve
Patriarchs, who was the visible rock until Moses was called. And yet had God
a church among the Jews all that time.

Thirdly who is so impudent to say, that all the successors of Aaron were so
strongly fastened in the faith, that they were able to stay all the small
stones that leaned upon them. Was not Vrias the high Priest an idolater? 2.
Reg. 16.

What were Jason, Menclaus, Lysimachus by the report of the book of Machabes?
Was not Caiphas and Annas Sadducees by the testimony of S. Luke Act. 5. and of
Josephus? Where is then the visible rock, whose faith never failed etc? we see
there was none such before Christ, therefore there need to be none such
after him.

His fourth reason is, of the name of a pastor, which signifies an ordinary
office, for as the sheep continue after S. Peter's death, so must there be also
a shepherd, as Peter was. But how proves he that Peter was an only shepherd?
forsooth Chrysostom says lib. 2. de sacerdotio. Christus sanguinem etc. Christ
has shed his blood to purchase those sheep, the care of whom he did commit
both to Peter and to Peter's successors. But whom does Chrysostom take for
Peter's successors? the Bishops of Rome only? No verily but all true pastors of
the church as his words going before do manifestly declare: Neque enim tum
volebat testatum esse quantum a Petro amaretur, siquidem id multis nobis
argument is constabat. Verum hoc ille sum agebat, vt and Petrum and caeteros
nos edoceres, quanta beneuolentia ac charitate ergasuam ipse ecclesiam
afficeretur, vt hac ratione and nos quoque eiusdem ecclesiae studium curamque
toto animo susciperemus. For his purpose was not then to testify unto us, how
much he was beloved of Peter for that was evident unto us by many arguments.
But this thing then he intended, that he might teach both Peter and all us,
what benevolence and love he bears toward his church that by this reason we
also might take upon us with all our heart, the love and charge of the same
church. This sentence shows that Chrysostom accounted him self and every
true pastor of the church a successor of Peter and not the Bishop of Rome alone.

As for Leo a Bishop of Rome I have often protested that he was more addicted
to the dignity of his see, then the Scripture would bear him, and therefore
was ouerruled and resisted, in the general council of Chalcedon.

His fifth argument is a rule of law, where the same reason is, the same right
ought to be. The reason of Peter's confession and power is such as agrees to
any ordinary office, of the church, therefore the office of Peter being a rock,
of strengthening his brethren and feeding Christ's sheep, is an ordinary
office. But I say, that Peter's confession made him not a rock, but declared him
so to be, being appointed of Christ for one of the twelve foundations of the
church, the office of strengthening and feeding as it was not singular in
Peter, so it is not ordinary that it should be singular in any man.

His sixth reason, Irenaeus, Optatus, and Augustine did reckon up such
successors of Peter, as had lived till eu^rie of their ages or times. Therefore
Peter had successors in his pastoral office. It is not denied, but he had
them, and other Bishops also successors in his pastoral office, at least the
Bishops of Antioche, whereby your own cofession he was Bishop, before he
came to Rome. Therefore his succession was not singular to the Bishops of one
see.

His seventh reason, no man may preach to them to whom he is not sent,
therefore there must be a general pastor to send other to preach, to them
that are not converted, to plant new Bishoprikes, to control them that are
negligent, to supply the things that lack: to excommunicate such as live in
no diocese etc. For sending he quoteth Romans 10. where mention is only of the
sending of God, and of the sending by men. But all his questions and doubts,
may be answered. Either the whole church in general counsels, or every
particular church in their synodes, as they shall see most expedient, may send
preachers as the Apostles and Elders sent Peter and John into Samaria and order
all such matters, as he imagines must be done only by the Pope. But he asks
who shall summon all other Bishops to general or provincial counsels. And
I ask him, who summoned, the four great and principal general counsels?
and so many provincial councels, but the Emperors and Princes in whose
dominion they were gathered? So that here is no necessary affairs of the
church that does require one general pastor or Pope of Rome when all things
may and have been done best of all without him.

As for placing of Bishops, in sees vacant, uniting of two Bishoprikes in
one, or dividing one into two, may better be done by the authority of those
churches, with consent of their Princes, who sees and knows what is
needful in those cases, then by one which sittinge in his chair at Rome,
requires half a years travel, from some part of the world, to him, before
he can be advertised of the case, and yet must understand it by hear say,
and therefore not able to see what is expedient, so well as they that are
present, and see the state of the matter. Finally it is against all
likelyhoode, that Christ would make such a general sheepehearde over all his
flock, as many thousand sheep, which live under the Sophi, the Cham, the
Turk, can have none access unto, for such things as are supposed necessary
to be had and to be obtained from him only. Wherefore if the Pope were head
of the church, such as by cruelty of tyrauntes are cut from him should be
cut from the body of the church. Yea if Hethenish tyrauntes could so much
prevail, as they do in hindering this government of the Pope, (pretended to be
so n^cessarie) the gates of hell might prevail against the church, contrary
to the promise of Christ.

The fourteenth Chapter.
THat the ordinary authority of S. Peter's primacie belongs Sander.
to one Bishop alone. The whole government of the church tends to unity.

COncerning Peter's primacie, as there is little in the Scriptures, whereupon it
may be gathered, so I have Fulke.
showed, that it was not in him perpetual. For there are greater arguments to
prove the primacie of James. Again the greatest show of Peter's primacy, that
we read of in the Scriptures, is the primacie or head Apostleshippe of the
circumcision. So that if one Bishop should succeed him, in that primacie, he
must be chief Bishop over the Jews, and not over the Gentiles. For the
chief Apostleshippe over the Gentiles, was by God committed to Paul. Galat.
2. 7. and 8. But if M. Sander say, as he does in an other place, that the Pope
succeeds both these Apostles, and therefore has both their authority. First
he overthrows his own rock of the church, which he will have to be Peter
alone. Secondly his argument of unity, which he urges in this chapter he
subuerteth, if the Popes authority be derived from two heads. Thirdly he
destroys his own distinction of Bishoplike and Apostolic authority, if the
Apostolic auctority of Paul should descend to the Pope by succession.

Now let us consider what weighty reasons he has, to prove the title of this
chapter. S. Peter's auctority was specified before the authority was given to
the rest, of binding and loosing. Mat. 18. Therefore seeing it was first in him
alone, it ought to descend to one Bishop alone. But let M. Sander show, where
it was given to him alone, or promised to him alone either. For the promise thou
shall be called Peter, gave him no authority, nor yet the performance thereof:
Thou art Peter. But still the auctority is promised, I will build, I will give,
(I reason as M. Sander does of the Future tense) which promise being made Math.
16. is performed Math. 18. not to Peter only, but to all the rest, and so all
authority is given in common Io^an. 20.

But S. Cyprian ad Iubaianum, says, that Christ gave the auctority first to
Peter. Petro primus Dominus (super quem aedificauit ecclesiam, and vnitatis
originem instituit and ostendit) potestatem istam dedit, vt id solueretur in
terris, quod ille soluisset. This does M. Sander translate, Our Lord did first
give unto Peter etc. Whereas he should say: Our Lord was the first that gave to
Peter (upon whom he builded his church and instituted and showed the
beginning of unity) this power, that whatsoever he loosed it should be loosed
in earth. This proves, that the authority came first from Christ, but not
that it was given first to Peter. And if we should understand it so, that it
was first given to Peter, yet he means not, that it was given to reside in
his person, but that in him as the attorney of the rest, it was given to them
also, as he says, lib. 1. Ep. 3. Petrus tamen super quem aedificata ab eodem
Domino fuerat ecclesia, vnus pro omnibus loquens and Ecclesiae voce respondens,
ait Domine ad quem ibimus etc. Yet Peter upon whom the church had been
builded, by the same our Lord, as one speaking for all, and aunswering in the
voice of the church says: Lord whether shall we go etc. as he spoke for
all, so he received for all. Which thing if it had been so (as we sinde not in
the Scripture) yet could it have been no ordinary matter, to descend to one by
succession. For the power being once received by one in the name of the rest,
and by him delivered to the rest, it should be continued in succession of every
one that has received it, and not every day to be fetched a new from a
several head. For that beginning came from unity, which Cyprian speaks of,
when Peter being one, was the voice and mouth of the rest, and so received
power for the rest, which being once received, the church holds of Christ,
and not of Peter or his successors, no more then a corporation holds of him,
that was their attorney, to receive either lands or authority from the Prince,
but holds immediately of the Prince. Wherefore this argument follows not,
although the authority had begone in one, that it should continue in one.

The second reason is, that the most perfect government is meet for the
Church, but most perfection is in unity, therefore there ought to be one
chief governor of all. This one chief governor is our Savior Christ, ruler
both in heaven and in earth. Who ascending into heaven, did not appoint one
Pope over all his church, but Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors and
teachers, that we might all meet in the unity of faith, and grow into a
perfect man. Ephesians. 4. 11. and 12.

The third reason is, that the state of the new Testament, must be more
perfect then the law, but in the law, there was one high pastor, the high
Priest on earth, therefore there must be one now also and much rather. I
answer we have him in deed, our chief Bishop and high Priest, of whom the
Aaronicall Priest, was but a shadow, namely Jesus Christ, whose government is
nothing less perfect and beneficial to his church in that he sits in
heaven, and has as before is cited left an ordinary ministry on earth in
many Pastors and teachers over every several congregation and not in one Pope
over al, which could not possibly either know, or attend to decide, the one
thousand part of controversies, which are determined by ye authority of
Christ's law, and such ministers as he has ordained.

The fourth reason is of auctority. Cyprian ad Iubaianum: Ecclesia quae vna est
etc. The church which is one was founded by our Lords voice upon one, which
received the keys thereof. And again, de simplicitat. praelat. Quamsis etc.
Although Christ after his resurrection gives equal power to all his Apostles
and says: as my father sent me so do I send you: receive the holy Ghost. If
you remit to any man his sins they shall be remitted. And if you r^teine them,
they shall be retained, yet that he might show the unity, he disposed by his
authority, the original of that unity, beginning of one. But Cyprian
proceeds: Hoc erant etc. Vere by the rest of the Apostles were the same thing
that Peter was, endued with equal fellowshippe both of honor and of power, but
the beginning proceeds from unity, that the church might be showed to be
one. These words are plain to declare, that Cyprian acknowledges no
inequality of the Apostles, in respect of any authority they had. Also that
the building of the church upon one, and the receiving of the keys of one, was
not an ordinary office to discende, by succession, but a singular privilege,
for that one time to show the beginning, and not the continuance of the power
to proceed from one, but to be held always of one, which is Jesus Christ,
without any shadows of one Bishop on earth to signify the same, when Christ
is revealed with open face unto us now sitting in heaven. 2. Cor. 3. 18.

The like thing teaches Optatus lib. 2. de schism. Vt in ^na etc. That in one
chair in which Peter sat, unity might be kept of all men, least the rest of
the Apostles should every one challenge a chair to him self: so that he
should now be a schismatike and a sinner, that against a singular chair,
should place an other. Therefore in that one chair which is chief in gifts,
Peter sat first. His meaning is to defend the unity of the church against
the Donatistes, but of the authority of Peter's chair over all other Bishops
chaires, if he had spoken any thing M. Sander would not have concealed it,
which does us great wrong to think that we can not distinguishe a chair of
unity, from a chair of authority.

The place of Hierom cont. Iouin. lib. 1. has been answered once or twice,
showing that among the Apostles which were equal, Peter was chosen to be
primate, to avoid contention, which was a primacy of order and not of
auctority. As for the collection of Lco Bishop of Rome, that Peter's primacy
was a platform, for other Bishops to understand, that they must have a Bishop
over them, if the very Apostles had an head among them, sauoreth of the
ambition incident to that see, which was appointed to be the seat of
Antichrist. Although neither Leo him self, challe^ged so much as the Pope does
now, neither the Bishops of his time, would yield unto him in so much as he
challenged. For beside the whole general council of Chalcedon, that concluded
against him, about the privileges of the Bishop of Constantinople, wherein
they made him equal with the Bishop of Rome, the title of seniority only
reserved, it appears by his Epistles, that many Bishops acknowledged not such
primacy over them, as he claimed, whereof he complameth in diverse of his
Epistles.

The place of Cyprian lib. 1. Epist. 3. that heresies have sprung because one
Judge is not acknowledged in ste^de of Christ, for the time, to whom the whole
brotherhood might obey He can not deny but it is meant of Cyprian of one Judge
in every diocese. But he reasons a fortiori, that there ought to be much
rather one Judge over all the world. Howbeit I have showed the in consequence
of this argument, by example of one Physician, one Schoolemaister, one Judge in
temporal matters over the whole world, to whom it is as impossible to
discharge such an office over all, as it is profitable for one such to be in
every town. He says that particular flocks, are voluntary, and likewise
particular pastors, but one flock and one pastor, is of absolute necessity on
earth. In deed the limits of particular flocks, and the persons of
particular pastors, are left to the appointment and choice of the church. But
that there should be particular flocks and pastors, it is of Gods ordination,
though God by his Apostles appointed it to be so, yet is it of as absolute
necessity, while the church is dispersed in diverse places of the world, as
that there is one flock and one shepherd over all Jesus Christ, and yet he is
not ashamed to challenge us page 298. Let the text be named where. Christ did
institute many parishes? Whereas he him self, page 294. quoteth. Tit. 1. and
Act. 14. which places prove, that Christ did institute many parishes, except he
will say the Apostles did it without the institution of Christ, which he
confesses they did not without the special inspiration of the holy Ghost or
else will say, that the inspiration of the holy Ghost in the ordinance of many
parishes, differs from the institution of Christ. But he that wrangleth thus
impudently and unreasonably, against the plain institution of many parishes by
Christ, brings a plain text where it is said, Feed me sheep to one pastor.

Has this man any foreheade think you, that calls this a plain text to
prove that there should be one sheepehearde upon earth over all the flock,
because Christ upon special occasion exhorted one man to feed his flock? Are
all things that were spoken to him singular unto him? Christ said to him and
to none other of the Apostles, come after me Satan, thou art an offense to me,
for thou sauerest not the things that are of God but of men. Christ said to
Peter and to none other, put up thy sword into thy scaberd, Christ said to
Peter and to none other, thou will deny me thrice. O painted rock of the
Popish Church, that has no better ground then this saying feed my sheep
when he that challenges authority hereby of all other feeds least, and
poysoneth most.

But let us return and see what authority of old fathers he has to prove
one pastoral pre-eminence over all the church. Cyprian lib. 1. Ep. 8. Deus.
vnus est, and Christus vnus, and vna ecclesia, and Cathedra vna super petram
Domini voce fundata. There is one God, and one Christ, and one church, and one
chair founded upon Peter by our Lords voice. Hear I say first of all, that
he does falsify Saint Cyprians words turning pe^ram into petrum, so that his
saying is, There is one chair by our Lords voice founded on the rock. An
other altar or a new Priesthood can not be appointed beside one altar and one
Priesthood. Whosoever gathers elsewhere scatters abroad etc.

But if the word were petrum and not petram, yet the whole discourse of that
Epistle shows, that Cyptian means by these words to set forth not the past
orall pre-eminence of one man over the whole church, but one Bishop in every
diocese. For he writes against five Elders or Priests, which had chosen one
Felicissimus a schismatike, to be Bishop in Carthage against him.

But what other malicious ignorance, or shameless impudence is this, that he
peruerteth the saying of Christ of him self, to the Pope? There shall be one
sheepefold and one shepherd. Joan. 10 Yet see his reason. A flock of sheep is
one by force of one pastor, therefore if the Pastor on earth be not one, the
flock is not one on earth. If this argument be good, how is the flock one
upon earth, when there is no Pope? For the sea has been void diverse times,
many days, many months, and sometime many years. How was the flock one,
when there were two or three Popes at once and that so often, and so long
together? Therefore the flock on earth is one by that one only shepherd
Jesus Christ, whose divine voice all the sheep hear, though in his humanity,
he be ascended into heaven, and not by any one mortal man, to whom they can not
be gathered, nether being so far abroad dispersed, can hear his voice.

And the whole order of the church on earth, tends to an unity in Christ,
and not in one man whatsoever, as one general pastor. For if that one should
be an heretic, and all the church tend to unity in him, the whole church
should be wrapped in heresy with him. That diverse Popes have been heretics as
Libe^ius, Anastasi^s, Vigil^us, Honorius, Ihon the 23. in known condemned
heresies, it is too manifest by records of antiquity, that it should be
denied, wherefore Christ instituted no such ordinary authority, to be limited
in one succession that it should have prehemine^ce and imisdiction over all the
church. Seeing unity is best mainteyned in doctrine by his word, in
government, by the discipline by him appointed. And unity in truth can not be
had at the hands of a man, which is a liar, and experience shows that the
jurisdiction which the Bishop of Rome has claimed, has been occasion of
most and greatest schisms and dissentions that have been in particular
churches, when no man would obey his ordinary pastors and Bishops without the
appealing to the sea of Rome, beside so many schisms as have been in the same
see, which have set all the Christian world together by the cares, while they
were divided in factio^s, some holding with one Pope, and some with an other,
and some with the third, and some with none of them all.

The 15. Chapter.
THat the Bishop of Rome is that one ordinary pastor who Sander.
succeeds in S. Peter's chair, and is above all Bishops according to the
meaning of Gods word. Why S. Peter dyed at Rome. S. Augustines mind touching
the supremacy of the Pope of Rome.

THe first reason is, that although Peter at the first Fulke.
was rather high Bishop of the circumcision, the^ of the Gentiles, yet
because he did at length settle him self at Rome by Gods appointment, and left
a successor there, he says he may well affirm, that the Bishop of Romes
primacy is warranted by Gods word. A strange kind of warantise, for to omit
that the primacy over the Gentiles by Gods word, is given to another, namely to
Paul, from whom he can never prove, that it was taken afterward. Where has he
any word of God to prove, that by his appointment, Peter settled him self at
Rome, and appointed there a successor? He quoteth Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 3. who
reports that Linus the first Bishop of Rome was ordained not by Peter only,
but by Peter and Paul the Apostles, who founded the Church there, even as
Polycarpus by the Apostles in Asia, was made bishop in Smyrna, which Church
with the Church of Ephesus founded by Paul, and continued by John the
Apostles, he cites as witnesses alike, with the Church of Rome, of the
tradition of the Apostles, against Valentinus and Marcion which being void of
Scriptures, bragged of the tradition of the Apostles. But of Peter's primacie,
or his successors over all Bishops, Irenaeus says not a word. No more does
Tertullian, whom likewise he quoteth, de praescrip. but even as Ireneus would
have the tradition of the Apostles, against those heretics that boasted of it,
to be tried by the confession of those Churches that were founded by the
Apostles.

His second reason is, upon a false supposition, that he has already proved,
Peter alone to be the rock, to have chief authority in feeding etc. all
which things are untrue.

That Peter came to Rome, he is not content that it be testified by all
ancient Ecclesiastical writers. But he says it is witnessed by the express
word of God. 1. Pet. 5. The Church which is gathered together in Babylon
saluteth you. Although the history of Peter's coming to Rome, and sitting there
25. years, testified by so many writers, is proved false, in many
circumstances, by the plain word of God, yet I am content to admit, that he
came thither, toward the later end of Ne roes reign. But that in his
Epistle, he sent salutations from Rome, I can not admit: seeing that in such
manner of salutations, men use not to write allegorically, albeit, that in the
revelation of Saint John Rome the sea of Antichrist is mystically called
Babylon. But Babylon from whence S. Peter did write, is more probably to be
taken, for a city of that name in Egypt, where Mark was with him, who^ the
consent of antiquity affirms, to have been Bishop of Alexandria a city of
Egypt also, who could not have been with him at Rome. Seeing it is manifest by
the first and second of the Epistle to the Galathians, and by diverse of Saint
Paul's Epistles, that if ever Peter was at Rome, it was but a short time in the
later end of Nero his Empire. Whereas Mark dyed in the eight year of his
reign, before Peter could be at Rome. For in the tenth year Paul was
brought prisoner to Rome, Saint Luke accompanying him, who would not have
omitted to show, that Peter was there to have met him, as the rest of the
brethren did, if he had then been at Rome. Again Paul in so many Epistles as
he writes from Rome, sending salutations from mean personages, would not have
omitted mention of Peter, if he had been there. Saint Luke then affirming that
he tarried two years in prison at Rome, which must be until the twelfe year of
Nero, it follows that if Peter came, he came very late to Rome within two
year before his death, at which time it was not possible, that Mark which was
dead four years before, could be at Rome with him, wherefore Babylon in that
text can not be taken for Rome.

Another reason of the Popes supremacy he makes, that Peter not only came
thither, but also dyed there. A simple reason, why the city of Rome should have
that prerogative, because she murdered ye Apostles. Rather might Jerusalem
claim it, in which Christ the head of all dyed. After this he tells the
fable out of the counterfeit Egesippus, of Simon Magus flying in the air, and
the Emperor Nero his great delight in his sorcerye. The credit of Egesippus he
desendeth, by blaming his translatour for adding names of cities, which had
none such when Egesippus lived. But that Simon Magus showed no experiment
ofsorcerye before Nero, as this counterfeit Egesippus reports it is plain,
by Plinius lib. 30. cap. 2. nature. Histor. who showing how desirous Nero was,
and what means he had to have trial thereof, yet never could come by any. It
was a practice of old time, to feign such fables, for love of the Apostles, as
Tertullian witnesses, de baptis. of a Priest of Asia, that was convicted and
confessed, that he fained for the love of Paul, a writing unto Tecla, in which
many absurd things were contained. Again so many Apocriphall gospells,
epistles, itineraryes and passions, as are counterfaited under the name of
Apostles, and ancient fathers, who knows not to be fables and false
inventions. Among which this fable of Simon Magus and Peter is one. That S.
Luke makes no mention of Peter's death, he preuenteth the objection, because he
continued not his storye so far: which doubt (says he) he would not have
omitted, if he had gone so far fo^ward in his story. But seeing he brought
Paul to Rome, both in his journey, and in his history, why makes he no mention
of Peter's being there? which if their story were true, must have sit there
twenty years before. To omit therefore the four causes, why Peter should dye
at Rome, whereof three are taken out of a counterfeit, August. de sa ctis, hom.
27. the 4. out of Leo and Gregory Bishops of Rome: he comes to decyde the
controversy between the Greeks and Latins, who was first successor of Peter,
Linus or Clemens, taking part with them that affirm, Clemens although
Irenaeus the most ancient writer of any that is extant, name Linus who was not
a Grecian far of, but a Frenchmam at Lions near hand to Italy, whose
authority although he reject, in naming Linus to be ordained Bishop by both the
Apostles, yet he glories much that he calls the Church of Rome. Maximam and
antiquissimam, etc. The greatest and the most ancient, and known to all men,
founded and settled by two most glorious Apostles, Peter and Paul. And again,
Adhanc Ecclesiam etc. To this Church by reason of the mightier principality,
every Church, that is, the faithful that are every where must needs agree. But
he proceeds and shows the cause why. In qua semper ab his qui sunt vndique
conser^ata est ca quae est ab Apostolis traditio. In which always that
tradition which is from the Apostles has been always kept, of them that are
round about. M. Sander calls it willful ignorance, in M. Jewel, that says
the mightier principality spoken of in Irenaeus, is meant of the civil
dominion, and Roman Empire, whereas it has relation to the former titles of
commendation, that it was the greatest and the most ancient: the greatest he
says, because it was fownded by Peter the greatest Apostle, but so says not
Irenaeus, for he says it was founded by two most glorious Apostles, and not by
Peter alone. It was then greatest, because the greatest number of Christians
were in Rome, as the greatest city. But how is it the most ancient? but in
respect of Peter's senioritie, for otherwise Jerusalem and Antioche were
auncienter in time. I answer two ways, first it is sophistical to urge the
superlatiue degree grammatically, as when we say, potentissimo principi, to
the most mighty prince, doctissimo viro, to the best learned man, etc. We do
not mean, that no Prince is equal or superior in power, nor that no man is
equal or superior in learning, to him whom we so commend, but to show the
power and learning of those persons to be excellent great.

Secondly I answer, that Irenaeus speaks coniunctly, it is sophistical to
understand severally. He says there is no Church of such greatness, so
ancient, and so well known, as the Church of Rome.

From this blind collection out of Irenaeus, he comes down groping to
Cyprian, who speaking of certain factious heretics, that sailed from Carthage
to Rome, to complain of Saint Cyprian and other Bishops of Afrike to Pope
Cornelius. Lib. 1. Ep. 3. ad Cor. Audent and ad Petri, etc. They dare carry
letters from sch^smaticall and profane men unto the chayer of Peter, and the
principal Church, from whence the priestly unity began, Nether consider
that they are Romans, whose faith is pray sed by the report of the Apostle
unto whom falshod can have none access.

In this saying we must note the privileges of S. Peter's supremacy, to be at
Rome. 1. This is S. Peter's chayer, that is his ordinary power of teaching, etc.
Nay rather the Bishops seat, which he and Paul did set up there as Irenaeus
shows, li. 3. ca. 3. 2. There is the principal Church, because the Bishop of
Rome succeeds the prince of the Apostles. Nay rather, because it is the
greatest Church, being gathered in the greatest city of the world, as Irenus
also calls it. 3. The priestly unity began not in Rome but in Peter,
therefore there is the whole authority of Peter. The argument is naught, the
beginning of unity proves not authority. 4. this word unity does import,
that as Peter alone had in him the whole power of the cbiefe sheepeheard, so
Cornelius his successor has in him the same power. This argument is of small
importance, for nether had Peter alone such power, nor any of his successors.
5. where he says infidelity can have no access to the Romans, what other
thing is it, then to say in the Church of Rome he vuleth for whose faith
Christ prayed. Luc. 22.

Christ prayed for the faith of all his Apostles, and of all his Disciples, to
the end of the world. Joan. 17. Beside this, Master Sander translateth
perfidia which signifies falsehood or false dealing, infidelity, secondly that
which Cyprian says of all the faithful Romans, he draws to his Pope,
thirdly where Cyprian shows how long they shall continue without falshoode,
namely so long as they retain the faith praised by the Apostle, he makes it
perpetual to the sea of Rome: whereas the Romans them selves write to Cyprian
of those praises of the Apostle, quarum laudum and gloriae degenerem fuisse,
maximum crimen est. Of which praises and glory to be grown out of kind, it
is the greatest crime. Finally if Cyprian had thought the Pope and Church of
Rome could not err, he would never have mayntayned an opinion against them,
as he did in rebaptisinge them that were baptized by heretics.

The 6. We must add heareto, that Cyprian calls Rome Ecclesiae Catholicae
matricem and radicem, the mother and root of the Catholic church. lib 4.
Epist. 8. we find not Rome so called there, we find that Cyprian and his
fellows, exhorted all such troublesome persons, as went over sea, and carried
false tales, Vt Ecclesiae Catholicae matrice^ and radi^em agnoscerent and
tenerent, that they would acknowledge and hold the mother and root of the
Catholic Church, by which words, they dissuaded them from ioygninge with
schismatikes, who being condemned in one Church, would gad up and down for
absolution in an other.

The 7. did not S. Cyp. confess Cornelius to have received the appellation of
Rasilides lawfully, out of Spaine^ li. 1 Ep. 4, There is no word of any such
confession or appellation, in that epistle. But rather, if you suppose an
appellation and a restitution by the Bishop of Rome, Cyprian and 36. bishops
with him, determine the same restitution to be void and of none effect: Neque
rescindere ordinationem i^re perfectam potest, quod Basilides post crimina sua
detecta, and conscientiam propria confessione nudatam, Romam pergens, Stephanum
collegam nostrum long positum and gestae rei ac veritatis ignarum fefellit, vt
ambiret reponi se miuste in episcopatum, de quo fucrat just depositus. Haec eo
pertinent vt Basilidis, non tam abolita sint quam cumulata delicta, vt ad
superiora peccata eius, etiam fallaciae and circumuentionis crimen accesseris.
Neque enim tam culpandus est ille cui negligenter obreptu^, quam hic execra^dus
qui fraudulenter obrepsit. Obrepere aute^ hominibus Basilides potuit, Deo no^
potest, cu^ script^ sit, Deus non irridetur: Neither can it make frustrate the
ordination lawfully made, y Basilides after his crimes were detected, and his
conscience opened by his own confession, going to Rome, has deceived our
fellow bishop Stephan, being far of and ignorant of ^ matter and of ^ truth,
^ he might a^bitiously seek to be unjustly restored into his bishopric from
w he was justly deposed These things tend to this end, that the offenses of
Basilides, are not so much abolished as increased, so that to his former sins
the crime of deceifulnesse and circumuention is added. For neither is he so
much to be blamed who was negligently deceived, as he is to be abhorred, which
did craftily deceive him. But if Basilides could deceive men, he could not
deceive God, seeing it is written, God is not mocked.

Here is no lawefull appellation spoken of, but the Bishope of Romes sentence
pronounced void, and he blamed for his negligence and rashness, to meddle with
matters whereof he could have no knowledge, by means of distance of place.
But if M. San. reply, that he is not reproved for taking such appellations, he
must hear what Cyprian says of such appellations which began to be used in
his days, unto Cornelius B. of Rome immediately after the words cyted by him.
lib. 1 epi. 3. of those schismatikes that were so bold as to sail to Rome,
and carry letters as above. Quae autem causa veniendi and pseudoepiscopum
contra episcopos factum nunciandi? Aut enim placet illis quod fecerunt and in
suo scelere perseuerant, aut si displicet and recedunt, sciunt quo reuertantur.
Nam cum statutu^ sit omnibus nobis, and aequum sit pariter and iustu^, vt
vnius^uiusque causa illic audiatur, vbi est crimen admissum, and singulis
pastoribus portio gregis sit ascripta, quam regat vnusquisque and gubernet,
rationem sui actus Domino redditurus, oportet vtique eos quibus presumus non
circumc^rsare, nec episcoporum concordiam coherentem sua subdola and fallaci
^emeritate collidere. Sed agere illic causam suam, vbi and accusatores habere
and testes sui criminis possint, nisi paucit desperatis and perditis, minor
videtur esse auctoritas episcoporum in Africa constitutorum, qui iam de illis
iudicauerunt and eorum conscientiam multis delictorum laqueis vincta^ iudicij
sui nuper grauitate damnaru^t: But what cause had they to come and to report
that a false Bishop was made against the Bishops: For either that which they
have done pleases them, and they continue in their wickedness, or if it
displease the^, and they go back from it, they know whether they should
return. For whereas it is decreed of us all, and is also meet and right, that
every man's cause should be hard there, where the crime was committed, and a
portion of the flock is committo every Pastor, which every one ought to rule
and govern, as he that shall yield an account of his doings to the Lord:
verily it behooves them over whom we have rule, not to run about, neither
by their crafty and deceitful rashness to crase the concord of Bishops agreing
together: but there to plead their matter where they may have both accusers and
witnesses of their crime, except the authoryty of the Bishops ordained in
Africa seems to a few desperate and wicked fellows to be less, which have
already judged of them, and condemned their consciences, bound with the weight
of their judgment in many cords of their offenses. This place of Cyprian
declares not only that the Byshopps of Africa, had decreede against such
appellations, but also that they thought their authority nothing inferior to
the Bishops of Italy, nor to the bishop of Rome him self.

The 8. note out of Cyprian is, That he required Stephanus the Pope, to depose
Marcianus the Bishop of Arles in France, which to dee in an other province is
a sign that the Pope of Rome is above other Bishops. If it were true that M.
Sander shows, it might prove the Bishop of Rome, to be a Primate or
Metropolitan, it could not prove him to be a Bishop over all the world. But
it is utterly false, that he says, Cyprian required the Pope Stephan to depose
him, for he was deposed by the judgment of all the Bishops of the Weste
Church: Ab v^iuersis sacerdotibus iudicatus, condemned of all the Priests,
only he exhorts Stephan of Rome, which was negligent in this behalf, to
join with the rest of the Bishops of France in ordering of another Bishop
in his stead, who long since has been excommunicated and deposed from his
place, for taking part with Nouatiane the Heretic. And lest you should think
the whole m^tter to be referred to the Bishop of Rome, these are is words in
the same Epistle. li, 3. Ep. 13. Id circo enim frater charissime, copiosum
corpus est sacerdotum concordiae mutuae glutine atque vnitatis vinculo
copulatum vt si quis ex collegio nostro haeres^m facere and gregem Christi
lacerare and vastare tentauerit, subueniant caeteri and quasi pastores vtiles
and misericordes, oues dominicas in gregem col^igant: For therefore most
well-beloved brother, the body or fellowshippe of priests is plentiful, being
coupled together by the Glewe of mutual concord, and the band of Amity, so
that if any of our company shall assay to make an heresy, or to rent or waste
the flock of Christ, the rest should give aid, and as profitable and
merciful shepherds gather again the Lords sheep into his fold.

The 9. note is, That notwithstanding Cyprian dissented from Pope Stephanus in
opinion concerning the baptizing of suchas had been baptized by here^kes, yet
he denied not his prerogative. but kept still the unity of the militant
Church, in acknowledging the visible head thereof. He quoteth his ep. Contra
Stephan, wherein is no word of acknowledging the Popes prerogative, but contrary
wise every child may see, that seeing he did boldly dissent in opinon from the
B. of Rome, and wrote against him, he held no such prerogative of that sea, as
the Papists now maintain, that the bishop of Rome cannot err. In deed
Cyprian professes, that notwithstanding he differed from him in opinion, yet
he would not depar^e from the unity of the Church, but what is this for
acknowledging of a visible head, whereof M. S. speaks much, but Cyprian never
a word, neither in that place, nor in any of all his works.

The next authority is Hippolitus whose words Prud rehearses: Peristeph in
passion Hip. Respondetfugite etc.

H^s aunsvvere was O flee the s^smes of cursed Nouates l^re:
And to the Catholic f^lke and stock, your selves again restore.
Let only one faith rule and ra^gne, kept in the Church of old:
Which faith both Paul does s^l retain and Peter's chair does hold^
No dout this was a good exhortation, so long as the temple of Peter and Paul
at Rome did hold the old catholic faith: from which seeing the Pope is now
fled, we may not honor the empty chair of Peter, to think there is his faith,
where his doctrine is not.

After Hippolitus, follows Sozomenus, who reports that Athanasius and
certain other Bishops of the Greek Church came to Rome to Julius the bishop
there, to complain that they were unjustly deposed by the Arians. Whereupon
the Bishop of Rome finding them upon examination to agree with the Nicene
counsel did re^eiue them into the communion as one that had care of them all,
for the worthynes of his own See, and did restore to every of them their own
Churches. etc. Here M. Sander has his 9 observations, he delights much in
that number. But it shall not need to stand upon them, it is confessed that in
Sozomenus time, the writer of this story, who judges of things done according
to the present state in which he lived, the sea of Rome was grown into great
estimation, and counted the first See or principal in dignity of all Bishops
Seas in the world. Yea, it is true that Socrates a writer of Historyes as well
as he says, That long before his time, the Bishops Sea of Rome as well as of
Alexandria, was grown beyond the bands of Pr^esthood, into a foreign
Lordship and dominion. Soc. lib. 7. cap. 11. But if we consider the records of
the very time in which Julius lived, we shall not find that the dignity of
his Sea was such, as that he had such authority as Sozomenus aseribeth to
him, and much less such as M. Sander imagines of him.

In Epiphanius there is an Epistle of one Marcellus, which beside that he
called him his fellow minister, acknowledges no such dignity of his Sea lib.
3. to. 1. And Sozomenus himself testifyeth that the Bishops of the East,
derided and contemned his commandementes. lib. 3. Cap. 8. and cap. 11. they
were as bold to depose him with the bishops of the West, as he was to check
them, that they called not him to their council. Wherein as I confess, they
did evil, yet thereby they showed evidently, that the Christian world in
those days, did not acknowledge the usurpation of the bishop of Rome, as M.
Sander says they did. Neither durst they eaer to dissent from him, if it had
been a Catholic doctrine received in the Church, that the Bishop of Rome is
head of the Church, Bishop of all Bishops, Judge of all causes, and one which
cannot err. As for Athanasius, Paulus, etc. and other Bishops being tossed to
and fro, by their enemies, no marvel if they were glad to find any comfort
at the Bishop of Romes hands, having first sought to the Emperors for refuge,
of whom sometime they were helped, sometime they were hindered as informatio^
was given either for them or against the^.

But Arnobius he says gives a maruailous witness for the church of Rome in
Psa. 106. Petrus in deserto. etc Peter wandering in the desert of this world,
until he came to Rome, preached the baptism of Jesus Christ in whom all
floods are blessed from Peter unto this day. He has made the going forth of
the waters into thirst, so that he which shall go forth of the Church of Peter
shall perish for thirst. It is a marvelous wit of M. Sander, that can find
such marvelous prerogative of Peter, in this place which Arnobius would have in
the example of Peter to be understood of all men. Quid est ascendunt? Disce in
Petro, vt quod in ipso inueneris, in omnibus cernas. Ascendit Petrus etc. What
means this they go up as high as heaven? Learn in Peter, to thend that yt
which thou shall find in Peter, thou may see in all men. Peter went up as
high as heaven, when he said: Although I should dye with thee, yet will I not
deny thee etc. and so applying the understanding of the Psalm to Peter, and in
him to all Christians, he comes to that marvelous testimony of the church of
Rome, which M. Sander reports, showing how after his repentance God exalted
him to be a preacher of that baptism of Jesus Christ in whom all floodes are
blessed from Peter to this day. Where M. Sander uses a false translation,
saying the floodes are blessed of Peter, and expounds the floodes to be the
churches, whereas Arnobius speaks of all waters, which in Christ are
sanctified to the use of baptism, from the Apostles time until this day. But
it is a Catholic argument that whosoever goes out of the Church of Peter,
goes out of the Church of Christ, therefore Rome is the mother Church and
Peter the head thereof. Even like this, whosoever goes out of the Church of
Paul, or of any of the Apostles wheresoever they planted it, does perish
therefore Corinth and Paul, or any other City and the Apostle that preached
there, may be taken for the head and Pastor, and mother Church of all other,
yet is this with M. Sander a marvelous testimony.

Optatus succeeded Arnobius. Cont. Pamen de not: lib. 2. Negare nonpotes. etc.
Thou can not deny, but that thou know that to Peter first the bishops
chair was given in the city of Rome, in which Peter the head of all the
apostles has sit: wherofhe was also called Cephas, in which chair unity might
be kept of al men, so that he should be a scismatike wc should place any other
chair against the singular chair. Unto Peter succeeded Linus, unto Linus
succeeded Clemens, and so names all the Bishops until Siricius which lived in
his time, of whom he says, Qui noster est socius, which is our fellow. In this
sentence Optatus laboreth to prove against the Donatists which were
scismatikes, that there is but one Catholic church from which they were
departed. He uses the argument of unity commended in Peter's chair whom he
calls head of the Apostles in respect of unity, and not of authority, which
appears by this that in the end he accounts Syricius bishop of Rome and
Peter's successor, not head of all Churches nor universal Bishop of al Bishops,
but Socius noster, our fellow or companion, as one consenting with him in the
unity of that Church, which was first planted by the Apostles, and not as a
general governor of the universal Church of Christ. Wherefore although
Optatus do more the^ was necessary urge this argument of the unity of Peter's
Chair, yet his meanining was not to set forth an vnrepr ouable authority
thereof, such as the Pope now challenges, but only to make it tbe beginning
of unity.

At length he comes to S. Hierome in an Epistle to Damasus, out of which he
gathers diverse sentences. M^hi cathedram etc. I thought it best to ask
council of the Chair of Peter, and of the says praised by the mouth of the
Apostle. I speak with the successor of a fisher, and with a difciple of the
cross. I following none first but Christ, am joined in communion with thy
blessedness, that is with the Chair of Peter. Upon that Rock, I know the
Church to be builded. Whosoever shall eat the Lamb out of this house he is
unholy. If any man l^e out of the Ark of Noah during the time of the Floude,
he shall perish. I know not V^atis, I despise Melitius, I have no
acquaintance with Paulinus, whosoever does not gather with thee, he does
scatter abroad, that is, he that is not of Christ, is of Antichriste. The
conclusion opens all the matter as long as Damasus Bishop of Rome, gathers
with Christ, that is mayntameth true doctrine, Hierome will gather with him,
who professed before that he would follow none as first, but Christ, For he
would not have gathered with Liberius Bishop of Rome, whom he confesses
to have subscrybed to the Arians that were Hereukes in Catal. Script. ecclesi.
What mockery is it then to draw the commendations of a good Catholic Bishop
maintaining true Doctrine, to every Bishop sitting in that seat, agreeing
neither in doctrine nor manners with that Christian predecessor.

Augustine must succeed Hierome, who in his 166. Epistle gives us this rule.
Caelestis magister. etc. The Heavenly master makes the people secure,
concerning evil overseers, lest for their sakes the Chair of healthfu^l
doctrine should be sorsaken, in which Chair evil men are ever constrained
to say good things, for the things which they speak are not their own. But
they are the things of God.

Here says Master Sander we have a Chair of healthful doctrine, and that
is afterward called the Chair of unity, therefore it is not the Chair of
every Bishop, which are many, and of which many have been Heretics, but the
only chair of the bishop of Rome, in which Chair the Pope be he never so
evil, is constrained to say good things and cannot err. But seeing I have
often proved that many Bishops sitting in that Chair of Rome have spoken evil
things, and were fylthy Heretics, it follows, that this is not a wodden
Chair that Augustine speaks of, but the Chair of true doctrine, such as the
Chair of Moses was, in which not only Aaron and his successors, but even the
Scrybes and Pharisees did sit, having the authority of Moses, while they
uttered nothing but that which God delivered by Moses. But when they preached
false doctrine they did not sit in the chair of Moses, but in the chair of
pestilence, as the Pope and all other heretics do. He talks much of unity
in S, Peter, in his chair, sea^e and succession, as though any of these, were
worth a straw, without unity in S. Peter's doctrine, which was the doctrine of
Christ.

But Saint Augustine Contr epist fundament confesses that the succession of
priests from Saint Peter unto this present time stayed him in the Catholic
Church. It is true, he confesses that this succession among many things was
one that stayed him. And yet he acknowledges that the manifest truth,
Praeponenda est omnibus illis rebus quibus in Catholica tene^r, is to be
preferred before all things by which I am stayed in the Catholic Church,
namely before antiquity, consent of nations, miracles, succession of Bishops
and the name of Catholics.

Likewise rehearsing the same things in a manner against the Donatistes which
Master Sander has not omitted. Epist. 165. He says, Quamuis non tam de
istis documentis presumanus quam de Scripturis sanctis. Although we presume not
so much of these documents as of the holy spriptures. Wherefore as the argument
of sucessio^, was well used against heretics, so long as there was succession
of doctrine with succession of persons: so now to allege the only succession
of persons where the doctrine is clean changed, is as folish and ridiculous, as
by showing of empty dishes, to prove abundance of victuals, or showing vessels
full of filthy waters, to prove that they are full of good wine, because meat
of old time, has been served in such dishes, and wine preserved in such
vessels.

But if the authority of one man as Saint Augustine was, seem little M. San.
brings the two councels gatheredin Africa and Numidia, against the Pelagia^s
which sent their decrees to the Sea of Rome, That the authoriof the Apostol^ke
Sea might be given to them Epi. 19. if they required the B. of Rome to agree
with the^ in the truth, what pretog^tiue of supremacy do they grant unto him?
Nay rather they do p^iu^ly reprehend him, that he had so long suffered the
Pelagian poison to be spread under his nose in Europe, and the doctriue neither
called to examination, nor confuted, yea rather seemed to consent to the den of
the bishops of the East, that Pelagius was justly absolved. But Pope
Innocentius himself praises them Ep 91. that they had kept the customs of the
old tradition, in referring the matter to his Sea and says, That the sathers
not by human but by divine sentence have decreed that what soever was done in
the provinces a far of, they should not account it before to be ended, except
it came to the knhwledge of this sea, where whatsoever had been justly
pronounced should be coufirmed by the authority of this sea, and those other
churches should take it as it were waters which should flow from their own
native fountain. We know the ambitious Ep. of Innocentius if it be not
counterfeted, because many patches thereof are found in other decretal epistles
but we deny that ye authority which he pretended, was acknowledged by these
two councels, yes says M. S. the fathers of the Mileuitan council say:
Arbitramur etc. We think these men that have so pernicious and froward
opinions will give pla^e more easily to the authority of your holiness, being
taken out of the authority of the holy Scriptures, by help of the mercy of our
lord Jesus Christ which ^ouch^^feth to rule you when you consult and to hear
you when you pray by these words they show, that they hope ye here tikes being
reproved by the B. of Rome out of the wo^d of God, will the rather give place,
with out imagining, that the B. of Romes authority is so stablished by the
scriptures that whatsoever he decre contrary to thescriptures the same should
be embraced But a farther confirmation of the epistle of Innoce. he bringeih
out of Aug. Ep. 106. Where he says, Pope Innocent did write an answer to the
Bishops in althings, as it became the prelate of the Apostolic sea. But these
words neither prove that epistle to be written by Innocent, nor if it were, do
allow his pretended auth ority, because that was no matter whereof they
required his answer. But to put it out of dout. Both these Councels have
decreed against the usurpation of the Romish sea. As the council Mileuitan cap.
22. decreed that no man should appeele out of Africa, under pain of
excommunication.

The last authority cited out of Augustine, is, Epistle 162. speaking of the
Church of Rome. In qua semper Apostolicae cathedrae viguit principatus. In
which always the principality of the Apostolic chair has flourished. A
matter often confessed that the fathers especially of the later times since
Constantine advanced the Church in wealth and dignity, esteemed the church of
Rome as the principal Sea in dignity, but not in absolute authority, such as
in process of time the Bishops of Rome claymed and usurped. For even the same
Augustine with 216. Bishops refused to yield to the Bishop of Rome, clayming
by a counterfaire Canon of the Council of Nice, to have authortie to receive
appeals out of Africa. Epi. con. Aphr. ad Bonifac. which they cou^pte an
intolerable pride and presumption, and in Epist. cont. Aphri. ad Coelesti^^m
fumosum typum seculi, A smokey pride of the world which the Pope claymed and
an absurd authority, that one man should be better able to examine such
causes, then so many Bishops, of the province where the controversy began, and
by the old Cannons should be ended.

To Augustine he joins Prosper Bishop of Rhegiu^ in Italy which affirms in
lib de ingrat. that Rome the sea of Peter was the first that did cut of the
pestilence of Pelagius, which Rome being made head unto the world of pastoral
honor holds by religion whatsoever it does not possess by war. And again.
Rome through the primacie of the Apostolic Priesthood, is made greater by the
castle of religion, then by the throne of power. First how untruly he boasts
that the sea of Peter, was the first that did cut of the heresy of Pelagius
you may ease y see, by that the council of Africa did before condemn it, and
had somewhat a do to persuade Innocentius Bishop of Rome to it. Whereby you
see, that Prosper was over partial to the sea of Rome, to whom yet he
ascribes a principallity or primacy of honor, not of power or auctority.

The testimonies of Leo and Gregory Bishops of Rome as always, so now I deem
to be unmeet to be heard in their own cause, though otherwise they were not
the worst men, yet great furtherers of the authority of Antichrist, which
soon after their days, took possession of the chair, which they had helped
to prepare for him. The last testimony out of Beda which lived under the
tyranny of Antichrist, I will not stand upon, M. Sander may have great store
of such late writers to affirm the Popes supremacy.

The 16. Chapter.
THat the good Christian Emperors and Princes, did never Sander.
think the^ selves to be the supreme heads of the church in spiritual
causes, but gave that honor to Bishops, and Priests, and most specially to the
sea of Rome, for S. Peter's sake, as well before, as after the time of Phocas. A
Priest is above the Emperor in Ecclesiastical causes. The oath of the royal
supremacy, is intolerable. Constantine was baptized at Rome. Phocas did not
first make the sea of Rome head of all churches.

COncerning the supremacy of our sovereign, which this traitorous Papist does
so maliciously disdain, Fulke.
although it be expounded sufficiently by her Majesty in her iniunction, not
to be such as he most slanderously does deforme it, yet I will here, as I
have done diverse times before in answer to these Papists, profess, that we
ascribe no supremacy to our Prince, but such as the word of God allows in
the godly Kings of the old Testament, and the church has acknowledged in the
Christian Emperors and Princes under the new Testament.

First therefore we ascribe to our Prince no absolute power, in any
Ecclesiastical causes, such as the Pope challenges, but subject unto the
rules of Gods word. Secondly we ascribe no supremacy of knowledge in
Ecclesiastical matters to our Prince, but affirm that she is to learn of the
Bishops and teachers of the church, both in matters of faith and of the
government of the church. Thirdly we allow no confusion of callings, that the
Prince should presume to preach, to minister the Sacraments, to excommunicate,
etc. which perteine not to her office. But the supremacy we admit in
Ecclesiastical causes, is authority over all persons to command, and by
laws to provide, that all matters Ecclesiastical, may be ordered and executed
according to the word of God. And such is the true meaning of the oath, that he
calls blasphemous and intolerable. And as for examples of honor given to the
Bishops by Christian Princes, which he brings forth, they deny not this
supremacy, nor make any thing against it.

The first is of the Emperor Philippus, counted of some for the first
Christian Emperor, although it be not like to be true, yet admitting the story
written by Eusebius to be so. This Prince without due repentance, offered him
self to receive the holy mysteries, and being refused by the Bishop of the
place, took it pacie^tly, and submitted him self to the discipline and order
of ye church. I answer, this example touches not the auctority he had in
ecclesiastical causes. For in receiving of the Sacraments, the Prince
differs not from a private person.

But he pusheth at M. Nowell with a two horned argument, called a dilemma. If
the Priest in these causes, be superior to yt Emperor, other causes be greater
or lesser then these. If they be greater, the Emperor which is not supreme
governor over the lesser causes, can not be in the greater, if they be lesser,
then the Priest wc governs the Emperor, in greater causes, must needs govern
him in lesser causes. These horns are easily avoided not by distinction of the
causes, but of the governments. The government of the Prince is one, and of the
Priest an other: this spiritual, the other external, and therefore no
contrariety between them. For put the case, that Philippus had seen the Bishop
profane the sacrament, in ministering to infidels, or otherwise uncertainly
behauing him self in his office, might he not justly have punished him, as
supreme governor over the Bishop even in those matters? I say not to do
them, but to see that they be well done, and to punish the offenders. Neither
is the meaning of the oath any other. And according to this meaning, M. Nowell,
M. Horn and M. Jewel dare warrant the King to be supreme governor in all
Ecclesiastical causes, although it please M. Sander to say, the contrary of
them. Whose traiterous quarelling upon the words of the oath, ought not to
trouble any man's conscience, when the meaning is publikelie testified both by
the Prince, and by the whole consent of the church.

The next example is of Constantinus the great, which in the Synod of Nice,
when the Bishops had offered unto him bills of complaint, one against an other,
without disclosing the contents of them, he said, as Ruffinus reports lib.
10. cap. 2. Deus vos constituit sacerdotes etc. God has made you Priests, and
has given you power to judge of us also, and therefore we are rigtly judged of
you, but ye can not be judged of m^e. For which cause, expect ye the judgment
of God alone among ye. Here M. Sander notes, first, that he calls them
Priests, whereby he would prove, they had power to offer external sacrifice,
which is a simple reason, for then all Christian men and women within the
Scripture are called Priests, have the same power. Secondly he confesses,
they have power to judge the Emperor, for none can be greater then a Priest:
In their challenge and spiritual government, the Emperor means, and not as
the Popish church practiced, to dispose the Emperor. Thirdly, that Priests
can not be judged of me^. If this be so, one Priest can not be judged of an
other, and where is then the Popes supremacy, but he answers, if one Priest
judge an other, it is Gods judgment, and not the judgment of men, because God
has set one Priest above another. O blockish answer: as though God has not
set one Prince above all his subjects. You see how Popish Priests advance
them selves, to the honor of God, and withdraw their obedience from Gods
Lieutenaunts on earth. An undoubted note of Antichristians. You will ask me
then, what sense these words have, you can not be judged of men? I answer
either they are meant, as Saint Paul speaks, of the vprightnes of his
conscience in doing of his office, which is not subject to the judgment of
men, or else Ruffinus as he was a bold reporter, frames the Emperors words,
according to that estimation which he would have men to have of the clergy.
For it is certain by records of Constantinus time, that he did judge
Bishops and took upon him as supreme governor in ecclesiastical causes,
Master Sander confesses, he judged certain Priests, or ecclesiastical
causes, but he did it as Augustine says, Epist. 162. as one that would
afterward ask pardon of the holy Bishops, at the importunity of the
Donatists: And as Optatus records he said, Deschis. lib. 1. Petitis a me etc.
Ye ask of me judgment in the world, whereas I my self look for Christ's
judgment. And Augustine reproves the Donatistes that they would have an
earthly King to be judge of their cause. In deed the importunity of the
Donatistes was wicked who would so refer the matter to the Emperor, yt
without knowledge of ecclesiastical persons, who were only meet judges in
respect of knowledge in that case, they would have ye cause decided. But the
Emperor acknowledging his auctoririe appointed judges ecclesiastical persons,
first the Bishop of Rome Melchiades, whom he commanded with other Bishops to
hear the cause of Caecilianus, as Eusebius who ^ued in his time writes li.
10. ca. 5. And when the Donatists appealed from the Bishops of Rome and his
companions judgment, he appointed other delegates, as Augustine also
witnesses. Ep. 162.

But to leave this cause of the Donatistes Eusebius in his life libr. 1. says
of him: Quoniam nonnulli variis locis inter se discrepabant, quasi communis
quidem Episcopus a Deo constitutus, ministrorum Dei synodos conuocauit, ne^
dedignatus est adesse, and considere in illorum medio. Because some of them in
diverse places were at variance among them selves, he as a certain general
Bishop appointed of God, called together the synodes of the ministers of God,
and disdayned not to be present, and to sit in the midst of them. And in lib.
3. He shows how he gathered the universal synod of Nice, as it were
leading forth the army of God to battle. To this Emperor did Athanasius the
great, Bishop of Alexandria, appeal from the synod of Tire, where he was
injuriously handled, as both Socrates testifies lib. 1. and the very Epistle
of Constantine him self unto that synod, commanding all the Bishops to
come unto his presence, and there to show before him, (quem syncerum esse Dei
ministrum neque vos sane negabitis, whom you can not deny to be a sincere
minister of God) how sincerely they had judged in that council. Finally in the
end of the epistle he protests, that he will execute his supremacy in causes
ecclesiastical. Omni virtute conabor ag^re quaten^s quae in lege Dei sunt ea
praecipue sine aliqu^ titubatione seruentur quibus vtique neque vituperatio
neque mal^ superstitio poteris implicari dispersis vtique ac palam contritis,
and penitus exterminatis sacratissimae legis inimicis, qui sub schemate sancti
nominis blasphemas varias ad diuersos inijciant. I will endeavor with all my
might to bring to pass, that those things that are in the law of God, those
chiefly without any staggering may be observed, which by no reproof or evil
superstition can be entangled, when all the enemies of the most holy law^,
which under a shape of an holy name, do cast out diverse blasphemies unto
sundry persons, are dispersed and openly trodden down, and utterly rooted out.
Let this suffice to show what supremacy Constantinus did exercise in causes
Ecclesiastical. Now Master Sander draws us to see, what honor he gave to
the sea of Rome.

First he takes it for most certain, that Constantine was baptized by
Syluester, which is an impudent lie and forged fable, as is manifest by
Eusebius, who lived in his time and after him, who knew him familiarly, and
affirms that he was baptized in his journey toward Iordane, where he had
purposed to have been baptized, if God had spared him life. But this manifest
testimonye of Eusebius, Master Sander refuses, because he was suspected for
affection to the Arrian heresi^. Beside that he was unjustly suspected, what
reason is it, to discredit his story, who wrote at such time, as many thousands
alive could disprove him, for any affection to that heresy, whereto the
baptism of Constantine pertayned nothing in the world? As for the stones and
pillars of marble, in which any such matter is graven, bearing the name of his
baptistry except Master Sander could prove, that they were set up in his
time, are simple witnesses against the historye of Eusebius, which lived in his
time. Nether the forged pontifical of Damasus, nor the writings of Beda. Ado,
Marianus, Gregorius Turene^sis, Zonarus, Nicephorus late writers, following the
fable of the Romish Church, are of any credit in respect of Eusebius, and the
eldest writers of the Ecclesiastical story, that agree with Eusebius that he
was not baptized many years after Syluester was dead.

And concerning the donation of Constantine, it is too absurd for any wise man
to defend, which has been so long before disproued by Laurentius Valla, no
enemy of the Romish religion, although a discouerer of that fable. Again his
forsaking of the city of Rome, and building of Constantinople, is as great a
fable, for although he bewtified Byzantium, and made it an imperial city, as
placed conveniently to keep the Oriental Empire, yet he forsook not Rome,
but still retained it as the chief see of his Empire, so did the Emperors
that followed him, until (after it was wasted by the barbarous nations,) they
made less account of it. And therefore although Constans the Nephew of
Heraclius could not conveniently remove thither, yet he removed from thence
what he thought good, by which it appeared he had authority in the city, by
the providence of God and not by chance, as M. Sander dreameth, that he was
prohibited by Gods providence in respect of the Popes supremacy, or else the
world should be governed by chance.

But leaving Constantinus the father, we must come to Constantius his son
which was an Arrian, of whom Athanasius complayneth, that he had no reverence
of the Bishop of Rome Ep. ad Solit. vit. again. nether considering that it was
an Apostolic see, nor that Rome was the mother city of the Roman Empire.
There were other Apostolikes sees beside Rome, and the Christian world was
larger then the Roman Empire, therefore this makes nothing for the singular
prerogative of that see.

But the noble Emperors Gratianus, Valentinianus and Theodosius made a law,
lege 1. Cod. de sum. trinit That all their people should continue in that
religion, as the religion which is used from S. Peter unto this day does
declare him to have delivered to the Romans, and which it is evident that
Bishop Damasus does follow, and Peter Bishop of Alexandria a man of Apostolic
holiness. This law proves, that the Emperors had authority in Ecclesiastical
causes. And that they joined the Patriarch of Rome with the Patriarch of
Alexandria, not because he of Alexandria agreed with him of Rome, but because
they both agreed with Peter, and Peter with Christ.

From these Emperors, he comes to Bonifacius, who writing to the Emperor
Honorius, and humbly desiring his aid to appease the tumults of his Church,
uses these words. Ecclesiae meae cui Deus noster meum sacerdotiu^ (vobisres
humanas regentibus) deputauit, cura constringit, ne causis eius quamuis adhuc
corporis incommoditate detinear, propter conu^ntus qui a sacerdotibus
vniuersis, and cl^ricis, and Christianae plebis perturbationibus agitantur,
apud aures Christianissimi principis desim. The care of my church to which our
God has deputed my priesthood, while you govern the affairs of men, does
bind me, that although I am yet withholden by infirmity of body, I should not
be wanting to the causes thereof in the hearing of a most Christian Prince, by
reason of the meetings that are held of all the Priests and the Clergy with
the perturbations of the Christian people. These words show, that the Emperor
was supreme governor in causes Ecclefiasti^^ll, for he writes concerning the
election of the Bishop. To whom the Emperor answers making a law against
the ambitious laboring for succession, that if two Bishops should be chosen,
they should be both banished out of the city. Con. To. 1. and did. 97. I have
set down the words at large to show the shameful salsification of M.
Sander, who sets them down absolutely thus. Mihi Deus noster mewn
sacerdotium vobis res humanas rege^tibus deputauit. Our God has appointed my
priesthood to me, whereas you do govern worldly matters. As though he had
denied to the Emperor, all government in Ecclesiastical causes, when he
flies to his authority in a cause Ecclesiastical, and does not only
acknowledge him to be a conseruer of civil peace as M. Sander would have it.

To Honorius he joins Galla Placidia the Emperesse in her epistle to
Theodosius, set before the council of Chalcedon, Assirming that Peter ordained
the primacy of the Bishoply office in the sea Apostolic. Thus wrote the
Emperesse or her Secretary, and so it was taken in that time. The like says
Valentinianus in his Epistle to Theodosius his father, that antiquity gave the
chief^y of priestly power to the Bishop of the city of Rome. And Martianus
with Valentinian confess that the Synod of Chalcedon inquired of the faith by
the authority of Leo Bishop of the everlasting city of Rome. Add hereunto
that the council it self confesses Act. ^. that Leo was over them as the
head over the members. All these prove in deed a primacy of the Bishop of Rome
acknowledged in those days, but not such a primacye as is now claymed. For the
same council and Emperors decreed that the sea of Constantinople in the East
should have the same authority that the sea of Rome had in the West, the title
of senioritie only reserved to the Bishop of Rome. Although the Bishop of
Rome, Leo by letters and his legates in the council cried out against it as
loud as they could. Cont. Chal act. 16. namely Lucentius cried. Seeds
Apostolica etc, The Apostolic sea ought not to be abased in our presence etc.
but all the synod and the Judges continued in their decree.

The saying of Justinian in cod de sum. trinit. is examined and answered in
the 69. article of M. Sanders treatise which is the true Church, before his
book of Images, as also the sayings of the Bishop of Patara, of Eugenius
Bishop of Carthage, and Gregory Bishop of Rome. The report of the council of
Sinuessa is too full of corruption and confusion to be credited for
authentical authority.

And yet it is plain that Marcellinus the Bishop of Rome was convicted by
witnesses to have committed Idolatry, before he confessed the sin, and
received sentence of condemnation and accursing of the Synod, howsoever that
patche is thrust in after the Acts of the council, prima seeds, etc. the
first see is not judged of any, which in every counterfeit decretall epistle
almost must have a place.

To prove that Phocas did not first make the sea of Rome head of all Churches,
when the history is plain he did, M. Sander brings in these and such like
alledgged before, which acknowledged a certain primacie of the sea of Rome.
And certain it is the Bishops of Rome before Phocas time, affected a great
primacie, which of many was acknowledged, but yet never absolutely, never
without controversy, until Phocas for a great sum of money received of
Boniface the third, struck the stroke, and made the decree, for which in all
popish writers he is highly praised: although in the Greek church his decree
was not long observed. Touching the examples of Emperors and Princes of later
times, although I could show they have often resisted the Pope, yet I know
many may be alleged that have submitted them selves to his Antichristian
tyranny, which I will not stand to examine, because they can be no prejudice to
the truth approved by examples of the eldest age. As for the history of Lucius
king of Britayne, that sent to Eleutherius for preachers, if it were true, it
makes nothing for the supremacy of the romish Bishop. I will therefore
conclude this chapter, with a saying of Socrates in proe. lib. 5. to show what
authority he judged them perours to have in Ecclesiastical matters. Etipsos
quidem Imperatores hac historia continua complectimur, pr^pterea quod ab illis
postquam Christiani esse coeperunt, res Ecclesiasticae pendent, and maximae
Synodi ex illorum sententia and congregatae sunt and congregantur. And in this
continual history we comprehend the Emperors them selves, because that upon
them, since they began to be Christians, the matters of the Church depend, and
the greatest synods have been gathered and are gathered by their authority.
The punishment he threat^eth to them that forsake the Church of Rome, shall one
day fall upon them that take part with ^ Church of Rome, as in part it does
already.

The 17. chapter.
THeir doctrine who teach the Bishop of Rome to be A^^ichrist Sander.
him self is confuted by the authority of Gods word, and by the consent of
ancient fathers. Why Antichrist is permitted to come.

AFter he has showed his opinion, what manner a one Fulke.
Antechrist shall be, and alleged ^^^^ cause of his coming out of S. Paul 2.
These. 2. because men have not received the love of the truth, that they might
be saved, God shall send the^ the working of error, yt they may believe lying,
etc. he stormeth out of measure against the Protestants, for that they can find
no place to setle Antichrist in, but in the sea of Rome, so beautified and
dignified by Christ, and all the primitive Church: But seeing Antichrist is
appointed to sit in the temple of God, which is a higher place then S. Peter's
chayer, it is no marvel if Satan have thrust him into that see, which of old
time was accounted the top and castle of all religion.

But let us see his reasons taken out of Gods word, by which it is proved, that
the Pope can not be Antichrist him self. The first is, because in S. Paul he
is called (...) etc. the man of sin which signifies one singular man, and
not a number of men in succession, and this is affirmed to be the Greek
article in this word man, by Cyrillus in Joan. lib. 1. cap. 4. But how friendly
Cyrillus was deceived, you shall see, by some examples, even out of the new
Testament. In S. Matthew cap. 12. 35. you have (...). A good man out of the good
treasure of his heart, and an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart
brings etc. where no one singular man is meant.

In S. Mark cap. 2. verse. 27. The Sabbath was made (...) for man and not man
for the Sabbath. In S. Luke cap. 4. verse. 4. Not with bread only (...) a man
shall live, but by every word of God. S. Paul. 2. Tim. 3. ver. 17. That the
man of God (...) may be perfect and prepared to every good work. These places
and an hundredth more which might be brought, do prove, how vain the
argument is thatis taken of the nature of the Greek article. Nether is Hierom
or any of the ancient writers to be heard without authority of the Scripture,
which supposed that Antichrist should be one man. Although none of them
directly affirms that he should be one man, as Christ was. Hierom in Dani.
cap. 7. says we must not think that Antichrist should be a Devil, but one of
the kind of men in whom Satan should dwell. This proves not that he should be
a singular man, no more then the fourth beast, which signifies the Roma^e
Empire, out of which he should rise, should be one singular Emperor. No more
does it prove that because Antiochus was a figure of him, he must be but one
man. And as little that Ambrose in 2. The. 2, says, Satan shall appear in
homine, in a man, which may signify the kind of men and not one singular
person. Likewise Augustine calling Antichrist the Prince, and last Antichrist,
means no one person for the words Prince and last, may agree to a whole
succession of men in one state, as well as the words king and beast, to a
whole succession of Emperors in Daniel. To conclude, there is not one whom he
names, that denies Antichrist to be a whole succession of me^, in one state
of deuilish government. And Irenaeus thinks it probable of the Roman
kingdom, lib. 5.

The second argument is, that Antichrist is called the adversary, and therefore
is the greatest enemy of Christ, denying Jesus Christ to be God and man, or to
be our Mediator. I answer, the Pope does so, denying the office of Christ,
although with the devils, he confess in words, Jesus to be the holy one of
God, and to be Christ the son of God. Mark 1. 24. Luke. 4. 41. his divinity
the Pope denies, by denying his only power in saving, his wisdom in his word
to be only sufficient, his goodness in the virtue of his death to take away
both pain and guylt of sin, which he arrogateth to him self by his
blasphemous pardons. Christ's humanity he denies by his transsubstantiation,
his mediation, in which he is principally Christ, he denies by so many means
of salvation as he makes, beside Christ videlicet man's merits, ceremonies
invented by man, pardons, a new sacrifice of the Mass, etc.

The third argument is, that Antichrist shall not come, before the Roman
Empire be clean taken away. For that which Saint Paul says, ye know what
withholdeth, etc. Although it be not necessary to expound this of the Roman
Empire, yet following the old writers that so understood it, I say the Roman
Empire was removed before Antichrist the Pope was thoroughly enstalled. For
beside that the sea of the Empire was removed from Rome, the government it
self was in a manner clean removed, the title of the Roman Emperor only
remaining, at last an other Empire by the Pope was erected in Germanye, whereof
little beside a name remains at this day, the Pope clayming authority of both
the swords, and he that is the Emperor in title, if he have no lands of his
own inheritance, scarce equal with a Duke by dominion of his Empire.

The fourth argument is, that the deeds and doctrine of Antichrist against
Christ, must be open and without all dissimulation, because Saint Paul makes
a difference between the mysterye of iniquity, and the open showing of
Antichrist. I answer, they are open to all faithful Christians, although they
be hid from such as be deceived by Antichrist. Here M. Sander answers to
that which he supposes might be objected, that some gloses of ye canon law,
call the Pope God, or make him equal with Christ, yea they call him God above
all Gods: but he thinks to avoid it by saying, they call him not God by
nature, but by office under Christ, where they say he is equal with Christ.
This bla^phemy will not so easily be excused. Nether is it to be thought that
any man will ever call him self God by nature. But to omit these flattering
gloses of the canon law, does not the Pope exalt him self above all that is
called God and worshipped as God. When he commands to abstain from meats
and marriage, whereof God has created the one and instituted the other, as good
and holy, for greater goodness and holiness then God created or instituted in
them. Does he not exalt him self above God the redeemer, when he affirms his
redemption to be, either only from sins committed before baptism, ^or only
from the guilt of sin whereas his popish pardons can absolve from both. Does he
not extol him self above God the holy Ghost, when he takes upon him to
sanctify the creatures of the world, otherwise then God has sanctified them
to apply the merits of Christ, otherwise then Gods holy spirit works
application by faith, etc.

The 5. argument is, that Antichrist should be received most specially of the
Jews, of which he brings the opinion of diverse old writers, but because
the Scripture says no such thing, but contrary that he shall sit in the
Church of God. We deny the antecedent or proposition of this argument. But M.
S. alleges the saying of Christ Joan. 5 I came in my fathers name, and ye
have not received me, if another come in his own name ye will receive him. This
other man says M. S. is Antichrist, and so expounded by the ancient fathers.
I answer they have no ground of this exposition. For Theudas the Egyptian,
Cocabas, and such like, deceived the Jews in their own name, yet none of them
was this Antichrist.

The 6. argument is, that Antichrist according to the prophecy of Daniel cap.
7. and the interpretation of Hierom, shall subdue 3. kings, the kings of Egypt,
Africa, and Ethiopia, which seeing the Pope has not done, he is not
Antichrist, I answer, Nether Hierom nor any Ecclesiastical writer, whom he
follows, has any directition out of the Scripture, for this interpretation,
wherefore it is more like, that the Emperor is the little horn which first
diminishing as it were a third part of the strength of the fourth beast, at
length began utterly to oppress and destroy it, I mean ye common wealth of
Rome.

The 7. reason is, Antichrist shall prevail in his reign but 3. years and an
half, Dan 7. which time the Apocal^se calls 42. months. I answer, this
time must not be limited by measure of man, but as God has appointed it.
Daniell names no years, but a time, times, and half a time. And Hierom in his
account of 1293 days differs from S. John Apoc. 12. 6. who sets them
down 1260. days.

The 8. reason is, that Helias shall come at the time of Antichrist, as
Hippolitus, Augustine, Hierom and Theodoret teach, who is not yet come,
although the Pope have long flourished. I answer, The Scripture speaks of no
coming of Helias, but of Christ's two witnesses, which have never failed in
the greatest heat of the popish tyranny. Apoc. 11.

The 9. reason is, that Antichrist shall be of the try be of Dan, by the
^^inion of Irenaeus, Hippolitus, Theodoretus, and Gregory, whereas the Popes
are of no such ^ribe. I answer, the Scripture has not reu^aled any such
matter, nether does Irenaeus rest upon that opinion, but judges he may well be
the king of the Roman Empire, saying very wisely. Certius ^rgo and sine
periculo est sustin^re ad^^pletionem prophetiae, qua^ susp^car^ etc. Therefore
it is more certain and without danger, to tarry the fulfilling of the
prophecy, then to surmise etc. Again if this opinion should be true, he
should not rise out of the Roman Empire, as all old writers have consenced
he must, according to the prophecye.

The 10. argument is, that Antichrist shall not come before the later end of
the world as August ne and Theodoretus judged. but Gregory seeing the ambition
of John of Constantinople affirmed, that the time of the revelation of
Antichrist was even at hand, and that the same John was the forerunner of
Antichrist, and Antichrist should shortly be reucaled, and an army of Priests
should wait upon him. Now seeing he, whosoever took that which John refused,
by Gregory's judgment should be Antichrist, and it is certain, that Pope
Boniface the 3. soon after the death of Gregory and his successors, usurped
not only that, but more also, it is certain by Gregoryes prophecye, that the
Pope is Antichrist. Who being within the 600. years, answers to M. Sanders
fond challenge. And although none within that compass had pointed out the sea
of Rome, yet the fulfilling of the prophecye in the later times, did
sufficiently declare who it should be. And most of the ancient writers name
Rome to be the sea of Antichrist. Although they could not foresee that the
Bishoprike of that see should degenerate into the tyranny of Antichrist. M.
Sander answers, that Tertullian and Hierom, call Rome Babylon, because of
the confusion of tongues of di^ersenations, that hau^ted thither in time of the
Emperors. And the Rome was full of Id ^any, and did perse^ute the Saints and
namely more t^^n 30 Bishops of Rome. The reason of tongnes is very absurd, and
not given by any of those writers. As for Idolatry and persecuting of
Saints, although it might be said in time of Irenaeus, and Tertullian, yet
could it not be said in the days of Hierom, Augustine, Ambrose, Primasius, and
a number that lived in time of the Christian Emperors. And whereas Hierom ad
Algasiam, expounds the name of blasphemye written in the foreheade of the
purple harlet to be Rome everlasting, it agrees very well unto the sea of the
Popedom, which they boast to be eternal, although the Empire of Rome shall be
clean taken away. For M. Sander him self likes well the title given by
Martianus and Valentinianus to Leo, whom they call Bishop of the everlasting
city of Rome. cap. 16.

But whereas Rome is the city builded upon seven hills, spoken of in the
Apocalypse cap 17. M. Sander cou^teth it a childi^he argument, to prove the sea
of Antichrist to be there, for that the city is now gone from the hills, and
stands in the plain of Campus Martius, and the Pope sits on the other
side of the river, upon the hill Vatican hard by Saint Peter's Church, by
whom he holds his chair, not at all deriuing his power from the seven
hills, etc. But if the Pope sit now in an other Rome, then Peter the Apostle
satte, how will Master Sander persuade us, that he fitteth in the chair of
Peter. For that Rome where Peter satte, was builded upon seven Hills, and not
gone down into the plain of Campus Martins, nor over the River. Beside this
it is plain, that although the people have removed their habitations from the
hills, yet the Pope has not, for on them be still to this day his Churches,
Monasteryes, and courts. For on the Mount Caelius be the monastery of Saint
Gregory, the church of John and Paul, the Hospital of our Savior, the round
Church, the great Minster of Laterane, in which are said, to be the heads of
the Aposiles Peter and Paul, and the goodlyest buildings in the world, where
the Bishops of Rome dwelled until the time of Nicolas the second, which was
almost eleven hundredth years after Christ.

The Mount Auentinus, has three Monastetyes, of Sabina Bonifacius, and Alexius.

The Mount Exquilinus, has the Church of Saint Peter himself surnamed Ad
vincula.

The Mount Viminalis has the Church of S. Laurence in Palisperna, and S.
Potentiana.

The Mount Tarpeius or Capitoline, has an house of Friars Minors called Ara
Coeli. And there did Boniface the ninth build a fair house of Brick for
keeping of Courts.

The Mount Palatinus, is a place called the great Palace, and has an old
Church of S. Nicolas and of S. Andrewe.

The Mount Quirinalis is not altogether void of habitation, to which
appertains the Church of S. Maria de populo.

The city with 7. hills is still the sea of Antichrist, described by S. John at
such time as those 7, hills were most of alinhabited and garnished with
sumptuous buildings. But M. S. to darken the prophecy says, Those 7. hills
be the fulness of pride in secular princes, to whom the Protestants commit the
supreme government of the church. I will not speak of this contumely that he
blows out against christian Princes, neither will IN stand to prove that 7.
hills in that place are taken literally, which is an easy matter because 7.
hills are the exposition of 7. heads of ye beast, but how will M. S or all the
Papists in the world deny the city of Rome to be that Babylon and see of
Antichrist, When the Angel in the last verse of the chapter says, And the
woman which thou saw is that great city which has dominion over the Kings
of the earth: which if any man say was any other City then Rome, all learning
and learned men will cry out against him. The sea being found, it is easy to
find the person by S. Paul's description, and this note especially that
excludes the heathen tyrants, he shall sit in the temple of God, which when
when we see to be fulfilled in the Pope, although none of the eldest fathers
could see it, because it was performed after their death, we nothing doubt to
say and affirm still, that the Pope is that man of sin and Son of
perdttion, the adversary that lifts up himself above all that is called God,
and shall be destroyed by the spirit of the Lords mouth, and by the glory of his
coming.

The 18. Chapter.
NOT the Pope of Rome, but the Protestants them selves are the members of
Antichriste, by forsaking the Catholic Sander.
Church, by setting up a new Church and by teaching salse doctrine against
the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Heretics depart from the Catholic Church.
Heretics being once departed out of the Church, have new names. Why among
the Catholics some are called Franciscanes, Dominicanes, etc. Heretics can
never agree The short reign of Heretics. Heretics preach without commission.
Heretics do prefer the temporal reign or swoorde before the spiritual.
They are the members of Antichrist, who withstand the external and publke
sacrifice of Christ's Church. Heretics deprive Christ of his glorious
inheritance in many nations together. The intolerable pride of Heretics, in
making them selves only Judges of the right sense of Gods word. The
Protestants teach the same doctrine which the old Heretics did. The
Protestants are the right members of Antichriste, in that they spo^le Gods
Church of very many gifts and graces and articles of the faith.

HE makes 11. marks of an Antichristian. The 1. is. Fulke,
They depart from the church as all her^ti^s do. I answer, the Protestants
have not depart^d from the Church of Christ, but are gone out o^ the Church of
Antechrist, according as they are comm^unded by the holy Ghost ^poc. 18. 4. and
are returned to the ^h^^ch of Christ, which by the Pope and the d^uill was
driven into the wilderness, Apoc. 22. 6. But M Sand would have the place named,
where they dwelt, from whom the Pope departed, as though the place were
mate^iall, when his depa^ture from the doctrine of Christ, is manifest.

And Saint Paul prophes^ed of the great Apostasy and departing from Christ,
which Antechrist should make. 2 ^hess 2. to him self and his own doctrine,
as Irenaeus does expound it. ^^b. 5. and Basi. Ep. 71. which all nations
peoples and tongues should embrace. Ap^^. 18. 3. therefore it were no marvel,
if no place could be named, altogether void of the insection of Ant^christ,
especially seeing the Church her self was driven into the desert, that is out
of the sight of men. yet there is no donbt, but God preserved his Church,
though in small numbers, both in the East and in the West. And namely one part
of the Church of God was in Britain, both in Wales and Scotland, not subject
to the Pope, nor acknowledging his auctority, at such time, as Augustine the
monk came from Pope Gregory, and so con^nued long after the revelation of
Antechrist. Bed. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 2. lib. 3. cap. 25. And no doubt but the
like was in many corners of the world.

The 2. mark of an Antechristian he makes, to have new names after they be
gone out of the Church, as, Lutherans, Zwinglians, etc. whereas they have none
but Catholics, yes verily, the name of the Popish Church and Papists, is as
ancient as the name of Luther and Luthe^ans, and more aunciente to. M. Sand.
says we give them these names of spite, eight or nine hundredth ye^res since
the papacy Began. The like I say of them, who call us Lutherans etc. of mere
malice, when we are nothing but Christians, wherefore the trial must be in the
doctrine, which either sort profess, and not in names.

The Christians of the Arians were called Homousians, Athanasians. etc. but the
doctrine of the Cathotholike Christians ag^eeing with the words of God proved
them to be no s^ctaryes nor Hetetikes, so does our doctrine justify us what
names soever be devised against us. But Ma^ster Sander would have us to show
a man, whose p^oper name was Papa or Romanus as though many Heretics were not
called of their hearisie or place from whence they came, and not of proper
names of men. Angelici, Apostolici, Barbarita, Cathari, Collyridiani,
En^ratitae, Patripassiani and a great number more were called of their heresy,
Cataphryges, Pepuziani and such like were called of the place where they were.
Wherefore the name of Papists and Romanistes agrees ^ith the example of old
heretics. As for the long tarying, large spreadinge, and strange commng in
of the Popish heresy is therefore without example, in all points like,
because Ant^christ is not a common pettit heretic, but the greatest and most
dangerous enemy that ever the Gospel had.

The names of Benedictines, Fraunciscanes etc. Master Sander would excuse,
because these sects maintain no doctrine, dissenting from the Pope, but all
seek the perfectiou of the Gospel by diverse ways, as though there were any
other way but Jesus Christ. Saint Paul 1. Cor. 1. condemns the holding of
Peter, of Paul, of Apollo, when the Doctrine was all one, and counts them
schismatikes, that so did. And the purer P^imatiue church, condemned such apish
immitators of the Apostles in forsaking all things and possessing nothing, in
abstayning from Marriage etc. for Heretics, and called them Apostolicos,
witness Epiphan. Cont. Aposto. haer, 61.

The third Mark of an Antichristian, is, dissagreement among Heretics: and
here not content to charge us with the dissagreeing of Anabaptists from us,
he amplysieth the dissension between Luther and Zwinglius, about the presence
of Christ's body in the sacrament, for which contradiction, he thinks it
must needs follow that one of them is an Antichriste.

I answer every error stifely mayntayned, makes not an Heretic, except it
be in an article of faith necessary to salvation.

Cyprian against the Byshopps of Rome Stephanus and Cornelius, held an error
in Baptism, as great as that same of Luther, dissenting from Zwinglius in the
Supper of the Lord, yet is not Cypryan accoumpted for an Heretic. Master
Sander replyeth and says, that Cyprian was not so stubborn, that he would
excommunicate them that held the contrary.

Luther also and Zwinglius, although they could not be reconcyled in
opinions, yet agreed to abstain from contention, at Marpurge Anno domini. 1529
Sleid. lib. 6. Master Sander says, further, that in the contention of
Cyprian, and Stephanus, the Catholic Faith was not fully and universally
received in any general Council. But he forgeteth that the Bishop of Rome
was one party, whose judgment should have ended the striefe if his authority
had been such then, as he usurped most ambiciously afterward.

Now where as he defends the Papists for their unity, which he says,
could not be with out the spirit of God, I aunsweare he might as well defend
the Doctrine of the Mahometistes, where is greater unity then ever there was
among the Papists: who to omit an hundredth small contentions of the
schoolmen, are not yet agreed, of the greatest question of all, whether the
Pope be above the council or the council above the Pope. For seeing some of
the Papists, make the Popes determination to be the rule of truth, other make
the council, there is no unity among the Papists in truth, when they are not
agreed what is the only rule of truth: whereas we all agree, that the word of
God is the only rule of truth, whereby we would have all doctrine tried and
examined.

The fourth mark of an Antichrist, is, to reign but a short time, and here he
would have us to mark how Luthers kingdom is come to an end, whose
doctrine Melancthon has changed although Illyricus would defend it. What
deep root ye doctrine of God delivered by Luther, has taken, it is so well
known, that it can not be dissembled. Neither has Melancthon departed from
him, except it were in his opinion of the real presence. Wherefore this is a
great impudency, to triu^phe over the decay of Luthets doctrine, which daily
increases, to the overthrow of the Popish kingdom.

The fall of Hosiander an heretic, no man either marueleth or pitieth. The
doctrine of Zwinglius and Oecolampadius of the Sacrament is the same that
Calvin teaches, as every wise man does know, and their learned works shall
live and be in honor, when the Popes decretalls and his Mass books etc. shall
stop mustard pottes, and be put to viler uses.

Neither is Caluines doctrine failed, by our oath of supremacy, for Calvin in
the right sense of it, taught the same supremacy of Christian Princes which we
swear to acknowledge, in our sovereign.

Neither does Beza teach any otherwise of the descending of Christ into hell,
then Calvin did, nor otherwise expounded the place of the Psalm, cited in
Acts the 2. then Calvin does, as all men that will read them both may see,
notwithstanding the shameless cavil of M. Sander.

The long continuance of the Popish kingdom, is a small cause to brag of,
when it being sound enemy to the kingdom of Christ, is now entered so far
into destruction, out of which it shall never escape, although Master Sander
says it does flourish, when it is banished out of so many regions and daily
decreaseth in every place, Gods holy name be praised therefore.

The fifth mark of Antichrist (he says) is to preach without commission, as
Luther did, who was sent of none. I answer in the state of the church, so
miserably deceived, as it was in his time, God sends extraordinarily,
immediately from him self, as Helias and Helizaeus and the Prophets were sent
to the Jews and Israelites, which were not of the Priests and ordinary
teachers, so Christ sent his Apostles and Evangelists. And so was Luther and
such as he sent to repair the ruins of the church. And yet the Papists have
small advantage against the calling of Luther, seeing he was a Doctor,
authorized to preach in that church, where he first began, which after he
had reformed the abuses thereof, and restored true doctrine in many points
banished, by the false doctrine of Antichrist. The same reformed church has
ever since sent forth ordinary pastors and teachers and shall do to the end
of the world.

The sixth mark of an Antichrist is, that heretics prefer the temporal
sword before the spiritual. And therefore Antichrist shall by force of arms
compel men to a new faith, for he shall come as S. Paul says in virtute,
that is to say in power or strength. O impudent falsifier of the holy
Scripture, does not Saint Paul say that his coming shall be according to the
efficacy of Satan in all power and signs and lying wonders, and in all
deceitfulnes of unrighteousness, 2. These. 2. by which is showed seduction by
false doctrine, but he shall maintain his kingdom by cruelty, as it is
manifest in the Revelation cap. 13. and 17. etc. But M. Sander has a great
quarrel against the B. of Winchester for saying in his book against Feckenham,
that the civil Magistrate, may visit, correct, reform and depose any Bishop in
their own realm. Which is directly to say that the power of the King is
higher and greater in Gods church, then the power of a Bishop. And what
inconvenience is this, in things perteining to his office, seeing that the
Bishops power in his spiritual office of preaching ministering etc. is
confessed to be above the King? Hereby we make the body above the soul (says
M. Sander) the temporal reign above the kingdom of heaven. Not a whit, no more
the^ Solomon in deposing Abiather, and Christian Emperors in deposing proud
Bishops of Rome. Only this we say, that M. Sander dissembleth. The cause must
be just, for which ^ King should depose a Bishop or pastor, for! think there
is equal right in deposing of the greatest Bishop, and the poorest Priest from
his benefice. This latter was always lawful by the common laws upon just
cause. Now if the cause be just, it must be either manifest or doubtful. If it
be manifest as Abiathers was for murder, treason, adultery, etc. the King
observing the process of the law, as in all other men's causes, may proceed
against a Bishop. If the cause be doubtful, it is either for life or doctrine.
The trial of the Bishops life, ought to be as all other men's are, with due
consideration of his accusers. The trial of doctrine is not in the Kings
knowledge ordinarily but in the knowledge of the eccle siasticall state, who
are judges of the doctrine by reason of their knowledge, and to depose him from
his ministry by reason of their calling, if he be culpable, and the King has
power to exclude him from his place and from his life also if his offense
deserve it. But that in spiritual matters the King should rule ye Bishops, and
pastors otherwise then Gods word would have them ruled, none of us did ever
affirm: for that were tyranny and not Christian government. And of such
tyranny of Constantius the Arrian Emperor, does Athanasius complain: In
Episi. ad sol. vit. agent. and show the judgment and aunsweres of the
Christian Bishops, Paulinus, Lucifer, Eusebius, Dionysius, Liberius, Hosius,
unto him, when he would have enforced them to subscribe against Athanasius, for
defending the eternal divinity of our Savior Christ.

But yet the same Athanasius, appealed, him self, to the godly Emperor
Constantinus the great, although in the end the Emperor being carried away by
multitude of false witnesses, as any mortal man may be, and deceived, as David
was about Mephibosheth, gave wrong sentence against him Socr. lib. 1. ca. 34.
And when the same Emperor in his letters before, threatened to depose him, if he
were disobedient, he never repined but acknowledged his auctority. Si cognouero
quod aliquos eorum qui ecclesiae student prohibueris, aut ab accessu ecclesiae
excluseris, mitta^ euestigio qui te meo iussu deponat ac locum tuum transferat.
If I shall know (says the Emperor) that thou will prohibit any of them that
favor the church or exclude them from entering into the church, I will send
one immediately which shall depose thee by my commandment, and remove thy
place. Socr. li. 1. ca. 27. Thus Athanasius judging Constantius the heretical
Prince for an Antichristian image, in usurping auctority in matters of faith
against the truth, obeieth Constantinus a defender of the truth, and seeks
aid of his auctority in ecclesiastical causes, according to the truth: M.
Sander fearing we would object against him that Constantinus, Martianus, and
other godly Emperors, used to sit in general councils with the Bishops,
replieth, that it was only to keep peace, whereas they did not only keep peace,
but also prescribe and commau^d the Bishops, to proceed according to Gods word
as Constantine did in the Nicene council. Euangelici enim etc. The books of
the Gospells and of the Apostles and the oracles of the ancient Prophets do
plainly instruct us in the understanding of God. Therefore setting all hateful
discord aside, let us take out of the sayings of Gods spirit, the explication
of the questions. They did also publish the decrees of the council by their
authority, like as they called the counsels together to make their decrees.

But Ambrose says Ep. 32. that even an heretical Emperor coming to years of
discretion, will be able to consider, what manner a Bishop he is, who lays the
Priestly right under the lay men's feet. By which (says M. Sander) you may see
what manner a Bishop M. Horn and his fellows be, wc give the most proud and
intolerable title of supreme head and governor, to lay Princes. I answer in
giving this title, they mean to take nothing from the right of the clergy,
and confess with Augustine, that there is no greater then a Priest in his
office, although Moses after the distinction was no Priest, but a civil
Magistrate and in his calling above Aaron, that was high Priest. And although
M. Sander say, this is the divinity of England only, to acknowledge the Prince
to be chief governor, he says most untruly, for all learned men of all
countries, do acknowledge the same, in such sort as we do in England, and not
as he in Flanders, either dreameth or slaundereth us to do. For we confess
with Valentinian the good Emperor, that the Prince must submit his head to his
godly pastor, in matters perteyning to his spiritual power Theodor. lib. 4.
cap. 5. And yet we allow the same Valentinian writing to the Bishops of Asia
and Phrigia Theodor. lib. 4. cap. 8. Qui omnes noxios daemones student abigere
precibus suis etc. They which study by their prayers to drive away all
hurtful deuells, know to submit them selves to public offices, according to
the laws, they speak not against the Emperors power, but they keep the
commandments of a sincere and great Emperor, and the commandments of
God, and are subject to our laws, but you are found disobedient. Finally we
never meant, to give the Prince by flatterie^, authority in such matters as
belong to Bishops alone, neither would we have a confusion, of the office of an
Emperor and a Bishop, wherefore neither the saying of Leontius to Constantius,
nor of Eulogius to Valens which were both heretics and would enforce men to
receive the heresy of Arrius, does any thing at all touch us, who limit the
supremacy of Princes, within the compase of Gods word, and Christian
religion, against which, neither Prince nor Priest has any authority to
command.

The seventh mark of Antichrist is, the withstanding of the external and
public sacrifice of the church, by which he means the sacrifice of the
Mass. Nay rather it is a setting up of a new altar and sacrifice
propitiatory, against the only propitiatory sacrifice of Christ's death once
offered, by which one oblation he has made perfect for ever, them that are
sanctified Heb. 10. The auctor of this sacrifice, which is the Pope, he is in
deed Antichrist the son of perdition.

But Master Sander for proof of the sacrifice of the Mass, alleges the
prophecy of Malachie cap. 1. with 16. fond comparisons of the defectes of the
Jews, and the perfection of the Gentiles, which he affirms to be the
uniform interpretation of the ancient fathers, of whom no one denies the
body and blood of Christ to be here meant, albeit some of them expounds this
prophecy of prayers and inward righteousness which are always joined with the
unbloody sacrifice. I answer no one of the ancient fathers, understands
this prophecy of the sacrifice of Christ's body and blood, otherwise then of a
sacrifice of praise and thanks giving, for proof whereof, I must refer the
reader to mine answer to M. Heskins lib. 1. cap. 33. 34. 35. and 36. where he
shall find the places of the Doctors set down, which are by M. Sander in
place only quoted.

But one other strange reason of M. Sander to prove the sacrament of the Lords
supper to be a sacrifice propitiatory, I may not omit because I remember not
that I have read it before. Every public and external fact which is made by
Gods authority to put us in mind of that great sacrifice, once fulfilled on
the cross, m^s^e also be partaker of the nature of that Sacrifice whereof it
is a remembrance. As if the killing of a Calfe, which signified the death of
Christ, was an external sacrifice, how infinitely more shall the body and
blood of Christ being made of bread and wine, to signify his own death be a
public and external sacrifice.

This reason M. Sander makes no small account of. But how beastly an
absurdity his principle is you shall easily perceive, if you consider, that
Baptism is a public and external fact made by Gods authority, to put us in
mind of the death and bloodshedding of Christ, yet no man was ever so mad, to
say baptism is a sacrifice. Again the Calfe that was killed was by Gods
appointment a sacrifice of the only and singular sacrifice of Christ's death,
and not by virtue of the signification, for the Jews had other ceremonies then
sacrifices, which did signify the death of Christ: But the Lords supper is not
by Gods appointment a sacrifice, therefore the signification cannot make it so.

The 8. mark of the false prophets of Antichrist, is to spoil Christ of his
inheritance, which God gave him in all nations, as the Protestants do, Which
for 8. or 9. hundredth years, can not show any nation, town or village, church
or chapel in the wide world, where they had public prayer. I answer, seeing
the spirit speaks expressly, of a general Apostasy, and of the flying of
the Church into the desert, it is no more derogation to the inheritance of
Christ, that his Church among many nations was in persecution under Antichrist
for 7. or 8. hundredth years, then that the same was in persecution under the
heathen Emperors, for 300. years and more. For the nations were then the
inheritance of Christ, in as glorious wise as when the Church flourished in
outward peace under the Christian Emperors. Yet was there towns and
countries, not only in France, Italy, and Germany, but also in the east part
of the world, great nations, among wc Christ had a visible Church, which were
never subject to the church of Rome. If M. S. reply that they held some errors
which we deny, as prayer for the dead etc. I answer, holding the only
foundation Jesus Christ, they might be true Christians, although they were
infected with some such errors as these.

The 9. Mark of Antichrist is, intolerable pride, to make him self judge of
the sense of Gods word, and of the text also. I allow this mark, and it
agrees to none that ever was so aptly, as to the Pope, whom the Papists
affirm, that he ca^ not err in the sense of the Scripture, who affirm that
he has authority to receive and reject what books of Scripture he will. But
M. Sa^der says this note agrees to us, and that we make our selves judges of
the sense of Gods word, and of the text. But we utterly deny that: for we make
the spirit of God in his word, judge of the interpretation. No says M.
Sander, and brings an example of these word's of S. Paul. He that joins his
virgin in marriage does well, and he that joins her not does better. Here upon
(says he) we ground this doctrine, Virginity is a better state and more
acceptable to God, then the state of marriage. This we grant in some respect,
as the Apostle speaks, but not simpyl. The question is of these words, he
does better what is meant thereby: M. Sander charge us to say, that S. Paul
means he does better in the sight of the world, which is an impudentlye, and
therefore al his foolish dialogisme, is a fighting with his own shadow. Beza
expounds he does better that is more commodiously, not in respect of the
world, but in respect of godliness, for the reasons before alleged by S. Paul,
and S. Paul him self is auctor of this interpretation verse 35. of that 7.
chap. 1. Cor. This I say for your commodity, when he exhorts to virginity.
And that his purpose was not absolutely and simply, to prefer virginity above
marriage, as a thing of it self more acceptable to God, it is plain by these
words. First he says, of virgins, I have no commandment of the Lord. But
he has a commandment, to prefer those things that are most acceptable to
the Lord. Secondly he says: I suppose this to be good for the present
necessity, by which words he does emply, that it is not always and absolutely
better, but at sometimes and in some respects, for them that have the gift of
continence, and for none other. So we hold virginity to be better then
marriage, according to the meaning of the best ancient writers, whereof some
were too great extollers of virginity, yet not like the Papists.

But M. Sander says the Protestants make them selves Judges, not only of the
meaning of Gods word, but also of the books them selves. For they reject not
only the book of wisdom, Tobie and the Machabees, with other such books, but
also the Epistle of S. James. Nay rather the Pope is Antichrist, for receiving
these books of Wisdom, Tobie, Machabees, wc were never received of the church
of the Israelits, nor of the vniuersalchurch of Christ for Canonical
Scripture, as I have often showed. And as touching ye Epistle of S. James, it
is a shameless slander of him to say, that the Protestants reject it, but we
must hear his reason. First Luther calls it a strawen Epistle. So Luther
called the Pope supreme head of the church, and the Mass a sacrifice
propitiatory, if Protestants be charged to hold whatsoever Luther sometime
held, and after repented. But the confession of Zurich with the consent of the
churches of Heluetia and Sabaudia, writes thus, of it. Iacobus ille dixit etc.
That James said, that works do justify, not speaking against Saint Paul,
otherwise he were to be rejected. Here says M. Sa^der, they think it
possible, that S. James might be contrary to Saint Paul, and so his Epistle
to be no holy Scripture. A wise collectio^ I promise you. S. Paul him self
said. If I my self or an Angel from heaven, should preach any other Gospel
then you have already received, let him be accursed. Ergo S. Paul thought it
was possible, yt him self or an Angel should be auctor of a new Gospel, and
so his preaching should not be ye Gospel. Who sees not ye madness of this
co^seque^ce.

But S. James his epistle (he says) has always been clearly admitted among
true Catholics, and for witness hereof he quoteth most impudenly Eusebius. lib. 1.
ca. 23. in which book and chapter, Eusebius clearly affirms that it is a
counterfeit epistle. I say not this to allow the judgment of Eusebius, but to
show the impudency of M. Sander. But he says we reject S. James because he
is contrary to our deuilesh doctrine of only faith. We teach only faith none
otherwise, the^ the apostle teaches, that a man is justified by faith, without
works. We teach not that a man is justified by a dead faith, which is void of
good works, but by a living faith which works by love. We say with Saint
James, if a man say he have faith and has not works, his faith shall not save
him. For Abraha^s faith, which was imputed to him for righteousness by God, was
not without good works, as appeared by his obedience in offering his son,
wherein God tried him, neither to know him, nor to justify him, whom he knew
and justified before, but to show his obedience and to justify him before
men. So it is true that S. James says a man is justified of works and not of
faith only. For a solitary srutles faith does not justify before God, but a
faith which is fruteful in good works is the only instrument to apprehend
justification, and the works as Augustine says follow and show a justified
man they go not before to justify. Thus our doctrine agrees very well with
the Epistle of S. James and Saint Paul's doctrine, wherefore we have no need
to reject the Epistle of Saint James, as contrary to our doctrine.

But the Protestants do not only make them selves judges of the whole books,
but also over the very letter (says he) of Christ's Gospel finding fault with
the construction of the Evangelists, and bring the text it self in doubt.
Example hereof he brings Beza in his annotations upon Luk 22. of the words:
This cup is the new Testament in my blood which is shed for you. In which text,
because the word blood in the Greek, is the dative case, the other word that
follows is the nominative case, Beza supposes that S. Luke uses a figure
called Soloecophanes, which is appearaunce of incongruity, or else that the
last word which is shed for you, might, by error of writers, being first set
in the marge^t out of Matthew and Mark, be removed into the text. Hereupon M.
Sander out of all order and measure, raileth upon Beza and upon al
Protestants. But I pray you good Sir, shall the only opinion of Beza, and that
but a doubtful opinion, in dite all the Protestants in the world of such high
treason against the word of God? For what gains Beza by this interpretation?
Forsooth the Greek text is contrary to his Sacramentary heresy. For thus he
should translate it: This cup is the new Testament in my blood which cup
is shed for you. Not the cup of gold or silver (says he) but the liquor in
that cup, which is not wine because wine was not shed for us, but the blood
of Christ. Why then the sense is this. This blood in the cup which is shed for
you is the new Testament in my blood. What sense in the world ca^ these words
have? By which it is manifest, that the words which is shed for you ca^ not be
referred to the cup, but to his his blood. For the cup was the new Testament
in his blood, which was shed for us, which sense no man can deny, but he that
will deny the manifest word of God. Neither does the vulgar Latin translation
give any other sense, although M. Sander is not ashamed to say it does. The
vulgar Latin text is this. Hic est calix nouum Testame^tum in sanguine meo
qui pro vobis fundetur. What grammarian in construing, would refer qui to
calix and not rather to sanguine. Again Erasmus translateth it even as Beza.
Hoc poculum nouum Testamentum per sanguinem meum qui pro vobis ^ffundit^r. Now
touching the conjecture of Beza, that those words by error of the scriuener,
might be removed from the margent into the text, is a thing that sometime has
happened as most learned men agree, in the 27. of Matthew where the name of
Jeremy is placed in ye text, for that wc is in Zachary, and yet neither of the
Prophets was named by the Evangelist, as in most ancient records it is
testified. The like has been in the first of Mark, where the name of Esaias is
set in some Greek copies, and followed in your vulgar translation, for that
which is cited out of Malachie which name was not set down by the Evangelist,
but added by some unskillful writer, and is reproved by other Greek copies. But
this place you say is not otherwise found in any old copy, as Beza confesses:
then remains ye second opinion, yt S. Luke in this place, uses Soloe
cophanes wc is an appearance of inco^g^uity, and yet no incongruitie. Wherein I
can not maruayle more at your malice (M. Sander) then at your ignorance, which
put no difference between soloecismus and soloecophanes, but even as spitefully
as unlearnedly, you affirm that Beza should teach, that S. Luke wrote false
Greek, whereas Soloecophanes is a figure used of the most eloquent writers
that ever took pen in hand, even Cicero, Demosthenes, Greek and Latin,
profane and divine, and even of S. Luke him self in other places, whereof for
examples, I refer you to Budaeus upon the word Soloecophanes. The appearance
of incongruitie is, that it seems, that (...), which is the nominative case,
should agree with (...), which is the dative case, whereas in deed (...) is used
as a relative for (...), as it is often, and the verb (...) which wants, is
understood, as it is commonly in the Greek tongue, and so the translation
must be hoc poculum nouum Testamentum est in sanguine meo, qui pro vobis
effunditur, or effusus est. So that this is nothing else, but an impudent and
unskillful quarelling, against Beza, whereas you Papists defend against the
manifest institution of the cup, and the practice of the primitive Church,
the communion in one kind of bread only Con. Constable. Sess. 13. 21.

The tenth mark of an Antichristian is to agree with the members of
Antichrist, which are heretics. To agree with them in heresy is a point of
Antichristianisme, I confess, but not to agree with them in any thing. For
every heresy affirms things that are true. But let us see in what points of
heresy he charge us to agree with the old heretics. First Eunomius said,
that no sin should hurt him, if he were partaker of the faith which he
taught, so the Protestants say of their faith. Yea sir, but their faith is not
Eunomius faith, and yet they say not that no sin shall hurt them, but no
sin shall condemn them: and so say you Papists of your popish faith.

Secondly Acesius the Nouatian Bishop affirmed, that mortal sins committed
after baptism, might not be forgiven of the Priest, but of God alone. The
Protestants deny the Priest to have any right to forgive sins. This is a loud
lie and false sclaunder, for we hold that the minister of God, has authority
to forgive all sins, that God will forgive, according to the power given to
them Joan. 20 But you Papists agree with the heretic in this point, that you
deny the Priest to forgive all sins according to the power given, but have
your casus Episcopales and Papales, by which you abridge the power given by
Christ.

Thirdly, the Messalians denied that baptism does pluck up the root of
sins, the same is the opinion of the Protestants. The Protestants have none
opinion common with the Messalians, who affirmed that our own merits and
satisfaction with prayers continual were necessary for plucking up the root of
sins, whereas we affirm, that baptism saves us according to the Scripture
1. Pet. 3. 21. by forgiveness of our sins, whereby even the root of sin is
plucked up, although co^cupiscense remain after the act of baptism, which
you Papists also confess to remain and to be the root of sin, although
you grant it not to be sin. But we limit not the effect of baptism, to the
time passed before ye act of baptism only, as you do, but extend it to our
aeternall salvation: he that believes and is baptized shall be saved. Mark 16.
16. Therefore you Papists both in this and in your continual lipplabor
maintained in your Abbeyes, agree with the Messalians.

Fourthly, AErius taught, that we must not pray for the dead, nor keep the
accustomed fastings, and that there is no difference between a Priest and a
Bishop. The superstition of praying for the dead, was justly reproved by
AErius, so was the fast of custom and decree rather then of consideration, for
the first that prayed for the dead were heretics, Montanists, as Tertullian
and his sect, the first that made prescript laws of fasting, was Montanus the
heretic also, as Eusebius witnesses lib. 5. cap. 18. Of the third opinion was
Hierom Euagrio, affirming that the distinction was made by men and not by God.

Fifthly, Iouinian judged virginity equal with marriage, so do the
Protestants. I have showed before how it is equal, and how it is superior.

Sixthly, S. Hierom reproves Vigilantius of heresy, for denying prayer to
Saints, and giving honor to relics. For praying to Saints, there is no
mention in S Hierom, the immoderate honoring of relics was justly reproved,
and yet it was not then the one half of that it has been since. Hieronym,
although he rather rail then reason against Vigilantius, as ^rasmus has
noted: yet he desendeth not the adoration or worshipping, but the reverent
estimation of relics.

Seventhly, the Arrians would not believe the consubstantiality of the same,
because that word was not written in the Scripture. So do the Protestants deny
many things upon the like pretense. This is a mere sclaunder. for we stand
upon the sense of the Scripture, and not the words only.

Eighthly, Eusebius notes it for an heinous impiety in Nouatus, that he was
not consummate with crisme, which the Protestants call greasing. In deed
Cornelius Bishop of Rome reports that Nouatus was baptized in time of
necessity being very like to dye. Iacens in lecto pro necessitate perfusus
sit, nec reliqua in eo qu^ baptismum subsequi solent solemniter adimpleta sunt:
nec signaculo Chrismatis consummatus sit: vnde nec spiritum sanctum vnquam
potuerit promereri. Lying in his bed according to the necessity he was
baptized, nether were the other things that are wont to follow baptism
solemnly fullfilled, nether was he consummate with ye seal of Chrisme: whereby
he could never obtain the holy Ghost. First I say this is noted as no
impiety in Nouatus, but as a defect of necessity. Secondly that the Chrisme
which Cornelius speaks of, was either a seal of the extraordinarye gifts of
the holy Ghost, which in some remained in the Church until that time, or else
he magnifieth that ceremony intollerably: to deny the holy ghost to such as had
it not, being none of the institution of Christ, and contrary to that the
Papists them selves hold at this day.

Ninethly, Lucius the Arrian persecuted holy Monks, so do the Protestants.
Nay they punish none but filthy, idle, Idolaters, and hypocrites.

Tenthly, the Montanists and Luciferians said there was a stews made of the
Church. They said so falsely when the Church was chaste. but Esaye say de
truly: how is the faithful city become an whore, when the Church of Israel
was so in deed.

Eleuenthly, the Donatists said the Church was lost from all the world, and
preserved only in Africa. So say the Protestants that the Church was lost in
all parts of the world, and raised up again in Germany. The Protestants say
not so. For the Church has been scattered over the face of the earth, since
the first preaching of the Apostles unto this day. But the Papists say that
the Church was lost out of all the world and preserved only in a part of
Europe, when of all parts in the world only a part of Europe, which is the
least part of the world, was subject to the Church of Rome.

Tweluethly, the Seu^rians used the law and the Prophets, but they perverted
the sense of the Scriptures by a certain peculiar interpretation of their
own. So do the Protestants. Nay so do the Papists, that submit all
understanding of the Scripture, be it never so plain, to the interpretation of
their Pope, and popish Church: as the commandment of Images forbidden, and
the cup to be received of all, do most manifestly declare.

Lastly, it has always been a trick of Jews and heretics to be still in
hand with translating holy Scriptures, that by changing they may get some
appearance of Scripture on their side, as Theodotion, Aquila, Symmachus. So do
the Protestants now. Hieronym was no heretic, yet did he translate the
Scriptures both into Latin and into the Dalmatian tongue. And the Papists
have played the part of Antichristian heretics, to confirm the vulgar Latin
translation, which is so manifestly corrupt and false, contrary to the truth of
the Hebrew and Greek textes upon pretense of avoiding uncertainty of
translatio^s, whereas there is none so bad as that.

I might here run through a great number of the old heresies, in which the
Papists consent with the ancient Heretics. The Valentinians in their cross.
Montanistes in their purgatory, and prescript fastings. Carpocratians in their
images. The Hemerobaptists in their holy water. The Offenes and Marcosianes in
their relics and strange tongue in prayers. The Heracleanites in annoynting
them that are ready to dye. The Caians in praying to angels. The Archonticks in
their cou^terfaite mo^kery. The Marcionists in extolling virginity and
fasting, and in permitting women to Baptize. The Enctatits in abstaining from
flesh. The Apostoliks in their vow of continence. The Cyrians in worshipping
the virgin Mary. The Pelagians in their opinion of merits and freewill. The
Eutychians in denyinge the truethe of Christ his body. The Anthromorphites in
making Images of God, and many other, but that I have done it elsewhere, more
at large. But of these, Epiphanius, Augustine, and others are witnesses.

The 11. and last mark is, that Antichristians should go about to make
void, and deny the supernatural graces which God has given to his Church, so
that the seal of Antichrist by Hippolitns judgment should be Nego I deny. So
do the Protestants which deny five sacraments of the church, the sacrifice of
the Mass. etc. And so makes rehearsal of a greatnumber of popish errors,
which indeed we deny, because they be contrary to the truth of Gods word.
Among which he rehearses some false and shameless slanders, as, that we
deny our sins to be taken away by the Lamb of God, saying they tarry still
but that they are not imputed. In deed, if we say we have no sin, we deceive
our selves, and the truth is not in us. But we say all the sins that we
have, are taken away, when they are not laid to our charge.

Secondly he charge us to teach, That no justice is at all made in us by
spreading charity in our hearts, Whereas S. Paul says Romans 5. many shall be
made just: but they say only that Justice shall be imputed. We say with
Saint Paul Romans 5. that being justified by faith we have peace with God,
rejoicing in hope, which does not confound us in the midst of afflictions,
because the love of God is powered forth in our hearts. I mean the love of
God toward us, and not our love toward him. We say likewise with Saint
Paul, that by the obedience of one which is Christ, many shall be made
righteous. But how can we be made righteous by obedience of Christ, but that
his obedience is imputed and made perfect unto us? O putide and absurd
slanders.

He charge us thirdly, that we deny Baptism, to remit our sins, which is
false, except as Saint Peter denies the work wroughte to save us. 1. Pet.
3. verse 21. not the washing of the filth of the body, but the aunsweare of a
good conscience unto Almighty God.

Fourthly, he charge us to deny that Baptism is necessary to Children, which
are borne of christian Parents wherein he lies most impudently: although we
agree not with the Papists that the Infantes of Christians excluded by
necessity from Baptism, are damned. In which error although Augustine was,
yet he is no more to be followed, then in an other error, about the same
infantes, to whom both he and Pope Innocentius thought the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper as necessary as the Sacrament of Baptism, affirming that
Infantes which have not received the Lords Supper were damned. Contra duas
Episto. Pelag. ad Bonifac. lib. 2. cap. 4. Ecce beatae memoriae Innocentius
Papa sine Baptisino Christi and sine participatione corporis and sanguinis
Christi vitam non hobere paruulos dicit. Behold Pope Innocente of blessed
memory says, that without the Baptism of Christ, and the participation of
the body and blood of Christ, little Children have no life.

To conclude, we deny nothing that they can prove to be true, but such matters
as we prove by the only rule of truth to be false. But the Pope shows
himself to be Antichrist, which denies all the soueraignitie of the office and
prerogative of Christ.

He denies that Christ is the only head of his universal Church in Heaven
and in earth.

He denies that Christ only is a Priest, according to the order of
Melchizedech.

He denies that Christ only is our Mediator, as well of intercession, as of
redemption,

He denies that Christ's word is sufficient for our salvation.

He denies that the sacrifice of Christ his death is the only purgation of
our sins.

He denies that the merits of Christ are our only justification.

He denies that God only is to be prayed unto.

He denies the verity of Christ's body by his transubstantiation.

Finally he denies all honor and glory to be dew only to God by Jesus
Christ, and therefore he is none other, but even that detestable monster
Antichriste whom I beseech the Lord, speadely to confound and abolish by the
spirit of his mouth which is his holy word, and by the brightness of his
coming.

Amen.
God be praised.

