THE FRIARS CHRONICLE: OR, THE TRVE LEGEND OF PRIESTS AND MONKS LIVES.

Sua cuique, mihi mea.



LONDON, Printed for John Budge: and are to be sold at his Shop in Paul's
Churchyard, at the Sign of the Green Dragon. 1623.

TUm puppe e media magno clamore Sacerdos:
Parcite pollutis contingere vincula palmis,
Et procul hinc moneo, procul hinc quaecunque prophanae
Ferte gradus, nec vos casto miscete labori,
Dum satis est mouisse deae: quod si qua pudica
Mente valet, si qua illae si sibi corporis adstat,
Constat, vel sola subeat pia munera dextra.
Silius Italic. lib. 17. Bell. Punicum.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Countess of DEVONSHIRE, with all her other
well-deseruing VERTVES.
Right Honorable,

ALthough such Ladies as your self, are either compared to rich Caskets,
containing within the^ more richer Jewels, or resembled to precious Diamonds,
made the more glorious by enameling, and the cunning of the workman: yet, I
protest, being an eyewitness of your constant resort unto wisdoms Feast;
and apprehensiue, that you love Religion merely for Gods love: that alone has
incited me to select you the Patroness of this Discourse, whereby, I make no
doubt, you shall not only run with Zacheus to the top of a Fig Tree to
behold JESUS: but be glad in your very soul, that your footsteps are fixed
in the way of salvation, and that you are now going on in the path, that will
conduct you to new Jerusalem.

The Work it self is the Discovery of the unswept corners of Popish
Monasteries: The Instrument wherewith it is done, though it be not the
Prophets Lantern and Candle to search the great City: yet it is the opening
of a Book, wherein you may read such loathsome particulars against Papistry,
that in your friends behalf, you will do, as we were wont to do in England,
even spit at the naming of the Devil: and in your own, lift up your hands to
Heaven with thanksgiving, that God has blessed you with a better knowledge.

The Author, is I confess, no Divine, but a penitent sinner, and one that
would feign strive to be a doore-keeper in the House of GOD, who has taken
this mercy upon him, to welcome him home with better acates, then to feed with
the Hogs at the troughs: My name you shall sure find at the last, which if
it carry an unpleasant accent, oh be thus honorable, to admit of one good
quality, as the mirror of his time Sir Philip Sidney was wont to say. For a
great many have none, and no man has all.

Your Honors humbly devoted,

T. G.

THE FRIARS CHRONICLE: OR, THE TRVE LEGEND OF PRIESTS AND MONKS LIVES.
I Make no question, but that true and well written Discourse of the Anatomy of
the English Nunnery at Lisbone in Portugal, has not only had a gracious
acceptance with you, but wrought upon your judgments and understanding, as
far as the abhorring their impieties, and lamenting the seduction of silly
Ignorants, who, I dare affirm, being brought out into the sunnie splendor of
Truth and Discovery, would either vvonder, where and how they have been so
long detained in darkness, or make sport at such ridiculous absurdities, as
they have been befooled withal.

But because there remains much more to be spoken out of other Relations, and
undeniable Verity, to make the pride of Babel loathsome to true Christian
souls, and the impieties of that Man of sin abhorred of all judicious and
understanding men: I have here undertaken further searches for the good of
all true-hearted Protestants indeed. And although I have no such portion
allotted, as with the Prophets Lantern and Candle to search the unswept
corners of Jerusalem; or with Christ's rod of cords to whip the buyers and
sellers out of the Temple: yet I hope I shall have strength enough to wrestle
down the Strumpet, and lay her flat on her back to the hissing of the
passengers.

For all the painting of Iezabel, and adorning of her head to seem more
maiesticall to Iehu: she was yet at the last thrown out of the window, and
dashed against the ground: so shall Babylon that great City beserued, in the
end she shall be set on fire, and the Merchants of the earth shall howl at
her desolation, amazed afar off at her falling to rubbish, and beholding her
smoke to ascend, like the smoke of a furnace: wherein that you may see the
reason of Gods indignation, and whereby you may intertaine certain motives for
your own conversion, or establishment; I have here taken upon me to discover,
how the Popish Clergy left and forsook the pure waters of Siloa, to drink
the puddled streams of Traditions and filthiness, scorned to quench their
thirst, and buy milk and food without money, but would needs with Simon Magus
pay dear for spiritual gifts: and in a word, denied to come to wisdoms
Feast, because they would run a whoring after their own inventions, and feed
their sensual carkases with the banquet and acates of their own desires, and
devising.

At first I determined no method, or division, supposing that the spredding of
instances and examples would have afforded sufficient contentment to the Reader
for the subject in hand, which is the detection of sundry foul abuses in
Popery, or if you will, in the lives of Priests and Friars: but finding the
stream to come down with a maine current, and that the stopping or damming it
up too close, would ouer-flow the fields, and spoil much good ground. I
thought it better to cut out certain riuolets, and passages, wherein the River
might run between bounded Banks, and so the lookers on receive both
pleasure and profit in the handsome keeping their channels. For which purpose
if you run about the stream, you shall find out certain deceitful Nookes,
Holes, Creekes, and dangerous Flats or Shelues. First, of lying Miracles:
Secondly, coozening Devices. Thirdly, Whoredom. Fourthly, Epicurisme. Fifthly,
Thefts and Robberies. Sixthly, Murders. Seventhly, Blasphemies. Eighthly,
gross Ignorance. Ninthly, Beastlines. Tenthly, Fooleries and Absurdities.
Eleuenthly, Impieties: and 12. Simony. Of all which in order, or as orderly as
I can, not that I place them in their seats of precedencie, or tie them to any
coherence of depending one upon another; but to show you with what palpable
grosenesse they proceeded to overthrow True Religion, and justified themselves
in the world, to countenance their wickedness, though they were never so foul
delinquents.

I leave to dispute of their Doctrines, Schoole-questions, fundamental
Controversies, Church-Ceremonies, the Popes Supremacy, and many other tedious
disceptations, which have clogged us with heavy burdens, and filled Libraries
with thousands of Volumes, and only at this time with Elias gather up my
clothes for a cursorie journey, and take my staff in my hand, to go the more
speedier forward, and as I confess, I must pass over much ground unseen, and
unmarked: So I beseech you (gentle Reader) censure me in the same manner, and
excuse my not fully satisfying of you, by reason of the hastiness of my
journey, and the small time I allot my self for the dispatch of my business:
only herein I dare be confident, there is not a step I make, but I have
warrant for my footing; nor Story I relate, but is extracted out of the books
of their own Magazines, and Authority of their former Writers. And so I
conclude this Preface with the Poet:

Qui legis Oedipodem, caligantemque Thiestem, Martial. l. 13. Epigram.

Calchidas and Scyllas, quid nisi monstra legis?
Quid te vana iuuant miserae ludibria Chartae?
Hoc lege, quod possis dicere iure, meum est.
Concerning their Miracles: If ever Iris was Thaumantis 1. Lying Miracles.
Filia, the Daughter of Wonder: I will be bold to say, he that writ their
Golden Legend, was the father of Lies; but because there are so many books,
and so many Discoueries concerning their ridiculous Stories; insomuch that the
Papists themselves have been ashamed of such palpable grosenesse, and
ridiculous absurdity, I will insist the lesser on this point, and so leave you
to the lives of their Saints, Costerus, Doctor Sheldon, the Story of Saint
Patrick: the old Chronicle of Clayton, and many other Authors: yet some
Collections will not be amiss; and so you shall have these few at this time.

Dionysius Areopagita afterward canonized, took up his head, when it was
struck off, and carried it two mile in his hand: he is recorded for a blessed
Martyr, and many miracles done by him.

Saint Dunstane playing the Goldsmith, as he was at work, took the Devil by
the Nose with a pair of Pincers, and made him roar outright.

Saint Bernard turned Oken Leaves, into Loaves, by changing the Letter, and was
wafted over the Sea upon a stone.

One hundred and fifty of Joseph of Arimatheas company sailed over a passage
upon his sons Shirt; as Friar Herneus did upon his Mantle: and Saint Francis,
between Naples and Messina upon a Cloak, having no money to pay the Ferry-boat.

Saint Nicholas fasted Wednesdayes and Fridayes, when he was an infant in the
Cradle, and would not suck.

Saint Christopher pitched his Staff into the ground, and it budded: at the
sight whereof, 8000. Pagans became Christians.

Bishop Trian having killed his Cow and his Calfe to entertain Saint Patrick,
was so pleasing to the Holy Man, that he restored them again, and so they were
found the next day feeding in the Meddow.

A certain Thief having stolen a sheep from a poor man, which he not only
denied, but threatened his Accuser for slandering him, was made to confess the
theft: For S. Patrick pitying the other, caused the sheep to bleat in the
Thieves belly.

Saint Briuius being but a Boy, saw the Devil behind the Altar, writing the
peoples faults in Parchment, and when by reason of the multitude of sins
committed, he wanted Parchment, he stretched it out with his teeth, till
pulling too hard, he knocked his head against the wall: Which when Saint Martin
perceived, he came to him, and made him blot out whatsoever he had written.

The Kings Daughter of Silena loved Saint George so well, that for his sake
she cast her Girdle about the Dragons neck, and led him about like a
Spaniell: but afterward she broke loose, and Saint George was compelled to kill
her.

Saint George being cast into a Caldron of boiling Lead, by making the sign
of the Cross, escaped un. hurt, etc.

Saint Crispina spoke when her tongue was cut out.

Saint Margaret was devoured of a Dragon, and swallowed up, but remembering her
self, she made the sign of the Cross, and the Dragon burst in pieces, and so
she was delivered.

Two Nuns sat talking from Christmas Eve to Midsommer, with a child sitting
on a Cushion between them, in a corner of the Cloister, till a Shepherd
coming by, saw the child, and told the Abbess, who had searched long for
these Sisters: but at last finding them, she asked for the child: they denied
they saw any: but that they were talking of the Nativity of Christ. Then the
Lady told them how long they had sat, when they verily thought it had been but
one day, which was Christmas.

A Taper on Saint Xauiers tomb burnt full three weeks day and night without
consuming: For at first it was but a cubit long, and so continued all the while.

Saint Katherine overcame fifty Philosophers, and converted the Empress and
the General of the Emperors Army: yea, she broke a wheel with her prayers,
that with turning killed four hundred Pagans: infinite impossibilities are
written of her.

Bernacus yoaked Hearts together; and tamed many Monsters.

Saint Brandon sailed into Paradise, and brought the blessed tidings of the
joys thereof.

A Crucifix of Wood re-saluted Burtismen a Monk of Durrham.

The blessed Virgins house was transported over the Seas: first, into Dalmatia,
then, into Italy, and last of all to Loretto.

These are the lying Miracles of Popish Prelates, which I have recited, because
they are not common, nor, as I take it, incerted in their Legend, but alleged
by substantial Authors, to countenance the Religion: but for these, and the
whole Catalogue of the rest in their notorious fables, you shall find, that
one of the grieuances of Germany, when the Emperor condiscended to the
reformation of Religion, was, that the Friars seduced them with lies, and
wrought upon the weakness of ignorant men, and superstitious women.

Concerning coozening devices; Are not yet men living, Coozening devices.
that can remember the knauerie of Priests to make the Roodes and Images of the
Churches in England in the days of Queen Mary, to goggle with their eyes, and
shake their hands: yea, with Wiers to bend the whole body, and many times to
speak as they do in Puppet plays, and all to get money, and deceive the
ignorant people?

Was not a Priest punished in the latter end of Henry the 8. for pricking his
finger, and be-bleeding the Corporas, making the people believe the Host had
done it, and that there was a very child seen in the singing cake?

Were not all our tales of Fairies, Goblins, Robingood-fellow, walking Spirits,
the knaueries of Priers and Priests, who for belly-cheere, and wanton Wenches,
came to houses by night, and swept the rooms, yea, gossiped with the crafty
lascivious houswiues?

Is not the tale of Saint Bernard worth the reciting, that coming into a
Church to perform his devotion, perceived how knauishly the Priests had dealt
with the Image of our Lady, to bid him good morrow, Bernard? whereupon to
exprobrate their folly, and crafty conueyance, he answered the Image in this
sporting manner; Peace, Madam, it is not lawful for women to speak in the
Church.

At Strasborough a certain superstitious old Woman resorted much to our Lady
with sufficient offertories: which when the Priests perceived, to countenance
her Devotion, they caused the child to speak and thank her in our Ladies
arms, which made the woman look strangely, and speak somewhat angerly. For
she presently replied: Peace young Gentleman, I have nothing to do with you,
let me hear what my good Lady your Mother says.

A Tailor of Florence, worshipping Saint John in the Church of Saint Michael
Barteldi, kneeling down, began in this manner, O glorious and blessed Saint
John, tell me, I pray thee, whether my Wife have played false, and what shall
become of my son. Which the Priests and Clarke hearing, lying in wait for
such purposes, either to make sport, or to raise a further profit, made Saint
John thus reply: My dear son, go in peace, and to morrow thou shall receive
an answer. The Tailor, I hope, mist not his hour, nor forgot his offertorie:
So he made his Petition, and the Image answered: Thy Wife has made thee
Cuckold, and thy son shall be hanged. At which the fellow was so amazed, that
he went home enraged, and wanted little of desperately making away himself
through the villainy of the Priests. This tale did Piero de Cosmo de medici,
relate himself to diverse of his guests.

A Priest of Louaine, called Anthony, having solemnly invited some merry
companions to dinner, knew not yet which way to intertaine them: For he had
neither meat nor money: at last stepping into a neighbors house, where he was
very frequent, and finding the servant absent, he took the pot from the fire,
and carried it home under his gown. Thus he not only supplied his wants, but
pouring out the meat into some other dish, sent the pot handsomely made clean,
as a pawn to the owner, and borrowed money of it, having a Bill of sale for
the receipt. The good man in the mean while chasing and fretting for the loss
of his dinner, and theft of his pot, knew not what to say, till the Maid
assured him, there was none there but Sir Anthony: he again loath to accuse so
reverent a man, and indeed afraid of the danger, was more vexed then before,
till the servant looking on the pawn, told him, it was his own pot: then out
of all patience he accused the Priest before a Magistrate; but when Sir Anthony
showed the Bill of sale, it was turned to a merriment, and so the theft was
shuffled over.

The Iacobinas of Berne, and Franciscans of Orleance got most of their wealth
by walking Spirits, and resorting by night to houses, as if Robin good fellow
had done the drudgerie to ease the servants of their labor.

Friar Reynald of Siena, loving a man's Wife, and so resorting to the house, was
ouer-taken on a sudden with the unlooked for coming home of her Husband, and
had scarce time to leap out of the bed, and carry his clothes in his hand;
the man knocking still, and the Wife making no great haste, some hurly-burly
arose: whereupon, the woman lays the child in the Friars place, and lets in
her Husband, who angerly demanded, why she tarried so long? Oh, replied she,
speaking so loud, the Friar might hear her, our son had like to have
perished through a fit of the Collicke, so that I was feign to send for Friar
Reynald to pray for him, who bade me keep him warm in the bed, and is
himself with his Sexton at his devotion in the Loft. With that, the Friar and
his Companion came down with a book in his hand; and after solemn courtsey
made, told the good man, the child had certain Worms in his Maw, and therefore
he must make a Statuae of Wax of his bigness, and present it to Saint Ambrose.

The Curat of Ouziane, near to Amboise, having long had the pleasure of his
Hostess, and bred a great deal of jealousy in her Husband, thought by a
crafty trick to remove that humor, pretending to be gelt: whereupon he
agrees with one Peier de Serpens, borne at Villantroies in Berry, for four
crowns to sport with him, and conceal the matter. Which when the Host
understood, he promises him twice as much to perform the thing indeed. The
Surgeon taking pity of the man, and despighted at the Friars knauerie, bound
him hand and foot, and while he looked the company should make Intercession
for him, and so leave him to his former liberty, the other whipped off his
Stones: telling him plainly, his profession was no dallying profession: and so
the Host seemed quieted, as being thus revenged.

A woman in Orleans being in love with a young Scholar, who yet was not
acquainted with her, knew no better way to discover her affection, then by her
Friar Confessor, desiring him to give him good counsel, not to tempt her, nor
solicit her any more, especially not to come over the wall into her Orchard as
he promised. The Friar ouer-taken with her simplicity, advised the young man
for the best, and to divert his love from her. The young man again knowing
there was no such matter, and yet apprehensiue of a woman's wit, admitted of his
good instruction, but instructed himself how he nowmight enjoy a Sweetheart:
but when the Friar understood how he had been made a Bawd and Pandar for the
business, he thought to beat out one nail with another, and so very
knauishly threatened the discovery, if he might not share in the bargain.

It is reported of Oliver Mailard, that when he saw the wickedness and
Villainy of Priests and Friars, he wondered, that the Saints interred in the
Church, did not rise and pull out the eyes of the Whore-masters, and Deceivers.

Pontanus says, that there were certain Nunneries at Valencia, which by
reason of the filthiness of Friars, who played the very Bawdes and Pandars to
get money, became loathsome Stews, and entertained young Gentlemen, as in
Brothell houses, but all under color of devotion. When any of the Priests
knauerie was discovered, there were excuses enough ready to desend them; yea,
when they were found kissing of a woman; the answer was, You must suppose he
did it to print a blessing on her lips.

What should I name the great abuses of Induigences, and Pardons, and all for
money? wherein there were many tricks, and counterfeit devices.

Certain cheating Friars having pawned their Relics in a Tavern, and wanting
money to redeem them, showed the people a firebrand, and made them believe it
was part of the fire, which broyled Saint Lawrence: whereupon according to the
ignorance of those times, many gave them money, which they spent in all
unthriftiness.

A Lady sent to pleasure a young Cardinal, according to a certain composition
between him and her Husband, seemed at first very coy, and for all the
baseness of her Husband, would by no means consent to his pleasure, till at
last, by forcible persuasions, fair entreaty, extraordinary promises, the
handsomnesse of his person, and the greatness of his estate, she condiscended
unto him, and seemed well pleased in the alteration: whereupon she returns
to her Husband with the money, and told him plainly, she was bought and
sold, and therefore would return, and forsake him for ever.

And thus much of their coozening and devices: wherein I pray you take only
this notice, that I mean to give you but a taste of every one of the
divisions. For if I should set a Banquet before you, or a Feast to feed you,
you would rather surfeit, then be satisfied; the dishes are so many wherewith I
could furnish the Table, and of that variety, that you might rather glut and
gorge your selves, then content nature with a temperate diet. Again, whereas
it may be objected, these were the times of old, there is now great reformation
since these enormities were looked into: I answer plainly and directly; the
same superstition remains at this hour, and the Priests do so prevail with
coozening deceit, and farrefetcht devices, that in Spain this present year
1622. the doctrine of the conception of our Lady without sin, and assumption
into Heaven, is newly divulged and ratified, and the contrary opinion reputed
Heresy, and the repugners hunted, and hissed at in every Town and City.

3. Concerning their Whoredom; or if you will have the cleanlier term,
Fornication; Who knows not, that there is a common allowance of Stews (more
then a conueniencie) under all the Catholic government, for which the women
do allow an annual entrado into the Popes Exchequer, or to the several
States where they live?

In the first Council of Toledo, in the reign of Arcadius and Honorius, it
was agreed, that the Clergy living without Wives, should have Concubines.

In the Patents of Abbots, in the Realm of England, this clause was incerted:
Licitum erit Domino Abbati, semel in mense habere mulierem, ad purgandas renes;
yea, in those days it was counted good policy to have a Wife, Daughter, or
Niece, a companion of a Cardinal, or Bishop, to be-friend the kindred in
matters of complaint, or in trials of Law.

A Gentlewoman taken in Adultery, and so divorced, desired for her penance to
be detruded into a Monastery, alleging this reason to her inward friends,
that in stead of punishment, she should be sure to have there the greater
pleasure.

When soldiers entered into any town to be lodged, or quartered, the first
thing they did, was to hunt after Priests Lemans; and search every corner for
their Whores. And thus much for the general: Now to particulars.

A Franciscan Friar lodging in the house of a Gentleman of Perigot, found the
means to lie with his Wife upon her Purification, as understanding by
confession his resolution. So he entered the Chamber first, and when he had
taken his pleasure, departed out of the house, excusing his haste to the
Porter, by special business. After he was departed, comes the Gentleman
indeed, and found by his Wives speech, that some body had wronged him: which so
amazed him, that he amazed her by saying, he was abused. She with tears
assured him, that none was in the house but the Friar, and her Brother: which
was no sooner spoken, but up he gets, and to the Porter he comes, and there
understands, how the Friar was departed. After him he follows, but not
ouertaking him, he returns home again. In his absence, the Wife enraged to
be so deflowred, hangs her self, and in the mischance overthrew a little
child dead to the ground: the noise raised the house, and at last comes the
brother, and finding his Sister hanged, supposing her Husband had done it, in
some fit of jealousy, out of doors he flings, and meets him returning home;
in which mood he sets upon him with Villain, and defiance; and so they
wound one another to death.

The Franciscans of Strasborough, before they were expelled, accustomed to
steal away men's Wives, and keep them cloystered like young Nouices, cutting
their hair, and charming them with fear of death; till at last a Butchers
Wife was sent in the same habit with the Cater to buy meat of her Husband; who
eying her very narrowly, as having seen the face before, could not be
restrained, but laid hands upon her, and so after great ado, all was
discovered, and the Friars banished.

Two Franciscans having no money to pay the Ferry, ravished the Woman that
carried them, and so pleased her.

A Franciscan in Perigot found the mean, by obscuring himself in the
bride-chamber, to lie with a Bride, before her Husband came to her, and
escaped, for all that the household could do, when they heard of it.

Another Franciscan by Lions, married his brother Friar, in the habit of a
Scholar, to a Widows Daughter of great riches and account, making them
believe, he was an heir to great revenues, and sent to Lions, as it were
under his tutelage: but at last the Mother and Daughter coming to hear Mass,
(as much devoted to this Order) espied her Husband answering the Priest in his
Friars weed, which for the time they concealed, till they came home, and at
night, as his custom was, he likewise kept his hours: but being in bed, the
mother comes in, and laid hold of his hands, while his Daughter pulled off his
Cap, and discovered her shaven crown, and so he was apprehended, and sent to
the Magistrate.

There are more Stories of the Franciscans, then of any other Order, and they
were evermore played upon, because they pretended more holiness, and sanctity
of life. They builded their Houses and Cells very near the Nunneries; insomuch
that many merrily said, Here were the Barnes, and there were the Threshers.

It is reported, that when Henry the second was King of France, and wanted a
great sum of money, a certain Lord wished him to sell the Friars beds; and
when the King demanded, where they then should lie; he presently replyde, With
the Nuns. But, quoth the King, there are more Monks a great deal then
Nuns. Why, said the other, one Nun may very well have five or six Monks.

Two or three Curats between Daulphine and Sauoy, persuaded the women to feign
themselves mad, that while their husbands went on Pilgrimage to recover their
health, the Priests might come and lie with them.

A Friar minorite of Sicilia, falling in love with the young Wife of old Agatha
the Physician, taught her a trick to feign her self pained with the disease
of the Mother: For which the Friar must be sent for, and bring in the Relikes
of Saint Bernardine. Which he did, commanding all the company in the Chamber
to avoid; and so he went to bed to the Physicians Wife, while his companion
lay with the Maid. But ere all was done, home comes the Old man, and found the
Friars breeches under his Wives pillow, which she confessed, as a part of the
Relics, there to remain, for fear of a relapse. Whereupon the Maid went to
the Friars, to tell what had chanced: who camedowne merrily with all the other
ceremonies of the cure, and so put his breeches together with the other
Relics.

The old Tale of the Abbess in Lombardy is remembered to this day; who hearing
that one of her Nuns was in labor, came in all haste to chide her; but
belike she was puzzled in the dark: for in stead of her Veil, she had put on
a Monks Breeches, that lay with her the same night: so coming to the Nun,
she began to revile her, who forall herpaine, soberly answered, Good Madam
mend your plaster, and all shall be well enough, I warrant you. This Tale is
seconded by many other Stories in mine Author.

Pogius the Florentine reports of an Hermit at Padoa, called Anfimirius, in
the time of Francis the 7. Duke, who was accused for intising the young and
handsome women to his lust and pleasure. Whereupon the Dukes Secretary was
very busy to examine him, hoping he would name some, at whose husbands he
might make sport, and laughter. In which iollitie, he urges him again and
again to set down the women. Why then, quoth the Hermit, and you be so
hasty, write down your own Wife first. I hope you may imagine he was
amazed; the Duke smiled, and the whole company stood silent, for fear their
turn should be next.

A Priest at Paris, after Shrift went no further then the Pew he sat in, to
satisfy his lust.

A Curate near Vienne in Daulphine, went behind the high Altar.

A woman taken in Adultery with a Priest, was accused and examined; but
because she could not deny the fact, the Priest was brought before the Bishop,
who prescribed him this penance, not to come in three months within a Church.
When the man, who was thus abused, understood of so small a punishment, he lies
in wait for him, and cruelly beats him; so that he is brought before his
Judge to receive punishment: who awarded him not to come into a Tauern in 3.
months. At which the Bishop seemed much offended, till the Judge answered: My
Lord, considering the first abuse, I hope it is as great a punishment for him
not to visit a Tavern, as penance for the Priest not to trouble a Church.

In a Village near Corguac, called Cherues, a Maid was got with child by her
own Brother, which she discovered to a Priest, and he persuaded the people
impragnatam a spiritu: But when so great an imposture came to the ears of the
Earl of Angolesme, father to Francis the first, he quickly found out the
deceit, and so they were both burnt, and the Priest suspended.

To conclude this Section, I will be bold with the Records of the time of Henry
the eight in our own Country, concerning the Visitation of Monasteries,
Couents, Collegiat Churches, and other religious Houses, out of which these
particulars are extracted, that in the Monastery of Battle, or Beat, in the
Diocese of Chichester, these So domites were discovered: John Abbot: Richard
Salchurst: Thomas Cuthert: William March: John Hasting: Gregory Champion:
Clement West field: Iohn-Crosse: Thomas Crambrooke: Thomas Bayl: John Hamfield:
John Ierom: Clement Grigg: Rich. Toucy, and John Austine.

In the Church of Canterbury among the Monks of Saint Bennet, Richard
Godmershem: William Leichfield: Christopher James: John Goldingston: Nicholas
Clement: William Causton: John Ambrose: Tho. Chichester: John Champion; and
Roger Barram. And in the Monastery of Saint Austine: Tho. Barram, all these
were found Sodomites, and punished accordingly.

To name other places, and other commissions of whoredom and fornication, were
infinite; but so it was, and will be in all Nations, where impuritie and
superstition ouercomes true zeal and devotion: yet because there were certain
religious men that did observe state in their impiety, and thought scorn to
go to common Brothels, or prostituted Whores, but kept women by the name of
sequestration, and so lived more glorious, then the rest of poorer Priests; I
will also name you some of them, as among the Monks of Saint Bennet,
Christopher James had the command and use of three married women: William,
Abbot of Bristow had four Whores. In Windsor Castle, Nich: Whyden, Priest, had
but four. George Witborne had five: Richard Hunn five. Robert Danison, six:
Richard Prior of Maiden-bedly, five.

In the Monastery of Shulberd, in the Diocese of Chichester: George Walden,
Prior, had seven. John Standney, seven. Nicholas Duke, five. In the Monastery
of Bath, Richard Lincombe had seven. In the Cathedral Church of Chichester,
John Hill had only thirteen. John White Prior of Bermonsdy had twenty. Now if
there were four hundred Couents of Monks, and Nuns, and two hundred of
Begging Friars, and a survey taken of all the delinquents in this kind, O
judge; for Gods sake judge; how many Whores, and Bastards of Priests, and
Friars might be in England in those days, and then, if according to the Poet,
-- sic paruis componere megna solebam: we could step into France, Italy,
Spain, Germany, and other Countries, where the Clergy bare the sway, and gave
the example, and so pull out the dust and rubbish of their unswept corners: Oh
what a deal of filth, and a dunghill of noisomeness, would arise, and what a
mountain of sin would this sin make! As for the distinction of time, I
will be bold to say, It is as ill now, as ever it was in any time.

Concerning their Epicurisine and gurmandize: If ever the Prophet had cause in
his time to 4. Epicurisine, and Drunkenness.
find fault with the Priests, not only for their hypocrisy, but their filthy
and incontinent lives, given to gluttony and belly-cheere, which he sets
out by the terms of Drunkenness and vomiting, I hope, the Monks and Friars of
Europe come behind none of them all. Oh look, for Gods sake, look, and you
shall find in the Book of God, many inuectiues against corrupt priests,
covetous priests, winking priests, negligent priests, obstinate priests,
idolatrous priests, rebellious priests, indifferent priests, gluttonous
priests, blind priests, ignorant priests, dumb priests, courtly priests, idle
and unconstant priests, bribed priests, hypocritical priests, devilish
priests, devouring priests, raging priests, incredulous priests, flattering
priests, bloody priests, murchering priests, lukewarm priests, mad priests.
Oh look for Gods sake, look, and you shall find in the Cloisters of
Monasteries, in the Cells of Abbeys, in the Walks of religious places, in the
Courts of Princes, in the Castles of Lords, in the houses of Gentlemen, in the
streets of Cities, in the Farms of Countrymen, and in the Chambers of
Widows, religious men of all these sorts, especially hunting after
belly-cheere, and to fill their veins with fullness of blood, hot, and
corrupted. Mark but the situation of their Monasteries and Houses! Are they
not in the fattest grounds, and the plentiful fields of the Country? Do they
not feed on the choicest Lambs of the fold, and stretch out their limbs on
beds of Iuory? Do they not carowse in Gobblets and Chalices of Gold, and have
the purest Wines of the Vintage? With what delicate fruits are their Orchards
stored? and with what walks of pleasure are their Gardens contrived? Was it
not a byword in those days, A chuffing Abbot, A fiery-faced Abbot, A
gorbellied Abbot?

Is there not at this hour bread made at Paris of the finest Wheat, called the
Chapter bread? do they not every where feed on the daintiest Manchet? yea,
those they call Mendicant Friars, eceiue no scraps, I hope, but whole Loaves,
and the best provision in an house.

Are not their Caters sent to the Markets to provide the best meat, both Flesh,
Fish, and Foul; Pikes of five French crowns, Carps, Tenches, Barbels, and all
of that sort at high rates? and must they not be sod and stewed in Wine, to
please the palate, and heat the stomach? Are not their fasting days, days of
banquets, sweet-meates: and confectionary stuff, Cullises and Broths, Cawdles,
and Panados? sweet and hot Waters? Perfumes and Incense? Are not their linen
of the best Diaper and Damask? and the Vtensels of their house so far from
temperature, and moderation, that they exceed in sumptuousness, and bravery?

There was a certain Cardinal in Rome, that, to make demonstration of
humility, had always a net for his Table-Cloth: but preferred to the Papacy,
he bade take away the Net; for he had that which he fished for.

When English Cromwell had a great suite to Clement the Pope, he acquainted
himself with his custom, and diet, and so invented a dish of sauoury and
pleasant gelly, which he brought in, in a fantastical manner, with a true man's
song, a thing much in use in those days; and so whether his Holiness were
pleased with the sport, or delighted with the dainty, he granted his request.

Pope Julius accustomed to eat Porke and Peacocks flesh, would make long
meals, and was a mere glutton.

Becket himself was accused for an Heretic, as eating Capons on Saint Marks
day, and feeding like an Epicure on prohibited times, so that he should have
been attached, had not the Holy Man miraculously turned a Capon to a Carpe.

In the Legend of Cardinal Wolsey, it is objected against him, that he ate
stewed Capons in Lent, and sat at his Feasts as long as the King himself. I
could name the rest, or at least many more: but these, I hope, shall suffice
for the subject in hand: and if any have forgot the vsance of their own
Country, let them still demand of the travelers in other places, who have
frequented the Monasteries of Europe, and I hope they will confess the truth
without blushing.

5. Concerning their thefts and robberies: what was all their sellings of
Indulgences and Pardons, 5. Thefts and Robberies.
but the exhausting of the treasure of a whole Kingdom? Insomuch, that for
such theeuish exaction, Luther and others rolled a stone, which never lest,
till it turned the Popes Supremacy out of most Countries of Europe.

Was not the imposition of Peter Pence in England, amounting to the yearly
rent of a 100000. pound sterling, a mere theft? Did not women go about (as
they do still in Ireland) with a cozening Priest, to howl over the graves of
the dead, and mourn for the desunct, teaching their eyes to weep, and their
hearts to sob, and all for money?

Are not the Priests still set on work to incroach upon the flexible nature of
men and women, to persuade them to wilful poverty, that they might be
enriched with their gifts and Legacies, and have their Monasteries augmented
with their Lands and Revenues?

Were not the Jesuits banished Venice, for cozening the Ladies and Gentlewomen
of their Collanas, and Jewels, some of them worth two thousand pound sterling,
being of great Oriental Pearl, and other rich precious stones.

What an infinite treasure did Cardinal Wolsey convey out of this Realm, for
the ransom of Pope Clement, and briberie of the Cardinals for his own
advancement to the Papacy, and maintaining his ambition?

Is not that ridiculous tale worth the reciting, of the man that buried his
Dog, for which he was accused, and brought before the Bishop? Which he
answered in this manner; O my Lord, if you knew the wisdom of this Dog, you
would not condemn me! For at his death he bequeathed a Legacy to your
Lordship of a hundred crowns, knowing your wants, and great occasions. By
which excuse he was remitted, and the Bishop pacified. But was not this either
manifest Atheism, or plain robbery.

Was and is not the Croysade a trick of theeuerie, to make men believe, they
must pay so much money, or be damned?

Did not a ghostly Father preach in the open Pulpit, that when any money was
given for a soul departed, the souls in Purgatory hearing it tingle in the
Basin, did laugh for joy?

Was not this the very cause, that Christ did exprobate the Pharisees for buying
and selling in the Temple, saying plainly, this should be a house of Prayer,
but ye have made it a den of thieves.

At Casall one finding three hundred Crowns, confessed the same to a Priest,
who so terrified him with damnation, if it were not restored, that the silly
fellow delivered him the money to impart it back again to the owner (as he by
coniuration would find out) but he deceived him, and spent the same amongst
Whores, and potcompanions.

A Curtizan in Venice lying very sick, sent for a Friar to confess her
sins: and so opening a Casket, in which was our Ladies Psalter bound in Gold;
the Friar peeping in, saw beside a 1000. Zhekinos lying by. For the time he
said little, but afterward found a better time to purloyne the same away.

Was not the Hermit of the Valley of Monte Negro a jolly fellow, who with two
Friars kept the passages in strange habits, and robbed all comers?

Did not certain Priests frequent the Scholars lodgings at Sienna, and still
as their exhibition came from their Parents, they would either steal some, or
be the cause of unnecessary expenses: and when money failed, they would either
have books, or apparel?

At the garden of Simples in Padoa, a Gentleman of Poland having a rich
Hat-band, was deceived of it by a Friar, that came and lay by him, as he was
searching the ground for some new Herb to show the Master.

I could name you a thousand of these Stories, both to prove their general and
particular thefts, some serious, some ridiculous, some indifferent. But these
shall suffice at this instant, and I make no question, there is no Reader, or
Searcher of Inuentories, but lights upon many more: and although some with
Licurgus law allow of theft, to make men the more wary and cautelous of their
goods; and other-some excuse them, as men subject to imperfections, or
politic Husbands, that may increase their estates by thriuing devices: Yet
the true-hearted Christian will confess such theeueries, the branches of
impiety; and if they condemn them in other men, will much more abhor them
in the Professors of Religion, and Priests of the Clergy.

6. Concerning their Murders, and cruel and bloody practices, either to
compass their own 6. Murder, and bloody cruelty.
ends, or take revenge of such as had offended them; I am thus fraighted with
many Stories. But before I come to particulars, give me leave to tell you, I
could discover many horrible and fearful executions: many notorious and
formidable massacres: many grievous and sanguinarious persecutions, I could
tell you, that the Priests persuaded silly women, that abortion was no sin.

I could also add, that in the gardens of Nunneries, was always a tree or two
of Sauine, which they say the Nuns used to drink steeped in Wine: now the
property of Sauine is to destroy any thing condensed in the womb, and so you
may judge of the cause: And so I come to the rest.

In the time of Maximilian the Emperor, a Franciscan Friar in Flanders, came
one night into a Gentleman's house, and after he had murdered some servants,
took the Gentlewoman perforce, and dis-robed her of her apparel, putting a
short garment on her, which he brought with him, of purpose to steal her away
to the Monastery, and so threatening her with death, if she spoke or discovered
the matter, though she met with her Husband, hurried her out of doors, riding
with a long Pike staff, and a short Dagger disguized.

But as he posted away in this manner, he met with her husband indeed and his
man. The Gentlewoman, as she was threatened and coniured, passed by, and durst
not speak: and so the Friar followed as churlishly. The servant had only a
glimpse of her, and knew her; yea, he discovered the Friar also, telling his
Master, what had happened. But he by reason of the impossibility of the matter,
as he supposed, told him he was a fool, or mad, and so would have rid home
without any more ado: but the servant would needs go back again to take his
better view. Which when the Friar perceived, and apprehensiue, that his
knauerie should be revealed, he took the advantage of the man's peering under
her Veil, and so with a violent stroke, feld him to the ground with his
brains dashed out. The Gentleman seeing his man fall, returned in fury, and had
the fortune to cloze with the Friar, and so struggling together, at last
overthrew him; which when his Wife perceived, she returned and assisted him,
wounding the Friar with his own Dagger. Thus was he taken, and afterward
examined, and adjudged to dye: and so he was publicly burnt.

The Lord Saint John of Ligoures, cousin to the Marshall of Saint Andrews,
committed Incest with his wives Mother, and had diverse children by her; yea,
he so loved her, or if you will, burned in Lust toward her, that he revealed
the same in confession to his ghostly father, who to pleasure the Lord, told
him plainly he might kill his Wife, and so be rid of her. This was dangerous
and bloody, and thereupon he made a stay, till the Friar andaciously told him,
he would be the executioner for his sake: and so the murder was committed by
certain Ruffians, but at last detected, for which the Friar was publicly
executed.

A Priest of Fonsigney, called Don John, under the dominion of Thiez, then
Governor of Geneua, out of mere malice and heart-burning, boted out his
brothers eyes: not so contented, he brought him to Chambery, to a Saint called
Saint Iuery, and then in great request; and as he was passing over a Bridge,
would have thrown him into the River: but missing of his purpose, by access
of greater company, he with certain as wicked as himself, killed him in a
Barn.

A Priest called Saint John, came to Autuns Church in Paris, to visit the
Curate of Saint Andrew des ars, who stood between him, and a Benefice: but not
willing to tarry the time, and growing enraged to be so long disappointed, he
took an opportunity, and set upon him and his man, and with his companions
killed them both: For which he was afterward executed.

In an Inn at Soysons, the good man's Daughter of the house had a child
unlawfully, which was brought up in the house to his great grief; and
therefore he could never endure it, because it still put him in mind of her
shame. At last he contrived to put her to a Nunnery with a certain piece of
money: and so he bargained with a Priest called Hector, a Bakers son of
Moyen. But this Varlet took the child, and without any more ado cut her
throat, throwing the body into a heap of Nettles. But see the goodness of
God! hard by, was a Sexton making a grave in a Churchyard, to whom he proffered
money to bury the body: but he suspicious of the murder, revealed all he knew
to the Magistrate. And so the parties were examined, and the murder found out.

A Priest of Orleans jealous of a Whore which he kept, and loath to be further
tormented, carried her to a Tavern, under color of kindness, and there
beginning cause of displeasure, at last cut her throat.

The Duke of Brabant, and Earl of Gelderland, raised war for the Duke-dome
of Limbourg, in which the Bishop of Cullen as assistant to the Earl, was taken
prisoner, and kept seven year, till all conditions were accomplished. Thus was
he in the custody of the Earl of Mount in Heinalt, whom he could not corrupt
for his escape with any promise or gifts, which so enraged him, that in his
heart he swear revenge. At last he is set at liberty, and all unkindness
seemed to be forgotten; insomuch that the Bishop came to visit the Duke, and
in his return entreated the Earl to accompany him to Tuits, a town standing
over against Cullen; which he did, suspecting no harm: but the Bishop had
lived in Ambuscado for him, and not only imprisoned him, but every hot day
used him in this manner: he script him naked, and most cruelly put him into an
iron Cage, all nointed over with honey, and so set him in the Sun, where
Flies, Hornets, Wasps, and Bees, tormented the poor Earl to death.

Two Canons of Cullen upon displeasure against Herman Grin, and yet dissembling
their malice, invited him to dinner; and in stead of friendly fare, thrust him
into a room, where was kept a hungry Lion: but the valiant man winding his
Cloak about his arm, drew his Rapier, and killed the Beast, and so escaped the
revenge of these wicked priests.

Henry, Archbishop of Cullen, most cruelly and barbarously brake the arms and
legs of Earl Frederick; and when he had done, cast the carcass to the
Crows.

In the time of Otho the Emperor, there was a cruel Bishop of Mentz, called
Hatto, who hated the poor, and said they were worse then Vermin, and Rats,
and fit for nothing but to be burnt: whereupon in a time of Dearth he filled
a barn full of them, and set it on fire, consuming them to cynders: For which,
the judgment of God fell upon him, and he was devoured of Rats alive. For when
he fled from all places, they following him in great multitudes, he went into a
tower in the midst of the Rhine, called the Rats-Tower for ever after, whither
the Rats swamme after him; but it lay not in the strength or policy of man to
deliver him: For there they devoured him alive.

A Iacobine poisoned Henry the 7. Emperor, with his breaden god.

John de Roma, a Iacobine Friar, one of the holy house of Spain, so persecuted
the Christians of Merindol and Gabriere, that he filled boots with hot
grease, and drew them on their legs, both to draw them to confession, and
make them confess where their money was.

A Monk called Heran, presuming of his merits, by reason of his holiness, and
austeritie of life, after fifty years was persuaded by the Devil to throw
himself into a deep Well, from whence preserved and taken out by miracle, he
could not be persuaded, or removed from any other opinion, but that it was an
Angel appeared unto him, to make him glorious to posterity.

Philip the Emperor, and his Successor Otho, were both brought to their
destruction by the practices of Innocent the third. And why may not I bring in
here, that King John of England was poisoned by a Monk of Swinsted Abbey,
seeing they themselves bring it in, and insert it in their Stories?

About the year 1513. Henry of Lutzenburg was poisoned in the Sacrament by a
Dominican Friar, which Baptista Ignatius affirms, and Sleidan recites the
reason, from a motive of Clement the fifth, because he grew too strong in
Italy: but what followed: many Friars of that Order were slain afterward by
the Soldiers.

Pope Innocent the fourth was charged with the poisoning of Frederick the
Emperor, by means of Peter de Vinca: but escaping at that time, he was
afterward murdered by Manfrede, by the same Popes practice.

Ioane Queen of Naples was murdered by the priuity and consent of Vrbane the
sixth:

Charles King of Naples, by the nefarious and bloody counsel of Clement the
fourth, caused Conradinus and Frederick Duke of Austria to be put to death,
which at last cost the young Prince his life: and, so murder upon murder
followed, and the Popes themselves were defamed for such hateful mischief and
treasons.

Sixtus the fourth, was the principal contriuer of that treason, whereby
Julian de Medices was slain, and his brother Laurence hurt in the Church of
Reparata at Florence, at the elevation of the Sacrament. For Volateran says,
that the Pope knew of it, and countenanced the malefactors.

Alexander the sixth most inhumanely caused Gemes the Turks brother to be
impoysoned, being seduced and corrupted by the bribes of the Great Turk, and
promises of more money.

Henry the third of France was most shamefully murdered by a Dominican Friar,
called James Clement; and the fact not only allowed of at Rome, but highly
commended by the Pope.

The lamentable Story of that man of men Henry the fourth of France, is not yet
forgotten, and whenever it pleases God to spread abroad the carpet of
revenge, oh what foul souls peradventure will appear under fair faces!

The late Prince of Orange was first wounded by John Iauregui, and afterward
murdered by Baltasar Gerard, being both persuaded by Mass Priests and Friars,
that such a facinorous act must needs be meritorious.

I could also name Michael Reinion, Peter de Four, and Peter Pann, animated to
kill Prince Maurice, all instructed by Priests and Jesuits, who are indeed the
very Incendiaries of the Popes furnace, to set all Europe in combustion.

What should I trouble you further with their own murdering one another for
the Papacy, with the cruelties of the Consistorian Cardinals, and the
exorbitant wickedness, which streameth all over the City, and is more
infectious to their souls, then the plague, which often happens in that place,
to their bodies?

7. Concerning their Blasphemies, I mean not to trouble you much with their
oaths, strange invented 7. Their Blasphemies.
oaths, forswearings, protestations, execrations, curses, equivocations, or
such like. For I have other things to make you amazed withal, and such
fearful speeches hammered on the anuill of the Devils shop, that I must
needs say with the Poet, Horresco referens: Yet I will begin gently, and tell
you, it was a Proverb, a common Proverb in those times, He swears like an
Abbot.

A certain Priest at Rome, who had been angered by a Curtezan, burst out into
an oath, and swear by Potta de la Virgin.

When the Monks had no Wine, they used to send to their Brethren, and say,
Date nobis de oleo vestro, quia Lampades nostra extinguuntur.

A certain Friar preaching of the Passion of Christ, acted his gesture in such
a manner, that he moved his auditorie to shed tears: which when he perceived,
he changed the accent of his voice, and cried out, Weep not so greatly. For
perhaps it is not true, which I told you.

A wicked Priest of Toures, railing on the Hugonets, for putting their trust in
Christ, durst adventure to tell them, that for his part he would believe the
Pope before Christ.

Julius the third, called John de Maria de monte, exclaimed thus, that if God
was so angry for the eating of an Apple; how great reason had he to be raged at
the loss of his Peacock, which meat he loved so well?

Cardinal Bembus in a conference about their glory and wealth in the world,
exclaimed with a smile: Oh what riches have we gotten by this fable of Christ!

A popish Prelate railing against Lutherans, said plainly, that sure Saint
Peter at the first was a Lutherane. For out of the presumption of his faith,
he would needs come to Christ on the water, and might thereby have been
drowned, if not saved miraculously.

Menot a Frenchman, and Barlet an Italian, said, that if Christ had not been
crucified, the Uirgin Mary would have performed it with her own hands for the
salvation of mankind.

The Papists in general confess perfection in the rules of Monks and Friars,
and the Mass Priests of Trent do make traditions equal to Scriptures, and
they commonly deny Scriptures to be a perfect rule of life and doctrine.

The Turks punish feuerely such as blaspheme Christ: but Papists, I mean, the
Monks and Friars tear him in pieces with their hands and mouths. For such
are thought to be most clear of Heresy, that can swear most wickedly, and
blaspheme outragiously.

Though Papists profess Jesus Christ, etc. yet do they teach that Dogs and
Hogs do eat his body, as often as they eat the consecrated Host.

The Pope is called the sovereign Lord of Purgatory, and can deliver souls
from thence by Indulgences and Pardons.

The Turks deny all manner of God-hood in man, yea, in their own Prophet
Mahomet; and verily believe, that Cosdras was vanquished by the Romans, for
calling himself a god: but the Popes not only call themselves so, but have
decreed it heretical to think otherwise.

I could load you with examples: but these shall suffice. For I would not
raise this mount too high, considering I determine but a kind of hillocke, to
ouer-looke the neighbor fields, and easy passages: only I will add hereunto
how God has been displeased with these men, even as far as desperate deaths
and punishments: yet neither have they repented, but dyed in their perfidious
blasphemies; nor others taken warning, but continued in their malicious
wickedness.

The Chancelour of France cried out on his deathbed, Oh Cardinal, thou have
sent us all to the devil!

Bonanenture de Periere, author of that detestable book, called Symbolum
mundi, ran himself upon his sword, and dyed most desperately: as Razis, and
others in Switzerland threw themselves headlong from high Rocks, by reason of
the blasphemies of Popes prelates.

The Chancellor and Legate du Prat made a fair Hospital, of which Francis the
first was wont to say, it was not half large enough to lodge so many poor
people, as he had undone: He dyed at Nantouillet of a strange disease; his
stomach eaten through with Worms: and while his Coffers were sealing up, he
roued, and said, See, what is gotten with serving the King with soul and body!

Stephen Ponchier, Archbishop of Toures, laboring to erect a new Court against
the Professors of True Religion, called the burning Chamber, was attached by a
disease, named Le feu de dieu, beginning at his feet, and rising up to his
head: so that he was constrained to cut off one leg and member after
another, till he dyed.

John Ruze a Chancellor of Parliament, and great blasphemer of God, and
persecutor of the Protestants, had a burning disease in his priuities and
stomach, which consumed him.

Claudius des asses, a great swearer and blasphemer, the same day he had
condemned a Protestant to be burnt, as he was in the act of filthiness with one
of his Chamber-Maids, the same day dyed of an Apoplexy.

Oh the lamentable deaths of our own Clergy in England, rauing, and
blaspheming God even at the last gasp (as they say) namely, the Bishop of
Winchester, Cardinal Bewford, Cardinal Wolsey, Cardinal Poole, Gardner,
Bonner, and diverse others.

John Andrew a Stationer, and a Spy against Protestants, set on by the popish
Clergy, died stark mad, and railing both against God and them.

John Menier, Lord of Opidel, fell into a strangurie and burning disease,
blaspheming his Creator, and crying out against the Clergy.

A Iacobine Friar, called De Roma, withdrawing himself to Auignion, determined
to make merry with the spoils of the Protestants of Prouence, where he was
first robbed by his own servants, and then died in beggary of a strange
disease.

Petrus Castellanus was once a professor of the Gospel, in the time of Francis
the first, and so displeased the Sorbonists at Paris: afterward he returned as
they say, to the vomit, in the reign of Henry the second: and thereupon was
made the Bishop of Orleance: the reason is rendered, because the Protestants had
no countenance nor honor. But what followed he fell into a strange disease:
the one half of his body was as hot as fire, the other as cold as might be;
which, joined with a bloody flix, killed him at last: but before he died, all
were amazed at his sorrow and extremity.

8. Concerning their ignorance and doltishnesse. 7. Their Blasphemies.
For the general, it is well known, that many priests could scarce read
Latin, much less understand it, and knew not their Mass and Mattens, but by
the great letters: yea when they were drunk, were often deceived in the rules
of the Pie; and would diverse times repeat one for another: insomuch that in
England we had these phrases: Ignorant Sir John: A very Dunse: a Queen Mary's
priest, and such like. But to make you sport, and give you some examples:

It is a common tale of a pretty Boy, that set the Priests Barn on fire, and
speaking to him in his own Latin, all was burnt, because he understood him
not.

Pogius the Florentine has a hundred examples of the Priests of his time, that
knew no Latin, when they came to receive Orders, they are called his facetiae:
and indeed he sets down the stories, merely for jests and laughter.

There was an Italian Friar, that told the people, they were to celebrate that
week the feast of Epiphany; but by his troth he knew not, whether it were Man
or Woman.

When a certain Priest read the Gospel of Christ's feeding so many men with a
few loaves and Fishes, he named 500. for 5000. at which the Clarke being
discontented, stepped to him, and told him he was mistaken, it was 5000. Hold
thy peace, replied the Priest, I pray God they believe this number.

There was a certain Priest, that supposed dignus, was Latin to dine: for
when he came to the Bishop to be preferred to a Benefice, the Bishop only
asked him, Es ne tu dignus? He replied, that if it pleased his Lordship, he
would dine with his Gentlemen.

What should I name him, that could not tell the father of the four sons of
Aimon; or him, that knew not who begat Iaphet, for all they said, that Noah had
three sons, Some, Ham, and Iaphet?

There was a Priest in Italy so absurdly ignorant, that when he came to baptize
an Infant, he accustomed to say, In nomine Patria, and filia, and spiritua
Sancta.

Of diverse Priests the relation is thus: One, in stead of euertit domum, said
euerit domum: Another, for demissus per portam, demissus per sportam. A third
englished Haereticum deuita, put an Heretic to death; and a fourth, Inuenimus
Messiam, we have found the Mass.

A Curate of Artois suing his Parishioners for not pauing the Church, alleged
the Prophet Jeremy for his action -- Paueant illi, and non pauea^ ego.

A profound Clerk, being urged with certain laws, called Clementina and
Nouella, was very angry, that they objected to him the testimony of Whores and
Harlots.

Prat the Chancellor, interpreting Henry the 8. Letter to Francis the French
King, englished Mitto tibi duodecim Molossos; so many Mules, in stead of
Mastiues.

Hugo Carensis will not have Diabolus, a slanderer, but to eat up one at two
morsels, body and soul.

In the conference holden at Poyssi, a Priest called Demochares, pleading for
Images, was so ignorant, that he had no other thing to allege, but the
painted windows of Saint Denis. True, answered the Minister, your argument is
made of glass.

The Papists commend the Colliers faith, that could answer the Devil nothing,
but that he believed, as the Church believes, although he knew not what that
belief was. Whereupon Linwood and others say; It is sufficient to believe the
Articles of the Creed, and no more.

Dante says, that the Friars preach their own inventions, and tell idle tales
without edification: and Cornelius Agrippa condemns their ignorance, as
preaching mere toys, and humane devices, as not understanding any other.

Alfonsus a Castro says, that diverse Popes were utterly vnlearn'd. For one of
them, in stead of fiat, said fiatur.

Gregory the sixth, according to Laziardus, understood not the Mass. Pope
Zachary condemned Virgilius, a Bishop of Germany, as an Heretic, for saying
there were Antipodes: and Paul the second could not endure the name of
Academie, as an enemy to all learning.

John Peckam, in the Provincial constitution, thinks it sufficient for
Priests once in a quarter of a year to expound the Articles of the Creed, ten
Commandments, the two commandments of the Gospel, the seven works of Mercy,
the seven deadly sins: the seven Virtues: the seven Sacraments, and that
without curiosity.

Durandus teaches us, that the two points of a Bishops Myter, signifies the
Old and New Testament: but Loies Mersilius, an Augustine Friar says, that the
two strops of the Myter that hang on the Bishops back, do signify, that he
neither understood the Old nor New Testament.

Alnarus Pelagius complains, that the Bishops of Spain committed thousands
of souls to their kinsmen priests, that had no learning. And the Germans of
late told Adrian the sixth; that unlearned Idiots, unfit, vile, and ridiculous
fellows were made Priests.

The Monks and Friars at this hour can scarce read their canonical hours.
For in the Monastery of Fulda, the Monks accused Rabanus Manrus for being
learned, and studying the Scriptures, and neglecting their temporalities: but
of late, lest children should mock the popish priests, that cannnot read their
Mass with true accents, every word in common Missals is accented: and yet they
miss every day.

9. Concerning their Beastliness, both in ribaldry and other (...) actions, I
will insist the 9. Their Beastliness
less, because the (...) are filthy, and can no way delight either chaste
ears, nor a civil auditorie yet to keep correspondency with my division,
something must be spoken befitting this discourse, and agreeable to the Section.

In other places as well as there, when women came to confession, the Friars
and Priests would demand of them, whether they were Sodomites or no? many times
putting them in mind of that, which they understood not, and causing a
filthiness to be practiced, which before they knew.

You shall read in the life of Iuniperus, whom Saint Francis held for an
honest man, that he commonly used to defile his bed, by ravening in of
hotch-pot diet; as seething Cabages, Roots, Bacon, Beef, Flesh, Veale,
Pigeons, and all together, without either scumming the pot, or cleanely
dressing.

They tell it for a jest, and yet not to be denied, that the Monk Ruffinus
drove away the Devil, by threatening to untruss a point in his throat.

In the life of Saint Dominick, a certain man was possessed with Devils:
whereupon the Saint bound about his neck certain Relics, whereof some of
them were no better then shitten clouts at the least, whose perfume the Devils
could not abide, and therefore cried out they would depart: but the holy Man
would not believe them, till the Relics were sureties for them. As he also
preached, the women were amazed, and cried out, that if he said true, they had
served a very strange Master; he bade them be quiet, and they should see what
Master they had served. Whereupon enters in among them an ugly Cat, with
flaming eyes, showing his posteriors unto them, which were more filthy then in
other Beasts: At last he leapes into the Belfry, and left such a stink behind
him, that had almost choked them all.

In the legend of S. Dominick, a Nun called Mary, had a sore thigh, for which
she prayed to S. Dominick, as daring not to pray to God: Who pitying her, came
to her when she was asleep, and anointed the place.

Pope Felix the eighth after S. Gregory, built a Church in the honor of S.
Cosmas, and S. Damias, wherein one had his thigh almost rotted off with a
canker: but these Saints came with Salues and Ointments, yea took very
excrements to cure the fellow: but when they saw they could do no good, they
cut off a leg of an Ethiopian newly buried, and put it to the man, and so
cured him.

At Lodone in Gascoine, the Mouse that had eaten their bready god, was
canonized, and called the holy Mouse.

The famous Fransciscan de cornibus; died of the Neapolitan disease: yet, when
the buttons and pimples brake forth, and made him look fiery red, they
reported he became a Seraphin; yea, when a Gentlewoman died of the stink, by
kissing of his feet, it rather confirmed their opinion, then gave them eyes to
look into the villainy.

When a certain Cardinal made report; that there was a Woman possessed by a
Devil, who could not be coniured: No, quoth Lon the public Notarie, give her
but a glister of holy water, and the Devil will be gone, I warrant you.

It is written in the life of Pope Sixtus the 4. that he granted liberty to
the whole family of the Cardinal of, S. Luce, to use carnal company with the
male sex, during the three hottest Months: and Pope Alexander the 6. permitted
Peter Mendozze, a Spaniard, and Cardinal of Valentia, to make a Ganimede of
his bastard son, the Marquess of Zannet. But of this no more.

10. Concerning their Fooleries, and Absurdities, 10. Their fooleries.
I know not werhe to begin, nor once beginning, how to make an end: For there
are so many remarkable things of this kind, that I stand amazed at the
blindness of former times, that could not discover such fopperies and abuses;
and wonder at their superstitious ignorance, which would not suffer them to be
led into the fairer fields of knowledge: But to the purpose.

A Franciscan, putting on a short garment, and leaving off his breeches of
purpose, used such emphaticall speeches and gestures to the people which stood
before him, about the passion of Christ on a good Friday, that they fell a
weeping: but such as were behind, seeing his naked buttocks, as he bowed
himself, fell also a laughing, he proved so ridiculous in the action.

Robert Liciencis, another Franciscan, could cause either sorrow, or laughter,
by the enforcement of his words, and manner of his gesture: yea he had a trick
to win wagers with his potcompanions of eithers enforcement.

A Friar having a Sweet-hart, who loved him extraordinarily, but could not
endure his habit, he took occasion one day to preach of the wars against the
Turk: and coming to the point of choosing a General, or Captain, he threw
off the gown, and preached in the habit of a Soldier, which became him so
well, that his Sweetheart seeing him, was much delighted with his presence.
And when for this and other fooleries he was sent for before the Cardinals,
he answered them very merrily and reverently, that he did it to please his
Love, not in any contempt of his Order, or the Catholic Religion.

A certain Curate complained to his Parishioners in this sort; Alas, what
would you have me do, O my Parishioners? You bring me no offerings, and I see
none of you dye; How shall I live then, think ye?

The Franciscans of Enreux counterfetted a Ghost, or a Spirit, to procure
money; and a young Franciscan Nouice, called Harecourt, at Orleans,
counterfetted the ghost of the Provost Marshals Wife, because he gave but six
crowns to the Franciscans.

At Triers in Germany, in the Abbey of Saint Simon, Saint Joseph's pantophles
have been in request a long time: and in Aix they showed his Breeches, with
the Virgin Mary's Smock: nay, there is not so much as the tail of the Ass,
on which our Savior rode, but it is at Genoa accounted for a Relicke: and in
the Country of Loraine the holy Hay found in the Cratch, where our Savior was
laid, is very famous.

At the Blacke-Friers in Arles, at Vigand in Languedock, and at Florence, the
stones are showed that killed Saint Steven: with the arrows wherewith Saint
Sebastian was wounded.

When Nicodemus took our Savior down from the Cross, he gathered some of
his blood, and put it in one of the fingers of his Glove, by which he wrought
many miracles, and for which he was persecuted by the Jews: so that he was
glad to be rid of it, and took a piece of Parchment, writing therein all his
miracles, and what the blood was, rolling it together, and enclosing it in the
beak of a Bird, and so tying it hard, cast it into the Sea: but after 1200.
years, the waves drove it into Normandy, among certain shrubs, where a Duke
found it, and built the Abbey of Beck in the place: For hunting of a Stagge,
and losing him and the dogs, they were all found kneeling before the Birds
bill: which when it was searched, discovered the secret, and the miracle
wrought the Duke to Devotion; and as I said, made him build a glorious Abbey:
-- O manifesta phraenesis!

What say you to Christ's blood kept in Vyals, gathered from under the Cross by
his Mother? The tears of Christ? the Swaddling bands of Christ? the Milk of
the Virgin Mary? yea, the very breath of Christ, and the horns of Moses?

What think you of the several Saints and their Offices? Saint Genniesne, to
cause Rain? Saint Burbe, Thunder: Saint Maturin, a Physician for Fools: Saint
Acuire, for Madmen: Saint Auertin, for the diseases of the head: Saint
Entrope, for the Dropsy: Saint Mammard, for the Paps: Saint Phiacre, for the
Emerods: Saint Maine, for the Scabs: Saint Genoa, for the Gowt: Saint Crepine,
for Shoes: Saint Medard, for smiling: Saint Job, for the Pox: Saint Roch, for
Cobblers: Saint Wendelin, for Shepherds: Saint Pelage, a Neat-herd: Saint
Anthony, a Swineherd: Saint Gertrudia, a Rat-catcher: Saint Honor, a Baker:
Saint Eloy, a Smith: Saint Hubert, a Hunts-man: Saint Luke, a Painter: Saint
Nicholas, a Mariner: Saint George, a Knight: Saint Yue, a Lawyer: Saint Anne
for things lost: Saint Leonard, to open Prisons: Saint Feriol, to keep Geese:
Saint Wendalus, to keep Sheep: Saint John, to keep Lambs: Saint Hubert, for
Dogs; with infinite others? And is not this fine foolery? or how can there be
more palpable grosenesse?

O Savior! what shall I now say to such a foolery, as is unanswerable? whether
all our Ladies make one Lady, the Mother of Christ, or not? as Lady of Loretto,
Bononia, Wels in Auergue, Aix, Nantuile, Franckucile: the Valley, the
Mountain, Mount-ferra, Mount-guatier, Mount Rowland, Cabimont in Languedoc:
Our Lady of the Woods, our Lady of the Fields, of the fair Oak, Walnut-tree,
Fountain: and at Chartres, our Lady above and beneath: our Lady of Crotes, or
in a Cave: of Carmel, of Snow. What say you also to our Lady of recovery, of
comfort, of gladness, of all joys, of pity, of virtues, of good tidings, of
good wishes, and infinite others? but what? all one woman? O blessed Jesus, what
absurdity is here?

Do you think it is not worth the laughing at, to observe the many Masses,
wherewith the Friars and Priests maintain their Gluttony, in ringing, singing,
quauering, mumbling, grumbling, and pattering great, little, high, low Masses,
with a sop of Wine, and dry Masses; Masses for quick and dead; Masses ad
requiem; Masses for all Ladies, pity, virtue, good news, and such like:
Masses of Saints, Sebastian, Godegran, Guerlichon, Aliuergo, Andoch. Masses for
11000. Virgins: Fraternities, Chanters, Warriers, and such like? Yea, what say
ye to the Ornaments? Albe, Stole, Girdle, Maniple, Amist, Cope, Chasible,
Platine, Pix, Censour, and many other things?

A Gentleman being reproved for not vailing his Bonet, when the Holy Water was
cast on his head; answered, that if it had that virtue to penetrate to
Purgatory, it would no doubt go through his Hat well enough.

In Burgandy, near a Village called Chaseule, a Countryman hearing Ringers,
went into the Church, and kneeled before a Crucifix standing near the Belfry,
which fell down and had almost dashed out his brains, so that the Ringers
were feign to leave work, to carry him home. Upon his recovery he comes to the
same Church again, and finds a young smiling Crucifix in the place of the old,
(for the other was broken in the fall) which looking steadfastly upon, he could
forbear no longer, but thus began, Cast as good a countenance toward me as
thou will, I will never trust thee. For if thou live to be a man, thou will be
as unhappy as ever was thy father, who would have killed me.

When Pope Leo the tenth was told by his Confessor, that he needed to fear
nothing, considering he had the keys of heaven, and the treasury of the
Church. He answered in this sort: Thou know that he which has sold a thing,
has no longer right nor interest therein; therefore seeing I have sold heaven
and all to others, I am afraid I shall have nothing to do there my self.

When Pope Julius the second cast S. Peter's Keys into Tiber, and took Saint
Paul's sword, he said alowd, Saint Peter's Keys would stand him in no stead for
the Wars, but Saint Paul's sword would help him well.

The manner was among the Priests that went a begging for Saint Anthony, to
heat their little Crosses, or brazen Images: which when the women came to
kiss, and felt it very hot, they would tell them, that S. Anthony was not
pleased with their Alms, and the poor women so frighted, would return and
fetch better.

There is a Story of Pudding Saint Peter, in the Country of Berry to this
purpose. A Priests maid powered swines blood into a great Latin Basin, which
had the Image of Saint Peter embossed in it, and whereinto the Curate was wont
to put his offerings, as it stood for show upon the Altar. Now it happned, that
a drop of the blood was vnwash't out of it, and so perceived on S. Peter's
face: whereupon the Priest rung the Bells, and cried, A miracle; which caused
the neighbor parishes to meet at Procession, had not another envious Priest
discovered the foppery; and so it ended in laughter and ridiculousnes.

11. Concerning their Impieties: I will neither 11. Their impieties.
trouble you with the wicked Doctrine of Papists, nor imposturing trumperies of
Priests and Friars, touching either the abuse of holy Scripture, or mixture of
their own fancies with the written Word; but show you certain instances and
examples, whereby you may see, with what daring hands, worse then Ieroboams
arm, they have reached to pull the good Prophets by the throats: that is to
say, what attempts they have made, both in words and actions, against Christ,
and true Religion. Oh let such hand and arms wither, as that wicked Kings did.

The Schoolmen determine, that the Son of God might have assumed any other
nature, besides that of Man.

The Idolatrous Gentiles and Egyptians did not eat those creatures, which
they adorned as Gods: and yet Alexander Hales, and Thomas Aquinas will not
only have men to devour their God and Savior, like bread, but affirm that
Dogs, and Hogs, Mice, and Birds may eat the true body of Christ.

When the Pope goteh on progress, Christ's body is sent before with the
baggage, and when the Pope is near, then it goes out to meet him, while all
the Gallants of Rome attend on the Pope.

They make Saint Francis, and Dominick, equal to Christ in diverse things; and
in some, superior: For they call Saint Francis, Iesum Tipicum, that is, a
figurative Jesus, and say plainly, that Dominick and Francis did more Miracles
then Christ.

In the conuenticle of Trent, Cornelius, Bishop of Bitonto, said, Papa lux
venit in mundum, The Pope the light came into the world: and Simon Begnius, in
the Council of Laterane, called Leo the tenth, The Lion of the tribe of Judah,
and cried out, Te Leo beatissime, saluatorem expectauimus, that is, We, blessed
Leo, have looked for thee our Savior.

Beno the Cardinal shows, that Gregory the seventh, cast Christ's body into
the fire, burning the Savior of Papists: and so did Pius the fifth, as Catena
reports, throw an Agnus Dei into the flames.

Theoderick shows plainly, that Vrbane the Pope melted crosses and Images of
silver, to pay soldiers: and thus, that which they pretend to honor as God,
they convert into the service of the Devil.

Horatius Tersalinus in an Epistle to Peter Aldobrandini, prefixed before the
Story of our Lady of Loretto, says, that God made the Virgin Mary, as much as
could be, companion and partaker of his Power and Majesty, etc. and
Bernardinus in Mariali likewise says, that all graces came down from God by
Mary. And Bonauenture has transformed the praises and honor of God, set out
by the Prophet David, to the Virgin Mary. To conclude, in the Roman Breuiary,
she is called dulcis amica Dei, and the happy gate of Heaven: Yea, in the
Missas of Sarum, they esteem of her, as the Savior of the world.

Is it not impiety to make a scorn of Christian Religion? Then harken what the
Popes themselves have done? Julius the 2. upon Easter day, fought with the
French at Rauenna. Gregory the 7. commanded his Army to join battle upon a
good Friday, against Henry 4. Emperor, and in Saint Mary's Church he sought
to murder him, by throwing down a stone upon his head from a Vault with his
own hands. Sixtus 4. by his Agents, at the elevation of the Sacrament,
endeavored to murder Laurence. And Julian de Medices, Leo the 10. called the
Gospel a Fable. And Cardinal Poole, an inkie Gospel. I could tell you more of
Eccius, Piggius, and diverse others: but I will not make your ears glow again
with their horrible impieties.

Paulus Aemilius tells, how the Ambassadors of Sicilia cried out to the Pope.
Thou which take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us. And Simon
Begnius, Bishop of Modrusa, in the Council of Laterane, calls Leo the 10.
his Savior. Stapleton, writing to Gregory the 13. calls him Supremum numen
in terris. Tho: Waldensis, a most ridiculous and impious Friar, conuerteth the
words, which the Apostle spoke to Christ, to Martin the 5. Domine, salua nos,
perimus. Fulbertus, Bishop of Chartres, says Rodulphus Niger, was nourished
with our Ladies Milk. They tell also blasphemous tales of Alane de rupe, the
Author of our Rosary, that he was very familiar with our Lady.

If I should raise this mountain of impiety with the stories and instances,
that I my self have read, it would be too stupendous, and make both you and
my self amazed, to behold my own handyworke: therefore I will use contraction,
and conclude this Section, with showing what wicked and impious persons they
have been, by whose authority, and means, the Popish religion has thriued,
and received supportation.

The principal Agent of the Popes Supremacy was Phocas, a barbarous Thracean,
and wicked murderer: and Bonifacius 3. nothing inferior unto him, in
nefarious and abominable actions.

Irene, a proud, insolent, and irregular woman, one that murdered her own
son, and conspired with Adrian, Bishop of Rome, to perpetrate horrible
outrages in the Church of God, brought in the idolatrous worship of Images and
Saints.

Gregory 7. first dissolved by force Priests marriages, and exalted the Miter
of the Pope, above the crowns of Emperors: Yet Beno testifies, he was a
Necromanticke, a Murderer, Empoysoner, Sacrilegious, and impious person: yea,
the Synod of Brixina condemned him for diverse abominable crimes.

Paschal the second is called an Incendiary, or firebrand of sedition and
trouble, setting the son against the Father, and the Subjects to oppose their
Princes. Thus having prevailed against the Emperor, he denied his body
burial, and caused the carcass of Pope Clement to be burned in a triumphant
despite.

Alexander the 3. betrayed the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa to the Sultan, and
persuaded him to destroy him, having yet most proudly trod upon his neck, with
abusing a place of Scripture: Super aspidem, etc.

Innocent 3. first established auricular confession and transubstantiation,
raised tumultuous wars in France, caused the bones of Almericus to be burned
for preaching against Images, and showed himself a bloody deuourer of Christ's
flock, and zealous Christians.

Honorius the 3. authorized the worship of the Masse-cake, forbade the marriage
of Priests, and maintained the filthiness of Monks and Friars: his malice so
extended against the Scots that had slain Adam Bishop of Catnes, that he
caused four hundred to be hanged, and gelded their children, to extinguish
their race for ever.

Boniface the 8. Clement 5. John 22. made up the body of the Canon law; you
know, what that means. Of the first, it is written, he entered like a Fox;
reigned, like a Lion; dyed, like a Dog. Of the second, he was infamous,
insolent, and a Lecher. Of the third, Petrarch writes a whole Sonnet, etc.

John the 23. denied the Immortality of the Soul, and was convinced of
Incest, Sodomitry, and Atheism. And Eugenius the 4. was condemned for an
Heretic, driven out of the City as a public enemy by the Romans, and caused
Ladislaus to periure himself with the Turk, whereby so many Christians were
slain at Varna.

Paul the 3. Julius the 3. and Pius the 4. the wicked Authors of the Decrees,
and Anathematismes of the Conuenticle of Trent, were such infamous and impious
men, that the first was a Parricide, Lecher, Negromancer, and Empoysoner. The
second an Epicure, and filthy Sodomite: for Innocentius de monte, a Boy he
used, was made Cardinal by him. The third died between two Concubines, and
was odious to the Romans for his Vices.

I could say much more in this point, and spread a Carpet of such odious
filthiness, that the very steame and ordure would poison you in the opening;
and therefore I will cloze it up for modesties sake. And if any object, that
here are a number of stories recited, almost incredible to be believed,
without partiality, or farre-fetcht devices, I refer them to all their own
Histories, the Sibils, ancient Fathers, their own Saints; Costerus, Nauclerus,
Platina, Herodatus, Scotus, Aquinas, Durandus, Biel, Stapleton, Harding,
Bellarmine, Kellison: their Legends, Rosaries, Decretals, Cannon Law,
Lombardus, and diverse others, even the Popes Champions. If you would have more
justifiable Authors, then you may peruse Bernard in diverse places, Petrarch,
Mantuan, John of Salisbury, Warnerus, Theoderick, Johannes Marius, Robert
Grosted, Beno, Matthew Paris, Vergerius, Sleidan, and so many others, that if
they now should be traduced for scandalizing the Church and Religion of Rome,
their very bones would rise out of their graves in Judgment against you, and
their now books extant in the world would up and assume life, to defy you to
your faces.

12. Last of all, concerning their Simony. The 12. Their Simony.
History of Matthew Paris is a very Map, wherein he does quasi digito
demonstrare the Usury, Symony, Rapi ne, Sacrilege, and unjust gain, wherewith
the Popes enriched their Coffers out of England; yea, he inlargeth the
particulars of every Kings Reign, insomuch, that speaking of Gregory the 7. he
cries out, that his Agents did vex the people. And Feline shows, that
without the rent of Simony, the Church of Rome would come to contempt. For of
late days they have erected diverse Banks, called Monti de Pieta, as appears
in Onuphrius in the lives of Julius the 3. Paul the 4. and Pius the 4. Vrbane
the 6. would sell Crosses, Chalices, and Images. Boniface the 9. would bargain
for money for Benefices, and when it was scarce, take Pigs, Cattle, and Wares,
which his Agents should vent out again. I will not talk of Masses,
Sacraments, Pardons, Indulgences and such like: but tell you what they say in
Spain, and that in a Rhyme, Es el primero ganor dinero: and for the person of
the Pope -- Todo parami, nada para Vos.

There is a saying of Alexander the 6. Vendere iure potest, emerat ille prius.


Benet the 9. sold the papacy for 1500. pounds of gold, to Gregory the 6. And
no man obtains that place, but for great sums of money, and larger
promises, as the discourses of the Conclaues testify, and Been writes at
large.

Briget in her Revelations says, that the Pope has turned all Gods
commandments into one, and that is, Dapecuniam.

But Mantuan has it thus: -- Venalia nobis,
Templa, Sacerdotes, altaria, sacra, coronae,
Ignis, thura, preces, Calum est venale, Deusque
Frederick the 2. for one absolution paid to Gregory the 9. 125000. ounces of
gold, as the Pontifical, Nanclere epitome reru^ Germ. John of Pineda, and
others do reckon.

Leo the 10. brought such a scandal upon the sale of Indulgences in Germany,
as coming then to Magdalene the Popes honest Sister, that all the Country was
moved, and complained thereof: But Theoderick testifies in his book, that
Boniface the ninth sold benefices as he was hearing of Mass: and Theoderick
Trudo has a pretty complaint, That Christ's sheep-folds were broken down with
hammers of silver.

The time of Henry 3. in England was so deplored of the Emperor, that he
reprehended the King, for suffering his Country to be so shamefully
empouerished by the Pope: For Matthew Paris writes, that at one time they had as
much money out of England, as remained there; except Church ornaments, Plate,
and Jewels, etc. yea, Bonner in his preface to Gardiners Book De vera
obedientia, says plainly, That the Popes spoils did equal the Kings
reuennues.

Lewis the 9. of France, in his Pragmatical sanction, not only complains of
the Popes exactions, but absolutely forbideth them. Whereupon the University
of Paris, in an appeal from Leo the tenth, taxes the insatiable Avarice of
the Court of Rome, as drawing from thence 2500000. crowns a year; confounding
laws and Cannons, by expectatiues, and reseruations, and upon pretense of
diverse faculties coming from thence.

James Archbishop of Ments paid diverse sums of money for his Pall: and
Valla made a treatise against the forged devotion of Constantine; accusing the
Pope, for selling the gifts of the holy Ghost: wherein he did worse then
Verres, or Cateline, or any robber of the common treasure. But Theoderick
compares the Popes exchecquer to the Sea, into which all Rivers run, and yet
it runs not over: yea, he says plainly, that the Popes officers were so
many tormentours of Hell, to scourge the people. Alan Chartier testifies, that
Gods Sanctuary was a common market place for the sale of benefices. John of
Salsburie cries out, that the Pope became intolerable, and delighted in the
spoils of the Church: Vesperge^sis affirms, that all men sought to Rome for
dispensation of offenses, and were released for money. But Johannes Andreas
goes further, exclaiming that Rome was founded by robbers, and yet retains a
sent of her first liquor; as if he should say, Quo semel est imbuta recens,
seruabit odorem, pesta diu. I could here also recite the 100. grieuances of
(...), the sayings of Albericus a Rosato: the complaints of Johannes Petrus de
Ferrara: and that Pretrach calls her Lanata Babylonia.

But if I now should tell you, after all this getting of wealth, and amassing
of treasure, their pride and sumptuousnes in the spending of the same, you
would be amazed and wonder, with what spirit they durst justify such
sacrilegios, vanity, and unparalleled magnificence; wherein Princes come short of
their Regality. Baptista Fulgosius records, of one Peter Riarus, at first a
Friar minorite, that being created Cardinal by Pope Sixtus 4. he had his
Gowns of cloth of gold; the Couerings and Tikes of his bed of the same, and
all other furniture of the best Silk. At Rome he made a Feast to Elenor of
Arragon, as she was going to marry the Duke of Ferrara, called Hercules de
Est, which lasted seven hours with great variety and pompous plays, and
lived in that excess of Voluptuousness and cost, that all Italy admired his
wealth.

Another had a Concubine called Tiresia, and kept her publicly with shoes set
with Pearl and precious Stones: but this is common, and the Cardinals at this
hour glory in such excess.

A Franciscan of Millane, called Sanson, had so enriched himself by Bribery,
Simony, Sacrilege, and other exactions, that he offered 120000. dukats for the
Popedom: but this kind of life and expenses is so customary in Rome, that I
need insist on no further particulars, especially, the maintaining of
Curtezans, which name had original from the courtlinesse and majesty of the
Cardinals; so that you shall read, that in the time of Paul the 5. which was
then esteemed a time of restraint, there were but 45000. notorious Curtezans in
Rome. But what need I go so far as Rome for wealthy Prelates, when we had
in England in the time of Henry the 5. a Bishop of Winchester, who lent the
King 20000. pound Sterling to go into France? In the time of Rich. the 1. a
Bishop of Durham able to buylan Earldom. In the time of Henry 6. Cardinal
Beuford, worth above 200000. Sterling. In the time of Henry the 8. a Cardinal
Wolsey, exceeding all the Prelates of Europe, for wealth and magnificence. And
in the time of Queen Mary, a Cardinal Poole, one of the sumptuous subjects of
the world.

The Conclusion.
NOw ye Lords, that entertain these Priests with familiar embraces, and admit
them to your Tables and Closets, as if you would rely upon the Verdict of some
Oracle; whereas yet in other Countries they are even derided of their best
Supporters: Now ye Ladies, that in a manner hang about their necks with
admiration, as if you were to run to touch the hemme of Christ's garment,
supposing all sanctity and piety to be the ornaments of their hypocrisy: Now
see, Gentiles, that are so easily seduced with imposturing cunning of
dissimuled holiness, and will not believe the incantation of Sirens, whose end
is destruction, or to devour your souls: Now ye people, that are transported
with vain apparitions, and gew-gaw superstition, to please the natural man
with pastime, and trumperies; seeing these things are so, which I have recited,
being not the tenth of that which I could enlarge: May I not well say to you,
as S. Paul said to the Galatians, O ye Fools, who has bewitched you? What a
Pope do you adore? The Man of sin, the son of perdition, the Whore of
Babylon, the Beast with seven heads, and ten Horns, etc? What Priests and
Prelates do ye entertain, that will lead you from the pure Waters of
Shiloa, where you may wash and be clean without money, into the durty puddles
of filthiness, where yet you must be at great expenses, to purchase monstrous
deformity?

What doctrine do you make much of, of darkness and pollution, which cannot
endure the sunny splendor of the Word of God; so that without controversy, if
the blind lead the blind, both fall into the Ditch, and in the end you shall
be so besmeared with the devices of wicked Traditions, that neither Culanais,
nor a thousand Rivers of Oil shall make you clean?

Return therefore betimes, I beseech you, to Wisdoms Feast, to the balm of
Gilead: to bring in the Arc, and to re-edifie Jerusalem. Oh, return, return,
I say, for Gods sake, for Christ's sake, for Religions sake, for your own
souls sakes, that you may see the difference between the bloody Scarlet Robes
of the Cardinals, and the innocent white garments of the Saints. That ye may
hear the voice of, Come ye blessed; and, not, Go you cursed: And that you may
come before the Lamb, freely with the signature of righteousness and
repentance, and not at all be beholding to Saint Peter, and his Keys, which I
dare swear are not yet found, since the Pope cast them into Tyber.

A Jove surgit opus.

FINIS.

