TWO TREATISES WRITTEN AGAINST THE PAPISTS, THE ONE BEING AN answer of the
Christian Protestant to the proud challenge of a Popish Catholic:

THE OTHER. A CONFVTATION OF THE POPISH CHVRCHES doctrine touching Purgatory
and prayers for the dead: by William Fulke Doctor in divinity.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Vautrollie^ dwelling in the Black friars. 1577.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER: WILLIAM FVLKE WISHES GRACE AND PEACE from God the
father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.
THE great bragges that were made by diverse Papists of this treatise of
Purgatory that it was vnansvverable, were so intolerable, that certain of
my godly friends were moved thereby, to send the book to me, desiring me to
shape an aunsvvere unto it. But when I had readde it over, and found therein
in deed much new railing, yet nothing else but the old fond kind of
reasoning, I was altogether unwilling to deal with it, both because there
has been so much already written of that argument, and for that I thought,
that our contrymen were now, as well by reading of that which has been
written before, as also by continual preaching against that absurd doctrine,
sufficiently dissvvaded from that blaspemous heresy of Purgatory. But when
this excuse, or any other that I could bring, vvoulde not satisfy there ernest
desire, who importunatly still urged me to take the matter in hand, and that I
had once again perused the treatise, I began to think otherwise of the
whole case, then I did before. I considered that many there were, which
perhaps had not seen, and many also that vvoulde not read, such books as
have been written in times past of this question, and that some also were so
simple, that they could not discern this new disguised defense of the
Catholic churches doctrine, from the old drousie dream of popish Purgatory.
Wherefore if any one of these, or any other that shall voutsalfe to read this
answer, might thereby either be confirmed in truth, or reclaymed from error:
I began to think it were sufficient cause for me to take the pains, and the
pains so taken to be well bestovved. Again when I remembered the spightfull
railing, and the most disdainefull arrogance of Allen him self, together with
the presumptuous boasting, and vain confidence, that some of his friends have
in his vvriting: I confess it kindled that small zeal of godliness that is in
me, both to meinteine the common hope of Christians, against the insolent
assaults of so malicious and proud an adversary, and also to discover the
infirmity and feebleness of that fortres, which these vvillfully blind
Papists do vaunt to be invincible. In which doing I have used great
brevity, not only by a natural inclination, vvherby I love to be short, in
any thing that I wright: but also because my friends urged me, to dispatch it
with so great expedition. And yet in this shortness, I trust I have not
omitted any thing, that has any shadovv of reason or show of matter in it,
but that I have sufficiently discharged it: as the diligent and attentive
reader, I hope will confess no less. How be it neither my have in
finishing, nor my friends diligence in soliciting, was so great, but the
slacknesse and vntovvardnesse of some Printers was much more. For where as it
was ended and authorized almost two years a go, yet it has stayed
hitherto, until a godly and learned brother, who was once purposed to have
answered the same him self, and cold full well and substantially have
acquitted him self there in, if other business had not hindered him, moved of
godly zeal, has now at the last undertaken the printing thereof, and brought
it to this pass as you see. I heard of late also of a third man, which had
learnedly begone the aunsvvering of this book, how so ever he was let from
accomplishing the same. But how so ever Satan has hither to hindered the
setting abroad of this aunsvvere, yet God has now at the length brought it
forth: I doubt not but to his glory and the confusion of Satan in his members
the Papists.

I have thought good also to ioygne unto this work, an other short treatise
that has lain by me these eight or nine years, written at the request of a
godly and learned friend of mine, in aunsvvere to a proud challenge of the
Papist against the Protestant which though at the first and many years after,
I determined not to publish, supposing the same challenge to have been private,
or in fevv men's hands, yet now of late, that I have seen it in diverse godly
Gentlemen's hands, to whom it has been delivered by Papists, be like to
pervert them, and of whom also I have been desired to answer it, and am
further credibly informed, that the same is in printe, and esteemed of many
ignorant Papists to be so vnaunsvverable, that although it be protested by
Ge^tlemen of great vvorshippe and credit, that they have seen the aunsvvere
thereof in vvriting, yet they will not believe, that any man dare set his pen
to the paper, once to attempt the matter. I have thought best to put it in
printe as it was written at the first. Nothing doubting by Gods help, but I
shall be able to stand to that defense if the challenger will proceed to
meinteine his challenge any longer. That I have copled it with the aunsvvere
unto M. Allens book, is because I do greatly suspect, that he was the
author thereof, for the similitude of the styles and of the stomakes in both,
at the least I trust I do him no wrong, to suppose him to be so stout a
champion. And thus I commit the Christian reader to the direction of Gods
spirit who voutsalfe to lead thee into all truth for Christ's sake. Amen.

The faults of this impression are thus to be amended: The first figure
signifies the page, the second the line.
In the answer of a true Christian, etc.
Page 3. line 35. Lithuania read Lithu^anda. 5.3. vvriting r. writings.
10.10. the scripture, read the book of scripture. 13.17. then, read thou.
and line 19. you, read thou. 15. line the last. Tiberius. read Liberius.
19.4. you, read the. and line 10. Ca. line. 58. read Carolines. 8. and line
19. Mercamas, r. Marranias. 20.9. favor, read honor. 23.26. the prince, read
the printers. 24.1. put out and. 25.9 not for his, r. for his. 29.10. unity of
mind, r. unity of faith and mind. 30.3. in the places above rehearsed. in
diverse places of his epistles, a^ lib. 3. epist. 14. and 15.16. etc. 41.30.
Rhenes, r. Rhemes. 49.5. the the, r. that the. and the 12. r. and the Catho.
etc. 52.13. in Brytish, read in the Brytish. 63.14. about the articles, r.
about the chiefest articles. 64.20. put out (that hilde.) and the 24. here,
rea. sore. 67.21. which can not, rea. which you can not. 68.4. in a name,
read in a manner. 69.4. prorsus opinemur, r. prorsus non opinemur. and 34.
universally, r. universality. and 36. which you do, r. which you do not.
70.17. propone^da, r. praepone^da. and 22. in a. r. in the. and 24. when. r.
when the. 71.20. where, rea. were, and the 22. to, read in. 78.26. that you
^avv a bastard church, r. that you being a bastard church have. 87.34.
Commentualls, rea. Conuentualles. 91.32. that he. rea. then he. 92.30.
cultiued, r. continued. 97.1. your, read youres. 99.13. there, rea. therefore.
and 14. vinci, read vince
In the answer of a true Christian, etc.
page 14. li. 6 for that, r. the^. 22.21. conseites, r. conserues. 23.19. they
made a cushio^, read they made marriage a chushion. 25.37. fast, read fact.
26.37. canche, rea. couche. 30.35. greatest, rea. great. 31.1. read
instruments for the defense. 46.33. for, read far. 47.30. sins, read
sinner. ^9.19. praedicate, rea. praeiudicate. 64.37. fauteles, r. fruictles.
87.6. heavy, read hearie. 89.2. as, read or. 92.6. bitter, read better.
95.31. paltinge, r. peltinge. 102.15. r. liklihodes nu^bred. 121.29.
conuenientes, read conuenienter. 127.13. r. to death, and a sin not etc. and
li. 28.10. rea. to. 139.34. vnreco^cyled, read that are reconciled. 143.2 you.
read her. 151.27. and has, rea. having. 156.5. can not, read can stand.
etc. 205.29. to his brother, rea. to his brethren. 210.14. fast, read fact.
^24.31. read and forsakers. 232.38. sorovving, r. saying 238.10. clame, r.
exclame. 248.1. an, read any. 249.23. pray, read prayed. 255.19. Tecta,
read Tecla. 259.37. toti, read hi. 262.7. after writings make a full poinct,
and l. 10. Troianus, read Traianus. and 14. Barlau^, r. Barlaam. and 16.
Ephraim, r. Ephreem 265.27. and 29. Rhenamus, read Rhenanus. 268.36. knavv,
rea. knave. 277.17. should seem, read as it should seem. 283.2. Capth, r.
Chapter. 284.30. after decree, read concerning that which was not etc.
286.31. put out he. 299.19. had, read has. 295.11. xemia, rea. xenia. 307.8.
mistrusted, read misconstrued. 316.2. you vvil, r. you vvil not. and 23. then,
rea. thou. 334.19. criall, read trial. 335.31. put out, in. 347.1. same,
read sun and right, read light. 350.6. r. and deceives etc. 361.16. unto,
read in. 361.29. profatam, rea. profoctam. 364.31. we before, read before
we. 378.17. vindicemus, read iudicemus. and line 37. either, read other.
373.11. stringe, r. spring. 374.10. Consilio Meleuitano, r. Co^cilio
Mileuitano. 382.19. Common, r. Cannon. 386.31. degree, r. pedigree. 391.25.
thou, read there. 396.1. God, read man. 397.24. hidden, r. sudden. 399.15. as
for witness, read for vvitnesses. 406.6. the matter, read thy matter.
409.32. make a full poincte after in deed. and line 22. put out the full
poincte after describes. 435.16. sparte, r. sponte. and line. 29.
superstition, read supposition. 441.34. parleis, rea. paruis. 443.2. when,
rea. where. and 31. li. aliquid, r. aliquod. 447.2. strife, read stripe.
455.33. named, r. varied. and li. 34. shall, rea. should.
AN ANSWER OF A TRVE CHRISTIAN TO A COVNTERFAIT CATHOLIC.
The proposition of the Adversary.
CHrist did commit at his departure hence, the testimony of that truth, for
which he died, and the conversion of the Nations to the belief in him, to the
true church of God, which then stood principally, and almost only in the
persons of the Apostles and a few more, that by their preachings, and those
afterward of their calling, the Christian religion might be planted in all
Nations, beginning at Jerusalem, and so proceeding to the coasts and corners
of the earth.

AN ANSWER TO THE PROPOSITION.
I Grant that our Savior Christ, at his departure hence, commanded his
Apostles as principal members of his Church, though not the greatest part of
it, to preach the doctrine which he confirmed by his death unto all nations,
beginning at Jerusalem, and so forth according to his saying: Go therefore and
teach all Nations baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the holy Ghost: Teaching them to observe all things what so ever I have
commanded you. Matthew. 28. Whereupon I challenge the Papist that if he be able
to prove that the doctrine of popery is all that truth, and nothing but that
truth, for which Christ dyed, and which he commanded the Apostles to teach, I
will acknowledge the popish church to be the Church of Christ.

The first article conteyneth 3. demandes.
1 First I ask of the protestant what Church that was, which converted all
these cuntries that be now Christian, to the faith of Christ? IF you mean by
Christians, true Christians, and by the faith of Christ, the true faith of
Christ, I answer: only the true Church of Christ, has had the word of God
and sacraments, as means which God uses, to subdue al nations unto the
obedience of the faith, as was the primitive Church of the Apostles, which has
continued unto this day by succession, not of persons, and places, but of
faith and truth, wherefore if the Papist can prove, that we hold not the same
faith and truth, unto which the Apostles converted the nations, we refuse to
be called the Church or Congregation of Christ.

But if by Christians and Christian faith, you mean all them that profess the
name of Christ, in the whole world, I answer, that the true Church of
Christ, did not convert them all, for in Aethiopia, there are yet people,
converted by the false apostles, which taught circumcision, and observation of
the law, in which heresy they continue unto this day, and it is manifest by
all histories, that the nations of the Alanes, Goths, and Vandales, were first
converted by the Arrians.

2 And let him show unto me, that ever his Church converted any people, or
land in the earth, from Idolatry, or Gentility, or Iudaisme, to the true
Religion of Christ, or that this his faith was taught to any Nation in steed
of true Christianity. WE are members of that Church, which converted all lands
in the earth that are converted, from Idolatry, Gentility, Iudaisme, or
heresy, to the true Religion of Christ, and we affirm that the Apostles
taught none other faith in steed of true Christiantie, but that which we hold,
as we are ready to prove by the word of God: And at this day the most part
of Europe, is converted from Idolatry, heresy, and Antichristianitie, unto
the same true faith, that we maintain, as in England, Scotland, Ireland,
France, Germany, Denmark, Suetia, Bohemia, Polonia, by public authority, in
Spaigne, and Italy, a great number under persecution and tyranny. Also of the
Jews, no small number are converted to our religion, since the rising up of
the Gospel in our days.

3 Or any Church, but the common Catholic Church to have don that, and I
recant. BEcause you mean by the common Catholic, not the true Catholic, but
the popish church: First I deny that ever the popish church converted any
people, to the true faith. Secondly, I deny that the popish church has
converted all nations, to the profession of Christ: For, it is showed before,
that the false Apostles, and Arians, converted some nations to the profession
of Christ's name, but yet to false religion, And it is also manifest by
histories, that the Grecians, whom the papists count no part of their
church, but schismatikes, converted the Moscouites first of all, unto the
profession of the name of Christ, which yet continue in their religion, being
neither the true faith, nor yet popish religion. As for the popish church, as
it is certain, that it has perverted and corrupted all parts of the Latin,
or Western Church, with Idolatry and false religion, so it shall be hard for
the papists to prove, that it has converted any Nation from Gentility to the
popish religion, except some parts of Germany, and them by force of arms,
rather than by preaching, and reaching, as appears by the conversion of
Liuonia, Anno Domini 1200. of Prussia, Anno Domini 1254. and of Lithuania, Anno
Domini 1386. wherefore I conclude that seeing I have showed that our Church,
holding the true doctrine of the Apostles, is that which converted all nations
to true religion, and that the popish church, has not converted any people to
true religion, nor all people to the profession of the name of Christ, this
chalenger, whosoever he be, do the recant.

The second article conteyneth 4. demandes.
1 I ask of him what Church it was, which has induced the Christian people
through the whole world, to give most humble credit in all points, to the holy
books of the Bible? I Answer, it was the Church of Christ, and not the
Popish church, which has commended the books of holy Scripture, to be believed
of all true Christians where soever they be, although it be the office of the
holy Ghost, to open the hearts of men, and to form them that they may believe
the scripture to be true, like as it is the office of the scripture or word of
God, to try and examine, whether it be the spirit of God that persuades us
to believe any thing, so the spirit bears witness to the word and the word
to the spirit. As for the popish church it could not induce the Christian
people to give credit to the scripture in all points, because she is contrary
to the scripture in many points: and even in the cheifest points of Christian
Religion, namely in points concerning the glory of God, and the salvation of
mankind, giving the glory of God to dead men, and dumb Images, and denying
the mercy of God, pourchased by the only sacrifice of Christ's death, to be
the only cause of man's salvation. Finally seeing it is manifest by the
answer to the first article, that the popish church did not convert all
nations, to the profession of the Christian faith, it is evident thereby, that
the popish church did not induce all them, that are called Christians, to give
credit to the books of the holy Bible, as this chalenger would have it to be
thought.

2 What Church has had the discerning and seuering of them from other
writings of all sorts? THe Church of Christ, has not an absolute authority
to allow or refuse books of the scripture, but a judgment to discern true
writing from counterfaicts, and the word of God, of infallible verity, from ye
writing of men, which might err, and this judgment she has, not of her
self, but of the holy Ghost: as for the popish Church, it can not be said to
have this judgment of discerning the scripture of God from other writings, not
only because she is so blind that she can not discern between ye Canonical
books of the scripture, from the Apocrypha writings, as appears by receiving
the books of the Machabees, Ecclesiasticus, etc. to be of equal authority
with ye books of the Law, Psalms, etc. but also because she is so
presumptuous, as to compel men to believe, that Customs, and traditions,
writings of doctors, decrees of Popes, and Counsels, are equal with the
authority of God his word, yea are of force, to alter and change the law of
God, and the institution of Christ, set forth unto us in ye scripture. And
although she boast that she receaueth all the books of scripture, yet this
proves no more that she is the Church of Christ, than was the churches of the
Arrians, Donatistes, Nouatians, Euthychans, and other heretics, which received
the Bible, as well as the Popish church.

3 What Church has had the custody of them, and most safely has preserved
them, for the necessary use of God his people, and from the corruption of
adversaries, as well of Jews, as heretics of all sorts? THe providence of
God, has always preserved the Scripture, both from the violence of tyrants,
and from the falshoode of heretics, and has never suffered the true Church, to
be destitute of the necessary use thereof. But the popish church, has not
kept the scripture for the necessary use of the people, which has so kept it
in an unknown tongue, that the people could have no use, much less the
necessary use thereof: wherefore if this be a note of the Catholic Church, to
keep the word of God for the necessary use of God his people, it is plain
that the popish church is not the Catholic Church, which has kept the
scripture so, that God his people could have no use thereof.

And if the only custody of the scripture from corruption of heretics, be a
sure note of the Church, why is not the Greek Church, the Catholic Church,
which unto this day has kept the scripture as safely as the popish church? why
are not other Estern Churches of Asia, which never acknowledged the Pope, or
popish religion, true Churches, which likewise have preserved the scripture, as
we have seen of late, that the new Testament is printed in the Syrian tongue,
at themperours charges, for the increase of Christian faith among them. And
finally, why are not the Jews, the Catholic Church, which have kept the old
Testament in Hebrew, more faithfully than ever the Papists. And because they
boast of safe preserving of the scriptures, all men, that are learned in the
tongues can testify, in how corrupt a Latin translation they have kept the
scriptures, both of the old and of the new Testament.

4 And let the Protestant declare to me, that their Congregation has had from
time to time, or ever had right herein, or any other Church, saving the
Catholic Church, and I recant. Our Congregation, which is the body of Christ,
has ever had, both right and possession of the inestimable treasure of the
word of Christ her head: as appears by this, that our Church and
Congregation believes nothing but that she learneth in it, acknowledges that
all things profitable to salvation, are sufficiently contained in it, and
finally in all things submits her self to the judgment of it. But the
popish church, which believes many things contrary to the scripture, teaches
many things beside the scripture, necessary to salvation, and refuses to have
her faith, doctrine, and ceremonies, to be judged by the scripture, neither
has, neither ever had, any right to the scripture, though she have never so
many books of them in possession. Wherefore these things considered, this
chalenger does recant.

The third article conteyneth 5. demandes.
1 Show me why our common known Church, did not as well corrupt the text of
the Testament, as the true religion contained in the same? THere may be diverse
good reasons showed, why your Church, commonly known to be the church of
Antichrist, did not as well corrupt the text of the Testament, as the true
religion contained therein. First, because she could not, the copies thereof
being so many, by the providence of God dispersed throughout the world.
Secondly, because she thought it not so needful, having other means to work
her deuilish devise: For, although she could not corrupt the scripture, yet it
made the less matter, because she found means to diminish, and control the
authority thereof by advancing decrees of men, Popes, and Counsels, to be
equal or of greater authority than the scripture. Thirdly, because she would
be less in fear, to be reproved by the scripture, she provided that the
knowledge thereof, should be hidden from the unlearned people by a strange
tongue, and from the learned, by the tedious mazes of questions, devised by her
Canonistes, and Sententiaries. Fourthly, because she submitted all
interpretation of the scripture, to her own judgment, and therefore would
not be controlled by the judgment thereof, but would always expound it, as
it liked her best. As appears by Ockam, and Duns, who though they confess,
that transubstantiation, seems to them, contrary to the scripture, and
reason, yet they believed it, because of the authority of the church, and for
none other cause. These are the reasons, why the Romish church did not, as well
corrupt the text of the Testament, as the true Religion. And yet how corrupt
that Latin translation is, which they would needs thrust upon us, is
sufficiently known to all learned men, even in such texts, as are the most
coulerable places for the defense of Popish doctrine. I will give one example
for all: They allege the text 1. Cor. 10. Qui stat, videat ne cadat. He that
stands, let him take heed he fall not, against the certainetie of faith,
whereas the Greek has, not he that stands, but, he that thinks he
stands, let him take heed he fall not: Thus the popish church cannot
altogether excuse her self, from corrupting of the text of the Testament,
whether it was of fraud, or of ignorance, or of negligence, the Lord knows.

2 Show me why, she kept not so safely, and faithfully, the true sense of God
his word, as she preserved the word it self? BEcause it was against her own
estimation, and profit, which are the chief ends for which popish Prelates
mainteyne popish religion. Take away the Popes prerogative, which is contrary
to the sense of God his word, down go Cardinals, Legates, Prothonotaries:
down goes all the Court of Rome, take away works of supererogation, which
are contrary to the Scripture, down go Abbeys, Priories and Chantries. Take
away the sacrifice of the Mass, and Purgatory, which are contrary to the word
of God, down goes the estimation, and gaynes of all the popish clergy: And
this is the cause, why the popish church kept not so safely, and faithfully,
the true sense of God his word, as she preserved the word it self, although
she preserved not the word it self, in such safety as becommed the Church of
Christ.

3 Show me why, we should believe the Papists, as you term them, for the word
it self, and rather you Protestants tha^ them, for the meaning of the word. WE
do not challenge credit to our selves, in any point, so presumptuously as the
Papists, that men must believe it because we affirm it. But because we prove
it to be true, by the word of God. And therefore for the meaning of the word,
you should believe us rather than them, because our grounds and proves are
better then theirs, or else we require not to be believed better than they.

4 Show me why, you believed our Church, telling you this to be God his book,
and will not credit her, auouching this to be the true and undoubted sense of
the same book? IF we had no better ground to persuade us, of the authority of
God his book, than ye testimony of your Church, you may be sure we would not
believe it. But because we have most steadfast assurance of God his spirit, for
the authority of that book, with the testimony of the true Church in all ages.
If you say it is God his book, we believe you not, because you say so, but
because we know it to be true. But if you bring out a false sense, we believe
you not, because we know it to be false, and are able to prove by the word of
God, that it is contrary to the meaning of the holy Ghost. To be plain with
you, we give as much credit to your Church, as to the devil. When the devil
says: it is written: He shall give his angels charge over thee, and with
their hands they shall hold thee up that thou dash not thy foot against a
stone. We believe that this is the word of God. But when he avouches this to
be ye meaning of it, that we may cast down our selves from a Church steeple,
without danger, we do not believe him, because we know this sense is contrary
to an other Scripture, which says: Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. So
when you say these words are the Scripture of God: This is my body: We believe
it, because we know it to be true. But when you say this is the meaning of
these words. This bread is turned into my natural body, we believe you not,
because it is contrary to all places of Scripture, which prove the truth of
Christ his humanity or natural body. Thus I show you why we believe you, if
you say the Scripture is God his word, namely because we know it to be true,
and why we believe you not, saying this is the meaning of it, that is, because
we know by the word of God that it is false.

5 Last of all, Show me why, you believed the old known church, affirming this
to be the word of God, and will not believe her, affirming Luther to be an
heretic, show me good reason or Scripture for these things, and I recant. IF
you mean by the old Church the primitive Church, whose testimony of the word
of God we allow and believe, I deny that the primitive Church did affirm Luther
to be an heretic, or the doctrine that he taught, which we hold,, to be
heresy, but I am able to prove, that the primitive Church, from which you have
received the Scripture, affirms your doctrine to be heresy, and your Church
ye Church of Antichrist.

But if by ye old known Church, you mean the Church of old, known to be the
Church of Antichrist, which is the popish church,, we believe the devil if he
speak the truth, and we believe not an Angel coming from heaven, if he bring
any other Gospel, than S. Paul delivered to the Galathians. Therefore when
your church affirms Luther to be an heretic, seeing we know that Luther did
not obstinately, and maliciously err, in any article of faith, concerning the
substance of religion, we do not believe her: and specially because she is a
partial witness against him, whom God used to discover, so much of her
wickedness, to her great hindrance, there is no credit to be given unto her,
when she goes about to deface him, by sclaunderous names, and false
accusations. Thus I have showed these things that you require, both by good
reason, and also by scripture: Therefore if I may believe you, you recant.

The fourth article conteyneth 3. demandes.
1 I demand, what Church has mightily gonne through, borne down, and fully
vanquished, all heresies in times past, as well against the blessed Trinity, as
other Articles of our religion? I Answer, the true Catholic Church, has
always resisted all false opinions, contrary to the word of God, as her duty
was, and fought against them with the sword of the spirit, which is the word
of God, and by the aid of God obtained the victory, and triumphed over them.
So did Paul overcome the Jews Act. 18. So did the fathers of the primitive
Church, from time to time, confute heresies, by the scriptures, and declare in
their writings, that by them they are to be confuted, for examples sake of a
great number, I will allege a few. Hylarius, writing of the blessed Trinity
against heretics Lib. 4. says: Cessent itaque propriae hominum opiniones,
neque se vltra Diuinam constitutionem, humanae iudicia extendant: Sequamur ergo
aduersus irreligiosas, and impias de Deo institutiones, ipsas illas diuinoru^m
dictorum authoritates, and vnumquodque eorum ipso de quo quaeritur auctore
tractabimus. Wherefore let opinions propre to men give place, and let not men's
judgments stretche them selves further than God his constitution. Therefore
against these vnreligious and ungodly opinions of God, let us follow the very
authority of God his sayings, and handle every one of them, by the aid of him,
about whom the question is: Thus Hylarius, would have heresies against the
Trinity, to be confuted, not by men's judgment, but by God his word. Basilius
magnus, very often testifies, that he would have all good things, proved by
the scripture, and all evil things confuted by the same, In his moralles
Did. 26. Every word or deed, must be confirmed by the testimony of holy
Scripture, for the persuasion of good men, and the confusion of wicked men: And
in his treatise of Faith: we know, that we must now, and always, avoid every
voice or opinion, that is differing from the doctrine of our Lord. And in his
short definitions to the first interrogation: whether it be lawefull or
profitable for a man to permit unto him self, to do or say any thing, which
he thinks to be good, without the testimony of the holy Scripture? he
answers: forasmuch as our Savior Christ says: that the holy Ghost shall
not speak of him self, what madness is it, that any man should presume to
believe any thing, without the authority of God his word. By these, and many
other places, it is manifest, that Basilius, would have heresies and false
opinions, confuted by the holy Scriptures.

Chrysostom, upon Luke cap. 16. says, that the ignorance of the scriptures,
has bred heresies, and brought in corrupt life, yea it has turned all things
vpsidown, by which it appears, by what means he would have heresies kept
away, namely by knowledge of the scriptures. It were to long to rehearse all the
places of S. Augustine, by which his mind appears, that he would have the
Church, sought only in the scriptures, and heretics confuted, only by the
scriptures, to whose only authority in many places, he professes that he him
self will be bound, as Epist. 19. ad Hieronymum. Epist. 48. Vincentio. Epist.
111. Fortunatiano. Epist. 112. to Paulina, contra Faustum. lib. 11. cap. 5.
Contra Cresconium Grammaticum, lib. 2. cap. 31. and 32. de Baptismo contra
Donatistas lib. 2. cap. 2. De meritis and remissione peccatorum, contra
Pelagianos lib. 3. cap. 7. De naturae and gratia cap. 61. De gratia Christi
contra Pelagium cap. 43. De nuptijs and concupiscentia lib. 2. c. 29. In these
places, S. Augustine prefers the authority of the Canonical scripture,
before all writings of Catholic Doctors, of Bishops, of Counsels, before all
customs, and traditions. But that he would have the true Church sought only
in the scriptures, it is manifest, by these places, first in his 48. Epistle to
Vincentius. Nos autem ideo certi sumus, neminem se a communione omnium gentium
just separare potuisse, quia non quis quam nostrum in iustitia sua, sed in
scripturis Divines quaerit Ecclesiam. speaking of the Donatistes, he says. We
are suer, that no man could justly separate him self from the communion of all
Nations, because none of us seeks the Church in his own righteousness, but
in the holy Scriptures. So if the Papists would not presume of their own
righteousness, but seek the Church of Christ in the scriptures, they would
not separate them selves from the communion of Christ's Church, now by God his
grace enlarged farther than the Popish church. Also in his book De vnitate
Ecclesiae. cap. 2. he has these words. Inter nos autem and Donatistas
quaestio est, vbi sit Ecclesa. Quid ergo facturi sumus? in verbis nostris ^am
quaesituri, an in verbis capitis sui Domini nostri Jesus Christi^ puto quod in
illius potius verbis eam quaerere debemus, qui veritas est, and optime nouit
corpus suum. The question is between us, and the Donatistes, where the Church
should be, what shall we do then? shall we seek her in our own words, or
in the words of her head our Lord Jesus Christ? I think we ought rather to
seek her in his words which is ye Truth, and best knows his own body. So
the question is at this day, between the Papists and us, where the church is,
let us seek in God his word, there we shall easily find her. To the same
intent, he speaks in the third, fiueth, and sixtenth Chapters of the same
treatise. Furthermore, that he would have heretics confuted only by the
scriptures, he shows likewise in many places of his works: for writing
against Maximinus the Arian, lib. 3. cap. 14. a place commonly and often cited,
he says: but now, neither must I preiudicially bring forth the Council of
Nice, nor then the Council of Arimine, for neither am I bounden to the
authority of the one, nor you of ye other, but let matter with matter, cause
with cause, reason with reason, contend by authority of the scriptures, not
proper to any, but ind^fferent witnesses to both parts. If Augustine would not
oppress the Arrians, by the authority of the Nicene Council, which was the
first, and the best general Council, that ever was, but only by the
scriptures, how much less would he charge them with other authorities, that
the Papists allege, beside the authority of holy scriptures. And in his
book De Vni^ate Ecclesiae against the Donatistes the 16. chapter: Sed vtril
ipsi Ecclesiam teneant, non nisi diuinarum scripturarum Canonicis libris
oftendant, quia nec nos etc. But whether they hold the church or no: let them
show none other wise, but by the canonical books of holy Scripture, for we
our selves do not say, that men ought to believe us, that we are in the Church,
because we hold that Church which Optatus of Mileuitum, or Ambrose of Millayn,
or innumerable other Bishops of our communion, have commended to us, or because
it is set forth by the Councels of our fellow bishops, or because so many
miracles of hearing requests, or healinges, are don in the holy places, which
our fellowship does frequent in the whole world, so that the bodies of
Martyrs, which were hidden so many years (which thing if they will ask they
may hear of many) were revealed unto Ambrose, and that at the same bodies, one
that had been many years blind, very well known in the city of Millayn,
received his eyes, and eye sight, either because this man dreamed, or that man
was ravished in the spirit, and heard a voice, that he should not join
himself to Donatus, or that he should depart from the faction of Donatu^:
for when soever such things are don in the Catholic Church, they are to be
allowed, because they are don in the Catholic church* but the church it self
is not therefore proved to be Catholic, because these things are done in it.
By this Augustine declares first that heretics must be confuted, only by the
scriptures, and secondly that neither Counsels, succession of bishops,
universality, miracles, visions, dreams, nor revelations, are the notes to
try the Catholic church, but only the scriptures. Moreover in his book De
Pastoribus cap. 14. Quaerit infirmus Ecclesiam etc. A weak person seeks the
Church, he wandreth and seeks the church* what say you? The church is of
Donatus side. Enquire for the shepherds voice, Read me this out of some
Prophet, read me this out of some Psalm, rehearse me it out of the law,
rehearse it out of the Gospel, rehearse it out of the Apostle, out of them do
I rehearse the Church dispersed over all the world. And a little after: Tu
accusas non Euangelium etc. Thou accusest, not the Gospel, thou accusest not
the Prophet, not the Apostle of whom this voice speaks to me I believe him
other I believe not. But thou will bring forth decrees, I will also bring forth
decrees, should I believe thine? believe thou mine likewise. I believe not thine,
neither do thou believe mine, then let men's writings be laid away and let Gods
word sound between us: bring me one place of scripture for Donatus side etc.
These places may sufficiently declare by what means this doctor thought the
Church should overthrow heresies, namely by the word of God only, which
thing also Leo, the first bishop of Rome, in his Epist. 10. ad Fabianum contra
Eutychen plainly confesses saying: Sed in hanc insipientiam cadunt, qui cum
ad cognoscendam veritatem etc. But those men fall into this folly, which when
they are hindered by any doubt to know the truth, have not recourse to the
voices of the Prophets, not to the writings of the Apostles, not to the
authority of the Gospel, but to them selves. And therefore they become,
masters of error, because they have not been scholars of truth. Of the same
judgment was the whole Council of Constantinople the sixth, as appear Action
18. Si igitur omnes simpliciter etc. Therefore if all men from the beginning
would have simply and without subtlety taken upon them the preaching of the
Gospel, and have been content with the constitutions of the Apostles, suerly
matters should have been well, and in good case, neither should painful
contention, have been exercised against the authors of heresies, nor against
the favorers of priests. Here the Council confesses, that the heretics and
schismatikes grow so fast, because they were not beaten down, by preaching of
the Gospel and authority of the scriptures. Thus I have declared by example,
and authority of these Fathers, that the true Church of Christ, has convicted
all heretics, only by the scripture.

2 And what Church it was, that has always stand still, and steadfast,
whilst all other Congregations, as well of Arrians, as Anabaptists, Aerians,
Nouatians, Vigilantians, Iouinians, and the rest have decayed. THe true Church
of Christ, has always stood steadfast, and inseperable, from Christ her
head, when all heretics have been, and shall be confounded. But the true
Church has not always flourished in wordly peace and tranquillity: for until
the time of Constantine the great, which was Anno Dom. 339. the Church had
small rest from cruel persecution in most places: and soon after again under
the Emperors Constantius, Constans, and Valens, it was greatly infected with
the heresy of Arius, what time also Tiberius Bishop of Rome, was infected with
the same heresy. After that when Iulianus the Apostata, was Emperor, the
temples of Idols were opened, and gentilitie again restored, so that the
Church suffered great detriment. To be short, when the barbarous Goathes,
Vandales, Alanes, and other Idolatrous or heretical nations destroyed the
Empire, the Church of God suffered a great Eclipse. But when Mahomet, in the
East, and Antichrist the Pope, in the West, seduced the world with most
detestable heresy, then was fulfilled that which was revealed to S. John in
the 12. of the Apocalypse, the woman clothed with the Son, which you your self
confess to be the Church, was so persecuted by the Dragon, that she fled into
the wilderness, there to remain a long season. Where she has not decayed, but
ben always preserved, until God should reveal Antichrist, and bring her again
into open light, which (his holy name be praised) is now brought to pass in
our days, to our inestimable comfort, and his everlasting glory.

3 And if it can be proved that either the Protestants Church or any other
Church but ours, has mightily overthrown these foresaid sects, and other of
all sorts, I recant. IT has been already proved sufficiently, that the true
Catholic Church which is led only, by the word of God, as a most
infallible rule, has overthrown heresies of all sorts. But the popish church
which refuses the only weapon, by which heresies are cut down, to be
sufficient for that purpose, never was nor shall be strong enough to encounter
with heretics, therefore she practices to vanquish those whom she counts
for heretics, not by authority of the Scriptures, but by fire and sword, and
cruel war, as appears by her dealing with the Waldenses, Albigenses,
Bohemians, and in our days with the true Christians. But where her power of
fire and sword could not prevail, there has she not overthrown such as she
condemns for heretics, namely the Grecians church, and all other churches of
Asia, and Aphrica, which unto this day will not acknowledge her doctrine to be
Catholic, nor her authority to be lawefull. Wherefore seeing the Popish
church neither has confuted those that are heretics in deed, nor subdued
those whom she counts to be heretics, if you be a good as your word, you
recant.

The fiueth article conteyneth 3. demandes.
1 Again, what Church is that, which has exercised by Christ's appointement,
Discipline, upon offenders in all degrees? Only the Church of Christ, by
Christ's appointement, has exercised true discipline upon offenders, Although
by means of persecution, she could not always practice the same as she would.

2 And for that purpose, has continually executed laws and Canons
Ecclesiastical, with Excommunication, Degradation, suspension, and such like.
THe Church of Christ only, has had lawful authority to exercise discipline:
but as it is said before, she has not continually practiced the same, because
she could not, being hindered by persecution, and dispersion. Concerning
excommunication, she has practiced it according to the word of God, and
against such offenders, as the scripture judges worthy of that severe
punishment: As for degradation, and suspension, it may be doubted what you
mean by them: If you understand by degradation, that such persons as the
Church has tried unmeet, either for doctrine or manners, to execute the office
of preaching, and ministering the sacraments, she has displaced and rejected
from that charge: she has also practiced drgradation: And if you mean by
suspension, that when the accusation of a man's doctrine or life was uncertain,
that she has willed him to cease from executing his office, until his cause
were tried either good or evil, she has also used suspension: but if by
degradation and suspension, you mean those foolish and wicked ceremonies,
which the popish church now uses and so terms, I deny that ever the true
Church of Christ had to do with such degradations and suspensions.

3 Prove me this geere to proceed from Protestants, or from any other Church
than the Catholic, and I recant. IT is proved before, that true discipline
belongs to the true Church, whereof we are a part, which Church is
sufficiently proved to be the spouse of Christ, because she is ruled in all
things by his only voice: And therefore all congregations of heretics, which
depart from the true word of God, though they take upon them, to exercise
discipline, by excommunication or otherwise, it is not to be regarded, and lest
of all the Popish church, where remains nothing of discipline and
excommunication, but the very names: for what call you popish discipline? is
not that it which they use in Lent, whisking men on the heads, and women on
the hands, with white rods which they them selves call discipline? Or is it
the severe punishment that they use against offenders by excommunication,
suspension, interdighting etc. First, it is manifest they have no
excommunication by Christ's appointment, for neither it is executed by the
persons appointed by Gods word, nor against such offenders only as God his
word appoints: for whereas our Savior Christ appoints the order of that
discipline, to the Congregation of such as are wise, godly, and careful of
men's health, which first shall labor by fatherly admonition and wholesome
exhortation, to bring the offenders to repentance, whom if they refuse to
hear, they are to be reputed for hethens and publicanes, the Pope contrariwise
refers the same to profane and vnreligious officers, which are more desirous
to gain the fees of absolution, than by bringing the party to repentance, to
save him from excommunication. Moreover whereas by Gods word, excommunication
is the last and most grievous punishment, that the Church can enjoin against
any, of whom there is any hope of salvation, and therefore ought not to be
practiced but for heinous offenses, the Popish church makes it serve for every
trifling matter, yea for petty debts and all, then comes in interdightings
and suspensions of places, as churches and towns, yea whole realms, for one
man's fault: what likelinesse has this unto the discipline of Christ's church
set forth in the scriptures, and practiced by the fathers? with what face can
you Papists affirm, they have discipline, in their Church, when all penaunces
for most horrible offenses, may be bought out for money, and an open market
thereof set up at Rome, with the prices rated, what men must pay for every
thing that they buy: as absolution for him that has killed his father, or
mother, brother, sister, or wife Turones 4. Ducat. 1. Ca. line. 5.8. For an
heretic before he have abiured 36. Turones. and 9. ducates. For a witch 6.
Turones. 2. ducates. For a priest that is a Sodomite, or has lain with brute
beasts 36. Turones. 9. ducates. For a nonne that has been a common whore both
within and without her Abbey, with dispensation that she may be able to receive
any dignity, in her order, yea to be Abbess, 36. Turones. 9. ducates. And so
for all other offenses, with dispensations, inhibitions, rehabilities,
licenses, relaxations, commutations, confirmation, perinde Valeres Marcamas and
the devil and all for money: wherefore except you be to impudent, to
acknowledge this to be Christian discipline, be as good as your promise, and
recant.

The sixth article conteyneth 3. demandes.
1 Again from what Church, did all the solemn ceremonies, and observations,
all festival days, all fastes, all distinctions, and varieties of service, by
diversities of seasons, and times of the year, (proceed.) FIrst you must
understand, that we detest and abhor all your beggarly ceremonies, which you
count holy and solemn observations: for we know, that God is not to be
worshipped with such things but that the true worshippers must worship him in
spirit and verity John 4. And seeing we know God, or rather are known of him,
we will not regard the weak and beggarly elements, because they are
destitute of God his word, which only i^ able to give them strength and
estimation? as for your festiuities, in the honor of creatures, we do
likewise abhor them* we honor the Saints as S. Augustine says for
imitation, but we do not worship them for Religion. De vera Religione cap. 55.
Where he also says. Quare honoramus eos charitate, non seruitute. We honor
them with love, and not with service. And as he does often affirm, that it is
Idolatry to build churches in the honor of Saints, so is it as great
Idolatry, to institute festival days, in the favor of the same Saints. As
for the festival days that were used in the primitive Church, although they
might have been omitted, without any hurt of Christian Religion, yet were they
not kept in the honor of creatures, as they are of the Papists, but only for
the memory of the Martyrs, and other Saints, that their good life might be
followed. Your fastes are also abominable: for they are nothing else but
abstinence from meats, created of God to be received with thankesgeuing, which
S. Paul affirms to be the doctrine of Devils 1. Tim. 4. Also your
distinctions and varieties of service, because they consiste most of
blasphemous prayers to dead Saints, and sometimes to damned spirits, with
foolish lessons, responses, versicles, etc. Lewd lies and uncertain tales,
which you read and sing, as God his service, they are all abominable. In
vain do they worship me, says our Savior Christ, teaching for doctrine the
precepts of men. Math. 15. Also it was decreed in the Council of Laodicea,
the 59. chapter, that nothing should be song or read in the Church, but the
Canonical books of holy Scripture: wherefore if you demand whence your
ceremonies, festival days, fastes, and varieties of service did proceed? I
answer plainly, out of the bottomless pit of hell.

2 From whence did all things, yet indifferently for most part, observed, and
allowed, on both sides, from whence did they proceed? IF you had uttered what
things you mean, that are so indifferently allowed on both sides, we might
better have answered: but seeing you have not, we must conjecture what you
mean: if you mean any thing that is allowed without controversy on both
sides, it did either proceed from the scripture of God, or from the primitive
Church or else it a thing merely indifferent, but if it have no ground in
holy Scripture, nor example of the primitive Church, nor judged merely
indifferent, it not indifferently observed for the most part, nor yet allowed
on both sides.

2 And if it can be proved, that the Protestants Congregation, or any other
Church, but ours, has instituted and ordered all these, or any of these, for
the comeliness and honor of God his house, I recant. I Have answered before,
that the Protestants Congregation, gives you leave to brag, that you are the
inuentors of all these Idolatrous superstitions, and false worshipping of God,
and yet because you offer so liberally to recant, if it can be proved that any
Church but yours, has instituted and ordered all these things, you shall
hear what can be said. First, your great doctor Durande, plainly affirms
that many of your ceremonies, and solemnities, had not their first institution
of your church, but were taken of the Jews or Gentiles: And it may easily be
proved, that many of your ceremonies, were instituted of heretics, as your
holy water which you say you use to put men in mind of their baptism, was
derived of ye heretics called Hemerobaptistae, which were, baptized every
day, Epiphan. lib. 1. Tom. 1. cap. 17. Of the Ossenes, you took the great
estimation of water, salt, oil, bread, etc. and use to swear by them, as
they did. Epiph. contra Ossenes 19. Of the same heretics, you received the
superstition of relics, for they used to take the spittle, and other filth
from the bodies of Marthys, and Marthana, which were of the seed of Elxai,
that is, great Saints with them, and used them to cure diseases, as Erasmus
witnesses, at Canterbury were kept the clowtes, that Thomas Becket did occupy
to wipe of his sweat, In peregrinatione Religionis ergo.
and to blow his nose on, which were kissed as holy relics, and thought also
to be holsom for sick folks: of the same heretics you learned to command
the people to pray, in an vnknowene tongue, as Elxai, the great Pope of those
heretics said: Nemo quaerat interpretationem, sed solum in oratione haec
dicat. Let no man seek the interpretation, but only say these words in his
prayer. Which words were in a strange tongue, either the Hebrew, or the Arabike.
Epiphan. lib. 1. Tom. 1. haeres. 19. Likewise the Marcosians when they
baptized, used to speak certain Hebrew words, that the ignorant people might
marvel the more at them, as you do in Baptism Ephata, etc. Epiph. lib. 1.
Tom. 3. haer. 34. To make the Images of Christ, and of the Apostles, and to
sense them, you learned of the heretics called Gnostici, and Carpocrati^ae,
Epip. lib. 1. Tom. 2. in the preface Epiph. lib. 1. Tom. 2. haer. 27. and
Irenaeus lib. 1. cap. 23. Of the Valentinians, you learned to have in price the
sign of the cross, and to abuse the places of scripture for the same
superstitious use: as, God forbid that I should rejoice but in the cross of
Christ, etc. Irenaeus lib. 1. cap. 1. Epiphan. lib. 1. Tom. 2. haeres. 31. Of
the Heracleonites, you learned to annoynte men at the point of death, with
oil, and balm, and to cast water upon dead men, with inuocations. Epiph. lib.
1. Tom. 3. haeres. 36. Of the Cayanes, you learned to call upon Angels. Epiph.
lib. 1. Tom. 3. haeres. 38.

Of the Marcionistes, you learned to give women leave to baptize. Ep. lib. 1.
Tom. Haer. 42. George, Bishop of Alexandria, invented bears to carry dead
corpses, charging all men to use them for his own advantage, as do you
Papists your bearing clothes and other toys for funeral pompes. Ep. lib. 3.
Tom. 1. Haer. 76. Of the Colliridianes, you learned to make images of the
virgin Marie, and worship them and her, with offering of candells, etc. as
they did of cakes, etc. Ep. lib. 3. Haer. 79. Of the Messalians or Martirians,
you learned to shave your beardes and to let your locks grow long. Ep. lib. 3.
Haer. 80. Of the Pharizees, you received your superstitious masking garments,
which you call amictus dalmaticus, and pallia, as witnesses Epiphanius, in his
epistle to Acacius, and Paulus. Last of all what say you to the ceremonies,
festiuities, fastes, and solemnities, used in the Greek Church, and in the
other Oriental Churches, if they be sufficient to make their church Cathol^ke,
why do you count them heretics, and Schismatikes? if they be not sufficient,
why do you reason of the insti^ution of the like, to prove your Church
Catholic? You see that proved which you desired, play the honest man therefore,
and recant.

The 7. article contains 3. demaundes.
1 Further I ask them, what Church that is, which has brought forth out of
her womb, so many noble personages, of Martyrs, Confessors, Doctors, Virgins,
and holy Saints, of all sorts, all which both they and we do outwardly
profess, by the continuance of the Callendare, which yet is used every where,
to be Saints in heaven. FVrther I answer you, that all true Saints,
whether they were Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Eua^gelistes, Martyrs,
Confessors, Doctors, Scholars, Virgins, wives, widows, married, or unmarried,
are all children of that Church, in whose fellowship we rejoice to be, and are
our dear brethren and sistern begotten in Jesus Christ by the gospel, and we
all hold of one head Jesus Christ, as members of his mystical body. We all
believe to be received into that glory that they are, by the only mean that
they were, that is by the mercy of God in Christ Jesus. But as for the
continuance of the Callendar, we have little respect unto it, yea no regard at
all, to use it either as a record, or as a register of those whom we
acknowledge to be Saints in heaven. Let the Prince make you answer, for the
continuance of such calle^ders, for we have not to do with them. Nevertheless
because you speak of a Callendar, that is used every where, you declare that
you have small experience in Callendars, for every cuntry has them diverse in
most days, except holy days, and in some cuntry Callendars, such days are
festival to those Saints, that have not their names in Callendars of other
cuntries, yea it may be doubted whether they have their names in the book of
life. If you saw a Bohemians Callendar, perhaps if you should see John Hus,
and Ierom of Prage, which your church condemned for heretics, and have as
solemn feasts, in the Callender as Peter and Paul, wherefore we acknowledge
those to be Saints in deed, not whose names are continued in the Callendars
of men, but are written in the book of life of the Lamb, that was slain from
the beginning of the world. Apoc. 13.

2 And if it can be proved by any man of the Protestancy, that these were
either, of the Protestants Congregation, or belief when they were alive. IT is
sufficiently proved against you, of the Papistrie, that all they, whom we
acknowledge to be Saints in heaven, are members of the same mystical body
of Christ, that we are, and hold the only foundation that we hold, which is
Jesus Christ, and although some of them, builded straw and stubble upon the
same foundation, yet the Lord has not imputed it unto them. But whereas the
Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles were chief lights and pillars of the
church of Christ, the day is yet to come, and ever shall be, that all you of the
Papistrie, shall be able to charge us with one point of our faith, contrary to
the doctrine of the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles.

3 Or canonized and allowed for Saints by the Protestants Church, when they
were dead, or by any other Church, then I recant. Our Church does take all
them that show the fruicts of a lively faith, to be Saints, while they be
alive, as well as after their death, and we say with David: All my delight is
in the Saints, that are in the earth Psalm. 16. and with S. Paul: We labor
to comprehend with all Saints, what is the length, breadth, depth, and
height, and to know the love of Christ. Ephesians. 3. Finally the scripture
teaches us, to call all them that are sanctified in the blood of Christ, and
called to the fellowship of the Gospel, holy and Saints of God. 1. Cor. 1.
Ephesians. 1. etc. Wherefore, your Popish church does great injury to the Saints
of God, first, because she does not so account them while they live, and
secondly, because she refers the canonization of them only to ye Pope, who
not for their holy life, makes them Saints, but for the holy honger of
gold, as appear by Pope July 2. who would not canonize king Henry the sixth,
at the request of king Henry the seventh, under an unreasonable sum of money.
If that sum of money had been paid, he should have been a saint, though he
had not deserved, not for his virtue. And because that sum of money was not
paid, he might not be canonized, although his godliness never so much
deserved. Again of what force your Canonization is to be esteemed, we may
learn by a fact of Pope Boniface the 8. who condemned, dug up, and burned
the body of Hermannus in Ferraria, 30. years after his burial, who had been
worshipped for a saint above 20. years before, as witnesses Platina and
other. Gregory the seventh canonized Pope Liberius, which was an Arrian, as S.
Hieronym testifies, Moreover if I should likewise demand of you, what Pope
canonized Peter, Paul, and the rest of the Apostles, yea most of the Martyrs
of the primitive Church, you shall never be able to show me either what Pope
did it, or that any Pope did it: For seeing none may canonize but the Pope in
your church, and you can not prove that the Pope has canonized the Apostles
and chief Martyrs, you can not prove that your church has canonized the
Apostles and principal Martyrs. But it is manifest that your canonization is
taken from the heathen Senate of Rome, which challenged authority to make Gods,
whom they them selves thought best. And if I should rippe up the most part
of those Saints, which have been canonically canonized by the Pope, it were
an easy matter to find them heretics, traitors, Necromancers, Whoremongers,
and whores, as you may read in Bales Votaries abundantly, believing his
report no farther than he alleges his Author, where you may find it.
Wherefore it were wisdom for you, not to depend upon the Pope his
Canonization, but upon God his approbation, and to recante.

The 8. article conteyneth 3. demandes.
1 And because Christ as S Paul says, has established in his Church some
Apostles, some Prechers, some Teachers, and Doctors even until his coming
again, I ask the Protestant, what Church that is, which is able to show and
prove, the continuance and use of the said functions ever sense Christ's time
by plain account of orderly Succession. I Answer the Papist, that Christ
has given to his Church some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some
Pastors, and Teachers. Ephesians. 4. and 1. Cor. 12. And we are able to show and
prove, that we continue in that unity of faith and knowledge of the Son of
God, for which end such offices were ordained. But whereas you require, that
we should show you the continuance of those functions by orderly succession
from Christ's his time until our days, you declare how small skill you have
in understanding the scriptures, for the offices of Apostles, Evangelists, and
Prophets, were not appoincted to continue always in the Church, but for a
time, until the Gospel had taken root in the world. Moreover, whereas you
requier an orderly succession, according to persons, or places, you are never
able to prove, that any such thing was promised to the Church, that we should
show you the performance thereof in our Church. Otherwise we doubt not, but God
has always stirred up some faithful teachers, that have instructed his Church
in the necessary poinctes of Christian Religion. Although the world and the
church of Antichrist did not always see them.

2 And is able to name you by the histories of all ages, the notable persons
of all the forsaide states, in their government and ministry. Again I
answer you, that you are not able to name, me any text of scripture, by which
you can prove, that al these offices must have perpetual continuance in ye
church of Christ, nor yet that any of them should keep an ordinary succession
of place or persons: But contrariwise, seeing it was prophesied that the church
should fly into the wilderness, that is, be driven out of the sight and
knowledge of the wicked, and be so narrowly persecuted of the Romish Antichrist
for a long season, it were a token our church were not the true church, if we
could name such notable persons as you speak of, in all ages flourishing in
their government and ministry. And it is a good argument, that the Popish
church is not the church of Christ, because it was never hidden sense it first
sprang up, in so much that you can name all the notable persons in all ages in
their government, and ministry, and especially the succession of Popes, you
can rehearse in order upon your fingers, in which beadroole, nevertheless you
must name many tyrants, many traitors, one whore, many whoremongers, many
Sodomites, many murderers, many poysenors, many sorcerers, and Necromancers,
and from Boniface the third, all blasphemous heretics, and Antichrists. But
our church, which has not had so many registers, chroniclers, and
remembrancers has perhaps fewer, but yet honester men to name: we can name
Peter, Paul, Matthew, John, etc. Mark, Luke, Timothe, Agabus, Epaphras, etc.
Justinius, Irenaeus, Cyprianus, Athanasius, Hylarius, Ambrosius, Augustinus,
etc. Gyldas, Bertramus, Marsilius de Padua. Joan. de Ganduno, Bruno
Andagauensis VVickleue, John Hus, Hierome of Prage, etc. With the first, namely
Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets, we consent wholly in all points of
doctrine, with the rest, in the chief and most substantial articles of faith,
always agreeing with any man, so far as he agrees with the word of God.

3 And if he can prove unto me, that their Church has never lacked the same
appointed officers, or that any Church or Congregation but ours has kept that
charge, the^ I recant. FOr some of those officers I have twice answered
before, that they were not ordained, to continue always, with the church,
wherefore they are not to be exacted of us, but such officers as are necessary
for the conservation of God his people in the unity of faith and the knowledge
of Christ, our Church has never lacked, although in time of the great
defection and Apostasy whereof S. Paul does prophecy 2 Thessalonians. 2. there were
but few, as there were but few members of Christ his Church notwithstanding
that through injury of the time, the remembrance of all their names is not
come unto us. And although we could rehearse in order as many successions in
our Church as the papists boast of in theirs, yet were that nothing to prove
it to be the Church of Christ, which must be tried only by the Scriptures, as
S. Augustine says in his book de vnitate Ecclesiae, against the Donatistes
cap. 16. Sed vtrum ipsi Ecclesiam teneant, non nisi diuinarum Scripturarum
canonicis libris ostendant, quia nec nos propterea dicimus nobis credere
oportere quod Ecclesia sumus, quia ipsam quam tenemus commendauit Mileuitanus
Optatus, vel Mediolanensis Ambrosius, vel alij innumerabiles nostrae
communionis Episcopi, etc. But whether they hold the Church or no, let them
show none otherwise, but by the canonical books of holy Scripture, for we our
selves do not therefore say that men must believe us that we are in the Church
because we hold the same Church, which Optatus of Mileuitum has commended, or
Ambrose of Millayn, or innumerable Bishops of our communion. Even so we require
at the Papists hands that show them selves to hold the Church not by
succession of Bishops, or rehearsing of their names, but only by the
Scriptures: for although we did rehearse innumerable names of Bishops in
orderly succession on our side we would not require men to believe us, but only
because we prove the doctrine of our Church by the authority of the
Scriptures. But as for the popish church, neither has nor ever had any of
those officers which S. Paul speaks of, for Apostles, Evangelists, and
Prophets, she can challenge by no reason, seeing she refuses to be tried by
their doctrine uttered in their writings, in steed of pastors and teachers she
has wolves, du^me dogs, or false prophets, which either teach not at all, or
else teach the doctrine of devils and the dreams of men. And further I would
desire none other place in all the Scripture, to overthrow the popish
Hierarchy (which is the greatest glory of their Church) then this place of
Paul, Ephesians. 4. he speaks of Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors and
teachers. But where are Popes, Cardinals, popish archbishops, Bishops,
Priests, Deaco^s, Subdeacons, Exorcistes, Cantors, Acolyts, Ostiares, Monks,
Friars, Chano^s, Nuns, etc. Wherefore I conclude that all these popish orders
are no offices in the Church of Christ. And especially, seeing the Apostle both
in this place Ephesians. 4. and 1. Cor. 12. by these offices proves the unity of
mind, he acknowledges no Pope as one supreme head in earth, which might be
very profitable (as the Papists say) to maintain this unity: for if there had
been any such office appointed of God, S. Paul in no wise would have omitted
it, especially when it made so notably for the confirmation of his purpose,
which was unity. To conclude if it be sufficient, or any thing worth, to
rehearse the names of them that have orderly succeeded in all ages in the
bishops sees, in an outward face of the Church, the Greek Church is able to
name as many as the Latin Church, and in as orderly succession. Wherefore if
you be as ready to perform as to promise, you recant.

The nynth article may be divided into nine demaundes.
1 And for the necessary use and execution of the foresaid offices, they must
further be asked, what Sacraments the Protestants ministered for the space of a
thousand years together, in which they confess their congregations to have
been near or else wholly hidden. THey ministered those Sacraments which Christ
did institute, namely the Sacrament of baptism, and the Sacrament of the body
and blood of Christ, at such times as the cruel tyranny of you Papists did
not hinder them, to come together for such purposes.

2 What correction they kept and discipline for offenders. THey did use such
discipline as was used in S. Cyprians time, when persecution hindered not the
free course of it. As he does often complain in the places above rehearsed.
They did admonish secretly, before witnesses, and when persecution stayed them
not, they did also excommunicate.

3 To whom they did preach their Faith. TO such as would give them hearing,
as VVickleue to the Englishmen: John Hus to the Bohemians: VValdo to the
Frenchmen, and so of the rest.

4 How did they reprove heresies? THey reproved heresies, by the word of God,
and patient sufferinge of your tyranny: the one you may read in their works,
that are yet extant of VVickleue, Bertrame, Hus, etc. The other in histories of
your own writers.

5 Where did their principal Pastors sit in Judgment? I Might ask you where
the Apostles did sit in judgment and you are never able to show me, for I
read as one says: that they stood often to be Judged, but I never read that
they sat in judgment upon others: And so I answer of the principal Pastors
of our Church, especially in time of persecution.

6 Where did they gather as in Counsels to try the truth of doubtful
matters? AS God gave them respight, from your tyranny, they had conference one
with an other: and as for doubts, they tried them by the word of God, and not
by number of voices, as you do in your counsels, as for the places where they
met, is nothing at all material, at Prage, at Lions, at Merindol, etc.

7 How might Christian men, justly offended with some of their brethern, have
sought out your officers or Congregation, to make complainct of him? YOu are
void of all reason that in a persecuted church, will require all things to be
so formal and orderly, as in time of peace and quietness, I could choke you
with putting like cases of your Church. If a number of Papists be carried
prisoners into Barbary, or Turkey, what Sacraments, what discipline, what
Judgment have they among them, if one be offended with his brother how shall
he come to your office^s, or to your Church to complain. In such cases where
the ordinary authority of the Church is hindered by persecution, or otherwise,
the rule of S. Paul. 1. Cor. 5. may serve and ought to be observed: If any
that is called a brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an Idolater, or a
rayler, or a drunkard, or an extorcioner with such one eat not. So that if a
Christian be justly offended with his brother, he ought to abstain from his
company. And if he may have ordinary authority, he may complain further.

8 Or how if it had liked any man to have been baptized of them, or to have
received the communion of them, or to have been married of them, or to have
joined them selves in Faith and Religion to them, how might I say that secret,
contemptible, and unknown company, be found in this case? HE must have sought
them out as well as he could, and if he had been persuaded, that they only
ministered the Sacraments, and Ecclesiastical rites, sincerely, according to
the word of God, it were no great matter for him to find them, seeing he knew by
whom he was so persuaded, and of them might also be informed where he should
have them. I marvel you are not ashamed to demand these questions, as though
it were material to discuss, whether of us has the Church, to have the
Church so manifest, that every man may see it. Do you not remember how many
schisms have been even in the popish church, more the^ twenty, and sometime
two Popes at once, sometime three, and sometime four, which of them should a
simple Papist take for head of the Church, especially in the 22. schism, which
lasted 39. years: one Pope sitting at Rome, an other at Auinion, either having
his court, either having and making Cardinals, either cursing other. Or in the
23. schism, when the question was of one of the highest points in all popery,
and is not yet thoroughly decided among them: Whether the Pope be above the
Council, or the Council above the Pope. In the time of these schisms how
might a man have found out, which was the true Church, which was Christ's
vicare in earth, which had the right Sacraments and Sacramentalls, to which
Popes court should he appeal, where did the principal Pastors sit in
judgment, etc. How should counsels be gathered, which Pope should confirm
their acts, etc, When you are able to answer these questions, for your own
church; then you may better require them of ours. As for that secret,
contemptible, and unknown company of our Church, in the sight of the world,
was nevertheless manifest, glorious, and known to our Savior Christ, and the
lively members of his body.

9 If therefore you can show me, that any man ever sought Justice or knowledge
of truth, sacrament, or faith, or any help of Salvation at the Protestants
secret and close congregation, or any other where, but of Gods known Catholic
Church, I recant. ALthough it be to little purpose to answer this demand,
because it is no reason to say, these things has not been, because chronicles
make no mention of them: yet that all men may see, how far you ouershoot
your self, I will partly satisfy your request. Charles the great sought
knowledge of the truth of the sacrament of Bertramus. John, Duke of Lancaster,
and diverse other noble men were instructed in our Religion by VVickleue. The
land of Bohemia, was converted by John Hus, and Hieronym of Prage, and sought
the sacraments of them. Finally, you always forget the Greek church, which
you do not account part of the Catholic church, and yet you can not deny but
men have sought Justice, sacraments, faith, etc. of it. Therefore if a man
might trust you upon your word, you recant.

The 10. article conteyneth in effect but 2. demandes.
1 Moreover I ask whether for all these many hundredth of years or ever else
before there was any temporal Prince or Potentate, that offered to be under
God a minister of Justice and an executor of Christian laws in the right of
your Congregation, that ever maintained by laws Civil or other, your Faith
and Congregation, and I recant. BEfore ye general defection, it is an easy
matter, to name you the Emperors and Princes which both offered, to be
ministers of Justice in the right of our church, and also mainteyned our faith
and Congregation, by Civil laws, as Constantine the great, Iouinianus,
Valentinianus, Theodosius, Archadius, Honorius, Marcianus, Iustinianus,
Mauricius, and diverse other. But when the kings of the earth had committed
fornication with the great whore of Babylon (as the holy Ghost foresheweth
Apoc. 17. and 18.) it is no prejudice to our cause if we can not show, any of
them that have maintained our Religion. Yet because you make so gentle an offer
upon the trial of such a matter, which is of small force either to the hurt of
our cause or the maintenance of yours, I will let you understand what I have
read for this purpose. Not doubting but other which have read much more, and
seen more ancient histories than I, can show you a great deal more. I pass
over as to well known, how many of the Grecian Emperors resisted the setting
up of Images, in so much that in the Greek church to this day they can abide
none in their temples, likewise I pass over Charles the great, who wrote a
book against Images, which is in printe, who also declared, that he liked not
the heresy of the real presence and transubstantiation, which in his time was
in forging, in that he called Bertrame, to declare his mind of that matter, as
appears by his book, which is also in printe. I will not rehearse those
princes, that contrary to the Popes laws, defended their priests, that were
married: For although these and such like defended some part of the truth,
which we hold against you, yet lest you should object, it was but in some one
or two points, I pass them over with silence. But VVickleue, I wene, you will
not deny, but he was of our Church and Religion. And I read that king Edward
the third, both in his Parliament holden Anno Domini, 1371. and at other times
with diverse other noble men defended his cause: in so much that so long as he
lived, all the popish bishops, could do him no harm, yet did he openly
inueigh against the Pope, calling him Antichrist, and all popish doctrine
without any couller or dissimulatio^ both in the university of Oxeford, where
he was reader, and also in his sermons abroad, as appears by his books and
English homilies, which yet are common to be seen, with unless he had been
supported, and maintained by the king and other potentates, could never have
continued so long as he did. Further, have you not heard of Zisca, and
Procopius, two mighty Capitaines, which defended the Bohemians from the
tyranny both of the Emperor, the Pope, and almost all the Princes of
Germany? For what cause did Paul the second Anno Domini, 1466. condemn
George, a noble and a worthy Prince, king of Bohemia for an heretic? and
deprived him of his kingdom? was it not for defending the Protestants in his
dominion? Thus you see that some Princes and Potentates have not only offered
but have in deed, taken in hand to defend our church, which you thought unable
to be showed, wherefore I challenge your promise, you must recante.

The 11. article is so confuse that it is hard to bring it into any certain
number of demandes.
1 Again I requier of the Protestants to declare by good histories, or by
reasonable likelihoode when the true church, as they count theirs, decayed? I
Answer, even in the Apostles time, there arose many heresies which did not a
little trouble the Church, but immediately after the Apostles time, while the
fathers of the church were earnestly occupied, in resisting of horrible
heresies, by the craft of Satan, some errors and abuses crept into the true
Church of Christ, which at the first because they were small, and men occupied
in greater matters, were either not espied, or not regarded: as may be known
by the writings of Justinius Martyr, and Irenaeus, two of the most ancient
writers, sense the Apostles time. Justinius, was in this error, that he thought
that the Angels lusted after women and therefore were turned into Devils. It
seems also, that the Church in his time, was in some error, about second
marriages and diuorcements. Irenaeus, affirms, that our Savior Christ lived
here 50. years, which he says was received of them that heard it, even of
the Apostles mouths. Also both he and Papias, which was before him and was the
disciple of S. John: are charged by S. Ieronym, in Catalogo Script. Eccl. to
have held this error, that Christ should reign a thousand years after the
Resurrection here in the flesh, whereby it is manifest, seeing these ancient
fathers, and pillars of the Church were thus stained with errors, that the
Church in their time, could not be free from the same. And so it is evident,
that the true Church decayed immediately after the Apostles times.

2 What year the Religion of the Papists came in and prevailed? ALthough
many abuses and corruptions were entered into the church of Christ immediately
after the Apostles time, which the devil planted as a preparatiue for his
eldest son Antichrist. Yet we may well say, that the religion of the Papist^s
came in, and prevailed, that year in which the Pope first obtained his
Antichristian exaltation, which was in the year of our Lord 607. when Boniface
the third, for a great sum of money, obtained of Phocas, the traiterous
murderer, and adulterous Emperor, that the Bishop of Rome should be called
and counted, the head of all the Church. Since that time, that deuilish heresy
has always increased in error, until the year of our Lord 1414. in which
the Council of Constance decreed, to rob the people of the Sacrament of
Christ his blood. From this time it has again decayed, being mightily subdued
by the bright beams of the Gospel, shining in the world, and at the length
shall be utterly destroyed.

3 Whether all their true Church was so soundly sleeping, that none could
preach against it as it first entered. 1 Thessalonians. 2. Math. 24.
WHen the coming of Antichrist was in all power of lying signs, and wonders,
in so much (that if it were possible) the very elect should be deceived, and a
general departing from the faith was foreshewed, and the Church to be driven
into the wilderness, what marvel were it? if none of our Church could preach
against it, as it first entered: yet because you speak of the first entering of
popish religion, which depends chiefly upon the Popes authority, you shall
hear, that when it first began to advance it self, there wanted not some,
either to preach or write against it. When Victor, bishop of Rome about the
year of our Lord 200. passed the bonds of his authority, in excommunicating
of all the Churches of Asia, many bishops withstoode him, and especially
Irenaeus, bishop of Lions, and Policrates of Ephesus, as witnesses Eusebius,
libro 5. cap. 25. Eccle. S. Cyprian, also reproves Cornelius, bishop of Rome,
for that he was moved by threatening of heretics to receive their letters, and
did not send them back into Africa, to their own bishop lib. 1. Ep. 3. Also
when Stephanus, bishop of Rome, was bold to communicate with Basilides, and
Martialis, two Spaniards, that were justly excommunicated and deposed by ye
bishops of their own province, and sought to restore them: Cyprian and his
fellow bishops of Aphrica, being required to give their advise, gave counsel,
that in no wise they should be received, not a little blaming Stephanus, that
being far of, and ignorant of their cause; he would take upon him, to defend
such wicked men. lib. 1. Ep. 4. Likewise when the same Stephanus, threatened
excommunication to Helenus and Firmilianus, and almost all the Churches of
Asia, because they thought that such as were baptized by heretics, should be
baptized again: he was misliked by Dionysius of Alexandria, and diverse other
godly bishops, as appears by his Epistle written to Xystus. Eusebius. lib. 7.
cap. 5. Cyprian also reproves him very sharply, for the same opinion, accusing
him of presumption and contumacy Epi. ad Pompeium, and in his epistle to
Quintinus, he says plainly, that Peter himself was not so arrogant, nor so
presumptuous that he would say he held the primacy, and that other men should
obey him as his inferiors. When Anastasius, Innocentius, Zozimus, Caelestinus,
bishops of Rome all on a row, challenged prerogative over the bishops in
Aphrica, by forginge a false Canon of the Nicene Council, they were withstoode
by all the bishops of Aphrica, who decreed, that none under pain of
excommunication, should appeal to any bishop, beyond the sea. Council.
Aphrican. cap. 92. and that the bishop of the chief see, should not be called
prince of priests, or highest priest, but only bishop of the chief see.
Conc. Aph. cap. 6. When Celestinus bishop of Rome dealt hardly with the
Nouatians, Socrates testifies, he could do not good with them, because they
envied his ambition, saying that the bishoprike of Rome, like as of Alexandria,
was long before grown beyond the bonds of priesthood, into foreine lordship.
Lib. 7. cap. 11. By these examples it is plain, that although the mystery of
iniquity, began to work in Victor, Cornelius, Stephanus, Anastasius,
Innocentius, Zozimus, Bonifacius, and Caelestinus, yet it was reproved, by some
godly men: as Irenaeus, Polycrates, Dionysius Alexandrinus, Cyprianus, the
Council of Aphrica, and Socrates the Historiographer.

4 Whether all nations suddenly and in one year were moved to the doctrine of
the Papists, no one man of all their true Church neither preaching, teaching,
writing, nor attempting any thing against it, or making mention of it. WHen the
scripture tells us, that the mystery of iniquity, preparing for the
general defection, and revelation of Antichrist, wrought even in S. Paul's
time 2 Thessalonians. 2. it is folly to ask, whether suddenly and in one year all
Religion was corrupted. And yet all nations never consented to the doctrine of
the Papists, for as it has been often said, the Greek church, and other
Oriental churches, has never received the Popish religion, in many chief
points, and especially, in acknowledging the Popes authority: what preaching,
teaching, and writing has been against it, is showed before, and shall be more
declared hereafter.

5 Whether suddenly all books of service were altered? NO forsoothe, but by
little and little, in the Latin Church: as for the Greek and Oriental
Churches, never received nor used your Latin service books.

6 Whether in a moment, the Mass was said in steed of other Apostolic
Communion? WHen Durande, your own doctor, shows what Pope sewed on every
patche, that belongs to your Mass, it were folly for us to say: it came in
suddenly, and impudency in you, to affirm that it came whole from the
Apostles, which was so long a framing in so many pieces.

7 Whether men began suddenly to pray for the souls departed? FIrst it is
manifest, that men had no warrant out of God his word to pray for the dead:
and it can not be proved for 200, years after Christ, by any credible author,
that it was used in the Church: wherefore it is certain, that it was first
planted by the devil, as were other abuses: And because it has a pretense of
Charity, deceived simple men the sooner. Yet did it not so prevail, in the
primitive Church, that they durst define, what profit the souls received
thereby: for Chrysostom in his 3. Homely, upon the first Chapter of the
Epist. to the Philippians, says: Procuremus eis aliquid auxilij, modici
quidem, attamen iuuemus eos. Let us procure them some help, small help
truly, but yet let us help them. Likewise, Augustine in the 9. book and 13.
Chapter of his confessions, where he prays for his father and mother,
declares how uncertain he was of that matter, one while he fears the danger
of every soul that dies in Adam: An other while he believes, that they need
not his prayer, yet he desires God to accept the same, and move other men to
remember them in their prayers: Thus it is necessary that they wander, which
lean unto men's traditions without the word of God.

8 Suddenly required the help of Saints in heaven? WHether suddenly or by
little and little, men were brought to such superstition, that they required
help of Saints, it makes little matter, seeing it is contrary to the word
of God, and the example of the primitive Church, for 200. years after Christ.
Yet it is to be thought, that it grew up, as other errors, by little and little.
And S. Augustine in his book, De cura pro mortuis agenda, wearieth him self,
and in the end can define nothing, in certain, how ye Saints in heaven
should hear the prayers of men, on earth. Such doubtfulnesse they fall into,
that leave the word of God, and leave to traditions.

9 Suddenly the tongue of common prayers altered? FIrst ye Greek church, and
other churches both in Asia, and Aethiopia, never received the Latin tongue:
but to this day continue in their vulgar tongue. The Western Church, for the
most part all spoke and understood Latin, as the sea coast of Aphrica,
Italye, France, Spain, Britayne: as for Germany, was lately converted to the
faith. Then seeing they spoke Latin, and had their common prayer in Latin:
The tongue of their common prayer was not altered, but their speech was altered
from the tongue of their common prayer: and this was not suddenly, for it was
more than twelve hundred years after Christ before it wa^ taken for a
Catholic doctrine, that common prayer should be used in latin. S. Augustine
preached in latin and all the people understood him, and that they might the
better understand him, he does use such phrases and terms which were not pure
latin, but commonly used of the people as Ossum, and Foenerare, etc. But soon
after his time, when the Goths, and Vandalles, oueranne the Empire, the latin
tongue which before was not pure among the people, began daily to be more
corrupted, and yet remained after a sort latin, until the year of our Lord
768. when Charles the great began to r^igne in France, and long after: for
within the time of his reign, which was 47. years, a Council was holden at
Turon, in France, what year it is not certain, but it is probable, that in
the latter end of his empire, in which it was decreed, that every bishop,
should have certain homilies. Et easdem quisque aperte studeat transfer in
rusticam Romanam linguam aut Theotiscam; quo facilius cuncti possint
intelligere quae dicuntur. Turon. 3. cap. 17. And that every one study to
translate them plainly, into the rusticall Roman tongue or into the Theotisce
tongue, that all men may more easily understand what is said. By this Canon, it
is evident, that at this time, the people understood the Latin tongue, though
it were very rude and rustical. And where the Canon prescribes the same
homilies to be translated either into the rude latin tongue, or into the
Theotisce tongue. Although this word Theotisca, seem to be corrupted, yet it
is most certain that they meant Dutch tongue, for as much as Carolus magnus,
had a great part of Germany under his dominion, and the Germans, as never
thoroughly subdued by the Romans, never thoroughly received the latin tongue.
Yet it is manifest, that they understood their common prayer in the latin
tongue, though not perfectly, because the Canon says: Quo facilius etc. That
all men may more easily understand, signifying that they understood the pure
latin tongue though hardely and not perfectly. About the year of our Lord
813. the knowledge of the latin tongue, began more and more to wear away,
from amongst the common people, which when the bishops perceived, they decreed
in the Council of Magunce, cap. 25. that every Sunday, and holy day, there
should be a sermon in such sort, that the common people might understand it:
and in the 45. Canon. they decreed, that every Christian, should learn the
Creed, and the Lord his prayer, Et qui aliter non potuerit, vel in sua lingua
hoc discat, that is, And he that can not, yet let him learn it in his own
tongue. Whereby they declare, that they desire to retain the latin tongue
still, but rather than the people should be ignorant, they command them to
learn their prayers and belief in their mother tongue. Also by the 43. Canon,
wherein they judge that no preeste can say Mass alone, it appears that the
people commonly understood the latin service: for they ask how he should
say: Dominus vobiscum, and admonish the people to lift up their hearts, and
diverse like sayings, where there is none by him but him self. Now if the
people understood not these sayings, it were all one, whether they were
present or absent. Also in the Council of Rhenes, holden in France about the
same time, the like decree was made cap. 15. that bishops study to preach
sermons, and homelies of the holy fathers so that all men may understand,
according to the property of their tongue. Finally in the Council of Laterane
holden under Pope Innocent the third, Anno Dom. 1215. in which Council
transubstantiation was first established, the 9. chapter, it was plainly
decreed that forasmuch as within one city and diocese people of diverse
languages be mingled together, having under one Faith, diverse rites, and
manners, we straightly command, that the bishops of such cities and diocesses,
provide able men, which according to the diversity of their rites, and
languages, celebrate unto them, the divine service, and minister the
sacraments, instructing them both by word and example. Hereby it appears,
that when the latin tongue, was either almost, or altogether grown out of the
common peoples understandings, order was taken that common prayers should be
said and sacraments ministered in the mother tongue of every nation. But the
bishops which should have seen it put in execution, either negligently
omitted it, or willingly refused to do it, because it was more for their
profit to keep the people in blind ignorance. So thus I have showed, that
suddenly the tongue of common prayer, was not altered.

10 Tell me what year of our Lord, under what Emperor, under what Pope, by
whom these things were wrought, upon what occasion, this marueillous mutation
was made? WHo can tell the original of every blind custom and peuish
tradition, of every old error and foolish fashion it is sufficient to show,
that these things have no ground in the scripture of God, they were not
taught by Christ and his Apostles, nor received in the church that followed
immediately after them, and then we are bold to say, with Tertullian: This
prejudice there is against all heresies, how soever they came up or when soever
they sprange up, That is true that was first, and that is false, that is
latter, therefore from the beginning it was not used to pray for the dead nor
to the dead, from the beginning common prayer was not in an unknown tongue.
Wherefore prayer for the dead and to the dead, with prayer in a strange
tongue are false, when soever they began, or how long soever they continued.

11 Who preached against it, what history makes mention of it, who of all
your Pastors preached against it, was God his Church so void of the spirit of
Truth, and strength, that even then when it most flourished, it had none that
durst open against ^uch corruption of religion, as it entered in, and when it
might soon have been repressed? BEfore you demand what year the religion of
the Papists came, in and whether it came in suddenly: and as though we should
answer that it came in suddenly, you demand, who preached against it etc.
This is to fight with your own shadow: for we say not that it came in
suddenly, but that it entered by small degrees at the first and therefore was
less espied by the true Pastors, especially being earnestly occupied against
great heresies, and open adversaries, that sought to beat down the chief
foundations of Christian faith, as the Valentinians, Marcionistes, Manichees,
Arrians, Sabellians, and such like monsters. So when Satan had gotten in one
foot, by such crafty pollitie, he never rested, until he had thrust in his
whole body, with the power of Antichrist.

12 If it could not, show me then what year of the Lord this mutation was
made, and who of all the true preachers did with stand this doctrine? SO often
as you demand one thing, so often must I answer after one sort, this
mutation was not all in one year, nor in one hundredth years, nor in one
thousand of years, for transubstantiation no small article of your religion,
was not decreed until the year of God 1215. what preachers have withstoode
your doctrine at diverse times are declared before in the answer to the 8.
Article 2. demand.

13 Or note the name of him that ever first preached any article of our
doctrine: and if we note you not by their names, every one of your Capitaines,
and the several errors that they tought and the time, and the year when they
arose against the former received truth and the Counsels in which they were
orderly condemned if I, say this can be done of your side toward us, or if we
do it not for improofe of your Church and religion, I recant. I Have noted in
the answer to the 6. article 3. demand, the names of diverse heretics, that
first preached diverse articles of your religion, and further I note unto you
Pelagius, and Coelestius, which tought that free will without grace could do
somewhat toward eternal salvation, and that grace was given according to
merit, which article you teach also with culler of a distinction De congruo
and condigno, which is a mere cavil: for God is as much bound unto
congruitie, as to dignity or worthiness, and as he can do nothing against
worthiness, no more can he do any thing against congruitie, which is a kind
of Equity. And whereas you brag, to note unto us every one of our Capitaines
etc. except you note unto us the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists,
and Christ himself, you shall never be able to perform that you promise, for
we teach nothing but the eternal truth of God, wherefore we refuse not to be
counted heretics, if you can prove, that we hold any one article of faith,
contrary to the scripture: you may perchance note the names of them, that
preaching the truth of our doctrine, against your received errors, were
accounted of the world for heretics, but you must prove that their opinions
are contrary to the word of God, or else all your labor is in vain: we
confess also, that some articles of our doctrine, were taught by heretics, as
there was never no heresy, which had not many things common with true
Religion, but yet in those poinctes they were no heretics, neither did they
err. Yea but you will say, they were condemned for those opinions, as
erroneous. I will not dissemble, that which you think the greatest matter.
Aerius tought, that prayer for the dead was unprofitable, as witnesses both
Epiphanius, and Augustinus, which they compte for an error, but neither of them
both, reproves it by the scripture. Wherefore, if Aerius had not been an
Arrian, this opinion could not have made him an heretic. Also he tought that
fasting days are not to be observed, if he espied the superstition of fasting
days and reproved it, that was no error at all. But if Aerius was an heretic,
for denying prayer for the dead to be profitable, why were the Heracleonites,
accused of heresy, because they buried their dead with inuocations Epiph.
lib. 1. Tom. 3. Haeres. 36. Augustine, also by authority of Philaster charge
the same Aerius, with abstinence from flesh, if this be an heresy, then be all
Papists heretics, which compte abstinence from flesh an holy fast. Again you
will bring in Iouiniane, which affirmed that virginity was no better than
marriage, which if it be well understood, is no error at all: for although
virginity in some cases and respects, and for some persons is better than
marriage: yet is it not simply, that is in all respects and cases, and for all
persons better than matrimony. And if he tought further that such as could
not contain, though they had vowed Virginity, should nevertheless be
married, this was the doctrine of S. Paul: It is better to marry than to burn.
And Epiphanius was of the same judgment, although he compte it an offense to
marry after their vow, yet he says: It is better to marry then to burn.
Melius est itaque vnum peccatum habere, and non plura, etc. It is better to
have one offense, rather then many. It is better for him that is fallen from
his course, openly to take a wife according to the law, and to repent long
time that vow of his virginity, and so again be brought into the Church, as
one that has done amiss, as one that is fallen and broken, and having need
to be bound: rather then to be wounded daily, with privy darts of that
wickedness, which ye devil puts into him. So knows the Church to preach,
these are the medicines of healing. Ep. lib. 2. Haer. 61. this medicine the
popish church will not acknowledge, but will separate them from their wives, as
they did in Queen Mary's times. S. Ieronym also, who was a most bitter enemy
unto Iouinian, plainly affirms, that rather then they which have professed
virginity, should live incontinently, they ought to marry. Sanctum Virginum
propositum and coelestis angelorumque familiae gloriam, quarundam non been se
agentium nomen infamat. Quibus aperte dicendum est, vt aut nubant, si se non
possunt continere, aut contineant, si nolunt nubere. Epi. ad Demetriadem. That
is: The name of certain virgins, which behave them selves not well, does
blemish the holy purpose of virginity, and glory of the heavenly and angelike
family. To whom must be plainly said that either they should marry, if they can
not conteyne, or else conteyne if they will not marry. Note well this saying of
S. Ieronym, the great aduancer of virginity, and dispraiser of marriage.
Moreover if Iouinian taught that fasting, abstinence from certain meats, and
other bodily exercise of them selves profit little, his doctrine agrees with S.
Paul. 1. Tim. 4. but if he taught (as he is charged) that such things profited
nothing at all, we agree not with him in that opinion. Last of all Vigilantius,
shall be brought in, who wrote against invocation of Saints, superstition of
relics, and other ceremonies, him Ieronym reproves or rather rayleth on him:
for his reasons are nothing worth that he has against him, therefore howsoever
Ieronym esteemed him in his rage, if he had none other opinions contrary to the
truth: we doubt not to acknowledge Vigilantius (as many godly and learned
Bishops of his time did) for a true preacher and reprehender of that
superstition whereunto Ieronym was to much addict, although he do somewhat
qualify the matter. If any man think his reasons to be effectual, let him
ma^ke this one, that he uses, and thereby judge the rest, he says of the
Martyrs: Sequuntur agnum, etc. They follow the lamb whether soever he goes.
If the lamb be every where, therefore they which are with the lamb, are to be
thought to be every where. Beside this evil consequence, consider what
perilous assertions these be: that the lamb is every where, and that ye
martyrs are every where, this is to destroy the humanity of Christ, and to
give divinity unto the Martyrs: for Christ concerning his humanity, according
to which, he is called a Lamb, is not every where, but in one place alone, as
S. Augustine says Ep. ad Dardanum 57. Secundum hanc formam non est putandus
vbique diffusus, that is: According to this form it is not to be thought, that
he is diffused every where. Again no creature is every where, in more places
than one, at one time. Wherefore to say that the souls of Martyrs, be every
where, is to deny them to be creatures and so make them gods. I doubt not but
S. Ieronym if he had quietly considered these absurdities, would have revoked
them as erroneous and heretical: but while he rather followed affection, then
judgment, you may see how he was deceived. Thus seeing we have noted to you
the names of diverse heretics, which first preached certain articles of your
doctrine, and you are not able to name any, which preached any article of our
doctrine, but the same was consonant to the Scripture. If you were as ready to
perform, as you are to promise, you should recant.

14 And for that purpose because the government of the Bishop of Rome is most
misliked of them, and yet most notoriously known by every history, let them
name the Pope that first brake of the course of his forefathers belief, and
regiment in any article of faith or necessary Christian usage, and I recant. I
Have named before Victor, which was the first that went about to usurp
authority over other Churches. Also I have named Boniface, the third, which
was the first that challenged to be universal bishop: For Gregory the great
says: Nemo meorum decessorum hoc prophano vocabulo vti voluit, That is: None
of my predecessors would use this profane word. The same Gregory, as
Hulderichus, bishop of Auspourge does testify, was ye first that compelled
priests to live unmarried, which afterward when he saw the inconvenience, he
revoked. Thus having named diverse Popes that first brake the course of their
fathers faith, and regiment etc. and more could rehearse but for avoiding
prolixitie, I challenge your promise that you must recant.

The 12. article has 3. demandes.
1 Item I ask what kind and order of service, or common prayer, what way of
ministering of the sacraments your Church had: before Papistry (as you call it)
did prevail in the world? IVstinus Martyr, in his second Apollogie to the
Emperor, declares plainly what order of service and ministration of
sacraments our Church had before Papistry prevailed. On the day called Sunday
(says he) there is a meeting together of all them that dwell in the City or
in the country, and the monumentes of the Apostles, or the writings of the
Prophets are read until it be thought sufficient, when the reader has made
an end, he that is our ouerseer (or chief minister) makes a sermon of
admonition and exhortation to follow those good things that are read. After
this we all stand up together and make our prayers, and as we have said
before, when our prayers are ended, there is brought forth bread and wine and
water, and the chief minister, does likewise with all his might yield prayers
and thankesgeuing, and the people answers Amen. Then is made distribution to
every one and receiving of those things for which thanks was given, and to
them that be absent, it is sent by the deacons. Such as are rich and willing
do give alms what they will, etc. By this one authority, it may be seen
though other might be brought, what order of service and ministration of
sacraments our Church used before Papistry gat the upper hand.

2 Show one book of Communion or what else you list that was in English, or
lacked prayer for the departed, or invocation of Saints in heaven, or that
wanted oblation, or sacrifice, or that charged a number to receive, or else that
the priest could not consecrate nor say Mass, himself, or show any note in a
Communion book, that the people should take the sacrament for plain bread,
or that they should give no honor to it, show this book or any leaf or line
of this book. IT may trouble a wise man to answer all the questions that a
fool can propounde: you requier to see a book of Communion in English, or
that lacked etc. When it is confessed, that the English nation received their
religion first from Rome, at such time as Religion there was very corrupt,
what marueill is it, if we can not show you such a Communion book as you
require, but we can easily show you out of the scripture, the the Communion
ought to be ministered in the vulgar tongue, that prayer for the dead and to
the dead ought not to be used, that the sacrament ought not to be turned into
a sacrifice, that there ought to be a communion of many receauers and not a
private mass, that the substance of the bread is not changed, that the
elements of the sacrament are not to be honored: these I say we can prove out
of the word of God, the Catholic writers of the old Church. And though
perchance, it will be hard to find a communion book in English, yet have I
found you a canon of the Laterane Council, that it ought to have been
translated into English, yet are there found diverse monumentes of Antiquity,
as Prayers, Psalms, and Homilies, etc. in the old English or Saxons tongue,
in which the real presence, transubstantiation, and other poinctes of Popish
doctrine are plainly confuted. There may be showed you also Bybles both the
old Testament and New in the English tongue of diverse translations, in old
written hand. Also great books of English homilies inueighing directly
against the Pope and all Popish doctrine in old English written hand, with
diverse other small treatises and pamphlets of like matters, if these would do
you any good, you might have the sight of them, when you please.

3 Or any Church or Congregation that ever had any Authentical service but
ours, and I recant. THe Church of the Brytannes before Augustine came in, with
Romish service, had they not trow you Authentical service? which continued in
the faith of Christ even from the Apostles time. The Grecians also and
Oriental churches, have they not unto this day, their Authentical service?
which is not yours? If you can not deny this, you should recant.

The 13. article has 2. demaundes.
1 Furthermore I requier to know what should be the cause that the Protestants
them selves, do receive all Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and other officers
spiritual of all sorts of our Catholic church, and do admit them as men
lawfully and sufficiently ordered, both to preach, minister sacraments, and to
exercise spiritual jurisdiction no less, but rather more, than if they were
of their own ordering, where we of the Catholic church, do not acknowledge
any man of their calling to be any whit more fit for any spiritual function
than other lay men. ALthough all godly men wish more severity of discipline
to be used, in receiving them that come out of heresies to serve in the Church,
than is commonly practiced in England: yet you are highly deceived, if you
think we esteem your offices of Bishops, priests, deaco^s, any better than
the state of lay men, but far worse: for we judge them to be nothing else but
Antichristianitie, heresy, and blasphemy. And therefore we receive none of
them to minister in our church, except they forswear your religion: And so
their admission is not an allowing of your ordering, but a new calling unto the
ministry.

2 Therefore upon this presumption that they do not only admit our ministering
of sacraments, but also the lawful ordering of the ministers for the same, if
they can show me why our church having by their own consent and approving
lawful priests and bishops should not be the true church, I recant. YOu
presume to much as I said before to think that we receive your orderinge to
be lawful or your ministering of sacraments to be pure. And if you gather, that
we admit your ministration of sacraments because we do not rebaptize them
that were baptized by you, we may likewise gather that you admit our
ministration of sacraments, because you do not rebaptize them that are
baptized of us, nor marry again those that are married in our Church: whereas
you count marriage to be a sacrament, so that our accepting of your doings does
no more allow your church, than your accepting of our doings, does allow our
Church. And as touching the sacrament of Baptism, because you reteyne the
Institution, in baptizing in the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost: and in as much as the sacraments take not their effect of the minister,
but of God, we receive it: as of other heretics which likewise retain the
Institution. Wherefore there is no cause why you should think we allow yours
to be the true Church thereby: So that there is good cause why you should
recant.

The 14. article has 5. demandes.
1 Also I demand what furniture or commodity in serving God the Christianity
of any age, or any part of Christendom had ever by your Congregations? THe
service of God has small need of furniture in outward things: for God being
a spirit, is not worshipped with outward pomp but with spiritual and inward
reverence. And as for other furniture that is necessary, was decreed to the
Church by the Emperor Constantine and his successors, that were of our Church,
before the revelation of Antichrist. Notwithstanding the Church was in better
case, before such furniture was granted, than it was since. Therefore it is a
small reason to challenge the Church of Christ by outward furniture.

2 What Churches did you build for your assemblies and service? Our
assemblies were kept in secret places, long time after Christ's Ascension, in
most cuntries, that were subject to the Roman empire. Wherefore the building
of material churches proves nothing at all the builders to be members of the
mystical Church, that is the body of Christ. Howbeit in such realms and
cuntries where the faith of Christ, was received by public authority, as in
this land of Brytaine, there were churches builded as our Chronicles declare.
And when Constantinus had given peace to the Church: he also builded Oratories
and great Synagoges called Basilicas, for our assemblies and service.

3 What Bishoprics for the government of the Church did you find? AS the
church continued long without material churches, so also without large
possessions, for the living of bishops, yet in Brytish Church our histories
make mention that the possessions and places of the Pagane Flamines, and
Archiflamines were converted to the use of Ecclesiastical bishops and
archbishops, so soon as Lucius, the king received the faith. Also the same
histories do testify, that when Augustine came into Britayn, there were still
7. bishops and one archbishop among the Britains. And in the Roman Empier
Constantinus, and other Christian Emperors appointed great possessions for the
mainteyning of the ministers of the Church.

4 What Universities, Schools, or Colleges, did you ever erect? THe Church
of God has always had schools, or Universities for the mainteinance of godly
learning. For the first Colleges of monks in solitary places, were nothing
else, but Colleges of students, that were after, as occasion served, taken to
serve in the Church, as appears by Chrysostom in his book De Sacerdotio,
where he shows yt Basilius, who was a Monk with him, was taken by violence
and made a minister of the church, as he him self was afterward. Also in the
bishops house was a college of students: and our histories testify, that at
Bangor, in Wales was a great University of learned men. Also of late days,
you may hear that diverse Universities, Schools, and Colleges are erected by
Protestants, in Germany, and other contries that have received the gospel: As
at Wittemberge, Geneua, Zuriche, Conigsperge in Prussia, etc.

5 Name one Church, not builded in all fashions, as well for the making of the
chancells, the form of the aultars, the use of the chalices, the signification
of the vestiments, as also for the special intent of the builders thereof.
Name one of them in the whole Church of Christ, either erected for your Faith,
Church, and service, or not prepared, in all sorts for catholic practices:
Prove unto me that any of all those things were ever provided for any other
service and Religion then ours, or that they be monuments of any other Faith
and Church then the common Catholic, and I recant. HEre are many words to
little purpose. What if it were granted that all churches that now remain were
builded by Papists, and for popish uses, what had you won thereby. The same
challenge might the Idolaters have made to the Apostles: Show us a temple in all
the world that was not builded by Idolaters, and to mainteyne Idolatry?
Certainly they could show none when the Temple of Jerusalem was destroyed. But
for all your bragges, we are able to show that such Churches as were builded
by true Christians were not builded to such end as yours are: for they were
all builded in the honor of God, and the most of yours in the honor of
creatures: for whereas you have one Church in the honor of Christ, you have
near a thousand in the honor of Saints: For Basilius magnus in his 141.
epistle proves ye holy Ghost to be God because he has a Temple. For Omne
Templum Dei Templum est. Every temple is the temple of God. Also Didymus, in
his book De spiritu sancto, which S. Ieronym translateth, uses the same
reason and to the same purpose. S. Augustine in the same matter is very
plentiful: as in his book De vera Religione cap. 55. speaking of the Saints
he says: Quare honoramus eos charitate non seruitute, nec eis templa
construimus, etc. Wherefore we honor them with love and not with service,
neither do we build temples unto them: for they will not be so honored of us
because they know that we our selves when we are good, are the temples of the
highest. In this saying beside his judgment for building of temples, note that
he will not have Saints to be honored with service, which he calls
seruitus, and is the same that dulia is, contrary to the Papists which will
worship them with service called dulia, or seruitus. Also in his 174. epistle
to Pascentius, he says, the holy Ghost could not have our bodies to be temples
except he were God, And in his Enchiridion ad Laurentium, cap. 56. he says:
how should he not be God which has a temple? Also in the 8. book cap. 27. De
ciuitate Dei. Nec tamen nos ijsdem martyribus templa, etc. he says:
Christians build no temples unto Martyrs which were to make them gods. And in
the 22, book cap. 10. De ciuitate Dei. Nos autem Martyribus nostris non templa
sicut dijs, sed memorias sicut hominibus mortuis, quorum apud Deum viuunt
spiritus fabricamus. Nec ibi erigimus altaria in quibus sacrificemus
martyribus, sed vni Deo and martyrum and nostro sacrificium immolamus: ad quod
sacrificium sicut homines Dei, qui mundum in eius confessione vicerunt, suo
loco and ordine nominantur, non tamen a sacerdote qui sacrificat inuocantur,
Deo quippe non ipsis sacrificat quamuis in memoria sacrificet eorum, quia Dei
sacerdos est non illorum. Ipsum vero sacrificium corpus est Christi quod non
offertur ipsis quia hoc sunt and ipsi. that is: We truly do not build temples
to our martyrs as unto gods, but memories as unto dead men whose souls live
with God. Neither do we there set up aultars in which we should sacrifice unto
the martyrs, but to God only which is God both of the martyrs and of us, do
we offer sacrifice: at which sacrifice they are named in their place and order,
as men of God which have overcome the world in his confession: yet are they not
called upon by the Priest that does sacrifice, for he offers sacrifice to God
and not to them although he do sacrifice in their memory, because he is the
Priest of God and not of them, and the sacrifice is the body of Christ which is
not offered unto them because they them selves are the same. Here also beside
building of churches, note that no sacrifice ought to be offered to Martyrs,
but prayer is a sacrifice, therefore it ought to be offered only to God.
Secondly, that Martyrs were not called upon in time of the sacrifice but only
named for remembrance. Thirdly, that Altares were not builded in the honor of
Martyrs or other Saints as they be in Popish churches: as our Ladies altar.
S. Peter's altar. S. Laurences altar etc. Fourthly, that the body of Christ,
which he says was the sacrifice that was offered, was not the natural body
of Christ but his mystical body, because he says the Martyrs and it are all
one, whereby it is manifest, that he means the sacrifice of thanks giving
offered to God for the redemption of his church by the death of Christ.
Wherefore if this one place were well wayed, it will interpret and answer all
places of the ancient doctors, where mention is made of sacrificing the body
of Christ at the time of the communion. But to return to building of churches
the same Augustine, contra Maximinum Arrianum. Lib. Titul. 11. has these
words: Nunc si templum alicui sancto angelo excellentissimo de lignis and
lapidibus faceremus, anathematizar emin a veritate Christi, and ab Ecclesia
Dei, quoniam creaturae exhiberemus eam seruitutem quae vni tantum debetur Deo?
Si ergo sacrilegi essemus faciendo templum cuicunque creaturae, quomodo non est
Deus verus cui non templum facimus, sed nos ipsi templum sumus? that is: If we
should build a temple of wodde and stones to any holy and most excellent
Angel, should we not be accursed from the Truth of Christ and from the Church
of God, because we should show that service unto a creature which is due only
unto God? Therefore if we should be sacrileges by making a temple to any
creature, how is he not true God to whom we do not make a temple, but we our
selves are a temple. If this be true, how be not the Papists accursed from the
Truth of Christ, and from the Church of God which build and uphold churches
to Angels, as S. Michaels, S. Gabriels, etc? So that to build churches as
Papists do, is church robbing or sacrilege. Furthermore whereas you will us
to name one church whose chancell is not builded in all fashions to serve
popery. First it is manifest that the first Churches which were builded for
Christians had not the same fashion of chancels and other parts that most
churches have in England, for that purpose read the Panegyricall oration made
before Paulinus bishop of Tyrus. Eusebius. lib. 10. cap. 4. In which is described
the fashion of that church builded in that city far unlike the most part
of churches at this day in all parts, and specially in the cha^cel which was
in the midst of that church, a place compassed in with grates or wodden
latesses called Cancelli, whereof this word chancel is derived, and the altar
stood in the midst of it whereof some similitude remains yet in old
Cathedral churches. Contrariwise your chancells in most churches be at the
East end and the altar hard at the wall, there was also but one alter in that
church, but you in every church must have many, it is certain also in their
church the Ministers and Deacons stood round about the table or a^lter, but
so they can not about your aultars except some of them stand on the top of
the wall or in the window. Moreover if you mark the most part of old
churches in England you shall plainly see, that the chancells are but
additions builded sense the churches, of likelihoode by the parsons that
disdained to have their place in the midst of the people as the old manner
was. Also you may see some churches builded round: as at London the Temple,
and another is at Cambridge of ye same fashion. And some churches have the
steple at the Est end, very unhandsomely for placing of the roode lofte.
Again many churches have cross Isles in which the people can not see the
chancell, nor the high altar, which argues that there was no use of such
chancells when they were builded: For such churches as are lately erected have
the chancell and church all of one building, and are made of such fashion that
men may see the high altar in every part of them: Beside this, in the
Oriental church, as their ceremonies are diverse from yours, so no doubt the
fashion of their temples differs from yours. As for chalices, the church in
the beginning was content with wodden cups, and then came Zepherinus and
brought in the use of glasses. Acacius Amidenus is commended for selling the
golden and silver vessels of the church, to redeem captives. Socrat. lib. 7.
cap. 21. S. Ambrose also Offic. lib. 2. cap. 8. says the church has gold,
not to keep it but to be bestowed for necessary uses, for which it is lawful
to break, melt, and sell, even the holiest vessels of all. But of your church
it is true that one said of old time: ye had wodden chalices, and golden
priests but now you have golden chalices, and wodden priests: your
vestimentes are of as good stuff as your chalices. The old church knew none
such, but as your own Authors write: when they went to celebrate they changed
the affection of their mind rather than the garments of their body: as
Antoninus witnesses of Fulgentius. Howbeit we are content that your church by
her gorgeous garments as well as by other things should declare it self to
be that woman which is described to be clothed in purple, gold, perles, and
such like ornaments Apoc. 17. Finally whereas you will us to name one church
that for the special intent of the builders, was not prepared in all sorts
for Popish practices: Although I could name many, yet for examples sake, I name
Pantheon, a church in Rome, prepared by the special and only intent of the
builders for Cybelle, the great mother of the gods and for all false gods of
the heathen, which now is called the church of Mary and Alhalowes. Then this
church with many other in Rome, and other places, being monuments of the faith
and religion of the Paganes and not of yours, except yours and theirs be all
one, as they are very like, you are bound by your promise to recant.

The 15. article conteyneth in effect 3. demandes.
1 Again name any one company of men in the Christen world that in all
articles of Faith, be in one meaning and belefe. IT is an easy matter to name
diverse companies agreeing in one meaning and belief: as the church of the
Grecians, the church of the Aethiopians, the church of the Chaldeans,
Moscouites, etc. But especially the whole company of Protestants in Europe do
agree in all necessary articles of true faith, by which we are justified.

2 Or in things where they doubt, be contented to submit their several
meaning to the judgment of their Superiors. THe Greek church in doubts
will be ruled by the Patriarch of Constantinople, and so will the rest of the
Oriental churches by their chief Patriarchs and bishops. And the Protestants
in Europe will also be ruled by their Superiors, so far as their superiors
are ruled by Gods his word.

3 And to that communion and company whereof they be, name any company of men
agreeing and thus humbly affected in Christ's Religion, saving the blessed
fellowship and members of the Catholic communion, and I recant. TO the
communion and company of the Grecians, I name the Moscouites and Russians
agreeing in Religion, and so humbly affected, and these are not of the
fellowship, that you call the Catholic communion: Among the Protestants, to
the church of Saxony, I name the church of Dennemarcke, or to the church of
Hel^etia, the church of France, or to the church of England the church of
Scotland, but so, that none of these allow any consent or submission, but to
the Truth, which must be tried only by God his word. And seeing none of these
are of the Popish communion, if your promise be any thing worth, you must
recant.

The 16. article conteyneth one demand, and one challenge.
Furthermore name any one man that is confessed on both sides by the judgment
of the world, to be holy and learned, and a member of the true Church, in what
age soever you list sense Christ's time, and prove him to have been in all
articles of Faith of the Protestants meaning. SEeing you give so large scope,
I will name S. Paul, who I think is confessed on both sides to be holy and
learned, and a member of the true Church, whom I can prove by his writings,
that in all articles of faith, he taught the same, which we believe. And for
trial of this, because it would requier a whole volume, if I should prove
every particular article, wherein we dissent from you Papists: If you will
name an article, wherein we agree not with S. Paul, If I be not able to prove
that we agree with him in the meaning thereof, I will revoke that article and
agree with you therein.

Yea if I bring not the adversaries them selves to acknowledge in the end him
to be wholly against their doctrine in diverse of articles of great importance,
and therefore that he could not be of their church, I recant. YOu shall never
bring us, neither in the beginning, nor in the end to acknowledge that S. Paul
is against us in any article of our Faith, but we agree wholly with him.
Nevertheless I know what you mean, and will not be afraid to utter.
Forasmuch as immediately after the Apostles time, corruption entered into the
Church, which was hardly kept out, while they lived: as we may learn by the
Epistle to the Corinthians, you think that we dare not depend upon any one
man's judgment: and therein you are not deceived: for we must depend only
upon Gods word. But where you say there is none but he dissenteth from us in
diverse articles of great importance, you say untruly: for you are not able to
prove that Justinius Martyr, or Irenaeus, two of the most ancient authentical
writers, that the Church next unto the Apostles had, are against us, in any
point of doctrine wherein we differ from you? Yet are there certain errors in
them, which neither you, nor we allow, as is touched before in the answer to
the 11. article 1. deman. But they are both wholly against you in diverse
articles of your doctrine, and namely in transubstantiation, which is one of
the greatest articles of Popery: as Irenaeus, in the 34. cap. of his 4. book
Contra haereses: Quemadmodum enim qui est a terra panis etc.. Even as the
bread* which is of the earth after it has received the invocation of God, is
not now common bread, but the Eucharistie, or (bread of thanks giving)
consisting of two things earthly and heavenly, so our bodies receiving the
Eucharistie, are not now corruptible, having hope of resurrection. Here you see
plainly, that Irenaeus affirms the sacrament, after consecration to consist
of the earthly substance of bread: which may better be understood, when we
know that he reasons against such heretics as denied the world to be made by
God, saying that he would never have made so great a mystery of bread, which
is a creature of the world, if the world had not been made by him. Justinius,
in his second Apology to the Emperor. (...) etc. We do not receive these
things as common bread and a common cup but even as Jesus Christ our
Savior was incarnate by the word of God and took upon him flesh and blood
for our salvation: So we are taught that this meat for which thanks is given
by the word of prayer from him of which our flesh and blood are nourished by
transmutation, is the flesh and blood of Jesus that was incarnate. Here, he
plainly affirms that the substance of the Sacrament is turned into the
nourishment of our bodies. Therefore it remains still after the consecration.
The other writers of later years, as they have some errors which neither you
nor we do allow in them, so we are not afraid to confess that they have some
corruption, whereby you may seem to have color of defense for invocation of
Saints, prayer for the dead, and diverse superstitious and superfluous
ceremonies, yet not so addict to these, nor joined with such absurdities as
yours are. But for the chief points of Christian Religion, and the foundation
of our faith, that is, for the honor of God, the offices of Christ,
Redemption, Justification, Satisfaction, the fruits of Christ his passion,
Grace, faith, works, authority of God his word, authority of the Pope, real
presence, transubstantiation, Communion in both kinds, Images, etc. the most
approved writers Tertullian, Cyprian, Origin, Epiphanius, Hilarious,
Chrysostomus, Ieronymus, Ambrosius, Augustinus, etc. are utterly against you,
and therefore can not be of your church. But for as much as they hold the
foundation, that is Christ, though they have diverse errors and superstitions,
they were doubtless, the members of the true Church of Christ, which because you
are not able to disprove, reason would you should recant.

The 17. Article conteyneth 5. demandes.
1 I ask of them whether the Lutherans, Zuinglians, Illirians, Caluenistes,
Confessionistes, Swenkefeldians, Anabaptists and such like, be all of one
Church? BEcause you would make simple men believe, that there be so many diverse
sects of Protestants, as you have given them names, I will first discuss
these sects, and afterward answer your question. Lutherans, you mean them
that follow Luthers opinion of the Sacrament. Zuinglians, follow Caluines
judgment of the same. Confessionistes, them that exhibited their confession at
Auspurge, which were both the Lutherans and Zuinglians, so these 3, names may
be contracted into two: Lutherans and Zuinglians. As for Illyrians, if you call
them of Flaccius Illyricus, they be Lutherans, in opinion of the Sacrament, and
differ only in ceremonies, which can not divide them from the faith. Calvin,
and they that be of his judgment, agree plainly with Zuinglius, so that of
five names, there remain but two sorts differing in opinion, whereunto you
join the Swenkefeldians and Anabaptists. Now to your question, these be not
all of one Church, for ye Swenkefeldians and Anabaptists be detestable
heretics, but ye Lutherans and Zuinglia^s (as it pleases you to call the^) are
of one true church, although they differ in one opinion, concerning ye
Sacrament, for although the one affirm a real presence, ye other deny it, yet
they both consent in this, that ye body of Christ, is received spiritually, not
corporally, with the heart, and not with the mouth. Wherefore, this dissension is
not so great (though there be error on the one side) but that they may be both
of the Church of Christ, as well as S. Cyprian, the Martyr, and all the Bishops
of Africa, and a great many of Asia, differing with Stephanus, bishop of Rome,
and the rest of his opinion in rebaptizing such as were baptized by heretics.

2 And if either they can prove unto me, that these, being of such diversity
in faith and religion make one Church. WE have always abhorred the heresies of
the Anabaptists, Libertines, Swenkefeldians, Dauidians, Seruitians, and all
such. But that Luther and Zuinglius, may be both of one Church, differing only
in one opinion of the Sacrament, is declared before.

3 Or that each of their sects may give salvation to their folowers, being so
disagreable, one with an other in high points of our Religion. Salvation is the
gift of God, and not in the power of any company, or sect of men: but this we
affirm, that out of that Church, whereof we count Luther, and Zuinglius,
notwithstanding their diverse opinions (which is but in one matter of the
Sacrament) to be members, there is no salvation.

4 Or that I should believe all these rather then the Catholic Church, or one
of these more then another, all making such a bold challenge of the truth and
Gospel. NO man requires you to believe all these, but the true Catholic
Church only. Neither do we requite you to believe any one company of men, more
then an other: but to believe the truth before falsehood. Now, which of them
has the truth, that they all brag of, you must search in the word of truth,
desiring the spirit of truth that you may understand and believe the truth, and
so without doubt, you shall come to the knowledge of the truth, and of the
Church of God, which is the pillar and stay of truth.

5 Let the Protestants of all these kinds put their heads together, and show
me a reason of these things, and with all, let them among them selves agree,
to what sort of these sects they would have me, and I will recant. SVch is
your impudency in this matter, as in all other, that you would make men
believe that the Anabaptists, Swenkefeldians, Libertins, and other abominable
heretics, be Protestants: But it is well that you can make none but fools
think so: as for the Protestants, they need take no great deliberation to
answer your demandes but you had more need to lay your heads together to
reconcile the Thomistes, Albertistes, Ockamistes, Scotistes, Reales, and
Nominalls, which be all sects of Papists, and especially your Canonistes, and
divines, about the articles of your religion, that is: whether the Pope be
above the Council, or the Council above the Pope. Whether the Pope may err
and not the Council, or whether the Council may err and not the Pope. These
two: the Popes determination and the Counsels determination, being the rules
of truth in your religion and not agreed upon: how can any truth be certain
in your Church? As for Luther, and Zuinglius, they agree upon one rule of
truth, that is the word of God, and differ only for the applying or laying
of this rule, and yet but in one matter and that not the greatest. But you
Papists, some holding of the Pope, and some of the Council, as rules of truth,
can have no ground nor certainty thereof. Therefore if you would have me, or
any man, to be of your belefe. First determine how I shall know when I am in a
right belief: one says, if the council allows it, an other says if the
Pope allows, what shall I do, when one of these is against an other? yea
when one Pope is against an other, and one council against an other, shall I
think that truth changes so often as they change. Moreover when one Pope
grants, that the council is above the Pope and that the Pope may err.
Likewise one council grants, that the Pope is above the council and that
the council may err, as it has been within the 200. years, the counsels of
Constance and Basil, determined that the council was above the Pope and that
the Pope may err. Contrariwise, the council of Ferraria, and Florence,
determined that the Pope was above the council and that the council might
err. Martinus 5. the Pope chosen by the council of Constance, was of the same
judgment that the council: But Eugenius 4. that gathered the council of
Ferraria, and Florence against the council of Basil, was of the contrary
judgment. Now I would say he were a witty fellow, that could reconcile
this gear together. For, if he be a Canonist that holds this opinion: that
the Pope can not err, when the Pope him self grants that he may err, which
way shall he turn him self? For, if this proposition be true: the Pope can
not err, then this is true also, that the Pope may err: for if he can not
err he can not err in saying so: And if the Pope erred in saying, he could
err where he can not err, then this proposition is false, the Pope can not
err, so one proposition shall be both true and false, which is impossible.
Likewise if he hold that hilde that the council can not err, and the
council it self confesses it that it may err. Gentle master N. reconcile
me these together, which concern a case that has been in practice and still
is, in the Papistrie, and may here trouble a man's conscience that would
believe your church, and if he have any wit, restrain him for ever coming into
your church: If you can not untie this knot nor wind your self out of this
maze, unless you will be still obstinate, it were wisdom for you to recant.

The 18. article has but one demand.
I demand whether they were ever of the true Catholic church, which either
took to them selves new names of religion according to the calling of any
sect master, or liked not so well the name of Catholic or Christian as of
their several teachers, as to be called of Arius, Arians, or of Calvin,
Caluinistes, or of Luther, Lutheranes, or Protestants etc. if any man therefore
can prove unto me that men which have chosen to themselves to declare their
diversity of faith, from the common known Catholic church such new names,
should be of the Catholic church, I recant. I Answer that they which can
not be content with the name of Christians, but chose unto them selves new
names after the calling of their sect masters: as Arrians, Pelagians,
Franciscanes, Dominicanes, Benedictines, Gilbertines, Augustinians, Scotistes,
Thomistes, Albertistes, etc. are none of the Catholic church: But the true
Christians which desire most of all to be so called, and compting it a most
honorable name without chosing any other name, be of the Catholic church,
although in reproach, they be called of you Caluinistes, and Lutherans. As for
the name of Protestants, came first of them that made protestation against the
decree of Spires in Germany, and from that time has been attributed to the
professors of the Gospel: which name they do not so much delight in, as you
do in the name of Papists. Therefore, if nothing else do let you but the name*
there is no cause why you should not recant.

The 19. article has but one demand.
Again, if these, which by the common calling and judgment of Christian
people, be named and commonly taken for heretics, have not in all ages proved
them selves in the end to be heretics in deed, notwithstanding their craking
of Gods word, and therefore that the Protestants being so taken and called,
prove not so in deed, I recant. THose that by true Christians, have been
called and counted for heretics, have proved so in deed, and therefore the
Papists, being called and counted heretics of true Christians, without doubt,
are heretics in deed. But it has not been always true, that they, which of
the people commonly called Christians, were called and taken for heretics,
proved so in deed. For the true Christians of the Arrian people, that were
called Christian people, were called and taken for heretics, and in reproach,
were called Homousians, and Athanasians, yet they proved and were in deed,
true Christians and no heretics. So the true Christians at this day, being of
the Papists, which after a sort, are named Christians: called heretics, and
in reproach Protestants, and Caluinistes, in that their faith agrees with the
word of God, prove them selves in deed, to be true Christians, and no
heretics. Therefore you have bound your self to recant.

The 20. article has 3. demandes.
1 Likewise, if any man can prove unto me, that either those be not true
Christians, which by the consent of nations, and by old prescription of so
many years as be since their conversion, be and ever has been called
Catholics. YOu your selves, will not account the Grecians for true Christians,
and yet by consent of nations, and prescription of as many years as you can
prescribe, they be, and ever have been called Catholics, if you say: they, are
not called by you, I answer: no more are you so called by the^. And sense the
time that you departed from them, as great a portion of the world, and as many
nations, have called them Catholics, as you are able to show on your side.
Therefore either you must compte them true Christians, or else you must grant
that they, which have been long called Catholics, are not always true
Christians.

2 Or that those can be any true members, or children of the Catholic church,
which do mislike and mistrust so farreforth these holy names, as well of Church,
as Catholic that they have turned the^ into Congregations, and Gospellers, and
Protestants, and such like. HE is a foolish sophister, that reasons from
names to things, as you do most vainly and childishly: we mislike the names
of Church, and Catholic, because we do sometimes use these names:
Congregation, and Gospellers or Protestants, and therefore be no true members
of the Catholic church: we neither mislike nor mistrust those names as you
sclaunder us, neither do we boast and trust only in these names, without the
things them selves, as you do, and as your forefathers the wicked Jews,
crying: the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the
Lord: when they had nothing less than the Temple of the Lord, but rather a
den of thieves: So, you cry, the Catholic church, the Catholic church, the
Catholic church, when you have nothing in deed but the synagoge of Satan.
But because you make so much of these two names, Church, and Catholic, let us
see what great mysteries are contained in them. This word, Church, comes of
the Greek word Kyriaka, in Latin Dominica, in English, the Lord his house:
for so were they wont, in old time to call their temples, or oratories, so
that this word, church, proprely signifies a material temple, and can not
signify the fellowship and communion of Christian people, but by a figure.
Therefore if we other whiles use this word, Congregation, which can not deny,
but it is the English word of this Greek name Ecclesia, that the Scripture
uses, and signifies without figure ye same thing that this word, Church, does
by a figure, you may be ashamed, if you were not impudent, to find any fault
with us for so doing. Likewise this word, Catholic, comes of the Greek
word, and signifies Universal, or over all, which word the common people
does not understand. Therefore we expound it plainly and say: that the
Catholic Church, is the Congregation of Christ, dispersed over all the world.
What reasonable man can reprehende this doing, and not rather your folly,
which think it inoughe, if the people can prate like parates: Catholic,
Catholic, and understand not what Catholic means. Thus, as we do not
refuse these words: Catholic, and Church, because they are commonly received,
so do we interpret them, by Universal, and Congregation, because they are
not else, commonly understood.

3 If therefore any thing can prove our true Church better than the honorable
name of Catholic, or more condemn them to be out of Christ's church tha^ that
not only the Christian world gives it not to them, but they in a name, do
refuse the same them selves, then do I recant. HEre you bewraye your self
evidently, and acknowledge, that we do not sclaunder you, when we say: you
boast only of the Catholic church: For you declare plainly, that you have no
better argument then the very name of the Catholic Church, to prove, that you
be the Catholic Church: if this be the best argument, all the rest is little
worth. For if the only name of an honest man, is enough to prove an honest
man, many a knave may prove him self an honest man, and if the very name of
learning, make a learned man, many an ass may prove him self to be a learned
man, or if ye name of a good Christian, prove a man to be a good Christian,
every hypocrite may prove him self a good Christian. Likewise if you have no
greater argument, that can more condemn us, then that we are not called the
Catholic Church, then can you no more condemn us, then Christ and his
Apostles, that were not only, not called the true Church, but also were called
heretics and deceivers by the people of the Jews, which were as rightly
called God his people, as they that give you the name of Catholic Church, are
called the Christian world. It is well you have nothing better to prove your
Church, then the honorable name of Catholic, nor any thing more to condemn
our Church, then that we are not called Catholic, and yet we have as many
nations, and more then you have, that by public authority, call us
Catholics, and you heretics, although you most shamefully sclaunder us, that
we do refuse the name being offered unto us. Seeing you boast so much of the
name, Catholic, you shall hear what some of the old writers judged thereof.
Chrysostom, in an homely, that he writes of Adam, and Eve, in the later end
has these words, after he has told them that he has no need to repeat
such deep questions, as those men have handled which have fought against
heretics: Satis sufficere credimus quicquid secu^dum praedictas regulas
Apostolica scripta nos docuerunt, vt prorsus opinemur Catholicum, quod
apparuerit praefixis sententijs esse contrarium, that is, we believe that what
so ever the Apostles have taught us according to the foresaid rules is
sufficient, in so much that in no wise, we think that to be Catholic which
shall appear to be contrary to the sentences before determined. By this you
may see that Chrysostom thought it not sufficient to have the name of
Catholic, for he judged nothing to be Catholic in deed, that was contrary to
the rule grounded in the writings of the Apostles. Wherefore how so ever you
boast of the honorable name of Catholic, except you can prove that your
opinions agree with the Scripture, they are not Catholic in deed, by
Chrysostomes judgment. S. Augustine also, in his book de Genese ad literam
imperfecto cap. 1. speaking of the Catholic faith, says: This is an article
thereof, that we should believe. Constitutam ab eo matrem Ecclesiam quae
Catholica dicitur, ex eo quia vniuersaliter perfecta est, and in nullo
claudicat and per totum orbem diffusa est. That he has appointed a mother
Church, which is called Catholic, of this, because it is universally perfect,
and halteth in nothing, and is dispersed over all the world. S. Augustine
here, is not content that the Church be only called Catholic, but shows
when it is that, which it is called, and therefore the popish Church, not being
universally perfect, as most Papists will confess, that many things in their
church have need of reformation, and halting in many things from the truth of
God his word, neither yet being dispersed over all the world but contained in
a corner of Europa, is not by S. Augustines rule the Catholic Church.
Furthermore S. Augustine, co^tra Epistolam Fundame^ti cap. 4. against the
Manichees plainly declares, how far forth, not only the name of Catholic,
but also how far universally, consent, succession, antiquity, are to be
allowed: Vt ergo hanc omittam sapientiam, etc. Therefore to omit this wisdom
which you do believe to be in the Catholic Church, there be many other things
which may hold me most righteously in her bosom. The consent of people and
nations holds me, the authority begun with miracles, nourished with hope,
increased with charity, confirmed by antiquity, does hold me. The succession
of Priests from the very seat of Peter the Apostle, unto whom our Lord after
his resurrection, committed his sheep to be fed even unto this present
bishopric, does hold me. Last of all that very name of Catholic does hold
me, which name, not without a cause, this Church alone has so obtained, among
so many heresies, that whereas all heretics would be called Catholics, yet when
a stranger shall ask: where men meet at the Catholic Church, none of the
heretics dare show him, either their principal temple or house. All this, you
will say makes exceeding much for us: yea, but hear that which follows:
Apud vos autem, vbi nihil horum est quod me inuitet ac teneat, sola personat
veritatis pollicitatio: quae quidem si tam manifesta monstratur, vt in dubium
venire non possit: proponenda est omnibus illis rebus, quibus in Catholica
teneor, that is: But among you where there is none of these things, that may
provoke or hold me, there sounds the only promise of truth, which if it be
showed so manifest that it can not come in doubt, is to be preferred before all
those things, by which I am holden in a Catholic Church. By this you may
plainly see, that though consent, antiquity, succession, and the name of
Catholic, be good confirmation, when they are joined with the truth, yet when
a truth is severed from them,, it is more to be regarded then they all: and it
is truth that makes Catholic, to be esteemed, and not Catholic, that gives
authority to truth: Wherefore, seeing it were better to prove your Church, to
be Catholic, then to boast, that it is so called, and to disprove our Church
so to be, then to say: it is not so called: The best way for you, is to recant.

The 21. article conteyneth but one demand.
1 Moreover, I ask of the Protestants: whether in that time, in which they
hold the true church to have been hidden or lost: the people that learned this
article of their Creed (I believe the Catholic church) was bound to go from
that church which they saw, and taught them both the article, and all other
things touching their faith and by which they were Christened, and received
all other sacraments, and commodities of salvation, whether they were bound, I
say, to believe this unknown and close Congregation, which they could never
come unto, nor by which they ever received; or could receive any benefit, and
so forsake that church by whom and in whom, they received both their faith and
sacraments: Show me therefore that the Christian men of these days, were
charged to believe any other church than that, which taught them the article of
the church, and baptized them, and I recant. THis demand, is like a drunken
man's dream, having neither head nor foot: whether they should believe the
church was lost: whether they should believe the church that was unknown to
them, etc. But if your demand have any sense in it: This is my answer. The
church was never lost, but hidden from the eyes of the world: Therefore, if
the people that where taught that article: To believe the Catholic church, and
were baptized to your church, understood that this church, was not the
Catholic church, which was so commonly called, but that God had a secret
Congregation, which was in deed, the true Catholic church, they were bound to
forsake your church, and to believe the secret Congregation: for if a man had been baptized of the Arrians and being brought up by them, had learned that
article, to believe the Catholic church, which the Arrians would expound to be
them selves, if afterward, by God his help, this man understood, that the
church of the Arrians, was not the catholic church, as he was taught it was,
but that Athanasius, and a few other, that were banished and persecuted, were
the true Catholic church: he was bound to leave the Arrians, commonly called
the church, and to join him self with the secret, banished, hid, and
persecuted church of Christ. But as for your Popish church, in that time of
blindness and error taught not the people that article, nor any other but
kept them back from the knowledge, as well of that article, as of all other
things that were necessary to their salvation: for you taught them nothing
else, but to pronounce, and that full il fauoredly, like popingeys, certain
latin words, which they understood no more than stocks or stones. So that
the people had no instruction of you, no not of the name of God, in many places
but that they received by uncertain talk of their parents, as it were from
hand to hand: for how many thousand parishes are there in England, that
within these 60. years would declare, that they never heard sermon in their
life. As for that they heard of their service, they learned as much of it, as
of the ringing of their belles, which was a sound without understanding.
Therefore you may be ashamed to speak of teaching the people, their belefe and
all things necessary for salvation, when you have counted it heresy to learn
their creed in English, or to read the scripture in English, in which is
contained all thing necessary to be known for everlasting salvation. Finally
because you requier me to show you that the Christian people of those days,
were bound to believe any other church than that, which taught them the article
of the church and baptized them, I trow I will so show it you, that for both
your ears, you dare not deny it: how say you? The Christian people of the
Greek church, which were taught by the Greek church, that article of the
church, and by the same Greek church were baptized, whether ought they to
believe any other church but the Greek church? If you say no: then you
acknowledge the Greek church to be the true church which denies the Popes
authority, if you say yea: Then you are welcome home, you recant.

The 22. article, although it be very confuse, yet it conteyneth in effect 3.
demandes.
1 I ask also whether any man for the space of that 1000. years, of blindenes
could be saved, out of that secret and small Church, which they say was the
true Church, if they answer me, there might be some saved, with our
Sacraments, and in the Communion or fellowship of the Papists out of the
Protestants Church, then there was a way to heaven, out of Gods Church: if they
say that none could be saved by our Sacraments out of their close Church, then
all men young and old perished for those years without any hope of mercy,
because they could not unite them selves, and be incorporate to that company
and Congregation, whereof they never neither heard, nor could by any means
surmise. Therefore let any man alive prove unto me that either any man could
out of the true Church be saved. NO man alive that knows what the true Church
means, will say, that any man can be saved out of the true Church, for he
that is not a member of the body of Christ, ca^ by no means receive any
benefit of Christ to his salvation. Therefore how long so ever the true Church
were hidden, whether it were a thousand years (as you bear men in hand that we
should say) or two thousand years it is not material, this is certain, that
out of this Church, none could be saved, and though you count it small, as in
deed in respect of the world, it is but a small flock, and few are elected,
and few find the streit gate of life. Luke 12. Matthew. 7. and 20. yet is the
number of it greater, then man's eye commonly can discern. As when Elias
thought that he only had been left alone of the true Church: God answered, that
he had yet reserved 7000. that never bowed their knee to Baal. 1. Reg. 19. And
as Esaias declares when the people should be almost all destroyed, yet a
remnant should be saved, which though it seemed to be small, yet it should
ouerflow and fill all the world with righteousness, Esa. 10. and though it shall
be like a gathering of grapes when vintage is ended, or the shaking of an olive
tree when men think they have left nothing upon it, yet there be two or three
in the top among the boughs, and four or five under the leaves in the
highest branches. Esaias. 17. and 24.

2 Or that any other company could be known for the true and only Church but
our common Catholic society. THe true Catholic Church was never so secret
or hidden but it might be known of all those that had eyes to see it, whose
hearts were lightened with the spirit of God and were enstructed by the word
of God, that they might understand the truth, and know the spouse of Christ
from the common strompet of Antichrist.

3 Or that all men were damned for a thousand years together because they
could not find, nor surmise of any other Church, then that which practices
all holy functions, which Christ left for our salvation in the world, and I
recant. WE take not upon us to meddle with God his judgments, whom he
condemns, and for what causes, further then the word of God teaches us,
namely that as many as have not believed in the only son of God, are
condemned for their unbelief, other secret causes we remit to his secret
counsel and knowledge. And whereas you say that the popish church practices
all holy functions that Christ left for the salvation of his Church, it is most
false: for first you do not preach remission of sins in the blood of Christ
only, for either you preach not all, or else you preach remission of sins in
any thing, rather then the only merits of Christ, as in men's own merits,
works of supererogation, pardons, masses, beggarly ceremonies, as holy water,
auriculer confession etc. Secondly, you minister not the Sacraments purely
according to Christ his institution, but either corrupt and defile them with
man's traditions, as you do Baptism, or else clean change the use of them, as
in the Lords Supper, which you make a Sacrifice, an idol, a Priests
breakfast, and defraude the people of the one half of the sacrament, as though
you were wiser then he, that instituted it in both kinds. Thirdly, discipline
you have converted into tyranny and covetousness, reteyning nothing but the name
of it alone: Wherefore seeing you exercise no holy function after Christ his
institution, but clean contrary to the same, and do obstinately defend the
filthy whore of babylon against the clear light of the Gospel, and the true
spouse of Christ, ye shall be damned except you recant.

The 23. article conteyneth 2. demandes.
1 Again show me any Church, or imagine if you can by good reason, a church of
Christ in which there is no gathering together for preaching, no spirit of
prophesying, no rod of correction, no order of ministering nor any spiritual
function that can be named, prove me that there should be a true Church for a
thousand years together, and lacked all these things. YOu would feign have a
great nombre of Articles and therefore you bring in one matter often times in
diverse phrase of words, that it might seem a new matter when it has been
uttered twice or thrice before: as this Article is contained before in the 5.8.
and 9. Articles, where you shall find it more largely answered. But let us
see, what this strange demand requires, we must show him a church, or else
imagine by good reason a church of Christ without preaching, ministering, and
discipline for a thousand years together. Although we will not grant that it
has so long continued without these exercises, yet because you give us leave
to imagine, we can imagine that it may as well continue without public
preaching, ministering, and discipline for a thousand years, as it did for
three hundred years before Constantine. But you will say there was preaching
ministering, and correcting, though it were not known to the tyrants and
persecutors, so say I unto you, for that thousand years there was gathering
together for preaching, ministering, and correcting, though the Pope and his
persecuting Prelates could not always see it, nor come to the knowledge of
it: for if they had once intelligence of it they smarted for it, as is known
by the stories of the Waldenses, Bohemians, etc. Furthermore continual
exercise of preaching, ministering of sacraments, and executing of discipline,
are notes of a quiet and peaceable Congregation, not of a dispersed,
persecuted, and disquieted Church. How often does S. Cyprian complain, that
the brethren could not be gathered together for executing of discipline,
whereby it is certain, that likewise they could not be gathered together for
other exercises. Therefore the intermission of these exercises in a persecuted
Church, does not prove the same to be no true Church: But where so ever there
be two or three gathered together in the name of Christ, there is he in the
midst of them. But whereas you require the spirit of prophecy (except you
mean the gift of interpreting the Scriptures) the Church in the most quiet and
flourishing state, may want the spirit of showing things to come, as well as
the gifts of tongues, healing, etc.

2 And withal, that there was an other untrue Church which for those many
days only practiced to the salvation of many, all these offices: and give me
a good reason why this Church, that always has had these things should be a
false Church, and the other that wanted them, to be a true Church, and I
recant. WE utterly deny, that beside the true Church, there was an untrue
church, that practiced those offices to the salvation of any man: for once
again I tell you, you have neither the preaching of the word, nor ministering
of Sacraments, nor execution of discipline, according to the truth of God his
institution, but either altogether changed, or else greatly corrupted. And
whereas you say, that the popish church only has practiced these offices: I
ask you again whether the Greek Church be a part of your Church, and
whether the Papists in England be a part of your Church. The Grecians you will
say, are not: but the English Papists are. Then have I found out by your own
judgment, the Church of the Grecians, practicing these offices being an untrue
church, and the church of ye English Papists not practicing the same, yet
granted of you to be a true Church. Therefore you are bound to recant.

The 24. article conteyneth 10. demandes.
1 Moreover let any man show how that Church can be the pillar of truth, which
durst not for a thousand years claim either preaching of Gods word or
ministering of Sacraments or show her self against falsehood or superstition. AS
the number of your articles does draw to an end, so your matter is far
spent, and therefore to make up your number, you must repete one thing twice.
This demand is contained before in the 11. and 12. articles, where also it is
fully answered. Notwithstanding, seeing it comes again it shall be briefly
answered in this place. The Church is not called the pillar of truth, because
it should stand always in the sight of the world: for then the defection,
which S. Paul speaks of, could not have come, neither should the Church fly
into the wilderness, as was declared to S. John: But it is called the pillar of
truth, because that where so ever the Church is, either visible or invisible,
there is the truth. So though the Church were hid a certain time in the
wilderness, yet there was truth with the Church. You seem to be a good
Arithmetrician: for no number sounds in your mouth but a thousand.
Nevertheless how long so ever it was, the pillar of truth decayed not, And as
God gave his spirit, diverse times was bold to challenge preaching and
ministering of the Sacraments, yea, and so boldly, that it cost many of the
chalengers their lives. As Berengarius, Bruno, Marsilus de Pandua, Ioannes de
Gaudano, Ioannes VVickleffe, VValdo, Ioannes Hus, Ieronymus de Praga, etc. Thus
it is manifest that the Church has diverse times challenged her right, and
withstood falsehood.

2 Let any man show that all gifts of the spirit, and functions of the holy
Ghost have been taken from her, a thousand years together, and only practiced
to the peoples use by an aduouterous Church. THere is no man can show this: for
it is a false lie, that all gifts of the spirit, and function of the holy
Ghost were either taken from the true Church, or given to the adulterous
church. And this has been showed more then once or twice before.

3 Let it be declared, how the gates of hell have not prevailed, or Christ's
promise and warrant for her, not been void and frustrate, if a bastard Church
exercising idolatry, as they say, has spoiled the true Church of all holy
actions, and the whole government, and the whole name of Christianity, almost
ever since Christ's time. THe Devil has bent all his force and ordinance, he
has armed all the power of darkness, he stirred up ^yrantes, heretics,
Popes, Saracenes, and Turks to destroy the Church, the dragon, that old
serpent Satanas, the Devil, stood before the woman to devour her child, he
persecuted her into the wilderness, he cast out of his mouth, a great river
to carry her away, he made war with the rest of her seed that keep the
commandments of God. Apoc. 12. but yet in despite of the devil, the Pope,
and all her enemies, she is to this day preserved, and shall be to the worlds
end: Therefore the gates of Hell, have not prevailed against her, nor the
promise of Christ has failed. And whereas you say, that your bastard church
has spoiled her of all holy actions, government, and Christian name, it is a
most impudent lie, as it is true, that you saw a bastard church usurped her
holy name, counterfaicted her holy actions, and turned her government into
tyranny.

4 Let me see therefore how the only dearling and spouse of Christ should be
neglected of him so long. SHe has not been neglected of him, but felt his
continual aid, he has given her safe deliverance of her child, and taken it
up from the cruelty of the Dragon, he has provided her a place in the
wilderness, he has made war with the Dragon for her sake, and driven him
out of heaven, he has given her Eagles wings to fly into the wilderness, he
has caused the earth, to swallow up the water that should have carried her
away, he has given the remnant of her seed, Victory over the Dragon.
Finally, his merciful protection and loving care over her, has never more
notably appeared than that against so many dangers and enemies all this while
he has preserved her, until such time as he has thought good, now to bring
her out of her secret place in the wilderness, into the open sight of the
world again.

5 Let the adversary show that the Church should ever by superstition and
falsehood commit adultery or be deuorc^ from him. THe true church, consisting of
God his elect, and the lively members of the body of Christ, shall never
commit such adultery that she shall be divorced from him. But the visible church,
by Idolatry and superstition may separate her self from Christ, and be
refused of him, as God speaks by Esaias to the church of Jerusalem cap. 1. How
is the faithful City become an harlot? It was full of judgment, and justice
lodged therein, but now they are murderers. Thy silver is become dross, and
thy wine is mixed with water. Thy Princes are rebellious and companions of
thieves etc. even so may he say to the church of Rome: how is that faithful
church become an harlot, true Faith and Religion have dwelled in her, but now
Idolatry and superstition: thy silver is turned into dross, and thy wine is
mixed with water, thou have nothing pure and uncorrupted, thy Princes be
rebellious Antichrists etc. Thus I have showed that the visible church, may
become an adulteress, and be deuorced from Christ.

6 Or that Christ should ever want his spouse in earth. THis has been often
answered before, Christ has never wanted his spouse in earth, though the
blind world can not always see her, or when they see her, will not
acknowledge her to be his spouse, but persecute her, as if she were an
adulteress.

7 Or that he should be a head either without a body. THese are but one
thing in diverse phrases, as he has never wanted his spouse in earth, so has
he never been an head without a body, and seeing these words in this sense
are relatiues (for Christ is called a head in respect of the Church which is
his body, and the Church is called a body, in respect of Christ that is her
head) I answer you by a rule of the Logicians: No man knows a relative,
except he know the correlatiue thereof, Therefore, though Christ had a body in
earth, yet could it be known of none, but such as knew Christ the head of
that body. Of whom, when the Papists were ignorant, specially when they
appointed an other head in earth, it is no marueill, if they could not see the
body of Christ, though he have never been without it.

8 Or such an unknown and small body. THis has been answered immediately
before, it suffices that it be known to Christ the head. As he says: My
sheep hear my voice and I know them. John 10. And to them that be of the
members of the same body. As for the rest, it is not necessary that they should
always see it, which will never acknowledge it. Neither is it so small, as it
is thought of, it is dispersed in many places over all the world, and yet few
in comparison of the malignant church, whose number is as the sand of the sea,
etc. Apoc. 20.

9 Or that Christ's only kingdom should become so co^temptible. NOthing else is
to be looked for of the world, but hatred and contempt, as Christ him self
says: You shall be hated of all men for my names sake. Matthew. 10. and S. Paul
bids us look on our calling, not many wise men, according to the flesh, not
many mighty men, and not many noble men: but God has chosen the foolish
things of this world to confound the wise, and the weak of this world to
confound the strong. 1. Cor. 1. And what has the true church to boast in but
in the Cross of Christ. Gal. 6. than the which, nothing is more shameful,
contemptible or reprochefull to the wisdom of this world: what knowledge or
preaching has the true church but Jesus Christ crucified, which to the Jews
is an offense and to the Greeks foolishness, but to them that be called, both
Jews and Greeks it is the power and wisdom of God to everlasting salvation.
1. Cor. 1. Romans 1. So that as the church in the sight of God and his Saints
is most glorious and honorable, so in the sight of the world it has always
been most base and contemptible.

10 Or that his spouse in earth should ever lack the singular prerogatives of
Gods spirit, show me these things, and I recant. THis also has been declared
before in the second demand of this Article. There be certain singular
prerogatives, which are not continually with God his Church: as the gift of
tongues, the gift of prophecy, the gift of healinges etc. but there be other
prerogatives of God his spirit, that are necessary for the salvation of God his
elect, as the gift of understanding, the gift of Faith, the spirit of adoption,
etc. and these the spou^e of Christ has never wanted. Wherefore if you will be
partaker of those benefits which are received in the church of Christ, you must
forsake your Romish religion, and recant.

The 25. article has 2. demandes.
1 Show me that the Church, which ought to be a Christian man's stay, in all
troubles and tempests of doctrine might become so hid or so close that no
man could find her. THe reader must not be offended with me for any tedious
repetition of mine aunsweres, seeing you give the occasion, by propounding your
demandes so often. This demand has a false principle: that the church ought
to be a Christian man's only stay in all troubles and tempests of doctrine:
for when soever any such tempests do arise, there is as great question and
doubt of the Church, as there is controversy of the doctrine: for as every
heretic chalengeth unto him self the truth of opinions, so also does he
challenge the possession of the church, so that the church is always in as
great question as the doctrine. And then is it to be sought out and tried only
by the scriptures, as we have declared at large in the answer to the 4.
Article, 2. demand. Secondly whereas you demand: whether she could be so
hid or close that no man could find her, because I have answered to this
demand four or five times already, I will now answer in one word: Although
she was bidden and close from the world, yet was she known to them that were
her children.

2 Or so harteles that she could succor no man nor instruct any man in his
doubt of conscience or distress of Faith, prove me that there may be such a
decay of Gods spirit, truth, and Church, and I recant. THe Church has never
been afraid to do her office toward her children and true members, in
teaching, ^xhorting, comforting, confirming, etc. neither has the spirit of
God failed to lead her into all truth, and Christ has been with her ever
more, and shall be to the worlds end. But that the spirit of God, truth, and
the Church of Christ, should depart from the greatest number of the world,
is proved by S. Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2. and by the Revelation of S. John. Apoc. 12.
Therefore if the spirit of truth did lead you, you should recant.

The 26. article conteyneth in effect but 3. demandes.
1 Show me again whether any man of years may be saved, except he believe the
Catholic Church? THere is no man of what age or years soever he be that can
be saved, except he be a member of the Catholic church. But how necessary it
is to believe the Catholic church, it is very doubtful, as you demand, and as
the conclusion of this article seems to require. If you mean that it is
necessary to believe the Catholic church, that is to say, that God has an holy
universal Congregation, I grant it is necessary to believe. But I utterly deny
that ye Romish church is that holy Catholic church. But if you mean (as it
seems) and as the rest of the Papists do interpret that article, I believe
the Catholic church, that is: I believe, what soever the church does allow, to
be true: I deny that it is necessary to salvation, that a Christian man should
so believe the Catholic church, both because the church may err, and also
because something may be commonly received of the church, which is not
material to salvation. And that this is a false interpretation of this article
of our Creed, I believe the Catholic church, that is: I believe what so ever
she does set forth or maintain, to be true, appears manifestly by the words
them selves: For who ever was so ignorant in the Latin tongue, to think that
Credere Ecclesiam, and Credere Ecclesiae, were all one in signification. In
deed if the words were: Credo Ecclesiae Catholicae, in the dative case, this
interpretation might take place, but when it is in the accusative case, Credo
Ecclesiam Catholicam, A boy that would conster it otherwise than thus: I
believe that there is a Catholic church, were worthy to have a doosen stripes
for his labor. Moreover this common distinction of Credere in Deum, that is:
to put our trust in God. Credere Deum, that is: to believe that there is a God,
and Credere Deo, that is: to give credit to God, that he speaks the truth,
plainly overthrows this foolish and false interpretation: For we say not:
Credo in Ecclesiam, that is: I put my whole trust in the Church, for that were
blasphemy, against God, in whom only we must believe, neither do we say: Credo
Ecclesiae, that is: I give credit to the Church, as though she should always
speak the truth: But we say and confess against all heretics and
scismatikes: Credo Ecclesiam etc. that is: I believe, that there is one Holy,
Catholic, and Apostolic church, whereof I am a member etc. Finally, when the
articles following, are spoken in one context and phrase, it can not be chosen,
but that they must have one kind of interpretation Communionem Sanctorum,
Remissionem peccatorum, Carnis resurrectionem, that is: I believe the Communion
of Saints, the forgiveness of sins, the Resurrection of the body, etc.
whereof the interpretation must needs be this: I believe that there is a
Communion of Saints, that there is forgiveness of sins, etc. Even so I
believe, that there is a Catholic Church, which is an article of our creed,
necessary to be believed of every Christian man, but to believe all and every
thing that the Catholic church, by common consent does maintain, is no
article of our Faith, and therefore not necessary to salvation.

2 And that is it which has in the face of all the world practiced preach^ng:
the conversion of nations to the obedience of the Gospel: that has always
had the ministering of sacraments, the hearing of matters in controversy, power
Iudiciarie in Ecclesiastical causes, the orderly succession of Bishops,
uniformity in solemn ceremonies, unity in faith, that has in her self all
holy functions of the spirit, as working of miracles, remission of sins, the
true sense and interpretation of Gods word that is bewtified by the diversity
of states, commended by Christ in the Gospel, as with Virgins, with Martyrs,
with Confessors, and the rest. BEcause these colewortes have been sodden twice
or thryse already, they are not worthy to be showed in several dishes, but
even as they are here mingled all together in an hochpotte. Of these notes that
you make proper to the Catholic Church (as it has been declared before) some
are not always necessary in ye catholic church: As open preaching in the face
of the world, open ministering of Sacraments and execution of discipline, these
are not to be required in a persecuted Church. Some were proper for a time, and
then ceased, as working of miracles, and diverse other functions of the spirit.
Some are never necessary in the Church, as succession of Bishops, uniformity
in ceremonies, etc. But of all these notes, there is not one that is proper to
the Church of Rome: for she has not always practiced open preaching, and
never preached the word of truth, she has converted but few nations to her
Religion, from Gentilitie, and them rather by war, than by preaching: she
never had sense she first arose, the ministering of sacraments according to
Christ his institution, she has hard matters in controversy, not for
furtherance of Justice, but for love of money. Her iudiciarie power, may be
dispensed withal for money. She has had no orderly succession of Bishops,
except an hoar be an orderly Bishop of the Church of Rome: And except so many
schisms as they write of, be orderly successions: she has not uniformity in
all ceremonies, for diverse nations, and diverse Churches in these nations have
diverse ceremonies, as Sarum, York, Bangor, etc. in England: she has not
unity in faith: for it is not yet determined, of one of the greatest articles
of Popish faith, whether the Pope be above the church: she has no holy
functions of God his spirit, but profane vsages of men's inventions: she has
no true miracles, but the power of Antichrist in lying signs and wonders. She
has nothing less then the true sense of God his word, which submits the
same to her own corrupt and changeable judgment. She is not bewtified with
estates commended in Scripture, as Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors and
Teachers, but with Popes, Cardinals, Monks, Chanons, Friars, etc. In steed
of virgins, she has filthy strumpets, her Nuns, or else such foolish
virgins as bring no oil in their lamps: she has no Martyrs, but obstinate
traitors, as Becket, Fisher, More, etc. she has no confessors of truth,
though she have ten thousand mainteyners of falsehood and lies: Wherefore if
these be the notes of ye Catholic Church, ye Church of Rome can in no wise be
that same.

3 Prove unto me that this is not the true Church, or that we be not bound to
obey this Church and no other in all controversies, and doubts raised either
by the difficulty of the Scripture, or by the vain contention and pride of
heresy, and I recant. I Have proved, even immediately before that not one of
those notes, which you count to be marks of the true Church, is proper to your
Church. And therefore it is not the truth, neither ought it to be obeyed in any
thing. And as for doubts that arise by difficulty of Scripture, or contention
of heresy, must be resolved and determined, as it is abundantly declared
before, only by the Scriptures: for the hard places of the Scripture must be
opened by easy places, and heretics must be confuted, by the Scriptures: for
there is never heresy, but there is as great doubt of the Church, as of the
matter in question, only the Scripture is the stay of a Christian man's
conscience, which I would wish that you would truly embrace and recant.

The 27. article conteyneth 5. demandes.
1 Moreover let any man prove unto me, that the true and only Church of God,
may at any time be void of God his spirit. THe true and only Church of
Christ, can never be void of God his spirit, and yet she may err from the
truth, and be deceived, in some things, even as there is no true Christian man
that is void of God his spirit, for he that has not the spirit of Christ, is
none of his. Romans 8. yet may every true Christian err, and be deceived in some
things, according to the saying of the Scripture, every man is a liar.
Wherefore the whole Church militant consisting of men, which are all liars, may
err all together, as every part thereof, although neither the whole Church nor
any true member thereof be void of God his spirit.

2 Or falsely interpret any sentence of holy Scripture. THis gentle offer must
needs be taken, I will prove unto you, that the church of Rome, has falsely
interpreted diverse sentences of scripture, and therefore by that which she has
done, it cannot be doubted but that she may do it. S. Augustine was in this
error, that he thought Infantes must receive the sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ, under pain of damnation, and was deceived by false
interpretation of this scripture: Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man
and drink his blood etc. Joan. 6. This error and false interpretation, he
affirms to be common to all the Western church, and to Pope Innocent him
self. Contra duas epist. Pelag. ad Bonifacium lib. 2. cap. 4. and co^tra
Iulianum lib. 1. cap. 2. Furthermore the second Council of Nice, how many
textes of scripture does it falsely interpret, which it were to tedious to
repete, yet for examples sake I will rehearse some of them. God made man to his
own image Genesis 1. therefore we must have images in the church. No man lights
a candle and sets it under a bushel Math. 5. therefore images must be set
upon the altars. As we have heard, so we have seen in the City of our God,
Psalm. 48. that is: God must not be known by only hearing of his word, but
also by sight of images. If these be not true interpretations I report me to
you. Beside these, I will bring you a sentence of holy Scripture, not only
falsely interpreted in sense, but also falsified in words, and concerning not
a small matter, but even one of the chief articles of our Faith. It is written
in the 10. chapter of the Gospel after S. John the 29. verse (...). My Father
which gave the^ unto me (speaking of his sheep) is greater than all. This
sentence, has the Council of Laterane, holden under Pope Innocent the 3.
where were present 70. Metropolitanes, 400. Bishops, 12. Abbates, and 800.
Priors commentualles in all 1300. Prelates, falsified in words, after this
manner, Pater quod dedit mihi, maius est omnibus, that is: That which the Father
has given me, is greater than all. This sentence they allege, to prove that
God the Father begetting his Son from everlasting, gave his own substance
unto him, the words be in the 2. Canon. Pater enim ab aeterno filium
generando, suam substantiam ei dedit, iuxta quod ipse testatur: Pater quod
dedit mihi, maius est omnibus. At dici non potest, quod partem suae substantiae
illi dederit, and partem retinuerit ipse sibi, cum substantia Patris
indiuisibilis sit etc. that is to say: For the Father, begetting his son,
from everlasting, gave him his own substance, according as he himself
witnesses: that which the Father gave me, is greater than all. But it can not
be said, that he gave him part of his substance, and kept part unto him self,
when as the substance of the Father is indivisible etc. Go your ways now and
persuade us, that your church can not interpret any sentence of the scripture,
falsely, when the Laterane Council, which is your represented church has thus
both falsefied, and falsely interpreted, this scripture. Persuade men, that
they may safely lean to the interpretation of your church, when among a
thousand and three hundred Prelates, gathered canonically in a Council, not
one was found that could epsy such gross abusing of the word of God, but
let it pass in a Canon, under the name of the whole Council. Persuade men,
that in all controversies, and condemning of errors, they must be ruled by the
determination of your Church, When the Fathers of the Laterane Council, can
not confute the error of Ioachim Abbot, concerning the Divinity of Christ, but
by falsefying and false interpreting of scripture. These few examples of an
infinite number, I have set forth, because they are sufficient, both to
satisfy your challenge, and to persuade the simple, that the church of Rome may
falsely interpret the scripture, which you would bear them in hand were
impossible.

3 Or induce any error among the people. THe true and only church of God, is
so guided by God his spirit and direct^d by his word that she can not induce
any damnable error to continue. Yet, as it is declared before, she has no such
privilege granted, but that she may be deceived, in some things: for her
knowledge is imperfect, and her prophesying is imperfect. 1. Cor. 13. And it is
true that S. Augustine says: even the whole church is taught to say: Forgive
us our trespasses. And if general Counsels be the church represented (as you
Papists do teach) S. Augustine plainly affirms that they may err: De
Baptismo contra Donatistas, lib. 2. cap. 2. Quis autem nesciat sanctam
scripturam Canonicam tam veteris quam noui Testamenti etc. And who knows not,
that the holy Canonical scripture, as well of the old, as of the new
Testament, is contained within her certain bounds: and that it is so
preferred, before all later writings of bishops, that of it, no man may in any
wise doubt, or dispute, whether it be true, or whether it be right, what so
ever is known to be written therein: and that the writings of bishops, which
have been written, or are now in writing, may be reprehended, if they have
gonne astraie, any thing from the truth, both by the saying that is perhaps
more wise, of any man, that is more skillful in that matter, and by the more
grave authority and wisdom of other better learned bishops, and also by
Counsels: and that even those Counsels which are gathered in every region or
province, ought to give place without all doubt, to the authority of the
general Counsels, which are gathered out of all the Christian world: and
that even the very general Counsels, may often be amended, the former by the
later, when as by any trial of things, that is opened, which before was shut,
and that is known which before was hidden, without any swelling of wicked
pride, without any stubbernesse of arrogance, without any contention of peuishe
envy: with holy Humility, with Catholic peace, with Christian charity. Thus
far, S. Augustine, which clearly affirms, that general Counsels may
often err, which may often be amended, but that the authority of God his
word, is to be preferred before the writings of all Doctors, and Decrees of
all Counsels, and that it only can not err. The Council of Carthage the 3.
ca. 23. determined, that all prayers at the altar, should be directed only to
the Father, and not to the Son, or the holy Ghost, whether this be an error
to define that it is unlawful to pray to God the Son, and God the holy
Ghost, let every man judge. But you will except, that this was a provincial
Synod, and not a general Council. But I answer you, it has the authority
of a general Council, because it was confirmed in the sixth general Council
holden at Constantinople in Trullo. And as for the Popish church, that it may
err, what need we better proof than the prayer, which it makes, after the
ending of every general Council, Precamur scilicet vt ignorantiae parcas and
errori indulgeas, that is we pray truly that thou would spare our
ignorance and pardon our error. And again, Et quia conscientia remordente
tabescimus, ne aut ignorantia, nos traxerit in errorom, aut praeceps forsitan
voluntas impulerit a Iustitia declinare, ob hoc te poscimus, te rogamus, vt si
quid offensionis in hac Concilij celebritate attraximus, condonare, and
remissibile facere digneris. that is: And because we are grieved with remorce of
conscience, lest either ignorance have drawn us into error, or perhaps rash
will has driven us to decline from Justice, therefore we pray thee, we
beseech thee, that if we have drawn unto us any offense in the celebration of
this Council, thou would vouche safe to pardon, and to make it remissible
etc. If it be impossible for the general Council to err, what need they
pray to God to pardon their error, and when their own conscience condemns
them and compels them to confess, and that before God, that they may err,
what impudence is it in any man, to contend that they can not err? Furthermore
the second Council of Nice, determined that Angels, and souls of men had
bodies, were visible, and circumscriptible, and therefore might be painted, and
this it affirms to be the judgment of the Catholic church, Con. Nice. 2.
Action 5. If this be not to induce an error, to make men believe that Angels
and spirits have bodies visible and circumscriptible, there was never any
error sense the world began. Finally, when they say the Pope can not err,
they acknowledge that such general Counsels as condemned Popes, for
heretics, did err, as the sixth general Council of Constantinople in Trullo,
which condemned and accursed Pope Honorius for an heretic, Action 13. Even as
Pope Leo, the 2. did also, as appears in his epistle, to the Emperor
Constantine. Also the Council of Constance did err, which condemned Pope John
the 23. for denying the immortality of the soul, and the resurrection of the
body. Session. 11. which Council, Pope John him self affirmed to be most
holy, and that it could not err. Session. 12. And the Council of Basile did
err, which deposed Pope Eugenius, the 4. Session. 34. the same Council being
confirmed by Pope Nicolas the 5. Session 43. If you say: these two last
Counsels did not err, in condemning and deposing these Popes: Then the great
general, and OEcumenicall Council of Ferraria, and Florence, did err, in
disallowing the determination of these Counsels. Thus it is manifest that the
Romish church, which they them selves confess, to be represented in a general
Council, may err, which has so often erred. And if it may err, and be
deceived it self, what man is he, that need to doubt: Whether it may induce
any error among the people.

4 Or approve any unprofitable or hurtefull usage among Christians. IF the
church had not approved many unprofitable and hurtefull vsages, among the
people in S. Augustines time, what need had he to complain, that many of God
his co^maundeme^ts, were little regarded, and man's presumptions so highely
esteemed, Sed hoc nimis doleo etc. But herewithall I am to much grieved, that
many things which in God his book are most holsomly commanded are less
regarded, and all things are so full of so many presumptions, that he is more
greuousely reproved, which in his vtas has touched the earth, with his bare
foot, that he that has buried his mind in drunkenness. Therefore if it be
an unprofitable and hurtefull usage, to prefer man's traditions before God his
commandments, the Church in S. Augustines time approved an unprofitable and
hurtefull usage. Furthermore, if the Church can not approve an unprofitable or
hurtefull usage, wherefore are so many ceremonies, as were approved in S.
Augustines and S. Ambroses times, abrogated and disanulled, either because they
were unprofitable, or else hurtful. Last of all, what superstitious vsages,
does the church of Rome still approve? even such as the wiser sort of Papists
are ashamed of.

5 Or that she suffers any man, damnably abusing her religion, without open
reprehension thereof, prove any of these things, and I recant. THe true Church
of Christ, in such places as she is, suffers no man damnably abusing her
Religion, with out open ^eprehension, as in the days of VValdo, VVickleffe,
Husse, etc. whereof sufficient mention is made before, but because she is not
in all places at all times, many men, yea whole nations, may damnably err, and
not be reprehended of her, As all the Mahometistes, which occupy the greatest
part of the world, who does, or has always openly reprehended them. And the
Romish Church, can well enough abide, ye true Religion of Christ, to be
damnably abused, not only without reprehension, but also with allowing: For
when the Friars, Dominicanes, and Franciscans, had forged a new Gospel, out
of the doctrine of Ioa^himus, and the visions of Cyril, which they called the
Gospel of the holy Ghost, the Gospel that should endure hereafter, the
everlasting Gospel: which diuilish gospel they affirmed to be so much more
perfect, then the Gospel of Christ: as the Sun is more perfect then the
Moon, and a kernel of a nut, before the shell: yet did not the Church of
Rome, once reprehend it. So that it was cultiued 55, years, and at length set
forth to be openly expounded in the University of Paris, Anno Dom. 1255.
without open reprehension of any, but such as were counted heretics for their
labor, As Gulielmus de S. Amore, Gerardus Sagurellus, etc. And finally, when
the matter was brought before the Pope, Anno Dom. 1256. by Gulielmus de S.
Amore, and other sent from the University of Paris, the Pope and the
Cardinals, took o^der that it should be privily burned, and not openly
reprehended, for shaming their orders. Mathaeus Paris. Whereby it is clearly
proved, that the Romish Church has suffered wicked men, damnably to abuse
Religion, without open or privy reprehension for the space of 55. years, and
at length without open reprehension, when there was no remedy but it must
needs be reprehended, wherefore if there be any grace in you, you will recant.

The 28. article conteyneth 3. demandes.
1 If unity in Faith, austeritie of life, sharp discipline, great penance,
much fasting, large alms, godly devotion, obedience to higher powers, gravity
and constancy in all cases, be not the signs of the true Church. IF you ask
of true Faith, repentance, discipline, etc. these might be signs of the true
Church, but if you mean unity in any faith, etc, as it seems by your
words, the Mahometistes and Turks, are the true Church, for they have unity
in their faith, austeritie of life, sharp discipline, fasting, alms,
devotion, obedience, gravity, Constance, etc. as much, or rather more then the
popish church.

2 Or be not more in our Church then in their Congregation, I recant. YOu have
not unity in true faith: for you know not what it means, but are utter
enemies unto it, and in your own principles, there is no unity, whether the
Pope or the Council be superior, etc. you may, as all hypocrites, pretend
austeritie of life, when you are most luxurious riotors, as the world knows:
your discipline is not so sharp, but money will make it blunt: you have great
penance but no true repentance, you have much abstinence from meats, which is
the doctrine of diuills, but you fast as little as other men: your alms are
large but without faith, and therefore sin: your devotion is blind, and not
godly, but like her mother Ignorance: you are disobedient to Christian
Magistrates, submitting your selves to Antichrist: your gravity and constancy
in all cases, is better commended of your self, then known of other men:
Wherefore being void even of these, which you make the signs of the true
Church, you are none of the true Church, except you recant.

3 But if discord in religion, licentiousnes in living, contempt of
Discipline, rejecting of penance, lothesomnesse of fasting, lack of zeal and
devotion, disobedience to Magistrates, sacrilege, apostacy, breach of vows,
unlawful lusts, wantonness in all life and manners, if these things, I say,
agree not better to the Protestants, than the Catholics, or if these be not
the plain signs and fructes of a false church, and doctrine, I recant. WE
acknowledge that in the outward face of our church, be many hypocrites,
chargeable with these crimes that you speak of, and we yield our selves
guilty before God of grievous offenses, that our life is not aunswerable unto
our doctrine: Nevertheless we doubt not, but God for Christ his sake, will
have mercy upon us. But if in life and conversation we be compared with you
Papists, even the cheifest of your church, as Popes, Cardinals, Bishops,
Monks, etc. We dare approve our life to be honester both before God and men.
You shall never be able to charge us with such riot, whoredom, adultery,
incest, sodomitry, bestiality, murder, poisoning, necromancie, apostasy,
blasphemy, etc. as both the world sees to ouerflowe in your Prelates at this
day, and we are able to bring forth of your own Cronicles and Hystories, to
have been committed in times past: wherefore, for very shame, leave of this
comparison. We meinteine no stews, neither of males nor females, we set forth
no books in commendation of Sodomitry, we exact no tribute of Cour^isans, to
keep open bawdrie, we privilege no writings that teach men to commit
vylanie, worthy of a thousand deaths. Therefore be not so impudent, to charge
us with these crimes above the Papists, but rather forsake that filthy whore,
the mother of all fornication, and recant.

The 29. article conteyneth 8. demandes.
1 Let any Protestant in the world, prove unto me, that their church could
rightly be called Catholic, which was so particular, that no man alive could
name a place where any such church was. WHy might not our Church, when it was
most hidden, be as rightly called Catholic, as the Church of the Apostles,
when it was so particular, that it was contained in the narrow bonds of Jury:
for it is not called Catholic, because it should be every where, for that it
never was nor shall be: But because that where so ever it be, in parts, it is
one body of Christ. The Popish church is not in every part of the world: For
Mahomets sect is in the greatest part. Many cuntries are Idolaters and the
most part of them that profess the name of Christ, are not in the fellowship
of the Popish church: And whereas you say: that no man alive could name the
place where it was, you make an impudent lie: For although it were unknown, to
the Papists, and enemies thereof, yet was it known to the true members
thereof. It was in Italy, when Marsilius of Padua, preached: in France, when
VValdo preached at Lions, and there about. In England, when Wickliffe taught:
in Bohemia, when John Hus, and Ieronyme of Prage did florishe.

2 Or that it might be called holy, which never had Baptism, or other
sacraments, to sanctify any of her followers withal. IT had the spirit of
God to sanctify the true members of it, and it had sacraments to testify the
same: Also did not the Bohemians baptize: Were not pauperes de Lugduno
baptized? etc. But if you count their Baptism no Baptism, why did you not
rebaptize in Queen Mary's time, all those that were baptized by our Church in
King Edwards time?

3 Or that it should be one, which as soon as it grew up in the world, was
divided into so many sundry sects. NOne of us will grant you, that our Church
began first to grow, when it was last brought to light, and knowledge of the
world: for it has continued even since Christ. But if there arose, or were
renewed many heresies, with it, that is no new matter, but an old practice of
the devil. For as soon as the Church of Christ began to grow up after his
ascension, even in the Apostles time, there were many sects and heresies, As
the Jews that mainteyned the law, they that denied the Resurrection among the
Corinthians Hymenaeus and Philetus, Simon Magus, Cerinthus, Ebion, Marcion,
Basilides, Valentinus, Carpocrates, etc. So that there were many more heresies,
at the first preaching of the Gospel, in, and immediately after, the Apostles
time, then at the last restoring of the public preaching thereof unto the
world in our days: And yet the Apostolic Church was one Church, and so is
ours at this day one and the same.

4 Or that it might be called Apostolic, which could never count by orderly
succssion from any Apostle, or Apostolic man. YOu are never able to answer
the arguments that are brought to prove that Peter was never Bishop at Rome.
And then where is all your braggs of Apostolic sea, and succession, etc. But
be it that Peter was there, except you prove succession of doctrine and faith
as well as succession of men, your succession is not worth a straw. And our
Church, which holds all the doctrine of the Apostles, and none other but the
doctrine of the Apostles, shall be truly called, and found, the Apostolic
Church, when your with all her succession of Antichrists whore, whoremongers,
heretics, Sodomites, blasphemers, coniurers, etc. shabe Apostaticall, rather
than Apostolical.

5 Or the secret, base, contemptible, defaced, and disordered Congregation, was
ever of that majesty, that it might require the obedience of all Nations. HOw
base, and contemptible soever it be, in the eyes of the wicked despisers of it:
yet did it not only require, but also subdue all nations to the obedience of
the Faith, so many as were ever subdued, in the days of the first Christian
Emperors, and before. And sense, when it was most defaced by the tyranny of
Antichrist, it was of such majesty, that it both required and obtained the
obedience of the realm of Bohemia, and in process of time, has obtained the
obedience of almost all the nations of Europe. If the church of Rome retain
the like majesty, why does it not now, requier the like obedience of all
nations, both Christians and Turks. you will say: It requires, but it can
not obtain. Even so, I answer of our Church, it has always been worthy to
requier: but it has not pleased God, that it should always obtain.

6 Or that it was ever able to gather general Councels. THe four best
general Counsels were gathered by our Church, and the Emperors, that were
defenders of the same, and not by the bishops of Rome. Neither were they
Presidentes in them, as it is manifest, that other men were Authors of the
Canons, or distinctions: As of the Nicene, Alexander Bishop of Constantinople
of the Constantinopolitane. Nectarius bishop of the Ephesine. Cyrillus bishop
of Alexandria of the Chalcedonense. Anatolius of Constantinople etc. and in
other general Counsels where the bishop of Rome was president, I answer as
John Patriarche of Antioche did, in the Council of Basile, his presidence was:
Honoraria ad beneplacitum Concilij eis data: non authoritatiua, nisi ex
concessione aut permissione habente vim concessionis aut ex tolerantia, that
is: For honor sake granted to them so long as it should please the Council,
and not of authority but either by grant or permission being of the force of a
grant or else of sufferance. And I conclude as he does, the Pope was never
President either of honor, or of authority, but by the grant or permission of
the Council. And how is the Popish church able to gather general Counsels at
this day? who will come at her calling? Except a few Spaniardes, and a ioly
company of buckram bishops of Italy? general Counsels of all the world, can
never be gathered, but either when there is a Monarchy, or else (which is not
to be looked for) that all the Princes of the world, will consent together.

7 Or exercise Discipline. BEcause this demand has been answered so often
before, I will say the less now. The free course of discipline, in time of
persecution may be hindered: As it was in S. Cyprians time, when the members of
the Church be dispersed: but the power of discipline, has always remained,
and when occasion served, been executed: As the Bohemians, excommunicated the
Adamites, and the civil Magistrates punished them by the sword.

8 Or that these names, proper by scripture and Doctors of the true Church,
could be ever challenged, by any right to their said Congregation. AS many of
these names as are proper to the Church by scripture, or Doctors agreeing, with
scripture, have been always justly challenged of right to perteine to our
Church and Congregation.

I mean these:

1 Corpus Christi. Our Church does rightly challenge, to be the body of Christ,
which acknowledges Christ to be her only head, Savior, Redeemer, Priest,
King, Intercessor. etc. The Popish church can not challenge this name, because
she does not acknowledge Christ to be these only and wholly.

2 Sponsa Christi. THe spouse of Christ, hears the voice of Christ, and is
ruled thereby, so does our Church, therefore she is spouse of Christ. But the
Romish church goes a whoringe after her own inventions, commits gross
idolatry, and will in no wise be ruled only by the voice of Christ, there she
is not the spouse of Christ.

3 Vencidilecta Christo. How tenderly Christ loves his Church, the true
members thereof, which have received the first fruits of his spirit, do better
understand in heart tha^ can be expressed with words, and how he abhors the
whore of Babylon the Romish Synagoge, the Scripture does plentifully declare.

4 Columba speciosa. Our Church, expressing the simplicity of a fayer dove,
may justly challenge this name: But the Babylonicall Strompet your church, in
craft and subtilitie, is more like a fox than a dove.

5 Domus Dei. THe true Church, in which we are, is the house or family of God,
which he governs by his stewardes, the sincere preachers of his word. The
popish church is the Synagoge of Satan, where the preaching of God his word is
despised, and the word it self, made subject to men's determinations and
authorities.

6 Columna veritatis. Saint Paul by this title does admonish Pastors, and
Preachers, how great a burden and charge they sustain, that the truth of the
Gospel can not be continued in the world, but by their ministry in ye church
of God, which is the pillar and stay of truth, this their duty true preachers
considering, are diligent in their calling to set forth the Gospel and to
preach the truth. But the popish church, which is not the vpholder, and
mainteyner, but the ouerthrower and oppressor of the truth, compelling it to
give place to falsehood and error, can by no equity challenge this name, to be
called the pillar and stay of truth, but rather of falsehood and lies.

7 Ciuitas Dei. Our Church is the city of God, builded upon the foundations of
the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, Jesus Christ being the head corner
stone: ruled by the laws of God only, reteyning that form of regiment and
common wealth, that Christ him self has prescribed. The Church of Antichrist,
is founded upon seven hills, Apoc. 17. upon the traditions, dreams,
fantasies, and devises of men, refuses to be ruled only by the laws of God,
has clean altered and changed the form of regiment prescribed by God, and
set up an other, full of Antichristian pride, cruelty, and tyranny. Therefore
in no wise may be called the city of God, But Babylon the mother of
fornication, Sodoma and Egypt, where our Lord is daily crucified in his members.

8 Ciuitas supra montem posita. THis saying of our Savior Christ in the 5. of
Matthew, is not properly meant of the Church, but of the Apostles and their
successors the ministers of ye Church, even as these sayings: You are the
salt of the earth, you are the light of the world, A city builded upon an
hill can not be hidden, neither is a candle lighted to be set under a bushel.
By which words, he teaches them above all other men, to look diligently to
their life and conversation: for as they excel in place and dignity, so the
eyes of all men are set upon them. As a city builded upon an hill, must
needs be seen of all them that come near it, so they being placed in so high
an office and dignity shall be noted and marked above all other men. As a
candle is not lighted but to be set on a candlestick and to give light unto
all them that come into the house, even so a Minister and Preacher of God his
word is not ordained for any other end but that he should shine before men in
true doctrine and good manners. Hereby it appears how fondly some Papists
would seem to prove out of this place that the Church must always be visible,
when the words are not applied to the Church, but to the ministers thereof, I
know some of the doctors expound this place otherwise, but the context of the
words does plainly confute their error.

9 Hortus conclusus. AS a garden or orchard walled in or enclosed with hedges,
is more esteemed of the owner, the^ great broad fields, and the trees and
flowers that grow therein are preserved and kept more safely, then such as are
wild and grow abroad, right so the Church of Christ severed from the rest of
ye world, though it be small in compass, yet is it more esteemed of him then
all the world beside. But the Church of Rome, which will not be enclosed with
the walls or hedges of God his word, but wandreth at large after her own
inventions, can not be called the enclosed garden of Christ.

10 Fons signatus, THe true Church of Christ is also compared to a spring or
founteine, which is shut in or sealed up from the profane waters of
worldly vanities, ministering the water of life to all the children of God. But
as for the popish church, which ishueth out of the bottomless lake, is a
stinking puddle of all false doctrine and heresy, whereof the whore bears a
cupp full. Apoc. 17. out of which all nations have dronk, Apoc. 18. So far is
it, that she should be a well, sealed up by Christ.

11 Sponsa Agni. THe description of the Spouse of the Lamb, set forth in S.
John's Revelation, does in all points most aptly agree unto our holy Church and
congregation. But the popish church, which is not content to be clothed in that
white shining silk, which is the Justification of Saints made white in the
blood of the Lamb, but with the filthy rags of man's righteousness, Esaias 64.
is no Spouse of Christ, but the darling of the devil.

12 Mulier amicta Sole. NO place in all the scripture does more plainly set
forth the estate of our Church than this 12. of the Apocalypse. She is clothed
with the sun of righteousness Jesus Christ, which is her beauty. She
treads under her feet, the Moon of mutabilitie, changeableness, and
inconstancy, she is crowned with 12. stars, which is the doctrine of the 12.
Apostles, the word of God. She is always fruitful, and persecuted by the
devil and his members, but yet by Christ defended, protected, and provided for
in all dangers and adversities. But the church of Rome, is that whore of
Babylon clothed in purple and scarlet, gold, precious stones, and perles,
described Apoc. 17. sitting upon the beast with seven heads, which are the
seven hills, and is the great city that had dominion over the kings of the
earth.

13 Habitatio fratrum in vnum. ALthough this saying be not proper nor peculiar
unto the Church only, but common to every society and fellowship of men that
continue in godly unity, yet does it most aptly agree unto our Church, which
holds one unity of doctrine, faith, and religion of Christ. But the Popish
church how so ever it brag of unity, because their agreement is not in
verity, can not be that cohabitation of brethren, which the Psalmist does so
highely commend.

14 Mons Dei mons pinguis. THe hill which David so extolleth Psalm. 68. is the
mount Zyon, which though it be small, yet it excels the high and fruitful
hill of Basan, because God had chosen it to place his tabernacle thereupon: even
so the church of Christ, though it surmount not over kingdoms in worldly
dignities and commodities, yet to such as David was, the little hill of Zyon is
more worth, than all the seven hills of Rome.

15 Sacra anchora. IN all the Scripture the Church is not compared to an holy
Anchore, but in the sixth to the Hebrews Faith in God his promises, is compared
unto a sure and steadfast Anchore of our souls, upon which Faith seeing our
Church is builded we may truly say that in our Church only is this sure
anchore, which the popish church does so much despise that she counted it
heresy for us to fly unto Faith, tanquam ad sacram anchoram, that is: As to
our only sure refuge.

16 Vinea Domini. THe Vineyard of the Lord is of his own plantinge, dressed
and tilled by such husbandmen, as he has placed in it, which will yield him
fruit in time convenient. This agrees aptly unto our Church, which allows no
plant, but such as is planted by our heavenly Father. This Vineyarde ca^ not
the popish church be compted, which plucketh up the vines planted by God, and
in the steed of them sets thorns and thistles after the devises of men.

17 Terra viuentium. THe land of the living in scripture signifies this
present life, as: I trusted to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of
the living. that is: Although I was near death, yet I believed that God would
preserve me in this life Psalm. 27. And unto Doeg, he says: Psalm. 52. God
shall destroy thy root out of the land of the living. that is: Out of this
life. Also Ezechias, in his psalm. Esaias. 38. I shall not see the Lord, even
the Lord in the land of the living. that is: I shall no more praise God in
his temple here in this life. And when you shall bring forth a place of
scripture where it is proprely applied unto the church, it shall be an easy
matter to prove that we only are the lively members of Christ, which abide in
his body receuing all benefits of life from him which is our head: And easy
it will be to prove that you are the land of the dead men, which are strangers
from the life of God Ephesians. 4. which are alive in this world and not dead
unto Christ.

18 Regina in vestitu de aurato circundata varietatibus. ALthough this saying
alleged out of the 45. Psalm, be figuratively meant of the church, as it is
literaly spoken of Pharaos daughter whom Solomon married: yet being alleged not
after the truth of the Hebrew but after the error of the old translation, I
will not interpret it contrary to my conscience (as S. Ieronym ^ayeth)
according to that corrupt version but according to the truth of the text,
which is: The Queen in a garment of gold of Ophir, As for compassing with
varieties, it is not in the text. By this figure the spiritual magnificence of
the church of Christ gathered of the Gentiles is set forth unto us, and
therefore let not the Papists dream that material gold is the ornament of
Christ his spouse, but as it is before said, of the whore of Babylon.

19 Ecclesia magna. 20 Populus grauis. David in the 35. Psalm promises that
he will give thanks unto God after his deliverance, in a great company and
solemn assembly of people, such as was wont to come together at the holy
meetings in the Sanctuary. This is the true and the simple meaning of this
text. And it were to violent an interpretation to enforce it to be a prophecy
of the church of Christ, although it be true that the church is a great
congregation and a mighty people, yet remembering therewith that in comparizon
of all the world it is as Christ him self calls it: A little Flock.

21 Archa Noe. IN the Arch of Noe, as S. Peter testifies 1. Pet. 3. but a
few, namely 8. souls were saved in the water, even as many as were obedient
unto the voice of God, the whole world beside were drowned. Wherefore how few
soever we be: As the Papists say we are not many, so long as we obey the voice
of God, we doubt not but we shall be saved in the Arch. And the Papists with all
their universality and multitude, despising the law of God, shall perish with
the wicked world.

22 Tabernaculum altissimi. THe old Tabernaecle was a figure of the true
Church, and we know that none shall dwell therein but such as be described in
the Psalm. 15. Therefore let the Papists brag as long as they list of the
Tabernacle of the highest, yet shall they not dwell there, neither shall they
rest in his holy hill, because they be not endued with such virtues, springing
of true, and a lively faith: As in that Psalm be set forth.

23 Ager and area Dei. THe church is the feelde and flower of God, in his
feelde he sows none but good seed, and the chafe shall be purged from his
flower. The Papists are some of these tares, whom the envious man has sowed
while men were a sleep, and the chafe, which after it be purged from the
corn together with the tares shall be burned in the unquenchable fire.

24 Matter fidelium. Jerusalem that is from above is free, which is the mother
of us all, which embrace Jesus Christ as our only Redemer from the bondage and
curse of the law. As for that step mother of Rome which brings men into
captivity through ceremonies and traditions of men: Begets unto bondage as
Agar did, and is become the mother, not of the faithful, but of abominable
fornication Apocalip. 17.

25 Nutrix Christianorum. THe church of Christ is the Nurse of Christians,
which brings them up and feeds them first with milk, and afterward with
stronger meats according as they are able to receue it 1. Cor. 3. Heb. 6. But
Rome, which feeds her babes with poison of man's traditions in steed of the
milk of God his word, and will rather see them famish than they should taste
of God his word, may well be a nurse of Antichristians, but never did good
unto Christians.

26 Ecclesia orthodoxa. TRue opinions are confirmed out of the word of truth,
wherefore our church which holds no doctrine, but such as is tried by the
word of truth most truly may be called the true believing church. Contrariwise,
the Popish church which so manifestly dissenteth from the word of truth that
she dare not be judged thereby, but most blasphemously submits the same to
her corrupt and false judgment, may justly be called a false believing church.

27 Vna, Sancta, Catholica. 28 Apostolica. THis has been often proved before:
And namely in the first, second, third, and fourth demandes of this last
Article.

29 Vxor de latere Christi sicut Eua de latere Adam. AS S. Augustine says:
The church of Christ is taken out of his side: as Eve was out of Adams side,
which so long as she obeys the voice of her ^usbande, is not deceived by the
serpent: But if she be absent from him, that she be not instructed by him, she
is deceived by heretics Augusti. De Genes. contra Manichaeos libro. 2. cap.
24. and 26. by which place of Augustine it is proved that the Church may err,
if she be not ruled by the word of God.

30 Domus Pacis. THe church may be called the house of Peace, because there is
in it Peace and agreement in the cheifest Articles of the Faith, or because in
it is taught us the Peace and reconciliation wrought by Christ, whereby we
knowing that we are justified by faith, have peace with God. Romans 5. But
neither of these Peaces are in the church of Rome: for there is dissension in
doctrine and their doctrine dissenteth from the truth: as for the peace of
conscience is altogether unknown unto Papists, even as the justification of
Faith, by which only it is obtained.

31 Domus Refugij. THe house of Refuge or defense may also be applied to the
Church, out of which is no salvation: And in whose bosom it becomes every
man to rest, which shall look for the refuge and defense of God. But God
forbid that any man should seek for refuge or help at your church, which
must be overthrown with such violence as a great mylstone that is cast into
the Sea, and shall be found no more Apoc. 18.

32 Domus Veritatis. AS our church is the pillar and stay of truth, so is she
also the house of Truth, which knows nothing but him that is the Truth it
self Jesus Christ and his most holy Scripture: In which this truth is signed
and testified. But your Synagoge is the house of lies, where beside men's
doctrines and traditions which are nothing but lies, there be also leaden
legendes of lies, Promptuaries of lies, Festiuals of lies, and other infinite
books of lies.

33 Societas Sanctorum. HOw should not our Church be the society and
fellowship of Saints, which is sanctified and purged by the blood of Christ,
which has received the spirit of sanctification, by which we cry: Abba,
Father, which is guided and governed by the most sacred and holy word of God.
And how can the Popish church be the fellowship of Saints, when she refuses
the sanctification of Christ his one oblation and sacrifice, as sufficient to
make them perfect, which scorneth at the spirit of sanctification, which can
abide any thing, rather than to be directed only by God his holy word:
Finally which acknowledges no saints, but such as the most unholy Pope, for
money does canonize and make saints.

Prove unto me therefore that these excellent and propre callinges, can agree
to any disordered company or Congregation, or to any unknown society of men:
but only to the true Church of Christ spread throughout the whole world by
Christ's his promise, and by virtue of his spirit, continued in truth and grace
from falsehood sense Christ's time, and I recant. AS many of these excellent
names, as in the word of God, or the doctors agreeing with the word of God,
are propre or perteyning to the true Church of Christ, so many have I proved to
be propre and perteyning to our most holy and well ordered Congregation. And
moreover that they can in no wise be rightly applied to that most abominable,
Idolatrous, and disordered Synagoge of Rome, which is utterly departed from the
faith, giving heed to spirits of error, and doctrines of devils, being so
lively painted forth and even pointed forth by the scripture to be that
Antichristian church, whereof the holy Ghost prophesies, that no man, except
he will wilfully be blind, can be ignorant thereof, so that if you be not
stark blind, and given up into a reprobate sense, when you consider these
things you will recant.

Let any man therefore alive answer directly and plainly without color or
fraud of words and unprofitable digressions to the foresaid or any of the
foresaid demandes, and I shall willingly leave the known Church and plain way
of Salvation, and wander in the woods to seek after them, and their
congregation. IF you had not added this conclusion, we might have conceived
some hope, that upon further instruction in such matters as troubled your
conscience you would have been contented to be reformed after God his word, and
good counsel. But now you declare that you are so obstinatly bent that what so
ever be proved against you, you will not receive it as truth but yield unto it
perforce. As for me, Although I know there are very many which with more
learning and eloquence could have answered your demandes, yet being such as
they are, I submit my self to the judgment of all them, that be learned and
godly minded, whether I have not directly and plainly, without color or
fraud of words, and without all digression answered the same, so that I
doubt not, but as many as are tractable, and stayed upon these doubts only,
may be fully persuaded by these not very long and yet sufficient Answers.

THE END.
1 A DEFENSE AND DECLARATION OF THE CATHOLIC Churches doctrine, touching
Purgatory, and prayers for the souls departed.
By WILLIAM ALLEN Master of Art and student in Divinity.
1 AN OVERTHROW AND CONFVTATION OF THE POPISH Churches doctrine, touching
Purgatory, and prayers for the dead.
By W. FVLKE Doctor in Divinity.
2 Mortuo ne prohibeas gratiam: Eccle. 7.
Hinder not the departed of grace and favor.

2 Such liberality as by any means may extend unto them, in burying their
bodies, honoring there memory, helping there posterity. TO THE READER.
3 A Friend of mine, very studious of the truth and zealous of Gods house, one
that learned to believe first, and then sought to understand afterward (which I
take to be the natural order of a christian school, where faith must in most
matters direct reason, and lead the way to understanding) asked of me, as of
one whom he heartily loved, and knew to be studious in such matters by my trade
of life, upon what grounds the Churches doctrine, and the Christian peoples
faith of Purgatory, and prayers for the departed, stood. I answered him then
presently, as I could, and shortly after (as his further request was) in
writing, somewhat more at large. The which my doing though it was both rude and
short, yet he so measured it, either by love, as it commonly happeth, or else
by a singular facility, whereby he misliketh nothing that is meant well, that
he made it common to many more then I would my self. For though I was well
contented, that the simple people or any other should take profit or pleasure
by my pain, yet ^onsidering the matter to be full of difficulty, and to rea^h
to Gods judgments in the world to come, I called to my mind the saying of
Nebridius, August. Epi. 23.
who (as S. Augustine reports of him with whom he was very familiar,) being
much studious and inquisitiue of the secret po^ntes of our faith, would be
excedingly offended, to hear a man ask of a matter of importance, a brief
declaration: his saying was, that he loved not a short answer to a long
question. Whereby, I was me thought in a manner admonished, that my treatise
though it satisfied my friend, and displeased not other, yet could not, written
both hastily and briefly, serve so long and large a matter. I did fear with
all, to enter, in this my lack of years, judgment, and knowledge, into the
search of such secrets as I kn^w, by that light vow that I made of the matter
before, the orderly proceeding in the cause would drive me unto: I did learn
of ancient Irenaeus, that such doctrine and mysteries may be safely had, and
without all fear of error, Libr 3. Cap. 43.
taught by holy Priests and Bishops, Qui cum episcopatus successione, charisma
veritatis certum, s^cundum placitum pat^is accepe^unt. Who have received with
their ordinary succession in their pastoral seat, the gracious gift of
understanding the truth. And these are they (says he in the same place) which
may without all danger to them selves and their hearers, expound unto us the
holy Scriptures. Other men doubtless (which this miserable age of ours sees
not, that measures all things by a fond flourish of learning, whereof ^et
there was never less store) can not, nor must not be so bold, though their
gifts were many more, and study much longer then mine. And to confess the
truth in deed, I was somewhat loath (such was my foolish fear then) to fall in
hand with that matter, which being well and to the bottom ripped, I perceived,
of all other causes in the world, most to touch the very sore of heresy, and
therefore might to me procure the hatred of such, whose love otherwise I could
be content, either to keep or win. Besides that, I saw the contention of the
contrary part, seking to make some answer to such things as might in this
cause most grieve their minds, or mar their matter, should drive me from
that course of study, which otherwise in quietness I would most gladly keep,
to serve truth and defend my cause, which once of freedom and good will taken
in hand, must afterward of duty and necessity be vpholden. Notwithstanding
all these things, good reader, which might most justly hold me back, yet now
my friends request, the case and condition of this present time, and my duty
toward my mother the Church, may of good reason, and must of necessity
change my former intent, and remove my private study to the benefit of the
common cause. Therefore being at length by just occasion wholly minded to serve
as well as I could that way, I thought good these late months, to make a more
full declaration of that thing, which at my said friends request, I had so
briefly touched before. That as then when he first had it of me, it only
served him for his own contentation, the pleasuring of his singular and secret
friends, and the help of some simple whom he knew deceived by over light
looking on so grave matters, so now (good Christian reader) I trust it may
help in common, not only such as have been carried a way by the guile of
heresy, but other that are much subject to the dangerous flattery of this
present time: with whom, pleasure ever joined to the protestants doctrine,
often more prevails, then the preachers persuasion. Be bold to charge any of
our adversaries, make he never so great account of him self, with the force of
truth here expressly proved both by argument and authority: if it hold him
not, he shall (I am sure) brast out with impudency, and not lose him self by
reason, just dealing, or honesty. And if it be proved to touch with safety
the poison it self, let no man doubt to use it for a preservative, in this
common infection of our time and country. For it were no reason, any man
should practice with the poor people priuyly, in such things as he were not
hable to maintain before their pilloures and preachers openly. And for that
hatered which I may procure to my self by mine own travel, it shall not much
move me: for I shall either be partaker thereof, as a common praise in these
evil days to most good men: or else if I be not worthy so much, I will learn
to bear it as some part of punishment and satisfaction for my sins. I may
not bye friendship with flattery, nor man's love with forsaking Gods truth.
Of such things then I will not make much reckening: but my principal care is,
that in writing or wading in so deep matters, I keep the straight line of the
Churches truth, which, in the exceeding rashness of these dark days, a man
may quickly lose. And therefore to make sure, I humbly submit my self, to the
judgment of such our masters in faith and religion, as by Gods calling are
made the lawefull Pastors of our souls. Of whom I had rather learn my self,
then teach other: if either they had occasion and opportunity to speak, or I
might of reason and duty in these miserable times hold my peace. Farewell
gentle Reader, and if I pleasure thee by my pains, let me for Christ's sake be
partaker of thy prayers.

At Antwerp the Second of May. 1565.
3 WHether this occasion of your writing were true, or only pretendid, it is
all one to our purpose. But where you commend your freinde, for that he
learned to believe first, and sought to understand afterward, which you take
to be the natural order of a Christian school, if you had showed where you
learned that method, his commendation should have been the greater, and your
judgment the weightier. For we learn by Saint Paul, a contrary order, namely
first to hear the word of God preached and expounded, and then to believe it.
Romans 10. For God by the riches of his grace, has abounded toward us, in all
wisdom and understanding, and has opened unto us, the mystery of his will,
according to his good pleasure, so that after we heard the word of truth,
the Gospel of our salvation, we have thereby believed, and so are sealed with
the holy Spirit of promise, laboring and praying, that those which have
received the first grace of knowledge, and understanding, may daily more and
more, increase in the same, that they may be full filled with knowledge of Gods
will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding. Col. 1. And as for that
blind faith, which must be thrust upon men's consciences, to be accepted
before they see what ground it has, we leave it, as meet for sect masters
and heretics, and in no wise to be admitted by the Disciples of Christ, who
calls all men to hear him, and understand him. Matt. 15. Mar. 7. But faith
(say you) in most matters must direct reason. But I say, reason in all matters
must be subject to faith. For the natural man with all his reason, neither
does, nor can perceive the things of the spirit of God, for the eye has not
seen, nor the ear has heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the
things that God has prepared for them that love him, but God has reueiled
them to us by his spirit. 1. Corinthians. 2. And this is the thing that deceives
you (Master Allen) which more like a master of profane arts, then a good
student of holy Divinity, can put no difference between carnal reason, and
spiritual understanding. For that knowledge and understanding of Gods holy
mysteries, contained in his word, whereupon our faith is grounded, we have,
not by light of natural reason, but by revelation and opening of Gods spirit.
But omitting this matter, as touched by the way, with two other pages
following, as containing nothing material to be answered, I will come to the
third leaf and second face, where you promise an orderly proceeding in the
matter you take in hand. Which order of yours, if you had not professed your
self to observe, men might have taken your hochpot, to be such as your matter
would bring forth, and that the treaty of Purgatory should be like the
troublesome state thereof: but when you are not content, to have your method
counted to be of the nature of your matter, but you will needs make boast of
an orderly proceeding, in so disordered a cause, you must not be offended if
your confusion in stead of order, be sometime discovered.

Howbeit the want of order were a small fault, if the matter were pregnant and
certain. But what assurance shall other men have of your doctrine? when you
your self affirm, and have learned (as you say out of Irenaeus) that such
doctrine and mysteries, may not be safely had at such a man's hand as you are,
but only of holy Priests and Bishops, which with the succession of their
office, have received a sure and certain gift of truth according to the
pleasure of their father. It is the duty, not only of a good teacher, but
even of a good Christian, to say with the Psalmist: I have believed, and
therefore I have spoken. If you believe not these matters, why have you uttered
them* ^f you believe them, then be bold to show us your grounds, out of the word
of God. For other persuasion, then ^uch as is grounded upon the hearing of
Gods word will never of Christians, be counted for true belief, so long as
the 10. chapter to the Romans remains in the Canon of the Bible. But I know
your meaning: you affect the praise of humility and modesty. For wavering and
uncertainty in faith among Papists is counted mod^stie, but this modesty is
soon forgotten, and this boldness now utterly refused, in the next leaf
^ollowing, is not only resumed by your self, but also enjoined to others. Be
bold (and blush not you might say, though you should for shame) to charge any
of our aduersa^^es, etc. A sudden change he that even now, neither can nor
must be bold, although he h^d many more gifts then he has, and studied much
longer then he has done, to expound the holy Scripture, without danger to
him self, and his hearers, because he has not the certain gift of truth,
with ordinary succession: by and by is grown to such a full persuasion of
truth, expressly proved by argument and autho^itie, that men must be bold
upon his warrant, to charge all his adversaries, either to be held thereby,
or else with no honesty to escape his hands. A man would marvel, to behold
this speedy alteration, if he did not understand the true difference, between
the certain faith of a Christian, and the obstinate blindness of an
heretic. For when he compares his opinion with the authority of Gods word
where upon true faith is builded, he will not, he can not, he must not be
bold, to understand the scriptures, he wants that certain gift of truth:
but when he remembers that he can not deceive others, nor retain the glory of
constancy him self, by doubtfulnesse and uncertainty: then he ^aunteth and
braggeth, of the force of his feeble arguments, and insufficient au^horitie.
But concerning the place of Irenaeus, by him alleged, I must admonish the
reader, that his meaning was not, that every one that succedeth in a Bishops
seat, has as necessarily annexed to his see, that certain gift of verity,
whereby, he may expound the Scripture without error, as (master Allen perhaps
would insinuate) But that some in the first age of the Church, as they
succeeded the holy Bishops and elders that were ordained by the Apostles, in
place and office, so also it pleased God their father, that they should
succeed in the like gifts and namely in that excellent gift of interpretation
of the Scriptures, which was but extraordinary, and for a season. For if it
had been an ordinary thing, that every Bishop by succession, should receive
that gift, there should never have been any heretic Bishops, as there have
been many: and again, that prerogative, which Master Allen him self will
affirm, to be peculiar to the Bishop of Rome, should be made common to every
other blind Bishop, where so ever he sat, which were a great absurdity in
popery it self. And as for the gift of the interpretation of scriptures, God
g^ueth it still though not in such full measure, nor commonly without ordinary
means allowed in the Scripture, as reading, comparing, praying, never the
less, with as full persuasion in matters concerning Gods honor and our
salvation by his holy Spirit, as ever he did bestow the same in any age. And
as for the helps of learning requisite for the same, as knowledge of the
tongues and rational sciences, there was never greater sto^e in the church of
Christ, son Christ his time: ye if we shall judge by the writings and stories
of all ages (unless we will be as impudent as master Allen) we must say,
there was never so great store of learning in any age, as (Gods holy name be
praised) there is now in these our days, in men professing Christian
religion: with what conscience can master Allen affirm? that there was never
less store of learning then in this age, when even in remembrance of men that
are alive, there was a great deal less store then is now, but in their
fathers and grandfathers time, there was almost nothing but rudeness and
barbarousnesse, even with the same conscience, that soon after he affirms
that pleasure is ever joined to the Protestants doctrine, which more prevails
then the preachers persuasion. If you had meant Master Allen that peace of God
which passes all understanding, which they taste of, that by the Protestants
doctrine have learned that they are justified by faith. Phil. 4. Romans 5. and to
that perpetual joy in the holy Ghost, whereunto we are exhorted by the Apostle.
Phil. 4. wherein the kingdom of God consists. Romans 14. we willingly would
have consented, that such pleasure is always joined to the Protestants
doctrine: but seeing it is more like, you speak of carnal pleasures, I must
say thus much to confound your blasphemous tongue, and to dashe out your
slanderous writing: let the world witness that hears our doctrine, and God
judge that sees our hearts, whether carnal pleasures be joined to our
teaching, which daily preach with all vehemence and earnestnes, unfeigned
repentance, mortification, denial of our selves, bearing of the cross,
hatred of this world, amendment of life, holiness and righteousness, and that
under pain of everlasting damnation. And whether pleasure more then the godly
persuasion of the preachers, prevails to win professors of our doctrine, if
it be not so clearly seen in this Church of England, by the means of the
great peace and tranquillity, we have through Gods singular goodness, under the
happy government of our Sovereign Lady enjoyed these many years: look to
those Churches of God in France, and the low countries of Germany, which
within these twenty years have been for the most part planted, grown up, and
flourished altogether under the heavy cross and most sharp persecution, what
carnal pleasure has allured them? what worldly voluptuousnes has and does
still intise them, in so great multitudes to embrace this doctrine? whereof if
they taste never so small, they see present danger of death or loss of all
their goods with banishment. Surely, this is the Lords doing, and it is
marvelous in our eyes. But to conclude: this man, if he can not have love and
praise for his valiant enterprise, yet by patient bearing of hatred and
reproach, he makes full account of satisfaction for his sins. O miserable
conscience of the Papists, which have no peace with god through faith in his
infinite mercy, but seek to satisfy the streightnes of his eternal justice,
by such beggarly shifts as these, which also he is so uncertain whether they
will serve his turn, that he fears lest he lose al his labor, if he happen
to lose the straight line of the Churches truth, which in these dark days, a
man may quickly lose. What say you M. Allen? is it so hard a matter to keep
the straight line of the Churches truth in these dark days? Why? Where is the
city builded upon an hill that can not be hidden? Where is that visible and
known Church which can not err? If that which was wont to be the only rule of
truth among Papists fail you, try an other rule of the Protestants, and as
Augustine exhorts you, search the word of God in the holy Scriptures, and
then undoubtedly you shall find the truth and the Church also, that is the
pillar of truth, though the days be never so dark, or your eyes never so
dymme: if with like humility you would submit your self to the judgment
thereof, as you pretend to do to the ministers and pastors of your faith and
religion. The Lord if it be his will, open your eyes, that you may see the
truth, and give you grace when you see it, that you strive not against it, to
your own destruction.

THE PREFACE, WHEREIN BE NOTED TWO SORTS OF Heretics: the one pretending
virtue, the other openly professing vice. And that our time is more troubled by
this second sort. With a brief note of the Authors principal intent in this
Treatise.
1 ALthough heresy and all wilful blindness of man's mind, be undoubtedly
a just plage of God for sin, and therefore is commonly joined with evil life
both in the people and preachers thereof, as the history of all ages, and
sundry examples of the Scriptures may plainly prove: yet by the gyle and
crafty conueiaunce of our common enemy the devil, The devils craft in
promoting error.
falsehod is often so cloked in shadow and shape of truth, and the masters
thereof make such show of virtue and godly life, that you would think it had
no affinity with vice, nor origin of man's misbehauiour at all. So did he
cover the wicked heresies of Manicheus, Hiero. in 7. cap. Osee.
Marcion, Tatianus, and the like, with a fained flourish of continency and
chastity: so did he ouercast thenimie of Gods grace Pelagius, with thapparance
of all gravity, Augustine. epist. 120.
constancy, and humility: and so has he always, where craft was requisite to
his intent, made show of a simple sheep in the cruel carkase of a wily
woulfe. This good condition S. Paul noted in him, in these words: Ipse enim
Satanas ^ransfigurat se in Angelum lucis. 2. Cor. 11.
For Satanas his own person shapeth him self into an Angel of light. And
that his scholars play the like part, our master Christ of singular love gave
his flock this wachword, Matthew. 7.
for a special prouiso: Attendite a falsis prophetis qui veniunt ad vos in
vestimentis ouium, intrinsecus autem sunt lupi rapaces. Take heed of false
prophets that come in sheep vesture, but within be ravening wolves. He saw
(that sees all things) that the outward face of fained holiness might easily
carry away the simple: he detected the serpents subteltie, that none might
justly plead ignorance, in a case so common: and withal for thenstruction of
the faithful, he gave falsehoode and her fortherers this mark for ever, that
convey they never so clean or close, yet their unseemly works should ever
detect their fained faith.

But all this notwithstanding, if we deeply weye the whole course of things,
we shall find that this counterfaiting of virtue and show of piety, is not the
perpetual intent of the devils devise: but rather a needful shift in
forthering his practice, there only where faith and virtue be not utterly
extinguished, then the full end of any one of all his endeuoures. For this may
we assuredly find to be the scope and prick of al his cursed travel, to set
sin and her followers in such freedom, The devils mark and thexteame and of
heresy.
that they neade not (as often else) for their protection the cloak of virtue,
nor habit of honesty: but that they may boldly encounter with the good and
godly, and in open ostentation of their mischief, over run all truth and
religion. Wherefore as he often cloketh subtell heresies in honest life, and
virtues weed, so when he by likelihoodes conceyueth hope of better success,
and forther adventures, he the^ opens a common school of sin and
wickedness, where mischief may with out color or craft be boldly
maintained. This open school of iniquity, and doctrine of sin, Hieron sup.
13. Ezech.
he once busely erected in the gentilitie, by the infamous philosopher Epicurus
and his adherents: teaching to the singular offense of honesty, pleasure and
voluptuousness to be thonely end of all our life and endeavors. The which
pleasant sect, though it ever sense has had some promotours, yet the very
shade of fained virtue, and worldely wisdom of those days, with ease bare
down that enterprise.

This broad practice was yet further attempted even in Christ's church: first
by Eunomius, Eunomius.
who doubted not in the face of the world, to avouch that none could perish
(were his works never so wicked) that would be of his faith. And then by
Iouinianus, Iouinianus.
who taught the contempt of Christian fastes, matched marriage with holy
maidenhood, and afterward to the great wonder of all the Church, persuaded
certain religious women in Rome, to forsake their first faith, and mary to
their damnation. For which plain supporting of undoubted wickedness, Cont.
Ioui libr. 2.
S. Hierome calls them often, Christian Epicures, boulsterers of sin, and
doctors of ^ust and lechery. Nevertheless the force of Gods grace, which was
great in the spring of our religion, (the sin of the world not yet ripe for
such open show of lice^tious life) speedely repressed that wicked attempt. Ad
quod vult de haeresi. 82.
For as S. Augustine declares, it was so clear a falshoode, that it never
grew to deceive any one of all the Clergy. But not long after, with much more
advantage the like practice was assayed by Mahomet, the devils only dearling:
by whom numbers of wives together, often diuorcies, and perpetual change for
nouelty, was permitted. By which doctrine of lust and liberty, the flower of
Christiandom (alas for pity) was carried away. At which time though our faith
and Christ's church were brought to a small room, and very great straights,
yet by Gods grace, good order, and necessary discipline, this school of lust
has been reasonably till our days kept under: and the gravity of Christian
manners (as the time served) orderly vpholden.

TO THE PREFACE.

1 IF you had not promised and professed an orderly proceeding in this cause, we
would never have enquired, whether good order would require, that an heretic
should have been first defined, before he were divided. And especially in this
controversy, where either party charge other with heresy, it had been
convenient, that the right definition or description of an heretic had been
first set down, that men might thereby have learned who is justly to be
burdened with that crime. For an heretic is he, that in the Church, obstinatly
mainteineth an opinion, that is contrary to the doctrine of God, contained in
the holy Scriptures, which if any of us can be proved to do, then let us not
be spared, but condemned for heretics. But if just proof thereof can not be
brought against us, but contrariwise we be able to show manifest evidence, that
our adversaries doctrine is clean contrary to the Scriptures of God, then let
the name of heretics be applied to them, to whom the definition does agree,
with further punishment due to calumniators, that slander other men in that
whereof they are guilty them selves. Now to the matter of this Preface, which
as the argument declares, consists of three parts, whereof the first is,
that there be two sorts of heretics, ye one prete^ding virtue, the other openly
professing vice. This part is showed in three leaves following. In ye substance
of which point I will no^ differ with you, yet something will I note in your
handling thereof, as occasion moves me. First you affirm that heresy and all
wilful blindness is undoubtedly a just plague of God for sin, I mislike
not your affirmation, but I marvel how you can affirm this, and be a good
Catholic: when we cannot say half so much, but we are charged by you, to make
God ye author of sin. But such is the force of truth, that oftentimes the
enemies thereof them selves, when they speak without contention cannot auoyed
a true confession. God therefore, as this Papist can not now deny, punishes
sin with sin, not as an evil author, but as a rightuous judge. Proceeding
further you say that Christ has given all heretics this mark, that there
unseemly works should ever detect their fained faith: wherein, you speak not
only contrary to the truth, but even to your own affirmation before. For our
Savior Christ has appointed false prophets to be known by their fruits,
which is there false doctrine contrary to Gods word, cloked with the sheep
skins of fained holiness and virtue, which though it be many times
discovered, yet is it many times so closely conveyed, that it clearly escapes
the judgment of all men. Who was ever hable to chardge that damnable heretic
Pelagius with any notorious crime or wicked behavior in his outward life and
conversation? you your self confess, that there appeared in him nothing, but
gravity, constancy, and humility. If his doctrine had not been found contrary
to the word of God, he should never have been tried to be a faulse prophet by
his works. Such are many of his scholars the free will men of our time, whose
opinion, if it were not manifestly repugnant to the authority of the holy
Scriptures, there manners are unreprovable in the judgment of mortal men. The
like may be said of Iouinian (who if he were so great an heretic, as you make
him) yet he himself as you show after out of Augustine, offended not in that,
which he persuaded others to do. Your last example of heretics openly
professing vice, is of Mahomet, by whose licentious doctrine, you affirm that
your faith and Christ's Church, were brought to a small room and very great
streights. If this be true tha^ you affirm, that the Catholic Church must be
otherwise esteemed, and by other notes then you are wont to describe it: or
else, your Church by your own assertion can not be counted Catholic. For if
Christ's Church be brought to a small room and great streights, where is
universality, Consent of all nations, multitude of people, etc. that you are
wont to talk of? But by your discipline the school of lust has been
reasonably, till our days, kept under, and the gravity of Christian manners as
the time served, orderly vpholden. You do well to qualify your asseueration
with those terms, reasonably, orderly, and as the time served. For otherwise
the whole Christian world should be witness against you, and yet to show,
with what reason, order, or opportunity, the school of lust has been shut up
before our time, or yet is. Where your doctrine most prevails, let the filthy
stews and brothel houses, opened in every city, yea and at your mother city
of Rome, most licentiously of all other, not only by your governors
permitted, but also by your doctors defended, let them I say, bear sufficient
witness against you.

2 But now once again in our cursed days, the great flow of sin turning
Gods mercy from us, with exceeding provocation of his heavy indignation toward
the wicked, has made our adversary much m^re bold, and long practice of
mischief, a great deal more skilful. Genes. 3.
The serpent passed all other creatures in subtelty at the beginning, but now
in cruelty he far passes him self. The Devil takes better hold in our
time, then he did before.
The downfall that he has in a few years rage driven man unto, by thopen
supporting of sinful living, it is sure very woeful to remember, and an
exceeding hearts grief to consider.

Look back at the Christian Epicures whom I now named, and view the men of
like endeavor in all ages: compare their attempts to ours, their doctrine to
ours, the whole race of their proceedings to ours: And if we match them not in
all points, and pass them in most, (I except the wicked Mahomet, and God
grant I may so do long: though they had out of his holy school, their often
diuorci^s and new marriages in their wives life,) excepting him therefore, if
ours pass not in open practice of mischief and supportation of sin, all the
residue, miscredit me for ever. This is evident to all men, that things once
counted detestable before God, abhorred of the priests, strange to the
Christian people, punishable by the laws of all Princes, be now in case to
maintain them selves, to give virtue a check mate, and without all color to
bear down both right and religion. Behold the liberty of sin.
Thus does sacrilege boldly bear out it self, and ouerreacheth the promoters
of Gods honor: so does incest encounter with lawful marriage, the unordered
Apostates shoulder the ordinary successors of the Apostles: F^asting has
won the field of fasting: and chambering almost banished chastity.

It was surely a wonderful fetch of our busy adversary, when he so joined
heresy and evil life together, that either might be a singular guard to
the other: and both together, easily be the plage of all good order. And now the
matter brought to such terms, and so evident an ishue for the clear gain of
sin here needs no Caveat for the fruits of the doctrine, as in other cloked
heresies before, and continually in case of deceit is requisite (for no man can
be deceived here, but he that willingly and wittingly list perish.) Having no
excuse reasonable, why he should follow or credit the public professors of
plain impiety: vnlest this may be accounted cause sufficient of his light
credit, that they term the foresaid offenses and others the like not by their
accustomed callings, but by some honester name of virtue. Note.
Which thing rather shows their folly, the^ excuses their malice. For they
must here be asked, by what right they change the names of things, that can
not alter their natures. Who authorized the^ to call that extirpation of
superstition, which our fathers called sacrilege? Or that blind devotion,
which our holy elders named true religion? How can they for sin and shame
honor that with the name of holy marriage, that S. Ambrose terms adultery:
Amb ad Virg. lapsa Cap. 5. August. de bono vid. 20.8.
S. Augustine worse then adultery: and they with all the residue of the doctors,
horrible incest? But because they can show no warrant, I must charge them for
their labor with Gods curse, pronounced upon all such by the Prophets words,
thus as follows, Vae qui dicitis malum bonum, Esaias. 5.
and bonum malum, ponentes tenebras lucem, and lucem tenebras. VVo to you that
call evil good, and good evil: making darkness light, and the light darkness.
But (as I said) in such open show of wickedness, and all unlikelihood of their
assertions, there can none doubtless join with them, except they be allured by
present pleasure, Sin drives men to the doctrine of this time.
or driven headlong by the heavy lode of sin. For as I think, they do not
follow these sect masters, as scholars moved by any probability of their
teachers persuasion, but rather join unto them as fit fellows of their
lusts, and good companions for their own conditions. Ostendisti tales
discipulos (says S. Hierom to Iouinian) non fecisti. Lib. 2.
Thou have but opened to the world who be thy followers, and not procured them
thy self to be thy scholars. Yea S. Paul affirms by such lovers of lusts
(whom he calls Voluptatum amatores) that they should give over the true
teachers, 2. ad Tim. Cap. 4.
and provide or make masters for their own tooth. Ad sua desideria
coaceruabunt sibi magistros. Sin therefore as it seems, has engendered and
framed her self this new faith, for the guard and safety of her person: And
the ungodly procured for their own diet masters of perdition, ready both by
life and doctrine, to further the lusts of licentious persons, to serve the
itching ears of new fangled folks, and so to set them in all security, with
words of peace and pleasure.

Call to your memories the first entrance of this misery, and you shall find
how they had certain persons in admiration (as the Apostle says) for their
own advantage. Judas in Epist. Can.
Since which time, these preachers have by observation raised up a perfect
school of flattery, and brought the detestable excusing of most horrible
sins, unto a formal art. It is long since the Poet feigned that Gnato would
have been the author of a sect, In Eunuch.
and have had some scholars to bear his name: Here he might have had for his
turn, but that the Epicure has prevented him. The Prophet Ezechiel terms
this pernicious flattery in matters of such importance, the boulstering of
wickedness. And gives a heavy blessing from Almighty God, to all boulsterers in
these words. Vae his qui consuunt puluillos sub omni cubito manus, and faciunt
ceruicalia sub capite vniuersae aetatis, ad capiendas animas. VVo be to all
them that sow cushens under the elbow of every arm, and boulster up the
heads of all ages, meaning to catch their souls. And surely if this curse
took ever hold of any (as it could not proceed from Gods mouth in vain) it
must needs fall straight down upon these men, that wholly bend them selves thus
to uphold iniquity, and to set sin soft. To such as made no store of good
works, they cast only faith under their elbow to lean upon. To such as were
burdened with promise of chastity, they made marriage a cushen for their ease.
For such as cast an eye upon Church goods, they borrowed a pillowe of Judas:
Joan. 12.
Quare non vaenijt trecentis denarijs, and datum est egenis? Why is not this
made money of and given to the poor? And so in all points they artificially
follow man's fantasy, nourish the humor of the ungodly, and preach peace with
pleasure, Commit what you lift, omit what you list, your preachers shall praise
it in their words, and practice it in their works. For look how they teach,
and so do they live: far passing the Epicure, 2. De fin.
who (as Cicero says) in talk praised pleasure, but in all his life, was full
courteous and honest. And much exceeding Iouinianus, Vbi supra haere. 28.
who as Augustine reports of him, being a Monk, maintained the marriage of
votaries, but yet for diverse inconveniences, him self for all that would not
be married. But ours being once in Bishops room, or of that disordered new
ministry ere they be well warmed in their benefices, as in all other
licentious life they will lead the dance, so they must out of hand, for the
most part, as though it were annexum ordini, as schole men term it, have a
wife with necessary cherishing to that state belonging. And good reason it is,
that these delicate doctors having ever in readiness pillowes for their friends
ease, should want whole coutches for their own.

But it were to long a matter for me at this present, purposing an other thing,
How this svveete heresy first began.
fully to declare how sin in all points has achiued such liberty, by the
unhappy yoking her self unto heresy. Only this may be noted briefly for that
point: that generally in the beginning of their endeavors, they removed with
speed out of their ways, as especial impediments and stumbling stocks, all
those means which Christ commanded, or the Church prescribed, or our fathers
followed for thabating of sins dominion: that the world might well
understand, they meant the extolling of all vice, and to make the way for sin
and wickedness. First that sovereign remedy of man's misdeedes, that grave
judgment left by Christ to his Church, for the weal of us all, that power
which the Son of man has in earth to remit sins, the true court of man's
conscience, the very word of reconcilement, and the board of refuge after
shipwreck, which is the Sacrament of penance, they have to the unspeakable
gain of sin unworthily removed. The subduing of man's pride by due obedience
to his spiritual pastors, and humble honoring of the guides of Gods Church,
fitly for their purpose have they lowsed. Fasting, which is the bridle of
carnal concupiscence, and torment of all fleshly lusts, for sins sake they
have set at such liberty, that it is almost lost. And what hauoke in all other
spiritual exercise is made for these men's free passage to hell, we se it: all
the posterity shall feel it: and the very workers shall be weary of the way
of wickedness, when they shall lack grace and space to repent them. But I can
not now stand upon these points: Meaning at this time, only to overthrow an
other like ground of this detestable school, which has no less auaunced
sin then the other, and dishonored God much more: which has perniciously
deceived not only open heretics, but also much weakened the devotion of some
that otherwise were Catholics: The harm whereof pertains not only to most
men that be alive, but also to many that be dead. That is the abolishing of
penance, discrediting of purgatory, and abandoning of satisfaction for our
offenses committed. All which, being nothing else but a kind of soft
handeling, and sweet cherishing of sin, has wrought such vain security in
men's minds, that few have any feel or fear of Gods judgments: few consider
the deep wound that sin makes in man's soul: and most men abhor the
remedies requisite for so grievous a sore.

When I look back at the flower and spring of Christ's church, and see sin
counted so burdenous, and Gods dreadful punishment for the same so earnestly
feared of all men, that no salve could be so sore, no penance so painful,
but they would both have suffered and desired it, to have been fully free from
the same: and withal consider the extreme dolor of heart, which al men then
expressed by often tears, by humble acknowledging of their misliuing to Gods
ministers in earth, and exceeding painful penance, by long fasting, dangerous
peregrinations, A profitable comparing of the time past with our present days.
continual prayers, large alms, so sharply enjoined, so meekely received, and
so duly fulfilled: and then returning again to our time and state, where I
may and must needs behold the pitiful wast of Christian works, the marvelous
shake of all good manners, and more then an image of mere paganism, as in
which we find no face nor shadow of Christianity, no nor any step almost of
our faithful fathers paths: then do I well perceive, the ishue and end of
the last ground of this wasting heresy, to be nothing else but a canker of
true devotion, an enemy to spiritual exercise, a security and quiet rest in
sin, and briefly, a safeguard and presumptuous warrant, from the judgment of
Gods mighty arm, which reaches over thoffences of the whole world. Evil we
were before by other points of this deceitful doctrine, but by this last part
we are utterly lost. For as truly S. Hierom writes by their predecessors: Hoc
profecit doctrina istorum, Vide supra.
vt peccatum ne poenitentiam quidem habeat. This has this doctrine of theirs
won and wrought, that of sin there is no way of repentance: even so may we
much more complain of this pernicious falsehood, that directly without all
color, has rased up both the remedies of sin, and boldly discharged us of
Gods judgment and all penaulty for the same: that as before by falsehood and
flattery we were led into the sweet school of sin, so now by thabbandoning
of penance and purgatory, in vain hope and security we might needs for ever
remain therein.

2 You have undertaken to prove that our time is troubled with heretics openly
professing vice, by whom if you would mean the Anabaptists and Libertines of
our time, we would not strive with you: but seeing you are not ashamed to
accuse thereof the true worshippers of God and professors of his Gospel, I must
plainly tell you, that you are a blasphemer of God and a sclaunderer of his
Saints. But let us consider your profes, and so we shall best bewray your
blaspheming. First you will men to look back to ye christian Epicures, whom
before you named, from which number you except the wicked Mahomet, as though he
also were a Christian Epicure, and we (say you) our doctrine, attempts and the
whole race of our proceedings compared with them, shall not only match them in
all points, but pass them in most. If your meaning were as your words sound,
I would easily agree with you, when you name your self and your fellow
Papists. But because I know, whatsoever you speak here of your selves, you
understand of us that are your adversaries, I must prove that which you said to
be true, and that which you meaned to be false. For to leave your general
tayling, not meet to be answered: I will come to your particular crimes which
are sacrilege, incest, apostasy feasting and chambering. Then who are gilty
of sacrilege? but they that rob God of his honor, and give it to stocks
and stones? who are rather to be charged with incest then they which beside
their abominable filthy life, allowed dispensation for such persons to marry,
as the law of God and nature abhors? and where is apostacy to be found, if
it be not in them which are clean departed from the faith of Christ, attending
to spirits of error and doctrines of devils, forbidding to marry and
commanding to abstain from meats which God has created to be received with
thanks giving. 1. Tim. 4. and as for feasting, where is it more gluttonous,
then among the greatest professors of fasting? Even their Carthusian fastes,
and their good friday fastes, among the wealthy of that sect, compared with the
sobre diet of Christians, is voluptuous banqueting. And concerning chambering,
if the world were not to to full of examples of their filthy lechery, which
profess wiuelesse chastity: yea if their brutish lust were not broken out of
the secret chambers into the open stews, I would spend more time to prove it.
Then let all men indifferently judge who has not matched, but also ouerpassed
the Epicurean heretics of the former ages. There is yet an other crime
contained in his former exception, and that is, that we follow Mahomet, in
allowing often diuorses and marriages in men's wives life. We allow no diuorses,
but such as Christ allows for adultery, and we wish that adulterers were
punished as God commanded in his law, and then the other question of marriages
were soon answered. But howsoever the adulteress lives after diuorsment,
she is no more the wife of him from whom she was divorced. But far many more
causes of diuorsement does the Popes canon law devise, and if marriage after
diuorsement be unlawful, why is it dispensed with all by the Pope? But to
return to our former accusations, which are so egerly followed, that before
any one piece of proof is brought against us, they are said to be so manifest,
that we have not so much as any reasonable excuse to hide them, but only to
term vice by the name of virtue. And then we must be examined by what right we
change the names of things that can not alter their natures. Stay a while
your examination M. Allen, this is no orderly proceeding. Good order would
require, that you should first prove us gilty of the crimes, and then to take
away our excuses. Howebeit, I blame you not if you leave of the proof of those
things, which would sooner reprove your selves, then convict your adversaries.
And yet that you may see how clear a conscience we have in these crimes
objected, I will not refuse to answer your interrogatories, although by no
lawful and orderly proceeding I can be compelled thereto. In primis, who
authorized you to call that extirpation of superstition, which our fathers
called sacrilege. To this I answer, I care not what your fathers called or
counted sacrilege. But God our heavenly father commanded us to break, burn
and destroy, all your idols, and to deface all the monuments of them. Deuteronomy. 12.
And all the godly Patriarchs and fathers, both before Christ's coming and
since, have given us example of obedience unto this commandment, and the
observation thereof they have termed the extirpation of superstition and
idolatry. Or that blind devotion which our holy Elders named true religion? we
learned of our Savior Christ and his Apostles to condemn that for blind
devotion which is not grounded upon certain knowledge of Gods word, you
worship you know not what, says Christ to the Samaritane. John. 4. S. Paul
charge the obstinate Jews, with zeal without knowledge. Romans 10. How can
they for sin and shame honor that with the name of holy marriage that S.
Ambrose terms aduoultry, S. Augustine worse then aduoultery, and they with all
the residue of doctors horrible incest. The holy Ghost has taught us to call
marriage honorable in all men, and the bed undefiled, whatsoever any man has
said to the contrary. And yet diverse godly men of the ancient fathers, as
Hieronym and Epiphanius allow marriage in them that can not contain, although
they have vowed virginity, even as the spirit of God also has spoken by S.
Paul. Because it is better to marry then to burn. Epipha. lib. 2. Haere. 61.
Hieron. Epi. ad Demetriaden. And now that I have answered your questions: I
must be bold to demand the same of you, what authority you have to change
the names of things when you can not alter their nature? Who taught you to
call that religion, which holy Scripture calls Idolatry, or that true
devotion, which God calls vain worshipping, where learned you to call a
gluttonous feast of fish, a religious fasting? or a sumptuous banquet of wine,
spices, fruits and deintie conseites, a straight and holy abstinence? with
what face or conscience can you call that ouerflowing lust of your popish
unmarried Clergy, a pure and undefiled chastity? Finally, where learned you
but of the Devil him self to command abstinence from meats and marriage, for
religions sake? to some men at all times, and to all men at some times? If for
these and an hundred such, you can show no better warrant, then the terms of
your fathers, the practice of your elders, or the authority of mortal men,
the curse of God pronounced by Esaias, against them that call evil good, or good
evil, must needs be turned over unto you. But to go on with this orderly
proceeding, whereby we are first accused and then by and by condemned, without
ever being convicted, or once put to the trial. Next of all, lest men should
marvel how so manifest impiety could so mightily prevail, they are told
that it is only present pleasure, and similitude of manners that joins so
many unto us. And for proof hereof, men must call to remembrance the first
entrance of this misery how these preachers have had certain persons in
admiration for their own advantage. We refuse not the trial, but let men on
Gods name call to remembrance how our doctrine began to be restored in
these last days. I pray you what private advantage could they by any
likelihood be supposed to seek, which incurred manifest danger of their lives
by the least suspicion of their profession? or what persons could they have in
admiration, when all Princes and great personages were their greatest
persecutors? but they wanne them by flattery, and sewed them cushians under
their elbowes, and laid pillowes under their heads. This is in deed a sore
accusation, but where is the proof? Forsooth to such as made no store of good
works, they cast only faith under their elbowe to lean upon. O impudent
blasphemer, which of us ever taught that such a faith as is not lively, and
fruitful of good works, did ever profit any man but to the increase of his
damnation? To such as were burdened with promise of chastity, they made a
cushen for their ease. To such as had rashly vowed that which they could not
possibly perform, not we but S. Paul says, if they can not contain let them
marry, for it is better to marry then to burn. S. Ieronym otherwise an
unmeasurable aduancer of virginity, and dispraiser of marriage Ep. ad Them.
speaks of virgins, that professed chastity and lived vnpurely, etc. aperte
dicendum est, vt aut nubant si se non possunt continere, aut contineant si
nolunt nubere. It must be plainly said unto them, that either they should marry
if they can not contain, or else contain if they will not marry. Epiphanius
lib. 2. haer. 61. calls marriage for such men not a cushen for their ease, but
an wholesome medicine against their disease and the wound of burning, and that
says he, was the doctrine of the Church in his time. To such as cast an eye
upon Church goods, they borrowed a pillow of Judas, why was not this sold and
given to the poor? If ever any man heard this text alleged by any preacher
for such purpose, let that man be counted such one as M. Allen terms him, if
no man were heard ever to speak after that manner, let M. Allen be taken for a
man of such truth, as he shows him self to be. But it is a small thing to
break the bonds of modesty in a few points, if a man strive not to pass
impudency it self in shameless lying. Commit what you list, omit what you
list, your preachers shall praise it in their words, and practice it in their
works. Saving that vain glorious affecters of painted eloquence, be sometime
so careful of their words, that they forget their matter. I would have
thought that the father of lies him self the continual accuser of Gods
Saints, would have feared for ever loss of his credit, to have uttered so
unseemly a sclaunder of us. But I suppose that this disciple of his more
regarding how finely, then how truly he inueyeth against his adversaries, had
such pleasure in allusion of these terms commit and omit, praise and practice,
words and works, that he respected not what sense they made, so they were
handsomely matched together. Well, howsoever our works shall be found when they
shall be openly judged before him that best does know them, I am sure they
shall not prove worse then the popish clergy, and if they shall be examined by
man's judgment, me think they should be very unequal Judges, before whom we
should not be able to approve our innocence, in comparison of our adversaries
doings. But that in words we praise all manner of sin, whether it be in
committing that which God forbids, or in omitting that which God
commands, If that I say can be proved against us, then let our enemy pursue
our soul and take it, yea let him tread our life down to the earth and lay
our honor in the dust. But to return to our works, what example is brought
out to confirm the same? Not the particular faults of some of our profession,
that might bear some color of confirmation lest for the infirmity of every
one of our side he might be requited with the enormities of an hundredth of his
own sect, but that he chooses which is common to most of our preachers, and
not to be found in any one of theirs. This no doubt must be some great offense
to justify so heinous an accusation. In deed a great mote in the Papists
eyes, that is the marriage of our ministers. Blessed be God, that although some
singular persons may be accused of notorious crimes, yet our whole state can
not be charged by this instrument of Satan with no greater fault, then the
allowance of Gods own institution. And yet see how this rolling rhetorician
scoffeth with the schole men's term of Annexum ordini. Be like S. Paul takes
marriage to be so annexed to the order of an ecclesiastical minister, that he
never describes the perfect pattern of a Bishop or Deacon, but one of the
first points is, that he be the husband of one wife. But I pray you M. Allen
though you can not away with the marriage of vowed Priests: are you also angry
with the matrimony of our new disordered ministers (as it pleases you to call
them) which never took your order, nor meddled with any vows? you were wont to
account them for mere lay men, and will you not allow the marriage of lay men at
least wise to be lawful, if you can not with the Apostle call it honorable? Is
that which the Apostle counts honorable, of you called licentious life? and
which the spirit of God names an undefiled bed, dare you term it
contemptibly a couch for delicate persons ease? What have you here to cloak
your open blasphemy, for your words are not of the abuse, but of the state of
marriage it self. You proceed with like modesty to affirm that we have removed
all those means that might serve for the abating of sins dominion, and which
are they? For soth the Sacrament of penance, fasting, and the opinion of
purgatory. To the first we answer that we know no Sacrament of penance
instituted by Christ, but the doctrine of repentance defaced by the false and
deuilish persuasions of auriculer confession, superstitious satisfaction, and
popish absolution we have faithfully restored, according as the same is taught
in the holy Scriptures of God. And those other we have removed as being not
only contrary to the doctrine of Gods word, but also as most pernicious
pillowes and blasphemous boulsters of all sin and security. For what fear
or conscience could be of sin intended or committed, where this persuasion
took place, that, the fast once rehearsed in the ear of a priest, and a few
words by him pronounced after a sorry satisfaction of a pelting penance
according to the Priests pleasure, was a full and sufficient discharge both
before God and the world. And as for the power and authority of pardoning or
reteining sins, that our Savior Christ has committed to his ministers, is
not taken away by us, but truly declared to be the judgment of God and not the
absolute authority of man. But how blasphemously the Papists challenge unto them
selves this authority, let it appear by this that M. Allen calls it, that
power which the son of man has in earth to forgive sins, by which words
our Savior Christ challenges unto him self, that which is proper unto his
divinity, although he were humbled in the shape of a servant upon earth,
namely an absolute authority to forgive sins, which none has in heaven or in
earth but only God. And as to the removing of fasting, if that be fasting which
they call fasting, namely the eating of fish, it has not been diminished but
increased in our time, and as for true fasting and abstinence in deed, it has
been publicly commanded and observed as occasion was offered, and private
fasting with the right use thereof is still commended in our doctrine, and men
exhorted unto it. Only the abuses, superstition and deuilish doctrine set
forth by the papists is removed, if it be little practiced, it is because among
many professors there are but few followers of the Gospel. But look upon the
persecuted congregations and you shall see often public fasting, the private
exercise the Lord knows, and has commanded to be covered rather then
opened. Now must we come to ye opinion of purgatory, which in deed together
with mass of Scala coeli, we have utterly removed and dug up even from the
very foundations, howsoever M. Allen gathering together the old rude rubbish,
and tempering it with new and fine cement, would labor to build it up again.
And even as I said of popish confession and satisfaction, so say I of
purgatory, we abhor the opinion thereof, not only as blasphemous against the
blood of Christ which purges us from al our sins, but also as a very canch
of careless security, which Satan has devised to advance the dominion of
sin. For where as the fear of everlasting torments of hell fire is the right
terror to bridle iniquity, as that which is due for sins and wickedness, and
yet restrains not the ungodly from their abominable life, what restraint
shall there be when the eternal pains are changed into temporal, and the
temporal pains may be redeemed by so small a price as popish satisfactions may
be bought for? which redemption if it be neglected in men's life, yet it may be
performed by their friends after their death. M. Allen says few of us
consider the deep wound that sin makes in man's soul. But we may justly say
to the Papists that they neither consider the depth of the wound, nor the
perfection of the medicine. For we consider the wound of sin to be as deep,
as the deepest pit in hell, which will not be filled up with the slabbersawce
of men's merits and satisfactions, but only with the blood of the only son
of god, which is so sovereign a salve for this so desperate a sore, that of
them that were the children of wrath and dead in sins, it quickneth them,
rayseth them to life, and places them in heaven with Christ. Ephesians. 2. And as
for that painful penance, that M. Allen complains to be so neglected in our
time, he charge us unjustly with the cause thereof. For within time of man's
memory, before the light of the Gospel did shine openly, we saw no such
painful penance commonly, but v. ladies psalters, v. pater nosters, v. pence
to v. poor men in remembrance of the v. wounds, v. fry days fast and such
like. And as for pilgrimage, it was but a pastime for such as loved to roue
about the cuntryes. The hardest penance was to pay so dear for the paultry of
Monks merits, and Friars fables, Popes pardons, and such like. Et hinc illae
lachrymae. This makes the bitter complaint, that this marchaundise will no
more be bought, but this is the judgment of God upon the great whore of
Babylon.

3 Considering therefore the great spread of contagion that this untrue
doctrine has wrought both to the everlasting misery of heretics them selves,
and also to the grievous punishment that almighty God of just judgment may take
upon us (that by his great mercy be yet Catholics) because we live in wanton
wealth, with out just care or cogitation of our life past: Neither doing any
worthy fructes of penance, nor yet endeavoring to make a mendes and recompense
by satisfying for our sins, before of mercy so pardned that to our damnation
they can not now any more be imputed, but yet for answering in sum part of
Gods justice, and perfect purging of the same sinful life past, out of all
doubt sharply punishable: for these things I say, and for the stirring up of
the fear of God in my self, Why this treatise was taken in hand.
the help of the simple, the defense of the truth, and thabating of this
great rage of sin and heresy, I thought good to give warning (moved
thereunto by my friend also) to all such as be not them selves able to search
out the truth of these matters, of that temporal or transitory punishment
which God of justice has ordained in the other world, for such as would not
judge them selves, and prevent his heavy hand whiles they here lived: our
forefathers (more then a thousand year since) called it Purgatory. The truth
and certain doctrine whereof, I trust through Gods goodness so clearly to
prove, that the adversary (be he never so great with the Devil) shall never be
able to make any likely excuse of his infidelity. The matter of the first
book.

The argument of the second book.


And that so done, I shall both open and prove the means which the Church of
God has ever profitably used for the relief of her children from the same
punishment, to the sovereign good, and comfortable for the faithful souls
departed.

And here I heartily pray thee gentle Reader, whosoever thou be, that shall
find just occasion undoubtedly to believe this article of necessary doctrine,
ever constantly set forth by the grauest authority that may be in earth, that,
as thou faithfully beleues it, so thou perpetually in respect of the day of
that dreadful visitation, study with fear and trembling to work thy
salvation. Let that be for ever the difference betwixt the unfruitful faith
of an heretic, and the profitable belief of the true Catholic Christian:
that this may work assured penance to perpetual salvation, and his vain
presumption to everlasting damnation. And though the matter which I have taken
in hand, be nothing fit for the diet of such delicate men as have been
brought up under the pleasant preaching of our days, yet perchance, change of
diet with the sharpness of this eager sawse, were, if they could bear it,
much more agreeable to their weak stomachs. Cyp. Epist. 3. lib. 5.
Truth was ever bitter, and faulshood flattering. For the one by present pain
procures perpetual wealth, the other through deceitful sweetenes works
everlasting woe.

But as for these pleasure preachers them selves, because I fear me they have
indented with death, and shaked hands with hell, whatsoever may be said in this
case, they will yet spurn with the words of the wicked. Isai. 28.
Flagellum inundans cum transierit not veniet super nos: quia posuimus
mendacium spem nostram, and mendacio protecti sumus. Tush, the common scourge
when it passes over shall not touch us, for we have made lying our succor,
and by lying are we guarded. Yet when the light of the Apostolic tradition
shall dase their eyes, and the force of Gods truth bear down their boldness,
their own black afflicted conscience, by inward acknowledging that truth
which they openly withstand, shall so horribly torment their minds, that
denying Purgatory they shall think them selves a live in hell. But gentle
Readers pray for them with tears, that God of his mighty grace would strike
their flesh with his fear. Prayer is thonely remedy against vvilfull blindness.
And if my poor pain with the prayers of us all, could turn any one of them
all from the way of wickedness, it would recompense doubtless some of our
sins, and cou^r a number of my misdeedes. And ever whilst we live let us
praise God that in this time of temptation he has not suffered us to fall, as
our sins have deserved, into the misery of these forsakers. To whom if I
speak sometimes in this treatise more sharply then my custom or nature
requires, the zeal of truth and just indignation toward heresy, with the
example of our forefathers, must be my excuse and warrant. I will be as plain
for the vnlearneds sakes as I may, and the matter suffer. And therefore now at
the first I will open the very ground, as near as I can, of so necessary an
article: that the ignorance of any one piece may not darken the whole cause.
Desiring the studious to read the whole discourse, because every peculiar
point so jointly depends of the residewe, that the knowledge of one, orderly
gives light to all the other. And so the whole together I ^rust shall
reasonably satisfy his desire.

3 Here (as I take it) in the second face of the 18. leaf, begins the 3.
matter promised in the argument, namely a brief note of the authors intent,
etc. The chief consideration (as I gather) is for that men endeavor not to
make amends and recompense, by satisfying for their sins, and therefore for
answering some part of Gods justice, and perfect purging of the same sinful
life past, there remains sharp punishment after this life. I will commit to
Christ, to be reue^ged, the horrible injury done to his death and blood
shedding, which if it be not a full aunswering of Gods justice, and a perfect
purging of all our sinful life, in vain shall we seek it else where. But I
will reason with M. Allen in his own principles. What say you Sir? remains
there some part of Gods justice to be answered by suffering? Surely, if the
passion of Christ will not serve, that was the immaculate lamb of God, it were
strange that the suffering of a sinful man should satisfy the same.

And if suffering of the party that has sinned be necessarily required, for
aunswering some part of Gods justice, how can the same suffering be mitigated
by masses, pardons, merits, etc. or clean taken away by a pardon of Iubely, a
poena, and culpa? Again, how can the merits of an other, abate his
punishment, which must suffer him self to answer Gods justice? If the
justice of God be not answered by the offering of Christ, how is it answered,
when any man's suffering is by any of your means mollified or taken away? But
it suffices you that your forefathers, more then a thousand years ago,
called that place of sufferance, purgatory. But I pray you what is it called in
the Scripture? either of the old testament or the new, or in the first and
second hundredth years after Christ? Diverse errors be older then a thousand
years, but age can never make falshoode to be truth, and therefore I way not
your proud bragges worth a straw. I am one of the least of Gods ministers,
and not worthy, in respect of my greatest infirmities, of the lowest place in
his Church, yet by his grace and the authority of his holy word, I shall be
able to overthrow, both this and all other babylonicall bulwarks, that are
cast up by Satan and all his instruments. For the defense of popish heresy,
against the truth of God. And neither the mist of men's inventions, which you
call the light of apostolic tradition, shall be able to darken the truth of
the Gospel, nor the errors of mortal men, which you term the force of Gods
truth, shall bear down thauthoritie of Gods holy spirit. And as for the
torment of conscience, by inward acknowedlging of the truth openly withstanded,
it is not like you could so lively describe it, if you had not experience of it
in your self. Our consciences (most humble and hearty thanks we yeald to the
infinite mercy of God) are washed white and purged from all blacknes, by the
precious blood of Christ, which is the propitiation for our sins, that cleave
unto him by true and lively faith: and open judgment shall one day show, that
all obstinate Papists, which seek to establish their own justice, shall be
void of the justice of God, and while they wrestle to come out of purgatory,
they take the high way to fall headlong into hell. God lighten the eyes of them
that are blind of simplicity, and confound all such as sin of malicious
wickedness. The excuse of your sharp speech, perhaps might seem probable, if
you did not use intolerable sclaundering and railing, which neither by zeal
of truth, nor example of godly fathers, can well be shadowed, much less
warranted.

THAT OFTEN AFTER OUR SINS BEFORE GIVEN BY THE sacrament of penance, there
remains some due of temporal punishment, for the satisfying of Gods justice,
and some recompense of the offenses past. CAP. I.
1 AS it is most true, Ephesians. 1. Heb. 9.
and the very ground of all Christian comfort, that Christ's death has paid
duly and sufficiently for the sins of all the world, by that abundant price
of redemption paid upon the Cross: August. Enche. cap. 65.
So it is of like credit to all faithful, that no man was ever partaker of
this singular benefit, but in the knotte and unity of his body mystical,
which is the Church. To the members whereof, the streams of his holy blood and
beams of his grace, for the remission of sin and sanctification, be orderly,
through the blessed Sacraments as condethes of Gods mercy, conueyde. All which
Sacraments, though they be instituted and used as means to derive Christ's
benefits, Mark the ground of the cause.
and bestow his grace of redemption upon the worthy receivers: yet like effect
or force, is not by the meaning of their first author and institutor, employed
upon all receivers, nor given to all the Sacraments. That may well appear, if
we mark the exceeding abundant mercy, that is powered upon al men at their
first incorporation and entrance into the household of the faithful, by
Baptism: In which Sacrament, the merits of our masters death be so fully and
largely carried down for the remission of sin, that were the life before
never so laden with most horrible offenses, that in this misery man may commit,
yet the offender is not only pardoned of the same, but also perfectly
acquieted for ever, of all pain or punishment (other then the common miseries
of mankind) which his proper offenses before committed by any means might
deserve. And no less free now then the child after baptism, which only
original sin brought thither. So says S. Ambrose by these words: Gratia
Dei in Baptismate non quaerit gemitum, Super vnde. ca. ad Romans
aut planctum, aut opus aliquod, nisi solum ex cord professionem. The grace of
God in Baptism requires neither sorrow nor mourning, nor any other work, but
only an hearty profession of thy faith. Whereby he means, that after our
sins be once thus freely wiped away in our first regeneration, there is no
charge of punishment or penance for farther relief of the same.

But now a man that is so freely discharged of all evil life and sin
committed before he came into the family, if he fall into relapse, Note.
and defile the temple of God, then (as Gods mercy always passes manns
malice) even in this case also, he has ordained means to repair man's fall
again. That is, by the Sacrament of penance which therefore, In cap. 3. Isai.
S. Hierome terms the second table, or refuge after shipwreck: as a means
that may bring man to the port of salvation, though lightly not without
present damage and danger. In which blessed Sacrament, though Gods grace have
mighty force for man's recovery, and works abundantly both remission of
sins, and the discharge of eternal punishment due by just judgment to the
offender, yet Christ him self (the author of this Sacrament as the rest) meant
not to communicate such efficacy or force to this, as to baptism, The force
of Christ's death is not so largely applied unto us in the Sacrament of
penance as in Baptism.
for the utter acquieting of all pain by sinful life deserved. For as in
Baptism, where man is perfectly renewed, it was semely to set thoffender at
his first entrance on clear ground, and make him free for all things done
abroad: so it excedingly sets forth Gods justice, and nothing impareth his
mercy, to use (as in all common welthes by nature and Gods prescription is
practiced) with grace discipline, with justice clemency, with favor
correction, and with love, due chastisement of such sins, as have by the
household children been committed.

Now therefore, if after thy free admission to this family of Christ, thou do
grievously offend, remission may then be had again: but not commonly without
sharp discipline, seeing the father of this our holy household punishes where
he loves, Ad Heb. 12.
and chastises every child whom he receives. Whose justice in punishment of
sin, not only the wicked, but also the good must much fear. Whereof S.
Augustine warns us thus: Deus (says he) nec iusto parcit, nec iniusto: Lib.
22. co^tra Faustu^ cap. 20.
illum flagellando vt filium, istum puniendo vt impium. God spares neither the
just, nor unjust: chastising the one as his child, punishing the other as a
wicked person.

A child then of this household continuing in favor, though he can not
everlastingly perish with the impenitent sinners, yet he must (being not by
some especial prerogative pardoned) bear the rod of his fathers discipline.
And gladly say with the prophet. In flagella paratus sum. I am ready for the
rods. And whatsoever these wantons, that are run out of this house, Psalm.
37.
for their own ease or other men's flattery shall forge, let us continue in
perpetual cogitation of our sins forgeuen: and by all means possible
recompense our negligences past. Let us not think but God has somewhat to say
to us, even for our offenses pardoned: being thus warned by ^is own mouth.
Apoc. 2.4.
Sed habeo aduersum te pauca, quod charitatem tuam primam reliquisti: Memor
esto itaque vnde excideris, and age poenite^tiam, and prima opera fac. But
somewhat I have against thee, because thou art fallen from thy first love.
Remember therefore from whence thou fell, do penance, and begin thy former
works again. And the consideration of this diversity betwixt remission had
by baptism, and after relapse by the sacrament of penance, moved Damascen to
call this second remedy, De orth. fide lib. 4. ca. 9.
Baptismum vere laboriosum, quod per poenitentiam and lachrymas perficitur. A
kind of Baptism full of travel, by penance and tears to be wroght. In
which God so pardons sins, that both the offense it self, and the
everlasting pain due for the same being wholly by Christ's death and merits
wyped away, there may yet remain the debt of temporal punishment on our part
to be discharged, as well for some satisfaction of Gods justice, against the
eternal order whereof we unworthily offended, In Ench. cap. 65.
as for to answer the Church of her right (as S. Austine says) in which only
al sins be forgiven

Mary when occasion of satisfying for our offensies in this life is neglected,
or lack of time, by reason of long continuance and late repentance,
suffers not due recompense in our life, which is the time of mercy, then
certes the hand of God shall be much more heuie, and the punishment more
grievous. And this is with out doubt to be looked for, that the debt due for
sin, must either here by pain or pardon be discharged, or else to our greater
grief after our departure required.

CAP. I.

1 ALthough the argument of this chapter be but one, yet I thought it good to
divide the answer into two parts. The former part contains his proposition,
the latter his confirmation. And first concerning the sufficiency of Christ's
redemption, there is nothing can be spoken so magnifically, but that the
worthiness thereof passes and excedeth it. I will therefore agree with you in
that you say of the comfort, sufficiency and abundant p^^ce of the death of
Christ, and I would you would always agree with your self in the constant
confession of the same truth, I receive also that which you affirm, that the
benefit of his death, extends also to the members of his mystical body. But
in that which you make to be the only mean, whereby the same is conveyed and
applied unto us, I can not but dissent from your judgment. For the mean on
Gods behalf, by which we are made partakers of the fruits of Christ's
passion, and so grafted into his body, is his holy spirit of promise, which is
the earnest and assurance of our inheritance, who works in us faith, as the
only mean by which the righteousness of Christ is applied unto us. Ephesians. 1. And
as for the Sacraments, which you seem to make the only condittes of Gods
mercy, we are taught in the holy Scriptures, that they are the seals of Gods
promises given for the confirmation of our faith, as was circumcision to
Abraham, when he was justified before through faith, Romans 4. You will us in the
margent, to mark the ground of your cause, which is in deed a good
admonition. For seeing the ground of your cause leans upon your only
affirmation, and is contrary to thautority of Gods word, injurious to the
spirit of God, and neglecting the faith of Christ, what so ever you buyld
thereuppon, must needs be like the foundation. But how should your free will
be maintained? if Gods spirit had any place, that distributeth to every one
according to the good pleasure of his own will. 1. Cor. 12. And how should the
Sacrament give grace of the work wrought? if faith were requisite in them that
receive them. Of like authority it is, which you say, that like effect is not
given to all the Sacraments. Surely all the Sacraments of Christ's
institution, have like effect in Gods elect. But let us hear your difference.
By baptism all sin committed before, and the punishment thereof, is clearly
forgeuen, by the Sacrament of penance, though the sin be forgiven, yet there
remains a temporal punishment. When the Pope gives a general pardon a poena
and culpa, does he not it by ye sacrament of penance? if he do it by yt
sacrament, then are temporal pains also remitted thereby. Thus one falshod
overthrows an other. But Christ you say the author of this sacrament, meant
not to communicate such efficacy ^o this, as to Baptism. Here are two
assertions, first of the author, then of the force of this Sacrament, but
neither of both able to be proved by the word of God. Nevertheless here is
brought in that which is thought to be the pillar, not only of purgatory, but
also of all other popish satisfactions: namely the chastisement and correction,
that God ministers to his children, whose sins he has pardoned, which is
not a satisfaction for the sins past, but a warning for the time to come, and
is never accounted in scripture, for an answering of Gods justice, but a token
of his mercy, being not the punishment of a judge, but the chastisement of the
father to the amendment of his child that suffers, and for an admonition of
other, that they likewise offend not. Heb: 12. And after this manner, are also
those places to be understood, where God is said to punish the offenses of his
children. But whereas M. Allen allegeth the saying of Christ unto the Angel of
the Church of Ephesus, Apoc. 2. But I have somewhat against thee, etc. to prove
that God has somewhat to say for our offenses pardoned, I marvel whether he
were sleeping or waking when he wrote it, for there the pastor and Church is
charged, for their offense which is not to be pardoned, except they repent, and
if they repent to be clearly remitted. But (...), or, age poenitentiam, with M.
Allen, is do penance, and doing of penance, with him sounds to make
satisfaction. He professes in one place his ignorance in the Greek tongue:
but if he would but acknowledge what poenitere in Latin signifies to be sorry,
he need not to have occupied him self in alleging that place. But proceeding a
little further, he makes two causes why the debt of temporal punishment
remains to be discharged by us. One for some satisfaction of Gods justice, as
though the satisfaction of Christ were imperfect. An other to answer the
Church of her right (as S. Augustine says). In deed the old discipline of
the Church, required that open offenders, should not only repent privately
before God, but also show open signs of hearty repentance for satisfying the
Church, by whom they were to be received as before their repentance they were
cast out. And in this sense, satisfaction is often used by the ancient
fathers, and not to fulfill the righteousness of God, either by doing or
suffering of any thing. Seeing therefore that God^ justice is thoroughly
satisfied by Christ's suffering, there remains no satisfaction to be supplied
by men. For the afflictions of the faithful, are the matter of their patience
and conformity with Christ their head, the punishments that are inflicted upon
them, are the corrections of mercy, not the satisfactions of justice. There
remains therefore no temporal punishment for satisfying of Gods justice in
our life, and much less after our death.

2 And this to be the grave doctrine and constant faith of the fathers I must
first declare: both for that it shall firmly establish our whole matter, and
clearly open the case of controversy betwixt us and the forsaken company.
Who would so gladly live at ease in their only faith, that they list nether
satisfy for their sins, nor procure Gods mercy by well working. In this case
then let us seek the order of Gods justice, by the diligent consideration of
some notable pers^nages, of whom we may have by the plain Scripture evident
testimony both of the remission of their sins, and their penance and
punishment after they were reconciled again.

Our first father Adam, Adam that first did fall, and was first pardoned* did
yet abide the scourge for his sins.
in whom we may behold almost the whole course of Gods judgment, and through
whom both sin and all punishment due for sin entered into the world, I
think he had the first benefit by Christ's death for the remission of his
disobedience: or at the least (because I would not avouch an uncertain thing)
this I am sure, that by Christ he was raised up to Gods favor again. Of whom
we find it thus written in the book of wisdom. Haec illum qui primus
formatus est pater orbis terrarum, cum solus esset creatus, custodiuit: Cap. 10.
and eduxit illum a delicto suo. This (says he, meaning by Christ under the
name of wisdom) safely preserved him that was first formed of God, the father
of the world, when he was created all alone: and raised him out of his sin
again. The which disobedience (with what other sin so ever was thereunto in
him joined) though it was thus clearly pardoned, yet the punishment thereof,
both he felt long after in his own person, and it lies upon his posterity
till this day. For which sin he him self began to do penance (as Irenaeus
says) even in paradise: Lib. ^. ca. 33
and then God practiced judgment upon him (as Augustine notes) first by his
disinheritaunce, then by painful travel enjoined, by the unaptness of the
earth to serve his turn, by rebellion of the inferior creatures, by the
troublesome motions of his own affections, and briefly in all points by a
lothsom life and a dreadful death. Yea and that his punishment ceased not in
this world by his death, but many hundredth years after remained as further
condemnation of his disobedience, I shall more conveniently anon declare.

Now seeking further to have clear and open evidence in this case, we can not
wish more proof then may be had by the straung working and dispensation of
God, in the manifold affairs of that sanctified people, and chosen nation of
the Israelites. In which peoples perpetual protection, a man might find a
perfect platte of mercy and judgment. So often they fall, so suddenly they
rise: so grievously they offend, such mercy they find, that it is marvelous to
consider. Of this elect family therefore thus God speaks. Psalm. 88.
Si autem dereliquerint filij eius legem meam, and in iudicijs meis non
ambulauerint, visitabo in virga iniquitates eorum, and in verberibus peccata
eorum: misericordiam autem meam non dispergam ab eo, neque nocebo in veritate
mea. If his children reject my law, and walk not in my judgments, with rod
will I visit their wickedness, and in stripes their sins: yet will I not take
my mercy from him (or them, as it is also read) nor harm him in my truth.
Gods people first pardoned, was then after punished. Exodus 32.
This people, at their first passage out of Egypt committing horrible idolatry,
was pardoned thereof at the instance of Moises: yet so says our Lord God unto
him: Ego autem in die vltionis, visitabo and hoc peccatum eorum: But yet in the
day of reuengement, I will visit this their offense also. The same people
offending grievously again by murmr and mistrust of Gods careful providence
toward them, at their Governors humble suit were expressly forgiven in these
words. Numer. 14.
Dimisi iuxta verbum tuum. I have pardoned them according to thy word. But
after their assured warraunt for the full remission of the fault, and the
eternal pain due to that grievous sin, behold yet their punishment
temporal for the same. Attamen omnes homines qui viderunt maiestatem, etc. For
all that (says our Lord) every one that has seen my majesty, and the wonders
which I wrought in Egypt, and in the wilderness, and yet has notwithstanding
tempted me ten times, shall not behold the land for which I bound my self
by oath to their forefathers. But passing the peoples sin Moises and Aron them
self, in many points minister abundant proof of this matter. Who both dying
in perfect favor of God, yet for their mistrust were discharged of guiding
Gods people, or entering them self into the land so heartily desired, and so
long looked for before, Number. 20.
Of these two the Prophet says thus: Psalm. 98.
Custodiebant testimonia eius and praeceptum quod dedit illis. Deus tu
propitius fuisti eis, and vlciscens, in omnes adinuentiones eorum. They
observed his testimonies, and the charge that he gave unto them. Lord God thou
wast merciful unto them, and sharply revenged their own inventions. The like
ordinance of Gods justice in punishment of such as he highly favored, may
appear in Samson, in Hely, sudic. 16. 1. Reg. 3.
and all other notorious personages in the whole Scripture.

But the heartely beloved of God King David's example so bears down our
adversaries, that I can not well omit it, though I now long to be nearer my
matter. This Prophet had an express pardon, with a plain prouiso that he
should notwithstanding bear the heavy hand of God, for the punishment of his
former sin. Once for taking pride in the multitude and numbering of his
people, God, though he pardoned him, yet by the prophet, 2. Reg. vlt.
God gave him leave to choose of three named scourges, which he would: to whom he
answered. Coarctor nimis: sed melius est incidere in manus Domini, multae enim
sunt misericordiae eius. I am sore urged: but better it is to fall into Gods
hands, for his mercyes be exceeding many. And so according to his election, he
had many thousands of his people perished by Gods plague. Of whose case, S.
Gregory says marvelous much in these few words. Deus delictum delet, sed
inultum non deserit: peccato non parcitur, quia sine vindicta non laxatur. Lib.
9. in Job. cap. 82.
God wypeth away man's offense, but he leaves it not unpunished: sin is not
spared, because it is not without revenge released. But before this, he had a
full warrant of remission of his horrible murder and adultery, by the Prophet
Nathan, saying unto him thus after his repentance. 2. Reg. 12.
Dominus quoque transtulit peccatum tuum, nonmori eris: veruntamen quoniam
blasphemare fecisti inimicos nomen Domini propter verbum hoc, filius qui natus
est tibi morte morietur. Our Lord has removed thy sin: nevertheless,
because thou have made thenimies blaspheme our Lords name by this word, thy
son which is borne unto thee shall dye the death. Of which matter S.
Augustine by occasion talking against Faustus, asks what manner of pardon it
was, Lib. 23. cap. 67.
that the Prophet brought from God unto David. And he answers thus. Ad quam
rem nisi ad sempiternam salutem? neque enim praetermissa est in illo, secundum
Dei comminationem, flagelli paterni disciplina. To what end else (had he his
pardon) but to euerlasting-saluation? For he escaped not the scourge of his
fathers discipline, according as the threatening of God before did portend. All
the forsa^d examples then being so evident, they must needs conclude this
assuredly, that after our offenses be remitted, there commonly yet remains
some pain and right debt, to be discharged by the offenders punishment, before
he receive the ample benefit of eternal salvation.

2 Now comes in the colorable confirmation of this false proposition, and
that by examples of the holy Scripture, which must therefore more diligently be
wayed, because they are so seldom alleged. But first he must rail a crash at
the forsaken Protestants, which would so gladly live at ease in their only
faith, that they list neither to satisfy for their sins, nor to procure Gods
mercy with good works. Doubtless ( M. Allen) they list not by seeking to
justify them selves, procure to be forsaken of God. But you Papists are they,
that seek to justify your selves, like the old pharisees, and boast of your
prayers, fastings and satisfactions, but God knows what you are within. As
for our only faith shall stand before God, when your infidelity shall condemn
you, and the fruits of our only faith shall appear to Gods glory, when the
vain brag of your meritorius works shall be discovered to your eternal
shame. But to come to your examples, I must admonish the Reader, that neither
your wit, memory, diligence, nor learning, deserves any commendations, for
alleging them that have so often before been abused, by all them that of your
side have defended your cause, of whom you are but a translator or borower, not
an author or obseruer your self. And therefore I might justly refer the
Reader to the learned and godly aunswers of so many, as have impugned this
heresy before, but because every man either can not or will not seek further
then this book, I will briefly answer every example, as it is an easy matter
to do, they are so unfitly applied to the purpose for which they are alleged.
The first example is of our first parent Adam, whose sin though it were
pardoned through Christ, yet he and all his posterity feels the punishment
thereof. An argument very far fetched to maintain the pains of purgatory.
The miseries of this life in that they be common to the godly, with the wicked,
they sufficiently declare, that they are no satisfaction for sin, but a
demonstration of our miserable condition to humble us, and make us desirous of
restitution by Christ. And although they were enjoined by the curse of God
against sin, yet to those that are delivered from the curse of God by the
blessed seed Jesus, they also are converted into blessings. Hereof the godly
rejoice in afflictions, knowing that afflictions work patience, patience
works trial, trial hope, and hope confounds not, yea by them we are made
conformable unto Christ, that suffering with him we may reign with him. Romans
5. and 8. As for that which Adam suffered after his death, when you have
declared it, then will I also confute it. Next follows the examples of the
Israelites which often fell, were punished and rose again. The former example
was not so far of in time, as this is in matter, for that example although it
were impertinent, yet it had some similitude with the cause, for that Adam was
pardoned, and yet bare some part of punishment. But here are brought in the
whole people, among whom many were wicked, and commonly more hypocrites then
true Israelites, and yet the very text alleged out of the 88. Psalm, declares
that the godly children which were punished, were chastised in mercy, and not
condemned by justice. And as for the saying of God. Exodus 32. that
notwithstanding he had pardoned the Israelites, yet he would visit their sin
in the day of vengeance, little helps the matter. For the pardon was general
to the whole people, that he would not destroy them from being a nation, as
appears in the 14. verse of that chapter, but not particular to every one,
that he would remitte their sin and take them into his favor, as appears
verse 33. where he says, that who so ever had sinned he would put him out of
his book. The same answer serves for the like text. Number. 14. But Moises and
Aaron are examples of this matter most manifest. I answer to the punishment of
Moises and Aaron, as to the punishment of all other faithful persons, they
were not to satisfy the justice of God, but to declare his mercy in
admonishing them, and others by their examples, how odious sin is unto him,
and yet even the chastisement of God is a benefit unto his children, not only
because it is a sign of his fatherly love toward them, but also because he
conuerteth it always unto their reward and profit. As in the example of Moises
and Aaron, it was a fatherly rod to discharge them of guiding Gods people,
and entering into the land of promise: but in the mean time it was a great
benefit that they were discharged of a heavy and troublesome burden, and
entered sooner into that land of eternal life, whereof the other was but a
sign and shadow. And therefore the Psalmist says justly of them, that God was
merciful unto them, in revenging their inventions. But because S. Augustines
words may be of more credit with you, he says of the death of Moises and
Aaron, that they were signa futurorum non supplicia indignationis Dei. Signs
of things to come not punishments of Gods displeasure. Quaestion. Number. lib. 4.
Quest. 53. But the example of King David is counted a great and special
bulwark of this cause, which notwithstanding is answered even as the rest.
David the child of God, was beaten with the merciful rod of Gods fatherly
correction, and set as an example to Gods children of all ages, to show how God
abhors murder and adultery. And although the pain were bitter for the time,
as all chastisment is, yet no doubt but he received great profit thereby. Heb.
12. And as for the plague for numbering the people, it fell upon them for their
own sins, as the text is plain. The saying of Gregory, that God leaves no
sin unpunished, which is pardoned: if it be understood that all the sins of
the faithful are punished in Christ, which became sin for us, it is most
true. But if he mean that God punishes all sins that he pardons in the
parties them selves, it is contrary to the manifest word of God, and infinite
examples of the Scripture. The Publicane, the prodigal child, the debtors,
all clearly remitted, do plainly prove that God freely forgiueth, justifies,
rewards the penitent sinners, without exacting any punishment of them for
aunswering of the debt, satisfying for the sins, abusing his fatherly
clemency. Luke 7. and 15. and 18. Finally for auouching mine answer, I would
wish no better authority of the ancient fathers, then even that which M. Allen
him self allegeth out of Augustine contra Faustum, lib. 23. cap. 67. that the
punishment of David, was flagelli paterni disciplina, the chastisement of Gods
fatherly scourge, as he does most plainly declare the same in his book de
peccatorum meritis ac remissione, lib. 2. cap. 33. and for a flatt conclusion
contradictory to M. Allens assertion, I will use the very words of Chrysostom
in the 8. Hom. upon the Epistle to the Romans Vbi venia ibi nulla erit poena.
Where there is forgeuenes, there is no punishment.

The double and doubtful shifts of our adversaries pressed by this
conclusion, are removed: and it is proved against one sort, that these
foresaid scourges were in deed punishments for sins remitted. And against
the other sect, that this transitory pain has often endured in the next life.
CAP. II.
1 ANd the weight of this foresaid ground, has ever pressed the adversaries
of truth so sore, that beholding as it were a far of, what inconvenience this
might import, they ever busily endeavored to stay the beginning of their likely
overthrow. But yet (as it was and will be for ever noted in false teachers)
they seek diverse escapes, so disagreable, that one hinders an other, and
neither of them helps their own cause. One sort not so impudent, but a great
deal more foolish then their fellows, agree by force of the places named and
evidence of the examples, that there is punishment to be suffered, and some
temporal pain remane at to be discharged in this world, after remission of
sin, but for the next after this life (so fearde they be of purgatory) they
will have none at all. Melanch.
The Other sect masters fearing what might follow on that grant, in no case
will confess, that there is any pain due for sin, in this world or the
next, after the fault be once remitted. For Calvin captain of this latter
ba^d, Caluinus.
saw well, that if any debt or recompense remain to be discharged by the
offender after his reconcilement, it must needs ^ise by proportion, weight,
continuance, number, and quantity of the faults committed before. Whereby it
must of necessity be induced, that because every man can not have time, either
for the hugeness of his sins past, or his late repentance, or his careless
negligence, to repay all in his life, that there is all, or some part
aunswerable in the next world to come. And therefore boldly and impudently, as
in case of this necessity, he aduentureth to deny with shame, that any of all
these painful miseries be as punishments for the sins of the sufferers: but
certain fatherly checkes, exercises of patience and virtue, rather then
afflictions enjoined for sins. Which vain shift has no bearing by reason,
or text of Scripture: but only is vpholden by the exercised audacity of the
author.

CAP. II.

1 IF M. Allens titles of his chapters were as sufficient reasons, as they be
bold affirmations, there were no man able to stand against him. But I can well
compare them to the arguments of those vain fables that were wont to be
printed in english of Beuis of Hampton, Guy of Warwick, and such like, where
the arguments show how such a Knight overcame such a Giant, how such a sorcerer
wrought such a miracle, which are told as confidently as though they were
true, and yet there is no man of mean wit so ignorant, but he knows them
to be feigned fantasies. Even so with M. Allen, to affirm is to prove, to deny
is to confute, briefly in his titles, and at large in his chapters. But if he
would as he pretends, have removed all those reasons, that we bring against
his false conclusion, or any of them all, he must have proved, that Christ has
not satisfied the justice of God perfectly by his death and suffering, that God
does not freely forgive us our sins, that he is still an angry Judge against
them that put their trust in him. He must have proved against Ezechiel, that
what time so ever a man does truly repent, the Lord does not put all his
sins out of his remembrance, against David, that he has not removed our
sins from us as far as the East is from the West. Against S. John, that if
any man sin after Baptism, Jesus Christ is not our advocate with the father,
and propitiation for our sins. If he could say any thing against these
reasons and authorities, with an hundred more of the same sort, he were worthy
to be heard. But because that is to hard a matter for him to take in hand,
without all shame or show of truth most impudently, he fayneth a contrariety
between Melanthon and Calvin, but not once noting by one letter where the same
is to be found in any of their works, lest their manifest words out of the
same places being brought against him, should reprove his shameless lying.
Melancthon he says, acknowledges some temporal pain after remission of
sins, to be discharged in this life, but not in the life to come. Calvin will
have none at all. O brazen face and iron forhead: does Calvin deny
thafflictions of this life? or Melancthon affirm that they are suffered for
satisfaction of our sins. Does Melancthon deny the passion of Christ to be a
perfect aunswering of the justice of God? or Calvin affirm, thereby to be
taken away the merciful correction of God? Would God that all that profess
the religion of Christ agreed in all points as truly, as they do in this.
But admit that M. Melancthon or any man beside, should grant, that the
sufferinges of the godly in this life, are some part of satisfying unto the
justice of God, what were purgatory promoted thereby? Forsooth then of
necessity it must be induced, that some part of these sufferinges are
aunswerable in the next world to come, what necessity call you this? even
such as he suffers, which being bound hand and foot with a straw, can not
steare to help him self. But let us see this adamantine chain of Master
Allens necessity. If any punishment remain, it must needs rise by proportion,
weight, continuance, number and quantity, which if it be not all discharged in
this life, then it is to be answered in the life to come. By proportion
Master Allen? What proportion? Arithmeticall or Geometrical? If it be by
arithmeticall proportion, then so many thousands of sins, whereof every one
deserves one death, must be punished by so many thousand deaths. If by
geometrical proportion, then so many offenses committed against that infinite
majesty, can not be answered, but by infinite and eternal punishment, and
which way so ever you take it, by weight, number, time or measure, it is
evident, that while you seek for purgatory, you have found out hell. For
otherwise says the spirit of God, in the person of the faithful, He has not
dealt with us according to our sins, neither rewarded us after our
iniquities, Psalm. 103. But as heaven is above the earth, so great is his mercy,
as a father has compassion on his children, so has the Lord compassion on
them that fear him. This is an other manner of proportion M. Allen, then you
Papists can skill of, which think such a necessity to be of this conclusion,
that if any sins be punished in this life, they must be punished after this
life also. For if nothing but justice be sought against sins, then follows
nothing but eternal damnation, if mercy may moderat the matter, what necessity
is in this consequence? some sins are sometime punished in this life, ergo in
the life to come. Thus I have reasoned, supposing that any man had granted,
that the justice of God must be satisfied with our sufferings in this life: for
I my self had rather see the Pope at the devil, then I would affirm the
sufferings of Christ to be insufficient to answer perfectly the justice of
God. But behold christian reader the blasphemy of these popish serpents, first
they will seem in words thoroughly to acknowledge the benefit of Christ's
passion, lest that every man yt hears them speak, should spit at them. When
they have thus obtained audience, then they will gather in them selves, and
begin in some part to diminish the perfection thereof, and so proceed until
they have in deed, though not in words clean excluded Christ and all his
merits, whereof thou have a plain example in this hipocrite, who in the
beginning of his first chapter, confesses liberally the effect of Christ's
death* afterward restrains the force thereof, to sins committed before
baptism, then brings in punishment, for aunswering the justice of God in
this life, afterward extends the same unto the life to come, and last of all,
estemeth the punishment by proportion, weight, continuance, number and quantity
of the faults committed: which of necessity thrusts back again the sins
into eternal torments. And what then becomes of the propitiation for our
sins purchased unto us by the blood of the son of God?

2 S. Paul in plain words writes: Ad Romans 6. Vide Augu. super illud psalm.
50. in peccatis co^c^pit me matter m^a.
Corpus mortuum est propter peccatum, and stipendium peccati mors est. The body
is dead because of sin, and death is the reward of sin. And so of David:
because thou have slain Vrias, Non recedet gladius de domo tua, says the
Scripture: The sword shall not depart thy house. And again, because thou have
made the enemies blaspheme my name, thy child shall dye. And of the people of
Israel: Visitabo and hoc peccatum eorum. I will visit this sin of theirs
also. Yet in this light of Scripture, whereas the punishment is named, so it is
expressly mentioned that sin is the proper cause thereof, the adversary
seeks a blind mist, to dase the simplicity of the reader, and to maintain
error. It helps our cause exceeding much, In Psalm. 50.
that the very show of an argument, drives them to such unseemly shifts. S.
Augustines words shall for me sufficiently refute this error, Veritatem
dilexisti, impunita peccata eorum etiam quibus ignoscis, non reliquisti. (He
speaks to God in the Prophets person). Thou loves righteousness, and have not
left unpunished, no not the sins of them whom thou love. August. lib. 2. de
peccato mer. cap. 33.
Notwithstanding, this is very true: that all these afflictions though they
come of sin, and for the reward of man's offenses, yet God of mercy turns
them to the exercise of virtue, and benefit of such as shall be saved. But it is
one thing to dispute of what cause they come, and an other to reason of the
wisdom of God in the use of the same. Who, as the said Augustine witnesses,
is so mighty in his provident governance, that he is able to turn, even the
very sins them selves, to the benefit of such as by grace and mercy shall be
raised up to salvation. And much more is he ready to frame the punishment which
he him self of justice works for correction of sinners, to the salvation of
the elect.

2 This peace should prove that the fatherly rod of Gods mercy, is a sword of
his justice to punish those sins that are remitted. But what manner of proves
brings he. S. Paul (he says) in plain words writes, the body is dead
because of sin, and death is the reward of sin. In deed S. Paul writes
so, but is the mercy of God turned therefore into justice, or his rod into a
sword? or he from a merciful father into an angry judge? to omit how unfitly
he joins these 2. places together, whose sense is so far differing, for in
the former saying: Romans 8. he speaks of the relics of sin, that are not
altogether abolished in them that are regenerate: in the latter Romans 6. he
shows that they which serve sin, deserve eternal damnation: what is this
to the proof of his conclusion? but his purpose was only to make some show
of variety of places: for by and by he returns to the places alleged, and
answered before, of David, and of the people of Israel, whereunto he
adioyneth the saying of Augustine, that God leaves not the sins of them
unpunished, whom he has pardoned. One answer serves al, if there were ten
times as much of this sort. That God punishes not to satisfy his justice, but
to show his mercy toward his children, to bring them to repentance, to humble
them, to make them beware of the like sins, to admonish others by their
example, but in no wise that they should make a mendes by due punishment, for
that which by transgression was committed, which answer howsoever he would
seem to eleuate by words, yet he brings no matter against it, but even the
places by him self alleged in the chapter before, which either all or almost
all, do plainly confirm it, as is before noted, and none of them all confute
it.

3 But now the other sort which be more curteise, The confutation of the
second opinion.
and confess that in this world the just may suffer of reason for his sins
already remitted, but not in the next life, as their doctrine is very untrue,
so it gives great lice^se and liberty to evil liuer^, and is the very mother
of presumption. For if man were suere to be discharged at his departure hense
of all pain for his sins, then certes were it madness, to travel in this
life further for his offensies, then he must of necessity. Yea more, it makes
the case of grievous sinners till the hour of their death (so that they then at
last repent) much better, then of small offenders converted long before. For
these must be punished in their life, the other can not be punished (as these
suppose) after their death. What a vain absurdity is this, that the prophet
offending once or twice in all his time, should suffer so heuie judgment: and
the party which abides in wickedness till the end of his life, when sin
rather leaves him, then he sin, must because of his late conversion, without
pain be carried at ease to heaven? This is not doubtless semely to Gods
justice and ordinance, whose ways be truth and uprightness. Homil. 11. in
Leuit.
Est apud iudicem iustum poenae moderatio, non solum pro qualitate, sed etiam
pro quantitate. To a just judge there must be consideration had of punishment,
both for the quality and quantity (so says Origin.) And the holy Scripture
thus. Quantum glorificauit se, and in delitijs fuit: tantum date illi tormentum
and luctum. Look how high she exalted her self, and how delicatly she lived:
and give her so much woe and torment again. It is spoken as of Babylon in the
revelations of Saint John. Cap. 16.


And because this touches our matter, and the very point thereof: I will stand
with the adversary the longer. Here then I ask him, why God takes punishment
in this world, for sin already remitted? His answer must needs be, for
the revenge and hatered of sin, and satisfying of justice. Now then does God
practice judgment and justice no where but in this world? Or if it be not
here answered, because of lack of space, or late reconciliation of the
offender, shall our lord of necessity be forced to remitte the debte, and
release his sentence of justice for lack of means to punish in an other
world? No no, Gods hand is not abbridged by the terms of this life. Late
repentance can be a benefit to no man: God forbid it should. Especially seeing
punishment and judgment for sin (as many learned do suppose, and as reason
with scripture bears) properly apperteineth not to this world, but by a
special grace, and singular benefit, which God of pity grants to such as
he loves, that they may here prevent his anger: which else in the next life
should be found more grievous, where properly is the reward of sin, and
judgment kept ordinarily for the same. As it is plain mercy and grace, when
man may take punishment of him self (as S. Paul says) and be his own
correctour, 1. Cor. 11.
to avoid the judgment of God. And thereof the next life is termed commonly
dies Domini: where there is no place for our working, but sufferance alone:
where the account of man's life must be straightly required, and the sins even
of the just, not otherwise amended, sharply visited. Therefore if Melanthon
grant that the righteous and reconciled persons, Eusebius. Emis. homil. de di
uersis viti.
may justly bear the scourge of God, for satisfying for their sins before
pardoned, in this world, where, though punishment be exercised for wickedness
properly, yet at the least not so ordinarily as in the next, where God has laid
up the great store of reward, as well for the good as the badde: he must needs
by force of reason acknowledge, that the world to come is no less (if it be
not more) appointed of our Lord for just iudgeing of our faults forgiven, then
the time of this present life, whereas many an evil liver escapes all
punishment so diverse of great virtue suffer full grievous torments.
Excellently well said S. Augustine: Multa mala hic videntur ignosci, Ench. ca.
6.
and nullis supplicijs vindicari: sed eorum poenae reseruantur in posterum etc:
much evil may seem here to be pardoned, and without all punishment released:
but the pain for such things is reserved til the world to come.

3 He ascribes more courtesy to the other sort whose opinion is of his own
framing, but yet they please him not altogether, because their doctrine gives
license to evil livers. For if a man were sure to be discharged at his death
for all pain for his sin, then it were madness to travail further for his
offenses in this life, then he must needs. M. Allen speaks here according to
his own affection, and the sense of all Papists, which will take no pains to
please God, but only for their profit: they will not bestow one half penny
for the love of God, nor suffer a fillippe for the glory of God, but for the
satisfaction of their sins, and increase of their merittes. And therefore
that which is the chief cause, that does and ought to move, and the principal
end for which all godly men are moved to seek to please God by good works,
namely the love of God, and the glory of God, the Papists think to prevail
with no man, because they are void of it them selves. But may not a man now
justly enforce, that the opinion of purgatory and satisfactions of sins after
this life, is the very doctrine of licentiousnes, to maintain wicked men in
their presumptuousnes? For what have will they make to amendment and newnes of
life, when they have hope of release after their death? The other absurdity
rises of deuilish envy, that God should be more liberal to them that repent,
at the hour of death, then to them that were but small offenders, converted
long before. And therefore ( M. Allen) I will answer you, as the householder
answered those murmurers, which grudged that they which wrought but an hour
were made equal in reward with those, that had borne the burden and heat of
the day. Is thy eye evil, because God is good? is it not lawful for him to do
what he will with his own? Matthew. 20. But this is that which always deceives
the papists, because they measure the reward by justice and not by mercy. I
think M. Allen is angry with Christ, that he did not send the penitent thief
into purgatory, but even that day promised to be with him in paradise. For
Origin is alleged to prove, that a just Judge must have consideration of
punishment, both for quality and quantity. He never thinks of Christ all this
while, who was stricken for our sins and wounded for our iniquities, in whose
punishment God had regard of such quality and quantity as his justice required.
Es. 53. For the chastisement of our peace was laid upon him. but we say with
the prophet: Lord if thou look straightly to our sins, who were able to
abide it, but with thee there is mercy and therefore thou shall be feared. Psa.
130. But for a stronger proof, there is alleged a place out of Apoc. 18. look
how high Babylon did exalt her self, and how delicatly she lived, give her so
much woe and torment again. Now I promise you, I will say M. Allen is a
cunning Logitian, if he can draw a good argument out of this place to prove
that God punishes his children to satisfy his justice. The whorish church of
Rome is justly condemned to eternal torments, for her pride and voluptuousnes,
there ore Gods children are punished to answer the justice of God. The people
of God are commanded to reward Babylon according to her wickedness, and to
spare her no more then she s^ared them in her tyranny. What pertains this to
ye afflictions of Gods Saints? But because this matter touches the point, he
will tarry longer with his adversary, and demand why God takes punishment in
this world for sin already remitted. And then he will co^pel him to answer
for satisfying of his justice, which if it be not performed in this life, it
must be in the life to come. This is a fine kind of reasoning, M. Allen, that
you will enforce your adversary both to answer you, and also to answer what
you list, and then you are good enough for him. Is this the logic of Louayne?
Nay you have a finer reason then this, punishment and judgment for sin
properly appertains not to this world, but to the next life. Then would I
grossly infer, therefore the temporal pains that the godly suffer in this
world, be not properly punishments for sin. But it is of mercy and grace that
they suffer in this life, that I grant, but not to satisfy for their sins.
Of which matter you do untruly call Saynct Paul to witness. 1. Cor. 11. as
when he is heard to speak him self, it will appear manifestly: If we would
judge our selves (says he) we should not be judged, but when we are judged, we
are chastised of the Lord, because we should not be condemned with the
world. Here is chastisement to amendment, or obstinacy to condemnation, but
never a word sounding toward purgatory, here is a manifest difference, between
the judgment which God exercises toward his children, which is chastisme^t
to avoid damnation, and that judgment by the which the impenitent world is
condemned. But in the next life (you say) there is no place for our working but
sufferance alone, etc. what then shall other men's works avail, when our own
will not serve? and yet it is a matter not so fully agreed upon among you
papists, whether a man may merit in purgatory. But to take your own
affirmation and not to charge you with dissension of other men (because you
dissent so much from your self) who so weighs the ground of your first
book, must needs confess that it ouerturneth your second book, and if the
matter of your second book be true, then is the ground of your first book
false. For the ground of purgatory you would make the justice of God, which
requires punishment for sins committed in this life: but how can that stand?
if God accept ye work of other men to release them, that should suffer by his
justice: if these works will answer the matter, the^ there is no such
necessity of purgatory to satisfy his justice. So that one of your books is a
pretty confutatio^ of the other. As for the saying of Augustine helps you
nothing at all, only he shows that God punishes not all sins in this
world, because many are reserved to eternal torments. But how uncertain his
judgment was concerning purgatory in that Enchiridion ad Laurentium, he him
self most plainly declares. Tale aliquid etiam post hanc vitam fieri
incredibile non est: and vtrum ita sit quaeri potest. It is not incredible,
that such a thing may be after this life, and whether it be so or no it may be
doubted, and either it may be found, or else it may be hid, that some
faithful should pass through a certain purgatory fire, etc. cap. 69. By
which words it appears that Satan was but then laying his foundations of
purgatory, and had not yet finished this work by a great deal, and that this
was not so grave a doctrine, nor so constant a faith of the fathers, as M.
Allen boasts of in the former cap. Fol. 25.

4 But let us step a foot further, and yet so much nearer the matter: and
note well whether we may find any case, where the payment for sins remitted,
passes the bonds of this life, and so required in the next, that by plain
dealing and orderly proceeding, Mark well that God punishes in the next
life, the sins of the just.
we may the better instruct the simple, confound the adversary and make truth
stand upon it self.

Consider then with me that our first father pardoned of his sin, as I proved
before, was punished for the same, and with him all the just of those days,
not only in the time of this present mortal life, but many hundredth years
after their departure. For whose delivery, the Catholic church holds and our
Creed teaches also, that our Master Christ descended down into hell. And
that no man here be deceived, he must understand, that it was no small
punishment to be banished so many worlds together from the land of the living,
and to lack the joyful fruition of heavens bliss: August. Enchi. cap. 112.
which of it self, but that it was not eternal, had been more then all
temporal pains that may be suffered. And this to be one of those miseries
which our first fathers disobedience wrought, and so to be pain for sin, I
think every wise man will confess. Yea it was the greatest dominion of sin
that could be for the overthrow of which, Christ him self vouchsafed to enter
into the land of darkness. It is called of the Prophet, lacus sine aqua: a lake
without water: And of the Apostle, Zach. 9. 1. Pet. 3.
Carcer, a prison. Where the fathers be also named, vincti tui, thine that
were bound. Whereby we must understand that Christ had a flock imprisoned
and bound, for the debt of sin in an other world. But that we may make
invincible proof, that this their captivity was a just enjoined plage and
penalty for sin, we must report what we find in ancient Irenaeus of this
matter. And he affirms that Adam was judged and condemned for his wilful
fall, till Christ's coming, in these words. Lib. 3. ca. 33.
Necesse fuit Dominum ad perditam ouem venientem and tandem despositionis
recapitulationem facientem, and suum plasma requirentem, illum ipsum hominem
saluare, qui factus fuerat secundum imaginem and similitudinem eius, id est
Adam: implentem tempora eius condemnationis, quae facta fuerat propter
inobedientiam. And straight after. Solutus est condemnationis vinculis, qui
captiuus ductus fuerat homo, thus I english it: It was necessary that our Lord
coming to the lost sheep, and making a recapitulation of his appointed
ordinance, and view of his own handeworke, should also save the same man which
was formed after his own image and likeness: I mean Adam, then fulfilling
the time of that condemnation which was for his disobedience appointed, and so
the man led into captivity was released of the bonds of his condemnation.

Eusebius Emissenus yet more expressly helps our cause, Homil. 1. de festo
Pasch.
as follows. Confestim igitur aeterna nox inferorum, Christo descendente,
resplenduit: siluit stridor ille lugentium, and Cathenarum disrupta ceciderunt
vincula damnatorum Out of hand at Christ's coming into hell, that eternal
darkness shined bright: the gnashing of the mourners ceased, and the brosten
bands of condemned persons, fell from them. Here lo many one, by the
judgment of this holy writer, were loused from much misery by Christ's
descending down. Where, to our purpose we must especially be advertised, that
all the just in those inferior parts were not in like felicity with our father
Abraham, or other of such perfect holiness: (although he also suffered the
common lack, in long looking for translation to joy) for some there were of
meaner virtue, and yet in the favor of God, which suffered personal pain for
purging and recompense of their sins committed in this life: Some were
released of pain, at Christ's descen.
of whom this Author seems to mean.

And as S. Augustine supposes, the scripture must needs import such a like
thing: undoubtedly teaching that Christ was not only in the place of rest,
where Abraham and other in his harbor were, but also in places of torment,
which could not touch his holy person: Act. 2.
Quem Deus suscitauit solutis dolo^ibus inferni: Whom God raised up again
after he had loosed hell pains. Thus says this holy Author. Quia euidentia
testimonia and infernum commemorant and dolores, nulla causa occurrit, Epist.
99.
cur illo credatur venisse Saluator, nisi vt ab eius doloribus saluos faceret:
sed vtrum omnes quos in eis inuenit, an quosdam quos illo beneficio dignos
iudicauit, adhuc requiro: fuisse tamen eum apud inferos, and in eorum doloribus
constitutis hoc beneficium praestitisse non dubito: Because (says he) evident
testimonies make mention both of Hell and pains, I see not why we should
believe that our Savior came thither, but to discharge some of the pains
thereof: mary whether he loosed all, or sum whom he thought worthy of that
benefit, that would I learn. For I am out of doubt he was in hell, and
bestowed that gracious benefit upon some that were in pains. Thus far spoke
Augustine. Let no man here take occasion to think that this father meant of any
release of the damned in the inferious hell: for that error he ever detested,
and writes earnestly against Origin for the same. De fide and operibus cap
16. Cap. 33.
Then it must needs be, that he spoke of some which were in pain and torment,
and yet worthy to receive mercy. (so he terms their estate both here, and in
the xij. Book of the literal exposition on the Genesis, where he has the
same words with more large proof of the conclusion) which neither agrees
with the state of Abraham's rest, nor yet with the forsaken souls. And the name
of hell is now commonly taken for any one of the inferior parts, where God
practices judgment for sin everlastingly or temporally: though (as
Augustine says) it ca^ not be found in plain scripture, that Abraham's happy
resting place should be termed Hell, or Infernu^.

But I need not seek further in the deep mystery of Christ's affairs in the
inferior parts. For as I am not ashamed to be ignorant upon whom he bestowed
the grace of delivery, so with Augustine, or rather with Gods Church, I dare
believe, that he loosed sum, upon whom he exercised judgment before. And
further may boldly auouche, that as there were certain at his coming down,
not unworthy after long pains tolerated to be released in his presens, so
there be yet some, which by mercy and means of Gods Church be released daily.
Not of that sort which died out of Gods favor: Quibus clausa est ianua
misericordiae, and omnis spes interclusa salutis: Bernard se de s. Nicolao.
Upon whom the door of mercy, and the hope of health be closed and shut up
for ever, but of the just departed in faith and piety, and yet not fully
purged of all corruption of iniquity.

4 This man has hitherto raked in purgatory, now he will step a foot
further into hell, and all to find a case where sins remitted are punished
after this life, and then he will return again into purgatory. For this
purpose we must consider with him, that Adam and all the just of those days,
were punished for their sins forgiven, not only in this life, but many
hundredth years after their departure. For whose delivery the Catholic Church
(he says) holds and our creed teaches, that Christ descended into hell.
First mark how he agrees with him self, and after how he cauilleth with the
holy Scripture of God. Here he says that Abraham and all the just were
punished in hell, afterward in the next leaf, he says that all the just in
those inferior parts were not in like felicity with our father Abraham, or
other of such perfect holiness, and in the next leaf after that, he affirms
out of Augustine, that Abraham's happy resting place can not be found in
Scripture, to be termed hell. But that the fathers of the old law before
Christ, were not in hell, although they were not, nor yet are in perfect
blessedness, God providing a better thing for us, that they without us should
not be made perfect. Heb. 11. It is to be proved with manifest arguments and
authorityes out of holy Scriptures. For seeing they all believed in Christ,
they had everlasting life, and entered not into condemnation, but passed from
death to life. Joan 5. And to what end was Christ called the lamb, that was
slain from the beginning of the world, but that the benefit of his passion,
extends unto the godly of all ages alike? Esaias speaking of the righteous that
are departed out of this life, says that there is peace, and that they shall
rest in their beds, Esaias 57. like as he affirms that Tophoth, which is
Gehinnom or hell, is prepared of old for the wicked, Es. 30. So that felicity
and rest was the portion of the godly fathers of the old time after their
death: and hell was prepared but for the wicked and ungodly. The same does our
Savior Christ teach in the history of Lazarus and the rich man. Luke 16. where
the soul of Lazarus was carried by Angels not down to hell, but up into
Abraham's bosom, from which hell is manifestly divided, when it is said that
the rich man being in hell in torments, lifted up his eyes and saw Lazarus a
far of: which words do plainly confute, that drousy dream of the Papists
concerning limbus patrum, which they say is but an edge and border of hell. But
Christ makes hell one place, and Abraham's bosom an other, and not that only,
but the one far from the other, yea a great distaunce between the one and the
other, therefore no edge nor border of hell, but a place of comfort, an high
place: for the rich man looks up, and sees a far of Lazarus in the bosom
of Abraham, who was a true child of Abraham by faith, for faith makes
children unto Abraham. Romans 4. And even as faith was imputed to Abraham, so is
it to all that be his children by faith as well as it was to Abraham, if
righteousness belongs to Abraham's children, the reward of righteousness also
pertayneth unto them, therefore Abraham's bosom was open to receive all the
children of Abraham, even as the bosom of God was ready to receive Abraham,
because he was his son through faith. And now to confute your vain reasons
which either be manifest wrestinges of the holy Scripture, or else are builded
upon the authority of mortal men. First you allege that the place into which
Christ descended, was called a lake without water, in which the godly fathers
were. Zachary 9. but this is so evident an abusing of the word of God, that he
which does only read that verse of Zachary in the original tongue, must
needs confess, that those words have an other sense, for God there
contineweth his speaking to Jerusalem, or the daughter of Syon: saying, he has
delivered her prisoners by the blood of her covenant, from the lake without
water, that is from miserable and desperate captivity, where appeared no
comfort. For the pronoune thou, is of the feminine gender, wherefore it is most
clear that this is not spoken of Christ but of the Church of Christ. As for
the common translation, which turns the feminine gender into the masculine,
and the first person into the second with manifest deprauation of the sense, is
not to be admitted in this case. Now that prison which you bring out of 1.
Pet. 3. is the prison of the damned souls, into which S. Peter does not say
that Christ descended, but that he came in the days of Noe by his spirit, and
preached to those that were then disobedient, and therefore are their spirits
now in perpetual prison and torment. And this is the true and natural sense
of S. Peter's words, which by means of that predicate error, rather then of
any great obscurity in them, has been diversely wrested by expositors. The
words of Irenaeus may be well understood of Christ's coming down from
heaven to save mankind, which deserved just condemnation for sin, rather then
of his descending into hell, and the name of Adam seems to be taken in these
words, rather for a noune common then for a proper name. He has words
toward the latter end of the fifth book that sound more like to this matter,
where he says: Cum enim Dominus in medio vmbrae mortis abierit, vbi animae
mortuorum erant, post deinde corporaliter resurrexit, and post resurrectionem
assumptus est, manifestum est, quia and discipulorum eius, propte^ quos and
haec operatus est Dominus, animae abibunt in inuisibilem locum, definitum eis a
Deo, and ibi vsque ad resurrectionem commorabuntur. Seeing the Lord went in the
midst of the shadow of death, where the souls of the dead were, and
afterward arose corporally, and then was taken up: it is manifest, that the
souls of his disciples for whom the Lord wrought these things, shall go
into an invisible place, appointed for them by God, and there shall tarry
until the resurrection. Nevertheless out of these words can nothing be
necessarily enforced, but that the soul of Christ, when he was dead, was in
the place of the godly that were dead before him, which no man denies. If you
urge that he was in the midst of the shadow of death, I answer, that is a
phrase of the Scripture, signifying that he was verily dead, and that death had
him in possession, after which manner of speech S. Peter says, that God raised
him again, loosing the sorrows of death, and you your self count it a
blasphemy to say, that he suffered any torments in hell after his death, and
Irenaeus him self affirms, that it was such a place as all his disciples
shall rest in until the time of the general resurrection, which plainly
overthrows your fantasy. Eusebius Emissenus helps you as little as Irenaeus,
for he speaks rhetorically, of the glorious victory that Christ obtained
against hell, and the power of darkness, by his death and passion, and
descending into hell, whose words if you would expound grammatically, you will
make a mad sense of them, and he shall be smally beholding unto you. But it is
plain enough, except it be to him that will seek confirmation of errors, out
of that which is truly spoken, that he means that the effect and power of
Christ's death, mightily vanquished the power of hell and eternal damnation,
not which it had actually over the godly, but which by the justice of God, it
should have had, if his sacrifice had not purchased mercy. And therefore he
says, Aeterna nox the everlasting night, which adjective is referred also to
the gnashing and cheines of the damned. For it was eternal not temporal
damnation, from which they were delivered by Christ's death. And therefore that
fond shift, which M. Allen imagines, which he says may seem like to be the
authors meaning, is not worth a straw, as being enforced and brought to the
words by him, not expressed in them, by Eusebius. But when these will not
help, the supposal of S. Augustine is set down, which because it is but the
authority of a man, and him not constant with him self always, it is not of
sufficient weight, to bear down the testimony alleged out of Gods word. The
same man contra Felicianum ad Optatum cap. 15. writes these words. Si igitur
mortuo corpore, ad paeradisum anima mox vocatur, quenquam ne adhuc tam impium
credimus, qui dicere audeat, quoniam anima saluatoris nostri, triduo illo
corporeae mortis apud inferos custodiae mancipitur. If therefore the body being
dead, the soul is immediately called to paradise, believe we yet that there is
any man so ungodly, that he dare say, that our Saviors soul, in that 3. days
of his bodily death, was committed to prison in hell, etc. In these words, he
seems utterly to deny, that he came in that prison of hell. You will say he
denies that he tarried there so long, but not that he came not there at all.
But then mark this reason, if the souls of good me^ immediately are called to
paradise, much more was Christ's soul immediately received into paradise, who
committed the same into his fathers hands.

5 Let the enemies of Gods truth come now, and deny if they ca^ for shame,
that Gods justice for sins remitted, reaches not sometimes to the places of
punishment in the next life: let them with purgatory raze up the fathers
resting place so plainly set forth by scripture, believed of the whole Church,
and always taught by the holy fathers. Yea let them that will have no place
for sinners, find with blasphemy, hell like torments for Gods own Son,
with the damned spirits. My heart surely will scarce serve me to report it,
and yet cursed Calvin was not afearde to write it: and with arrogant vauntes
against the blessed fathers, to avouch the same. That miserable forsaken man
saw, that the only grant of the old fathers punishment by the lack of
everlasting joy, might of force drive him to acknowledge, that God sometimes
exercises his justice upon those which he loves, in the next life: and so
consequently that Purgatory pains might be inferred therevppon, therefore he
fell headelong to this horrible blasphemye, Caluines blasphemy upon the
article of Christ's descention.
that Christ went not to loose any from the pains of the next life: but to be
punished in hell with the deadely damned him self, for to amend the lack of
his passion upon the Cross. O our cursed time, O corrupt conditions: this
beast writes thus against our blessed Saviors death, and against the
sufficiency of the abundant price of our redemption: and yet he lives in man's
memory, yea his books be greedely redd, read? Nay by such as would be counted
the chief of the clergy, and bear Bishops names, they are commanded to be
read: The heretics privily set forth by books that which they dare not
openly preach.
and the very book wherein this and all other detestable doctrine is uttered,
especially by their authority commended to the simple Curats study: that they
might there learn closely in deuilish books, such wicked heresies as the
preachers them selves dare not yet in the light of the world utter nor
maintain.

But other be not so far fallen, therefore they must of reason confess, that
God by just correction, has before Christ's coming visited in the next world
many hundred years together, the sins of those whom he dearly loved.
Although not only in all that time, the souls of the holy Patriarchs felt
the lack of the abundant fruition of the Majesty, but also for sin they
both then in rest, Excepting some that by peculiar prerogative have already
received their bodies.
and now in unspeakable felicity, want till this day the increase of joy and
bless, that by the receiving of their bodies yet lying in dust, they are
undoubtedly sure of. Therefore it is over much presumption to limit the majesty
of God in the government of his own creatures, to the borders of our short
life, and almost it touches his very providence with injury, to say that he
lets him escape without punishment for his sins, that repented not till the
hour of death: as for whom he has no scourge in the next life, as he had
here, if death had not prevented his purpose. These childish cogitations can
not stand with the righteousness of his will, that for the first sin
committed, does not only punish many everlastingly of the forsaken sort, but
also for the same, punishes both his best beloved in earth, and for a time
abateth the felicity of the blessed Saints in heaven. But I will not stray
after these men. My matter is so fruitful that I may not roue. And though the
sects of these days have so infected every branch of our christian faith,
that a man can not well ouerpasse them what so ever he takes in hand, yet I
will not meddle with them no further, then shall concern the quick of our
cause, and the necessary light of our matter.

5 Now this lusty gallaunt as though he had fully repaired and fortified the
old ruinous and battered towers of limbus patrum, with canuas painted walls,
he stands upon his bulwark of brown paper, and cries defiaunce to all his
enemies, and especially he utters his spite against Calvin, as a notorious
enemy of his cause and quarrel. Whom because he is to young to encounter
withal, by any wit, learning, reason, or truth, he spitteth out against him,
most impudent sclaunders, raylings and lies, in which faculty, he has striued
so much to show him self eloquent, that not satisfying him self with the
voice of a man, he has borrowed the tongue of the Devil him self, or at the
least wise, for fear he should not lie thoroughly given over his shameless
tongue to be wagged by the father of lies. For what man with any show of
humane reason would accuse Calvin to deny the sufficiency of the redemption of
Christ, to affirm that Christ went down into hell after his death to be
punished there with the damned him self, for to amend the lack of his passion
upon the cross? whose doctrine God him self, the Angels, and all the world
does know and testify, to be directly contrary to these sclaunders. For who
ever more constantly affirmed, or more substantially proved the sufficiency of
our redemption, by Christ's death? what ass so unlearned, if he can but
conster Caluins latin, in his catechism, institutions, or any part of his
works, where he entreats of that article of Christ's descense in to hell,
may not plainly see, that he utterly denies his descending into hell, after
his life, affirming the same to be understood of the wrath of God, which he
sustained for our sins before his death, at that time especially when he that
was God, complained that he was forsaken of God, which mystery if M. Allen
understand not, it is no marvel, seeing he abridgeth so much the benefit of
Christ's redemption, as all papists do always, and he specially in this his
defense of purgatory, and yet he is not ashamed to say of Calvin: this beast
writes against our blessed Saviors death. If I did not moderate somewhat my
corrupt affections, I could requite him the like reproaches, but this much I
must needs say. Is Calvin a beast for speaking the truth to the glory of
Christ's redemption, and Allen an honest man, for sclaundering him to the
defacing of Gods honor? But because he would not be thought to have spued out
all his poison against Calvin, he goulpeth up an other bowlefull of railing
and sclaundering against our Bishops, who have not only suffered, but also
commended Caluins books to be read, and studied of the simple curates,
affirming that they do privily set forth by books, that which they dare not
openly preach. If every man that can be a witness, that M. Allen lies in this
matter, should pull one hear from his head or bearde, they would leave him
never an hear of an honest man behind them. But that he may return to his
gentle adversaries, with whom is less dangerous dealing, there be some (he
says) that grant the punishment of the fathers, after their death, of whose
liberal concession, he doubts not but to patch up his Purgatory. In which
practice he is not unlike a fond fellow, of whom I have heard men jest in
Cambridge, who when he was, non plus, as they term it, in disputation, and all
his argument spent, that he had provided: Now (says he) will I dispute of your
concesses and graunts. So M. Allen for every matter, when his own reasons
fail, has the concessions of his adversaries which if they will not franckly
make, he will forcibly compel them to say what he will have them. Last of all
he says, it is presumption, and such as touches the very providence of God,
with injury, to say, that he lets any sinner escape unpunished, which
repented not until the hour of death, as for whom he has no scourge in the
next life as he had here, if death had not prevented his purpose. But these he
calls childish cogitations, but he might well have termed them deuilish
imaginations, which will control the wisdom and mercy of God under his
blind reason and corrupt affections and not suffer God to show mercy upon
whom he will show mercy. Romans 9. without his blaspemous and envious murmuring.
His promise made so pleasauntely, not to digress from his fautlesse matter,
how perfectely he performs, we shall see afterward.

That the practice of Christ's Church, in the court of binding and loosing
man's sins, does lively set forth the order of Gods justice in the next life,
and prove Purgatory. CAP. III.
1THis being then proved, that God him self has often visited the sins of
such as were very dear unto him, let us now diligently behold the grave
authority of loosing and binding sins, and the court of man's conscience
which Christ would have kept in earth by the Apostles and Pastors of our
souls: where we need not doubt but to find the very resemblaunce of Gods
disposition and ordinance, in punishing or pardoning offensies. For the honor
and pour of this ecclesiastical government, is by especial commission so
ample, that it contains not only the preaching of the Gospel and ministry
of the Sacraments, Note.
but that which is more near to the might and majesty of God, and only
aperteineth to him by propriety of nature, the very exact judgment of all our
secret sins, with loosing and binding of the same. For as God the father gave
all judgment to his only Son, Joan. 5.
so he at his departure hense, to the honor of his spouse and necessary giding
of his people, did communicate the same in most ample manner (as S. Chrysostom
says) to the Apostles and priests for ever: that they practicing in earth
terrible judgment upon man's misdeedes, might fully represent unto us the very
sentence of God in punishment of wickedness in the world to come. The princes
of the earth have pour to bind too, Lib. de Sacer. 3.
but no further then the body, but this other (says he) reaches to the soul
it self, and practiced here in the world beneth (which is a strange case)
has force and effect in heaven above. The pour of all potentates, under the
majesty of the blessed Trinity, in heaven and earth, is extreme baseness
compared to this.

By this grave authority therefore, the Pastors and Priests imitating Gods
justice, have exercised continually punishment, from the spring of Christian
religion, down till these days, upon all sinners: perpetually enioyning for
satisfying of Gods wrath, penance and works of correction, either before they
would absolve them, as the old usage was, or else after the release of their
offensies, which now of late for grave causes has been more used. In which
sentence of their judgment we plainly see, that as there was ever accomp^
made amongst all the faithful of pain due unto sin, though the very
offense it self and the giltinesse (as you would say) thereof, were forgiven
before: so we may gather that it was ever enjoined by the priests holy
ministry, after the quality and quantity of the fault committed. VVhereupon
they charged some manner offenders with certain prayers only, other with large
almose, diverse with long fasting, many with perilous peregrinations, some with
suspending from the sacraments, and very grievous offenders, with curse and
excommunication.

Ex communication has the image of Gods justice in the world to come.
Whereby thou may not only prove that there is pain to be suffered for thy
sins, but also have a very image of that misery which in the next life may
faule, not only to the damned for ever, but also to all other which neglected
in this time of grace the fructes of penance, and works of satisfaction for
the answer of their lives past. This great correction of excommunication and
separation from the sacraments, S. Paul terms the rod, Virgam.
wherewith he often threatened offenders: yea and some times though it was with
great sorrow (the punishment was so extreme) he mightily in Gods stead occupied
the same. As once against Himeneus and Alexander: 1. ad Timo. Cap. 1. 1. Cor. 5.
and an other time toward a Corinthian, upon whom, being absent, he gave
sentence of their delivery up to Satan: not to be vexed of him as Job was for
the increase of merit, In 1. ad Cor. cap. 5.
(says Chrysostom) but in their flesh meruelously to be tormented for payment
for their grievous offensies: and as the Apostle writes of the Corinthian, that
his soul might be false in the day of our Lord.

CAP. III.

1 BEcause this man would show him self mindeful of his promise hereafter, he
is even now wandered out of Purgatory into excommunication, which
notwithstanding he counts no digression at all, because it does set forth the
order of Gods justice in the next life, and prove Purgatory, which were neither
so nor so, but that he has a special grace, to make all things serve his
purpose, though they be never so far from it. Omnia ex omnibus, he can make
what he list of every thing. We confess the power of excommunication given by
Christ unto his Church, and the severity of the punishment thereof to be
greater, then the swelling words of M. Allens eloquence can express: but
where as he adds, that it has been the perpetual usage of Gods church, for
satisfying of Gods wrath, to enjoin penance and works of correction, before
they would absolve, which was the old custom, or else after the release of
their offense which was the new fashion, he shows him self ignoraunte of the
right use and end of that authority, which our Savior has committed unto his
Church. For the chief end of this discipline, is to bring the sinners to
repentance, which if it may be obtained by admonition, the sword of
excommunication must not be drawn out. As appears plainly by Christ's own
words Matthew. 18. If private admonition, where the offense is not public, may
prevail to win our brother, there needs no witness to be called. If two
or three may serve to admonish: ye matter need not to be referred to the
Churches knowledge: and he that hears the Church, so that by the admonition
thereof he is brought to hearty repentance, is not to be cut of from the
Church, nor to be delivered to Satan, for how should the Church refuse him,
whom God receives: But if he obstinatly contemn the gentle admonition of the
Church, or as our Savior says, if he refuse to hear the Church, then let
him be as an heathen or publicane. For afterward if being excommunicated: he
show hearty tokens of repentance, without any further satisfaction, he is to be
received again, as appears most manifestly, in the receiving of that
Corinthian which was excommunicated, of whose unfeigned repentance, when the
Apostle had intelligence, he writes again to the Corinthians of him saying.
It is sufficient for that same man that he was rebuked of many, but now you
ought to forgive him and comfort him, that he should not be swallowed up with
over much heuines. 2. Cor. 2. And as for the practice of the old and puerer
Church, by enioyning of works of repentance, was, that they might not be
deceived by conterfect repentance, in stead of true and earnest reformation,
not to satisfy the wrath of God against sinners (which is not satisfied, but
by the blood of Christ) but to satisfy and assure the Church (as much as man
might judge) of the unfeigned and hearty repentance of the offendour. For how
so ever the old writers use the word of satisfaction, something vnproprely,
yet their clear affirmation of the only satisfaction of Christ's death,
declares what they understood, when they used that term in an other sense.
But this is not to be omitted, that M. Allen confesses the Papists, to have
left the old usage of the Church, which was first to set satisfaction, and
then to absolve, and now of late, to have taken up a contrary custom that is,
first to absolve then to enjoin penance. This practice therefore lacks
antiquity, one of the chief pillars of Popery. But this he says is for
great causes, but what causes, he does not express: it is sufficient that the
Church can not err, though they do that which is contrary to the usage of the
ancient Church, without ground of Scripture, and against the commandment of
Christ. How hard Cyprian was to absolve them, that were excommunicate, before
they had showed great fruits of repentance, and how careful, that the Church
should not be deceived by them, that upon counterfected penance, required
absolution, appears by many of his epistles, and in his Sermon De lapsis. But
because we shall have a more proper place to speak of satisfaction in the next
Chapter, we will now follow M. Allen in this matter of exco^municatio^.

2 This punishment was ever by cutting of from the Christian society, and
often joined with torment of body or sickness. And sometimes with death. As in
the excommunication of Ananias and Zaphiras: Act. 5. Note.
Which Christ's vicar S. Peter, to the great terror even of the faithful,
gravely pronounced on them for retaining back certain Church goods, which by
promise they had before dedicated unto God and the Apostles distributio^.

This kind of punishment of sins was ever counted so terrible, that we find
it called of the old fathers damnation: August. de Correp. and gra. cap. 15.
as one that most resembles the pains of the world to come of all other. And
if man could see with corporal eyes the misery of the party so condemned in
Gods church, his heart would brast: Ita Grego. Nis. orat de Castigatione.
and it would move terror of further damnation even to the stubborn
contemners of the Churches authority. The which censure of Gods priests,
though it was sometimes to the everlasting woe of such offenders as neglected
the benefit of that present pain, yet commonly it was but chastisement and
loving correction of our dear mother, for their delivery from greater grief
in the life to come.

2 He says that excommunication was oftentimes joined with torment of body,
and sickness, and sometimes with death. Of torment and sickness he brings
no proof, but of death in Ananias and Saphira. But where finds he, that they
were excommunicated? I find that they were punished with death for their
hypocrisy and dissimulation, but there is no word, nor half word, of their
excommunication, and whereas you say, it was for reteining back of certain
Church goods, S. Peter says, it was for: lying and tempting the holy Ghost:
And those Church goods were not for vain ostentation of golden copes,
chalices, or such like superstitious vanities, but for the necessary relief
of the poor. Again, I know in what sense you call S. Peter Christ's vicar,
well if the Pope be in the same office Peter was, why does he not likewise
punish those whom he takes to be Church robbers, if he lack the power (as I
am sure he lacks not the will) then has he not the authority Peter had. And
if Peter did this as Christ's vicar, then is not he Christ's vicar, that can
not do as Peter did.

3 And for this cause, Aug. Ench. cap. 65.
as the example of all ages past may sufficiently prove, were certain times
and ordinary terms of penance appointed, for just satisfaction for every
offense: and by the holy Canons so limited, that no sin wittingly might be
reserved to Gods heavy revenge in the end of our short days. It were to long
to report the rules and prescription of penance, Nicen. c. 12. Ancyr. c. 5.
out of Nice Council or Ancyre: or out of S. Cyprian, for their punishment
that fell to Idolatry in the time of Decius and Diocletianus: or out of
Ambrose, the notable excommunication of Theodosius the Emperor. By all which
and the like, in the histories of the Ecclesiastical affairs, he that can not
see what pain is due unto sin, even after the remission thereof, I hold him
both ignorant and malicious blind.

3 That certain times and ordinary terms were appointed, in which they that
grieuousely offended, should show their repentance, the same was not for
satisfaction for their sins, but for certain demonstration of their
repentance, which thing appears even by the same canons of the Councels which
you allege, For when godly discipline began to decaie, whereof Cyprian
complains often in his epistles, men that notoriously offended would
sometime, by thretning and terrors, sometime, by refusing the censure of that
church, by whom they were condemned, sometime by flattering the constant
Martyrs, and so deceiving them, that they would become suitors for them (at
whose request the Church many times was entreated) would seek to thrust them
selves again into the communion of the faithful, before they had showed
sufficient tokens of sorrow, for so grievous faltes, of which enormyties Cyprian
much complains as one that was much trobled with the^. as Lib. 1. Epist. 3.
Lib. 3. Epist. 15. For remedy of which enormities, and for avoiding of all
subtle practices, to restore discipline to the ancient severity, decrees were
made by the ancient Councels, in which certain times of trial were
appointed, for offenders, to approve their repentance, with regard of the
heynousnesse of their crimes: but yet with such moderation, that they might be
received before the time appointed, if they showed sufficient fruits of
repentance, as appears most plainly, in the 11. Canon of the Nicone
Council, where it is said: Ab omnibus vero illud praecipue obseruetur, vt
animus little and fructus poenitentiae attendatur, etc. Let this be chiefly
considered of all (that are excommunicated) that there mind and fruictes of
repentance be considered, for they that with all fear, continual tears, and
good works, show their conversion, not only by words but in deed and in
truth. etc. With them the Bishop may deal more gently, whereas those that
think it is sufficient only to enter into the Church, are charged in any wise
to keep the ordinary time. etc. Wherefore he that gathers that pains are
due to sins after remission of them, by example of them that remitted no
sins, but after sufficient pains suffered for them, or amends made for
them, I hold him not only malicious blind, but beastly unreasonable.

4 And if any man yet doubt why, or to what end the Church of Christ thus
greuousely tormenteth her own children, by so many means of heavy correction,
whom she might by good authority freely release of their sins, let him
assuredly know, that she could not so satisfy Gods justice always, by whom
she holds her authority to edify and not to destroy: to bynd as well as to
loose. Although such dolor for offensies committed, and so earnest zele may
she sometimes find in the offender, that her chief and principal pastors may
by their sovereign authority, wholly discharge him of all pains to come. But
else in the common case of Christian men, this penance is for no other cause
enjoined, Ibidem.
but to save them from the more grievous torment in the world following. In the
which sense S. Augustine both speaks him self, and proves his meaning, by
the Apostles words as follows. Propterea de quibusdam temporalibus poenis,
1. Cor. 11.
quae in hac vita peccantibus irrogantur eis quorum peccata delentur, ne
reseruentur in finem, ait Apostolus: si enim nosmetipsos iudicaremus, a domino
no^ iudicaremur. Cum iudicamur autem a domino corripimur, ne cum hoc mundo
d^mnemur. Therefore (says he) it is of certain temporal afflictions which be
laid upon their necks, that being sinners have their trespasses pardoned, lest
they be called to an account for them at the latter end, that the Apostle
means by, when he says: If we would judge our selves, we should not then
be judged of our Lord. And when we be judged of our Lord, then are we chastened
that we be not damned with the world. This only careful kindness of our
mother therefore, that never remitted sin that was notorious in any age, but
after sharp punishment, or earnest charge with some proportional penance for
the same, does not only give us a loving warning to beware and prevent that
heuie correction of the world to come, which S. Paul calls the judgment of
God, because it is a sentence of justice: but also in her own practice here in
earth, of mercy, in pardoning: of justice in punishment: she gives us a very
clear example of both the same to be undoubtedly looked for at the hands of
God him self, by whom in the kingdom of the Church, these both in his
behalf be profitably practiced. For if there were no respect of the dreadful
day in the end of our life, nor any pain further due for sins remitted, in
the next world, then were it cruel arrogance in the ministers to charge men
with penance, needless to the offender, and folly to the sufferer. But God
forbid any should be so malipert or misbeleuing, as to miscredit the doings
and doctrine of the Catholic Church, which by the authority she has to bind
sins, and the protection of the holy Ghost, has used this rod of
correction to the profit of so many, and hurt of none, ever sense our masters
death and departure.

4 Mark here gentle reader, what an absolute power of remission of sins, this
Papist does ascribe to the Church, that she might (he says) by good authority,
freely release men of their sins, with out satisfying of Gods justice, but
that she will not, except in some case, where she finds such dolor and zeal
in the offender that her chief and principal Pastors, may by there sovereign
authority, wholly discharge him of all pains to come. Mark here the
sovereign authority of the Pope not subject, no not to the justice of God.
For else how should the Popes pardons stand, or Christ's merits be excluded? if
the Pope had not power to do by his sovereign authority, that Christ could
not do by his bitter passion, to discharge penitent sinners of all pains to
come: you see therefore, that ye Popish church, is not as a wife subject to
Christ her spouse, to exercise on earth the authority of Christ in heaven,
according to his will, but a presumptuous harlot, to claim sovereign
authority in earth, whereunto he is bound, which is in heaven. For otherwise,
though the old fathers, that were most earnest in maintaining the Churches
authority, as Cyprian Sermo. de lapsis, speaking against the^ which thought it
was sufficient, if they were received by the ordinary authority of the Church,
although they were not truly penitent, writes thus. Nemo se fallat, nemo
decipiat. Solus dominus misereri potest. veniam peccatis quae in ipsum commissa
sunt, solus potest ille largiri, qui peccata nostra portauit, qui pro nobis
doluit, quem Deus tradidit pro peccatis nostris. Homo Deo esse non potest
mayor, nec remittere, aut donare indulgentia sua seruus potest, quod in dominum
delicto grauiore commissum est, ne adhuc lapso, and hoc accedat ad crimen, si
nesciat esse praedictum: Maledictus homo, qui spem habet in homine: Dominus
orandus est, dominus nostra satisfactione placandus est, qui negantem negare se
dixit. Let no man (says he) deceive him self, let no man begile him self. It
is only the Lord that can show mercy. Only he can grant pardon to offenses
that are committed against him, who has borne our sins. Who has suffered
sorrow for us, whom God has given for our sins. A man can not be greater,
then God, neither can the servant by his indulgence remit or forgive that
which by so great offense is committed against the Lord, lest this offense
also be added to him that is fallen away, if he know not that it is fore
showed. Cursed is that man that puts his trust in man. The Lord must be
entreated, the Lord must be pacified with our satisfaction which says he does
deny that man that denies him. In these words, Cyprian not only plainly
denies that absolute and sovereign authority of men, which M. Allen
affirms, but also declares, what he means by satisfaction of God. Namely
that those which counterfected repentance, and though, by some outward
observations, to satisfy the Church, might know they had to do with God, who
was not pleased, but with inward and hearty conversion, whose knowledge they
must satisfy, with true repentance in deed, as they seek to satisfy
judgment of the Church by external signs and tokens thereof. But to return
to the common case of Christian men, (for the Popes cases be out of the common
case of christen men) M. Allen says penance (and by penance he still means
punishment) is for no other cause enioined, but to save them from more grievous
torment in the world following. In deed true repentance delivers men from
eternal torments, but what is this to purgatory? even as much as the saying of
Augustine, by him alleged, where he says that God punishes in this life with
temporal pains those, whose sins are pardoned, lest they should be reserved
in finem, that is for ever, which is to be chastised by the Lord, lest we
should be damned with the world, of which matter enough has been said already.
To conclude this chapter (because the words following contain nothing but a
vain repetition of that which he has often said before) the censure of
excommunication, with the power of binding and loosing, remains still
inviolable to the Church, now the opinion of purgatory is overthrown, as it
did before the doctrine of purgatory ever came into the world.

That the manyfolde works and fructes of penance, which all godly men have
charged them selves with all, for their own sins remitted, were in
respect of Purgatory pains, and for the avoiding of Gods judgment temporal
as well as eternal in the next life.CAP. IIII.
1 THere be of the Epicures of our time, that seeing the usual practice of
penance not only by the Churches prescription, but also by man's own
voluntary acceptance, Melancth.
openly to tend toward the truth and proof of Purgatory, have boldly
improued (not withstanding the express counsel of the Apostle, where he
wills us to judge our selves) all chastisement of our bodies, as unnatural
torments to the injury of our own person, and the excellency of our nature.

CAP. IIII.

1 THat a detestable error may be defended with a shameless lie, he begins
this chapter with a deuilish sclaunder. He reports that Melancthon (but
shows no place where, lest his impudent lie might be evidently reproved) does
boldly improve all chastisement of our bodies as unnatural torments, to the
injury of our person, and the excellencye of our nature, and in a manner he is
as bold with S. Paul whose express counsel, he says is, that men should
chastise their bodies, where he wills to judge them selves. As though it were
all one, for men to judge them selves, and to chastise their bodies. In deed
else where S. Paul commands, and by his example commends christian
chastisement of men's bodies, by abstinence and fasting, and that not for fear
of purgatory, but for danger of eternal damnation. This do I (says he) for
the Gospells sake, that I may be made partaker of it, and again I chastise my
body and bring it in subjection, lest while I preach to others, I my self
should become a castaway. 1. Cor. 9. So that all godly men did not chastise
their bodies in respect of the avoiding of the temporal pains of purgatory,
as M. Allen affirms in the title of this chapter, but contrariwise all godly
men that followed S. Paul's doctrine and example, had also the same respect
that he had. But to return to Melancthon, it may be that in some place of his
writings, he improueth the immoderate exercise of bodily chastisement, by
which some have killed them selves, some made them selves leapers, some made
them selves unable to execute the office of ecclesiastical administration,
whereunto they were called by God. But in these cases he has S. Paul for his
warraunt, who forbids Timothe the drinking of water, and wills him to use
a little wine, because of his stomach and his often infirmities, assuring him
that such bodily exercise profits but a little. 1. Tim. 4. and 5. But that
Melancthon improueth all godly chastisement of men's bodies, and for godly
purposes, it will never be proved until M. Allen have brought purgatory with
all men in as great credit as ever it was with any man.

2 Against these corruptors of Christian conditions and virtuous life, though
the examples of all faithful worshippers of God sense the world began, do
clearly stand, yet the notable history of the Prophet David's repair after
his heavy faule because it has an especial warrant of his pardon, a plain
process in penance, a goodly platte of due handeling the sores of our sins
after they be remitted, and contains a manifest fear of Purgatory, shall
best serve our turn.

This Prophet then, though he was assured of his pardon, and afterward (as I
said before) by Gods own hand punished, yet cries out with abundant tears.
Amplius laua me ab iniquitate mea, Psalm. 50.
and a peccatis meis munda me. More and more wash me from my iniquity, and of
my sins purge me clean. David offended (says S. Ambrose) as kings commonly
do, Cap. 4. apol. David.
but he did penance, he wept, he groned, as kings lightly do not: he
confessed his fault, he asked mercy, and throwing him self upon the hard
ground, bewailed his misery, fasted, praide, and so protested his sorrow, that
he left the testimony of his confession to all the world to come. What moved
this blessed man, by Gods own mouth pardoned of his sins, so to torment him
self? That happy awe and deep fear of Gods judgment in the next world,
which the cursed security of this sweet poisoned doctrine of our days has
now taken away, even that necessary fear of the things that might faule unto
him in the next life, caussed this holy prince and prophet so to vex and
molest him self. It was hell, it was Purgatory that this penitent did behold:
either of which he knew his sins did well deserve. S. Augustine shall bear
me witness, in words worthy of all memory. Yea the Prophets own words
uttered in a bitter prayer and a Psalm full of sorrow, shall bear me witness:
thus says S. Augustine. Haec iste grauiora formidans, excepta vita ista in
cuius malis plangit and gemit, In Psalm. 37.
rogat and dicit: Domine ne in surore tuo arguas me, neque in ira tua corripias
me: Non sum inter illos quibus dicturus es: ite in ignem aeternum qui
praeparatus est diabolo and angelis eius: Neque in ira tua emendes me, vt in
hac vita me purges, and ralem me reddas cui emendatorio igne opus no^ sit. This
man, besides the miseries of this life in which he was when he thus houleth and
wepeth, further makes suit and says, O Lord rebuke me not in thy fury, let
me not be one of them to whom thou shall say, away from me in to fire
perpetual, which is provided for the Devil and his angels. Neither yet
correct me in thy wrath, but so purge me in my life time and wholly frame me,
that at length I may have no need of the Ame^ding fire. So far speaks this
doctor. By whom we may learn that David after sharp punishment taken first
at Gods hand, and then in the midst of many miseries of this mortal life,
did yet before hand behold the horrible judgments in the next world: the
one for the damned souls and spirits, the other for the amendment of such as
God loved and shall be saved: in the earnest memorial of which assured pains,
and for the avoiding thereof, he so afflicted him self as is before said.

His heart was in heuines, his soul in sorrow, his flesh in fear, and in his
bones there was no rest before the face of his sins. Think you here a
protestant preacher with a merry mouth in Nathans stead, could have driven him
from this course of penance, dissuaded him from the fear of Purgatory, eased
him with only faith, and set him in security and perfect freedom from his
offenses past? No no, Musica in luctu importuna narratio. Ecclesi. 22.
Mirthe in mourning is ever out of season. Flagella and doctrina in omni
tempore sapie^tia. But rods and discipline be always wisdom. These delicate
teachers had never room but where sin bare great rule. And it is no small
licklyhood of Gods exceeding wrath toward us in these days, that such soft
phisitio^s please us in so dangerous diseases. It was not the doctrine of this
time that healed Nabuchodonosor: but this was his plaster. Daniel. 4.
Peccata tua eleemosy nis redime, and iniquitates tuas misericordijs pauperu^.
Redeem thy sins by alms, and thy iniquities, by mercy toward the poor. It
was exceeding fasting and many sorrowful sobbes, that bare of Gods hand from
the Ninevites, It was the painful works of penance that John the Baptist
first preached. This was Paul's rule, that if we would punish or judge our
selves, then would not God judge us. In to whose hands it is a heavy case to
faule. Horrendum est (says he) incidere in manus Dei viuentis. 1 Cor. 11.
Haeb. 10. In cant. 55. Sermo.
For he shall call to account and reckoning (as S. Bernarde supposes) even the
very acts of the just, if they be not well and thoroughly judged, and
corrected to his hands:

The undoubted knowledge of which strait account, moved our forefathers to
require such earnest afflictions of the people, for satisfying for their sins.

2 Now let us hear what this bragger brings to prove that all godly men have
chastised their bodies for fear of purgatory. First David in the 51. Psalm,
prays God to wash him thoroughly from his iniquity, etc. ergo he was afraid
of purgatory. I might justly refuse to answer this argument, lest I should
defer any thing unto it. But let Ambrose answer by M. Allen him self
alleged. He so protested his hearty repentance, that he left a testimony
thereof to all the world to come. But because S. Ambrose is alleged, rather for
the glory of his name, then for the help of his authority in this place S.
Augustine is annexed to supply that wanted in S. Ambrose. But that you may
see what patching this proctor of Purgatory uses of the doctors sentences, he
allegeth not Augustine upon the very words of the 51. Psalm, which make
nothing for his purpose, but upon an other Psalm, where the argument is
nothing like. If Augustine could have found Purgatory out of Amplius laua me,
he would have uttered it there, where he expounds those words, whereby it
appears plainly that M. Allens argument stands upon his own invention, and
not upon Augustines authority. But yet Augustine speaks of the amending fire
in the place by him alleged. He does so in deed: but I have showed before,
and more will show hereafter, that as Augustine had no ground of that fire, but
in the common error of his time, so sometimes he affirms that it is a matter,
that may be doubted of sometimes that there is no third place at all. And that
he has no ground of Scripture in that place of the 38. Psalm, is evident,
because David prays that God will not punish him in his fury, nor in his
wrath, for when so ever he punishes in his fury and plagueth in his wrath,
they must needs perish eternally, he prays therefore, that that sickness or
other affliction; which God has laid upon him, might be a merciful
chastisement of a father, and not a just punishment of a judge. But whereas the
vnpure mouth of this. Allen is once again opened in railing against the godly
preachers of our Church as flatterers of men in dangerous diseases, I would he
might hear the children of thunder, inueying with mighty power of Gods spirit
against sin and wickedness, and calling men to true and unfeigned repentance,
peradventure he might be moved to cease his sclaundering for shame of the
world, if he did not forethinke him of his wickedness for fear of God. But
Nabuchodonizer had a sore corrosiue plaster applied to him, that healed him,
and that was alms and mercy toward the poor. He might have alleged many
examples, and none less fit to show what paynfull penance, (as he terms
it) was enjoined by godly prophets. For it was the easiest that could be
enjoined to so rich a prince, for so great offenses, to be liberal to the
poor. Although David in that place, cited by him, speaks of no redemption of
sins, as that corrupt and false translation which he follows, does seem to
talk of. But Daniel willed Nabuchodoniser to break of thaccostomed course of
his cruelty and tyranny, by alms and liberality. The Ninevites in deed by
fasting and lamenting, but most of all by turning from their wicked ways,
showed their hearty repentance: and John Baptist requires the fruits of
repentance, and what godly preacher does not so? but where did Nathan, Daniel,
Jonas, John Baptist speak one word of purgatory? or of satisfying the justice
of God for their sins by such means.

3 And here gentle reader give me leave, though I be the longer, to give thee a
little taste of the old doctors dealinges in the sinners case, that thou may
compare our late handeling of these matters, with their doings: and so learn
to loath these light merchants, that in so grievous plages deal so tenderly
with our sores. And yet I intend not so to roue, but that the very course of
our talk well noted, shall be the necessary inducing of that truth which we now
defend concerning Purgatory. Especially if it be considered, that in all
prescription of penance by the antiquity, the pain of satisfying was ever
limited by the variety of the offense. And then that the very cause of all
pain enjoined, was for the avoiding of Gods judgment in the life to come.
First ancient. Origin writes thus. Behold our merciful Lord joining
always clemency with severity, Homil. 3. in lib. Iud.
and weying the just mean of our punishment in merciful and rightuous
balance. He gives not the offenders over for ever: therefore consider how long
thou have strayed and continued in sin, so long abase and humble thy self
before God, and so satisfy him in Confession of penance. For if thou amend
the matter and take punishment of thy self, then God is pitiful, and will
remove his reuengement from him, that by penance prevented his judgment. Thus
we see this father so to measure the pain and punishment of sinners, that he
makes his principal respect the avoiding of the sharp sentence to come.

S. Cyprian the blessed martyr, notes certain conuersies in his days, who
thought they had much wrong to be further burdened with penance for their
fall, more the^ the return to God, again he touches the manners of our time
very near, his words sounding thus: Before their sins fully purged, before
the confession of their fault made, Sermon de Lap^is.
before their consciencies by the priest and sacrifice be cleansed, before the
ire and indignation of God be pacified and past, they think all is well and
make boast thereof. But he instructs them in the same place better, as
follows: Confess your selves brethren whilst ye are in this life, and
whilst the remission and satisfaction by the priests apointement is
acceptable. Let us turn unto God with all our hearts expressing the penance
for our sins, by singular grief and sorrow: let us call for mercy, let us
prostrate our selves before God, let our heuinesse of heart satisfy him, let
us with fasting weeping and howling, appeace his wrath. Whom, for that he is
our loving father, we acknowledge to be merciful: and yet because he bears
the majesty of a judge, he is for justice much to be feared. To a deep and a
grievous wound a long and sharp sauluing must be accepted. Exceeding earnestly
thou must pray: thou must pass over the remnaunt of thy time with lamentable
complaints, thou must for thy soft bed take hard earth and ashes, and
romble thy self in sackecloth, for the loss of Christ's vesture refuse all
apparel, after the receite of the Devils food, chuese earnest fasting: and by
diligent applying thy self to good works and alms deeds, purge thy sin
and deliver thy soul from death.

3 Here he asks leave of the Reader to be somewhat long in rehearsing the
opinions of diverse doctors, to confirm his former falshod, but he should
rather have asked leave of the doctors them selves, to belie them so beastly,
and to rack their sayings so violently far from their purpose and meanings.
And to begin with Origin, what does he in that place by him alleged? but
exhort men unto hearty and earnest repentance, by humbling them selves before
God, and acknowledging their sins, which holy Scripture testifies to be the
way to prevent the wrath of God. And what his judgment was concerning
satisfaction for sins, he declares sufficiently in his 3. book upon the
Epist. to the Romans cap. 3. where often times he repeateth, that a man is
justified before God by faith only, affirming that in forgeuenes of sins,
God respects no works but faith only, as he proves by the parable that our
Savior used unto Simon the Pharise. Luke 7. and answers also those
objections, which even the Papists at this day, make against us for teaching
that faith only does justify us in the sight of God. S. Cyprian (as I have
sufficiently showed before) calls such as had fallen in time of persecution
from the profession of christianity, to hearty repentance, and to testify the
same, by submitting them selves humbly, unto the discipline of the Church. But
it is strange to see, how vnconsideratly M. Allen allegeth his places, that
oftentimes they contain more plain matter against him, then apparent proof by
violent wrasting can be wrong out from them. I marvel M. Allen either sees
not him self, or thinks that other men can not espy, that Cyprian exhorts
men to confession of their offenses in this life, where only satisfaction and
remission made by the Priests is acceptable unto the Lord. If men can not
satisfy, nor Priest remit, but whilst men are in this life, then farewell
satisfaction for the dead and purgatory.

Cap. 3. and 4. de poeuite^tiae medicina.
4 So does S. Augustine correct the error of such, as think the change of life
with out all cogitatio^ or care of their offenses past, to be sufficient for
man's perfect repair and reconciliation to our Lord again. It is not
sufficient (says he) to amend our manners and turn back from, our mi^dedes,
unless we satisfy before God for them which we have already committed, by
dolor of penance, by humble sighs and groans, and by ye sacrifice of a
co^trite heart working with alms deeds.

And in this sense again he vttoreth this comfortable rule. Sed neque de ipsis
criminibus quamlibet magnis remittendis in Ecclesia, Ench. 65.
Dei desperanda est misericordia, agentibus poenitentiam secundum modum sui
cuiusque peccati. But we may not despair of Gods mercy for the remission of
sins in the Church, be they never so greuoi^* I mean to all such as will do
penance according to the quantity of their fault. So S. Ambrose writing to a
religious woman that had broken her vow of chastity (which in those days was
reckened one of the most deadly and grievous crimes that could be) warns her
thus. Grandi plagae alta and prolixa opus est medicina: grande scelus grandem
necessariam habet satisfactionem. A grievous hurt must have a deep and long
sauluing, a heinous offense requires marvelous much satisfaction. This sin
is better boulstred now a days.
Yea and as I take his words, he plainly admonishes her, that she shall have
much a do to satisfy fully for her sin during her life: and therefore he
seems to will her, not to look for full remedy and release before she feel
Gods judgment. Which he means not by the general day, but the particular
account which follows straight upon man's death. But that I deceive no man
wittingly I will report his own words. Inhaere poenite^tiae vsque ad extremum
vitae, Cap. 8. ad virg. laps.
nec tibi praesumas ab humano die posse venia^ dari: quia decipit te qui hoc
tibi polliceri voluerit: quae enim proprie in dominu^ peccasti, ab illo solo in
die iudicij co^uenit expectare remediu^. Continue in penance to the last day
thou have to live, and presume not over boldly of pardon to be obtained in man's
day: for who so ever promises thee so, he deceives thee: for thou that have
offended directly against God him self, must at Gods hand only in the day of
judgment trust of mercy. If he mean by the last Judgment, then the author
supposes that such horrible incest shall be punished till the day of the
general resurrection, in purgatory: for after that day as Augustine affirms,
there shall be no more any of the elect in pain. He means the^ surely nothing
else, De ciuitate Dei cap. 13. lib. 21.
but that there ca^ be no penance aunswerable fully in this life to so grievous
a crime, and that the Church ordinarely pardons not the sins, which be not
by some proportion of pain and punishment recompensed. And this is ordinary,
though by the supreme power given to Gods ministers for the government of the
Church, the offender may in this case or the like, if his competent dolor of
heart and ze^e so require, wholly be acquieted through the merits of Christ's
death, and the happy fellowship of saints, in the communion of the common
body: where the lack of one membre is abundantly supplied by the residue. Mary
it is a ^arde matter to be so qualified, that a man may not be unworthy of so
singular a grace and inestimable benefit. Therefore this prerogative perteining
not to very many, excepted, for the residue that by the ordinary Sacrament be
raised up from their fall, every one must endeavor to do penance more or
less, according to the quantity and circumstancies of the crime committed: so
S. Augustine said before, so does S. Ambrose mean now, giving this woman
warning that her fault was so horrible, that the penance done in this life
could not properly and exactly make recompense therefore, and yet after
punishment tolerated at Gods apointement in the next life, he doubts not to
assure her of pardon at the length, and release of all pain. Thus was sin
handeled in those days. And why it was so painefully riped up to the very
bottom, you see. Compare our days and dealing to theirs, and thou shall
wonder to see the diversity betwixt their manners, and ours: and to see the
phisicions work so diversely, where the diseases be all one.

4 Now follows the authority of S. Augustine, both right and counterfeit, the
counterfeit Augustine, that writ the work de poenitentia, etc. I vouchsafe not
to answer, because I weigh not the authority, but detest the impudency of
him that had patched up such a piece a work, to father upon S. Augustine, as
no man of less learning then Augustine was, would abide to go under his own
name. The other place in his Enchiridion sufficiently expounds it self, that
it speaks of remission of sins in the Church, which according to the
discipline of that time, required satisfaction according to the quantity and
quality of the offense. The words of S. Ambrose import none other thing, but
that an heinous offense must be earnestly bewailed, if repentance be not
counterfeted. And where as M. Allen is in a pecke of troubles, between that
which he supposes to be the opinion of Ambrose, and that which he allegeth out
of Augustine, to prove that the pains of purgatory shall not continue after
the resurrection, it is not all worth the pains he takes about it. For that
the said fallen virgin, should not think she had been penitent enough, if
she obtained absolution in the judgment of men, he assures her as Cyprian in
his sermon de lapsis, does the fallen men of his time, that forgeuenes of
sins is proper unto God only, and follows not of necessity the sentence of
men, but the sentence of men ought to follow the judgment of God. And those
words, in die iudicij, about the meaning whereof, M. Allen vexes him self,
are to be understood by the opposite ab humano die, for thereby it is
manifest, that the judgment of God is set against ye judgment of men. And
that is the phrase of the scripture which S. Ambrose follows, as when S.
Paul says of the Corinthian, that his soul may be salfe in the day of the
Lord Jesus Christ, he means not that he should be punished in purgatory,
though he repent unto ye general day of judgment, but as S. Peter Act. 3.
affirms, that our sins are forgeuen against the coming of Christ to
judgment, signifying that then the full fruit of forgeuenes of sins shall
appear, when we shall thereby be discharged in the judgment of God. But what
S. Ambrose thinks of that kind of satisfaction, whereof M. Allen speaks,
is plain by those words which he utters of Peter in his exposition of S.
Luke lib. 10. cap. 2. Lachrymas eius lego, satisfactionem non lego. I read of
his tears, I read not of his satisfaction. But unto the other kind of
satisfaction, whereby the church is satisfied, our Savior Christ drives
Peter, when he causes him to blot out the memory of his treble denial, with a
treble confession of his love: As Augustine also acknowledges: but if
purgatory be so necessary to satisfy Gods justice by temporal pains of
sinners, according to the time, etc. and purgatory shall cease at the day of
judgment, as you affirm out of Augustine, how shall the same be satisfied in
such as dye immediately before the day of judgment, so that they have not had
time enough, there to be sufficiently purged, the like may be demanded, of all
them which in a moment shall be changed from mortality to immortalitye, at the
very coming of Jesus Christ to judgment. These questions M. Allen will trouble
your head to answer and retain your former principles, more then that
whereof you make your doubt, and your determination as uncertain as your
doubt: while you are so cumbred, on the one side to uphold purgatory, upon
color of satisfying Gods justice, on the other side, to maintain the Popes
pardon, without satisfying of Gods justice, so that how so ever you satisfy
your self in your own fantasy, I promise you no reasonable man can be
satisfied by your doubtful disputations, and unsteadfast conclusions.

5 I might here well to my purpose repeat the singular praises, that S.
Hierome gave unto noble Paula: who (as he writes of her) with fountains of
tears, In epitaph. Paulae.
exceeding lavish alms, and pitiful fasting, washed away such venial and
small offenses, as other men would scarsely do much more grievous crimes. And
to seek for what end this holy matrone vexed her self and tormented her
body, it were in a manner needelesse* for being not gilty of any grievous sins,
she could have no great fear of hell pains: then it must needs be, that she
took punishment of her self to prevent Gods temporal scourge in the life to
come.

She well considered (for it was the doctrine of that holy time) that every
sin be it never so small or common, Note.
does indebt the offender unto God: and therefore the iustest person that
lives (excepting Christ, and for his honor his mother) as S. Augustine says
must confess debte, and cry for pardon by our masters prayer: Dimitte nobis
debita nostra: forgive us our debtes, the which, because they be debt, must
either be pardoned by prayer, or paid by pain. And therefore being not here
remitted, or not satisfied by worthy punishment in this life, they must of
justice be purged after our departure, according to the number of them and the
negligence of the offender. And this faith of Purgatory and respect of Gods
judgments to come, feared the holiest persons that ever were in Gods church.
This drove many a blessed man to perpetual penance: this brought Hierom him
self into the wilderness of Syria, there to lament the lapse of his frail
youth, ever in expectation of this call: Exi for as Hieronime, Come out Hierom:
this filled the deserts with many a noble Hermit, this raised up the
cloisters and all the holy houses of mourning and prayers in the whole world,
and has in all ages appeared both in the words and works of all Christen
people, as we shall better anon declare.

5. Here, because you have no likely matter out of S. Ieronyme to serve your
turn, yet to make a show of his name, you must repeat that, which is nothing
like to your matter. Paula was penitent for her sins, with prayers, alms,
and fasting, and all for fear of purgatory. So says M. Allen. But Ieronyme
says not so, M. Allen is here all the credit of the matter, believe him as you
list. But if any man had rather believe Chrysostom speaking of such kind of
works, as M. Allen and his fellows, count to be the chief works of
penance, whether they serve for satisfaction for our sins unto God, let him
consider what he writes, in his treatise de compunctione cordis, lib. 2. Non
requirit Deus ciliciorum pondus, neque concludi inter angustias cellulae, neque
in obscuris antris and tencbrosis sedere iubet: hoc solum est quod exposcatur a
nobis, vt semper recordemur mala nostra, etc. God requires not the burden of
heavy garments, not to be shut up with the streights of a little cell, neither
does he command us to sit in obscure and dark dungeons or dens: this only
is that which is required of us, that we should always remember our evil
life, etc. you see therefore by Chrysostoms judgment, that neither the
satisfaction of Gods righteousness, nor any obedience of Gods commandment,
has banished the Heremites, closed up the Anachorets, and cloyed the world
with cloysterers, but the superstitious and slavish fear of purgatory, and the
blasphemous presumptuous pride of men's merits. I pass over, as not proper to
your matter, that for the honor of Christ, you except his mother, from
confessing her self to be indebted to God, and not to be in the number of
those, by whom the Lords prayer is to be said. Such honor neither does God
allow her, nor she arrogate unto her self, but acknowledges her own
baseness, and joyfully accepts Gods salvation. It is greater honor to
Christ, to be savior of his mother, then to have such a mother, as had no
need of his salvation. He him self more then once, is read to have reproved
her, wherein he had done her wrong, if she had committed no trespass. Luke. 2.
John. 2.

6 But list you see how this doctrine of penance liked Calvin? The shrew saw
that by granting of this satisfaction for sin and the profitable usage
thereof in this life, that it might argue of necessity the residue of some
pains in the next if it were here omitted or not ended. And therefore I pray
you see how substantially he answers and how like him self, Parumme mouent
(says he) quae in veterum scriptis de satisfactione passim occurrunt, video
enim eorum nonnullos, In institut.
dicam simpliciter, omnes fere quorum libri extant, aut in hac part lapsos
esse, aut nimis aspere and dure loquutos. I make small account of that which I
often find concerning Satisfaction in the ancient writers, for I perceive
diverse of them, shall I be plain with you? in a manner every one that ever
wrote till this day, in this point to have been foully deceived, or spoken more
roughly then they should have done. Is not this a fellow a lone? whether
think you now our English bragger craking all the doctors to be on his part,
or this man confessing plainly that they be all against him, and yet setting
not a butten by them all, whether think you is more arrogant? I am sure
Calvin deals here more sincerely, and the other more deceitfully. If craking
had been a maisterie in summer games as lying is, our man might have wone of
all the world, two games at a clappe. But there is no remedy he must yield to
the learned that have opened his impudency. Therefore I leave him, and take
the benefit of this his masters confession for further confirmation of my
cause, doubting nothing but that most wise men, seeing by the adversaries
grant all learned fathers to be on our side, will accept it either as a full
proof, or no small presumption of that truth which we defend.

6 But list you hear, how this presumptuousse pratler, can not conclude his
chapter which he began with lying upon Melancthon, but by slaundering of
Calvin. He faineth that Calvin in the words by him rehearsed, confesses all
the doctors to be against him, and yet sets not a butten for them all. The
best reproof of this calumniation, shall be to send them that be desirous to
know the truth, unto the whole discourse of Calvin, upon satisfaction Insti.
lib. 3. cap. 4 which who so list to do, shall plainly see, whether Allen does
him not here open wrong. But because every man either can not for the lack of
the book, or will not for want of good affections toward Calvin, take so
much pains, as to peruse his own writing. I will answer in a word or two.

After that Calvin has most substantially proved, both by authority of holy
Scripture, and also by consent of ancient doctors, that their is no
satisfaction unto God for our sins, but only the death of Christ, he comes
at length, to speak of the word of satisfaction, which says he, as it is
often used in the old writers, so sometime hardely, as improperly (that M.
Allen calls roughly) or if any of them have erred about satisfaction, it were
not reason, that their error should prevail against the open truth. And
clearly to conuicte M. Allen, of a loud lie, where he says that Calvin
confesses all the doctors to be against him, his words follow immediately
after those rehearsed by M. Allen: Sed non credam eos ipsos adeo fuisse rudes
and imperitos, vt eo sensu illa scripserint, quo a nouis istis
satisfactionariis legu^tur. That is, how soever they have either erred, or
spoken vnproprely of satisfaction, yet I will not grant, that the same men
were so rude and ignorant, that they did wright those things, in that sense,
in which they are read by these new satisfactionaries. Then does he bring forth
diverse testimonies both out of Chrysostom and Augustine to show what their
judgment was of satisfaction agreeable to the Scriptures by which must be
expounded, what so ever they have uttered that seems either erroneus or at
the lest vnproprely spoken. As for that reverend father M. Jewel whom this
arrogant Louanist, calls the English bragger, how well he has answered his
challendge, his own learned labors, do more clearly testify unto the world,
then that it can be blemished by this sycophants braynlesse babbling.

A brief joining in reason and argument upon the proved grounds, with the
adversaries, for the declaration of Purgatory. CAP. V.
1 HAving undoubtedly won thus much both by evident testimony of holy writ,
by the warraunt of all the learned fathers, by good reason, and by the
adversaries own confession, I will be bold to bare the very iointes of the
argument, that both the simple may acknowledge my plain dealing, and the
Protestant have his vauntage, if the reason stand not upright. With out color
or gloss then thus I make my proof.

ergo there is some pain due after sin be remitted.

And therefore not only the wicked, but the very just also must travel to
have their daily infirmities and frailty of their corrupt natures forgiven:
crying without ceasing forgive us our debts: Quia non iustificabitur in
conspectu tuo omnis viuens. For no man alive shall be able to stand before the
face of God in his own justice or righteousness, Aug. Ench. cap. 71.
and if these light sins should never be imputed, then it were needelesse to
cry for mercy or confess debt, as every man does be he never so passing holy.
To be brief, this debt of pain for sin by any way remaining at the
departure hence, must of justice be answered: Which can not be without
punishment in the next life, then there must be a place of judgment for
temporal and transitory pains in the other world. The whole discourse made
before has given force enough to every part of the argument: the Scriptures
do prove it, the practice of the Church confirms it, all the doctors by our
adversaries grant, agree upon it. If they have any thing to say, here I make
them fair play: the ground is open, the reasons laid naked before their face:
remove them as they can. Let them deal simply if they mean truly, and not
flourish as they use, upon a false ground, that in flow of words they may
cover error, or in raze of their smoth talk ouerrunne truth.

And that every man may perceive that we have not raised this doctrine upon
reason only or curiosity (although the grave authority of Gods Church might
here in satisfy sober wits) we will now by Gods help go nearer the matter,
and directly make proof of Purgatory by holy Scriptures: reciting such places
of the old and new Testament, as shall prove our cause, even in that sense
which the learned and godlyest fathers of all ages, by conference of places
or other likelihood, shall find and determine to be most true. Alleging none
else but such as they have, in the flour of Christian faith, noted and
peculiarely construed for that purpose which now is in question. That the
adversaries of that doctrine, may rather strive with the said saints and
doctors, then with me, that will as they shall well perceive do nothing, but
truly report their words or meaning. Or rather that such as have erred in
that case, by giving over light credit to the troblesome teachers of these
unhappy days, may, when they shall understand the true meaning of the
Scriptures, the constant doctrine of the Catholic Church, the words of all
ancient writers, the determination of so many holy Councels, and the old
usage of all nations by humble prayers obtain of God the light of
understanding the truth, and the gift of obedience to his will and word. Or
if there be any so sattled in this vnlickely sect, that he purposes not to
believe the grave writers of old times, nor receive their expositions upon such
places as we shall recite, for that prejudice which he has of this own wit
and understanding, yet let him not marvel at my simplicity, that had rather
give credit to others then my self: Or that in this hot time of contention
and partaking in religion, I do repose my self under the shadow of so many
worthy writers, as anon shall give evidence in my cause.

CAP. V.

1 Triumphing before the victory, and that is more, before the encontry of
hand strokes, (for we come to joining but now) you will now win your spurs or
else it shall be a black day with all Protestants. I will be as short in mine
answer, as you are in your arguments. And that I may put on an armor of
proof, to bear of your terrible haileshot, your first argument has neither
good form nor matter, no more has your second, no more has your third? If
you or any for you, will prepare your self to give a bitter charge, either I
or some other, shall be ready to shape you an other answer. But because here is
nothing in this brief joining, but which has been largly discharged before,
in answer to your long excursions, it were nedelesse to make such vain
repetition, as you do, especially in your last short argument, in which space
all the substance of your large book might easily have been placed, only to
fill up a competent length of the fifth chapter, and with such a tedious
enlarging of a superfluous matter, as a young practiser of Rhetoric would be
ashamed to use, in a feigned declamation, much worse becoming an ancient
master of art, professing to trusse up his arguments by Logic, to make a
perfect persuasion. As for the promise of further proof, both out of the
Scriptures and out of the doctors that follows after this gallant joining,
and lusty challenge, shall have no prejudice of my disabling of the mean to
perform it until it appear by plain conference of his arguments and mine
aunswers, that his words are but wind, and his promise but prattling.

That Purgatory pains does not only serve Gods justice for the punishment of
sin, but also cleanse and qualify the soul of man defiled, for the more
seemly entrance into the holy places, with conference of certain places of
Scripture for that purpose. CAP. VI.
1 IF we well consider the wonderful base condition and state of man's nature
corrupted by our first fathers disobedience, and more and more abased by
continual misery that sin has brought into our mortal life, we shall find
the work of Gods wisdom in the excellent repair of this his creature, to be
full of mercy, and full of marvel. But proceeding somewhat further, and weying
not only his restoring, but also the passing great anauncement to the
unspeakable glory of the elect, there shall reason and all our cogitations
utterly faint and fail us.

The kingdom prepared is honored with the majesty of the glorious Trinity,
with the humanity of Christ our Savior, with the blessed Mary the vessel of
his Incarnation, with the bewtifull creatures and wholly undefiled, of all the
ordres of Angels. There can nothing doubtless present it self before the
seat of Gods glory, nor stand in his sight, that has any blemish of sin,
any spotte of corruption, any remnaunt of infirmity. What purity is required
for the entrance into heaven.
There may no creature match with those perfect pure natures of spiritual
substance in the happy service of the holy Trinity, that is not holy as they
be, pure as they be, and wholly sanctified as they be. Nothing can join with
them in freedom of that heavenly city, in the joyful estate of that
triumphant commonwealth, that is not purified to the point, and by the work of
Gods own hand fully fined and perfected. This is the new City of Jerusalem,
which the holy Apostle saw by vision: Nec in eam intrabit aliquid
coinquinatum. Nothing shall enter therein, that is defiled. Apoc. 21.
It is the Church without spotte and wrinkle, it is the temple of God, it is
the seat of the Lamb, and the land of the living.

Now our kind, notwithstanding our pitiful fall and singular frailetie, with
exceeding corruption and vnaptenesse both of body and soul, has yet by Christ
Jesus our Redeemer, the assurance of this inestimable benefit, and the
fellowship of perpetual fruition with the Angels. To whom as we must be made
equal in room and glory, so we must in perfect cleannes be fully matched with
them. For it were not agreeable to Gods ordinary justice, Leuit. 21.
who in this earthly sanctuary expressly forbids the oblations of the
unclean, Rupert. de diuini. offi. l. 6. cap. 36.
that he should in the celestial sovereign holy acknowledge any nature that
were not pure and undefiled: or make man's condition not abettered, equal to
the dignity of Angels that never were reproved: whereby injustice might appear
in God, or confusion in the heavens common wealth, where only all order is
observed.

And though man's recovery after his fall be wroght by Christ. and the perfect
purgation of sins by the blood of him that only was with out sin, yet it
was not convenient, that the might of that mercy should work in this freedom
of our wills, with out all peine of the party, or travel of the offenders.
Whereof ma^n straight upon his miserable down fall (as S. Ambrose excellently
well notes) had warning by the fiery sword holden at the entrance of
paradise: In Psa. 118. Sermon. 20.
thereby putting him in remembrance, that the return to bless so sone lost,
should be through fiere and sword hardely achieued again. Therefore if any man
think the only forgiveness of our sins past, sufficient either for the
recovery of our first degree, or the atteining of further dignity in the glory
of the Saints, he sees not at all what a deep stroke sin has set in man's
soul, what filth and feebleness it has wroght in the body, what rule and
dominion it bears in this our mortality, what care all perfect men have had,
not only in the healing of the deep wound, but also in purging the relics,
and fall abbating the abundant matter thereof. And yet when man has with all
his might wrastled with the pour of sin, being in this estate, he can not be
able to recover the worthiness of his creation, much less the passing honor
and end of his redemption. Let him wash and water his coutch with tears, let
him weaken his body with fasting, and humble his heart with sorrow? Happily the
fiery sword shall not hinder his passage after his departure, yet till the
separation of the body and the soul, full freedom from sin or perfect
purgation thereof (excepting the privilege of certain) can not be fully
obtained. Wherein yet mercy at the end has the chief stroke, by which the
soul that was the principal vessel of sin, and no less abased then the
body, shall out of hand in the perfectest sort, obtain the purity of Angels
and fellowship with them for ever.

CAP. VI.

1 ONce again I pray you note this orderly proceeding, look when he makes
such a liberal promise, as in the chapter going before, the performance shall
not follow by and by after, but by interlacing of other matter, it shall be
first out of mind, and then he may better keep his credit, when he goes
about to perform it. Year while he would in all the have, make direct proof
by holy Scripture, of the doctrine of purgatory, but now as though purgatory
were already proved, he will show for what use it serves, namely to cleanse
and qualify the soul of man, that it may be meet to enter into the holy
places. And for this purpose, he shows at large, which might have been
uttered in brief, that the corruption of man's sinful nature is so great,
and the perfection of dignity, whereunto we are called so high, as man, except
he be thoroughly purged, is no meet person to be partaker thereof. But lest he
should be thought here to forget the perfect restitution by Christ, he
confesses the perfect purgation of our sins to be wrought by his blood, yet
he says, it is not meet that the might of that mercy should work in this
freedom of our will, without all pain or travel of the offenders. This is to
give with one hand, and to pull away with the other hand. But that this enemy
of the cross of Christ, shall not thus pass away with his reseruations and
exceptions, that which he grants, we will take at the hand of God, and not
of this vnpure blasphemer: who by his holy spirit teaches us that the blood
of Christ does purge us from all our sins: and being washed by him we are
thoroughly clean. John 13. So that although our sins were as redd as scarlet,
they are made as white as snow. Esaias 1. Then being thoroughly purged, washed
and cleansed as white as snow, we are made capable of the heavenly inheritance
and the fruition of eternal glory. And if any man had rather believe an Angel,
before M. Allen, an elder of the heavenly consistory, sooner then a young
palting proctor of purgatory: Let him hear what is said to S. John in his
revelation, 7. cap. whereby is declared by what privilege, all the faithful
departed appear in innocence before the throne of God. These are they (says
the Angel) that came out of that great affliction, and have washed their stoles
and made them white in the blood of the lamb: therefore they are in the
presence of the throne of God, and serve him day and night, etc. Mark here that
they which came out of this great affliction, were not purged thereby, after M.
Allens fantasy, but that they washed and made white their garments, in the
blood of the lamb, by whose righteousness they being clothed, may appear in
innocency before the throne of God. As for that which is cited out of Ambrose,
of the fiery sword, is meant of the sorrow of repentance, and with no equity
can be racked to the pains of purgatory.

2 I marvel not now to see the Prophet seek not only for the remission of his
grievous sins, but to be better cleansed, to have them wholly blotted out, to
be made as white as snow: beholding the purity that is requisite for a citizen
of the celestial Jerusalem. And I note this the rather of the soul, because
I see that the body also, before it can shake of the stroke and plague of
sin, must be driven (by the common course) to dust and elements, that being
at the end raised up again in the same substance, may yet wholly in condition
and quality be so straungely altered, that in honor and immortality it may
everlastingly join with the soul again. To the newness whereof, the very
elements that before answered it in qualities of corruption, August. lib. 20.
de ciuit. cap. 16. 1. Cor. 15.
shall be perfectly by fire reformed, and serve in beauty and incorruption
eternal. If sin then be so revenged and thoroughly tried out of man's body,
and all corruption out of these elements for the glory of that new and eternal
kingdom, shall we doubt of Gods justice in the perfect revenge of sin in
the soul, or purifying that nature, which as it was most corrupted and was the
very feate of sin, Note.
so namely apperteineth to the company of Angels and glory everlasting? It were
not otherwise agreeable to Gods justice surely, nor convenient for the glorious
estate to come: it were neither right, nor reason.

He will then, where man neglects the day of mercy, sharply viset with
torment, him self: and both purge and purify the dross of our impure natures
defiled and stained by sin, with judgment and righteousness. Abluet Dominus
sordes filiarum Syon, Isaie. 4.
and sanguinem Jerusalem, lauabit de medio eius, in spiritu iudicij, and
spiritu ardoris. Our Lord shall wash out the filthe of the daughters of Syon:
and will cleanse blood from the midst of Jerusalem, in the spirit of
judgment, and the spirit of burning. But because we will not stand upon
conjectures in so necessary a point, you shall see by what Scriptures the grave
and learned fathers have to my hand confirmed this believed truth. And first I
will recite those places which do set forth both the quality and condition of
that punishment, which God takes upon man for sin in the other world: and
also did give just occasion to our forefathers of the name of Purgatory.

2 Consider what wholesome doctrine this student in Divinity gathers out of
the Scriptures of God. David not content with remission of his sins, seeks
to be better cleansed, to have them wholly blotted out, and to be made as white
as snow* but by what means M. Allen? or at whose hands? Dare you say that he
prays God to cleanse him better by his own suffering, then he was by Gods
merciful pardon? What was figured by the bunch of Isope, dypped in the lambs
blood, with which he desires to be sprinkled, assuring him self that thereby
he shall be washed whiter then snow? Was it purgatory, or the aspertion of the
blood of Christ? O horrible blasphemer, will thou never acknowledge the
omnisufficiency of the benefit of man's redemption by the son of God? shall
thy vain gangling and iumbling of thy devises with Gods decrees, obscure the
glory of our Lord and Savior Christ his passion, who has loved us, and washed
us, from our sins by his blood, and made us Kings and Priests in the sight
of God, who has given him self for his beloved Church, that he might
sanctify it, and cleanse it, by the washing of water, through the word, that he
might make it unto him self a glorious church, not having spot or wrinkle or
any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blame. What similitude
has this with Allens prattling of pureness and patching in of purgatory? As
for the place alleged out of Esaias the 4. Because he dare not abide by it him
self, but confess that it is but a conjecture of his own, to draw it to
purgatory which in deed is plainly spoken of the reformation of the Church in
this life. I need spend no more time in aunswering it.

3 There be two textes of Scriptures to this purpose so like, that many of the
doctors, for better conference in so weighty a case, have joined them together
to make their proof full: and so will I do by their example. The first is in
the third chapter of the prophet Malachie in these words. Malach 3.
Ecce venit dicit Dominus exercituum, and quis poterit cogitare diem aduentus
eius? Et quis stabit ad videndu^ eum? Ipse enim quasi ignis con^^ans, and quasi
herba fullonum: and sedebit con^tans and emu^dans arge^tum, and purgabit filios
Leui, and colabit eos quasi aurum and argentum, and erunt Domino offerentes
sacrificia in iustitia. Et placebit Domino sacrificium Judah and Jerusalem,
etc. Behold he comes (says the Lord of Hosts.) And who may abide the day
of his coming? Who can stand and endure his sight* For he is like melting and
casting fire, and as the washers herb. And he shall sit casting and trying out
silver, Soap.
and shall purge the children of Leui, and cleanse them as gold or silver, And
the^ shall they offer sacrifice in righteousness: and the offerings of Judah and
Jerusalem, shall be acceptable unto our Lord. And thus far spoke the
prophet. The second is this, taken out of the first Epistle to the Corinthians.
Cap. 3.
Secundum gratiam Dei quae data est mihi, vt sapiens architectus fundame^tum
posui, alius aute^ superaedificat. Vnusquisque aute^ videat quomodo
superaedificet. Fundame^tu^ enim aliud nemo potest ponere, praeter id quod est
positu^: quod est Christus Jesus. Si quis aute^ superaedificat super
fundame^tum hoc, aurum, arge^tum, lapides preciosos, ligna, foenu^, stipulam,
vniuscuiusque opus manifestu^ erit. dies enim Domini declarabit, quia in igne
reuelabitur: and vniuscuiusque opus quale sit, ignis probabit. Si cuius opus
ma^serit quod superaedificauit, mercede^ accipiet: si cuius opus arserit,
detrimentu^ patietur: ipse aute^ saluus erit, sic tame^ quasi per igne^. Thus
in English: According to the grace of God given unto me, as a discriete builder
I have laid the groundewarke: but an other builds thereon. Let every man be
circumspect how he builds on it. For no fundation can be laid, but Christ
Jesus, which is already laid. If any man build upon this groundewarke, gold,
silver, preciouse stones, wodde, hay, or stooble, every man's work shall be
laid open. For the day of our Lord will declare it, because it shall appear
in fire. And that fire shall try every man's work what it is: if any man's
work erected upon that foundation do abide, he shall receive reward, but if
his work burn, he shall sustain loss (or it shall sustain ^osse, meaning
by the work it self, as the text well serves also) but him self shall be
saved notwithstanding, and that yet as through fire. These be S. Paul's words.

Now as men studious of the truth, careful of our faith and salvation, and
fully free from contention and partaking, let us enter into the search of the
meaning of these two textes, with such plainnes and sincerity that I dare say
the adversaries, them selves shall not mislike our dealing. Plain dealing.
We will follow all likelihoodes by comparing the scriptures together, and
admit with all, the counsel and judgment of such our elders, as by their
confession shall be taken for holy, learned, and wise. First the prophet and
Apostle

And that this work is not properly taken for any such trouble or vexation
that may fall to man in this life, but for a very torment prepared for the next
world, first the quality of the judgment, is named to be done by fire)
seems rather to import that, then any other vexation, the punishment of the
world following always Dies Hominis: the day of man, because as man in this
life for the most part serves his own will, so he often neglects Gods: but
at his death, there begins Dies Domini: Where God executes his ordinance
and will upon man. This trial then of man's misdeedes and impure works, must
either be at his death, or after his departure by one of the two judgments.
But if we note diligently the circumstances of the said letter, it shall
appear unto us, that this purgation was S. Paul expressly warns us to take
heed what we build, in respect of the difference that may fall to such as
build fine works, and other that erect upon the foundation, impure or mixte
matter of corruption: but the pains of death being common to the best, as well
as to the worst or indifferent, and no less grievous in it self to one then
the other, can not be imported by the fire which shall bring loss to the Saint
Paul plainly affirms, that in this judgment there shall be made an open
show of such works as were hid before from man, and not discerned by the
judgment of this world: which the private death of one man can not do. 2.
Cor. 5.
And lightely the Apostle warning man of the sentence of God in the next life,
admonishes him that our deeds must be laid open before the judgment seat
of God so here, Dies domini declarabit, quia in igne reuelabitur: the day of
our Lord will open the matter, because it shall be Die^ adue^tus domini: which
is a proper calling of one of the judgments: either that which shall be
general at the last day, or else that which every man must first abide straight
after his departure, when he shall be called to the peculiar reckening for his
own acts. In either of which judgments, Magis. l. 4. did. 47.
this purging and amending fire shall be found. For as in that general wast
of the whole world by the fire of conflagration, 2. Petri. cap. 3.
which is called ignis praecedens faciem iudicis, because it awaiteth to
fulfill Christ's ordinance in the day of his second coming, as in that fire
the whole man both body and soul may suffer loss and extreme pain for his
punishment or purgation, and yet by that same fire be saved: even so out of
doubt at this particulare judgment straight upon every man's death, the soul
of the departed if it be not before free, must suffer pains and Purgation by
the like vehement torment working only upon the soul, as the other shall do
on the whole man. And the Prophets words now alleged, do mean principally of
the purgation that shall be made of the faithfuls corrupted works, by the fire
of conflagration, in the second coming of Christ: though his words well prove
the other also, as S. Paul too, means by them both.

3 Now I trow comes the confirmation of purgatory out of the holy Scriptures,
or else it will never come, when two textes are alleged at once. But although
M. Allen has rather craftily confounded, then faithfully compared these two
textes together, for all his protestation of plain dealing: yet will I
severally consider them, and show both by the plain circumstances of the
places them selves, and also by the judgment of the ancient doctors, that
neither of them both appertains any whit to purgatory. First Malachy
prophecieth plainly of the first coming of Christ, and of his fore runner John
Baptist, as the words going before, without all controversy do declare.
Behold I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me: and
the Lord whom ye seek, shall spedely come to his temple, even the messenger of
the covenant whom ye desire, behold he shall come says the Lord of hosts,
but who may abide the day of his coming, etc. witness of this is no less,
then even our Savior Christ him self, Luke the 7. alleging this saying of the
Prophet, for the coming of John the Baptist. These words also, where it is
said that the Lord shall come into his temple, do sufficiently declare, that
he describes the office of Christ, in reforming the corrupt state of the
Church at his first coming, and not in judging the quick and the dead at the
last appearing. Finally the exact trial and purging that he speaks of, is ye
discovering of hypocrites by his doctrine, whereof also John Baptist preaches,
that his fan is in his hand, and he shall purge his floor, etc. To conclude,
that this may not be thought to be mine own collection, it is the judgment
and interpretation of Ieronym upon this very text Malachy the 3. in every
point: who with all his learning, could find no purgatory fire spoken of in
this cap. Now to the other place o^ Paul, that it can by no equity be drawn
to purgatory for all M. Allens likelihoode numbering in the margent, it shall be
manifest by as many evident arguments. First S. Paul speaks not generally of
all men, but of preachers only that are buylders of Gods Church. Secondly he
speaks not of all their works, but of their preaching or building only.
Thirdly he speaks never a word of purging or making clean of men's works, but
of the trial of the work of building which is doctrine. But what doctrine is
tried to be true or false, substantial or superficial by the fire of
purgatory? Fourthly the works are said that shall be tried by fire, and not
the persons. Fifthly the gold and silver abides, the straw and stuble
consumes, through the fire of this trial, which is the judgment of God, and
not the pains of purgatory. And this is the judgment of Ieronym upon the
place of Malachy, before rehearsed, where also he applies the text of Esaias 4.
before cited by M. Allen. fol. 59. The Lord (says he) is a consuming fire to
burn up our wodde, hay, and straw. The other observations be also taken out
of that ancient doctor whose commentary upon the epistle to the Corinthians
has gone under the name of Ieronym and is annexed to his works, saving that
by gold, silver, wodde, straw, etc. he understands the men them selves, and
not their works. But as for purgatory he finds none by that text. S.
Augustine also although otherwise, inclining to the error of purgatory, yet he
is clear that this text proves it not, neither ought to be expounded of it,
and that he shows by many reasons, Enchirid. ad Laurentium cap. 68. where he
affirms that by the fire is meant the trial of tribulation in this life,
Chrysostom upon the same text, understands by the fire everlasting punishment
even of him that shall be saved through fire without any mention of purgatory,
except it be in reproving them that denied immortal punishment to be meant by
this place. in 1. Cor. 3. Hom. 9. But if the place were to be considered
absolutely, without regard of circumstances, as the Papists do when they
expound it for purgatory, yet can not it aptly be framed thereto, because he
says that every man's work, or the man him self if they will, shall pass
through that fire, but they the^ selves affirm, that perfect good men shall
not come there at all, nor very wicked men, but only men of a middle sort, but
by trial of this fire whereof S. Paul speaks, good men shall receive reward
when their work endure, therefore this is not the fire of purgatory.

That there is a particulare judgment and private account to be made at every
man's departure, of his several acts and deeds, with certain of the fathers
minds touching the textes of Scripture alleged before. CAP. VII.
1 ANd though such as shall live at the coming of the judge in the later day,
shall then be purged of their corruption and base works of infirmity, by the
fire that shall a better and alter the impure nature of these corruptible
elements, or otherwise according to Gods ordinance: yet the common sort of all
men which in the mean time depart this world, must not tarry for their
purgation till that general amending of all natures, no more then the very
good, in whom after their baptism no filthe of sin is found, or if any
were, was wiped away by penance, must awayt for their salvation: or the wicked
tarry for their just judgment to damnation. The particular judgment.
But straight this sentence either of judgment or mercy, must be pronounced:
and therefore is called the particulare judgment, by which the soul only
shall receive welthe or woe, as at the day of the great account both body and
soul must do. Of this several trial the holy Apostle S. Paul says: Ad
Hebr. 9.
statutum est omnibus hominibus semel mori, post hoc iudicium: It is determined
that every man once must dye, and after that comes judgment. And an other
Scripture more expressly thus: Facile est coram domino reddere vnicuique in
die obitus sui, Eccles. 11.
secundum vias suas. It is an easy matter before our Lord, that every man at
the day of his death should be rewarded according to his life and ways:
Again in the same place: Memor esto iudicij mei: sic enim erit and tuum, mihi
heri, and tibi hodie. Have in remembrance my judgment, for such shall thine
own be: yesterday was mine, today may be thine. And therefore S. Ambrose says,
that without delay the good poor man was carried to rest, and the wicked rich
out of hand suffered torments. That every man (says he) may feel before the
day of judgment, Super 5. ad Roman.
what he must then look for. And in an other place the same holy man writes,
that John the beloved of Jesus is already gone to the paradise of everlasting
bless, passing as few shall do, In Psalm. 118. Ser. 20.
the fiery sword at the entrance of joy without all stop or tariaunce:
because the fire of love in his life time had such force in him, that the
ame^ding fire after his change should take no hold of him at all, so says
Ambrose. But of this private judgment the Reverend Bid has a goodly sentence
in the fifth of his history. Cap. 14.
Meminerimus facta and cogitationes nostras no^ in ventu^ diffluere, sed ad
exame^ summi Iudicis cu^cta seruari, and sieve per amicos Angelos in fine nobis
ostende^da, sieve per hosts. Let us remember (says he) that all our deeds and
thoghtes shall abide, and not be carried away with the wind, but be reserved to
the examination of the high Judge: The souls be not in doubt of their
damnation or salvation, till the day of judgment
and so shall be laid before our face at our ending, either by our good or
adversary Angels.

By all which it is evident, that the souls sleep not: (of which error
Luther was also noted) nor be reserved in doubt of their damnation, either
perpetual or temporal, till the latter day: but straight way receive as they
deserved before in their life, either wealth or woeful pains.

In this day of our Lord then this Purgatory pains must begin, to all such
as have after their Baptism, where they laid the foundation of Christ's
faith, builded the works of lesser sins and imperfection, and not washed
them a way by penance in their life, nor obtained mercy for the same. The
which truth, the places of the Prophet and Apostle before alleged with out
all unseemly wrething or wraesting do so plainly bear, that if ours were a
sense never heard of before, yet the only comparing of the textes, and
necessary circumstancies of the letter might rather drive us to that meaning,
then any other that they can ever allege or prove. But now, as Catholics ever
do, keeping the old meaning and forging no new, giving no other sense then
that which the persuasion of all Christian people both learned and simple has
driven from the beginning of our faith down to our days, and framing no other
understanding then that which we find expressly in the learning and faith of
our fathers both set forth and proved, who is so rude in judgment, or so
entangled with any contrary opinion, that will not acknowledge the truth and
doctrine every way so compassed with proof and all likelihoods?

CAP. VII.

1 THat the judgment of God begins at the death of every man and so
continues until the full manifestation thereof in the last day, is clearer by
the Scripture of God, then that it needs the confirmation of man's authority.
But that Ambrose is alleged to prove, that every man immediately after his
death, does feel that he must look for in the day of judgment, I marvel
to what purpose it is brought in, if it be not to overthrow purgatory. For if
it be true, as it must needs be, no man feels pain after this life, but he
that shall feel it eternally. And surely to the same effect he speaks in his
book de bono mortis where he commends the death of the faithful quia
deteriorem statum non efficit, sed qualem in singulis inuenerit, talem iudicio
fururo reseruat, and quiet ipsis fouet, and praesentium inuidiae subducit, and
futurorum expectatione componit. Because (death) makes not their state worse,
but such as it finds in every man, such it reserueth into the judgment to
come, and quietly chierisheth them and both takes them away from the envy of
things present, and setleth them in expectation of things to come. Thus says
Ambrose plainly in this place, what soever he speaks allegorically of the
fiery sword in other places. Well it is evident (you say) that the souls
departed sleep not, of which error Luther also was noted. I never hard any
man of credit note him thereof, who is well known to have been of a clean
contrary judgment: but I read in the acts of the Council of Constance, that
Pope John the 23 was condemned for denying the immortality of the soul, the
resurrection of the dead and the life everlasting. But if the souls sleep
not, then they be awake in purgatory, or if ye reason not so subtly, you
mean, that if they be at all in purgatory, they be there immediately after
their departure out of their bodies. But how shall we prove, that they come
there at all? Forsooth by the sayings of the Prophet and of the Apostle before
alleged, which are so plain proof and so evident to be understood, of them
selves, that they need none other interpretation. But how plain it is, that
they serve nothing to that purpose, I have sufficiently declared already: yet
must we further follow the same matter, because here are brought in the
authority of the doctors to agree with M. Allens gloss.

2 But as reason is, and my promise was at the beginning. I will let the good
Christian see the words of most notable ancient writers, that he may rejoice
his faith to be so surely grounded. First then you shall perceive that S.
Augustine expounds the text of the prophet Malachie before recited, Cap. 3.
for purgatory pains even as I said. I am certain he may much move our
adversaries, as one whom they challenge to be patron of some of their
opinions: but how unjustly in all points, God knows, and in this matter
especially you shall now perceive. After the rehersall of the Prophets words
and well weying of the matter, he thus writes. Ex ijs quae dicta sunt videtur
euidentius apparere, Lib. 20. de ciuit. dei. Cap. 25.
in illo iudicio quasdam quorundam purgatorias poenas futuras. Vbi enim
dicitur. Quis substinebit diem introitus eius? aut quis far poterit vt
aspiciat eum? quia ipse ingreditur quasi ignis conflatorij, and quasi herba
lauantium, and sedebit conflans and emundans sicut argentum and aurum, and
emundabit filios Leui, and fundet eos sicut aurum and sicut argentum, quid
aliud intelligendum est? dicit tale aliquid and Isaias: Lauabit dominus sordes
filiorum and filiarum Syon, and sanguinem emundabit de medio eorum spiritu
iudicij, and spiritu combustionis. Nisi sort sic eos dicendum est emundari a
sordibus, and eliquari quodammodo, cu^ ab eis mali per poenale iudicium
separantur, vt illorum segregatio atque damnatio purgatio sit istorum, quia
sine talium de coetero commixtione victuri sunt: sed cum dicit, and emundabit
filios Leui, and fundet eos sicut aurum and argentum, and erunt domino
offerentes hostias in iusticia, and placebit domino sacrificium Judah and
Jerusalem: Vtique ostendit eos ipsos qui emundabuntur, deinceps in sacrificijs
iusticiae domino esse placituros: ac per hoc ipsi a sua iniustitia
emundabuntur, in qua domino hostiae displicebant. porro in plena perfectaque
iustitia ipsi erunt cum mundati fuerint: quid enim acceptius deo tales offerunt
quam seipsos? verum ista quaestio de Purgatorijs poenis, vt diligentius
pertractetur in tempus aliud differenda est. thus in English. By the foresaid
words in seems very evident, that in the time of that judgment there shall
be certain Purgatory pains for some sort of men. For when it is said: Who
can be able to sustain the day of his coming? who can stand in his sight?
because he shall sit trying out and purifying as it were gold and silver, and
enter in like the fire of the furnace, and as washers soap: he shall make
clean the sons of Leui and shall try them as gold and silver: What other
thing by all these words can be meant? Cap. 4.
(but purgatory pains.) Namely seeing the prophet Esaie has the like in these
words. God shall wash a way the filthe of the sons and daughters of Syon,
and purge blood from the midst of them, in the spirit of judgment and
fire. Except a man might conveniently say that they shall be washed from
filthe, and as you would say new fourged, when the wicked by final judgment
are severed out of their company: that so their departure and damnation may be
the purgation of the rest, because after that day they shall live for ever
without the company of the badde. But when the Prophet says more, that he will
cleanse the children of Leuy, and purify them as gold and silver, that they may
offer their oblations in righteousness, and the sacrifice of Judah and
Jerusalem shall please our Lord. He ^urely gives us to wit, that even the
same self men which shall be purged, must afterward offer to God the
sacrifice of justice, that being once thus amended of their unrighteousness,
in which their offeringes could not be acceptable unto God, may afterward in
pure and perfect justice offer them selves as a most pleasant host and
oblation unto our Lord. But this question of purgatory pains I will differ to
a further treaty hereafter. All this has S. Augustine: Whereby we may both
acknowledge his mind and the Prophets meaning: which according to the grace
given unto him in the expounding of Scriptures, he has sought out by
conference of that place with other the like out of Esaias, by weying discretly
the whole circumstance of the letter, and finally by comparing of the other
meaning, which to some might have been reckened apt and mete for that place.
In all which doing he was as far from rash judgment, as our new doctors be
from good aduisement.

But because he refers us to the further discussing of the same matter
afterward, in the named work: it shall be to our purpose not a little, to have
this dictors full mind and constant judgment therein. In the xxj. book after
much matter uttered, and very deep discussing of the cause, he makes this
grounded Conclusion. Cap. 13.
Temporales poenas alij in hac vita tantum, alij post mortem, alij nunc and
nu^c, veruntame^ ante illud saeuerissimu^, nouissimumque iudiciu^ patiuntur.
Non autem omnes veniu^t in sempiternas poenas quae post illud iudiciu^ his sunt
futurae, qui post mortem sustinent temporales: nam quibusdam quod in isto no^
remittitur, remitti in futuro saeculo, id est ne futuri saeculi aeterno
supplicio punia^tur, iam supra diximus. Temporal pains (that is to say
punishment which shall have an end) some men suffer in this life, some other
after their death, and other some, both now, and then: But all this before the
day of judgment that is the greatest and last of all other judgments:
Temporal pains in the next life as well as in this.
not all that be te^porally punished after their departure come into pains
perpetual which shall be after the general day: for we have already
declared, that there be certain which have remission in an other world, that
is to say a pardon that they be not punished everlastingly, that had not
forgiveness in this. By these words we may be assured, that as in the next
life there be pains endelesse and perpetual for the wicked, so in the same
world after our end here, there must needs be some transitory punishment and
correction, for such of the mean sort as shall afterward be saved. And
again he speaks (as I take it) of the fire of Conflagration that shall in
the latter day purge some that be mean, and wast other that be wicked, and
send them from that present punishment, to further eternal damnation. I will
recite his own words, that ye may perceive the perpetual constancy of this
excellent man's mind in this matter. It shall also be a testimony sufficient
for the understanding of S. Paul's words now before alleged. Si aedificauerit
super fundamentum, ligna, foenum, Sermon. 3. in Psalm. 103.
stipulam, id est mores saeculares fundamento fidei suae super aedificauerit,
tame^ si in fundamento sit Christus, and primum locu^ ipse habeat in cord, and
ei nihil omnino anteponatur, porte^tur and tales: Veniet caminus and ince^det
ligna, foenu^, stipulam: ipse inquit saluus erit, sic tamen quasi per ignem.
Hoc aget caminos: alios in sinistram ^eparabit, alios in dexteram quodammodo
eliquabit. If any man erect upon the foundation woodde, hay, or straw, that is
to say worldely affections upon the groundewarke of his says: if yet Christ be
in the foundation, and bear the greatest stroke in his heart, so that nothing
be preferred before him, such may well be borne withal, for the fiery furnace
shall come and burn the wood, hay, and stooble, and shall be saved, as the
Apostle says, though it be for all that through the fire, that furnace then
shall part some to the lift hand, and try forth other (if a man may so term
it) to the right hand.

2 The first place is given unto Augustine, because he is in a manner confessed
to be a patron of some of our opinions, though he be not of all. This doctor
in his 20 book de ciuitate dei, is said to expound the text of Melachy as M.
Allen has done of the pains of purgatory. But read the place with
indifferent judgment who so can and will, and he shall plainly perceive, that
Augustine speaks not of M. Allens purgatory, which is said to be immediately
after men's death, but of certain purging pains, which he supposes some shall
suffer at the last day of Gods general judgment, and yet he is so uncertain
of that exposition, that he doubts whether this purging, whereof the Prophet
speaks, may not be understood of that separation, which shall be of the godly
from the wicked in that day. Howbeit 21. book cap. 13. of the same work, he
concludes very clearly, that some suffer temporal pains after this life.
This may not be denied: but how unconstant Augustine was in his error,
appears by this, that sometime he doubts whether there be any such matter,
other whiles he seems plainly to deny all other receptacles of the souls
departed beside heaven and hell. For both in his Enchiridion ad Laurentium cap.
69. and de octo Dulcitij in quaestionibus quaest. 1. he says, that as it is
not incredible, that such a matter may be after this life, so it may be
doubted, whether it be so or no. Likewise in his book de fide and operibus
cap. 16. he has these words speaking of that text to S. Paul 1.
Corinthians. 3. Sieve ergo in hac vita tantum homines ista patiuntur, sieve etiam
post hanc vitam talia iudicia subsequantur, non abho^ret quantum arbitror a
ratione veritatis, iste intellectus huius sententiae. Whether men suffer these
things in this life only, or whether such judgments follow after this life
also: the understanding of this sentence abhors not as I think, from the
way of truth. Again in Hypognost. contra Pelagianos lib. 5. he acknowledges
the kingdom of heaven for to receive the godly, and hell fire for the
punishment of the wicked, but a third place says he we are altogether
ignorant of, neither do we find it in the holy Scriptures. He writes
against the Pelagians, that imagined a third place, for the rest of infants,
that were not baptized, but the same reason serves as well against the popish
purgatory, because we find it not in the holy Scriptures: to the like effect
he writes de verbis Apostoli sermon 14. where he acknowledges the right hand
and the left hand of God, that is the kingdom of heaven, and the pains of
hell: the middle place he utterly denies, wherein infantes may be placed
because there is no mention thereof in the Gospel. But to return to the third
place, alleged by M. Allen, out of S. Augustine, ser. 3. Psalm. 103. How would
he have us to take it for a confirmation of his exposition of S. Paul's words,
touching the pains of purgatory, which are said to begin immediately after this
life, when he him self confesses that it is to be understood of the
universal conflagration of the world at the day of judgment? Thus you see
that here were great bragges made, that Augustines authority maintained his
interpretation of those 2. textes of Scripture, concerning popish purgatory,
which he him self contendeth to begin as soon as men are dead: When
Augustine in both those places (as the plain circumstance of the place
declares the one, and the conf^ssion of M. Allen admits the other) speaks
of a kind of purging which he did think should not be, before the whole world
were purged at once by fire.

3 And as S. Augustine takes these base substances of wood, hay, or stuble, to
signify worldly affections and secular desires: so S. Ambrose notes by the
same, vain, curious, and unprofitable doctrines: In com. super hunc lo cum.
the dross of which frivolous matter much corrupting the sincerity of our
faith, must be separated from the foundation, by the fire of the said furnace.
For this is a general doctrine without exception, that what so ever be
understood by those light matters, whether it be a difformity in life or in
doctrine, that only defiles and not utterly destroys the faith which is the
foundation, nor wastes the love due unto our Lord, what so ever (I say) that
be, it must be tried out by the spirit of judgment and fire. Briefly then,
thus S. Ambrose expounding the Apostles words. He shall be saved by fire,
writes, In commen tarijs super 3. c. 1. ad Cor.
Ostendit illum saluum quidem futurum, sed poenam ignis passurum, vt per ignem
purgatus fiat saluus, and non sicut perfidi aeterno igne in perpetuum
torqueatur. The Apostle declares that he shall be saved, and yet suffer the
pains of fire: that being purged by that fire, he may so be saved, and not as
the unfaithful, perpetually be tormented in everlasting fire.

3 As he says little out of Ambrose so it is soon answered: first it makes
little for him, that Ambrose expounds the wodde, hay, and stuble, vain
curious and unprofitable doctrine, for that prouethe, that only the work of
teachers shall pass the trial of this fire, which is the judgment of Gods
spirit the true discerner of doctrines, but yet Ambrose expounds the fire to
be a purging and a punishment. But whether it be in this life or after this
life, you have no ground out of this place of Ambrose, and therefore it finally
avails your cause. And that Ambrose allowed no purging after this life, is
plain enough by those words which he writes upon the 40. Psalm: For where
the prophet says he shall be made happy on earth: Ambrose infers, Been
addidit in terra, quia nisi hic mundatus fuerit, ibi mundus esse non poterit.
He has well added on earth, for if he be not cleansed here, he can not be
cleansed there.

4 This temporal torment of the next life S Hierom very fitly calls, A
judgment of God joined with mercy, the continuance whereof, or other
circumstances to serve men's curiosity he dare not define, being contented out
of doubt to believe that certain sinners be in grievous torments, and yet not
without hope of mercy these be that holy man's words in his commentaries upon
the Prophet Esai, Cap. vlr. and in primum Cap. Eze. in illud vidi quasi speciem
electri
talking by occasion, of the continuance of purgatory pains. Quid nos solius
Dei scientiae debemus relinquere, cuius non solum misericordiae sed and
tormenta in pondere sunt: and nouit quem, quomodo, and quandiu debeat iudicare.
Solumque dicamus quod humanae conuenit fragilitati, Domine ne in furore tuo
arguas me, neque in ira tua corripias me: and sicut diaboli omniumque negatorum
atque impiorum qui dixerunt in cord suo non est Deus, credimus aeterna
tormenta, sic peccatorum atque impiorum, and tamen Christianorum, quorum opera
in igne purganda sunt atque probanda, moderatam arbitramur and mixtam
clementiae sententiam iudicis. In English: We must commit this secret to Gods
wisdom and knowledge, whose not only mercy, but judgment and just punishment
be paised. For he right well knows whom, how, and what time he ought to
punish. And let us only as it becomes our frailty cry out: Lord in thy
furious wrath argue me not, neither correct me in thy anger: for as we believe
the eternal damnation and torment of the devil with the forsaken sort and
wicked, that said in their heart there is no God, so we suppose, that upon
sinners and evil men, being yet christen men, whose works shall be both
purged and tried by fire, shall be pronounced a moderate sentence mixed with
mercy and clemency. Lo here, this worthy writer grants there be two sorts
of punishments by fire, one of the damned spirits and wicked men eternal, and
an other of certain that in their life were sinners, and some wicked men too,
who yet being in Christ's Church and using the benefit of the blessed
Sacraments, had their sins so forgeuen, that not purging their wicked life by
sufficient penance in their days, they must of necessity enter into the
torment of transitory fire, there to be punished not in rage and rigor without
pity, but in anger of fatherly correction joined with clemency and much mercy.

4 The last place is reserved for S. Ieronym, who seems to give a perfect
testimony for M. Allens behoof, if he be no further examined, then M. Allen
rehearses his words. but how little they make for him if they be duly
discussed, except it be to prove Ieronym an Origenist, and so to discredit his
testimony, I will stand to the judgment of all reasonable Papists, that will
vouchsafe to weygh the matter with me, and not be wilfully deceived. For first
it is manifest, that Ieronym writing upon these words of Esaias, whose worm
shall not dye nor the fire be extinguished, speaks of the last judgment in
the end of the world, and then rehearses the arguments of them, that thought
the punishment of that worm and fire should be ended after long time, and
great torments: which thing Ieronym says must be left to the only knowledge
of God, etc, whom he confesses to be a merciful judge, and so it may be, that
he will release the eternal torments that wicked Christians have deserved
after the day of judgment, but he defines nothing. And as for M. Allens
purgatory, which he defends to begin straight way after men's departure hence,
he speaks never a word. But rather of the purging fire of Gods judgment,
which some of the Origenistes did extend to the purifying and saving of all
Christians, were they never so wicked, from whose opinion he seems not
altogether to descent, though he do not plainly allow it. And that he writes
upon the first of Ezechiel, to which place M. Allen sends us, he speaks of
the providence of God, which so governs the afflictions of his Saints, that
that which seemed to be a punishment is converted into a medicine. As children
imagine that spirits and goblines be in every dark corner: So M. Allen never
reads fire and torment, but by and by he dreameth of purgatory.

Origin is alleged for our cause, upon whose error in a matter somevvhat
appertayning to our purpose, S Augustins judgment is more largely sought: and
therevvith it is declared by testimony of diverse holy authors, what sins be
chiefly purged in that temporal fire. CAP. VIII.
1 THese three noble learned men might right well satisfy our search, for the
sense of the textes both of the Prophet and Apostle, and persuade any
reasonable man in the whole cause: yet for that there be ^ome that mean not to
relent in their lewd opinions, for light proffers, I will store them with
testimonies.

Origenes, one of great antiquity, in many places of his works understands
both the said textes of Malachie and S. Paul in the like sort: by whom we may
well take a great taste of the time and Church where he lived, what men of
wisdom and virtue then judged of things, which now of fools be contemned,
and of heretics condemned also. Homil. 12.
But namely upon the Prophet Jeremy in these words: Si post fundamentum Jesus
Christi, non solum in tuo cord aurum, argentum, and lapidem preciosum superae
dificaueris, verum and ligna, foenum, and stipulam, quid tibi vis fieri cum
anima seiuncta fuerit a corpore? vtrum ne ingredi vis in sancta cum lignis
tuis, and foeno, and stipula, vt polluas regnum Dei? an propter lignum, foenum,
and stipulam, foris residere vis, and pro auro, argento, lapide precioso, nil
mercedis accipere? sed neque hoc aequum est. Quid ergo sequitur, nisi vt primum
propter lignum ignis tibi detur, qui consumat foenum, lignum, and stipulam.
etc. If upon the foundation, which is Christ Jesus, thou do not only build
gold, silver, and preciouse stone, but also woodde, hay, and straw, what
do thou look for after thy death? will thou enter into the holy places with
thy woodde, hay, and stooble, and defile the kingdom of God? or else for thy
wood, hay, and straw, thou will abide forth: and so liese the reward of thy
gold, silver, and preciouse stone? But that were no reason: then there is no
way but one, first to receive fire for to consume and burn out thy woodde,
hay, and stooble: and then afterward to receive for thy better works, the
reward of salvation. so says Origin. Whose judgment if any man mistrust in
this point, because he erred in other, let him learn to miscredit only his or
other men's singular opinions and private pha^tasies, wherein they disagreed
from the residue of the common body of Christ his Church, Basil. Cap. penult.
de Spiritu sancto.
and not contemn in any man the confirmation of the universal sense, which he
finds in the uniform doctrine of all other Christian Catholics. In deed it
was so evident, that this Purgatory fire of which the Apostle speaks, should
be in the other life, that this learned man afterward, leaving the meaning
which the holy Church had opened for the proof of certain transitory
punishment in the next world for meaner offenders, would of his own head go
forward (which is the bane of many a goodly wit) and maintain that all
grievous crimes, Vince^t lyr.
and most wicked manners might be purged by this fire after death, and the
parties in time saved, so that they had faith for their foundation: whereby (as
S. Augustine notes of him) he made only faith to save the wicked, De fide and
operibus Cap. 16.
without repentance or good works.

CAP. VIII.

1 WHether M. Allen knew that his former witnesses did not agree, or that he
would give a taste of his bountiful dealing in pressing us with more
testimonies then needed, he will now produce Origin, whom though he confess
to be infamouse for heresy, yet eue^ of his error, he will not doubt but to
ground his purgatory. Origin will have men pass through a fire, but to make
it plain that he means not ye fire of Popish purgatory, we shall perceive by
other places of his writings, that he speaks of such a fire, as all men be
they never so just, shall pass through, affirming that all me^ have need of
purifications after his life, ye Peter and Paul and such like in Number. Hom. 25.
and in Psalm. 36. Hom. 3. But all men pass not through the Popes purgatory. I
pass over here the gross allegory, that he makes of the blood of Devils by
which a man shall be washed and purified in the kingdom of God, that being so
purified and made clean he may enter into the city of God. Number. Hom. 25. But
how soever he doteth about passage through fire and purifications after this
life, yet he affirms in an other place that the day of Christian men's death
is the deposition of pain, whereby it appears that either he was not constant
with him self, or else that Origens purgatory was a painlesse purgatory. His
words are in Job Lib. 3. Nam priores diem natiuitatis celebrabant, vnam vitam
diligentes, and aliam post hanc non sperantes. Nunc vero nos non natiuitatis
diem celebramus, cum sit dolorum atque tentationum introitus, sed mortis diem
celebramus, vtpote omnium dolorum depositionem, atque omnium tentationum
effugationem. The former men did celebrate, the day of nativity, as they that
loved but one life, and hoped for none after this. But now we do not celebrate
the day of Nativity, seeing it is the entrance of sorrows and temptations,
but we celebrate the day of death, as that which is a deposition of all
griefs, and an avoiding of all temptations.

2 Against which perniciouse error the said doctor often writes: and proves
that this place of S. Paul can not make for the delivery of the wicked or
grievous offenders in any case. And being somewhat urged by the adversaries
arguments, or else because he would take all hold from them which they seemed
to have by that scripture he seeks them out an other meaning, not contrary at
all to the truth of Purgatory: but yet farther of their purpose. Declaring
that this fire might (as he says there) signify some grief of this world,
for the abating of some inordinate affections that be found in many even
toward things otherwise lawful. Though he was very loath to avouch this as the
undoubted meaning of that scripture, being pleaced with any other whereby they
should not be forced to deny the eternal damnation of impenitent sinners: as
in deed he never gave this meaning but where the Origenistes did urge him, and
in such places only where he answers to Origens arguments, for in other
places where he was free from contention with the said sects, he ever in
express terms grounded the doctrine of Purgatory upon the Apostles words.
Yea even in the same answer to the adversary he was so mindful of Gods
justice in the world to come, and ferd lest he might give any occasion of the
contrary error to deny purgatory, that in the same talk with the Origenistes,
he confesses there might well be some grief in the next life also, which
might likewise purge and deliver a man from the love of transitory things,
wherewith the best sort of men be in this our misery often very sore laden.
Although in deed he doubted whether any such affection and love of things
dear unto us in this world, as of wife, kindred, acquaintance, Ench. Cap. 67.
and 68.
or such like might remain in man after his departure hense, and so there in
time to be lessened, and in fine utterly removed or worn away, by some grief
and sorrow which in the next life might by the lack of the said things, vex
and molest his mind. As we see it commonly fall in this present life, where
man by diverse profitable troubles of this world, learneth to set light by
things, which in order he might well love: being for all that more merit to
forsake them. And of this point S. Augustine has these words in one place:
Ench. Cap. 69.
Tale aliquid fieri etiam post hanc vitam incredibile non est: and vtrum ita
sit quaeri potest, some such thing may well be after this life, and thereof
question may be made. By which words, the heretics of our time either of
ignorance or of malice (which be ever yoked together in such men) have borne
the simple in hand, This clearkly argument our English apology urges.
that this holy doctor doubted of Purgatory. A little hold will serve such
wringers: because he doubted of it, they believe, as they think by good
authority, that with out doubt there is none at all. If S. Augustine had but
said, belike there is no such mean place in the life following: mary sir then
they might have picked more matter of their infidelity: and yet of that speech
determining no certeinty, there had been no great cause why they should have
forsaken the judgment of Gods Church. But now he so doubts, that he finds
more cause to think there should be one, then that any man might gather upon
his words, that there should be none at all. No nor he never went so far
good reader, as to make any doubt of Purgatory pains, for punishment of sins
committed in the world. For in all the same books where he has the like
saing, and almost in the very same places, he holds as a matter of faith, and
to be believed of all Christian men, that the prayers of the lieuing do release
some of their pains in the next life. And he constantly as all other
Catholics ever did, confesses that the sins or unclean works of the
living not duly by penance wiped away in this world, must be mended after
our death: although it be very doubtefull in deed, whether there be any
worldely affections left in man's mind untaken up by death and resolution of the
body and the soul, the care and remembrance whereof, might be afterward by
sorrow both purged and punished.

And this to be his meaning, and that he terms here purgatory, the grief
which a man has in losing that which he loved in this mortal life, his own
words testify in every of those works in which he keeps this combat with
Origenistes. Lib. 21. de Ciuit. 26.
In one place thus: Quod sine illicienti amore non habuit, sine dolor vrente
non perdet: and ex earum rerum amissione tantum necesse est vt vrat dolor,
quantum haeserat amor. That which by ticklinge love was kept, can not be lost
with out burning grief. And look how fast the love of such things did clean
to man's mind, so far must sorrow burn. So in the like talk with the said
Origenistes, Cap. 16.
in his book de fide and operibus, he follows the same signification of
Purgatory. Haec igitur (says he) quoniam affectu dilecta carnali non sine
dolor amittuntur, qui sic ea habent, in eorum amissione passi detrime^tum, per
ignem quendam doloris perueniunt ad salutem: these things being by carnal
affection loved, be not lightly lost without grief, and therefore those that
thus be affectionate, feel loss in parting from them: and so come to
salvation through the fire of sorrow. such a sadness the young man that
demanded of our master the way to heaven, conceived straight, Matthew. 19.
when motion was only made, of distribution of his goods. Who being otherwise
in the state of salvation, and to be borne withal, because he was a just man
and lacked not the foundation of his faith, yet the very loss or leaving of
his goods, was unto him (if he continued in that affection) a wonderful great
torment, and as S. Augustine here calls it, a kind of purgatory: the which,
perfect men, that esteem all the trashe of this world as durte and donge to
win Christ, feel not at all: whom the doctor supposes therefore, to take
no damage in the loss of things which they so little loved.

Now in every place where this exposition is found (as I think it is never in
all his works, lightly, but in conference with the Origenistes) he always
adds that the like fire of sorrow may also correct the affections even of the
departed, but yet whether it be so or no, he counts it a question of probable
disputation, rather then any matter of faith, as it is in deed very doubtful
whether any such inordinate affection may remain untaken up after man's
departure, which by grief and sorrow in the other world may be in time wholly
consumed. And further he never doubted. For in that famous work of the City
of God, Cap. 24. lib. 21.
with in two Chapters of that doubt made of this kind of purgation, which we
now have declared, he utters his faith with Gods Church, of that great
torment and just punishment of sinful life, not sufficiently purged by
penance in our time, which he calls the Amending fire: and thus he says
there. Tales etiam constat, ante iudicij diem per poenas temporales quas eorum
spiritus patiuntur purgatos, receptis corporibus aeterni ignis supplicijs non
tradendos, etc. It is certain (says he) Constat, (which is no word of
doubtefullnesse) that such men being purged by the temporal pains, which
their souls do suffer before the day of judgment, shall not after they have
received their bodies again, be committed to the torment of the everlasting
fire. Vide quaest. 8. ad Dulcitium.
This he utters in the same place where he doubts of the other kind of
purgation: as he confesses him self to be uncertain of the whole exposition,
refusing none at all that were agreeable to faith, and would not help the
falsehood which he the^ refuted. In his Enchir: where he disputes against the
same error, Cap. 110.
he so little doubts, that he calls Purgatory damnation though not
perpetual, as that which might be both eased and utterly removed by the
sacrifice and suffragies of the Church.

And thus did that grave author withstand Origin then, whose followers were as
it may be thought very busy and troublesome in those days and long after. But
yet his sure staff against that error was this, and the most common defense of
all Catholics, that the temporal pains in the next world could never
deliver the great and grievous sinners that died with out repentance or
remission of their sins, from everlasting death: because that torment was
prepared for the small offensies which we call venial sins: by which the
holy Apostle meant, under the names of the base substances of woodde, Sermon. 4.
de sanctis.
hay, and straw, as these words of much importance may well declare: There be
diverse (says he) that misconstruing these words of S. Paul before alleged,
De haeres. ad quod 43.
by over vain security and confidence deceive them selves, believing that if
they do build capital and grievous crimes upon the foundation which is Christ,
they shall be purged through fire, and them selves afterward escape to
everlasting life: but this understanding, good brethern, must be corrected. For
those that so flatter them selves, shamefully do beguile them selves. For that
fire which the Apostle speaks of in these words: He shall be saved through
fire, purges not mortal sins, but smaller offensies only.

2 Now follows a confuse and tedious discourse of Augustines judgment,
touching Origens error, but it may be reduced unto these two points. First why
Augustine would not interpret that place of Paul. 1. Cor. 3. of purgatory:
and secondly whether Augustine were in any doubt at all of purgatory, between
which two questions is begotten a third conclusion, that purgatory serves
only for venial and light offenses. To the first he seems to say, that
Augustine refuses to understand that place of purgatory, either because he
cold not otherwise withstand the arguments of the Originests, or else because
he would take all hold away from them, rather then that it was his constant
judgment, because in other places, where he was free from conte^tion he ever
grounded purgatory upon that place. How honorable this answer is for
Augustine, or how beneficial for Allen, using Augustines authority, I refer
to be judged of all them that be wise and learned. To the second he says, that
Augustine never doubted, whether there were any pains of purgatory after this
life, but whether men after their death retained any carnal affections. I will
once again rehearse the words of Augustine, that all indifferent, men may
judge, whether M. Allens answer may stand with his saying in a reasonable
meaning. Tale aliquid etiam post hanc vitam fieri incredibile non est: and
vtrum ita sit quaeri potest. It is not incredible, that some such thing is done
after this life, and whether it be or no, it may be enquired of, that is (says
M. Allen) whether men have any carnal affection to their wives, children etc.
after this life, it may be a question. But Augustine goes further in the same
place and says: Et aut inueniri aut latere, nonnullos fideles, per ignem
quendam purgatorium quanto magis minusue, bona pereuntia dilexerunt, tanto
tardius citiusque saluari. Non tamen tales de quibus dictum est, quod regnum
Dei non possidebunt, nisi conuenientes poenitentibus eadem crimina remittantur.
And either it may be found, or still be hid, that some of the faithful, by
a certain purgatory fire, by how much they have more or less loved transitory
Gods, by so much later or sooner, are they saved, but yet not such, of whom it
is saved, that they shall not possess the kingdom of God, except the same
crimes be forgeuen them being sufficiently repentaunt for them. These words
are so plain against M. Allens new forged meaning, that I suppose he never
read them in Augustines own books, but only received his notes of some
elder Papists, that had spent more time in gathering them, but had not such
audacity to utter them as M. Allen, of which conjecture, there is no small
likelyhoode sone after. I omit his foolish supposition, if S. Augustine had
but said: belike there is no such mean place in the life following. etc. I
have already with out M. Allens suppositio^ showed, that Augustine some where
said, he knew neither third place, nor mean place, nor none could find in
the holy Scriptures, nor Gospel of God. Nevertheless with much wrangling to
defend the vncerteinety or inconstancy of Augustines judgment touching
purgatory, we have won so much, that purgatory serves to purge none but very
small and light offenses. But how long shall we hold this? Scarce to the
latter end of this chapter. For in the next capter, he finds out a shifte to
wring in heinous and deadly sins also. For else the release of small faults,
would not be half so gainefull.

3 To this purpose S. Hieroms words, or the reverend Bedes whether you will,
(for either of their grave authorities shall serve my turn) do wholly agree in
the exposition of this sentence, In Cap. 11. Proverb.
Mortuo homine impio non erit vltra spes. A wicked man being once departed, is
past recovery or hope. Where the author writes thus. Heu misere hoc
pertransit Origenes, qui post universal iudicium vitam credidit omnibus impijs
da^dam, Notandum autem quod etsi impijs post mottem spes veniae non sit, sunt
tamen qui de leuioribus peccatis, cum quibus obligati defuncti sunt: post
mortem possunt absolui. Origin passed over this text pitifully, that believed
all the wicked should have at length life everlasting, after the day a^
general judgment. Yet this is to be noted, that although there be no hope of
pardon for the wicked after their death, yet there be certain which may be
released of lighter trespasses, in the bond of which they departed out of this
world. And so does Oecumenius a Greek author, expound S. Paul's words of
venial sins: for the purgation of which, he douteth not but that there is a
fire of judgment in the life to come. Super. 3. Cap. 1. ad Cor.
Ipse autem saluabitur: quis? Qui aurum, argentum, lapides preciosos superae
dificauerit: cum enim dixisset de eo quod mercedem accipiet, nu^c qualem
mercedem aperit: salutem scilicet. Saluabitur autem non sine dolor, vt par est
saluari per ignem transeuntem, and adhaerentes sibi leaves maculas purga^tem.
thus in English. By whom is it spoken when he says, he shall be saved? By him
it is spoken that builds on the foundation, gold, silver and preciouse
stones. For when he had told us that such should have a reward, now he
opens what that reward should be: to wit, salvation. And yet he must not be
saved without all pain, as there is no cause why he should, that must pass
through fire, and thereby be purged of the smaller spots which stick by him.
In the same sense does Theodoretus both expound the words of the Apostle, and
utter his judgment of Purgatory also: Super. ca. 3. Malach.
and almost the rest of all the Latin or Greek writers, which my purposed
brevity with plentiful proof otherwise forces me to leave to the studious
reader.

3 Next ensues the authority of Ieronym or Bid, or perhaps, neither of them
both, but yet of some old writer, which holds, that from light sins, men
may be absolved after their death by pains, prayers, alms, or masses. This
was a writer for M. Allens tooth, but neither of antiquity, nor credit
sufficient to carry away this cause.

The judgment of Oecumenius and Theodoretus, though they were writers about
that time, when corruption of doctrine had greatly prevailed, yet are they not
clear for popish purgatory, which the greek Church although they pray for the
dead, yet would never agree to acknowledge.

4 One place more I will only add out of Remigius, because he learnedly may
knit up the place, by joining both the Prophet and Apostles words together,
upon which we have stand so long. In 3. cap. Malach.
Thus that good author writes. Ipse enim quasi ignis conflans and peccators
exurens, Ignis enim in conspectu eius ardebit and in circuitu eius tempestas
valida. Hoc igne consumu^tur lignum, foenum, stipula. Nec solum erit quasi
ignis, sed etiam quasi herba fullonum, qua vestes nimium sordibus infectae
lauantur. Porro his qui grauiter peccauerunt erit ignis conflans and exurens:
illis vero qui leuia peccata commiserunt erit herba fullonum. Hinc per Isaiam
dicitur, si abluerit dominus. etc. Qui enim habent sordes leuium peccatorum
spiritu iudicij purgantur: qui vero sanguinem habent, hoc est grauioribus
peccatis infecti sunt, spiritu ardoris exurentur and purgabuntur. Et sedebit
conflans and emundans argentum, and colabit eos quasi aurum and argentum, hoc
est intellectum and colloquium: vt quicquid mixtum est stanno vel plumbo,
camino domini exuratur: and quod purum aurum est and argentum remaneat. Et
purgabit filios Leui: In filijs Leui omnem sacerdotalem ordine^ intelligimus, a
quibus iudicium incipiet, quia scriptum est: tempus est vt iudicium incipiat a
domo dei: 1. Petri. 4.
and alibi: a sanctuario meo incipite. Si autem sacerdos flammis purgandus est
and colandus, quid de caeteris dicendum est, quos nullum commendat priuilegium
sanctitatis? These golden words have this sense. He shall come as the
goldesmithes fire, burning sinners. For in his sight a flame shall rise, and a
mighty tempest round about him: by which fire, our woodde, hay, and stooble,
shall be wasted and worn away. With that, he shall be like the clensers
herb, whereby garments very much stained be purged. To all those that have
grievously offended, he will be a burning and melting fire: but to the light
sinners, he shall be as the washers herb. Which difference the prophet Esaias
notes thus: If our Lord wipe away the filthe of the daughters of Syon, Cap. 4.
and blood from the midst of Israel, in the spirit of judgment and fire.
For such as have only the spots of venial sins, they may be amended by
the spirit of judgment, but men of blood, to wit the more grievous
offenders, must be tried by fire. And he shall sit casting and purifying
silver, and shall purge men as gold and silver be purified: that is to say our
thoughts, understanding, and words, from impurity and uncleanness, I call
stannu^ peuter, moved by the circumsta^ce of the letter.

1. Pet. 4.


as from pewter and lead, by Gods furnace shall exactly be purged: and nothing
shall be left but as pure as gold and fine silver. And he shall purge the
sons of Leui: that is the order of priesthood, where this heavy judgment
shall first begin. For so it is written. Time is now, that judgment begin at
the house of God: and again: Begin at my sanctuary. If the priest must be
purged and fined, what shall we deem of other, whom privilege of holy order
does not commend or help? thus far goes the author in conference of
diverse scriptures. Who, with the rest of all the holy fathers that compassed
their senses within the unity of Christ's Church, has found by evident
testimony of sundry scriptures, the pains of purgatory: which the busy heads
of our time by vain bragging of scriptures, in singular arrogance of their
own wits, can never find.

4 Last of all here is vaunt made of the testimony of Remigius, as though he
were a new author, and perhaps M. Allen in his notes, found him so, but it is
nothing else but the saying of Ieronym almost word for word upon 3. Malach, 3.
which before we have showed sufficiently to be me^t of the judgment that
Christ should exercise by his doctrine, at his first coming, and nothing at
all pertaining to purgatory. And therefore these golden words (as you call them
M. Allen) have a leaden exposition, when they be drawn from the preaching of
the Gospel, to the mayntenance of purgatory.

A further declaration of this point, for the better understanding of the
doctors words. Wherein it is opened how purgatory is ordained for mortal
sins: and how for smaller offenses who are like to feel that grief, and
who not at all. CAP. IX.
1 ANd I think they now have small advantage, by the exception of Origens
testimony: by occasion whereof, such light is found for our cause, that we now
by goodly authority have both found the placies alleged plainly to prove
purgatory, and also what sins it namely purges, and what men after their
death may be amended thereby. That not only the bare truth, but some
necessary circumstances to the studious of the truth, have been here by just
occasion opened, and all error wholly removed. Except this point may somewhat
stay the reader, that hears in some places the pains of Purgatory to be both
a punishment for grievous sins, and a purgation of lighter trespasses with
all: and yet that it now may appear the contrary, by the mind of some learned
authors, who expressly make that pain as a remedy only for venial sins,
and not to apperteine at all to the capital and deadely crimes that man often
times does commit: Therefore to be as plain as may be necessary for the
unlearned, or any other that is godly curious in things much tending to the
quiet rest of man's conscience, it is to be noted: that this ordinary justice of
God in the life following for the purgation of the elect, A mortal sin not
remitted in this life is not discharged by purgatory.
can not discharge any man of mortal sin, which was not pardoned before in
the Church militant upon earth. And therefore what crime so ever deserves
damnation, and was not in man's life remitted, it can not by purgatory pains be
released in the next: because it deserves death everlasting, and staieth the
offender from the kingdom of heaven for ever: no peine temporal in this
world or the next but Christ's passion alone, (the benefit whereof is not by
the sufferers will, extended to any that sins unto death) being able to
satisfy for the same.

As often then as thou hear any Catholic man affirm purgatory to punish or
purge grievous and deadely offenses, be assured his meaning of the temporal
pain due unto wicked men and their sins, after their bond and debt of
everlasting death, with the very fault it self, be in Gods Church remitted.
For as S. Augustine says, A deadely sin remitted is in case of a venial
sin.

De vera and falsa poeni^ent. ca. 18.


a mortal sin forgeuen, is becomne a venial trespass, and so deserves no
more pain then a venial sin, which by transitory punishment may be fully
and perfitely released: thus he says. Quaedam enim sunt peccata quae mortalia
sunt, and in poenitentia fiunt venialia, non tamen statim sanata. There be
sins (says he) which being deadly of their own nature, be yet by poenaunce
made venial, though not always straight healed. Then by this rule, what so
ever is spoken of venial sins or the purgation thereof: it is meant both by
the small offensies which of their own nature are venial: and also of the
greater, so that they be forgeuen in Gods Church before: whereby they are
become venial as the other, and deserve proportionaly as the other: and may be
taken away (as the same man affirms) either in this world or the next, Ench.
ca. 71.
by the same remedies as the other, though not always so speedely.

CAP. IX.

1 NO marvel but you must crow like a cock of the game, you have obtained
such a noble victory out of Origens error, and specially you have discouer^d
such a solemn secret to the young petits of popery, that only venial sins
are cleansed by purgatory, that they are much beholding to you. But lest your
kitchen should be cold if none but venial sins should pass through the
heat of purgatory, you have found out a sutle shifte, how to bring mortal
sins also through ye same pykes of purgatory, for discharge of which you know
men will bestow more cost, then for release of those, that with only
sprinckling of holy water, as you wott well, may be washed away. Therefore
mortal sins must be remitted in this life, and then they may be purged in
the fire of purgatory, as being now become in the case of venial sins. O
deep mysteries reueiled out of the bottomless pit, which have no ground at
all in the word of God, but are manifestly overthrown thereby, even from the
foundations. For the foundation of this doctrine, is the distinction of venial
and mortal sins, whereas the word of God plainly determines, that every
sin is mortal and deserves eternal death, seem it never so small. Cursed
is every one that abides not in all things that are written in the law to
fulfill them. Deu. 27. The soul that sins shall dye. Eze. 18. The reward of
sin is death. Romans 6. And as for that distinction, which S. John makes of a
sin to death, a sin not to death, has nothing common with that of the
papists, for all sin that by the mercy of God is pardonable, he calls a
sin not unto death, for which God is entreated that gives life to them that
have so sinned. And that sin he counts unto death, which is irremissible,
as obstinate and wilful apostasy. Heb. 6. blasphemy against the holy ghost.
Math. 12. etc. for which it is not lawful io pray. Thus by judgment of Gods
word, are all sins mortal which Papists call venial, and all that they
count mortal, by Gods spirit are counted venial. For by the justice of God,
all sins are mortal, but by his mercy, they are all pardonable, except that
sin unto death, whereof S. John speaks. 1. Joan. 5. But to return to M.
Allens shift, and to examine whether it will satisfy the judgment of those
old writers, which affirm that only small and light offenses are cleansed by
the fire of purgatory. M. Allen says, mortal sins become venial, by
remission. The Scripture teaches that sins forgeuen are not imputed at all.
But M. Allens doctrine is, that remission of sins does not take sins away
but only changes their nature, from mortal to venial, yea he is not
ashamed to vouch Augustine to warranty, as though he should say, that a mortal
sin forgiven, is become a venial trespass, etc. If all men were blind,
this fellow would play trimly with their noses, when he will be so bold with
all men that can see: Augustines words as he cites them in Latin are these.
Quaedam enim sunt peccata quae mortalia sunt, and in poenitentia fiunt
venialia, that is, there are some sins which are deadly of their own nature,
but by repentance they are made venial. I have translated them as he does,
saving that he calls poenitentia penance which I, to avoid the ambiguitie of
the english word, as it is taken by the Papists, have turned repentance. Now
is it all one to say, that such sins as of their own nature deserve death,
may yet be pardoned to him that repents? which is the manifest meaning of
Augustines words, and that which M. Allen fathereth upon him, as though he
said, a mortal sin forgeuen is become a venial trespass? Again this
doctors words are plain of light and small offenses, and not of heinous and
great offenses, that by pardon are made little offenses.

2 Well then, to close up briefly, all this have we found by these
scriptures alleged: that being diverse degrees of men, Purgatory apperteineth
but to one sort. First not to such as lack the faith of Christ, for they
having no foundation are already judged: neither to such as have not builded
upon the foundation, but rather defaced it with works of death and deuilish
doctrine. For all these must like widdred branches be cast into the fire, not
to be purged, but utterly wasted. There be yet other that keep their foundation
fast, and work there upon both gold and silver, but yet abased and somewhat
defiled by the mixture of other infirmities not sufficiently redressed in this
life: these must of necessity by Gods ordinance, suffer the Purgation by fire:
that their works purified and amended by the sentence of his just judgment,
may at length by mercy and grace bring them to their desired end.

Now the perfect estate, which, having this groundewarcke, and building
thereupon nothing for the most part, but the tried fine works of heavenly
doctrine and perfect charity, can not fear the fire, as in whom it shall
find no matter of waste. For if any dross of seculare desires or worldly
weakness, was in their frailty contracted, their fructefull penance in their
life, washed that away by the force of Christ's blood, before the day of our
Lord great and fearful, came upon them: Naum. 1.
In which case God will not punish twice for one fault, nor enter into
judgment with such, as have judged them selves to his hand. 1. Cor. 11.


These therefore thus guarded by Gods grace, in whom only they challenge this
Privilege, can not feel any danger, their works (as S. Paul says) abiding
the brounte of the fire, though they were in place of torment with the rest.
For if such do pass the fiery sword, before they enter into the joys of
heaven, yet they shall even there be so shadowed, that to them it can neither
be any whit molestious, nor one moments stay from the reward of their pure
golden works, which by fire can not perish. For of such, we must believe with
Gods Church, that they go straight to heaven upon their departure, with out
stay or punishment in the next life. Although Christ only, of his own force,
being not subject to any spotte of sin, did pass this fire: and enter into
heaven, the eternal gates opening them selves unto him as to the king of
glory. Who being before in the place of pains also, yet could not possibly
be touched thereby, as the Apostle says. Act. 2.


And that is S. Ambrose his meaning (as I suppose) when he said. Vnus ille
ignem hunc sentire non potuit. Christ only was he, that could not feel this
fire. He speaks of the fire through which even the good must pass, before
they come to eternal joy. Where he doubts not to auouche, that many a man
that thinks him self gold, and is taken so to be of others too, shall yet
there be proved full of dross and impurity, long to be cleansed before his
final freedom and delivery: and yet to be saved through fire.

But for those that be in deed perfect men, as John the beloved of Jesus, and
Peter with the rest, this holy doctor was so sure of Purgatory, that he
thought these also to go through the same: and yet the fiery flame to have
given place as it did to the three children, Dan. 4.
and as S. Augustine supposes it shall do in the general conflagration to the
bodies of virtuous men, when at the very same time it shall both waste the
wicked, and purge the mean: the works of one sort withstanding the flame,
the dross of the other in a manner feeding the same. S. Ambrose therefore thus
writes of the holy Apostle. De morte Ioannis aliqui dubitaru^t, Sermon. 20. in
Psalm. 118.
de transitu per ignem dubitare non possumus, quia in paradiso est, and a
Christo non separatur: some doubt of John's death, but of his passage by the
fire, because he is in joy with Christ, we can not doubt. And of S. Peter he
says. sieve ille sit Petrus qui claues accepit regni coelorum, Psalm. 65.
oportet dicat transiuimus per ignem and aquam and induxisti nos in
refrigerium. Yea if it be Peter him self to whom the keys of heaven were
committed, he must say: we passed by fire and water, and thou have brought us
into the place of refreshing.

But how so ever God works in this case with the perfect sort, this the
Church believes, and so this doctor teaches, and therefore I dare be bold to
say it, that such neither suffer any pain, nor tariaunce by the way. Though
by nature, that fire or torment prepared for the amendment and punishing of
sin or the dross thereof, might of force and right take hold there, where
corruption of sin by any means has been, that is not wholly purified before.
Therefore the soul of our Savior, being altogether unspotted, could not be
subject to any sufferance in the world to come, by any ordinance prepared for
the punishment of sin: that fire having no further grant by creation and
natural property, but to waste there where sin is found to have been. Upon
other it would work till all corruption were consumed, if mercy did not
prevent both in purifying those singular elect vessels, and in repressing the
nature of the flame prepared, that it practice not justice, where God has
abundantly showed grace and mercy before.

Albeit I do not say that the fiery sword is in the passage of every soul
toward heaven, for that is Gods secret: and I will with S. Ambrose in the
same place say: Quod legi praesumo, Ibidem.
quod no^ legi scientibus relinquo. That which I have read, in grave
authority, that will I boldly avouch: that which I have not read, with fear
and reverence I commit to men of more knowledge. As with out exception I submit
my self to the determination of Gods Church in all these points of mysteries,
which in this deep matter course of taulke may drive me unto. But now for the
meaner sort that with Christian faith and good works have yet some baser
building of infirmity or lighter trespasses also, those must needs be tried by
the fire of just judgment, in the world to come. And this is that which S.
Augustine calls so often the Amending fire. S. Ambrose the fiery sword, Vide
Rupe^tum in 3. cap. Genes. In Ser. de S. Nicolao.
S Bernarde terms it the place of expiatio^, In quo pater benignus examinat
filios rubiginosos, sicut examinatur argentum: In which our merciful father
tries his rusty children as silver is tried. VVhi^h all these holy fathers
with the rest, oftentimes do name by the common calling of Purgatory. Read all
these place is named if thou have occasion thy self, and there thou shall
find to thy singular comforth, sufficient proof of thy faith, great motion of
godly life, with necessary fear of Gods judgments. Thou shall marvel at the
ignorance of our time, that could ever doubt of so plain a matter: thou shall
pity with all thy heart the unworthy deceiving of the unlearned, and have
large matter to withstand the deceiuer, and to help the simple home again.

2 The rest of this chapter is so vainly consumed, in serching how the perfect
men shall pass through purgatory and feel it not, that it is not worth the
aunswering, but only to see how he is combred to reconcile the doctrine of the
Papists concerning purgatory, and the opinions of the old writers, touching
them that pass through fire into paradise. For their opinion (as we have seen
before) was that all men were they never so just, passed through that fire, and
were purified thereby. The Papists affirm, that perfect just men come not at
all in their purgatory, as the M of the sentence teaches lib. ^. did. 21. M.
Allen to retain the authority of the old writers, holds that perfect just
me^ pass through this purgatory, without sense of pain, or making any stay
there, yea he doubts not to affirm, that Christ him self passed through the
fire of purgatory, though he could not feel the smart of it, because he was
pure from sin. Is not this wholesome doctrine think you? to be so careful to
rack the fiery sword, that Ambrose speaks of, unto purgatory, that he is
not ashamed to invent a new article of our faith, that Christ descended into
purgatory.

A place alleged for purgatory out of S. Matthew, with certain of the
ancient fathers judgments upon the same. CAP. X.
1 ANd yet it shall be convenient, that I help the studious reader with
further proof out of the holy Scripture, that he may be fully established in
his faith, and the adversary heretic wholly confounded in his misbelefe: If he
list not rather (as I heartely pray to God that he may) give over that
unnatural plea, holden to long against the Catholic Church our mother. Give
ear then unto the words of our Savior written in the Gospel of S. Matthew:
Cap. 5.
Esto consentiens aduersario tuo cito dum es in via cum eo: ne forte tradat te
aduersarius iudici, and iudex tradat te ministro and in carcerem mittaris. Amen
dico tibi non exies inde donec reddas nouissimu^ quadrantem. Lucae. 12.
Be at agreement with thine adversary speedely, whiles thou art with him in
the way. Lest that adversary deliver thee up to the judge, and the judge
commit thee to an officer, by whom thou may be cast into prison: surely I say
unto thee, thou shall not get out, till thou have discharged the uttermost
farthing.

Now being desirous of the truth and true meaning of this letter, (for the
understanding makes all) because there may arise by the darkness of that
figurative speech some diversity of sense, let us indifferently wey every
word, and with diligence examine the circumstances of the text whereby any
light may appear. And first being admonished to agree with our adversary, we
may right well know that he means not by the common enemy of our kind, 1.
Petri. 5.
that rometh about seeking whom he may devour: for his cruel assaults must
only by resistaunce be withstand. Neither the word which the Evangelists
there used, (...). Litigator. seu actor.
can properly signify any malicious enemy, that by hatered of our person is
become our deadly foe, as those which be skillfull in the language is wherein
they wrote, do confess: But rather, as well the word as the just
consideration of the place, drives us to acknowledge that this our adversary,
here signifies our brother, which has just quarrel against us in judgment,
for that we would not give ear unto him sharply admonishing us of our
faults, being therefore an adversary to our viceis and fleshly conversation.
In which sort, to us that are flesh and blood, and ready to evil from our
youth, all be adversaries that preach Christ, the amendment of licentious
manners, repentance of our loathsome life past, Vide Bern. ser. 85. super Cantic.
or else use against us the rod of correction and bodyly punishment, that our
souls may be saved in the day of the appearing of our Lord.

To this kind of adversary, Christ councelleth and commands us, for our
great good, to agree and consent whiles we be here in the way of this our
pilgramage and transitory life: lest all these means which he wroght to reduce
us to the perfection of a Christian godly life, be as it were a witness of our
contempt, and him self our accuser before the judge, that shall so justly
reward every man according to his deeds: that is Christ him self, Act. 10.
to whom the father has given all judgment. Whose ministers being Angels,
either good or badde, for the execution of justice upon sinners, shall at his
appointment cast us into the prison and dongion, there to be holden from life
and liberty, till we have paid the last farthing: the toleration of which
bonds shall recompense the debtes, which by well doing and much mourning, in
the way of this world, we refused to pay: as S. Augustine piththely speaks in
these words. De libero Arb trio. lib. 3. cap. 15
Si non reddit faciendo iustitiam, reddet patiendo miseriam: he that paieth not
his debt by doing that which is just and right, he shall pay it by suffering
misery. Which we trust the pitiful pains of that prison, through the only
deserts and merits of Christ our Lord and God, shall so discharge, that
after the payment either pardoned or fully made, we may have joyful access to
his blessed presence.

For the form of speech used in like order of words by both the
Evangelists, does us plainly to understand, that we may through Christ make
full payment thereof. Else he would not by likelihood have said, that we
should not escape forth till we had discharged* the utmost farthing, but rather
that severe judge would have given charge, that the offender should be bound
hand and foutte, and cast into the dark doungion of everlasting damnation
prepared for the devil, and his angels: which is the second and everlasting
death. Carcer.
Namel^ the word of Imprisonment so well agreeing thereunto, that it may not
well admit any other meaning, but a place of temporal torment. For a prison is
a place of correction and chastisement of such as be on live, in which as long
as life lasts a man may be in hope of liberty, though his bondage for a time
be never so intolerable: but when sentence of death is once pronounced in this
world, or damnation in the next, then we may right well know Gods mercy to be
shut up, and the party desperate of all recovery. Neither the name of
Imprisonment in Scripture, is lightly taken for the place of everlasting
punishment, nor can by conference of the sundry parts of this letter, have
here conveniently any such sense.

CAP. X.

1 HEre according to M. Allens orderly proceeding, is alleged for purgatory a
place out of S. Matthew, where Christ says to him that neglects to reconcile
him self to his adversary, before he came to the judge, that he shall be cast
into prison from whence he shall not come, until he have paid the uttermost
farthing. The meaning of Christ is plain, that he shall never come out no
more, then that wicked servant, which was cast in prison until he should pay
the whole debt which was ten thousand talents. Matthew. 18. But before we go any
further, let us se how the doctrine of this chapter agrees with that we had in
the chapter next before. The^e we were told, that purgatory serves but for
venial sins, or else for such mortal sins as by forgeuenes in this life
obtained, are made venial trespasses. But here not only vices and fleshly
conversation, but also contempt of all that preach Christ and repentance of
our loathsome life past, etc. are said to be the debt that must be discharged in
purgatory to the uttermost farthing, then the which no vice is more mortal,
nor farther from forgeuenes. For he that not only leads a loathsome life, but
also contemns all those means that Christ has wrought to reduce him to the
perfecton of a Christian godly life (I use his own words) how can he have
remission of his sins in this life, and yet M. Allen dare promise him, that
the toleration of bands in the prison of purgatory, shall recompense his debt,
and bring him from thence into the blessed presence of Christ. M. Allen has
the most passing faculty of any that ever I heard, to build one thing in one
leaf, and to overthrow it him self again in the next. Nevertheless I can
not abide that he should promise a pardon of that payment, which Christ
swears shall be made unto the uttermost farthing. For he that refuses
reconciliation or repentance in this life, must not look for a pardon after
this life. Therefore if M. Allen will needs understand this prison for
purgatory, I will be so bold upon Christ's oath and earnest asseueration to
affirm, that he which is so imprisoned shall neither look for mercy nor
satisfaction by other men's payment, but by his own suffering. But let us see
how he proves, that this place is to be understood of purgatory? First by
likelihood that he should not have said: he shall not escape until he has
paid the uttermost farthing, but rather, cast him into the dark dungeon of
everlasting damnation. M. Allen either can not, or will not see, that Christ
here continues an allegory of a temporal judgment, as Matt. 18. where he
has the same, Donec, as the same in like sense is often used else where.
Secondly the name of imprisonment, will not well admit (he says) any other
meaning, but of a temporal torment, as though hell is not called a prison. 1.
Peter. 3. And Apoc. 20. which is a place of everlasting torments. Therefore
here is no show of matter but big words only

2 And these notes well and diligently considered, may give great light to the
alleged words otherwise somewhat obscure, and therewith prove our matter too.
They be not of my scanning only, as for some part thou shall perceive by
these words of Rupert, Super. 5. ca. Matthew.
an excellent good author. Aduersarius eorum qui erant eiusmodi sermo fuit
euangelij, and omnis praedicator euangelicae veritatis, potestatem habens non
consentientem sibi tradere iudici: and non solum iudici, verum etiam malo
ministro, quemadmodum vnus eorum tradid^t hominem satanae. The adversary of
such men was the word of the Gospel, and each preacher of the truth, who had
pour to deliver him that would not agree unto him to the judge: yea further
then that, he had authority to commit him to an evil minister, as one of them
gave up a man to Satan. Here we see what that adversary is, to whom we must
consent in this life: and withal, we have an example in this judgment of Gods
ministers, how man may be committed in the next life to a tormenter, that may
vex him then at Gods prescription, as he does now at the charge only of his
minister: then in favor and mercy of the judge, as it is now in love and
charity of the vicegerent, then for the atteining of heavens bless, as it is
now for the salvation of the person punished. Lib. 21. de ciuit. Dei. cap. 13.
For the execution of Gods sentence may be either by a good spirit, or our
adversary Angel, or by his will and word only, to whom all creatures serve
and obey.

In this sense Paulinus, who was S. Augustines pear, writes that the holy
Ghost and Gods word, be man's adversaries in earth: to whom if we apply our
selves obediently in this world, our sorrow can not be long in the next life.
But these be his own words. Ad Amandum epist 1.
Neque septem dies luctus noster excedat, si consentiamus in huius vitae via,
aduersario nostro, id est, spiritui ac vei bo dei quod nobis pecca^tibus
aduersatur, etc. Our grief can not be much longer then seven days (he means
it shall be a temporal pain, and not very long) if we consent in the way of
this life to our adversary that is to wit, the spirit and word of God. For
they be our adversaries when we sin: because the holy Ghost charge the
world with sin, and the word of God, if we obey not, will be our accuser and
promotour up unto the Judge: who will have an account of his talent, to the
uttermost farthinge. Thus far spoke this Author: and in like sense many more
whom I need not now name. Because there is such store of testimonies, that
not only in some part make for the opening of this scripture: but altogether
for Purgatory. And one or two of them I will briefly recite: because I
determined with my self, and bound my self, for my discharge and the readers
more safe warraunt, to bring no text of scripture for the proof of my
purpose, except I might find some holy writers of the antiquity that used the
same directly in that sense: that if any man would reprehe^d my meaning, yet he
should not be so bold with such as I ca^ name, and prove to be my authors
therein.

2 In this part are two testimonies alleged, one of Rupertus, an other of
Paulinus, of which Rupertus affirms his exposition of the adversary, but
touching purgatory he says nothing. Paulinus interprets the adversary
somewhat otherwise, but he speaks of them that do agree with him in the way
of this life, whose sorrow he says shall not exceed seven days, but what
sorrow they shall abide that contemn this agreement, he says nothing, but
generally of the account of the uttermost farthing. I marvel whether M. Allen
was awake when he alleged these two testimonies for purgatory, or whether he
thought that all men should be asleep that should read them.

3 But whom may I more safely allege for the contentatio^ of sober wits,
and repressing the adversaries boldness, then the blessed martyr S. Cyprian?
Who in the forth book of his Epistles, for the declaration that every one
which here is pardoned of his sins, shall not straight be exalted to the
glory of saints and martyrs after their death, uses very fitly (as he does
all other placies of scripture) the forsaide text, by these words. Epist. 2.
Aliud est ad veniam stare, aliud ad gloriam peruenire: aliud, missum in
carcerem non exire donec soluat nouissimum quadrantem, aliud statim fidei and
virtutis accipere mercedem: aliud pro peccato longo dolor cruciari, and
purgari diu igne, aliud peccata omnia passione purgari: aliud denique pendere
in die iudicij ad sententiam domini, aliud statim a domino coronari: In
English: it is an other thing to stand at a pardon, then out of hand to
atteine to glory: it is an other manner of matter to be committed to prison,
thense not to depart till the last farthing be discharged, See how fully he
expresses both the word and meaning of purgatory.

He calls the sentence of God in the next life judgment.


and to receive out of hand the reward of faith and virtue: It is one thing by
great sorrow to be tormented for our sins, and by long fire amended and
purged of the same, and an other to have sufficiently purged them by martyrdom:
in fine, it is not all one to hang on Gods sentence in the day of judgment,
and out of hand to be crowned of our Lord. These words as you see,
expressly prove our matter, open the meaning of the scripture whereon we now
stood, and do clearly set forth the order of Gods justice in the next life.
And they shall content the reader better, if he mark upon what occasion this
blessed man spoke these words. There were many in the persecution of that
time, that for fear or worldly respects, denied their faith, and offered to
idols: who afterward, the storm of tyranny somewhat being caulmed, confessed
their fault, and did penance for the same, by S. Cyprian and other good
bishops prescriptio^, that then ruled the Church of those days. By whom, after
due satisfaction made, they were admitted to the communion of the Christian
company, and receite of the holy Sacraments again. But all pastors not of
like mercy of severity in the case, some were suspended from the use of the
Sacraments longer, and othersome by more clemency with speed pardoned again.
Now S. Cyprian, though he were very severe in such a cause, (as in all his
works it does well appear) yet he was blamed by Antonianus and others, that
he dealte over mekely with such as denied their faith, in so speedy admission
of them to the peace of Gods church, as they then termed that reconciliation:
alleging, that if such wordely wind wauerers might be admitted so soon after,
the open denial of their faith, then there would none steadfastly stand to
death, by confession of their belefe and their masters name, any more: the
refusers being in as good case as they, if pardon might so soon be procured.
But S. Cyprians answer is this: that their admission can not withdraw any
man's zele from martyrdom, or confession of Christ's name, seeing their
reconciliation does not set them on so clear board as martyrs be: Who being
tried by their blood shall straight receive the crown of glory: When the
others standing but upon pardon of their sins, and not discharged of due
pains for the same, must into prison notwithstanding, till they have paid
their uttermost duty: and by long amending by fire, at the last come to that
reward, which the martyrs atteined by sufferance at the first. And thus I
think this holy Martyr means. Markevvel.
His words surely be singular and being well understand, they contain as
much matter for our purpose, as can be possibly in so little room: besides the
exposition of the text wherein we yet do stand: But I will add more, that
all may be sa^fe on every side.

3 The place of Cyprian has more couller, but yet not so clear for purgatory
as M. Allen would seem to make it. For first it is plain by the words both
going before and following after, that he speaks of adulterers that are
pardoned in the Church, of whom some bishops that were Cyprian his
predecessors had so hard a judgment, that they did utterly seclude them from
reconciliation, and allowed them no place of repentance, but Cyprian was not
of that unreasonable severity, for his Church did receive them, although they
compted them not equal with martyrs or continent persons. For it is one thing
to be admitted by pardon, as adulterers are, but yet with some note of
ignominy, an other to come to glory, as martyrs and continent persons do. It
is one thing by denying of reconciliation to adulterers in this life, to drive
them to that prison, from whence they shall not come till they have paid the
uttermost farthing, an other thing to count them unreconciled, like them that
immediately receive the reward of there faith and virtue. It is one thing for a
man after he has been long time vexed with sorrow for his sins, to be
reformed as one that has been long purged in the fire, an other thing by
suffering persecution to have purged all his sins. Finally it is one thing to
hang upon the sentence of God in the day of judgment, as they seem to do
which being penitent for their heinous sins, yet are not absolved from them
by the Church: An other thing to be assured of their crown, which have striued
lawfully. And this I take to be the simple meaning of Cyprians words, agreeing
with the circumstaunce of the place. But if they were otherwise meant by him,
surely they can not but with carte ropes be drawene to the Popes purgatory. For
those that stand by pardon he excludes from glory, and those that are
reformed by sorrow and purged by fire, he suspendeth until the last day, and
then makes them uncertain of the sentence also: which can not stand with the
Papists opinion of purgatory: no more then that which he writes in his
treatise against Demetrianus toward the end. Quando isthinc excessum suerit,
nullus iam locus poenitentiae est, nullus satisfactionis effectus. Hic vita aut
amittitur aut tenetur etc. When men are gone hence, there is no place of
repentance, no effect of satisfaction: while we are here life is either lost
or held. And exhorting Demetrianus him self to repentance which had been a
wicked man and a persecutor of the Christians, he says to him: Tu sub ipso
licet exitu, and vitae temporalis occasu, pro dilictis roges Deum, qui vnus and
verus est, confessionem and fidem agnitionis eius implores, venia confitenti
datur, and credenti indulgentia salutaris de diuina pietate conceditur, and ad
immortalitatem sub ipsa morte transitur. If thou although it but a little before
the end and decay of this temporal life shall pray to God for thy sins,
which is the only true God, If thou desire confession and faith of his
knowledge, pardon is given to him that confesses, and wholesome forgeuenes of
the goodness of God is granted to him that believes, and even from the hour of
death he passes into immortality. By this appears what Cyprian his
judgment was of purgatory and the effect of satisfaction after this life.

4 Eusebius Emissenus, Homil. 3. de Epiphania.
an author of great antiquity and much credit in the Church of God helps our
cause by this notable discourse following. Hi vero qui temporalibus poenis
digna gesserunt, ad quos sermo dei dirigitur, quod non exient inde donec
reddant nouissimum quadra^tem: per fluuium igneum de quo propheticus sermo
commemorat, Dan. 7.
and fluuius rapidus currebat ante cum, per vada feruentibus globis horrenda,
transibunt. Quanta fuerit peccati materia, tanta erit pertranseundi mora,
quantum accreuerit culpa, tantum sibi ex homine vindicabit fla^mae rationabilis
disciplina: and qua^tum stulta iniquitas gessit, tantum sapiens poena deseuiet.
Et quia sermo diuinus quodammodo aeneae ollae animam comparans: Ezech. 24.
Pone ollam super prunas vacuam donec incalescat aes eius: illic periuria, irae
malitiae, cupiditates, quae puritatem nobilis naturae infecerant, exudabunt:
illic stannum vel plumbum diuersarum passionum, quae aurum diuinae imaginis
adulterauerant, consumentur. Quae omnia hic ab anima separati per eleemosynas
and lachrymas compendij transactione potera^t. Ecce sic exigere habet ab homine
rationem qui seipsum pro homine dedit, and confixus clauis, legem mortis fixit.
Thus it is in our tongue. As for all such, unto whom for their offenses our
Lords word is especially directed, that they shall not come out till they have
paid the uttermost farthing: Those must pass the fiery floode, by horrible
fordes of skawlding waves: Whereof the Prophet makes mention thus. And a fiery
stream ran before his face. The space of passage shall be measured by the
matter of sin: according to the increase of our offensies, the discreite
discipline of that flame shall revenge again: and look how far in
wickedness our folly did reach, so far this punishment shall wisely waste.
And like as Gods word compares man's soul to a brazen pot, saying: Set the
pot empty over the coals till the brass thereof of wax hot. So there thou
shall see perjury, anger, malice, vnfructefull desires sweat out, which did
infect the purity of man's noble nature: there the pewter and lead of diverse
passions, which did abase the pure gold of Gods image, shall be consumed away.
All which things might in our life time have easily been wiped away by alms
and tears. Such a strait account lo will he keep with man, He alludeth to the
place of the second chapter to the Colossians of the obligation of death which
was against us.
that for man's sake gave him self to death, and being throust through with
nails, has fastened the dominion of death also. So far has Emissenus
spoken: and his words be so weighty, that they have been counted worthy
rehersall in solemn Serm^ns and Homilies of the Antiquity, to stir up their
hearers to the necessary awe of Gods judgments, with much provocation of
virtuous life. S. Augustine has the self same discourse, almost no word
thereof changed: With this addition: Ideo (fratres charissimi) conuertamus
nos ad meliora, Homil. 16. Tom. 10.
dum in nostra potestate sunt remedia: Therefore dear brethern let us turn and
amend by time, whilst the remedies be yet in our own dealinge. And in an
other place thus he touches the scripture alleged: Apparebit Deus Deorum in
Syon: In Psalm. 103.
sed quando? post peregrinationem finita via, si tamen post finitam viam, non
iudici tradamur, vt iudex mittat in carcerem. The God of Gods in Syon shall
appear: but when? mary after our pilgramage be past, and the journey ended.
Except it s^ fall out, that after our journey here, we be delivered up to the
judge, and so the judge send us to prison.

To this place also S. Bernarde does s^eetely, but yet fearfully allude in
this exhortation: In vita Hu^berti.
Volat (says he) irreuocabile verbum, and dum creditis vos cauere poenam istam
minimam, incurritis multo ampliorem. Illud enim scitote quia post hanc vitam in
locis purgabilibus, centupliciter quae fuerunt hic neglecta reddentur, vsque ad
nouissimum quadrantem. Our word, not possible to be called back, flies
far: and whilst you seek to avoid a little grief here, you incur much
greater. For assure your self of this, that after this life, in places of
purgation, all negligencies past must be repaide a hundredth foulde home again,
till the discharge of the last farthinge.

4 As for this authority of Eusebius which has served for a patch to piece up
so many homilies, of so many diverse men as a Cuckowes song uttered in diverse
places, seems neither to have Eusebius nor Augustine, nor any other good
author to be the father of it, but even some cowled cuckowe, that has left
this egg in so many birds nestes to be hatched under their wings, and to be
counted for one of their chickens, but that your voice does soon bewray it.
And here a man may note a great piece of cunning in them that had the writing
out of books, about those times when errors began to take strength, that not
only whole works were falsely entitled to diverse good authors, but also
patches inserted to their own works. And if any thing by them were once
spoken, that sounded to the confirmation of those errors, that was thrust into
diverse places of their writings, lest it should scarce be espied in one. And
hereof it comes, that such sayings in Augustine, Chrysostom and other, as
seem to allow prayer for the dead, be so often repeated in their writings, and
especially in homilies that were taken of their mouths, by Scribes and
Notaries. But who so ever was the father of this sentence as he speaks
friendely for the pains of purgatory, so he shows him self an utter enemy to
the release of the same. So does that Augustine which adds his exhortation to
these words by him repeated. But the other Augustine, which writes upon the
103. Psalm says, that God shall appear to them only, which are not cast
into prison when they be departed out of this life, therefore I muse wherefore
those words are here brought in. For Augustine (as I will show afterward)
understands that prison for hell and eternal torments. Bernard although he be
too young to depose in this cause, yet he speaks not so much to avouch the
pains of purgatory as to deny the remedy or remission of them: wherefore his
testimony helps not purgatory so much one way, as it hinders the Papists
gain an other way.

5 Here now let our adversaries in this bright shining truth, blind them
selves: let them boldly bost, of their accustomed impudency, that the
Catholics have no scriptures, nor appearance of scriptures: or if they stand
with us for the meaning, let them shape with all their conueyaunce, any one
shifte to answer these doctors words: Or if the uniform consent of so many
of the best learning, and greatest wisdom in the whole Church, may have no
room with them, let them show whereupon their own credits be grown so great,
that without reason, likelihood, or authority, men must needs believe them. It
is a strange case, that what soever they avouch, it must be Gods word: what
meaning so ever they make for maintenance of their wicked folly, it must be
termed the true sense of Scripture: And the truth it self showing all force,
in the conference of diverse places of holy writ, in weight of reason, in the
works and writings of all antiquity, shall be so lightly regarded.

I would to God the people pitifully deceived by such vain flying talk, could
behold the upright ways of truth, or could learn by the plain dealing of
our side, to require some grounded proof of these new doctors devises. The
difference betwixt the Catholics dealing, and the adversaries.
They may well perceive if they have any necessary care of those weighty
matters touching our salvation so near, that the Catholic never aduentureth
to bring any Scripture for his purpose, but he will be sure for his warrant, to
have the same so expounded by the ancient fathers of our faith: lest by his
rashness he deceive other, and father some falsehood upon the holy writers of
Gods will: which were horrible sacrilege. But on the other side if a man might
pose M. Calvin, or Flaccius, or such other of that light family, what doctor or
Scripture they followed in the exposition of S. James his place, for the
anointing with holy oil, when they were not ashamed to give this sense of that
Scripture: Jacob. 5.
that it were good to call the elders of the people, that had some salve or
ointment medicinable to ease the sick man's sore: what would they say? I am
sure such fellows will not excuse them selves by ignorance, (for the arrogance
of that sort, had rather be counted either malicious or presumptuous, then
unskillful) but of passing boldness all such must needs be noted, that dare
shape such an exposition of Gods blessed word, which they never heard surmised
of any wise man before. What doctor did they or Luther follow, when they
expounded S. Paul's words of widows marriage after vows made, 1. ad Tim. 5.
which the text calls breaking their first faith, to be meant by the promise
of the Christian faith made in Baptism? Was not this a galant gloss in this
sense? she that breaks her faith of baptism, shall be damned for marriage.
Ask them where these pretty schools were first picked. Pose master Jewel
where he had, that the Church of God might err. You shall see them earnestly
urged in these matters, how little they have to say, and yet how fast they will
tennesse one to an other in talk.

But I will not make a reckoning of their unseemly gloses: I would their
followers would only but ask them in all matters, from whence they had such
new meanings, which they falsely father on Gods word: that we might once hedge
them within some compass of reason, as we be contented with all our hearts, to
charge our own selves in every matter that we handle, as partly they may
conceive by our discourse, and shall more clearly anon.

5 Here M. Allen like Thraso upon the stage alone, must show his vein in
foolish insultation, as though he had overthrown a whole army of men, when he
has not killed a mouse: he lacks but his Gnato to hold him up with ait aio,
negat nego. For we must be examined, and M. Calvin, and M. Jewel must be
posed, as though men had nothing to say, but that which M. Allen will imagine
they can say. For my part I will not refuse to satisfy his demand. He will
know and have us aposed, from whence we have that new meaning of our Saviors
words, that he which is cast into prison for neglecting of reconciliation
while he is in the way, is cast into hell, from whence he shall never come. As
it is most plain by the very words of the text that our Savior Christ
speaks of judgment with all extremity, and without all mercy, so this sense
has sufficient witness of antiquity greater then that I think M. Allen dare
except against them. First Chrysostom upon this place of Matthew
understands the prison to be a temporal punishment of imprisonment in this
life affirming that Christ does not only threaten torments of hell fire after
this life, but also citation, judgment and imprisonment. But that ancient
doctor whose commentary of 54. homilies has long gone under Chrysostomes name
being by Erasmus judgment as ancient and well learned as he, has these
words upon that place. Si autem quam diu in via huius vitae es, non feceris
pacem cum aduersario quem laesisti, sed sic inimicantes per mortem ieritis ante
iudicem Christum, tradet te Christo, conuincens te reum in iuditio eius, and
iudex tradet ministro: id est Angelo poenarum crudeli, and ille mittet te in
carcerem Gehennae. But if thou shall not have made peace with thine adversary
whom thou have offended, while thou art in the way of this life, but that you
go on in your contention by death before Christ the judge, he shall deliver
thee to Christ conuicting thee to be gilty in his judgment, and the judge
shall deliver thee to the minister, that is to the cruel angel of torments,
and he shall cast thee into the prison of hell fire.

Augustine de sermon Domini in monte lib. 1. Non exeas inde donec soluas
nouissimum quadrantem, semper non exiturum esse quia semper soluit nouissimum
quadrantem, cum sempiternas poenas terrenorum peccatorum luit. Thou shall not
come out until thou have paid the uttermost farthing, he means that he shall
never come out, because he is always paying the last farthing, while he
suffers everlasting pains for his sins committed on the earth. S. Ieronym
says the sense of that place is manifest by that which goes before and
follows, that the Lord exhorts us to peace and concord, while we are in
this life, and reproves them that seek any other interpretations. Chromatius
also an old writer upon this place of S. Matthew says: Tradi ministro, etc.
id est praeposito tormentorum, vt missus in carcerem Gehennae, debitas peccati
poenas absoluat. To be delivered to the minister that is to the chief
tormentor, that being cast into the prison of hell fire, he may pay the
punishment due for his sin: again in the same place, a quo tradetur
ministro, id est angelo tormentorum, mittendus in carcerem Gehennae. Vnde non
dimittetur, nisi etiam nouissimum quadrantem reddat, id est omnem poenam debiti
etiam vsque ad nouissimum peccatum exsoluat. By the judge he shall be d^liuered
to the minister, that is to the angel of torments to be cast into the prison
of hell fire. From whence he shall not be let go, except he pay even the last
farthing, that is, he shall pay all the punishment that is due unto the last
sin. Now let M. Allen say, if he dare, that these witnesses lack either age
or credit, or else let him say tongue thou did lie when he said our
interpretation of the Scripture was without all reason, likelihood, or
authority.

But now to the appositions a word or two, though out of the compass of
purgatory, but we must follow M. Allen whether so ever it pleases him to
range. M. Allen what Flaccius or any such as he is has said neither do I know
neither do I regard, let them answer for them selves: But whereas you
charge M. Calvin to expound the oil whereof S James speaks cap. 5. for a
medicinable salve or ointment, all rethoricke set aside, I say plainly you lie,
for he utterly rejects that exposition, Interpreting that place of the grace
and gift of the healing, which then was used in the Church with the outward
sign of oil, as appears also Mark. 6. But as for them that interpret the
first faith which those widows reject, that after they wax wanton against
Christ, they will marry, etc. for the faith of Baptism and christianitye, they
can not follow a better doctor, then S. Paul him self in the same chapter,
where he says, that who so neglects to provide for his own family, has
denied the faith and is worse then an infidel? what faith is this? but the
faith of Christianity, but yet he is more plain in these words, where he
calls it the first faith, for what is the first faith, but the faith of
Baptism and Christianity, and as for M. Allens cavil, she that breaks her
faith of Baptism, shall be damned for marriage, is not worth a rush. For S. Paul
says not, she shall be damned for marriage, but because she has rejected the
first faith, that is such wanton young houswifes proceed so far, that at
length they forsake widowhood, christianity and all. But if M. Allen were posed
where he finds this word (...) in the Scripture, used for a vow or promise
made to God, perhaps he would answer he is no Grecian, then let him pose D.
Hardinge, or some other with the same question, and with all let them show how
the first faith can be expounded for the last vow, that a body has made, if
he have made more then one. For the Papists hold that these women made one
vow in baptism, an other of there widowhood. What so ever M. Jewel has
affirmed against the Papists, he has so substantially and learnedly defended,
that he need not to have any other man to answer for him. Therefore if it
were not to choke M. Allen in his own collar, I would travail no farther in
this question. The Church you say can not err, and that company is the Church,
which has the Pope for their head, if therefore it can be proved, that the
Pope and all they that take his part, have erred, it is sufficiently showed,
that the Church may err. S. Augustine was in this error (as you will not deny)
that the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ was to be ministered unto
infants, but of the same opinion he affirms, that Innocentius Bishop of Rome,
and all the Church in his time was, therefore the Pope and all the Church did
err. read Augustine contra Iulianum lib. 1. cap. 2. where he says of
Innocentius: Qui denique paruulos definiuit, nisi manducauerint carnem filij
hominis vitam prorsus habere non posse, which has defined that infantes,
except they eat the flesh of the son of man, can have no life at all in
them. And by eating the flesh of the son of man, he means eating the
Sacrament of his flesh and blood, as it is evident to them that will bestow the
reading of Augustines discourse in that place.

An aunsvvere to certain objections of the adversaries, moved upon the
diversity of meanings which they see given in the fathers vvritings, of the
Scriptures before alleged for purgatory: and that this doctrine of the Church
stands not against the sufficiency of Christ's passion. CAP. XI.
1 But now the other side seeks for some shifts, and draws back in this
extremity thus. That the places of the old and new Testament, Object.
now rather alleged for my purpose and the proof of purgatory, though they be
thus expounded of the doctors, yet they may have some other meaning, and
sometimes be construed otherwise by the fathers them selves. To which I
answer, and freely confess that they so may have in deed: Aunsvvere.
but the adversary must take this with all, that the pillars of Christ's Church
would never have given this sense amongst other, or rather before all other
meaninges that probability or conference of scriptures did drive them unto, had
it contained a plain faulsehood, as the heretic supposes it does. Yea had
not the doctrine of Purgatory been a known truth in all ages, it should never
by the grave judgment of so many wise men, have atteyned any color of
scripture. For though many meaninges be found of most hard places in all the
Bible, yet there is no sense given by any approved doctor, that in it self is
false. And think you diverse textes of the holy Scripture could have carried a
false persuasion of Purgatory, down from the Apostles days to our time, for
true doctrine? Mark well, and you shall perceive that the Church of Christ
has ever given room to the diversity of men's wits, the division of graces,
and sundry gifts in exposition of most places of the whole testament: with
this prouiso always: Diversity of sensies be allowed, so that none of them
co^teine any falsehood in it self.

The dilligent vvatch that the Church keeps over the truth. Epist. 110.


that no man of singularity should father any falsehood or untruth upon any
text: but otherwise, that every man might abound in his meaning. Mary
falsehood she never suffered one moment, to take hold or bearing of any
scripture, vnreprehended. Ecclesia multa tolerat (says S. Augustine) and tamen
quae sunt contra fidem vel bonam vitam, non probat, nectacet, nec facit. the
Church bears many things: yet such things as be hourtfull to faith or good
life, she never approves, nor does them her self, nor holds her peace, when
she sees them done by others.

Thereof we have a goodly example in our own matter. So long as any convenient
meaning might be found out by the holy writers, of that place alleged out of
S. Paul for such as should be saved through fire, she liked and allowed the
same. Some proved that the elect must be saved by long sufferance, some said
the tribulation of this life and world must try men's faith and works, some
said the grief of mind in loosing that which they over much loved, was the
burning fire of man's affections: some would have the grievous vexation of
departure out of this life, to be a purgatory pains: some construed the text,
of the fire of conflagration, that shall purge the works of many in the latter
day: finally they all agreed, that the temporal torment of the world to come
is literally noted, and especially meant by the fire which the Apostle
speaks of. All these so little do disagree amongst them selves, that not
only by diverse men, but of one man they might well all be given. And being
all in them self very true, the holy Church so likes and allows them each
one, that yet by the common judgment of all learned men, that meaning for
Purgatory pains, she approves as the most agreeable sense to the text, and
whole circumstance of the letter. But as soon as Origin went about to prove by
the same scripture, that all wicked men should at length be saved after due
purgation by fire: then this pillar of truth seeing an open falsehood gathered
by the scripture of Gods word, could sustain no longer. She set up against
this error her pastors, the grave fathers of our faith. who ceased not, as
occasion served, to give men warning of the deceit intended: not only still
mainteining the doctrine of Purgatory. but also expressly condemning all the
reprehenders thereof, as hereafter it shall be better declared: and so
misliking no sense that in it self was true, the meaning of Purgatory yet,
has been of all the learned counted so certain, that in giving any other
likely exposition, that was ever added with all, as most consonant to the will
and words of the writers. So does Theodoretus, so does S. Augustine, and so in
a manner did they all. And as the said holy doctor says (with whose words I
am much delited, by cause he of all other makes truth stand most plainly
upon it self. 12. Confess.
) One text of scripture may well have so many understandings as may stand with
truth, and be not repugnaunt to good life and manners. And he hedgeth the
diversity of men's wits in the exposition of scripture, with in the double
knot of love, which is toward God and our brother: Who so ever (says he)
takes him self to understand scripture or any part thereof, De doctri.
Christiana lib. 1. ca. 36.
and in that meaning edifieth nothing at all the double love, of God and our
neighbor, he misseth the true meaning thereof. But who so ever can find out
such a sense that may be commodious to the increase of charity, although it
were not directly intended by the writer, yet he is not harmefully deceived,
nor found a liar therein. so says he. Now as for our matter, I am well
assured, there dare no man, though he were destitute of Gods grace, yet not for
shame of him self, affirm that the doctrine of purgatory is hourtfull to
virtuous life, the only miscredit whereof, has utterly banished all good
Christian conditions: or injurious to the faith of Gods Church, which is not
only agreeable, but principally intended by the plain letter of Gods word, and
consonant to all other meanings, that may be gathered by any such scripture as
we have alleged there for: and to be short, received of so many fathers, so
wise, and so well learned, as we have named for that purpose, as a truth most
reasonable, most natural, and most agreeable to Gods justice.

Well then, the misbeleuers can have no shifte nor escape, by the challenge of
Gods word, or doctures, or diversity of sensies: here is no hold for error:
all I trust be safe and sure on every side.

CAP. XI.

1 YOu should break your old wont, if you did not in this chapter overthrow
something, that you have builded in that which went next going before. He has
labored all this while to prove, that purgatory has ground in the Scriptures,
now he confesses franckely: that there has been no text of scripture by him
alleged to prove it, but it may have an other meaning, and is sometime other
wise construed of the fathers them selves. I will ask no more to prove that
purgatory has no ground in the word of God, which is not an ambiguous
oracle, that may be drawn every way like a leaden rule, and has but one true
sense or meaning, which is the right meaning of the holy Ghost. For although
diverse men may give diverse interpretations of some obscure and hard place,
which all contain no impiety or falshode, yet the spirit of God means but
one thing, and not what every man's wit and judgment will take it to be. True
it is that so long as the proportion of faith is kept, the Church bears with
them that give wrong interpretations, but the spirit of God which is in his
Church, allows not wrong interpretations for right. And where as M. Allen
allows all the interpretatio^s that the fathers have made of the text by him
alleged, as true, so long as they affirmed no error, he may by the same reason
affirm, that contradictories are true, as in that saying of him that shall not
come out until he have paid the uttermost farthing: some have expounded, that
he shall be always punished, some that he shall not be always punished. One
says he shall never be released, an other says, he shall be released at
length, how is it possible that both these interpretations can be true? and yet
both these interpretations are found in some writers. But his suerest shifte
is, that the doctrine of purgatory, was a known truth in all ages. But this
is the whole matter in controversy. For how can it be taken for a known
truth in all ages, which has none so suer ground in any text of scripture,
that ca^ be wrested for it, but the same text may have an other, and that a
true interpretation. But of the antiquity of that error, we shall have better
occasion hereafter to discuss in the second book, where this matter is of
purpose entreated of. In the mean time, we will take that which is here
granted so liberaly, that there is no text of scripture alleged for
purgatory, but it may be otherwise truly interpreted, and not of purgatory,
and that the fathers have so done by M. Allens own confession.

2 Their extreme and only refuge is, that the pain of Christ's passion,
Objection.
and his sufficient payment for our sins, stands not with our satisfaction
or penance in this life, nor with pain or purgatory in the next. O Lord how
far may man's malice reach? that not contented to abuse their reason and the
word of God in persuasion of error, but are bold to refer Christ's blessed
death also, Aunsvvere.
to cloak together with falsehood, wanton and licentious living.

Many virtuous persons have been provoked by the meditation of our Saviors
sorrows, to leave the stattering wealth of this world, and to charge them
selves with perpetual vexation of body: but that any did ever so rest upon
Christ's passion, that in respect thereof, they might pass their days in idle
wealth of lust and liberty, that was (I trow) unheard of, before this sinful
sect. These fellows argue thus: Christ has paid the full price of our
sins, ergo we must do no penance, nor suffer any pain for them. But S.
Paul thus: Christ by pain and passion is entered into the glory of his
kingdom, Romans 8.
ergo if we look to be his fellow heirs, or partakers of his glory, we must
suffer affliction with him, and join with him in pains and passion. S. Peter
also thus: Christ has suffered, leaving you an example that ye should follow
his steps, 1. Petri. 2.
therefore all his blessed life passed in pain must be a perpetual sturring
up of toleration, and glad suffering for his name again. Matthew. 3.
John our masters messenger prepared the way of Christ's death and doctrine,
by worthy fructes of penance: and that was the beginning of Christ's own
preaching, Matthew. 4.
therefore I dare be bold to say these things are not abrogated by the
teaching of the Gospel, nor void by Christ's passion: which only makes our
works and merits, to be of that value and acceptance, that all Catholic men
count them of: which else to the satisfying for sin should be nothing
available, nor to the atteining of heaven any thing profitable. But it is folly
to make over many words in a case so plain, seeing the example of both God
and good men's dealing, abundantly proves man's punishment either temporal or
eternal, to stand well with the excellent value of our Saviors death. For if
pain for sin, were injurious to Christ's death, then, the holy prophet David
that lived long in grievous penance, were injurious to his Lords death: then
the Church were injurious to her own spouse his death, that charge all
offenders with penance: then God him self were injurious to his own sons
death, that sharply punishes sin forgeuen: then Christ him self were
injurious to his own death, that both by his example and holy preaching, did
ever commend sharp penance and pain.

These delicat teachers of our time, that under pretense of preaching the
Gospel, auouching the glory of God and the grace of our redemption, have
served men's lusts, abandoned the old austerity of Christian life, and rased
out of the peoples hearts the fear of Gods judgments, were foreseen by the
holy Apostle Judas: And he calls them, Impios, Judas in epist.
transferentes Domini nostri gratiam in luxuriam. Wicked men, turning the
grace of our Lord unto wantonness and lust. Against whom also S. Paul made
this exception: Ad Gal. 5.
that they should not in any wise by the freedom of our redemption challenge
any liberty of the flesh.

Notwithstanding Christ's passion then, we must not otherwise think, but to
suffer for our own sins: not as helping the insufficiency of his merits,
but as making our selves apt to receive that blessed benefit, which
effectually works upon no man, but by means: nor serves any to salvation,
but by obedience of his will and word. Ad Haebr. cap. 5.
For if Christ's death should work according to the full force of it self,
it would doubtless suppe up all sin, and all pain for sin: it might wipe
away death, both of this present life, and eternal: it would leave neither
Hell, Purgatory, nor pain: the price and worthiness thereof being so
aboundaunt, that it might, being not otherwise by the unsearchable will and
wisdom of the sufferer limited, save the whole world. But now ordinary ways
by Gods wisdom appointed for the bestowing of that excellent medicinable
cup, (as S. Augustine terms it) and conditions required in the parties
beside, Articulo. 1. falso imp.
Christ's death does not discharge us of satisfaction for our sins, nor of
any other good work, whereby man may procure his own salvation.

2 The sufficiency of Christ's passion is compted a light argument to M. Allen,
but the weight thereof shall not withstanding bea^e down all the blasphemous
doctrine of Popery. He says thereby we cloak falsehoode and licentious
living. The Lord knows that he ^claundereth us. Then he will frame our
argument thereof as he list, but there in he does us too much wrong. But thus
we reason in deed: Christ has paid the full price of our sins, therefore
there is no part of the price left to be paid by us. Christ has fully
satisfied for our sins, therefore their remains no satisfaction for us.
Christ has suffered for our iniquities, therefore we are healed by his
stripes. And yet we neither exclude repentance, nor the true fructes thereof,
which are good works, but rather we establish them. For Christ has paid the
price of their sins, that repent and believe in him, that follow his steps,
that walk in his precepts, but neither our repentance, nor our faith nor good
works deserve any thing, only the death of Christ is all our merit, and the
only mean by which the same is applied unto us and we receive it, is our
faith, thus the scripture teaches, thus we believe. And as for that vain
amplification of M. Allen, that the full force of Christ's death would suppe
up all sin, death, hell, and pain, we may see there by how Satan deludeth
heretics to extend the benefits of Christ's death upon a fond supposition
beyond the limittes of his will, and not to allow the same to stretch so
far, as Gods determination has apoint^d it. Christ has satisfied for our
sins, yet we must make satisfaction our selves. Christ by his suffering is
become a cause of salvation to all that believe in him, yet every man by good
works must procure his own salvation. These are the enemies of the cross of
Christ, which glory in their own shame whose end is confusion.

3 And I am not a frayde to use the word Satisfaction, The word Satisfaction
so abhorred of heretics is common with the old fathers.
with Cyprian, O^^gen, Ambrose, Augustine, and the rest of that blessed
fellowship: Who right well knew the value of our redemption, and the force of
that satisfaction which our Savior made upon the Cross. I dare well leave
these pety divines and speak with the grand capitanes of our faith and
religion. And I would to God I could as well in any part come after them, in
example of Christian life: Who not so much in word, as in the course of all
their conversation, left unto us perfect paterns of great and grievous
penance. Their long watching and wailinge, their strange, weyelde, and waste
habitation, their rough appareling, their hard lying, their marvelous fasting,
their perpetual praying, their extreme voluntary poverty, and all this to
prevent Gods judgment in the world to come, for those small infirmities and
offensies of their frail life, may make our adversaries ashamed of them
selves, that neither will follow their blessed steps, nor yet (which is the
greatest sign of Gods anger toward them that can be) like it, and allow it
in others.

3 Touching the word of Satisfaction, used by the old writers, I have showed
before, that they used it not in that sense, which the Papists do. And I
confess with M. Allen, that they not only knew, but also have expressed the
valewe, of our redemption by Christ in such words, as it is not possible, that
the Popish satisfaction can not stand with them. Against the value of which
redemption, if they have uttered any thing, by the word of satisfaction or any
thing else, we may lawfully reject their authority, not only though they be
doctors of the Church, but also if they were angels from heaven. There hearty
bewayling of their sins, and fructes of true repentance, that they showed,
not to justify them selves thereby, but to humble them selves before God, and
to cause their light to shine to his glory, we pray God we may follow, not to
set up our righteousness, but to the praise of his name.

An evident and most certain demonstration of the truth of Purgatory: and the
greuousnesse of the pains thereof, uttered by the prayers and words of the
holy doctors, and by some extraordinary works of God beside. CAP. XII.
1 ANd we also, that by Gods grace and great mercy be Catholics, must needs
here conceive singular fear of Gods terrible judgments, which of justice he
must practice upon our wickedness, that live now in pleasure and worldely
wealth after such a careless sort, that men may judge we have no respect of
the dreadful day, nor care of Purgatory, which in words we so earnestly
maintain. For Christ's sake, let all Catholics here attend.
The deep and perpetual fear whereof, caused our elders not only to lead
their life in such perpetual pain, but further forced them to break out in
bitter tears, and utter most godly prayers, that they might escape the
judgment of God, exercised by the pains of Purgatory at the end of our
short and uncertain life. Some of them I will recite, that our hearts may
melte in the necessary foresight of that terrible time, and the heretics be
ashamed to deny that, which so constantly in word and work they ever
professed.

For fear of this fire to come, holy S. Bernarde makes this meditation. O
vtinam magis nunc daret aliquis capiti meo aquas, and oculis meis fontem
lachrymarum, forte enim non reperiret ignis exure^s, quod interim flue^s
lachryma diluisset. Oh would to God some man would now before hand prouid
for my head abundaunce of waters, and to mine eyes a fountain of tears: for
so happily the burning fire should take no hold, where ronning tears had
cleansed before. Ser. 55. in Cantic.
And thus again the same blessed man debateth the matter with his own
conscience. I tremble and shake, for fear of fawling into Gods hands: I
would present my self before his face already judged and not then of him to
be judged. Therefore I will make a reckening whiles I am here, of my good
deeds and of my badde: my evil shall be corrected with better works, shall be
wattered with tears, shall be punished by fasting, and amended by sharp
discipline. Provision must be made that I bring not thither cockel in stead of
corn, or chafe together with Wheat. I shall rippe up to the very bottom all
my ways, and my whole study, that he may find nothing untried, or not fully
discussed to his hands: Naum. 1.
And then I hope in his mercy, that he will not judge for the same faults, the
second time

In the like godly sense spoke another, long before his days: Beatus qui hic
mala sua deflere, Emissaenus de poenite^tia Niniuit.
qui hic debita sua festinat exoluere, and innocentiam quam iam non potest per
baptismum reparare, recuperare studeat per summum poenitentiae fructum: ad
tales merito ipse Dominus loquitur, non iudicabo bis in idipsum. Happy is he
that ever he was borne, that with speed bewaileth his sins, and in time
discharges his debtes: that he may so endeavor to recover by the fructes of
penance his innocence, which by baptism he can never repair again: to such
surely our Lord says, that he will not call twice to account for one fault.

CAP. XII.

AFter the exhortation to your fellow Papists to stand in awe of purgatory,
you bring in the meditation of Bernard for fear of the fire thereof. If you
mean thereby to terrify your fellow Papists, it is somewhat, for you know he
is a very late writer, and therefore his authority with us is of small account
in such cases, as he follows the common error of his time. I would both you
and your fellows not for fear of temporal pains, but either for love of
God, or fear of eternal damnation, would leave your blasphemous heresies,
contrary to God^ word, your sclaundering, persecuting, and murdering of Gods
Saints, and reforming your life after the rule of Gods Gospel, would take
hold of Christ by faith, to your eternal health, and so sorrow for your
sins, that you might rejoice always, as the children of God do. The saying
of Emissenus proves no fear of purgatory, but of Gods judgment unto
condemnation prevented by repentance.

2 S. Ambrose shows his fear also of Purgatory by this prayer. Precat
praeparatoria 2. ad mis.
Quod si etiam in illo adhuc saeculo aliquid in me vindicandum reseruas, peto
ne me pot^stati daemonum tradas, dum scelus meum Purgatoria poena detergis. O
Lord (says he) if thou reserve any whit in me to be revenged in the next
life, yet I humbly ask of thee, that thou give me not up to the power of
wicked spirits, whiles thou wipes away my sins by the pain of Purgatory. Lo
good reader the fear and faith of our fathers: lo how old this doctrine is,
how ancient the word is. But in an other place the same author expresses his
care and continual cogitation of this judgment to be practiced in Purgatory,
comparing thus S. Peter his state with his own. Ille (says he of S. Peter)
examinabitur vt argentum, ego examinabor vt plumbum, In Psalm 118. Sermon. 20.
donec plumbum tabescat ard^bo: si nihil argenti in me inuentum fuerit, heu me
in vltima inferni detrudar, aut vt stipula ^otus exurar: si quid in me inuentum
fuerit auti vel argenti non per meos actus, sed per gratiam and misericordiam
Christi, per ministerium sacerdotij, dicam fortasse ego: Etenim qui sperant in
te, non co^fundentur. In English. He shall be tried as silver, but I must be
searched and examined as lead: till the lead melt away, must I continually
burn. And if then there be no silver matter found, woe is me, I shall be
throust down to the neither parts of the deep hell, or wholly waste away as
strowe in fire. But if any gold or silver be found in me, not through my
works, but by grace and Christ's mercy, and for my ministry and priesthood
sake, I shall also once say: those that put their trust in thee, shall never be
confounded. Alas Ambrose was thou so careful f^r wasting away in thy
purgation? what shall become of us, where all is dross, and no fine substance:
so continual sinning, and so little sauluing: where the dignity of priesthood,
whereby thou conceived such comfort is almost worn away? his fear was so
hearty, and his meditation of purgatory pains was so earnest, that he
conceiueth a doubt in respect of his deserts, of wasting away, and further
casting into damnation: though he knew right well, that man admitted to the
temporal judgment of the next world, could not everlastingly perish, but
because the pains of the one is so like the other, the grief of the^ both
lightly occupies man's mind at once: especially where man's case is doubtful,
and often deserves the worse of the twain.

2 That Ambrose that writ the preparatory to mass, might be afferd of
purgatory, and of torme^ting by devils also, as his words are. But Ambrose of
Millayne wrate no such book. It is sufficient for Papists, that every
unlearned ass may entitle his fantasies to some ancient writer, and then they
must be authentical. But draffe is good enough for swine. As for that Ambrose
that wrote upon the 118. psalm, shows a fear of hell, if God should deal
with him according to his justice, but by the grace and mercy of God, which is
dispensed by his ministers, he recouereth him self being assured that all they
that trust in him, shall not be confounded. M. Allen translateth per ministerium
sacerdotij, for my ministry and priesthood sake, as though he joined his
priesthood with the grace of Christ. I had rather refer it to the priesthood
of Christ, but that I have given the true meaning of his words before.

3 So S. Augustine likewise, after that he had uttered his fear of hell in the
Prophet David's person, as I said once before, straight he adioyneth his request
unto God, to save him from Purgatory pains, by the Prophets words also. I
will recite his mind in English: In Psalm. 37.
O Lord amend me not in thy anger, but pourge me in this life, that I may
escape the amending fire, which is prepared for such as shall be saved through
fire. And why? but because they build upon the foundation wood, hay, and
straw. men might build gold, silver, and precious stones, and so escape both
the fires, the one of eternal punishment for the wicked, and the other, which
shall correct them that must be saved through fire. But now because we read
that he surely shall be saved, Note here Christian reder, whether. S.
Augustine douted of purgatory, as the lying and unlearned adversaries would
make the simple people believe. De vera and falsa poeniten. Cap. 18.
therefore that fire is not much regarded. And yet let them be boulde of this,
that though they be saved by fire, it shall yet be more fearse and grievous,
then any thing that man may sustain in this life, though both Martyrs and
malefactors have suffered strange torments. Again in an other place the same
holy doctor utters the like saying: Which I will repeat also, that the
world may behold the unjust dealing of the contrary part, that in the book of
their excuse why they departed out of the Church (they call it their Apology)
be not ashamed to avouch, that S. Augustine sometimes denied, and sometimes
douted of Purgatory. Thus he writes then against such deceivers, and for the
defense of him self and the Churches faith. Sed si etiam sic conuersus euadat,
vitam viuat and non moriatur, non tame^ promittimus quod euadet omnem poenam.
Nam prius purgandus est igne purgationis, qui in aliud saeculum distulit
fructum conuersionis. Hic autem ignis etsi aeternus non sit, miro tamen modo
est grauis, excellit enim omnem poenam quam vnquam passus est aliquis in hac
vita. Nunquam enim in carne inuenta est tanta poena, licet mirabilia passi sunt
Martyrs, and multi nequiter iniqui tanta sustinuerunt supplicia. Studeat ergo
quilibet sic delicta corrigere, vt post mortem non oporteat talem poenam
tolerare. If a sinner (says he) by his conversion escape death, and obtain
life, yet for all that I can not promise him, that he shall escape all pain or
punishment. For he that differred the fruits of repentance till the next
life, must be perfited in purgatory fire. And this fire, I tell you, though it
be not everlasting, yet it is passing grievous: for it does fare exceed all
pain, that man may suffer in this life. Never grief in this flesh could be so
great as it, though Martyrs have abiden strange torments, and the worst sort
of wicked men, exceeding great punishments. Therefore, let every man so correct
his own faults, that after his death he may escape that pitiful pain. So
far S. Augustine: By whom we see not only the truth of our Catholic
doctrine lively and vehemently set forth, but to the great fear of us all, the
weight of Gods sentence, and the pain of that intolerable punishment, a^ the
Church of his time taught and believed, to pass all mortal and transitory woe
in the world.

3 Concerning Augustine we have answered before, that as that error of
purgatory, was somewhat risely budded up in his time, so he seems not always
to be clear of it, although in some places he is not so certain of it, but
that he affirms it may be enquired of, and peradventure shall be found to be
so, peradventure it shall still remain hid or unknown.

4 Whereof, it has pleased almighty God sometimes, The pains of purgatory
has been reueiled to many holy persons.
to give man a taste, by calling some one or other above the common raze of
nature out of this mortal life, and speedy restoring him from the state of the
departed, to the company of the living again. Which work though it be
strange in nature, thought unlikely to misbeleuers, and contemned of such as
would extinguish the spirit of God, yet it has been the usual practice, 1
These. 5.
since the beginning of our faith and religion, of the holy Ghost, so to trade
man's frailey in faith and fear of Gods Judgments. Sometimes, the living (...)
in trance or sudden change by Gods omnipotency taken up to the vewe as it
were, of the unspeakable treasures of the prepared joys, or extreme
calamities of the world to come, So was the Apostle S. Paul, 2. Cor. 12.
he could not tell how him self, called to the beholding of Gods majesty and
mysteries unspeakable: So was S. John in spirit caused often to behold,
Apocal. 20.
and presently in a manner to see, not only the affairs of Gods Church till
the worlds end, but also the happy Seat of the Lamb, the eternal joy of
the elect, and the everlasting lake of the damned, with the infinite sorrow of
all the forsaken sort. And so have many one since that time, in the same
spirit, had a present taste of all those judgments, which by any means
through the unsearchable ordinance of God, be prepared for sinners.

Sometimes also, by the same force of the Spirit, the departed have appeared
amongst the live: Ecclesi. 4 6. 1. Reg. 28.
as Samuel the prophet to king Saul, uttering things to come. Or if that were
not Samuel him self, because that practice of unlawful arts may be thought
not convenient for the procuring of the Prophets own persons apparition:
Matthew. 17.
yet Moses was in deed personnaly present with Christ in the Mount, at his
transfiguration. And as he at Christ's call came from the dead out of the bousom
of Abraham, so did Elias at the same time come from Paradise (as S. Augustine
affirms) and were both conuersaunt and in talk with Christ, Intercourse
betwixt the live and dead, though it be not ordinary, yet it is not
impossible. De cura pro mor. cap. 16
and in the sight of the Apostles at once: from whense they departed at
Christ's appointement, to their several abode and rest again. VVhereupon, the
same holy doctor confesses, that these rare and marvelous works of God
though they follow not the common order of nature, yet they be neither
impossible, nor unpracticed in Christ's Church. Alij sunt (says he) limits
humanarum rerum, alia diuinarum signa virtutum: alia sunt quae naturaliter,
alia quae mirabiliter fiunt. The common course and limits of man's matters, be
of one sort: and the wondrous signs of Gods power and virtue, of an other:
the works that naturally be wrought, are nothing like such things, as
meruailously and miraculously be done.

And as Christ in his own person, made many extraordinary works to bear
testimony of his divinity, so he would that the glory of God and faith in him,
should take deep root and large increase through out all nations, not only
by preaching and word, but by works also. which the same holy Ghost for the
salvation of the beloved flock, disposes by the eternal wisdom, where,
when, with whom, and as he lists.

Mary as these be the most secret ways and unknown steps of Gods spirit,
and therefore most humbly to be reverenced of the faithful: so because they
are so far from the raze of natural affairs, and much ouerreach flesh and
blood, they are often of fools contemned, and of the unwise wisdom of
worldlinges, as extreme madness improued. The express signs of Gods spirit,
wrought by the Savior of the world in his own person, Matthew. 12.
were with singular blasphemy, of the proud Jews referred to Beelzebub, The
tokens and wonders wrought by his Apostles, were attributed to unlawful arts,
Wicked men have ever resisted the holy Ghost.
and misconstrued of most miscreants to false intentes. It was ever a special
note of incredulity, to blaspheme these peculiar steps of the spirit.

S. Cyprian complains of such misbeleuers in his time: that would not agree
to the truth after especial revelations had of the same: Which kind of men,
he notes in the latter end of an epistle, by these words. Quanquam sciam,
omnia ridicula, and visiones ineptas quibusdam videri, sed vtique illis, Lib.
4. epist. 9.
qui malunt contra sacerdotes credere, quam sacerdoti: Sed nihil mirum, quando
de Joseph fratres sui dixerunt, ecce somniator ille venit. Although (says he)
I know right well how little account they make of visions, which they esteem
as mere trieftes: But yet it is such only, that had rather believe against,
then with Gods priests. And no meruaill that is, seeing good Joseph's own
brethern said by him in mockage. Lo yender comes the dreamer. So did they
scoff at him, Genes. 37.
because he had more familiarity with the spirit of God, then the other had.

4 Now follows a large and needelesse apology of visions and revelations,
the doctrine of which is briefly and plainly set forth in the word of God,
what so ever is consonant to the word of God is to be received, that which is
not agreeable therewith, is to be detested, although not a man from purgatory,
but an angel from heaven were the bringer of it. Then seeing the doctrine of
purgatory is blasphemous against the merits of Christ's death, though all
those fables of visions that are feigned to defend it were true stories, yet
are we nothing moved with them. I pass over the impudency of this man, which
is not ashamed to compare so many thousand fables, or illusions of Satan, as
are reported to the maintaining of purgatory: to the revelation of S. Paul and
the Apocalypse of S. John, or the appering of Moses and Elias with Christ. They
may be in deed a great nombre of them not unlike to that spirit of Samuel
which was raised by the witch, which as Augustine affirms, and M. Allen dare
not simply deny, was the spirit of the Devil him self.

5 Now as the joys of heaven and Paradise, with the torment of sinners and
other secrets of the next life, have bin straungly represented to some one or
other in all ages, by sundry means most expedient to our salvation, and most
seemly to the wisdom and will of the worker, so certainly, no article was
ever with more force of spirit, or more grave authority set forth sense the
beginning of Christian religion, then this one of Purgatory. Never nation was
converted to the faith, but it had this truth not only taught by word, but by
miracle also confirmed. And namely in that abundant floode of faith, when it
pleased God, almost at once to spread his name amongst all these contryes, it
was thought most necessary to his divine wisdom, together with the true
worship of his name, to plant in all faithful men's hearts, the awe and
necessary fear of that grievous torment, for the revenge and just judgment of
wicked life. This grievous pain was uttered by the very sufferers them selves.
as we may see in the notable histories of Paschasius and Iustus, Cap. 24. l. 4.
dialogorum
reported by S. Gregory's own mouth. This grievous punishment was again
declared by Furseus: who, as the reverent Bid reports, had the beholding of
the eternal bless the everlasting mi^ery, Cap. 13. li. 3.
and the temporal pain of the next life. Drichelmus also, by the ordinance
of God taken from amongst mortal men into the state of the next world, Lib. 5.
ca. 13.
after he had seen likewise, the terrible judgment of God practiced even upon
the elect, was restored to life again in our own nation, and was a witness
worthy of all credit, of this same truth, not only by his word (whereof he was
so sparing all his life time after, that he would not utter this same mystery
but with singular care and respect of the persons intent, that asked him
thereof) but namely by passing great penance, and incredible chastising of his
body, which proceeded of the sensible knowledge that he had of the pains
prepared. And being asked sometime (as holy Bid says) why he so tormented him
self, in the willing toleration of extreme heat, or contrary cold, both of
frost and snow, he made answer simply and shortly, Frigidiora ora ego vidi:
austeriora ego vidi: Ah masters I have seen colder: I have seen sharper.
Meaning by the unspeakable pains of Purgatory. The whole history of his
visions, with many the like, P. Beda.
may be read in the Ecclesiastical history of our own nation, written by as
faithful a witness, as ever was borne in our land: of such virtue, that he
would begile no man willingly, of so great wisdom, that he would report no
tale nor triefle rashly: of such grace and learning, that he was well able to
dis^erne a false fable and superstitious illusion, from a true and divine
revelation.

For as it were folly and mere vanity, to give credit to every spirit, so to
condemn a spirit, or revelation, or any work of Gods finger approved by the
Church of God, 1. Cor. 12.
in which there has ever been the gift of discerning spirits, it is properly
a sin against the holy Ghost. And because every man has not that gift, as I
would not counsel any man, over lightely to give credit to every private
spirit and peculiar vision, because they may come of wicked intentes and
sinister motions, so I think it were good, in fear, reverence and humility,
to commit the discerning of such things, to the spirit and judgment of Gods
Church.

With the belefe of every peculiar man's fantasy, we are not charged: with
humble submission of our whole life and belefe, to the Church of Christ, there
are we especially charged. And because there is nothing reported either in the
works of S. Gregory, or in Bid, or in Damascen, or in any other the like,
concerning the pains either of the elect or the damned in the next life, but
as much has been uttered before, by all the holy and learned fathers, in great
agony of mind and fear of the said judgment, we may be the more bold to
think the best, or rather we are bound to think the best of that spirit,
which so conformably agrees with the doctrine of the Church, and faith of all
the fathers.

There can no man say more of Purgatory nor more plainly, Damascenus vo^at
purgatoriu^ baptisma ignis.
then S. Ambrose, being in a manner a frade him self, of wasting away in that
horrible torment: none more effectually then S. Augustine, that confesses
there is no earthely pain comparable unto it, Lib. 4. Cap. 10. de ortho fid.

Ad Amandu^ epist. 1.


none more fearfully then Eusebius Emissenus, who terms it skaulding waves
of fire: none more pithely then Paulinus, that calls those places of
judgments, Ardentes tenebras burning darkness. More peculiarly may the
circumstances and condition of that state by God be reveled, but the truth
thereof can not be more plainly declared, nor better proved. These babes
feared no bugges I warraunt you: neither picked they Purgatory out of Scipio
his dream, but they had it out of Gods holy word, and tradition of the holy
Apostles, and by the very suggestion of the spirit of truth. All which if it
can not move the misbeleuer, and stay the rashenesse of the simple deceived
sort, it shall be but lost labor to bring in any more, for the confirmation of
that truth, which all the holy doctors have so fully both proved and declared
to my hand.

5 The tales that you tell out of Gregory and Bid, may be heard as they are
told, and believed as they deserve, but that you make the opinion of purgatory
such an article of faith, that no article with more force of the spirit, nor
with more grave authority was set forth sense the beginning of Christian
religion (and yet never taught in the scripture) that is by no means to be
borne with all. If Satan has labored to plant that error, which is most
blasphemous against Christ, and occasion of most licentious wickedness in all
them that profess Christ and believe it, if Satan (I say) has bent all his
force to plant such an error, by which his kingdom is so much aduaunsed, no
wise man can marvel. Of like leven it is that you affirm. That never nation
was converted to the faith but it had purgatory taught by word and confirmed
by miracle. O impudent affirmer. Of so many nations as S. Luke records in the
Acts of the Apostles to have been converted to the faith name one, unto which
you can prove that purgatory was taught either by word or miracle. But to be
sure, you name all even of the primitive Church, when that abundant floude of
faith was spread over all countries. But when the proof comes, you leap but
600. years from Christ, to Gregory's dialogues, from which time I will not
deny but you may have great store of such stuff, as you have miracles now in
Flaunders of the honest woman of the old Baylye in London, and such like.

6 But now for us, that through Gods great mercy be Catholics, let us, for
Christ's sake, so use the benefit of this our approved faith, to the amendment
of our own lives, that where no argument will serve, nor authority of
Scripture or doctor can convert the deceived, yet the fructe of this doctrine
showed by good life and virtuous conversation, may by Christ's mercy move them.
Let the priest consider that this heavy judgment must begin at the house of
God, as S. Peter affirms, and so does S. Ambrose prove it must do. In whom,
Epist. 1. cap. 4.
for the dignity of his honorable ministry, as much more holiness is
requisite, Ambros. vbi supra.
so a more strait reckening must be required. Let the Lay man learn, for the
avoiding of greater danger in the presence of the high Judge, willingly to
submit him self to Gods holy ministers: Who have in most ample manner, a
commission of executing Christ's office in earth, both for pardoning and
punishment of sin: that suffering here in his Church, sentence and just
judgment for his offensies, he may the rather escape our fathers grievous
chastisement, in the life to come.

Therefore I would exhort earnestly the minister of God, that in giving
penance, he would measure the medecin by the malady: aptly discerning the
limitation of the punishment, by the quantity of the fault: not using like
lenity in closing up of every wound. For they shall not be blameless surely,
that do the work of Gods judgment committed to their discretion, negligently:
nor the simple soul that looks to be set free from further pain, can, by the
acceptance of such vn^quall remedies, avoid the scourge of judgment
prepared: except he him self voluntaryly receive (as I would wish all men
should) some further satisfaction, by the fructes of penance: that of his
own accord he may help the enjoined penalty, and so by Gods grace turn away
the great grief to come.

Excellently well, Epist. 2.
and to our purpose said S. Cyprian in the fourth book of his epistles,
talking of such offenders as were not charged with penance sufficiently, or
otherwise negligently fulfilled the same, by these words. We shall not herein
any thing be prejudicial to Gods judgment that is to come, that he may not
allow and ratify our sentence, if he find the perfect penance of the party
so require. But if the offender have deluded us by feigned accomplishing of his
penance, then God who will not be deluded because he beholds the heart of
man, shall give judgment of such things as were hid from us. And so our
Lord will amend the sentence of his servants. Where this doctor seems
to allude to the accustomed name of Purgatory, which S. Augustine and other do
often call the amending fire. Though it may well be, that he here calls the
contrary sentence of judgment to eternal damnation upon the impenitent
sinner, whom the priest, because he could not discern the feigned hypocrasy
of his external dealing, from the inward sorrow of heart, pronounced to be
absolved of his sins, it may stand (I say) that he terms that contrary
sentence of God, the correction or the amendment of the priests judgment.
How so ever that be, it is a work of singular grace and discretion, so to
deal with the spiritual patient, that he have no need of the amending fire.

6 Here is an exhortation unto Papists, first to the priests that they will
show the fructe of this doctrine in their conversation. For my part, ^ am
persuaded if fear of eternal torments in Hell, that God threatens by his
scriptures, will not terrify them, the feigned pains of purgatory which they
can by their own Masses and other like merits avoid, will not restrain them.
The lay men are exhorted to submit them selves to the priests, who have
such an ample commission, that they may both pardon and punish sin, even as
Christ him self did upon earth. But what avails this submission? when the
ignorant or negligent priest, that weighs not the penance, in even balance
with the offense, does not by his absolution or pardonning take away one
hours torments of purgatory as both M. Allen him self in effect confesses,
and the Master of the sentence also teaches: unto whom M. Allen has been so
good a scholar, that he has borrowed of him not only his judgment, but in
diverse places his very words also he has translated.

Of the nature and condition of Purgatory fire: the difference of their state
that be in it, from the damned in Hell: with the conclusion of this book.
CAP. XIII.
1 IF any curious head list of me demand, where or in what part of the
world this place of punishment is, or what nature that fire is of, that
works by such vehement force upon a spiritual substance: I will not by
long declaration thereof, feed his curiosity: because he may have both the
example and the like doubt of Hell it self, and many other works of God more.
The learned may see that question at large debated in the books of the City of
God, and in the literal exposition upon the Genesis. Lib. 20.
And yet after all search that man can make, this must be the conclusion, with
the author of those books: Quomodo intelligenda sit illa flamma inferni, ille
sinus Abrahae, Libro. ^. cap. 5.
illa lingua diuitis, illa sitis tormenti, illa stilla refrigerij, vix fortasse
a mansuete quaerentibus, a contentiose autem certantibus nunquam inuenitur:
melius est dubitare de occultis, quam litigare de incertis. I am sure (says S.
Augustine) the Rich man was in wonderful fervent pain, and the Lazare in the
rest of a pleasant abiding, but how or of what nature that Hell flame and fire
is to be taken, or Abraham his bosom, or the glottens tongue, or the
intolerable thurst in that torment, or the drop to quench his heat. All these
doubts can scarsely be dissolved and satisfied, to the contentation of him
that with humility makes search thereof. But to contentious and curious
ianglers, they shall never be known. Therefore better it is to be in doubt of
these secrets, then to stand in contentious reasoning of things uncertain. So
must we think also of Purgatory: that the pain thereof, of what condition so
ever it be, or where so ever the ordinance of God has placed it, is
wonderful horrible. And by force of operation, represents the nature of our
fire: and both by scriptures and doctors, is most termed by the name of fire,
as Hell torment is. It works so upon the soul of man, as the other did upon
the rich man's soul, and all other that be already in Hell, before the
receiving of their bodies into the same misery, at the general day of
Judgment. And the sensible grief may be as great of certain, as in the other
place of everlasting damnation, as Cyrillus in vita Hieronymi does declare.
Cyrill.


CAP. XIII.

1 THis is a very needelesse discourse, unless it were to make up a browen
doosen of chapters, to enquire of the nature or condition of purgatory fire
etc. and then to be able to determine nothing of it. If we shall give credit to
those visions, revelations, and apparitions, which M. Allen defended so pithily
in the last Chapter before, there is no man knows his own house, better the^
we may know every corner of purgatory, the place, the length, the breadth, the
depth, the fire, the water, the burning, the scalding, the broyling, the
frying, the whipping, the hanging, etc. At the least wise, if M. Allen would
have taken so much foolish pains, as to have translated out of that
worshipful author which he cites, that which he has written of the quality
and condition of the pains of purgatory, he might have enlarged this chapter
by two or three leaves. That beastly ass and shameless counterfector, that
calls him self Cyrillus (in the devils name) Bishop of Jerusalem, writing
to such an Augustine as he was a Cyrill, of the miracles of S. Ieronym, makes
a large discourse of the pains of hell and purgatory, as he learned of
Eusebius and of 3. dead men whom Ieronym caused to be restored to life after
he had showed them the pains of purgatory and hell, and this to confute the
error of them that denied purgatory, I would marvel surely whether impudency
in him that invented that fable, and set it out under the name of Cyrillus were
greater then in M. Allen that allegeth his name and authority as antique and
authentical, saving that, that counterfecter played the fool in the night, but
Allen brings him forth in the broad day light.

2 But this is the great misery, and the difference: The diversity of the
d^mneds case, and of such as be temporally punished in purgatory.
that such as be in the judgment of Hell pains, have no hope of mercy, no
passage from their infinite woe, no end of torment, no release of pain, no
expectation of salvation, no comfort by Christ: but endless desperation,
hatered of virtue, weariness of their creation: sorrow of their own being and
persons: and, which is most intolerable, perpetual blasphemy, and grisely
cursing of Gods holy name. The other being under their merciful fathers
chastisement in purgatory, suffer great pain, but in quiet peace of
conscience, in assured expectation and warraunt of their salvation, in love of
Gods justice and judgment, even toward them selves, in the unity of the
spirit of God, bearing testimony of them, that they be the children of the
houshoulde, in perpetual experience of mercy and grace, in daily hope of
release, in perfect love with out all sin or danger of sinning, in glad
conceiving the benefit of their redemption for the remission of their offenses
past, and in worship and confession of Gods holy name, then and after for ever
more.

And this is the company of the inferior parts, which boweth their knee, and
reuerenceth the name of Jesus, (as the Apostle says) when the other which be
in the deep hell (the Prophet bearing witness) can not praise nor confess
his blessed name, Philip. 2.
which they both detest and blaspheme, to their unspeakable pain. There has
ever been, sense the death of the first virtuous man till this hour, and so
shall be till the day of latter judgment, a company of elect and chosen
people, that do honor God in the loughers parts: as till Christ's descending
to Hell, the fathers resting place in general, and some that suffered for
sin further pain beside. And after, continually as before, the place of
Purgatory, to endure for the punishment of certain, till the latter day, when
all the elect shall reign without grief or peine, with Christ for ever more.
Vide Greg. 4. dialo. 20. and Isiodo. de ordi. creat.


And although, the place of this torment, and the nature thereof, be not
certainly determined, nor known to any, but such as God of his wisdom list
reuele it unto, yet it is with great probability and likelihood, thought of
such learned men as deserve singular credit, that it is in the lower roumes, as
sinus Abrahae, may appear by scripture to have been, and separated from hell
as it was: because all places of punishment after this life, be called of holy
writers, conformably to scripture, Inferna. But with curious search of these
things, as we be not charged, so to believe that justice is there done upon
sinners, by much sorrow and torment of their souls, by the authority of Gods
word and Church, we are of necessity induced. The care and consideration
whereof, if it take deep impression in our minds, I am sure it shall work
exceeding great change in our whole life and manners.

2 Here we are taught what the difference is between the pains of hell and
purgatory. This difference is not in quality nor quantity, but in respect of
continuance, and of the persons. The one is eternal, the other temporal, they
that are in one, are desperate and impatient, the other in hope and patience
without sin or danger of sinning. Surely if those tales were true, that are
told of them that are in purgatory, there appeared in some but small patience.
One that was promised by an Angel that he should tarry but 3. days in
purgatory, after he had been there but one day, told the Angel to his face,
that he was no Angel but a deceiuer, affirming that he had been there many
years. A monk that dyed without absolution in the absence of the Abbot, after
his death was absolved, and enjoined for penance to tarry in purgatory until
his body were buried, whereat he cried so horribly, that his voice was heard
all over the abbey, saying, O unmerciful man, have thou commanded me to tarry
so long in purgatory? A Bishop suspe^ded a priest for saying every day mass of
requiem, but as the same Prelate went over a churchyard, the dead arose every
man with such tools as they occupied in their life, threatening him, that he
should dye for it, he did not restore them their soul priest. Again one that
promised his brother to say mass for him immediately after his death, made have
to perform his promise, as soon as the breath was out of his hody: but when
mass was done his brother appeared to him saying, O unfaithful brother, thou
have well deserved the curse of God for me, thou have let me lie in torments
these 20 years, and neither thou nor any of my brethren would vouchsafe to say
one mass for me. If these and such like narrations, of which the popish
homilies and other writings are crammed full, were true revelations, there were
small patience, mekenes, or love, in some of the purgatory penitentionaries.
Yet M. Allen says: these are the inferior parts, which boweth their knee and
reuerenceth the name of Jesus, as the Apostle says Philip. 2. For those that
be in the deep hell, can not praise nor confess his blessed name as the
Prophet says: Although that which David says, be true of the damned spirits,
yet he speaks generally of all them that are dead, which can not praise God
in his Church as they do that are alive. But S. Paul to the Philip. speaks
not of any willing obedience, or joyful confession of them that be in hell,
but of that which is due to the majesty of Christ, and enforced even from his
enemies. For if none should bow to Christ but they that honor him willingly,
and praise his holy name cherefully, this text should not be verified of so
many 1000. Turks, Jews and Infidels, that now blaspheme his holy name, but in
the day of judgment, unto which time the perfect accomplishment of this
prophecy is referred, they with all the devils in hell, shall be brought on
their knees and acknowledge that Jesus is the Lord to the glory of God and
their eternal confusion. And even now already S. James teaches that the devils
do tremble. But if only the souls in purgatory were meant by them that are
under the earth, at the last day when Christ shall have his chief glory, and
purgatory as the Papists confess, shall be abolished, then there should be
none in the infernal parts, that should bow unto Jesus and acknowledge his
glorious majesty according to the prophecy of Esaias which S. Paul expounds
of the last judgment. Romans 14. And therefore although M. Allens affirmation of
godly men to have been in the lower parts from the beginning of the world unto
the end of the same, were true, as it is most false, yet it would not answer
the verity of the prophecy, when at that time there should be none, in which
time the prophecy should chiefly be fulfilled, but of what forehead, or mouth
does this proceed? that he affirms that Abraham's bosom may appear by
Scripture to have been in the lower rooms, though separate from hell His
reason seems to be, because all places of punishment after this life be in
Scripture called Inferna, that is, hell or the lowest places. The Scripture
teaches that Abraham's bosom was a place of comfort, separate from hell, not
with a small border, like the popish limbus, but with an infinite distance
(...) from whence the rich glutton looking up saw Lazarus a far of in blessed
estate, when he him self was in torments. But hereof I have spoken
sufficiently before.

3 Therefore I shall desire all Catholic readers, as they believe this grave
sentence of God to come, and fear the rod of our fathers correction, that
they prevent the same, by lowly submitting them selves unto the chastisement of
our kind mother the Church. Who with tears in this her contempt, yet
besecheth the children of her own how should, that they would rather
willingly submit them selves to her meek wande in this life, the^ against
their wills to the heavy scourge of their angry and justly moved father, in the
world to come. The penance which her ministers do charge us with all, is of
it self not great, yet accepted with humility and competent dolor of heart
in this time of grace, it may for the most part, if it any thing be
aunswerable to the faults, or helped by our own zele, either wholly discharge
us, or much ease and abridge the pain to come. Let us not stick to add unto
the prescribed pain by the priest our pastor, some such fructes of
repentance, as may more and more wash us from our sins: let us make friends
of wicked Mammon: Let us redeem our sins, Luke. 11. Dan. 4.
by alms and mercy toward the poor: Let us judge our selves with earnest
fasting, abundance of unfeigned tears, often watching and continual praying,
and then doubtless we shall not be judged of our Lord. Let us detest this
abominable flattering security, which this sinful schole so earnestly
exhorts us unto: It is the devil no doubt, that would have man pass his
time in pleasure, that he may be reserved to his everlasting pain. A small
remedy by man's freedom, in Gods grace here willingly accepted, may clear
acquitte us of great grief to come. Love alone, and earnest zele of Gods
house, in this multitude of forsakers, I dare say shall cover a number of
sins: and that which by nature is but duty, in this time of temptation I
take it to be great merit. Let us be circumspect therefore, and work whiles
the day is here, for in the night of the next world, sinners can not help
them selves, nor work one moment toward their own delivery or release.

3 Once again he desires Catholics not to doubt of this doctrine, but to
prevent the pain appointed by their angry father, with patient receiving the
chastisment of their kind mother, whose meke wande in this life, they were
better to sustain, then the heavy scourge of their justly moved father after
this life. In this proper antithesis, the kindness of the mother, is preferred
before the anger of the father: yea the mercy of the mother, is commended above
the justice of the father. It appears by this, that the Papists understand
not what they say, when they call God father, who takes unto him that name, to
declare his mercy toward us and not his justice, his love and not his wrath,
to reward us, and not to punish us, who though he chastise his children for a
moment, yet does he, not exact pains according to the measure of his justice.
As for that Prosopopaeia of the mother, opposing her to the father, in word is
more rethoricall, then Christian in deed, and because it is unfit for the
matter, it is more of garrulity then of eloquence. The rest of the exhortations
are such as we have heard before, to accept penance humbly, to add to the
penance zeleously, to merit while time serves diligently, etc.

4 And for the other sort which have been deceived by the Maremaides song, I
shall humbly in our Saviors blessed blood beseeke them, to consider with zele
and indifferency what has been said, and whereon it stands. And if God him
self has in all ages chastised his best beloved people and dearest children,
both here and in the next life, if the Church has practiced discipline, by his
authority, upon all obedient persons, if all virtuous have charged them selves
with pain, if all learned fathers have both preached and done penance, for
the avoiding of pains hereafter prepared, if the word of God expressly make
for this, if all learned men with out exception believed it and feared it, if it
agree with good reason, if it setforth Gods justice, if it duly answer to
the hatered of sin, if it raise the fear of God in man's heart, if it be the
bane of proud presumption, if it be the mother of meekness, of obedience, of
devotion, and of all good Christian conditions, let it for Gods love, I pray
thee once again, take place in thy heart, and drive out that rest and
quietness of sin, which these delicate doctors, for thy present pleasure,
under the color of some honest name, have deceitfully induced thee unto.

4 The conclusion has an exhortation to those whom he terms deceived with
the Maremaides song, to consider the weight of his arguments, whereof he
makes a short recapitulation. First if God have punished his dearest children,
not only in this life, but also after this life, then let purgatory have place
again: we are content, but until it may be proved out of the word of God,
that he has punished his children after this life, we are not bound by this
argument. Secondly if the discipline of the Church, the exercise of the godly,
the doctrine of all learned fathers that have preached or done penance, has
been for the avoiding of purgatory, then receive purgatory again. But if the
end of godly discipline, be either to heal the curable by repentance in this
life, or to separat the incurable from infecting the sound, if the fructes of
repentance and good works of the godly are to be referred, to the testifying
of their repentance, and their faith, and to the glorifying of God, if the
doctrine of all the godly, that have preached and done penance according to
the word of God, have been to the same ends, we may not yet give place to
admit purgatory. Thirdly if the word of God make expressly for purgatory, we
would not for our lives deny it, nor doubt of it, but if the word of God do
neither expressly nor by any probable collection allow, but manifestly
condemn it, as blasphemous against the passion of Christ: then must we still
not only exclude it from our belief, but also abhor it from our heart.
Forthly if all learned men without exception, believed and feared purgatory, we
will also believe it and fear it, but until that may be proved, or that any
godly learned ever knew of it for 200. years after Christ, we must crave
pardon of M. Allen at the least wise to suspend our judgment. Fifthly if it
agree with good reason, which agrees with the word of God, it were reason we
should receive it, but we account no reason good that is not consonant to the
truth, and therefore if it can not be won by Scripture, we will not yield for
any reason. Six^ly if it set forth the justice of God to answer the hatred of
sin as God has appointed, we refuse it not, but if it be blasphemous both
against the righteousness of God and satisfaction for our sins answered in
the sufferings of Christ, and against his unspeakable mercies, in providing
such a wonderful mean of so perfect redemption, we defy it and the
maintainers of it. Seventhly, if it raise the fear of God in man's heart, such
as God allows, we must needs accept it, but if it raise none but a slavish
and that a vain fear of torment, and diminishes the love of Gods goodness and
mercy, and excludes the peace of conscience, there is no remedy but we must
still reject it. If it be the bane of proud presumption, we have cause to
think well of it: but if it be the provocation of deuilish presumption, to
ascribe more to our merits then to the mercy of God, we acknowledge that it
proceeds from the prince of pride and presumption against God. If it were the
mother of meekenes, obedience, devotion and of all Christian conditions, we
were to blame if we would not entertain it. But if it be the father of fables
and false worship of God, the instrument of infidelity, and sleep of
security, which are sworn enemies of all Christian religion, we leave it to
Papists, deluded with the errors of Antichrist, and nothing convenient for
the disciples and members of Christ, whose pain is their purgatory, whose
suffering is their satisfaction, whose merittes are their reward, which are
vessels of Gods mercy ordained to the praise of his glory.

5 Ask once of thine own masters: and if they be able to answer to any
part of this which I have proved, but by unseemly wrasting of the Scripture,
shameful denial of the doctors, or deceitful coloring of nothing, in vain
words, without ground, matter or meaning, thou may better believe them, and
miscredit me. But if thou find they shall never be able to satisfy a
reasonable man in this case, then cast not thy self away willingly with them:
but betime turn home to us again. I my self seek no further credit at thy
hands, but as a reporter of the antiquity: But the Scripture requires thy
obedience, the Church which can not be deceived clameth thy consent, all the
old fathers would have thee join with them in their constant belief. If thou
did once feel what grace and gifts were, In populo graui and Ecclesia magna,
in the grave people and great Church, (as the prophet terms Gods house) or
could conceive the comfort that we poor wretchies receive daily, by discipline
and perfect remission of our sins, which can no where but in this house be
profitably healed, thou would forsake I am sure, al worldly wealth and
wantons abroad, to join with our Church again. And that the name of the
Church deceive thee not: this is the true Church (says Lactantius) In qua est
religio, Lib. 4. Cap. 30. de sap.
confessio, and poenitentia, quae peccata and vulncra, quibus est subiecta
imbecillitas carnis, salubriter curat. In which, devotion, confession, and
penance, whereby the wounds of man's frailty are profitably cured, be found.

5 Ask your own conscience M. Allen whether you have not miserably wrested
the Scriptures your self. And let all reasonable men answer whether such
textes of Scriptures as you have wrested out of the true sense, I have not
wrested out of your hands. And that not by shameful denial of the Doctors,
but even by the testimony and exposition of the doctors them selves, with force
of matter, rather, then flow of words, with plain meaning rather then with
deceitful dealing. And whereas you boast your self to be a reporter of
antiquity, you have showed your self to be a fauorer of forgery and a
corrupter of antiquity. As for the gracious gifts, and conceit of comfort that
you brag of in your counterfeit Church of hypocrites and sclaunderous
Synagoges of Satan, how so ever you paynt it out, with glorious terms, we give
most humble and hearty thanks to the infinite goodness of God, which has given
his holy spirit into our hearts, with perfect assurance of his favor
everlasting, and has so furnished his servant with such gifts as he has
thought sufficient for the setting forth of his praise in his Church upon
earth, that we need not desire any other gifts or comfort out of his family,
but only the continuance and increase of the same, which we have already in
his own house, until we shall be translated from this mortal and corruptible
state, to the eternal and incorruptible glory, which is laid up in heaven, for
all them that wait for the appearing of the glorious God our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, to whom be all honor and dominion both now and evermore. Amen.

THE END OF THE FIRST BOOK.
THE SECOND BOOK ENTREATING OF THE PRAYERS, and other ordinary relief, that
the Church of Christ procures for the souls departed. THE PREFACE OF THIS
BOOK, wherein the matter of the treatise, and the order of the Authors
preceading, be briefly opened.
1 WE have now tarried very long, in the consideration of Gods justice and
mighty scourge, not only for the everlasting outcastes, but also for the
exact trial of the chosen childrens ways. The beholding whereof, must needs
engender some sorrow and sadness of mind: and with all, as it commonly happeth
in our frailety, a certain bitter tediousness both in the writer, and the
reader: though for my part, 2. Cor. 7.
I will say with S. Paul, that it greeueth me never a whit, that I have in my
talk given you occasion of sadness: being assured, that this present grief,
may work perfect penance to undoubted salvation,

But the weariness of that rough part, which might both by the weight of the
matter, and also by my rude handeling, quickly arise to the studious reader, I
shall in this book wholly wipe away: not by art or pleasant fall of words,
which in plain dealing is not much requisite, but by the singular comfort of
our cause. In the continual course whereof, we shall joy more and more at the
beholding of Gods passing mercy in remission of sins, and mitigatio^ ^f the
pains, which justice enjoined. For now we must talk, how the fiery sword of
Gods ire may be turned from his people: Ambros.
Which, as one of the fathers truly said, bears a great show of
vengeance and judgment, because it is named a fiery sword, but yet known
withal, to be a tourning sword, that is gladius versatilis, Rupert. in 3.
cap. Genes.
it shall give great cause of comfort again. O sapientes (says devout
Dasmacene) ad vos loquor, scrutamini and erudimini, quia plurimus est timor Dei
domini omnium, sed multo amplior bonitas, In orat. pro defunctis.
and formidabiles quidem minae, incomparabilis autem clementia: and horrenda
quidem supplicia, ineffabile autem miserationum suarum pelagus. Thus he
speaks of Purgatory, and mercy: O you of the wise sort: to you do I speak,
search and learn, that the fear of God the Lord of all things, is
maruaillous much, A comparison of the mercy and judgment of God, toward the
souls in Purgatory, and that mercy is more.
but his goodness far ouerreacheth it: His threatening exceeding fe^refull,
but his clemency incomparable: the prepared punishments doubtless horrible,
but the bottomless ^ea of his mercies is unspeakable, so said he. Therefore
if our sins forgeuen were never so grievous, or our vicious life so far
wasted in idle wealth, that space of fructefull penance, and opportunity of
well working, by the nights approaching and our Lords sodden calling, be taken
away, (in which long differring of our amendment, heavy and sore execution
must needs for justice sake be done) yet let us not mistrust, but God
measures his judgment with clemency, and has ordained means to procure
mercy, and mitigate that sentence, even in the midst of that fiery doungion:
that the vessels of grace and the redeemed flock, may worthily sing both mercy
and judgment to our gracious God, who in his anger forgets not to have
compassion, neither withdraws his pity in the midst of his ire. Psalm. 76.
For this imprisonment endures no longer then our debtes be paid, this fire
wastes no further, then it finds matter to consume, this dis^riet and wise
flame (as some of the fathers before termed it) chastises no longer, then it
has cause to correct. Yea often before this fire by course of justice can
cease, God quenches it with his sons blood, recompenseth the residew by our
masters merittes, and accepts the careful cry of our mother the Church,
for her children in pain. The memory of Christ's death, lively and
effectually setforth in the sovereign mysteries upon the Altar in earth, The
motions of Gods mercy, In releasing or mitigation of the pain of Purgatory.

Psalm. 76.


enters up to the presence of his seat, and procures pardon in heaven
above. the merits of all saints, the prayer of the faithful, the works of
the charitable, both earnestly ask, and undoubtedly find mercy and grace at
his hand. For of such the Prophet David asks: Nunquid in aeternum proijciet
Deus, aut continebit in ira sua misericordias suas? Will God cast them away
for ever, or will he shut up his mercy, when he is angry? Li. 1 de poenit.
cap. 1.
No he will not: so says S. Ambrose: Deus quos proijcit non in aeternum
proijcit: God casts of many, whom he does not everlastingly for sake.

Then let us seek the ways of this so merciful a Lord, that we may take
singular comfort therein our selves, against the day of our account, and
endeavor mercyfully to help our dear brethern so afflicted: lest if we use
not compassion toward them, we justly receive at Gods hand, for the reward
of our vnmercyfulnesse, judgment and justice with out mercy.

THE SECOND BOOK

TO THE PREFACE.

1 YOu have tarried longer in consideration of Gods justice, then is agreeable to
the matter of his mercy, which is the death of his only son our Lord and
Savior Christ. And now you will mollyfie the hardness of that handling, with
the sorry comfort of your unchristian cause. Wherein you have more regard to
the heating of your own harthe, then to the cooling of the selye souls, to
kindle a good fire in your own kitchen, then to quench the flambes of
purgatory. But as I have noted before, that you have hitherto kept this order
for the most part, to plant one thing in one chapter, and then to pull it up
by the roots in the next, so you have not forgotten your self in the division
of your books. But that the latter should be a sufficient confutation of the
former, or else the former a manifest excluding of the latter. For if the
justice of God does so necessarily require a punishment for sins remitted,
that the same could not be satisfied, no not by that only sacrifice, which the
son of God offered once for all, on the altar of the cross: it is a cold
comfort that a careful conscience can receive, that the same should be done
by his merits, or your Masses, which was not done by the blood of Christ Yet
now you will talk how the fiery sword may be turned away, surely if the fiery
and shaking sword that was set to exclude man from Paradise, was not taken
away by the death of Christ, when he opened Paradise, yea the kingdom of
heaven whereof Paradise was but a sacrament, unto all beleuers, I meruaill how
either the penitent these had passage into Paradise, or what engines you
Papists have to turn it away, which he had not. The words of Damascene if
they were not applied (as you say they are) to purgatory pains and remedies
of the same, were true of Gods justice and his mercy, but as his age is to
young, so his authority is to light, to control the truth of the word of
God, or the practice of the first and purest Church, which knew no purgatory,
nor prayers for the dead. But if our sins forgeuen were never so grievous,
etc. what mad man would ever write thus? Even such a one as might be allowed
to speak thus: if black were never so black before it were clean taken away
and perfect white placed in the steed, yet when white is white, it is white.
But M. Allen will not allow that the coullor of our sins is clean taken away
and a contrary coullor of righteousness set upon us, but that sins
forgeuen, be but half forgeuen, the gilte taken away, the punishment due for
the gilte, still remaining. And this one half of forgiveness, is but granted
in words, and denied in deed. For if the gilte of our sins be clean taken
away from us, and laid upon the person of Christ, and the righteousness of
Christ is communicated unto us, what is there left in us that God of his
goodness can hate or of his justice can punish? So it is but for a fashion,
that the papists grant any part of our sins forgeuen, when they will have
us make satisfaction for them our selves. But where as M. Allen is out of
measure prodigal in promising releiffe and release of purgatory pains to them
whose sins were never so grievous, their vicious life wasted in idle wealth,
the space of penance and opportunity of working neglected in time, prevented
by sudden death etc: rehersing so many means of mitigation, as sometime the
blood of Christ, the residew of his merits, the cry of the mother Church,
the memory of the Mass, the merits of all Saints, the prayers of the
faithful and works of the charitable: All this notwithstanding take heed you
poor Papists, that you give no credit to these flattering words. For it is
the opinion of all the old writers, that do allow any of these things, to
profit men after their death, and concluded by the Master of the Sentence, and
aduouched by Allen him self afterward chapt. 7. that no man can receive
benefit after his departure, by any work or will of the living, but he that in
his life deserved the same, neither shall any thing work upon him more or
less, but according to his own deserving in this life. Trust not therefore in
these sophistical vanities, which are contrary one to an other, but embrace
the uniform and undoubted doctrine of Gods word, which teaches repentance,
faith, justification, and salvation, not with curious questions to troble your
brains, but with perfect conclusions to quiet your conscience, not suffering
you to sleep in security upon hope of help after your death, but charging
you to show the force of mortification and fruictes of faith while you are
alive. Not puffing up your fantasy with pride of your own merits, but
teaching you to ascribe all praise to Gods glorious grace, and infinite mercy.

2 The cruel adversary of man kind, as before he wrought his worst against
Purgatory, so here he busely pricketh forward the school of Protestants, to
improve to their own utter damnation, and the notable hinderaunce of our
loving bretherns salvation, all such means as God by scripture or other
testimony. of his word, has reveled to be profitable for the abating of
pain, or the release of the appointed punishment, in that place of temporal
torment to come. Against which deceivers, I mean by Gods help in this order
to travel.

2 The cruel adversary of mankind, and enuyor of Gods glory, invented
Purgatory to deface the merits of Christ's death, and to blemish the only
means of man's, eternal life, which when he could not with any seemly
coullor establish, by the authority of the holy Scriptures, the only testimony
of his word and will reueiled and confirmed by his holy Spirit, he has
invented feigned fables and deuilish illusions to deceive the minds of them
whom he had inclined unto superstition, and not been ashamed to match them in
credit and estimation with the very word of God it self. As appears by this
scribe of Satan, which names the scriptures for a simple show, but by and by
adds other testimonies of Gods word, beside the scriptures inspired by God:
whereby he makes equivalent, those false revelations raised up from Hell, with
the inspiratio^ of the holy Ghost which has brought the truth from heaven. But
now comes in the order of this deuillyshe horror.

3 First I will prove, that sins may be pardoned, or the debt and bond
thereof released, in the next world.

3 You shall never prove by authority of Gods word that sins not repented in
this life, shall be pardoned after this life, where there is no repentance
profitable, nor yet any debt paid but by them that pay it eternally in
perpetual torments.

4 Then I shall show what means the holy Scripture approves, A brief note
of the contents and principal points of this book.
or the example thereof awarraunteth to be proffitable for the souls departed.

4 When you can prove either by doctrine, or example agreeable to doctrine of
the canonical Scriptures, that any thing profits the souls departed that be
not in happy state, we will believe it.

5 I will open what the principal pillars, and in a manner the flower of all
the faithful sort in sundry agies, and almost in all Christian contryes, have
left in writing for this point.

5 You are not able to bring one authentical writer, that within one 100
years and more after Christ, has allowed prayer for the dead, or any point of
purgatory.

6 I will declare what they practiced for their dearest friends privately, and
what the Churches of most notable Nations used for all deceased in Christ's
faith, in their public service openly: I shall prove unto you, that the
practice of suffrages and Sacrifice for the dead, isshued down to us from the
Apostles days.

6 You shall not prove that either in public or private prayers, the dead
were commended otherwise then by way of thanks giving for their departure, or
that any suffrages or sacrifice was offered for them by the Apostles or their
lawefull successors, or many years after the Apostles times.

7 I shall point you to the first father of the contrary doctrine, and his
principal abettours, in such troublesome times at such merchants were to be
found. Ye shall see them known amongst all the holy of their time by the
name of heretics.

7 You shall show no heretic that denied your doctrine, but I will show you
other heretics before him that allowed it.

8 You shall see their doctrine improued, and them selves condemned, by the
grave judgment of Counsels, both General and provincial, for heretics. If
any of them all can say any thing, to the contrary of that, which we upon so
good grounds maintain, he shall be answered with no worse, then the very
words of the holy ancient writers. Finally, if any other things be necessary
beside, for the declaration of this matter to the simple, or for proof against
our adversaries, they shall not be omitted: as occasion, by course and fall of
the matter, may be given. All which points being avouched and not proved,
shall condemn me of arrogance: But both avouched, and fully proved, they shall
deserve any reasonable man's consent, and bear testimony of the adversaries
impudency here, and witness of their contempt of Gods approved truth, in the
world to come.

8 How vain your brag is of general counsels, it appears by this, that
with in fouretene hundredth years after Christ, you can find none to serve
your turn, until you come to the counsels Florens and Trent, whereof the one
was held in our grandfathers days, the other within these 20. years, your
provincial counsels shall be answered by as good provincial counsels as
they are. And that which I have to say in confutation of your heresy, shall be
no worse then the very word of God it self, which is better then ye consent of
all the world against it. And although the custom of praying for the dead, be
an ancient error, so that few of the latter writers there are, but they
show them selves to be infected therewith, yet has it not such an universal
consent of all writers, but that I shall be able by Gods grace to show that the
most ancient and nearest to the Apostles time, received it not, and that they
which of later time admitted it, had neither any ground out of the Scriptures
to warrant their doing, nor any certainty of faith to assure their conscience,
which when it is found in the end, as it is now said in the beginning, your
arrogant boasting and impudent lying together with the falshoode of your
opinions, shall be manifest to all men.

That there be certain sins, which may be forgeuen in the next life, and
that the deserved punishment for the same, may be eased, or utterly released,
before the extreme sentence be to the utmost executed. CAP. I.
1 ANd first, that sins may be pardoned in the next world, that were not in
this life forgeuen, our Saviors own words do teach us, Cap. 1^.
written in the Gospel of S. Matthew thus: Ideo dico vobis: omne peccatum and
blasphemia remittetur hominibus, spiritus autem blasphemia non remittetur. Et
quicu^que dixerit verbum contra filium hominis, remittetur ei: qui autem
dixerit contra spiritum sanctum, non remittetur ei neque in hoc saeculo, neque
in fu^uro. I tell you, that all manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgeuen
unto men, but the blasphemy of the spirit, shall not be forgiven. And who so
ever shall speak against the son of man, it shall be forgeuen him: But if he
speak against the holy Ghost, it shall neither be pardoned in this world, nor
in the world to come. The same thing in sense, has Mark and Luke, affirming
that such offense shall never be forgeuen. Cap. 3. Cap. 12.
The which word Never, S. Mark expresses thus, in aeternu^ non habet
remissionem, he shall not have pardon (as you would say) in all eternity, by
which he may plainly seem, to reach further then the limits and borders of
this world, for the remission of sin. And this speech has as much pith and
proper force in it, as S. Matthewes, who expressly, distinctly, and belike as
Christ spoke it, utters that sense of the eternity, which passes the measure
of worldely time, by these words: Neither in this world, nor yet in the world
to come. And for that cause S. Mark says, Reus erit aeterni delicti, he shall
be gilty of an eternal fault, signifying that in some case a man might
perhaps not speed of a pardon in this life, and yet may obtain it in the
next: But for that horrible blasphemy, he in a manner discharges the offender
of all hope of remission, either in this life, or in the next that is to come.
Which form of words can neither be found in scripture, nor in man's common
talk, to have any place in such things as extend no further but to the
transitory time of our life: for in those matters, it had been usually, and
truly spoken, it shall never happen in this world. And therefore instructing
us, that sins, or the pain due unto sins, may either be released in this
world, or in the world to come, he follows that phrase and form of words,
in which man might well conceive the reach of remission and pardoning of
sins, far to pass the compass of our time, and life.

CAP. I.

1 YOu were as good to kindle a fire out of y^e and snow, as to go about to
frame your fiery forge of purgatory out of this place. The meaning of our
Savior Christ is so plain, and his words so express, that no reasonable man
can gather any error out of them. For undoubtedly the error of purgatory was
first invented before this place was drawn unto it. So is there no heresy so
absurd, which Satan puts into the head of wicked men, but it may find some
sound of words in so many books of the holy Scriptures, that by perverse wit
may be wrested unto it. But the doctrine of Gods truth and all articles of our
belief, are plainly taught in the Scripture, either by manifest words, or by
necessary conclusion and argument, which by no subtilty of Satan or his
instruments, may be avoided or deluded. And this is the difference between
heresy and truth, when they both apeale to the authorities of the Scripture.
Truth as she has her foundation in the Scriptures, and in them is learned, so
has she perpetual confirmation in the same, and nothing contrary unto her.
But heresy as she is invented in man's head, so she seeks confirmation in the
reason and authority of man, which because they have not full credit with them
that profess religion, without the authority of Gods word, at length when it
is fully shaped, in the shop of man's brain, then it is brought to the
Scripture, to see if it can find any color, by any phrase of words wrested
from the meaning, or by any vain collection, that has no force of necessary
conclusion, being content to have but only a cold claim unto the authority
of Scripture, although it have the whole scope and purpose of the holy Ghost,
yea often times also manifest words against it, which difference as it may be
found in all heresies, so in none more notably, then in this error of
purgatory. Consider what textes of holy Scripture are alleged for it, and you
shall see they can not bring one, out of which any necessary argument may be
framed to prove their cause, or which has not by learned interpretors of the
old time been otherwise expounded then of their cause. As in the text here
alleged out of S. Matt. cap. 12. who so ever shall speak blasphemy against the
holy ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world nor in the
world to come. If the sense were not plain of it self, that he which so
sins shall not obtain forgeuenes in this life, nor be absolved in the last
judgment: yet the other Evangelists do plainly expound the meaning. S. Luke
says simply, he shall not be forgiven. S. Mark says he has no remission for
ever, but is guilty of everlasting judgment. Nevertheless behold what a
wrangling M. Allen makes about the interpretation of these words. But I will
offer him fair play, he is an ancient master of art, and since he writ this
book, he has added ten years to his study of divinity, in which space he
might have been a doctor of the same faculty, let him with all the divinity
that ever he studied, or with all the arts that ever he professed, make a true
syllogism in form and matter, out of this authority, to prove that God
forgiueth sins after this life, which are not remitted in this life, and I
will confess the doctrine of purgatory with him, which otherwise I would not
do to win all the patrimony of S. Peter that the Pope claymeth in Italy: but
until such time as we may obtain a good argument, let us consider such as we
have. He signifies (says M. Allen) that a man in some case, might perhaps not
speed of a pardon in this life, and yet may obtain it in the next: when the
matter goes by perhaps, it is good to beware of after claps, why M. Allen,
what sins are those of which a man may perhaps not speed of a pardon in this
life, and yet obtain it after this life? If they be truly repented in this
life, we have a warrant of Gods own mouth without, your perhaps, that in the
same hour they shall be remitted. Ezech. 18. and 33. But if they be not
repented, where is your warrant that ever they shall be remitted. But I ask
again, what sins are those that perhapps may miss of a pardon in this
life, and obtain it after this life? by all likelihood they must be some great
sins, that perhapps may not speed of a pardon here, and yet find it
afterward. There is no man would think otherwise, by these words, nor by the
words of Christ, if he understood them so, that some sins might be forgeuen
after this life, but when all comes to all. The Master of the Sentence and
Gregory before him, and M. Allen him self would allow no sins to be
forgeuen after this life, but very small and light offenses. How be it it is
plain, that these words (neither in the world to come) are added by way of
amplification: for it is the purpose of our Savior Christ, to set forth to the
uttermost, the heynousnesse of blasphemy against the holy Ghost, so that if he
had meant that any sins might be remitted after this life, that were not
pardoned after this life, he should have meant the greater and not the lesser,
for less sins be sooner pardoned and the pardon of greater more hardely
obtained. But mark the equity of M. Allen, the horrible blasphemer for all
the vehemence of Christ's words, by M. Allens judgment is but in a manner
discharged of hope of remission, as though he were not simply and altogether
excluded. And the light offender is turned over to purgatory, for his
remission: yet M. Allen will stand upon the form and phrase of words, not
knowing, that this world is taken for all the time that is unto the end
thereof, and the world to come, not for the state or time of them that are
departed unto the judgment, but for the time of eternitye after the end of
this world, or else the words of Christ in Matthew should not be equivalent
with the words in Mark, he shall be guilty of everlasting judgment or
condemnation, which the old interpretor calls eternal offense. The like
form or phrase of words is used by S. Paul to the Ephesians cap. 1. that
Christ is exalted above every name that is named, not only in this world but
also in the world to come: by which words he means the supreme and
everlasting kingdom of Christ, which extends unto all eternity. But if a
contentious person like to the Valentiniane heretics, or such like, would
invent monstrous names as those heretics did, and prove by this place that
there are names named in the world to come, that are not named in this world,
should he not have as good ground out of this place as the Papists have of
the other?

2 But because we have to do with fickle merchants, that will not stick to
brast boldly the bands of evident scriptures, as anon you shall see, and
therefore, will (as I think) little be moved with reasonable and plain
gathering out of the scriptures: nor much esteem this likelihood, as over
small a proof in so great a doubt, therefore I will show my warraunt for
this construction, that thereby the studious reader may see, whom the
adversaries do so rashly contemn herein: and whom we have as authors, in this
meaning of Christ's words now recited: that neither they may be believed with
out reason and proof, nor we miscredited, after so good authority of the
ancient writers, as neither they for shame, nor we of conscience can deny. S.
Gregory, whose authority I may boldly use against them, because they mislike
not his judgment, when it may appear to make for them, (as in deed it never
does) he doubted nothing to gather of this our Saviors speech that sins
might be forgeuen in the next world. And thus he writes for that point. De
quibusdam leuibus culpis, Lib. 4. dialog. cap. 19.
esse ante iudicium purgatorius ignis credendus est, pro eo quod veritas dicit:
Si quis in sancto Spiritu blasphemiam dixerit, neque in hoc saeculo remittetur
ei, neque in futuro. In qua sententia datur intelligi, quasdam culpas in hoc
saeculo, quasdam in futuro posse relaxari: quod enim de vno negatur, consequens
intellectus patet, quia de quibusdam conceditur, sed tamen, vt praedixi, hoc de
paruis minimisque peccatis, fieri posse credendum est. For certain small
sins, that there is a purgatory fire before the day of judgment, we must
needs believe: because the truth it self, uttered so much in these words: If
any sin against the holy Ghost, it shall not be remitted, neither in this
world, nor in the world to come. By which sentence it is given us to
understand, that, as some offensies be released in this world, so there may
some other be remitted in the life following. For that which is denied in one
sort, the meaning is plain, that of some other kind it must needs be
granted. But, as is said before, this is only to be taken of lighter
offensies, Only small offensies be remitted in the next life.
thus far spoke S. Gregory: and proves learnedly beside, by examples and
sundry Scriptures through out the whole work, our matter. If our adversaries
would with desire to learn, as they commonly do to reprehend, read but his
discourse only, they might quickly see their own folly, and amend their
misbelefe. They call him the last good Pope, as he was in deed a blessed man:
and by his authority the perfect conversion of our nation to Christ's faith,
was wrought. I would his holy works deserved but as much credit now, with
certain forsakers, as his Legates then did, with all the unfaithful people of
our country.

But to go forward in our matter, we shall find in S. Bernarde, the same
words of our Savior alleged for our purpose, thus: Sermon 66. in Canti.
Non credunt ignem Purgatorium restare post mortem, sed statim animam solutam a
corpore, vel ad requiem transire, vel ad damnationem: quaerant ergo ab eo, qui
dixit quod dam peccatum esse, quod neque in hoc saeculo, neque in futuro
remittetur: cur hoc dixerit, si nulla manner in futuro remissio purgatione
peccati? They believe not (says he, by some heretics of his own time) that
there is any purgatory pains remaining after death, but they suppose that the
soul straight upon departure hense, goes either to rest, or damnation: let
such fellows ask therefore of him, that said, a certain grievous crime
could neither be forgeuen in this world, nor in the world to come, why he so
said, if there were no remission nor purgation of sins, in the life
following? thus said Bernarde, opening his grave judgment both upon the text,
and our matter: whose authority, if any esteem less, because of his late
writing, let him know, that the adversaries have none for their side so
ancient by C C C. year, except they name the heretic Aerius, or such like,
whose antiquitye makes not so much for them, as his ancient condemnation for
heresy in this point, makes against them.

2 M. Allen in his conscience knows, that he has no ground in the authority
of Gods word, and therefore he flies to the authority of man. But that he
might seem to be driven perforce to that where unto he does come most
willingly, he pretends a fond excuse, because he has to do with such
fickle marchaunts, as will not stick to break boldly the bands of evident
Scriptures. But he knows in his conscience that he has no authority of
Scripture to charge us, for if he thought we would break the bonds of Gods
word, he might well think, we would not be holden by the authority of men's
writing, and those of the latter sort, six hundredth years after Christ, the
eldest. For Augustine make^h as little for them, as he does against us. Gregory
and Bernarde, whereunto he adds Bid, are of opinion that sins not remitted
in this world, may be remitted in the world ^o come, but how happens it, that
Chrys^stome and Ieronym which both interpreted that place, could gather no such
matter, although they otherwise allowed prayer for the dead? The reason must
needs be, because the error of purgatory growing so much the stronger, as it
was nerer to the full revelation of Antichrist, Gregory and Bid sought not the
true meaning of Christ in this Scripture, but the confirmation of their
pausible error. M. Allen thinks we must be sore pressed with the authority
of Gregory, because we m^slike not his authority, where he inueigheth against
the supremacy of one Bishop above all other, or where so ever he agrees with
the truth. But he must be once again admonished, that we are bound to no
man's authority, no longer then he follows the authority of Gods word And
therefore though Gregory were the last of all the Romish Bishops, in whom was
any spark of goodness, because Boniface his successor and so all the rest, by
Gregoryes own judgment and prophecy were all Antichrists: yet is not all
that Gregory writ, of equal authority with the word of God, without
authority whereof, we believe not an Angel from heaven, as I have often
showed, much less a Bishop of Rome.

3 But that in the mouth of two or three witnesses all truth may appear, and
contrary falsehood vanish away: S. Augustine him self, gathered by this place
now alleged, even then when he had no occasion given him, by the wrangling of
any misbeleuer, to wreast any scripture otherwise then the very words
imported, the truth of remission of certain faults in the next life, in
these words, Cap. 24. lib. 21. de ciuit.
Facta resurrectione mortuoru^, non deerunt, quibus, post poenas quas patiuntur
spiritus mortuorum, impertiatur misericordia, vt in ignem non mittantur
aeternu^, neque enim de quibusdam veraciter diceretur, quod non eis remittetur
neque in hoc saeculo neque in futuro, nisi essent, quibus etsi non in isto,
tamen remittetur in futuro. There shall be certain at the time of resurrection
also, who shall obtain mercy, after they have suffered such pains as dead
men's ghostes do abide, that they be not cast into the everlasting fire: for else
it could not in any true sense be spoken, that certain should neither have
pardon in this world, nor in the world to come, except there were some, that
speeding not of pardon in this life, might yet have remission in the next: so
says he. Being, I warraunt you, so sad witted and so far from fantasies,
that he would not ground any assured doctrine, upon every light occasion
offered, or motion made: had not the very words and form of phrase, approved
it, and Gods Church liked it.

Having then these grave fathers with others, Beda in 3. Cap. Marci.
for our warraunt in the exposition of this place, we do take it for a sure
ground, that the pain of purgation in the next world may be remitted, that
is to say, either made less, or else wholly released: before the due execution
of Gods sentence be extremely done. For it is not meant, Sometimes Gods justice
is answered fully by the pain of the party.
that the freedom which man may have after full answer and payment of his
sins, in that place of punishment temporal, should be properly termed a
remission, or pardon: For that is aunswerable to Gods justice: and although
there were no prayers or other ways of help, yet the patient by toleration,
in time, might, under the protection of Christ's merits, make full
satisfaction, and so be discharged. who being a vessel of mercy, can not be
damned. But when we say, that sins may be forgeuen in the next world, Gods
Church (which is the mother of all beleuers) teaches us, that some part, as
well of the rigor and extremity of the pain, as of the time and continuance
thereof (though God him self has appointed that punishment) may yet be
merciful released.

3 S. Augustine is much beholding to you, that you give men to wit, that when
he was wrangled withal by any misbeleuer, he had occasion to wrest the
Scripture, otherwise then the words imported, so you judge of him, because he
would not for your pleasure, expound the fire of trial. 1. Cor. 3. For your
fire of purgatory. But concerning this testimony of Augustine, it makes not so
much against us, but it makes as little for you. For if you have translated his
words according to his meaning, (as you have not according to his words) he
understands by this place remission of the pains, and not of the sins,
which helps you nothing to that which you have taken in hand to prove, that
sins are forgiven after this life. And so he seems to say in the 13.
chapter of the same book. Non autem omnes veniunt in sempiternas poenas, quae
post illud iudiciu^ his sunt futurae, qui post mortem sustinent temporales, nam
quibusdam quod in isto non remittitur, remitti in futuro saeculo, id est ne
futuri saeculi aeterno supplicio puniantur iam ante dixi. All they come not
into everlasting pains which after that judgment shall be to them, that after
death suffer temporal pains, for I have said already, that unto some, that
which is not remitted in this world, is remitted in the world to come, that is,
that they should not be punished in the world to come. In these words he
speaks of release of pains but not of forgiveness of sins. But in the place
by you alleged, if the words be truly translated according to the discourse of
that chapter, he affirms, that after the resurrection and those pains which
the spirits of the dead do suffer, there shall be some upon whom mercy shall
be bestowed, so that they shall not be cast into eternal fire, etc. So that
Augustine in this place, speaks not of such sins as are remitted in
purgatory, but of such persons as are forgiven in the last judgment, when
purgatory is ended. Wherefore though Augustine erred in this place, yet he
erred from your cause. And whereas you affirm in the margent, that sometime
Gods justice is answered fully by the pain of the party: you are contrary to
the rest of your family, for they hold that the general prayers and sacrifices
of your mother Church do help them. Yea the master of the sentence holds,
that a poor man having equal merits with a rich man, though there be no
special prayers, masses, fasting or alms done for him, is helped as well by
the common alms and prayers, as the rich man for whom special prayers and
large alms are done. lib. 4. did. 45. For otherwise the opinion of merits
could not stand. And unless M. Allen think that all such masses and prayers
in which the dead are generally commended be unprofitable, his proposition can
not stand by his own learning.

That the faithful souls in Purgatory being now past the state of d^seruing,
and not in case to help them selves, may yet receive benefit by the works of
the living, to whom they be perfectly knitte as fellovv members of one body.
CAP. II.
1 But now what means may be found, to ease our brethern departed, of their
pain? or what ways can be acceptable in the sight of God to procure mercy and
grace, where the sufferers them selves, being out of the state of deserving and
place of well working, can not help them selves: nor by any motion of mind,
atteine more mercy* then their life past did deserve? Where shall we then
find ease for them? surely no where else, but in the unity and knotte of that
holy fellowship, in which, the benefit of the head perteyneth to all the
members: and every good work of any one membre, wonderfully redou^deth to all
the rest. This society is called in our Creed, communio Sanctorum, the
communion of Saints, that is to say a blessed brotherhood under Christ the
head, by love and religion so wroght and wrapped together, that what any one
membre of this fast body has, the other lacks it not: what one wants, the
other supplieth: when one smarteth, 1. Cor. 12.
all feels in a manner the like sorrow: when one ioyeth, the other reioyseth
withal. This happy society, is not impared by any distance of place, August.
epi. 23.
by diversity of Gods gifts, by inequality of estates, nor by change of life:
so far as the unity of Gods spirit reaches, so far this fellowship
exte^deth, this city is as large, as the benefit of Christ's death takes
place. Yea within all the compass of his kingdom, this fellowship is found.
The souls and saints in heaven, Idem tract. 32. in Joan.
the faithful people in earth, the chosen children that suffer chastisement in
purgatory, are, by the perfect bond of this unity, as one abundeth, ready to
serve the other, as one lacks, to crave of the other. The souls happily
promoted to the joy of Christ's blessed kingdom, The christian communion and
fellowship is expressed.
in this unity and knotte of love, perpetually pray for the doubtful state,
of their own fellows beneth: the careful condition of the members below,
continually cries for help at their hands in heaven above. Now the members
of Christ's Church here yet traveling in earth, they pray together, they fast
together, they desire together, they deserve together. Christ our head, in
whose blood this city and society stand^th, will have no work nor way of
salvation, that is not common to the whole body in general, and peculierly
proffitable, to supply the need of every part thereof. He which instituted
the blessed sacraments, will have them in this unity to work in common, (as
far as the end of each of their institutions requires) and out of it, to
have no force at all: he that makes all our works acceptable, though they be
done of one, will have them perteine to all: the holy sacrifice of the Church,
by the will of the author, and the likeness of the exemplar (as in deed being
in an other manner, the very self same) is made so common, that it joins the
Saints and Angels in heaven, to the chosen and elect people, either in earth,
The souls depa^ted in p^ety are of our church and fellowship.
or under the earth beneth. And that this holy consent of good works, and
mutual agreement of prayer, to the continual supplying of each others lackes,
does also apperteine to the souls departed, no man that has any sense of this
happy community, can deny: for being members of our common body, they must
needs be partakers of the common utility.

CAP. II.

1 IF you ask me by what means they may be releued, whom the blood of
Christ has not purged, from all their sins, suerly I must answer you
plainly as I have learned in the scripture, that there is no name given under
heaven, by which they may be helped, which are not helped by Christ's death
Act. 4. But you have merits of men, to help the merits of Christ. O
blasphemy! they that can not be justified by their own merits, by the virtue
of them, shall healpe to justify other. But this is worthy to be noted, that
they which are in purgatory, can not by any motion of mind, atteine more
mercy, then their life past deserved. Therefore faith either is not in them, or
else p^ofitteth them nothing, for that is a notable motion of the mind. Then
the merits of other men must profit with out faith or else they profitte them
not all. But with out faith it is not possible that they should profit them,
for as much as with out faith it is not possible to please God, Heb. 13.
therefore it is not possible that other men's works alive should profit them
that are d^ad. But we have an other shift sought out to serve them, that is the
communion of Saints. What manner of communion is that which is with out faith?
But because M. Allen brings in the communion of saints. I must show where in
the same consists. The communion of saints is considered either of the whole
body of the church, or else of the Church militant here on earth. The communion
of the whole body, is the participation of life and all other offices of life,
that every member and the whole body has of the head, as S. Paul teaches
plainly Ephesians. 4. The communion of saints here on earth, as it is a pa^te of
the whole communion, so the whole Virtue comes also from the head, and the
members have but the administration thereof, according to the measure and
office of every one. So that when we speak of the universal Church, we believe
that all the elect of God are one mystical body, that so lives by Christ,
that it is not possible for any one member thereof to perish: when we speak of
the communication of the faithful hear on earth, we mean the dispe^sation of
the grace and gifts of God, which as every one has received of God, so of
charity he is bound to imploye the same, to the profit of his fellow members
here on earth: what place is here to merit for them that are dead, when one
can not merit for an other that is alive, no not for him self, but every man
has his worthynesse of Christ: this is the doctrine of the scripture: the
other participation of merittes is a mere devise of men, having no foundation
in the word of God, so that M. Allen him self can not vouch so much as one
text of scripture to warranty, where in he can have any coullor for such
communion of merits. For that which S. Paul writes 1. Cor. 12. is manifestly
understood of the mutual offices of love, whereby one member has compassion
with an other, and by no means teaches either the estate of the dead, or the
merittes of the living. Of like credit it is, that he so constantly affirms
that the Saints in heaven pray for their fellows beneth, and that they below
pray for the help of the Saints above: moreover that Christ our head by
whose blood the society stands, will have no work nor way of salvation
that is not common to the whole body in general, and particularly profitable
to supply the need of any part thereof. Here you see by a plain distribution
that M. Allen will have other works and ways of salvation, beside the blood
of Christ. These things being only affirmed and not proved by the authority of
Scriptures, although I might confute at large by the same, yet it shall suffice
to answer with that ancient father: That which has no authority in the
Scriptures, is as easily denied as it is affirmed. But it is a world to see
what a compass you fetch, to bring in the Mass, for one of the special
means. It was wont to be a sacrifice propitiatory both for the quick and the
dead, now you have nicer terms for it. Now: it is the sacrifice of the
Church. By whom instituted I pray you? which by the will of the author: if you
make God the author, where have you one syllable in the Scripture to declare
his will? but that which follows passes: By the likeness of the exemplar
(as in deed being in an other manner the very self same.) What is this that I
hear? does the Mass aueyle because it is like the exemplar? if you mean the
sacrifice of Christ his passion to be the examplar, the mass is as like it as
an apple is like an oyster, for all the apish pageantes that be played in it.
We read in the Scriptures, that all the sacrifices of the old law, with the
tabernacle, were made conformable to the exemplar and pattern that was showed
unto Moses which was Christ Exodus 25. Heb. 8. Act. 7. But that there should be
any more shadows, or resemblaunces, when the body and substance it self is
come, it is contrary to the whole scope of the Epistle to the Hebrews. M. Allen
has a shift for that, saying it is the very self same in an other manner. But
he is so deep in divinity, that he forgets his first principles of logike.
For every boy in Oxford can tell him, that those things which be like, can not
be the same. If therefore the Mass be like the sacrifice of Christ, then is it
not the sacrifice of Christ it self. Again the exemplar and the example be
proper relatiues, therefore if the sacrifice of Christ be the exemplar whereof
the Mass is the example, the Mass can not be the sacrifice of Christ. Neither
will it help, that he says, It is the self same in an other manner, so long
as the same respect remains. But let him make of his Mass what he can, the
Church of God instructed by Gods word receives no more sacrifices
propitiatory, but only the sacrifice of Christ his death, which was offered by
no other, but by him self, and that once for all. Seeing that by one oblation
he has made perfect for ever, those that are sanctified: Hebr. 10.

2 And so says S. Augustine in these words. Neque enim piorum animae mortuorum
separantur ab ecclesia, Lib. 20. de ciuit. Cap. 9
quae and nunc est regnum Christi: alioquin nec ad altar dei fieret eorum
memoria, in communione corporis Christi: for the souls of the faithful
deceased, be not severed from the Church, which is already the kingdom of
Christ, else there should be no memory kept for them at the altar, in the
communion of the body of Christ.

By the force of this unity, what so ever is profitably practiced in this
world one for a another, as prayer, alms, fasting, Sacrifice, the same thinks
may and ought, by the example of the Church, to be carefully and with out
ceasing procured for the help of our friends, and Christian brethern departed.
And Athanasius that great pillar, he by a marvelous fit example sets forth,
how the souls in an other world, may have the benefits of the Church or
Christian people, derived down unto them, and what sensible feel of release
they have, Quaest. ad Ant. 34.
when we desire God for them. Quemadmodum cum in campo vinea virescit, and
vinum in vase occlusum rebullit, ac propemodum feruet: ita etiam ^entimus, quod
peccatorum animae diuinis beneficijs incruentae Hostiae, and gratiarum actionis
pro ipsis habitae, gaudeant: vt idem solus nouit and ordinat deus noster, qui
in viuos and mortuos dominium exercet. As when the vine abroad in the field
does spring and wax green, The communion expressed betwixt the live and the
dead, by the natural agreement betwixt the vine in the field and the wine
in the vessel.
the wine salfely kept in barells at home, does also work in it self, and in
a manner buyle: even so, as we judge, the souls of sinners, through the benefit
of the unbloody host, and sacrifice of thanks gyuing done for them, may wax
joyful and glad: as the same Lord and God only knows how, and has
ordained: who exercyseth his might, upon the live and the dead. See I pray you
how he by the action of Gods Church in the holy Mass, in which the unbloody
host and oblation is bestowed, has found some way, of carrying down the
benefit of Christ's passion, upon the members of his body beneth. And though
some have wickedly sought, utterly to break the band of peace betwixt them and
us, as they have cursedly shaken thunity of the living amongst them selves,
yet their mother Christ's sp^use, acknowledges her own children still: she
sees by the spirit of God (whereby she sees all truth) the sorrow of her
dearest, so far out of sight, but never out of mind, she in a manner feels
a part of her own body in pain. And can not otherwise do, but by all
possible means and approved ways, assay Gods mercy for their delivery. And
this natural compassion of the Church, passes through every membre thereof,
and ought to move every man, by the law of nature, to procure as much help as
he may.

And so much the more, do we owe this natural duty unto them, because they
now can not help them selves, being out of the state of deserving, and place
of well working, only abiding Gods mercy, in the sore sufferance of pains
intolerable. They them selves, as yet your brethern, and a portion of your
body, require to be partakers of your benefits. They feel ease of every
prayer: your alms quensheth their heat, your fasting releaseth their pain:
your sacrifice wipeth their sins and sores: so strong is the communion of
saints, that, what so ever you do that is acceptable, it ishueth abundantly
down to them.

2 When all authority out of Gods word fails you, whereby you should prove
that the souls departed receive benefit by the merits of the living, you fly
to the authority of men. And first Augustine must prove that the godly
departed are not separated from the Church, because memory of them is made at
the aultare. We nothing doubt, but that the souls of the godly departed,
remain still in the body of Christ which is his church, but we ground upon
better authority then the authority of Augustine, and upon better proof then
the reason which he allegeth, or else we might not be so certain of it as we
are.

And to the similitude of Athanasius which you note to be Quaest. ad Ant. 34. I
answer that in the place by you noted there is no such word nor any of his
questions ad Antiochum that I can find, where so ever you had it. Although that
book of questions is easily to be seen of all men and confessed of Nannus one
of your own side to be none of Athanasius doing: we say that first it must be
proved that the souls departed receive benefit by masses, and then we shall
not strive for the manner how: but man's authority is to weak to carry away so
weighty a matter. And therefore I will be as bold with you as Augustine was
with the Donatistes de pastoribus cap. 8. Auferantur chartae humanae sonent
voces diuinae. Ede mihi vnam Scripturam pro part Donati. Let men's papers be
removed and let the voices of God sound, show me one Scripture for Donatus
side, even so M. Allen I will not stick to urge you when you lean wholly to
the authority of men. Away with men's writings, let Gods word be heard from
you, show me but one Scripture, to prove all that you have said in this chapter
of the merits of the living to profit the dead,

3 Only he that is cut of from this happy society, has no compassion of
them, nor feels not how they are knitt unto us, by love and unity of one
head, and one body. You shall hear his unnatural, and worse then heathen
words: Dum mortuos a nostro contubernio subduxit dominus, Call. Instit.
nullum nobis cum illis reliquit commercium, ac ne illis quidem nobiscum. When
the Lord has taken the dead out of our company, he has dispatched us of all
intermedlyng with them, or they with us. This man was borne to break the band
of unity, which he hated both in the live and dead. By whose means it is now
come to pass, that those which of reason might clame our aid, are unnaturally
disapointed of all such remedies, whereby any comfort might to them arise.
Such lack of compassion is driven into our heads, that we feel not the woe
of our own fellows, our kin, our brethern, and our own members. It is a
thousand year and more, since a holy father, not having half the cause that we
now have, Ad frat. in herem. 44.
yet noted the peoples lack of compassion toward the departed, in these
words. They that lie in torment intolerable, cry out for succor, and few
there be, that make answer: they woefully call, but there is none to comfort
them. O Brethern what a kind of cruellty is this? O how much inhumanity is
this? those that in their life time suffered much sorrow for our sakes, now cry
again for our aid, and we regard them not. Lo how the sick calls, and the
physicians are at hand: the hog groneth, and the whole heard groutleth with
all: the poor ass falls, and every man helps him up in have: but the
faithful alone calls, in his grievous torments, and there is none that
answers. Lo our unkindness (says this doctor) and lo our lack of
compassion.

But because all this forgetfullnesse, comes by the wicked suggestion of
these late deuilish opinions, which maintain that the prayers of the living,
or their works, do not extend to the dead in Christ: therefore, for the
destruction of this unkind heresy, and planting in our hearts with the
truth, the feeling of our household fellows sores, I shall prove that in all
times, as well of nature, as the law and Gospel, the faithful men have ever
joined in all their prayers and acceptable works, the souls departed: as unto
whom, by right of their communion and fellowship in faith, the relief of Gods
grace and Christ's merits do appertain. Therefore, this once declared, let us
except them from no painful work of the living, nor charitable deed, nor
good prayer, nor sacrifice, nor tears, no nor from the inward dolor nor love
of man's heart. Learn to know what it is to be in a common body, and thou shall
straight perceive, that the least motion of thy mind, stirred by Gods grace,
shall be carried to the relief of that part which thou pitied, and most
intended.

3 Here but that you have a pleasure to spue out your pestilent poison against
that noble light of Gods Church M. Calvin, is nothing that need any such
exclamation which you make with open mouth, as though Calvin denied the
communion of Saints, which he does most constantly affirm even in the same
place out of which you have rent those words that you so bite and tear with
your venomous teeth. lib. 3. cap. 20. sect. 24. where he speaks against
invocation of Saints, who being in rest with God (he says) are not to be
drawn by the prayers, unto earthly cares of our necessities, which either they
know not, or they can not help. For that office of charity which the godly
do exercise in this life by praying one for an other, is grounded upon the
commandment of God and upon his promise, which two things are the chief to
be considered in prayer. But all these reasons concern not the dead, whom when
the Lord has removed from our company, he has left us no intermedling with
them, nor them with us, so far as we can conceive by any conjectures. These
be Caluins words by which he means, that although the affection of charity
remain in the dead, yet it is not showed by looking to our earthly
necessities, which they know are subject to the providence of God. Moreover
they have not (that we know by the Scripture) any commandment or promise to
cause them to pray for us, neither have we any to pray to them. And this is
that intermedling which Calvin denies to be between the dead and the living,
namely such as is between them that are living among them selves. As for the
exhortation of him that wrote to his brother in the desert, what so ever he was
or how long so ever it be since he wrote, because it has not authority in the
word of God, I weigh it as the words of a man, whose credit in divine matters,
is nothing without the word of God.

What the Church of God has ever principally practiced for the souls
departed, by the vvarrau^t of holy Scripture: with the defense of the
Machabees holy history, against the heretics of our time. CAP. III.
1 But amongst so many means of help, these have been ever counted most
sovereign: Gregori. in epist. ad Bonifac.
Sacrifice, prayers, alms, and by example of scripture most commended. Though
fasting added unto any of them, has singular strength in this case, and ever
was joined in all earnest suit, made to God for our selves or other. We can
not better begin to show the practice hereof, then at that scripture, which
sufficiently commends at once, all three: written in the second book of
Machabees in these words: Judas hortabatur populum co^seruare se sine peccato,
Cap. 12.
sub oculis videntes quae facta sunt pro peccatis eorum qui postrati sunt. Et
facta collatione, duodecim millia drachmas argenti misit Ierosolymam offerri
pro peccatis mortuorum sacrificium, been and religiose de resurrectione
cogitans: (nisi enim eos qui ceciderant resurrecturos speraret, superfluum
videretur and vanum orare pro mortuis) and quia considerabat quod hi qui cum
pietate dormitionem acceperant, optimam haberent repositam gratiam. Sancta ergo
and salubris est cogitatio, pro defunctis exorare, vt a peccatis soluantur. The
valiant man Judas, exhorted the people to keep them selves from sin, having
before their eyes, what was fallen for the offensies of them that were slain.
And a common gathering being made, he sent xij thousand pieces of silver to
Jerusalem, to offer for the sins of those that were departed, a Sacrifice:
being well and religiously minded, concerning the resurrection: for except he
had suerly trusted, that such as were slain should arise again, it might
have been counted vain and superfluous to pray for the dead. But because he
did well consider, that such as in piety received their sleep, had grace and
favor laid up for them, therefore it is a holy and proffitable meaning to
pray for the dead, that they may be assoyled of their sins. So far the
Author of the history speaks: setting forth most evidently, the notable
piety of Judas in exhorting them to releue the departed, the like liberal
alms of the people, the prayers there in the camp, and the sacrifice at
Jerusalem celebrated for the same purpose. In all which doing, the scripture
much prayseth that worthy zele of Judas, as a thing both profitable to the
departed toward the remission of their offensies, and no less agreeing to
that his especial hope of the resurrection to come: counting it a folly to pray
for them, of whose resurrection we are not assured. VVherby, I can not tell
whether a man may well gether, that such as deny the fellowship of the live
with the dead, or condemn prayers made for them, steadfastly believe not the
resurrection. Take heed
And in deed if we note well, we shall find that the prayers for the dead
have been ever taken both as an argument to prove, and as a protestation of the
faithful, to show their mind and faith, concerning the resurrection. So did
Epiphanius that holy father, make confession of the Churches faith for the
resurrection, and immortality of the soul, by the praying for the departed,
and joining them to the partaking of the works of the live. In heresi. Aerij.
Hi qui decesserunt viuunt (says he) and non sunt nulli, sed sunt, and viuunt
apud Deum, and spes est orantibus pro fratribus, velut qui in peregrinatione
sint. Those which be deceased do yet live, and are not by their departure hense
fallen to be nothing, but they have their being, and yet do live before God:
and there is great hope to their orators or beadsmen, praying for them: as for
such that be in their pilgramage. So says Damascen, In oratione pro de funct.
that by supplication for the souls, resurrectionis spes solidatur, the hope
of resurrection is established. And therefore Dionysius the ancient in his
mystical prayer and sa^r^fice for the departed, declares that there was a
minister that did solemnly recite certain places out of scripture, for to
confirm the hope of resurrection. Ecclesiast. Hierrarch. Cap. 7.
So that this practice of the faithful has not only been ever accounted a
plain truth, but it has been a ground and a principle to confirm the
article of resurrection and immortality of the soul. And therefore the fact
of Judas, is with such commendation mentioned in the scripture. For in those
days the heresy of the Saduces denying the resurrection and the life to come
(as Josephus writes) began to take great hold amongst the Jews, Antiq. li.
1^. Cap. 8.
about bishop Ionathas his time: in which tiue of diversity, that true beleuer
thought to make plain protestation of his faith, by his notable fact.

And now I must needs be bold to tell these enemies of our communion, that in
acknowledging them selves to have nothing to do with the souls departed, they
are at the next door by, to deny the immortality, and to term them dead
souls as Vigilantius did. Hiero con. vig.
Whom Gods Church very conformably to Christ's calling and fittly for the
protesting the common faith, names, Dormientes in signo pacis, Prayers for the
departed agrees to our faith of the resurrection and immortality.
Those that sleep in the sign of peace: and the named Scripture, for the same
cause, calls them men a sleep in piety. Well, if their denial of prayers
for the deceased, grow so far as the utter impugning of Christian hope for
the life everlasting, and so with purgatory, take away hell and heaven
together, as the Sadduces did, (which God of his might turn from them) but if
they do, because there is such affinity betwixt both their teachings: and
this of theirs, may seem always to have been joined to that extreme falshoode
of the others, then shall Gods Church still protest the faith of her children,
by prayers and practice for the dead, both by the example of the fathers in
Christ's Church under the Gospel, and by the fact of worthy Judas in the law
before.

CAP. III.

1 WE have all this while called for authority of the scripture, now we shall
have scripture I trow, or else M. Allen shall miss of his purpose Sacrifice,
alms, prayers, commended by scripture, to be means to help the souls in
purgatory. And the scripture is written. 2. Machab. 12. Prothesauro carbones:
we have found coals in the steed of treasure. Is this all the scripture we are
like to have? this has been answered of old to be no holy nor canonical
scripture, and that by many reasons. First because it contains matter
contrary to the undoubted word of God. I omit this matter in co^trouersy in
the 14. chap. the author of the book commends one Razis for killing him
self, which is contrary to the word of God. Wherefore M. Allen by authority
of this book, and the example of a good man Razis may as well conclude that it
is lawful for men to kill them selves, as by the example of Judas, that men
may offer sacrifice for the dead. Secondly the author of this book declares,
that he abridgeth the five books of Jason the Cyrenian, into this one, which
is a manifest argument, that he was not the instrument of the holy Ghost. For
the holy Ghost makes no abridgements of others men's writings. Again the
purpose of the author proves that he was not directed by Gods spirit, for he
confesses that he took this matter in hand, that men might have pleasure in
it, which could not away with the tedious long stories of Jason. But the
spirit of God serves not such vain delight of men. Moreover, he shows what
labor and sweat it was to him, to make this abridgement, and to be short, he
makes a very profane preface, ambitiously commending his travel and showing
the difference between a story at large, and an abridgment: all which things
savor nothing of that spirit, by which the holy Scriptures of God were
written, which as S. Peter shows, came not by private men's will and
ordinance, but the holy men of God spoke as they were inspired by the holy
Ghost. 2. Pet. 1. where as all this preface shows nothing, but a private
motion and an humane purpose. And yet the man is to be commended for this, that
he does not boast of any more revelation then he had, but in the end of this
book confesses his infirmity and desires pardon, which is as far from the
majesty of gods spirit, as it is agreeable to the weakness of our deceiuable
nature, which are apt to deceive and be deceived. If I have well done (says he)
and as the story required, it is the thing I desired: but if I have spoken
slenderly and barely, it is that I could. For as it is hurtful to drink wine
alone, and then again water, and as wine tempered with water is pleasant and
delights the taste, so the setting out of the matter delights the ears of
them that reads the story, etc. Who is so void of the spirit of God, that
can not see plainly that this man had neither the purpose to write that which
should instruct, much less that should bind the consciences of men, neither
the gift so to write as in writing he could not err? But now to come to the
text it self, first the greek copy in this place is so mangled and corrupted
that no good sense can be gathered of the words, by which it appears, that
the devils limbs have been ^umbling with this book, as they have been with
the old doctors in places where mention is of prayer for the dead. Secondly
seeing this fact of Judas, has no commandment in the law, in which not so
much as one pin of the tabernacle, was omitted, lest any thing might be left
to the will of man, to devise in the worship of God, it is so far of, that it
is to be drawn into example, that we may be bold to condemn it for sin, and
disobedience, you shall not do (says the Lord) what seems good in your own
eyes, but that which I command you, that only shall you do, without adding
any thing to it or taking away any thing from it. But M. Allen thinks he
has a sure post to lean unto, because Judas Machabaeus did by this fast
testify, his hope of the resurrection, as Iasons abridger says, and also that
prayers for the dead, may be an argument to prove the faith that men have of
the resurrection. It is not unlike that this reason prevailed much with the
ancient fathers, as appears by their writings, for commonly it has the best
color of any reason that they bring to allow prayers for the dead. But if it
be weighed with good judgment, it is of no force to prove, that prayers for
the dead, are lawful. For as truth may be proved always with true principles,
so often times it may be concluded out of false affirmations. As for example,
Idolatry proves that there is a God, but Idolatry is not therefore the true
worship of God. Of the heresy of the Pharisees that held Pythagoras opinion,
of the passing of one soul into diverse bodies, may be concluded the
immortality of the soul, but this does not justify that error of the
Pharisees: by the heresy of Origines which taught that all men should be saved
at length, not only the immortality of the soul and the resurrection, but
also the infinite mercy of God may be concluded, which all are true articles,
yet was not the heresy of Origin true for all this, unless M. Allen has
forgotten that old sophisme which children can solute: who so ever says you
are an ass, says you are a living creature: but he that says you are a
living creature says true: therefore who so ever says you are an ass says
true. And such for all the world is M. Allens reason: who so confesses
prayers for the dead confesses that the dead do live and shall rise again:
but he that confesses that the dead do live and shall rise again does not
err: therefore he that confesses prayers for the dead does not err.

2 But now their answer must be here, that this book by which I have urged
them so far, shall be no scripture. And this is the ishue of heresy lo.
Heretics deny scriptures.
These men that lightly writh and wreast Gods word, from all true meaning to
the maintenance of their matter, being further charged by evidence of the
words, when other convenient shifte can not be found, they are driven, to
refuse utterly the sacred canonical scripture of God: for notwithstanding
their perpetual bragges of scripture, yet there can no scripture hold them,
but they will either find a fond shifte to loose it, or else a shameful
stoutnes utterly to brast and break it. They first seek by suttelty to
vnfasten the bond of Gods truth, which is every way so enwrapped with the
testimonies of holy Scripture, then as they can not work by wiles, they
boldly brast the bands in sonder. Thus when for misconstruing of this plane
assertion of the book of Machabees, they can convey no fit meaning, they are
driven to hard shifts and unseemly, to deny the whole book to be scripture,
and therefore in matters of question, of no authority. In which point, the
authority of the Jews moves them more, In prol. match.

Though against a levve or an heretic they could not prove any article of
faith neither then nor now, by them. Cap. 48. Cap. 47. Lib. 2. Cap. Cap. 36.


in denying the books to be in the canon of Gods scripture, then the decree of
the holy Church for the approving of the same to be scripture. But S. Hierome,
though he confess the Jews not to allow them, yet is bold to reckon them
amongst the books of the holy Histories: not measuring their authority by the
canon of the Hebrews, but by the rule of Christian counsels. The Canons of the
Apostles will challenge them from the Jews and heretics, to be scripture
still: Innocentius the first, in his rehersall of divine books, numbreth these
of the histories of the Machabees also: the Council of Carthage the third,
authorisheth them, S. Augustine in his books. De doctrina Christiana, numbering
all canonical scriptures, with the rest recites these also. Of which books
in the xviij, of the City of God, he thus further testifies, Ab hoc tempore
apud Iudaeos restituto templo, non reges sed principes fuerunt vsque ad
Aristobulum: quorum supputatio temporum, non in scripturis sanctis quae
Canonicae appellantur, sed in alijs inuenitur, in quibus sunt and Machabaeoru^
libri, quos non Iudaei, sed Ecclesia pro canonicis habet. From this time (he
means after the history of Esdras) there was no kings, but chief
governors, after the restitutio^ and repair of the temple, till Aristobulus
time: of all which time there is no Chronikle nor count, in the scriptures
which be Canonical, but in other that be extant, we find that supplied: as in
the books of Machabees: which books, although the Jews do not, yet the
Church of God counts for canonical scripture.

But what should we stand in this point: the whole Church of God and every
part or province thereof, every learned doctor and virtuous Christian man,
has received and allowed them for scripture. the which constant and perpetual
judgment of the Church of Christ, if any man refuse, let him be esteemed an
Ethnike. Or because he defends the Jews authority against the determination
of Christ's Church, let him be at this time accounted for a Jew. And yet I
think he over shoots them herein: for they confess the history to be true,
although not holy Scripture: neither have they found any such error of
doctrine therein contained, as he does.

And as for the ancient Christian writers, and famous doctors, they allege
even that place to prove the lawefull prayer for Christian souls departed,
whereby these fellows take occasion to say it is no scripture at all. As
godly Damascenus, in these words. Scitis enim quid dicat scriptura, quomodo
Judas ille Machabaeus, in Syon, Ciuitate regis magni, vt cognouit populum sibi
subiectum a Palestinis hostibus occisum, and scrutatione facta, inuenta idola
in sinibus little, statim pro vnoquoque eorum ad dominum qui ad misericordiam
facilis and paratus est, In lib. pro defunct.
munera propitiatoria obtulit, sane ob summam religionem fraternamque
charitatem, in hoc facinore, vt in omnibus alijs, a diuinissima scriptura and
magnificus and admirabilis habebatur. You know (says he) what the scripture
reports, how that worthy Judas Machabeus of Syon, the City of the great
king, after he understood certain of his subjects to have been slain of the
Palestines his enemies, and search being made, had found in their lappes,
idols, straight ways offered to God, who is much inclined to mercy, for every
of his souldiars so slain, propitiatory oblations* who suerly, for that act,
as proceeding of wonderful religion and brotherly love, and in all other
affairs, is of the holy writ esteemed mighty and marvelous.

Long before this writer did S. Augustine use the same book and text of
Machabees, to prove the prayers and sacrifice, De cura pro mort. agenda.
for the departed in peace. In the book of Machabees (says he) we read that
sacrifice was offered for the dead. But if it were in none of the old
scriptures read at all, yet the authority of the universal Church, which for
this point is plain, were of no small force, whereby it is provided, that in
the prayers, which be made at the altar by the priest, to our Lord God, the
commemoration of the dead shall have their place. Thus by these ancient
authors, both the books be approved, the text it self, for which our
adversaries unworthily denied the book, alleged for the same purpose, and the
doctrine so sure, that if no scripture could be found, it would bear out it
self against all falsehood. But this doctor handles Pelagius the heretic,
denying the book of VVisdome to be scripture, because there was a sentence out
of the fourth Chapter thereof, brought against his wicked doctrine, even as he
should be: and as these wranglers in the like case must be. The place well
marked, shall serve our turn when so ever we hear them so impudently reject
scriptures, because they impugn their heresies, which else should be as good
scriptures as any book of the Bible, if they either would make with them or
by any crafty coloring not plainly make against them. Thus he says. Nec ideo
liber Sapientiae, qui tanta numerositate annorum legi meruit in ecclesia
Christi, pati debet iniuriam, Augustines answer to Pelagius, denying
scripture for that it made against his heresy.
quoniam resistit eis qui pro meritis hominum falluntur: and rursus: omnibus
hic liber tractatoribus anteponendus, quoniam sibi cum anteposuerunt etiam
temporibus Apostolorum proximi, egregij tractatores: qui eum testem adhibentes,
nihil se adhibere nisi diuinum testimonium credideru^t: in English thus. It is
no reason that the book of Wisdom, which so many worlds together has been
worthy the reading in the Church of Christ, should now receive such wrong at
our hands, because it plainly resists these fellows, that exalt man's
merits (above Gods grace.) And again, this book is of more authority then
all the expositours in the world: for the noble writers hard by the Apostles
time, did much prefer this book before them selves, who alleging the
testimony of that scripture, doubted not, but they used thereby, the witness
of Gods holy word. Even so must we tell our masters, that it were plain
wrong, to discredit the history of the Machabees, which has been in our Bible
ever since Christ's time for holy Scripture, because it has an evident
testimony against their false belefe, concerning the state of the souls
departed: which book, is not only better to be believed then all Caluins false
gloses, but of more authority then all holy expositors. Out of which book,
both S. Augustine and others many, have used proof of their matters, as of the
testimony of Sacred and holy scripture.

2 I will not gain say, but who so denies the authority of the holy
Scriptures, thereby bewrays him self to be an heretic as all Papists do,
which I will prove afterward. But he that admits for scripture, that which
is not proceeded from the spirit of God, and thereby will avouch for truth,
that which is contrary to the undoubted word of God, is no less heretic then
he, for it is all one sin, to add to the word of God and to take from it.
But M. Allen pretending to prove the book of Machabees canonical by authority
of the Church, when he can not by consent that it has with the scriptures of
God, begins with the authority of Hieronym. in prol. Match. But what he
means thereby or what place he notes I know not. But this I know, that in
his Preface upon the book of kings he does not only omit it in rehersall of
the canonical books, but also accompteth it plainly among the Apocryphal.
Next he alleges the canons of the Apostles. Wise canons I promise you: as
truly made by the Apostles, as the double canons that lie on the tower hill of
London. In which are rehearsed 3. books of Machabees two Epistles of Clemens
for canonical scripture, but the Apocalypse of S. John has no place at all,
by which it may appear, what Apostles they were, that made that canckred
canon. Then follows the provincial Council of Carthage the third, which
names the 2. books of the Machabees among the canonical scriptures even as
it does the 5. books of Solomon, whereas the Church allows but 3. namely the
Proverbs, the preacher, and the Canticles: and although you should number to
these, the book of Wisdom, yet can you make but 4. in all that we know of.
Again, in what sense they did call those books canonical, appears by
Augustine, that was one of that Council, namely that they may be read, so it
be with judgment. Contra 2. Gaudentij epistolam lib. 2. cap. 23. Et hanc
quidem scripturam quae appellatur Machabaeorum non habent Iudaei sicut legem
and Prophetas, and Psalmos, quibus dominus testimonium perhibet tanquam
testibus suis dicens: oportet impleri omnia quae scripta sunt in lege, and
prophetis, and in psalmis de me. Sed recepta est ab ecclesia non inutiliter, si
sobrie legatur and audiatur. And this scripture of the Machabees, the Jews
compte not as the law and the prophets and the Psalms, to whom our Lord
gives testimony as to his witnesses saying, it behooved that all things should
be fulfilled, that were written of me, in the law, and in the Prophets, and
in the Psalms. But it is received of the Church not unprofitably, if it be
soberly read and hard. Here you see that Augustine howsoever he allows
those books, yet he allows them not in full authority, with the law,
Prophets and Psalms, nor with out condition of sobriety in the reader or
hearer. But Hieronym says plainly the Church receives them not as canonical
scriptures: in his preface upon the book of Proverbs: Sicut ergo Judith and
Tobiae, and Machabaeorum libros, legit quidem ecclesia, sed eos inter canonicas
scripturas non recipit: Sic and haec duo volumina legate ad aedificationem
plaebis, non ad authoritatem ecclesiasticorum dogmatum confirmandam. Therefore
even as the Church reads in deed the books of Judith, Tobias, and
Machabees, but yet receives them not among the canonical scriptures so may
she read these 2. books (videlicet Ecclesiasticus and the book of Wisdom
falsely entitled to Solomon) for the edification of the people, but not to
confirm the authority of ecclesiastical opinions. Thus if Augustine do
simply allow these books, you have Hieronym that does simply refuse them. If
Augustine say the Church receives them for canonical, Hieronym says the
Church receives them not for canonical. As for Damascene except you would
strive with number of witnesses I know not why you allege him, being one to
whose judgment as but a late writer in comparison, you know we ascribe small
credit. I might produce against him Athanasius or at least wise one of elder
time then Damascene under the name of Athanasius, but that I have alleged
already is sufficient to repress that vain and unskillful insultation, that
you use in so many wastfull words against us, for refusing the authority of
him, that abridged Jason the Cyrenians books, for canonical scriptures.

3 But our adversary learned not this practice of Pelagius only, for it is an
older sore, and a common sickness to all deuisers of deuilish doctrine: as the
skillfull in the Churchies affairs may acknowledge. For some there were, that
otherwise could not uphold heresy, but by the utter denial of all the old
Testament: as Carpocrates, Ceuerus, Manicheus. But Marcion and Cerdon reject
all together: August. de haeresib. 24. haeres.

T^rtul. de praescrip. Iren. cap. 26 libr. 1. Eusebius. eccles. histor. lib. 4.

De haeresi. ad quod vult deum 30. haeresi.


saving Lukes Gospel. Now Cerinthus, and Ebion, make count of none of all the
Evangelical histories, but the Gospel of Matthewe. Cerinthus again and
Seuerus, would have robbed the Church of the acts of the Apostles. A sect
called Alogiani, do refuse the Gospel of S. John, with the Apocalypse Martine,
illiricus, Calvin, and their companions, that no man, being but an heretic,
should ever out prick them, will shoulder with the proudest, and lift out of
our Bibles the books of Machabees, with S. James Epistle, and more when more
need requires. The which Epistle, as also the Epistles of John and Judas, were
once doubted of, not as containing any matter, whereof, the truth was
uncertain, but as books not known to be of like force as canonical
scripture in the impugning of heresies, or confirming articles of belefe: as
all works be, till Gods Church have published their authority, and declared
all things in them contained to be of the same credit that the spirit of God
is, and of Gospel like truth. The Churches use in confirmation or publishing
of the canonical Scripture.
And by that authority of the Church what book so ever be allowed, though it
was not so taken before, yet now we must needs accept it, sicut vere est
verbum Dei, as the very word of God. And so be these canonical Epistles, and
books of Machabees, as before is declared. Here now every man may learn,
that it is a very dangerous matter to give less credit to any of these
books, or waver in any point of faith written in them, for such fellows
judgments, that now amongst them, have left us neither old nor new
Testament. Such stubborn boldness, had these wilful men in mainteinaunce
of mischeuous doctrine. Whose open impudency, was counted handsome
conueiaunce of their scholars and adherents, which were very many,
notwithstanding the Catholic Christian men in all ages both meruailed, and
lamented their blindness. And yet doubtless it is not much to be wondered at,
to see that man flatly forsake the scripture of God, who is not abashed, to
refuse and condemn that sense and understanding of the Scripture, which the
whole Church with all her learned men have ever allowed, and counted most holy.
Well by the strength of this pillar we have challenged and saved hitherto, for
all the barking of bandogges, the Scripture of God, with the known meaning
thereof. And so I trust we shall do still, from the new adversaries, by the
assured promise of thassistance of Gods holy spirit, which shall lead us not
only to the true canonical Scriptures, with the sense of the same: but also
guide us in all truth, necessary for our salvation.

Let every man therefore here take heed, how he doubts of the known and
certain sense, that the Church of Christ, by decree of council or consent of
doctors, applies to any Scripture: least by mistrusting the said sense, he go
forward unadvisedly from open denial of the common, to found a private meaning
of his own: in the stubborn defense whereof, A necessary warning.
when he shall against the truth malipertly stand, he goes vnluckely forward,
and at the end blasphemously rejects the blessed word, and sacred Scripture
of God: as we have proved the ancient enemies of truth, to have done: and as
in these new sect masters we may to our great dolor, see. Yet lo, even these
are they that in all ages, as Vincentius says, fly in their talk and
teaching, over the law, the prophets, the Psalms, the Gospel. That cry out of
pottes and pulpits, nothing but Gods word, the book of the Lord, the
testament of Jesus, Christ, Paul, scripture, as it may be supposed, and as in
the end it is proved, to drive out of doors, Paul, Scripture, Testament, and
Christ too: and not to bring into the peoples heads or hearts, the fear and
love of God, the holsom precepts of Paul's heavenly preaching, nor the true
meaning of any Scripture. Who being urged, will rather credit a minstrells
ballat, then the Machabeis, or best book in the Bible.

But now you may see, that whiles these men thought to save their credits, by
miscrediting the Scripture, they have wrought so wisely, that they have lost
their own credits, both in this point, and in all other for ever. And as they
hoped by denial of Scripture, to cloak their error, they have won to them
selves the property of an heretic, by open show of their own folly.

3 And even as vain and frivolous is this discourse that follows to show
what books of scripture were in old time refused, by what heretics. But you
think to match us with them, for denying the Machabees, where unto you add
the Epistle of S. James. If Martine and Illyricus have some times doubted of
that Epistle, they are not the first that doubted of it, Eusebius says
plainly it is a counterfect Epistle. lib. 2. cap. 23. And yet he was not
accounted an heretic, I say not this to excuse them that doubt of it, for I
am persuaded they are more curious then wise in so doing, but whereas you join
Calvin with them it is because you can not leave to lie with out shame, while
you are an instrument to defend devilish errors with out show of truth. For
Calvin receives it, defends it, expounds it, and in all his writings
allegeth it as canonical! scripture. Therefore if he were as ill as you count
him, yet it were shame to lie on the devil. But we shall not need to ^ake
among the old heresies to find what books of holy Scripture you Papists
refuse, when it is an easy matter to take your own confessions and bold
assertions, by which it is manifest that you do not as those heretics which
you name reject some one or two books but the whole authority of all the
canonical scriptures. For when you affi^me that no book of holy Scripture is
canonical, but so far forth, as your Church will allow it, who sees not
that you do abrogate all majesty and authority from the word of God
submitting it to the judgments of men? Moreover when you will not admit any
sense of the scripture, but such as your Church will allow, although the same be
contrary to the plain words thereof, what authority do you leave to the
word of God: which you make to be but a dead lettre until you give it such a
sense as it pleases you. Finally where you make decrees of men either private
or common, customs, traditions, unwritten verities, in which is no certainety
at all, not only equivalent, but also oftentimes superior to the auctority of
holy scriptures, what certainety, credit or estimation do you leave to the
scriptures of God above other writings? nay all other writings are in better
case then the scriptures are with you. For other writings may be compted the
works of their authors, with out your censure the holy Scripture may not be
compted the word of God, except you list so to allow it: which may as well
refuse that which is Gods word in deed as you receive and obtrude, that which
is not the word of God at all. Other writings have such sense, as the authors
have expressed them selves in their works, and may be gathered by their
words. The holy Scripture may not have any allowed sense, approved to be the
meaning of God the author thereof, by consideration of the words, nor
conference of one place with an other, but it must needs have such sense, as
your Church will feign unto it. Finally other writings are of credit according
to the authority of the writers: The holy Scriptures with you, have not credit
according to the authority of God the author of them, but according to your
determination, that may confer or perferre unto them what you list, whereby
it is manifest, that you Antichristian Papists receive only the names of the
canonical scriptures, and the metaphysicall words abstract from all sense,
but the authority, meaning and credit, you utterly deny to be in them,
submitting them altogether to your own selves and your most corrupt and
perverse judgment. The rest of your tedious railing unto the end of the
chapter, I know not why I should answer further, except it were to waste
incke and paper. For the stock of your fructlesse tree being dug up by the
roots, the proud tops and brave branches thereof must needs fall down and
wither away with it.

That the funerals of the Patriarchs, both in the law of nature, and
Moises, and Christ, had practice in them for the relief of the souls
departed. CAP. IIII.
1 NOw therefore, I have great hope to trust so much of all studious readers,
for that love which they bear unto truth, that they will give creditte to the
manifest words of Scripture, which so plainly do set forth, not only the
benefit that arises to the departed by prayers, but also witness, that there
was practice at Jerusalem by oblation and sacrifice for the same purpose, Judas
follovved the order of the church, and not prescribed to the Church any new
sacrifice or ceremony.
by order of their law. For otherwise, would that good knight so highly
commended, never have presumed to bring in, any superstitious new usage
contrary to the rule of that Church, neither would the Priests at Jerusalem
have offered for the dead without contradiction, under the government of so
good a bishop: neither would the Author of she book, upon so light a beginning
have praised the fact: or otherwise made mention of it, then as of a new devise
of the same man. Whom I doubt not therefore, rather to have followed the
continual custom of the Church, then to have invented any new unknown order
of his own.

Which may well appear at this day, by the ceremonies and sacrifices of the
old law, yet superstitiously observed amongst the dispersed Jews: where,
amongst other rites of their law, De vniuersa iudeoru^ fide. recitatur a
Groppero in lib. de Eucharist.
they offer and make solemn supplication for the souls departed: as Antonius
Margarita, a Jew that forsook his profession, and became Christian,
witnesses in a book that he made of the faith of the Jews. Where he
reports out of their sacrifice, this prayer. Deus animarum fidelium
recordetur, and in paradisum cum Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, alijsque
integerrimis sanctis collocet: that is: Lord remember the faithful souls, and
place them in paradise with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and other thy perfect
Saints and holy men. And for that purpose they have a memorial book, as he
says, out of which the names of the departed are yearly recited. But we much
need not this report herein: for that may well appear to have been used long
before Judas Machabaeus his days.

For what other thing does that long mourning, fasting, charitable releuing of
the poor, and other common afflictions which men took upon them, at the
obites of their friends and fathers, as well in the law of nature, as
afterward continually in Moises time, what else can they mean but perpetual
practice for the rest of their souls? Genes. 23.
Look how religiously Abraham celebrated the rites of his wives funeral,
which the Scripture calls Officium funeris, the office of the Burial, which
he fulfilled by weeping and lamentation made over the corpse.

Neither can I think, that the office and just funerals stood in mourning or
sorowyng without praying, or other remedies of relief toward the departed,
seeing especially that office of mourning, by solemn dirigies, as we now
term them, had place, time, and order, by rule appointed to be executed: yea
and were not ended by many days together, nor at one time another. As it
appears that Joseph and his brethern, Genes. 50.
executed their fathers funerals, first forty days in Aegypte, and then in
their own country, celebrabant exequias says the text, seven days together.
So the children of Israel celebrated Moses obsequies, Deuteronomy. 34.
with thirty days solemn mourning, in the downs of Moab. Not by that weeping
which proceeds of private affection toward a man's friend, for that can not
be limited, nor yet prescribed by rule, as all these solemn dirigies were. But
questionless this office contained for the relief of the deceased, alms,
prayer, fastes, and tears: all which may well be termed mourning songs or
weeping over the dead, Eccles. 22.
for that time most convenient. Of which the wise man gives this precept,
Super mortuu^ plora, Weep over the departed.

And that thou may well perceive, these public rites of solemn dirigies,
to perteine properly to the due help of those, for whom they be exercised, S.
Ambrose doubts not to affirm, that of those burialls in the law of nature,
Super obit Theod.
the necessary observation of our Christian days, months, and years minds
kept for the dead, had their beginning: saying thus in his funeral sermon,
made the fourtith day solemnly kept, for the memory of the noble Emperor
Theodosius, Eius Principis and proxime conclamauimus obitum, and nunc
quadragesimum celebramus, assistente sacris altaribus Honorio principe, quia
sicut sanctus Joseph, patri suo Jacob quadraginta diebus humationis officia
detulit, ita and hic Theodosio patri iusta persoluit: and quia alij tertium and
trigesimum, alij septimum and quadragesimum obseruare consueueru^t, quid doceat
lectio consideremus: defuncto inquit Jacob praecepit Joseph pueris sepultoribus
vt sepelire^t eum, and repleti sunt ei quadraginta dies. Haec ergo sequenda
solemnitas quam prescribit lectio. Bonus itaque Joseph, qui formam pio muneri
dedit, etc. We kept of late the day of this noble kings burial, And now
again we celebrate his fourtith days mind, the prince Honorius his son
assisting us before the holy altares: for as holy Joseph bestowed upon his
fathers funeral forty days duty, even so does this prince procure his
fathers obsequies. And because some observe the third day and the thirtith,
other keep customably the vij. and the fourtith, let us look upon the text:
which reads thus: Jacob being departed, Joseph commands the prouisours of
the sepulture, to bury him: and so they did, and made up full forty days in
that obite, this solemnity then must we fellow, prescribed by the scripture.
Good was this Joseph, that first gave us the form and fashion of so holy a
function. By these words we see the antiquity of our Christian dirigies, and
diversity of days, as yet it is used in mounthes or twelve mounthes minds,
to have ishued down from S. Ambrose time to ours, from the law of nature by
the Patriarchs prescription, to his days: Geneua book appoints a still
burial.
not by mourning and mumchaunse as the burial of Geneuas book appoints, but
at the holy altares these obites were kept, as with devout prayers, and
sacrifice. Whereof in better place, I shall speak more anon. He alludeth
there also, to our dilexi: and other Psalms which we yet singe in Gods Church,
over the departed.

CAP. IIII.

1 WHen you have perforce as you phantysie made a breatch in that strong wall
that environed the canonical scriptures, and made a great separation between
them and all other writing, by thrusting in the abridgme^t of Iasons story
among them, now as though you had taken the city, you make spoil and hauoke,
with out all order or honesty of all that likes you within the compass of
holy writ and with out. Now burialls, mournings, alms, fasting, festing,
building, times and seasons all are youres. But he that longs to have his
spleen or his gaul moved, let him read these discourses following, if he list
to laugh at foolish arguments let him come hither, if he will be angry with
froward applications of the scripture here can he not want occasion. And
first he hops that all they that love the truth will favor his cause, when
they hear out of the scriptures, that sacrifice for the dead, was offered at
Jerusalem by order of the law? By order of the law M. Allen? show me one jot
or title of the law to approve sacrifice for the dead. Et eris mihi magnus
Apollo, and Phyllida solus habebis, and I will worship your words as an
oracle, and confess that you only have the truth. I know your answer: you
have no writing, but you have good reasons, for so good a knight, so many
priests, so good a bishop, such an author would never have allowed it, if it
had not been according to the law of God. Touching your author we have said
enough already, As for the good knight Judas, was not so suer of falling, but
David a better knight then he, transgressed the law of God, to carry the arc
upon a new chariotte, which should have been borne upon men's shoulders, 1.
Chron. 13. wherein not only David, but so many Priests, and Levites, so good
a bishop, and the whole general council of Israel did err. Here was neither
Zadocke, nor Abiather, nor Abinadab, nor Gad, nor Nathan or any other that made
contradiction, until God him self showed his displeasure by killing of Vzza
But because M. Allen thinks the bishop being so good a man, would never have
consented to it, if it had been evil. I would ask of him, who was bishop or
high priest then, that he was so good a bishop, and so worthy of his
commendation. Suerly if he were a good man, he was much to blame to suffer any
such thing to be done, in the temple of God, which was not appointed by the
law of God. But if he were a wicked and an ungodly man, by M. Allens own
reason, it is not unlike, but that he would for the gain of 2000 drachmes of
silver, suffer such a superstitious new usage contrary to the law. Now
because M. Allen says he was so good a bishop, let him chose which it was of
these 3. that satte on the seat of the high priest all the time that Judas had
any dignity among the people, namely Jason, Menclaus and Alcinus, let him take
the best of them (although it appears by the story that Menaelaus the worst
of them all three, was Bishop in that time) and he shall see, that no man ever
(except he were wilfully disposed to lie) would bestow such commendation upon
him as M. Allen does, to call him so good a Bishop, and to defend the
government of so good a Bishop from suffering any superstitious usage contrary
to the law, when they were all three open transgressors forsakers of the law:
And what the Priests of that time were, let his own author declare, 2. Match.
4. The priests were now no more dilligent about the service of the altar, but
despised the temple, and regarded not the sacrifices, but made have to be
partakers of the wicked expenses at the play, after the casting of the stone.
These were those reverend Priests of those days, not unlike your hedge
Priests of popery. And although Judas did afterward make a piece of
reformation, after the horrible profaning of the temple, and the laws through
cruel persecution, yet these Priests were not thereby suddenly changed into
godly men careful for the sincerity of Gods law: but were ready like the
reformed popish Priests that we have seen in our time, to do what so ever
the Prince has commanded, and to be as ready again to do the contrary at an
other Princes commandment. In such a time, and under so wicked a Priest, no
marvel, if such corruption did enter. Moreover, the fact of Judas favors
not the popish purgatory, where none but venial and light sins are expiable,
but those that were slain, for whom the same offering was made, dyed in deadly
sin as appears by the story, they had under their coats Jewels,
consecrated to Idols, which was so heinous an offense that Judas feared that
they should have been all utterly destroyed for their fault, and therefore it
might seem, that he caused the sacrifice to be offered not so much to pacify
God for them that were killed, as to purge them selves of that pollution and
profanation, saving that the author of the book expounds that fact
otherwise. And whereas M. Allen says, that prayer for the dead is yet used of
the Jews. They that have as good cause to know their custom as he, affirms
contrary. He cites Antonius Margarita turned from a Jew to a Papiste which
avouches the same. The rabbis in their writings, when they speak of any that
is dead, they only bless his memory, and in the book of their common
prayers, and ceremonies printed in the hebrew tongue there is no such form of
prayer to be found for the dead. But if any of them (as they do in many
ceremonies papizare) have learned the superstition of the Papists, it is not
this alone that they have contrary to the word of God. But let us come to the
matter of this chapter, M. Allen asks what other thing does all the mourning,
fasting, and other ceremonies of burying mean, but a practice for the rest of
their souls? I answer with distinction, because his question is with
confusion: partly they mean, that those which did such things lamented for
the departure of so excellent men, partly they meant to show their hope of their
resurrection, mourning and fasting were to express their sorrow, the other
ceremonies were to declare that men's bodies should rise again. As for alms I
find not that it was used at burialls. But what mean you M. Allen (if you be
not out of your wits) to imagine prayer for the dead to be practiced at those
burialls? when in so many burialls as are rehearsed in the Scriptures, with all
ceremonies used about them, never is there one word, nay not one syllable, to
prove prayer for their souls. And yet as a man with a marble face, you are not
ashamed to affirm, that rites, offices, diriges, obites, trentalls, etc. were
practiced by them, for the relief of the souls in purgatory. It may be that
much of your paultry, by fond imitation was taken of such doings to counterfeit
the examples of the Patriarchs: (but once again I say) there is no mention in all the Scripture of prayer for ^he dead at any burial. Wherefore the authority
of Ambrose helps you little, who although he commends Honorius for
solemnising the funerals of Theodosius by the space of 40. days, after the
example of Joseph, yet he says not, that prayer for the dead was taken by the
example of Joseph. But see M. Allen (if you can see any thing) whether blind
affection carries you, that you can not understand the plain latin of
Ambrose, or else will not translate it a right. Ambrose speaks not of his
fortieth days mind, but of the solemnity of his funeral kept 40. days
together, as in the embalming of Jacobs body was by Joseph. But to say the
truth, how simple a reason this was, to take example of, for the time of
solemnity of funerals, it is plain by that place which Ambrose allegeth,
where it is said that 40. days were bestowed, by the Physicians or
Apothecaries in embalming the body of Jacob, to keep it long from
putrefaction. And how slenderly he reproves them that kept 7. days funerals,
where if his reason were good by example of Joseph's Poticaries to keep 40.
days, theirs were better by example of Joseph him self to keep 7. days.
These be the grounds of such superstitions as crept into the Church, first by
emulation of the Paganes, and after seeking for colorable confirmation in the
examples of the Patriarchs. For avoiding of all which inconveniences that have
risen and may rise, by ceremonies practiced at burialls, the Church of Geneua
very wisely and godly, uses no more ceremonies in burying their dead, then
are convenient for the reverent laying up of the corpse which is ordained to
rise again with glory. Whose still burial is better then your yelling and
howling, and their mumming (if you will needs so term it) more commendable,
then you masking.

2 But in the second book of the Kings* the example of the holy King David is
a plain proof that they fasted also for the deceased. Apprehendens David
vestimenta sua, scidit: Cap. 1.
omnesque viri qui cum eo erant: and planxerunt, and ieiunauerunt vsque ad
vesperam super Saul and Jonathan filium eius, Fasting for the departed.
and super populum, and super domum Israel, eo quod corruissent gladio. And
David taking hold of his garments tore them: and so did the men with him, and
they howled, wept and fasted upon Saul and Ionathas his son, with the residue
of Gods people, that there were slain. Now what other thing did David here and
his people, but that which Judas Machabeus did afterward, for the like death
of his souldiars? I trow there was no fasting to be found over any manner a
person, live or dead, for thy selue, or other, in the whole course of
scripture, but it was to obtain mercy at Gods hand, toward the party for
whom thou did it. So did this same holy Prophet weep, fast, 2. Reg. 12.
lie on the ground, and change apparel, for his child, which he begat of
Vrias wife, when he lay at the point of death, stricken by Gods hand for the
punishment of his fathers fault. The which he did, as he protests him self,
to turn the angry sentence of God if it might be, and recover the child
again. But as soon as the child was gone, he brake of his long fast, giving
his friends to weete, that he tormented not him self so, of only natural
compassion toward the child, or inordinate lous, as they thought, but to
obtain his purpose by such bitter tears, and fasting, at Gods hands, for the
child's recovery.

Fasting then over any man, and such solemn mourning, is nothing else, but an
effectual asking of mercy, for whom so ever it be done. As more plainly it
is yet declared, in the burial of Saul and Ionathas before said, 1. Reg. 31.
celebrated by the Galadites and Saules souldiars: Where, as the scripture
says, after they had buried their bodies and bones, they fasted vij. days. Et
ieiunauerunt septem diebus. For no other cause, but thereby effectually to ask
pardon of their offensies. There can I am sure be no reasonable occasion of
their fasting alleged of no man, but that which the honorable Bid testifies
for us in these words. Recte and ad literam pro mortuis vt ad requiem
peruenire valiant septem diebus ieiunatur, quia post sex huius mundi aetates,
in quibus in carne laboramus, septima est in illo saeculo aetas requictionis
animarum carne exutarum, in qua beatae tempus illud glorificum, quando
resurgere mereantur expectant. Duly and according to the letter, they fasted
(says he) for the departed, seven days together, to obtain rest for them:
because after the six ages of the world, in which we travel in flesh, the
seventh age is looked for in that world, when the souls be loosed from their
bodies, when the blessed and happy sort, shall continually be in expectation of
the glorious time, by receiving their bodies in the resurrection again.

2 As we have had prayer for the dead, so now we shall have fasting for the
dead. In deed the words sound more like such a matter then any thing that
can be said of prayer for the dead. But the sense is evident, they fasted not
for them to redeem their souls, but they fasted, to declare their sorrow,
because they were slain with the sword as it follows in plain words. And
yet to make the matter more plain, in the same Chapter follows a large form
of lame^tation made by David for them, where if ever he had used prayer for the
dead, he would have used it: if not for his father in law Saul, yet at least for his dearly beloved and sworn brother Ionathas. But no such thing
came in his mind, as M. Allen foolishly fantysieth of him. But M. Allen says
this matter is more plainly proved, by the Galaadites, that fasted seven days
after the burial of Saul and Ionathas, and he is suer, there can no
reasonable cause be alleged of their fasting, but only to ask pardon for
their sins. I take this to be a more reasonable cause, that they fasted and
humbled them selves before God, because they did see the wrath of God against
the whole people in the calamity of the king and his son, whose contumelious
ha^dling by the uncircumcised, stretched to the dishonor of God. And this was
common among the Israelites in any great calamity or danger, or to show their
sorrow for profanation of Gods glory. And any of these are more reasonable
causes, then the superstitious surmise of Beda, with his curious conceit of the
six ages of the world, where other make seven and eight ages.

3 And that charitable relief of the poor, by open alms and doles, was also
practiced for the wealth of the departed in the obittes of old time, the
scripture it self in the fourth chapter of Tobie makes mention, Tobiae. 4.
by report of that godly commandment, that the good old father gave is son
herein: Panem tuum cum esurientibus comede, and de vestime^^is tuis nudos tege.
Panem tuum and vinum tuum super sepulturam iusti constitue, and noli ex eo
manducare and bibere cum peccatoribus. Eat thy bread with the hongry and
needy, and cover with thy clothes the naked. Set thy bread and wine upon the
sepulture of the virtuous and make not the sinful partaker thereof, which
words of exhortation can have no other sense, but that, as before in the same
place, he gave his son in charge to bestow upon all men according to his
hability, for that there was hope to all charitable alms giuers of Gods mercy,
so now he warns him to feed the poor, and break his bread to such
especially, as should come to the iustes and funerals of the departed. He
would never have put him in mind to have relieved the poor at burialls, but
for some commodity that might arise to the party deceased. for othe^wise his
charity might have proffeted the needy at other times as well as upon men's
departure. Some took foolish occasion by this place, to set store of meat
upon the grave it self, where their father or freinde was buried, as though
the dead had been desirous of corporal food. Ser. de cath. sancti Pet. Lir.
super hu^c locum.
The which superstitious error S. Augustine earnestly improueth.

Other some, made great feasts at the day of their freindes death. But the
text is plain, it was the needy and good people that were at those solemn
exequies, or other wise by their prayers might be profitably present in the
days of memories holden for them: which practice was not prescribed as a new
thing to the young Tobie, Tob. 12.
but it was moved and praised unto him, as a holy usage of other burialls in
those days, and always before. Bona est oration cum ieiunio and elecmosina:
Prayer is profitable, says the holy Raphel, when it is joined with fasting and
alms: and therefore as the fathers in their prayers for the dead, fasted, as
we have proved, so now I doubt not but alms shall cry for mercy at Gods
hand for the soul departed, upon whose sepulture these things be charitably
wroght.

3 What else? if we had not doles at burialls, proved by the example of the
Patriarchs, all were marred. Therefore Tobias must say for doles. But first we
have showed already, by authority of Hieronym, which is proof sufficient
against the Papist, that the Church receives not this book of Tobias for
canonical scripture. And secondly if we should receive it, yet here is
nothing that helps M. Allens cause but his own simple surmise. He says in
deed the words can have no other sense, yet all that he says is not gospel,
but what if the truer text of Tobias has other words? First in the Greek
there is no mention at all of wine, as is in the Latin nor of setting bread
and wine upon the grave of the virtuous, but the sense is this: As before he
exhorted his son to feed the hongry with his own bread, and to cloth the
naked with his own garments: so now he wills him to spare the bread out of
his own mouth, to bury the righteous, as he him self had done chap. 1. (which
is a clear interpretation of this:) but to give nothing at all to the ungodly,
or to be liberal to the rightuous even to their death and to see them buried
honestly. As for the iustes and funerals M. Allen dreameth that the poor came
unto, to receive penny dole or soul bread, appears in the first and second
Chapters how solemn they were, when poor Tobie was feign to steal the bodies
and bury them privily by night, yet upon that corrupt Latin text (as it
should seem) whereupon M. Allen builds, they used in Africa to make
sumptuous and dronken feasts, upon the graves of men in the places of burial,
which they thought not only to perteine to the honor of the martyrs, but also
to be some comfort to the souls of the dead. This old superstition
Augustine reproves epist. 64. Aurelio. But it is pretily renewed in the
funeral feasts of the Papists, as also the selling of oblations for the
dead which he in the same place condemns.

4 We have a notable example in the Acts of the Apostles, of the force of
alms with prayers, which wroght life and procured mercy, eue^ in the next
world. For the benefit of faithful works and holy prayers, will not be
limited by the terms of this world: it will have course down so far as the
fellowship of this Christian society reaches: the devil and all his
abettours can not stop the raze thereof. The only show of certain cotes,
with the request of the pore widows that wore them, made to Peter the
Apostle, turned Tabitha to life again after her departure: Act. 9.
those garments given by her when she was a lieue, by the careful travel of her
alms folks, procured relief in the world to come. They warmed the backs of
widows in earth (says Emissenus) and the geuer had comforth of them being
gone from the earth. It is good we should all learn here, Sermo. de initio
quadrage.
that have received benefit of any man in this liefe, with love and
carefullnesse, not only in this present world, but most of all when our friend
is departed, to represent unto God before his altar and holy ministers, with
sorrowful weeping and hearty prayer, the memory of such things as we have
received by way of alms or love, at his hand: It shall be a sovereign remedy
for his infirmities, and the approuedst way to procure Gods mercy that can be.

The elders of the Jews, making earnest supplication to our Savior, for the
Centurions servant lying in extremity, used the memory of that gentilmans
charitable acts in their church, as the rediest way to obtain grace and
favor at his hands. They cried out together: dignus est vt hoc illi praestes,
Lucae. 7.
diligit enim gentem nostram: and synagogam ipse aedificauit nobis. Lord be
gracious unto him, he is worthy that benefit: for he loves our nation, and
has him self founded a Synagoge. And S Cyprian says notably, that good
works make a more effectual intercession then good words, he speaks of the
same Tabitha as follows. Circumsteterunt Petrum viduae flentes and rogantes,
Ser. de eleemos.
pallia, and tunicas, and omnia illa quae prius sumpserant indumenta
monstrantes: nec pro defuncta suis vocibus, sed ipsius operibus deprecantes:
the widows compassed Peter round about, weeping and craving, holding forth the
clokes and cotes, and all their wiedes which they had given them before: not
requesting for the good woman deceased so much by their words, as by her own
good works. I pray God we be not over careless in offering to almighty God in
these our doleful days, the inestimable benefits which we have received of
our forefathers, by the building of all our Collegies, our Oratories,
Churchies, and chappelles. They were founded first, to procure Gods mercy, they
were many years together in the minds and memories of their beadsmen,
represented before the face of God at his holy altar: they are now forgotten
with most men, and offered to God with tears almost of none. We should be
much more diligent for our friends offensies doubtless, then the poor women
were, only for restore of there benefactors liefe again. And the force of
prayers and alms works rather mercy in remission of sin, then favor for
calling to the life of this world any more. Therefore seeing we read
expressly, that prayers and alms have been proffitable to many, out of the
state of our present life, we can not deny but the works of the virtuous pass
by Gods providence to the souls separated from their bodies, and work grace
and favor as the case and condition of the party requires.

4 But when shall we make an end if we answer such arguments as these? The
widows entreated Peter to restore Tabitha, and showed such garments as she
made whilst she lived, therefore prayer and alms helps the souls in
purgatory. At a word I say, here is no necessary nor probable consequence. But
this is notable, that he allegeth the sorrowing of the unbelieving Jews. He is
worthy of this benefit, because he loves our nation and has builded us a
Synagoge. Belike he would have men think this Synagoge was some chauntry, that
he builded for the benefit of the souls in purgatory.

5 The soul of Lazarus whom our Savior revived, was 4. days in the place and
state of the next world when Martha and Mary his sisters prayers, procured his
restore to the land of the living again. Which women I am sure, were as
earnest suitors for the rest of his soul, as for recovery of his personage:
Ioh. 11.
they wished Christ had been present in his sickness, they were assured of his
resurrection at the latter day, but being stinking ripe, they thought our
master would not presently call him up at that turn: yet for his rest, we
need not to doubt, but they made suit with sighs and sorrowful tears, every
day. Who by custom of their country, as I take it, kept solemn prayers for
diverse days together, in certain seasons, at the sepul^hre: as the conjecture
of Mary's friends, which came to comfort her in heaviness, may well declare
unto us. For as she s^denly at her sisters call brake from them, they, knowing
the usage of that solemn weeping at the sepulcher of the departed, said one to
an other, quia vadit ad monumentum vt ploret ibi. she is surely gone to his
grave, there to weep. In which weeping, kept as it were by course, order, and
time, if our adversaries yet deny to have been used any prayers or words of
request, then let them make proof by Gods word, that they used nothing but
unprofitable lamentation: which if it be immoderate, has especial mistrust of
the resurrection, as S. Paul declares, but joined with prayers or alms, as
before is proved, 1. These. ca. 4
it has the lively hope, of the life of those that sleep in peace.

And that to be the true mourning for the dead, S. Chrysostom witnesses with
me, both often else, and namely, upon the Epistle to the Philippians thus:
Defleamus istos, iuuemus eos pro viribus, procuremus illis aliquid auxilij,
Homil. 3.
modici quidem, attamen iuuemus eos. quomodo quaue ratione? precantes pro
illis, adhortemur and alios vt orent pro eis, pauperibusque indesinenter pro
illis eleemosinas demus: habet res ista non nihil consolationis: 4. Reg. 19.
Audi quippe quid Deus dicat: protegam ciuitatem istam propter me, and propter
David seruum meum. si memoria duntaxat iusti tantum valuit, quando and opera
pro tali fiunt, quid non poterunt? Let us mourn and weep (says he) over the
dead, and help them according to our ability: somewhat let us succor them
though it be never so small, yet let us put to our helping hands. But how and
by what means? mary both our selves praying for them, and moving others to do
the like: yea and with out ceasing let us bestow alms for them, this is
somewhat confortable. For see I pray you what God says: I will defend this
city for mine own sake and for my servant David's sake. Truly if the only
remembrance of a just man might make so much with God, what may not charitable
works done for the same intent, obtain at his hand? This was the mourning
meet for the Christian burialls, as this noble father teaches us, and this
and no other, was practiced in the fathers funerals in Christ's time and
before. As in an other place, this same doctor earnestly corrects the use of
vain mourning, or outrageous costly and curious covering of the body buried.
Cessemus quaeso ab hac insana diligentia, sed eam morientium curam habeamus,
Homil. 84. in Ca. 20. Ian.
quae and nobis and illis conferat ad gloriam Dei. Largas pro his eleemosinas
faciamus, mittamus eis pulcherrima viatica. Eleemosina mortuos suscitauit,
quando circumsteterunt viduae ostendentes quae fecerat ipsis Dorcas. Cum ergo
moriendum sit, quisque funus sibi paret, persuadeatque vt indigentibus aliquid
relinquat. Nam si reges haeredes scribentes, familiaribus partem relinquunt in
puerorum cautionem, cum Christum cohaeredem filijs tuis dimittis, intellige,
quantam tibi, and illis concilias beneuolentiam. Haec sunt funera pulcherrima
and remanentibus, and abeuntibus proficiunt: and caetera. For Gods love, says
he, let us leave this indiscreet and mad curiosity: and let us so provide
for the departed, that we may both help them and our selves to the glory of
God. Large alms must we give for them, in so doing we shall send unto them,
as you would say, a kind of necessary food and sustenaunce for their souls.
This has raised up the dead, when the widows stood round about, making
show of the garnements that Dorcas made for them. Therefore, seeing dye we
must, it were not amiss, that every man procured his own funeral before
hand, that is to say, by determination to leave somewhat to the poor and
needy. For if mighty kings making their heirs, do bequeath somewhat to their
familiars, for the salfe prouiso of their successors, As prayers do protest
the resurrection, so inordinate mourning shows the lack of belief therein.
thou may well understand, when thou make Christ the copartener with thy
children, thou procurest thereby his mercy, both to them, and thy self. And
these be the right obittes, these shall be commodious to the living, and
profitable to the deceased.

Again in an other place, he argues that this inordinate mourning can not
stand with the steadfast belefe of resurrection of the departed, which the
prayers of Gods Church, and the rites of Christian dirigies do planely protest,
and prove: these be his words. Cur post mortem tuorum pauperes conuocas? cur
presbyteros, vt pro eis velint orare obsecras? Homil. 32. in Cap. 9. Matthew.
non ignoro te responsurum, vt defunctus requiem adipiscatur, and vt propitium
iudicem inueniat: his ergo de rebus flendum atque vlulandum arbitraris? Non
vides quam maxim ipsi repugnas? Why do thou gather the poor people, to
come to thy friends burial? In his time the priests were desired to pray for
men's souls.
Why desire thou the priests to pray for their souls? Thy answer I am
shure will be, that thou do these things to provide for his rest, and to
obtain mercy and favor at his iudgies hands. Well then go too, what cause
have thou to mourn or bewail his case? do thou not perceive that thou art
contrary to thy self, in thy own fact? now all studious men may see, what
force the charity and alms of faithful people ever had, especially toward
the dead: how little weeping auayle^h, how unlikely it is that the prescribed
days of the old funerals in the law of nature or afterward, were spent in
mourning, with out words or works for the departed: but namely how this holy
fathers sentence and mind fully sets fourth the meaning of Tobies precept,
for setting his bread and drink upon the sepulchers, to be nothing else but a
calling together of the poor people, and feeding them for the benefit of the
person departed: that not only they by earnest prayer, but he by charitable
works, might together obtain rest and mercy for his soul. And here, the
simple sort, and such as be ignorant of the force of alms, or our fathers
practice, for their years, A great decay of virtue in our time.
being brought up in this sinful age when virtue is defaced, and the works
of Christianity scarce to be seen in a whole country: and where they be much
merueled at, as things rare, or contemned as unprofitable, or of the wicked
condemned utterly, as superstitious and ungodly: such good young men must look
back a great way with me, to learn their duties of the blessed times paste,
that were wholly free from the contagion of this pestilent waste in religion:
even to those days, that our adversaries confess, to have been holy and
undefiled.

5 What a shameless man is this? to say the soul of Lazarus was restored to his
body, at the prayers of Martha and Mary his sisters, who as the Scripture is
manifest, did not hope for any restitution before the general resurrection.
Yet we need not doubt (says he) but they prayed daily for his rest. How
proves he that? Forsooth Sir, when Mary went out suddenly to meet Christ, the
Jews said, vadit ad monumentum vt ploret. Alack that M Allen could not put
out that pl. and then it should be vt oret ibi. But in good sadness, if the
Jews had thought that Mary had gone to pray at her brothers grave, they would
not have followed her to hinder her devotions, but she went to wayle, and they
followed to comfort her and to forbid her M. Allen says, that immoderate
mourning has a special mistrust of the resurrection, as S. Paul declares.
1. The. 4. But joined with prayers and alms, it has a lively hope of those
that sleep in peace, if they sleep in peace what need have they of our
prayers? but will you see the ratte taken by his own rumbling? The place of S.
Paul 1. These. 4. is directly to reprove immoderate mourning for the dead,
which is not meet for them that have hope. But how happens it, that prayer,
and alms be not there joined to moderate mourning? yea how happens it, that in
so necessary a place S. Paul finds no other comfort to moderate the mourning
of the faithful, but only the quiet rest of them that are a sleep in the
Lord, and the hope of their glorious resurrection? Surely if S. Paul had been
of Chrysostomes mind he would have prescribed other manner of comforts as
Chrysostom does. But where learned Chrysostom that prayers and alms had any
comfort in them for the dead? Surely he allegeth Scripture, but he applies it
madly, and yet he often applies it to the same purpose, belike it was the best
he had for that purpose. God says unto Ezechias, I will defend this city for
mine own cause, and for David my servant sake. Alas good man what manner of
reason is this? be it as he says, that the memory of David being a righteous
man, and not rather the truth of Gods promise, made to David, moved him to
defend the city from the enemies: does it therefore follow that prayers and
alms are auailable for the dead for whom we have no scripture, no
commandment, promise, nor example to pray? Who if they be of the number of
Gods elect, be in so happy estate as they can not be better by our prayer,
which supposes them to be in misery. Hieronym upon the 37. of Esaias where the
same sentence is repeted, refers these words Propter David etc. to the
memory of David being a virtuous man, whereby the Jews were admonished, that
not for their merit, but for his mercy sake and for their ancestors sake, God
would protect them, but prayer for the dead he finds not auailable by these
words. The other place of Chrysostom allows rather alms that men give
before their death, or bequeath in their test^ment because it is a work of
their own, then that alms which other men give for them. For if Dorcas was
restored to life through her alms, it was through her own alms, that she did
give when she was a live, not for any alms that other did bestow for her when
she was dead. The third place of Chrysostom shows, how hardly the people
being once n^sl^d in superstition, could be kept in any moderation, no not in
those times where there was great care, diligence and knowledge, in their
pastors: but soon after as these things decayed in the teachers, so
superstition daily increased: and where as you note in the margent, that
priests in that time were desired to pray for men's souls, I will prove
afterward in a more proper place, that in the older time they were called
together at burialls for an other purpose. But such is the nature of men's
devises, that although at the first they seem not altogether evil, yet in
process of time, they grow to more and more inconueniens, until at the last
they come to be altogether abominable. And therefore your collection (M. Allen)
being all upon false grounds is nothing to be regarded of old or young. But
Satan your suttill master, has taught your rather to appeal to the
judgment of the younger sort, who have not known your horrible idolatry and
mischeiuous merchandise of men's souls, then to men of any riper years, which
remember your mysteries of iniquity, and are witnesses of your detestable
doings. And yet you do clame of the decay of virtue in our days, which
whether it have suffered a greater diminishing then in the time of your blind
and blasphemous government, let them that have known both the times, consider
diligently and judge indifferently. Finally where as you affirm, that your
adversaries confess, that the days of Chrysostom were holy and undefiled,
and would make young men and boys believe so, you must either bring forth your
authors that so confess, or else all men both young and old must say you are
a shameless liar: we confess that in those days, the only foundation Jesus
Christ was taught, and the article of justification by the only mercy of God
was preached: but yet we affirm that much straw, wodde, and other impure
matter, was builded upon the foundation, which was a preparation to the
kingdom of Antichrist, which was not long after to be reueiled. It may be a
shame for you Papists, to leave and condemn for heresy, all that is true in
those men's writings, and agreeable to the scripture and to make such vaunt for a
few superstitious ceremonies, and insincere opinions, which yet if either
young or old will indifferently compare with your abominations of desolation,
they shall easily perceive that they differe as much from you, as we from them.

Man may be relieved after his departure, either by the alms which he gave in
his life time, or by that which is provided by his testament to be given after
his death, or else by that alms, which other men do bestovv for his souls
sake, of their own goods. CAP. V.
1 ANd we find, the works of mercy and charity, to help the soul of man in
this life, toward remission of his sins, or else in the next world, for
release of pain due unto the same sins. All which may be done two days*
first, Iucae 11. and 16.
by thine own hands or appointment, living in this world, which is the best,
perfectest, and surest means that may be: for that purges sins, Dan. 4.

Ecc. 3.

Tob. 12.


procures mercy, makes friends in the day of dread, cleanses beforehand,
staieth the soul from death, and lifts it up also to life everlasting.

Regard not here the ianglers, that will cry out on thee, that man's works
must not presume so far as to win heaven, or to purge sins, lest they
intermeddle with Christ's work of redemption, and the office of only faith:
make no account of such corrupters of Christian conditions, live well, and
carefully follow these works of mercy so expressly commanded and commended
in the scriptures, keep thee within the householde of the faithful, and thy
very good conversation in operibus bonis, Jacob. 2.
shall refute their vain blastes, and improve their idle faith. Say but then
unto them by the words of S. James. Master Protestaunt, let me have a sight of
your only faith, with out good works: and here lo, behold mine and spare
not, by my good works. What religion so ever you be of, I know not, but I
would be of that religion, which the Apostle calls, religionem mundam and
immaculatam, The pure and unspotted religion: Jacob 1.
and that is (as he affirms) to viset the fatherless, and succoure widows
in their need. And then tell them boldly, that the Church of God has
instructed thee, that all works, whereby man may procure help to him self or
other, be the works of the faithful, which have received that force by the
grace and favor of God, and be through Christ's blood so wattered, tempered,
and qualified, that they may deserve heaven and remission of sin.

Doubt not to tell them, that they have no sight in this darkness of heresy,
in the ways of Gods wisdom: they have no feel nor taste of the force of his
death: they see not how grace prepares man's works: they can not reach in
their infidelity, how wonderfully his death works in the Sacraments: they
can not attain by any guess, how the deeds of a poor wretch, may be so
framed in the children of God, that, whereas of their own nature they are not
able to procure any mercy, yet they now shall be counted of Christ him self
sitting in judgment, worthy of bless and life everlasting. Bid them come
in, come in, and they shall feel with thee in simplicity and obedience, that,
which they could not, out of this society in the pride of contention, ever
perceive, And if they will not so do, let them perish alone. Turning then from
them thither where we were, let us practice mercy (as I said) in our own time,
in our health, when it shall be much meritorious, as proceeding not of
necessity, but of freedom and good will. And then after our departure, the
representation of our charitable deeds, by such as received benefit thereby,
shall exceedingly move God to mercy: as we see it did stir up the compassion
of his Apostle, in the fulfilling of so strange a request. VVhereupon S.
Cyprian says, that alms delivers often from both the second death, Sermon. de
Eleemos.
which is damnation: and the first, which is of the body.

CAP. V.

1 NOw we shall see how many ways alms proffiteth men's souls. First alms
given by a man's own hands, is allowed for the best, but that my thinks M.
Allen should keep men out of your purgatory and not help them: when they be
there. And here you will seem, to be zealous in exhorting men to alms, and
charge us with iangling against it, because we affirm, that men's works must
not presume to win heaven, nor to purge sins, nor to meddle with Christ's
work of redemption, and the office of only faith, which assertions you call
corruptions of Christian conditions. O blasphemous barking of an horrible
helhound. Does the glory of Gods mercy and grace, the work of Christ's
redemption and the office of only faith hinder alms or corrupt good
conditions, who sees not although it be a foolish thing to boast of our works,
but that we are compelled by this sclau^derous tongue of yours, who sees not
more true alms which is given for Gods cause in one city where the Gospel is
preached, then in a whole country where popery is received? Neither do we
refuse the trial of S. James, with the proudest of the popish hypocrites that
make most of their merits. And because you would be of that religion that S.
James calls holy and undefiled, which is to visit the fatherless children
and widows in their affliction. If I should speak of singular persons, the
trial were neither certain nor possible, let us therefore consider the whole
states. Show me M. Allen if thou can for thy gutts, or name me any city in
the world, where popery preuayleth, that has made such provision for the
fatherless children and widows and all other kind of poor, as is in the
noble city of London and in diverse other cities and towns of this land, and by
public law appointed to be throughout all the realm of England. I knowledge
and confess before the Lord, that it is nothing in comparison of his mercy
toward us, nor our duty toward him. But yet blessed be his holy name, that
it is sufficient to justify our profession against the Papists, and if not to
stop their malicious mouths, yet to condemn their cancred conscience of
obstinate lying against the manifest light of truth. And whereas M. Allen will
have us told, that the blood of Christ makes men's works meritorious, we will
not let to tell him, that ye church of Christ abhors that blasphemy, whereby
Christ's blood is made not the only nor the principal, but an accessory and
helping cause of remission of sins and eternal salvation, and will not doubt
to tell him, and all such hypocrites as he is, that neither see, feel, taste,
nor know the mystery of Christ's redemption, or any thing that ishueth unto us
thereof, which mingle merits of men, by what color or conueiance of words
what so ever, with the infinite and only cause of our salvation the mere
mercy of God. And whereas he bids us come into his Church, we say to all
them that are curable among them, as the spirit of God has taught us, come
out of her my people, come out of her, lest ye be partakers of her plages and
torments. But now at the last, he returns to his matter of mercy, affirming
that after men's departure, the representation of alms by such as received it
shall move God exceedingly to mercy. O vain imagination, for which he has
neither Scripture, nor doctor, for neither the example of Peter and the saying
of Cyprian helps him one jot, because there is not the like comparison
between man and God, nor between deliverance from hell which is certain, and
purgatory which is the controversy.

2 If thou yet chance to be negligent in the working of thine own salvation
when thou art in strength and health: when over much carfulness of worldly
wealth hinders the remembrance of thy duty toward God, for all that, help
thy self at the least in thy latter end: for though it had been much better
before, yet it is not evil now. I speak not for priests advantage, (God is
my judge) I am not of that room my self, and will not condemn my soul for
other. But I speak for pity of the deceived people, for compassion of the
souls that lack the relief of so sovereign a remedy, for mine own help,
and those that I so dearly love, against the day of our account. I speak it,
because I believe it, and I believe it, because I find it practiced of those
men, O that was a happy time.
and in those days, when true christianity was yet fervent in Christ's
blood, when the faith was undefiled, and when works and faith ran together,
in the raze of man's life, jointly without contention. Then floorished this
doctrine: and thou shall have further taste of their usage for mine own
discharge: we can not occupy our pen better. S. Chrysostom thus instructed
his flock in this case. Si adhuc in hac vita constitutus, Citatur a Dam.
omnia quibus animae tuae prodesse poteras, been dispensare neglexisti, and vel
ad calcem vitae tuae tuis mandasti, vt tua tibi ipsi submittendo erogent,
bonisque operibus te adiuuent (eleemosinis dico and oblationibus) etiam hac
ratione saluatorem conciliaueris: scribe in tabulis, and cum filijs cognatisque
tuis haeredem nomina and dominum. Nulli autem viuentium propterea occasionem
damus ne faciat eleemosinas, differendo vsque ad mortem. If thou in thine own
time was over negligent in disposing thy goods for the proffit of thy soul,
and yet at the very end, do at the last charge thy friends or executors,
that they will employ thy proper goods for the relief of thy self: and so
help thee with good works, that is to say with alms and oblation: even that
way there is great hope thou may procure Gods favor: write in thy will,
that our Lord may be named a fellow heir with thy children and kinnesfolkes.
Nevertheless, let no man take occasion hereby, to be slack in his life time,
or to differe his alms and charity till deaths approaching. This was the
preaching of that doctors days, this proceeded out of his golden mouth, and
this sounded out of every pulpit. And surely if you knew his life and
qualities, you would not take him to be the priests proctor: of whose dignity
as he wrote much, so where he found any vicious, he punished sore. But he was
a true proctor of our souls. Chrysostom was no crauer perdye, nor Christ
neither, though they warn us to make fr^ndes by Mammon for our own salvation.
They ask not much: they thrust out no inheretours: it was but a mite that
wanne the poor widow that praise, Marci. 12.
a cup of cold water, where more ability wants, shall win heaven at
thend. Matt. 10.
This then is the benefit of alms given in the time of man's life, or
otherwise by his appointment, of his own goods, after his departure: both
which, procure mercy as well by the deed it self, as by the prayers of those
to whom that charity apperteined.

2 This matter stands upon chance medly, for if thou chance (says he) to
be negligent, etc. and more rightly then he terms the burial of Geneua it
may be called a matter of mumchaunce, for he begins with a chance, but he
has never a title of scripture, nor any sufficient authority of a doctor, to
prove that alms bequeathed in a man's testament helps him out of purgatory.
And yet as though he had some great speak to make, he protests that he
speaks not for priests advantage, because he is not of that room him self
etc. but hereby you may see what he counts alms, cheefely, that which is
given unto priests, or else what needs he to make any such protestation. But
he speaks it because he believes it, he would feign counter fect his speech
like the Apostle, but an ape will be an ape, although he be clothed in purple.
For the ground of his belefe is not as the Apostles was, the word of God Romans
10. but the practice of men, which though they were never so good, yet they
were such as might deceive and be deceived. But to the matter, the flourish of
this doctrine was so great in those times which he comme^deth to be so happy,
that he can not find one man that speaks of it: but he is feign to cite out
of Damascene, that which Chrysostom should say. Which words prove no more,
but that alms is better given at the last then not at all: of deliverance from
purgatory never a word. There is one word oblationibus which perhaps M. Allen
would draw to masses, for he translateth it oblation in the singular number,
which in the Latin is the plural number. His fetch is easy to find, the
Mass though it be said never so often, yet is it called of them but one
oblation. But I infer upon his own conscience, Chrysostomes word is
oblationibus oblations, therefore he means not Masses, but only alms deeds
which in scripture are called oblations or sacrifices where with God is pleased
Heb. 13. But I will let this slight gear pass and go to the rest.

3 Now there is an other way of relief by alms of other men, which for love
and pity they bestow upon the poor, that the soul hense departed, may
through their charity receive comfort. And this contains a double work of
mercy, principally toward the deceased, for whom it was given: and then
toward the needy that received present benefit thereby: and it singularly
redoundeth to the spiritual gain both of the geuer, and the person for whose
sake it is given. And this kind of alms is it, which good Tobie did commend
unto his son, being so much more meritorious to the person that procures it,
then the other which we spoke of before, because it is grounded not only of
love toward a man's own proper person, The perfectest kind of alms.
but reaches to the benefit of our neighbor, by the singular gift of
compassion, and tender love that we bear even toward them which can neither
help us, nor them selves. It is nothing else but a wing of prayer, and a token
of earnest suit for the party on whom it is practiced, which no man will use
for his neighbors good, that list not do it before in his own behalf. This
effectual supplication by words and works together, is as strange now a
days in our country, either for the living or the departed, either in our own
lackes, or in other men's necessities, as it was common in old time, and
commended in the scripture. Bona est oration cum ieiunio and eleemosina: Tob. 12.
Prayer is sovereign, joined with alms and fasting: the which being done
either for the live or dead, is with speed by Angels ministry, carried into
heaven. For I take it (and so the text excedingly bears) that the bitter
prayers which the Angel so commended in that good father, and which had such
good success, was made in the funerals of the faithful departed. Quando
orabas cum lachrimis (says Raphael) and sepeliebas mortuos* etc. Ego obtuli
orationem tuam Domino. Tobie: when thou with tears prayed and buried the dead,
I offered up thy prayers to our Lord God. he seems to term that, prayers
with weeping, which in other placies of scripture is called, mourning over the
dead. And weying the words with out affection, it must needs be granted
that the just funerals had and required prayers with weeping, and that the
Angels of God do speedely offer such effectual request up to the presens of
the Majesty, as well to the relief of the dead, as to the comfort of the
procurer. But I would be loathe to descant upon Gods word for the beating out
of any new doctrine or devised meaning, or to avouch a sense not known to the
time of perfect spring in religion. Therefore to go surely to work, I will
look about me for example of this good Tobies alms, and prayers for the poor
departed souls, that we may learn withal, not only to be beneficial to our
selves, but to our neighbors both a live and dead. All the antiquity here
offer to take my part in so good and so known a quarrel. I may have as many as
I will, and whom I will* such therefore I do search for, as be plainest for
testimony of open doles, and relief of the poor in the burials of Christian
people. That not only one man's assertion, but also the plain practice of the
Church of God may bear downethe adversaries boldness: and the more ancient
the better. Lib. 3. in Job.
Origene then shall help us to the usage of his time and Church. He writes
thus. Celebramus diem mortis, quia non moriuntur hi qui mori videntur.
Celebramus nimirum, religiosos cum sacerdotibus conuocantes, fideles vna cum
clero, inuitantes adhuc egenos and pauperes, pupillos, and viduas saturantes,
vt fiat festiuitas nostra in memoriam requiei defunctis animabus etc. We
solemnly keep the day of our friends departure, because they be not dead which
appear unto us to dye. And this is our way of celebrating their funerals. We
gather the religious men and priests, the faithful people with the clergy:
we inuit also the poor, the needy, and the fatherless with the widows: and
we fill their bellies, that the memorial of their rest may be kept solemnly.
But Tobies scholar may learn his duty yet better, of the Apostles own
scholar S. Clement: who once or twice has these words in effect: In compe^d.
and epistola ad Jacob. fratrem domini.
To viset the sick, to bury the dead, to keep their obittes, to pray and give
alms for them is commendable: upon whose words I will not now stand, because
by and by, other occasion must drive me to repeat, for the worthynesse of the
man and the weight of his testimony, more plain evidence of his Church and
time. If thou here yet doubt how the prayer, work, or sacrifice, of one man a
live may help an other departed, remember always what I said in the
beginning, for the knot of our brotherhood and society in one body and under
one head: and thou shall not wonder how one membre by compassion may help and
relieve an other. And there with, for example, consider how the sacrifice of
Job and daily alms were auaylable for the misdeedes of his children, Job. 1
and 2.
and appeaced Gods wrath toward his importunate freindes. And though his
benefit went only then amongst the living in this world, neither his
children nor freindes at that time departed, yet the case of the living
amongst them selves differs nothing herin, from the communion and fellowship
which the departed in Christ has with the living in earth. And therefore I
bring the example of Job amongst many like in scripture, for that S.
Chrysostom fitly induces the same, to prove the partaking of good works to
be common as well betwixt the live and dead, as of the living among them
selves. These be his words in English. Let us help our brethern departed, In
15. cap. 1. Cor. Homil. 14.
keeping a memory of them: For if the oblation of Job purged his children, why
doubtest thou of the solace that may arise by our offeringes unto such as be
asleep in Christ? seeing God is pleased with some, for other men's sakes. It
was so known a truth in that time, that they never put difference nor doubt,
any more of the mutual help of the live toward the dead, then they did for
that benefit which in Christ's Church one man may hold of an other.

3 Now comes an other way of relief, by alms of other men, which being
joined with prayers in our country, is as strange as sometime it was common.
He would make fools believe, that prayers and alms as they are in deed not
so common as they should be, yet among us are not at all. But omitting that
sclaunder with the rest, alms for souls departed is never mentioned in the
scripture. And although Tobies story be no canonical scripture, yet it is not
once mentioned, nor by any reasonable or sober man can be imagined there. But
who can let M. Allen to dream that Tobies prayer and alms were for the dead
whom he buried? yet who can bear him when he bosteth, that all antiquity
does offer to take his part, and he may have whom he will to testify the
same. This is a strange matter (M. Allen) that you may have your choice of so
many and will not vouchsafe to bring one that so does write of Tobies prayer
and alms. But you will say you mean generally of alms and prayers for the
dead and thereof you have store of ancient testimonies, and the more ancient
the better. I will not deny but you have much dross and dragges of the latter
sort of doctors, and the later the fuller of dross. But bring me any word
out of Justinius martyr, Irenaeus, Clemens Alexandrinus, or any that did write
with in one 100. years after Christ, that allows prayer or alms for the
dead, and I will say you are as good as your word. But if neither you nor
any Papist for you, be able to do it out of these which I have named (which
are the most ancient writers whose works are extant) nor out of an ancient
or authentical writer with in the compass that I have named, I may justly
say, that you will boast of more in a minute of an hour then you are able to
perform all the days of your life. But you will come near the time if you
can not come to it. And Origin shall speak for you all that he can, or at
least wise as much as you will give him leave to say. But if a man might be as
bold to pose you ( M. Allen) as you are to pose your betters: where had you
this testimony of Origin, did you read it in his own works, or did you borrow
it of some other man's collection? I know you will be ashamed to confess the
latter, but you may be more ashamed to acknowledge the former. For who soever
allegeth this place of Origin, to prove prayers and alms to profit the dead,
is a foul falsery of Origens meaning, and a beastly gelder of ancient
authority though it be M. Allen him self. For this place of Origin as it
makes nothing in the world to prove that prayer, and alms profit the dead,
but the clean contrary, so does it plainly declare to what end those prayers,
alms, and oblations that were used in the primitive Church were referred and
how in p^ocesse of time, superstitious and erroneous opinions grew of them.
Wherefore that this may be evident I will rehearse the whole testimony of
Origin, which M. Allen has so mischieuously mangled. Nam priores diem
natiuitatis celebrabant vnam vitam diligentes, and aliam post hanc non
sperantes. Nunc vero nos non natiuitatis diem celebramus, cum sit dolorum atque
tentationum introitus, sed mortis diem celebramus, vtpote omnium dolorum
depositionem, atque omnium tentationum effugationem. Diem mortis celebramus
quia non moriuntur hi qui mori videntur. Propterea and memorias sanctorum
facimus, and parentum nostrorum vel amicorum in fide morientium deuote memorias
agimus, tam illorum refrigerio gaudentes quam etiam nobis piam consummationem
in fide postulantes. Sic itaque non diem natiuitatis celebramus quia in
perpetuo viuent ij qui moriuntur. Celebramus nimirum religiosos cum
sacerdotibus conuocantes, fideles vna cum clero inuitantes, adhuc egenos and
pauperes, pupillos and viduas saturantes, vt fiat festiuitas nostra in memoriam
requiei defunctis animabus quarum memoriam celebramus, nobis autem efficiatur
in odorem suauitatis in conspectu aeterni Dei. The former men did celebrate the
day of their nativity, loving but one life and not hoping for any other after
this. But now we do not celebrate the day of nativity, seeing it is the
entrance of sorrows and tentations, but we celebrate the day of death as that
which is the putting away of all sorrows, and the escaping of all tentations.
We celebrate the day of death, because they do not dye that seem to dye.
Therefore also do we make memories of the Saints and devoutly keep the
memories of our parents or friends dying in the faith, as much rejoicing in
their rest, as desiring for our selves also a godly finishing in faith. So
therefore we do not celebrate the day of nativity, because they which dye
shall live perpetually. And thus we celebrate it, calling together the devout
men with the Priests, the faithful with the clergy, inuiting also the needy
and poor, filling the fatherless and widows with food. that our festiuitie
or ioyfulnes may be done in remembrance of the rest which is unto the souls
departed, whose memory we celebrate, and may be made unto us a savor of
sweetenes in the sight of the eternal God. By this place it is manifest that
Origin and the east Church in his time acknowledged no purgatory pains,
because he confesses death to be the end of all sorrows to the faithful.
Secondly that they pray not for their friends souls, as being in torment, but
that they reioysed for them because they were in rest. Thirdly that the prayers
which they used in the memories of the dead, were not for the dead, but for
them selves which were alive, that they might likewise dye in the faith as
their friends had done before them. Fourthly, that the assembly of the clergy
and people, with the feeding of the poor, was not to pray for the dead, nor
to merit for their souls, but to rejoice for the rest of the dead, and to be
a sacrifice of thanksgiving for them that were alive. This one testimony of
Origin shall testify what the judgment of the greek Church was concerning
purgatory and prayers for the dead from the Apostles time unto his days. I
wotte well superstition in the Latin Church was somewhat forwarder, in as much
as there was the seat of Antichrist appointed to be set up according to the
revelation of S. John and the exposition of Irenaeus who judged that Lateinos
was the number of the beasts name spoken of Apoc. 13. By the way it may be
noted, how M. Allen translateth religiosos the religious men, which word might
well be used, but that he would have fools to think, that there were Monks,
and friars in that time, which were used to be called to burials, but it is
plain that Origin calls the^ religious, whom by and by after he calls
faithful. Moreover, in the latter end where he libbeth of the conclusion of
Origens words, he translateth: vt fiat festiuitas nostra in memoriam, etc.
That the memorial of their rest might be kept solemnly, yet when he has
clipped, shaven, pared, gelded, and falsified all that he can, the dead be in
rest, and not in purgatory, for whose sake he imagines in Origens time they
gave alms. But next follows a worthy authority of Clement the Apostles own
scholar, and he forsooth in his Epistle to James the brother of our Lord,
commends obites, prayer, and alms for the dead. But why do ye not M. Allen
rehearse his own words as they are written in his Epistle? belike you are
ashamed of his lousie latin, and think that all wise men would say you are
mad, if you believe that Clemens which lived in the Apostles time could write
no better style, the^ the cobling counterfecter of those epistles. For shame
away with such a durty doctor, as writes to S. James to see there be no mise
tordes murium stercora among the fragments of the Lords portion, etc. Epist.
2. He was a beastly ass that writ such nasty stuff, and thought to make the
world believe, that such a godly and learned father as Clemens was, would write
so foolishly, so barbarously, so filthily, so malapertly, of such bables as
were not invented 600, years after, to so holy and excellent an Apostle as S.
James was: but the old proverb must always be true: Draffe is good enough
for swine. But to put all out of doubt, the example of Iobes sacrifice and
alms which were auailable for his children, and friends, shows that the
alms of men alive profit them that be dead, In deed I read in the book of
Iobes sacrifice, and prayer, but I read not of alms given to merit for those
that were living, much less for those that were dead. I doubt not but Job
gave alms liberally when time and occasion served. But I say those places are
unfitly of M. Allen alleged to show the force of alms, where no word of alms
is spoken. Howebeit he shows his reason afterward, why he allegeth this
example of Job, because Chrysostom applies it to the same purpose. I deny not
but that Chrysostom does as substantially allege this example, for prayers to
profitte the dead, as he does the saying of God, that he will protect the
city for David his servant sake, what shall we say. Those good men in that
declining state of the Church, to superstition, being destitute of the clear
testimonies of scripture to maintain these plausible errors, are driven to
such simple shifts to uphold them, as it is great pity to see. It seemed to
Chrysostom the best way to stay the people from immoderate mourning, but he
might have used a better way, if he had comforted them as the Apostle teaches.
1 Thessalonians. 4. 1. Cor. 5. Otherwise when he judged uprightly and according to the
scripture his words sound clean contrary to the opinion of purgatory and
works of other men to be meritorious for the dead, as in the very next
Homily being the 42. 1. Cor. Quapropter oro and obsecro vos, adeoque ad genua
supplex procumbo etc. The words are long therefore I will rehearse them in
English, and let M. Allen find fault with my translation if he can: wherefore
I pray and beseech you yea and I fall down as an humble suter to your knees,
while never so small a portion of your life remains be ruled by my sayings,
be ye converted, be ye amended into better, lest like unto that richman when we
are gone hense, we pouer forth tears which shall nothing profit there, and
lament in vain: for whether thou have a father, or a son, or a friend, or
any other whom so ever that puts his trust in the Lord, none of these
shall deliver thee being accused of thine own works. For such judgment is
exercised there, every man is judged of his own deeds, neither is any man
otherwise saved there. And these things I warn you of, not as he that would
make you sad, or bring you into desperation, but that being fed with vain
and unprofitable hopes, trusting in this man or that man, we should not
neglect our own virtue, for if we be slothful and do slack the matter
neither any just man, nor Prophet, nor Apostle, shall help us: but if we be
diligent having help enough of our own works, we shall depart hense with
great confidence, and enjoy those good things that are laid up for them that
love the Lord, which that we may all enjoy let it be so through the grace and
mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ. Compare these words with the former, and
mark here not only the sound of his words, but the weight of his reasons,
where as in all other places that he holds the contrary, the words only
favors your cause, his reasons are either feeble or none at all.

4 But that I may serve not only the turn of truth, but with plainness also
instruct the unlearned, and with store satisfy the godly greediness of some,
that list see more for the comfort of their conscience, I will report one
notable place for the declaration of charities force even toward the
deceased, Ex Damasceno pro defunctis.
out of Gregory Nissen of the Greek church, and an other out of Athanasius the
great: both directly touching the practice of good Tobie in compassion of the
dead. Thus says Gregory. Dicitur been, quod si qui hinc non praemissis bonis
migrauerint, and postea a familiaribus neglecta oblatis reliquijs sarciantur,
imputari opus perinde ac ab eis factum fuerit, est enim and haec volu^tas
benignissimi Domini, vt creaturae quae ad salutem petuntur, sic petantur and
distribuantur: and vt exoretur non solum quando quis pro salute propria est
anxius, sed and quando pro proximo aliquid operatur: in English. It is very
well said, that if any depart this life, his goods by alme^ being not sent to
God before him, and yet afterward the matter by his freindes in the offering
up the residue, be amended, that his freindes fact shall stand and be reputed
as his own work. For so has God of his mercy ordained, that his creatures by
use whereof life and salvation may be obtained, should so be procured, and in
this order disposed, that man should not only obtain his request in the
careful study of his own salvation, but also when he wellworketh for his
friend or neighbor.

Psalm. 24.
Here may we well perceive, that all the ways of our Lord be mercy and truth.
And that he in a manner releeueth of his own accord our miseries, both here
and in the next life, that there may be no damnation to such as be in Christ
Jesus: for whose sakes he turns these base creatures of man's service in this
life, to the use of his pardon and salvation in the life to come: he accepts
the good will and travel of other, for the help of them which can not relieve
them selves: And, which is the property of a most merciful father, where he
loves he will raise the heart of some good intercessor, that by patronage and
prayers of some lust Job, his fury may cease by his own procurement. But how
this mutual work of mercy is current through the members of our common body
and how being practiced by one it serves before God for an other, either in
this life or the next, our holy father Athanasius by his authority might well
be a proof sufficient: but he is content to declare it unto us by an example:
and such an example, that beside the matter, may further put us in remembrance
of the devotion of our elders in an other point, which the studious reader may
mark by the way: thus then he says. Quod in pauperes collocatur beneficiu^,
omnis bonae retributionis est augmentum. Itaque pro defuncto oblaturus eundem
serves scopum, quem qui pro paruulo filio adhuc imbecillo and infant, interim
dum puer aegrotat, affert ceram, oleum, and thimiama, in templum Domini magna
fide, and acce^dit pueri nomine, neque enim puer hoc faceret, cum ignoret
diuinae regenerationis constitutiones. Sic cogitet etiam eum, qui in domino
morte^ obijt, and posse and offerre ceram, oleum, and caetera quae in
redemptione^ offerri sole^t. The benefit bestowed upon the poor is a
sovereign ground of Gods rewarding. And in thy oblations for the departed,
have always the same intent and scope that a father has, practicing for the
recovery of his sick child, being young and tender: Who for his sick son
brings into the Church of our Lord God, wax, oil, incense, and with
devotion and faith lights them in the boys behalf: for that the child him
self, being wholly vnskillful ^f the ordinauncies of our Christianity, would
never go about any such thing: even so must a man think of the deceased
persons case, that he may and does offer, (as in an other ma^s person) wax,
oil and such like, as commonly for rede^ptio^ are offered.

With proof of our matter in hand, here may be noted beside, the usual
oblation of things apperteining to the mainteinaunce of Church light, In
Athanasius his time candels were light in churchies, for their sakes that
were dead, sick, or absent.
and lamps: setting up of tapers of singular devotion for sick persons,
representing of our goods, and Gods creatures, from profane use of daily
occupation, to Gods honor in the temple: the undoubted hope that all faithful
people had, as well to procure favor to them selves thereby, as mercy to
other, for whose sakes they did it: and especially that in this man's age, that
was so ancient, these tokens of love and duty toward our Lord, and show of
their homage by such external acts, were taken as peculiar ordinauncies, and
solemn constitutions of our Christianity. These things (though the hedge of
my cause forces me to let them lightly pass) yet as I go by, I must needs
behold, as steps of old manners: with some mourning to say the truth, and
no little sorrow, in the contrary comparing of our corrupt conditions. The
reader as he list, may perchance with more leisure, or at least with less
injury to other, weye the wonderful waste that sin and heresy has wrought
in our days of darkness. And when he considers these things, that be now
of most men counted mere madness, to have been liked, allowed, preached,
avouched, sent out in solemn works and writings to the vewe of the world, and
the sight of all posterity, from the very heart and spring of the Christian
Church, by Athanasius the great, Athanas. authority only,. will bear down
all heretics in the world.
O Lord what a mighty man in word and work do I now name: him do I name,
whose memory is blessed in Gods Church, in whose lap our weeryed mother once
before, as she has been often, in a manner learned to take her rest from the
forsaken children: whose only word with out all proof (though he never
speaks but with weight of reason) would bear over all these pety
Protestants put together: so said Tully comparing the Epicures with Plato and
Aristotle: much more bouldly may I payse all heretics in the world with this
man's only word. Him therefore such a man, and so great a pillor of faith,
when the Catholic shall see prove and allow, and practice those same things,
The name only of Christianity left in many.
which our masters of sects can not abide, but most abhor, and by him take
a sure taste of his whole time, shall he not wounder with all wise men, at our
downfall so deep? shall he not marvel under one name of Christianity, that
goes yet common to our days with those happy times past, to be such
diversity of case and conditions, that the one under so glorious a name must
be nothing else but a cloked paganism? but yet I would not he should occupy
overmuch his mind in this consideration, till he see the whole rank of Gods
holy host, and all the blessed band of Martyrs and Saints stand with us for
the full defense of truth, and the common Church their mother and ours.

4 The last part of this Chapter has a boisterous brag of two great
doctors authorities Gregory Nyssene, and Athanasius the great, but they stand
both upon either the credit or judgment of Damascene, neither of which we
esteem so much, that we need greatly regard them. Counterfecting was so
common in those days and before them, to maintain such errors as could not
be proved by scripture. For to pass over that which Tertullian writes in his
book de Baptismo, of the priest of Asia, which was convicted to have feigned
certain writings of S. Paul to Tecta: was not the Nycene Council the first
and the best, corrupted with counterfect canons by the Bishops of Rome to
maintain their usurped authority, in the days of S. Augustine? which was
plainly espied and confuted in the Council of Carthago. 6. cap. 4. and 7. And
in the Africane Council, were there not three faulse quaternions found added
to the 5. Council of Constantinople? which was espied in the 6. Council of
Constantinople Act. 3. and 12. If men would be so bold with general
Counsels, think you that they would be afraid of Gregorius or Athanasius
writings? And what manner of a Sermon of Athanasius was that, which was read in
the 4. action of the 2. Nicene Council? Of the image of Christ and the miracle
done in Berytus, that when a Jew struck the image, there issued out water and
blood: what a shameless lie is that which Pope Adrian in his epistle writes,
that Constantine was cleansed of a leprosy and baptized of Syluester at Rome,
contrary to the History of Eusebius who lived in Constantines time and knew
him? what faulsyfying of authorities is there to prove the worshipping of
images out of Gregory Nissene, Basilius Magnus, Athanasius and Ambrosius,
Chrysostom, Cyrill, and Hieronym, with diverse other in that leude Council?
wherefore except you could allege their sayings out of their own works, I
will never trouble my self to answer them, although if they were there true
authorities, there is no cause why we should believe either of them both, in
an article of faith with out the authority of the word of God. Their time had
diverse errors and superstitious ceremonies which they being occupied in
fighting against greater heresies that then sprang up, of the Arians,
Macedonians, and such like, either had no leisure to epsy, or else made less
account to reform.

Of certain offeringes or public alms presented to God for the deceased, in
the time of the holy sacrifice, at men's burialles, and other customable days
of their memories: and of the sundry minds kept in the primitive Church for
the departed. CAP. VI.
1 Keeping our selves then from by matters, (if those be by, that are so near)
of relieuing the departed by the alms of the living there we left, and there
must we borowe breefely a word or two more. Because I think it very necessary
to be known, that besides the private procuring of the deceased souls wealth,
and more then the common doles at the day of burial, there was also an other
kind of alms not much differing in effect from the other, but in order and
usage not all one. Which, because it was solemnly presented to Gods minister
before the holy altar, in the face of the whole faithful assembly, hard at
then try unto the sovereign sacrifice, was highly always esteemed, and called
an oblation for the departed, or an offeringe. And it was most practiced at the
minds of the departed, and memorial days, which were very many at the
beginning of those happy times of our forefathers, the devotion of the good
Christians then very fervent: and be not now a days, as they faulsely
affirm, increased by superstition, but of late years, even before this
pitiful overthrow of virtue, by our negligence and lack of devotion much
decayed. Devotion much decaide somevvhat before this heresy began.
There is now used only, for the most part, but twelve months minds, or
months for the most: and that commonly but for the first year of their rest:
and then afterward either clean forgotten, or openly not often remembered, I
speak of the late better times. For now there is no blessing of man's memory at
all. These often oblations in the sacrifice time for both the live and dead,
gave name to that part of the Mass which is yet called the offertorie. whereof
there was a sign of late, in the offering of some small piece of money in the
common funerals, and at other times also of greater solemnity. But in the
primitive Church it rose to such a sum, that both the Church was thereby
mainteyned, and the poor singularly relieved. And the name of the peoples
oblation is often taken in this sense: although, because they join by these
means and other with the holy minister in the great and dreadful oblation of
Christ's own blessed person in the sacrifice, they be said sometimes, truly
to offer: as it were by the Priests ministry, whom with heart and affection
they do assist, and with whom they truly communicate. they may offer I say,
that sacrifice, in this sense for their friends departed. But else commonly
besides the blessed Sacrifice of the new Testament, which was always the
chief mean of Gods mercy, to both quick and dead, and in every mind or
memory for the souls principally procured, the offering of some part either of
the deceaseds own goods, or his lovers, for the upholding the ministry, was
also made. Of which kind of participating with the departed, we read in the
ancient council named Bracharense thus: Can. 39.
si quid ex collatione fidelium aut per festiuitates martyrum aut per
commemorationem defunctorum offertur, per aliquem clericorum fid^liter
deponatur: and constituto tempore semel aut bis in anno, inter omnes clericos
diuidatur. If there be any offeringes by the contribution of the faithful,
made either in the festival days of martyrs, or minds and memorialls of the
dead, let them be laid up aside, in custody of one of the clergy, that once
or twice in the year as time shall serve, they may be truly parted amongst
the rest. And because all times have had certain draw backs in religion, and
hinderers of devotion, the Council kept at Vase of great antiquity,
excommunicateth all such as in any wise hinder the oblations for the departed.
And in like case the fourth Council holden at Carthage. Cap. 2.
Thus runs the decree of them both. Cap. 95.
We do curse and excommunicate all those, that by any means withdraw or else
stay from the Churches the oblations of the departed, as murderers of the
poor. The decrees of both these notable assemblies, were thought worthy to be
confirmed by the vj. general Council holden at Constantinople: then are our
ministers in the ruff of their new communion, thrust out of the old holy
communion of saints, if either universal or provincial Synod can take
hold of men so desperate, that neither care for man's curse, nor Gods blessinge.
Well murderers and manquillers they must be counted, their predecessors not
half so evil, deserved no better name.

CAP. VI.

1 IN the latter end of the fifth Chapter was promised a whole rank of Gods
holy host, and all the blessed band of Martyrs and Saints to stand on their
side. But this promise is no sooner made then it is forgotten. The title in
deed talks of alms presented for the deceased in time of the holy
sacrifice, but the treatise has never a one that speaks for it. But M. Allen
him self who first speaks of the decay of popish devotion even in popish
time, and then tells us whence the offertory of the mass took the name,
which he says was of such oblations, as were offered for the dead. But except
his word be good payment, he brings nothing else for proof. But if we shall
rather believe Justinius Martyr, one of the most ancient and authentical writers
of the Church, whose works remain: the oblation that was made after the
communion was of alms for the relief of the poor. As appears in his second
Apollogie unto the Emperor for the Christians, where he describes the whole
order of their meeting and what so ever was done, or said among them. As first
the reading of the Scripture, the exhortation of the chief minister, the
common prayer of the whole Church, the administration of the Lords supper, and
then says he, (...) etc. They that are rich and such as will, according as
every man shall think good give what they will etc. by which it is manifest
that in those first and purer days there was no mention at all of sacrifice
for the dead, but only oblation for the poor living. And as for the council
Bracharense which was held 4. or 5. hundredth years after Justinius time, yet
proves nothing but the commemoration of the dead, and a collation of the
faithful but no oblation for the dead. Nevertheless to help the matter be
added 2. other provincial counsels, namely the council of Vase, and the 4 of
Carthage, which excommunicate all such as hinder in any wise, the oblations for
the departed, and these decrees also are confirmed by the 6. general council
holden at Constantinople. Therefore these ministers that be in the ruff of
their new communion, must be thrust out of the old communion with all a lie
a. But whether is he worthy to be thrust, that regarding no communion either
old or new of any truth, but his common union of lying and railing together,
has falsyfied both the decrees of Vase and Carthage, what M. Allen? two
Counsels at one clappe falsyfied? and that not ignorantly but wittingly, not
negligently but wilfully? and yet must you wipe your lips as though it were
not you, and rail like a ruffian upon our ministers in the ruff of their new
communion, when you are not ashamed to faulsyfie the decrees of the old
communion? Be not these the words of the Carthage Council Ca. 95? Qui
oblationes defunctorum aut negant ecclesiis aut cum difficultate reddunt
tanquam egentium necatores excommunicentur. They which either deny to the
Churches, or else pay with difficulty the oblations of the dead, let them be
excommunicated as murderers of the poor. Likewise the Counsel of Vase. Ca.
2. Qui oblationes defunctorum retinent, and ecclesijs tradere demorantur, vt
infideles ab ecclesia sunt abijciendi, quia vsque ad exinanitionem fidei
peruenire certum est hanc pietatis diuinae exacerbationem: quia and fideles de
corpore recedentes, votorum plenitudine, pauperes consolatu alimoniae and
necessaria sustentatione frauda^tur, toti ergo tales quasi egentium necatores
nec credentes iuditium dei habendi sunt, vnde and quidam patrum hoc scriptis
suis inseruit congrue^te sententia qua ait: Amico quicquam rapere furtum est,
ecclesiam vero fraudare sacrilegium est. They which retain, the oblations of
the dead and make delay to deliver them to the Churches, are to be cast out of
the Church as infidels. For it is certain that this provoking to wrath of the
mercy of God recheth even to the uttermost denying of the faith. Because both
the faithful departing from their body, are defrauded of the fullfilling of
their desires, and the poor of the comfort of food and necessary
sustentation. They therefore that are such, are to be compted as murderers of
the poor and such as believe not the judgment of God, wherefore one of the
fathers has put this in his writings, with agreeable meaning whereby he says.
To take away any thing from a man's friend is theft, but to defraude the Church
is sacrilege. What other thing can be gathered out of those decrees? but that
those men are noted with censure, which keep back such things as men that
are departed had bequethed, to the Churches, for the relief of the poor, what
is this to oblation or sacrifice for the dead: is it all one to speak of
oblations of the dead and oblations for the dead? With M. Allen it is all
one, for after he has said, that the Counsels do excommunicate all them that
hinder the oblations for the departed, he adds that the canons of the
Counsels run thus, that they which withdraw the oblations of the departed
are excommunicated. But herein he declares, that he is a manifest falsyfier,
not of error but of purpose.

2 Damascene that blessed man, that suffered so much sorrow for trueths
defense, whose authority I must often use in this treatise because he purposely
stood for this quarrel against certain heretics of his time. He therefore
in the life of Iosaphat excedingly prayseth his passing love toward his father
departed. In vita Iosaphat.
Who first with all godly devotion, procured his exequies and dirigies on the
day of his burial, then commended his soul to God with seven days solemn
prayer and supplication at his sepulcher: and with a wonderful liberal alms
or oblation for the poor people, he finished up the matter the viij. day. But
if you can find in you heart to credit this good man's report, he will assure
you of the usage of his time. By which you shall perceive, that it is a
horrible slander that the wicked have raised on Gods Church and ministers,
which be not ashamed, to say and avouch in their open sermons and vain
libells, that these yearly, and so many months minds, have been newely
practiced and devised against Gods word, and the usage of the primitive
Church. Wherein they show them selves exceeding ignorant in the affairs of
the Church, or else passing bold and malicious, in wilful de^eiuing the
simple. For our only months and years oblations, in Damascens days, as he
often affirms, there were customably kept tricesimales, quadragesimales,
anniuersariae memoriae: the thirtith, the fourtith, the years minds: and
portions appointed out, as he says, in testaments for the mainteinaunce
thereof. And all this commonly, besides the peculiar devotion of some, toward
their singularly beloved. If thou list go yet upward, thou shall find no
less care for the help of the souls deceased: for S. Ambrose reports of
his time: that otherwhiles the third and the thirtith, otherwhiles the seventh
and the fourtith mind days were religiously observed: Super obit Theodos.
yea and that (as he says) by good authority, and ancient usage of the
Patriarchs both in the law of nature and Moses, Cum freque^tibus
oblationibus omnibus, with often and sundry oblations for the rest of the
departed. This xxx. days memorial, old holy Ephreem in his testament and
last will provides for him self, Iulio interpr.
after his departure. The seventh day was also ever in the primitive Church
with great religion observed: because, as Beda says, that has the
representation of the life to come. And S. Ambrose practiced it for his
brother, for the like protestation and sign of the resurrection and rest
perpetual. Die septimo (says he) ad sepulchrum redimus, De fide resur.
qui dies symbolum est futurae quietis, the seventh day we come together again
to my brothers sepulcher, because that day is a pledge of the rest to come.

2 That which can not be proved by the Counsels, shall be made cock sure by the
doctors, and Damascene that blessed man shall begin the daunse: who as their
fables write of hm, had his hand cut of for crafty conueiance, yet was it
again restored by miracle by the blessed virgin, after it had been nailed to
the Church doors of a long time. I have often said we defer nothing to his
authority, who was both in a corrupt time, and he him self a corrupter of
religion by building upon fables and authorities of men as may be manifest to
any that shall read his writings, which of the Papists of mean judgment in
these days is not ashamed of that fable which he reherseth in Sermon. de
defunctis? how Gregory should pray and obtain pardon of God for the sins
of Troianus an heathen Emperor that was in Hell 4. or 5. hundredth years before
Gregory was bishop of Rome, so may they be of the tale of Falconilla and all
other like fables avouched by him in the history of Barlaum and Iosaphat. But
of memories of the dead and prayers for the dead also, we will not strive but
that they were used before the times of Beda, Ephraim, and Ambrose, but with
out warraunt of Gods word or authorities of scriptures, but such as is so
pitifully wrested and drawn unto them, as every man may see, the holy Ghost
never meant any such thing as they gather of them.

3 Hold on upward still, and Tertullian will witness with thee, that in that
flower of Christ's Church, with in less then CC. years of our masters death,
Oblationes fiebant annua die pro defunctis: De Cor. milit.
That oblations and sacrifice were yearly made at the xij. months minds of
most men: he means both by the sacrifice of the Church, and offeringes of the
freindes of the departed, In exhort. Castitat.
as there also: Repete apud Deum pro cuius spiritu postules, pro qua oblationes
annuas reddas: Call to thy remembrance, for whose soul thou prays, and in
whose behalf thou makes yearly offeringes: He speaks of a freinde of his,
that practiced thus for his wives departure. And in an other place he well
declares the duty of married persons one toward an other, if God by death
separate them in sonder. Pro anima eius orat, De monogamia.
and refrigerium interim postulat, and offert annuis diebus dormitionis eius,
She prays for her husbands soul, and obteineth in the mean space ease: and
offers every year, at the mind day of his passing hense. And he lets not
to affirm, that the married couple that practice not thus, do not believe the
resurrection. Therefore he concludes thus: Nunquid nihil erimus post mortem
secundum aliquem Epicurum, and non secundum Christum? quod si credimus
mortuorum resurrectionem, vtique tenebimur, cum quibus resurrecturi sumus,
rationem de altetutro reddituri: What say you, shall we fall to nothing after
our death, as the Epicure thinks, and not rise again as Christ teaches? And
if we believe the resurrection of the dead, then doubtless we shall be bound
to make account one of an other, as we shall together rise again. Beware here
my masters, once again I must tell you, This heresy much joins with the
Saduces
you are going toward the denial of the resurrection, so many as condemn
the usage of the Church in praying or offeringe for the dead. Tertullian says
you be Epicures in this point, and so you be in all others. Psalm. 13.
I say you are past privy muttering in your hearts that there is no God: for
you are come to plain Manducemus and bibamus: cras enim moriemur, Let us eat
and be merry, Cor. 1. ca. 15
we can not tell how long we lieue. I say you must answer for parting the
affection of man and wife, and the one must be countable at the day of
judgment to an other, that they procured not the duties of the dead by right
of Gods holy Church, for their souls departed. Take heed therefore, you are
warned.

3 Nay ho there M. Allen, no higher then Tertullian. And when we have examined
the testimonies of Tertullian in order as you have brought them, you shall have
small advantage out of him, yea your friends shall think you had been better
to have made no mention of him. For first I must tell you, that these three
lines which are all that he has written sounding that way, are found in three
books which all were written by him, when he was an heretic, and separated
from the catholic Church. And therefore it may well be, that all that he
speaks of prayers and oblations for the dead, was only in the conuenticles
of the Montanistes, of which sect he was an earnest defender, rather then in
the catholic Church. And this conjecture seems the more probable, because
Cyprian which was afterward a catholic Bishop in the same city, where
Tertullian sometime had lived, makes no mention of prayers for the dead, but
only of sacrifice for the Martyrs which was none other but the sacrifice of
thanksgiving. lib. 4. Ep. 5. But admit that the Church of God in that time,
used these superstitious prayers and oblations for the dead, let us consider
upon what ground they were used. The first place M. Allen allegeth in this
form. Oblationes fiebant annua die pro defunctis. But Tertullians words in
libro de corona militis be these. Oblationes pro defunctis, pro natalitijs
annua die facimus. We make oblations for the dead, for our birthes on the
yearly day. By which it is evident that M. Allen did not read these word^s him
self, but received them of some other man's collection, or sound them in some
book of common places. But to the matter: Tertullian him self shall say for
me, that the same custom, with many other which he there rehearses, has no
ground in the holy Scripture. Harum and aliarum eiusmodi disciplinarum, si
leges expostules scripturarum, nullam inuenies, traditio tibi praetendetur
autrix, consuetudo confirmatrix and fides obseruatrix. Of those and such like
disciplines, if you require the laws of the Scriptures, you shall find none,
tradition shall be pretended to you to be the author, Custom the confirmer,
and faith the obseruer. It is good to take that which is so franckly given: and
more is Tertullian to be commended, that confesses the ground of his error
not to be taken out of the word of God, then they that labor to wre^t the
Scriptures to find that which Tertullian confesses is not to be found in them.
I know the Papists will answer that tradition is of as good credit as the
Scripture, and is the word of God unwritten, as well as the Scripture is the
word of God written. But why then do they not observe all other things, that
Tertullian in the same place affirms to be tradition, if tradition be the
word of God, why do they not give to them that are newly baptized a temper of
milk and honey, and from the day of their baptism forbid daily washing all the
week after? Why do they not count it a wicked thing to fast on the Sunday,
or to pray and worship God on their knees? Why do they not count it a wicked
thing to fast between Easter and Whitsontide, or to pray on their knees all
that time? Finally why do not they cross them selves in the forehead, at
every step they set forth, at coming in, at going out, at putting on of
garments, at putting on of shoes, at washing, at the tables, at lighting of
candles, at beds, at stools, and at all things, what so ever they do? What
answer can they here make, but that their Church may dispense as well with
the word of God unwritten, which they call tradition, as she does against the
word of God contained in the holy Scriptures. So that always what so ever they
prate of antiquity, customs, traditions, unwritten verities, or the word of
God unwritten, the authority of their blasphemous church is above them all. Now
to the second testimony alleged out of Tertullian. S. Ieronym shall testify
for us, that this book, as the other that follows, was written against the
Church, so was also his book de corona militis, when he was out of the Church,
whereby it may appear, what good authorities they are, to prove the doctrine
of the Church. This book de castitate, he wrote to diswade a friend of his,
whose wife was dead, that he should not marry again, condemning second marriage
for adultery, as Montanus his master did, and labors to prove that he could
not pray for his departed wives soul, nor offer the yearly oblation, if he
married an other. To the same purpose he reasons in his book de Monogamia,
where the words alleged by M Allen be so corrupted in all the coppyes, that
Beatus Rhenamus confesses that no sense could be made of them, and these
words are the coniecturall correction of Beatus Rhenamus. But let them be
undoubtedly the words of Tertullian, as they seem to be. Here more manifestly
then before he brocheth his heresy of condemning second marriages, for in that
the wife prays for her husbands soul, and offers, etc: he would prove that
she is still married to him, and that she commits adultery if she take an
other, directly contrary to the word of God. Romans 7. and 1. Cor. 7. yet see
either the ignorance or ye malice of this Allen, that allegeth those words of
this writer, by which he condemns them that allow second marriage, as denyers
of the resurrection, against us that deny prayers for the dead to be lawful
by the word of God. And uses the same reason and words to prove prayers for
the dead to be allowable, that Tertullian uses to prove second marriages to be
damnable. For that account which Tertullian says men and women are bound unto,
one to an other, he means of the promise of marriage once made between them,
which M. Allen, like a wise young man expounds prayers and oblations for their
souls. The words of Tertullian following immediately where M. Allen leaves
them, are these. Si autem in illo aeuo neque nubent neque nubentur, sed erunt
aequales Angelis: non ideo, non tenebimur coniugibus defunctis, quia non erit
restitutio coniugij. At quin eo magis tenebimur, quia in meliorem statum
destinamur, resurrecturi in spirituale consortium, agnituri tam nosmet ipsos,
quam nostros, etc. But if in that time, they shall neither marry, nor be
married, but shall be equal to the Angels, we shall not therefore not be bound
to our wives departed, because there shall not be a restitution of marriage, But
so much the more we shall be bound, because we are appointed to a better
state, as they that shall rise again into a spiritual fellowship, and shall
know again as well our selves, as those that pertayne unto us. Wherefore M.
Allen once again I must tell you, that we would be sorry to be so near the
denial of the resurrection, by denying prayers for the dead, as you are
toward the heresy of the Montanistes, in using such reasons to defend praying
and offering for the dead, as Tertullian a Montaniste used to maintain his
heresy, but I shall have further occasion to return to Tertullian, when I
shall prove that the opinion of purgatory came first fr^^ heretics.

4 But as near as we be Christ's time by Tertullians help, we will approach
yet nearer, to the very Apostles age, and look out some record of that time
for oblations and distributions, with memorialls for the departed. And the
further from you of the new sect we go, the more plain destruction of your
doctrine, and more manifest proof of our old devotion shall we fiende, to
your open shame and the comfort of Catholics. S. Clement therefore the Roman,
one conuersaunt with the Apostles, and instructed by them in his faith, a
familiar of S. Paul, and promoted by S. Peter, a true pastor and a holy
martyr, thus reports of the Apostles ordinance in our matter. Lib. 8. Co^st.
Cap. 48.
Peragatur dies mortuorum in Psalmis, in lectionibus, atque orationibus,
propter eum qui tertia die resurrexit: Item nonus in commemorationem
superstitum atque defunctorum. Etiam quadragesimus secu^dum veterem formam,
Moysen enim hoc modo luxit populus: nec non anniuersarium pro memoria ipsius,
deturque de illius facultatibus pauperibus, in commemorationem ipsius. Thus in
English. We will that the third day be observed for the departed, in psalms,
lessons, and prayers, for his sake that rose the third day. And so the ix. day,
for the uniting together in one memory the departed with the living. In like
manner the fourtith day must be kept according to the order used of old: for so
did, the people observe the bewayling of Moses. And with all these, the xij.
months mind beside. Where for the memory of his departure, let somewhat be
distributed amongst the poor people. How say you now my masters, is this
Popish or Apostolic doctrine? was it invented for priests covetousness, or
observed as Christ's ordinance? made we much of late of the little we found
before, or of late lost for lack of devotion, that which we had so long
before? Merciful God who would think this gear were so ancient, and so
little set by. Who would think the adversaries. were so impudent and yet so
much regarded. What heart think you they read the ancient writers with
all? Or with what conscience can they pass by so plain practice of all the
Christian world? Or with what face can they name either scripture or doctor?
How dare they look back at any one step of antiquity, all which be nothing
else but a testimony of their wickedness, and as you would say a pointing with
finger at their horrible spoil of old doctrine and devotion? What if one of
their own scholars seeing this light in our matter, should ask of his
master: a less sir, The master Protestant is posed,
what if this be true that is proved so old, and you chance to lie that are
so late, where are we your scholars then? It is not answered, if you confort
him with fair words, and tell him you follow the scripture. For he will
charge you again straight, that these men had scripture, understood scripture,
alleged scripture, both of the new Testament and the old, and referred their
usage some to Moses and Aaron, other some to the fathers in the law of
nature, and all to the Apostles of Christ. Where are you then? no more but
this perdy, we understand scripture perchance better then they, we have the
holy Ghost perchance and so had not the fathers: perchance that is no
scripture, perchance this and this is not that doctors work, because it makes
against us. I think he that would believe your chauncing, that may have such
assurance of the truth on the other side, he is worthy to be deceived.

4 Not content with Tertullians testimony, you will clime higher, even to
Clemens the Apostles own scholar, but you shall be brought down with shame
enough. I will not here repeat the mise dounge, with the rotten bread in the
box, and such baggage as I have discovered before, of this carterly Clement,
but because you are so full of posing M. Protestant, as though you were
Johannes ad oppositum, I will pose you M. Allen an other while, or any M.
Papiste of you all, that has a forheade to maintain this trumperie, for
Clemen^ the ancient Bishops writing. Alas Sir, what if this be proved
counterfect that you say is so old? and you with out peradventure lie, that
of late have found it so ancient, what ground have your scholars then?
Tertullian has discharged you of authority of the scripture already, how will
you prove it then to be a tradition of the Apostles? your answer will be still,
Clenens says it. But alack Sir, whether is it more lick, that Eusebius and
Hieronym, that lived nearer to the time of S. Clement by twelve hundredth
years, then you, should know or here tell of his epistles and other writings
better then you? But Eusebius and Hieronym never heard of such writings as
were never seen in the Church 13. or 14. hundredth years after Clemens his
death. Where should you have them then but of some counterfecting knawe, that
could not otherwise maintain his heresy to be old, but by falsyfying and
counterfecting a new, that which never was in the old writers heads. But to
show that your shameless Clement, daunceth bare and breechelesse, with out all
honesty: I will yet pose you further, and bid you call your wits together
to answer me. Whether had you rather grant that so holy a Pope as Clemens
was, did err, or that he was a false know that would father an error upon so
holy a man's name and credit? your Sir Clemens decrees that the fortyeth day
must be observed for the departed, according to the old form because the
people did so observe the bewayling of Moses. But if the scripture affirm that
the people bewailed Moses but 30. days Deuteronomy. 34. Then is your Clement a
falsyfier of Gods word, and his foolish decree builded upon his false
ground. How say you now M. Allen is this Apostolic or apostotaticall? is
this plain dealing or Popish counterfecting? was Clemens in the Apostles age
so ignorant of the scripture? or was he an ignorant hypocrite that feigned this
under the name of Clemens? Truth seaketh not to be maintained which lies,
faith looks not to be defended by falsehoode. The Church of Christ craves no
counterfected authority to establish her doctrine. Therefore it is neither
truth, nor faith, nor the doctrine of the Church of Christ, that you
maintain, defend, and establish by lying, falsyfying and counterfecting, but
error, infidelity, and heresy, he therefore that will forsake the certainetie
of Gods word to build upon the traditions of men, for leuing the only pathe
of truth, has a just reward to fall into the pit of error.

5 Well, I will close up this part of our talk, for Tobies alms board in
the obittes of Christian men, with S. Augustines grave judgment: who, as he is
plain for the benefit of oblations in the memorialls of men's departures, in
all placies, so here in a manner he orders the action thereof, for abusies
that might thereon arise, in his epistle to Aurelius. The offeringes (says he)
observed for the souls departed, whereof there is no question but profet
arises to them, let them not be over sumptuous upon the minds of the
deceased, nor soulde away, but given with out grudge or disdain to such as be
present, and would be partaker thereof: but if money be offered, it may be
distributed out of hand to the poor, and then shall not those days of their
freindes memorialles, be to their great grief forsaken or destitute of
company. And the order with honest comeliness shall be kept continually in
the Church. So S. Clement him self teaches all them that be called to such
days of prayers for the departed, and to be partakers of those oblations or
charitable relieues, which were by some honest sober refreshing even in the
Church in those days observed, whether they be of the laity or of the
priests, he gives them this lesson. Qui ad memorias eorum vocamini, cum
modestia and cum dei timore comedite, veluti valentes legatione fungi pro
mortuis: cum sitis presbyteri and diaconi Christi, sobrij esse debetis and
priuatim: and cum alijs, vt possitis intemperantes coercere: All you that are
called to the funeralles of the departed, refresh your selves in measure and
fear of God, that you may be worthy, to be as it were in commission of
entreaty for the dead: and being priests or deacons of Christ, you are
bound to be sobre even at home: but abroad, for others example and discipline.

5 You had been as good to have left out the comparing of Augustines oblations
with Tobies alms board, for that custom which most resembled your fantasy of
Tobies alms board Augustine condemns where he allows oblations for them
that sleep to profit some what. Sed quonia^ istae in caemiterijs ebrietates
and luxuriosa conuiuia, non solum honores martyrum in carnali and imperita
plebe credi solent, sed etiam solatia mortuorum, mihi videtur facilius illic
dissuade^i posse istam foeditatem ac turpitudinem, si and de scripturis
prohibeatur, and oblationes pro spiritibus dormientium quas vere aliquid
adiuuare credendum est super ipsas memorias non sunt sumptuosae etc. But
because this dronkennesses, and riotous festes used in the Church yeardes of
the carnal and unskillful people are wont to be believed not only to be the
honor of the martyrs, but also the comfort of the dead, my think it were
more easy, that this filthynesse and beastlynesse may be there diswaded, if
both it be forbidden out of the scriptures, and that the oblations for the
spirits of the dead, which truly we must believe does help somewhat, upon
the memories them selves be not sumptuous etc. But if Augustine had known the
horrible abuses which grew afterward, by permission of these oblations, he
would as well have prohibited them out of the scripture as that hethenish
banquettinge in the Church yeardes in honor of the martyrs, as for comfort of
dead men's souls. As for Clement that teaches the preistes and deacones to be
sober and moderate in eating, where they were bidden to burial feasts, even
here also he shows him self in his own colors. As though in the days of
Clemens, when the Church was in great persecution, they had nothing else to do,
but to keep sumptuous feasts at their burialls, where at the priests, and
deacons, were in danger of glouttony and drunkenness, as they were in the
Popish church when Popery was in the pride, seldom temperate or sober, and
lest of all at burialls, and months minds etc.

That the benefit of prayer and alms appertains not to such as dye in
mortal sin, though in the doubtefull case of man's being, the Church uses
to pray for all departed in Christ's faith. CAP. VII.
1 THus far we now are brought, I trust with proof and evidence enough, with
reasonable clear light for the good simple peoples instruction, and with full
safety, from all the force our adversaries can make against us. The Patriarchs
example, the words of scripture, the practice of the Church, the natural
society betwixt the parts of Christ's mystical body in this world, and his
members in the next, and all our fathers faith have won so much, that alms
and offeringes in sundry memorialls and diverse observations of minds and
obittes, be singular and sovereign, to procure Gods mercy for the pardon of
the souls deceased. And now, lest any man take occasion of Gods mercy, which
he sees to be so ready that it may be wone by other men's works, to live in
contempt of virtuous exercise, and to pass the time of his own life in
careless negligence, presuming to purchesse favor at Gods hand so merciful,
by other men's merits, with out his own deed or deserte, let that man be
advertised, quod non habet partem in sermon isto, that he shall in that case
have no benefit by our talk: the mercy which we speak of, pertains not
unto him: such idle drone beyes can take no fructe of other men's labors,
neither quick nor dead. For that membre which in this body was so
unprofitable to him self, it is no right nor reason he should have any gaynes
by other men's travel. Therefore all these liberal promisies of favor and
grace, to be procured by the works of the live toward the departed, reach
neither to the unfaithful out of this house, nor to the impenitent who was but
an unprofitable burden of the house. Lib. 8. constit. 49.
These things says Clement we mean of the godly, for if thou gave all the
wealth of the world to the poor for the wicked sake, thou could not profit
them a hear. For he that dyed in Gods displeasure, can not look for more
mercy then he deserved. Therefore S. John the Apostle seems to abridge our
prayers, 1. Epist. ca. 5
and the obteining of our petitions, by borderinge them as with in certaines
bonds after this sort. We know that God does here us what so ever we require,
we be sure he will accomplish our requests which we make unto him. Therefore
he that knows his brother to sin being not a sin to death, let him pray
and life shall be given to him that sins not to death: there is a sin to
death, for such I do not will any man to pray. This place of the Apostle,
seems to declare the wonderful force that the prayers of the faithful have,
in procuring grace and remission for others, so that they be ^rethern, and
pass hense with out the bond of mortal sin. And the letter well weyed,
shall make exceeding much to prove the prayers for departed in piety: as it in a
manner forbids all intercession for such, as be known to pass in
continuance of mortal sin. There is no crime so grievous that man may commit
in the course of this life, but the Church uses prayers customably therefore,
and for her reverence is often heard. Therefore it may well be thought that
the party must be deceased of whom such diversity of deserts does arise: for
all that be a live with out exception, if they be brethern of our family, must
be prayde for. And so long as they be in this world, and may repent, The
church may pray for any sinner in this life, with hope of mercy.
their sin is not so unto death, but life by prayers may be, and is commonly
at Gods hand ob^eined. Then it may well be deduced, that the Apos^le means
to encourage the faithful to pray for such their brethren departed, as dyed
without bond of deadly sin to their sight, in a manner warning them that for
such their prayers shall be acceptably heard. But for others continuing in
sin to death, he wills not them to pray, nor can assure them they shall be
heard. So does Dionysius, a man not very ancient, but of a full spirit and
good grace, expound this text. Carth.
Whether he means (says this father) by final impenitence, or by any
mortal sin continued unto death, it is sure and plain a man must not pray
for him that dies in it. Then if we be admonished not to pray for one sort of
departed, the case is clear that we may, and are bound, and shall be heard
for the other sort that sins not unto death.

CAP. VII.

1 HItherto, but that you love to tell your chickens before they be hatched,
you need not greatly to boast of your winnings. But now you will show, that
prayer and alms helps not them that dye in mortal sin, and that beside
your Clement, with whose cloutes you cloy your book, you would feign prove
out of ye Epistle of S. John cap. 5. For that which S. John speaks of the
prayers that Christian men make for their brethren alive, whom they see to
sin, but not unto death, you would take if you could, for prayers to be made
for them that are dead, but passed not hence in deadly sin* and that which he
says of prayers not to be made for them that sin not unto death, you ween
he meant of them that are known to pass hence in continuance of sin. But you
that dare not presume to make any interpretation without authority of the old
Martyrs, when all comes to all, have none to father your new exposition
upon, but Denis the charterhouse Monk, a yesterdayes bird. But seeing you are
not only void of all ancient authority, but also have all the old writers
against you, that ever interpreted or alleged this place, let us see what is
your reason. Forsooth the letter well weighed, makes much for you, by the way
it may be noted, that you call the word of God the letter, in that sense that
S. Paul says the letter kills, but I omit that gross contumely against
the holy Scriptures, where S. Paul says the letter kills, he means not
that the holy Scriptures kills in which is contemed life, but that the law
which only commands and gives no power to fulfill it pronounces sentence
of death to them that break it. But to follow your reason. There is no crime
so grievous, that man may commit in this life, but the Church prays for it
and is often heard: therefore it may be thought that the party must be deceased
of whom such diversity of deserts does arise. I deny your antecedent: For the
church of Christ, prays not for them that sin against the holy Ghost, and
our Savior Christ affirms that he which sins against the holy Ghost shall
never be forgiven, who so ever pray for him, and of such says S. John, that
there is a sin unto death, for which we ought not to pray. Samuel was not
heard when he prayed for Saul, 1. Sam. 16. Jeremy is oftentimes forbidden to
pray for the obstinate Jews, Iere. 7.11. and 14. And the Lord testifies, that
if Noach, Daniell and Job prayed for the wicked, they should not be heard.
Ezec. 14. Therefore there be sins for which the Church ought not to pray, and
though she should pray, yet she should not be heard, even of men remaining in
this life, your second reason (as I conceive it) is, that so long as men are in
^his world, they may repent, and then sin is not to death. Therefore S. John
means, that they that dyed without bond of deadly sin are to be prayed for:
your antecedent as before is false, for the Apostle to the Hebrews the sixth
chapter, shows that there be some which sin so horribly in this life, that
it is impossible for them to be renewed by repentance. So that your exposition
being both void of authority, and contrary to the manifest word of God, of
none that is wise, or godly can be received. Beside this the whole context of
S. John's words do plainly declare, that he speaks of prayers for the
brethern that are living, and not for them that are dead. But I am to blame to
spend so many words in a matter so manifest. If the holy Ghost had ever
allowed prayer for the dead, he would once at the lest have uttered the same
plainly, in holy canonical Scriptures. But Tertullian, as wise a man as M.
Allen, affirms (as we heard before) that prayer for the dead, has no
foundation in the Scriptures.

2 To this place also S. Augustine, disputing in his book de ciuitate dei that
prayers profits not all men departed, alludeth, Lib. 21. Cap. 24.
or rather leans unto it as a sure ground against the Origenistes, that
would have Gods mercy by man's prayers obtained for the wicked souls deceased,
after this sort. Si qui autem vsque ad mortem habebunt cor impoenitens, nec ex
inimicis conuertuntur in filios, numquid iam pro eis, id est pro talium
defunctorum spiritibus orat ecclesia? cur ita nisi quia iam in part diaboli
computantur, qui dum essent in corpore, non sunt translati in Christum? If
there be any that till death continue in stubborn impenitency of heart, and
of enemies to Gods Church will not be made children, does the Church make
intercession for such, that is to say for the souls of them being departed in
that state? and why prays she not for them, but because they be now reckoned
for the devils lot being dead, that would not move to Christ's part when
they were in their bodies? And this is the cause, that for such as in
desperatio^ destroy them selves: by any kind of wilful or violent death, or in
the stubborn maintenance of heresy, offer them selves to be extirpate: as
well out of the society of man's life, as out of the communion of the Christian
company, our holy mother the Church, who by her practice is the best construer
of Gods word, never uses any means for their quiet rest. Whereon there is a
holy decree of Council in this sense, qui sibi ipsis quolibet modo culpabili
inferunt mortem, nulla pro illis fiat commemoratio, Bracarens. Cap. 34.
neque cum psalmis sepeliantur. All those that by any unlawful way procure
their own death, let no commemoration be had of them, Vide Timo. Alexand.
respons. 14.
nor be brought home with psalms. The which has been both diligently observed
ever amongst Christians, and for terror of the wicked often by holy Canons
renewed. VVherof there is no other cause but this: that such persons being at
the end cut of the common body, can receive no vtility of that, where unto
they are not, nor now can not be joined. And as in that case where Gods Church
has plain presumption of any persons everlasting perishing, either by
continuance in infidelity out of her happy family, or by heresy, and
separation of him self till the last end, leaping out of her holy lap where
he once was before, or being and continuing, with some open evidence thereof,
an unprofitable membre, and a dead branche: as, I say, in any plain proof
of these things, the Church never practices for his rest, because she neither
has hope of getting any grace, nor means to convey any benefit unto such as
be not in the limbs of life, so if our said careful mother do bestow of her
customable kindness, all her godly means upon those whom she knows not
otherwise but in final piety and penitence to have passed this life, and yet
in deed before God (to whom only all secrets of man's heart be perfectly
open) dyed as abiectes, and outcastes in sin and impenitencie, she can not
for all that, any whit help their estate so miserable, nor appeace Gods wrath
toward, them being now out of the time of deserving. out of the Churchies
lap, effectually and finally separated from the chosen people, and out of the
compaesse of grace and mercy. Much less any private man's prayer can be any
thing at all beneficial to his freinde, or other that dyed not in Gods favor:
whose pain can neither be finished, nor by any of these ordinary means, one
moment released or lessened. Yet every good faithful person must imitate the
diligence of Gods Church herein, that cease not both to off^^ and pray for
all sorts with in her limits, that be hense in any likelihood of repentance
departed: who had rather they should abound to the needelesse, then at any
time lack for the relief of such, that might want them.

2 All this discourse is needelesse, to prove that prayers profit, not the
infidels, or the impenitent, against them that believe that the souls of the
faithful and the repentant are where Christ is, as he prays Joan. 17. Father
I will that those whom thou have given me where I am they also may be with
me, that they may see my glory. And even so he says to the thief no perfect
just man, but a sinner repentant: This day thou shall be with me in Paradise
Luke 23. And S. Paul desires to be dissolved and to be with Christ Philip. 1.
This is the faith of the Church, of Christ, and these be the grounds of our
faith, void of all doubtfulnesse, obscurity, sophistry and variable sentence
of deceiuable men: builded upon the certain foundation of the eternal word of
God: The authority of Augustine proves that the Church prayed not in his time
for the spirits of infidells. But the Council Bracharense (as afterward I
shall more plainly show) does insinuate that no prayers were made at all, for
the souls of the departed in their Church at their burialls, but only a
remembrance of them in prayers with thankesgeuing and singing of Psalms. For
purgatory should seem had not yet traveled into spain. But touching this
assertion of M. Allen, that those which dye out of the favor of God, as
infidells and such like, are not to be prayed for, whose pain can neither be
finished, nor one moment released, or lessened by any of these means: what
say you then to Gregory the first, bishop of Rome, which with his vehement
prayer as your own Damascene and many others do witness, delivered the soul
of Traianus the heathen Emperor from Hell: whereof there rises a great
controversy among your doltish divines, some affirming, that he was delivered
out of Hell in deed, some that he remains still in Hell, but not in the
torm^nts of Hell, in which opinion is Matthew monk of Westminster in his Flores
historiarum Anno gratiae 605. How shall we believe the book of Conformities of
S. Frances, who is there reported to have delivered not one but many souls out
of Hell. If these be fables and lies M. Allen, they be forged in your own
shop, whereas purgatory and all such other rotten posts and pillars of your
Church were received. If these be true, that be set forth with so great
authority, then were not you well advised to publishe such principles as be
proved false by your own patrons and proctors.

3 Therefore let no man withdraw his alms, charity, or prayers, from any of
the houshoulde of faith, upon any light presumption yea or strong conjecture of
any man's final continuance in sin or wickedness: upon whom in the last
spirit of breath, as God may have mercy, so man's prayers then shall be both
needful, and exceeding beneficial unto him. Only with conscience thou may,
and must cease with Gods Church to practice the ways of mercy upon such as be
not baptized, or otherwise after their baptism, have by leaving this holy
communion of the faithful, Heretics not to be praide for after their death.
judged them selves unworthy, and made their case unapt by continuance
therein, to receive any benefit either of the Church, which of their own
accord they have forsaken, or of any membre thereof, whereunto by faith and
love they are not joined. And so all heretics shall be void of this mercy and
grace after their death, which did in their life so earnestly abhor the same.
Upon all other where any hope may be had, if thou pray or procure the means of
mercy, it shall at least be to thy self a singular help and gain, though the
party for whom thou do it, either need it not, being already received
into bless, or else in perpetual damnation of Hell, be helples for ever. Si
preces pro mortuis facimus (says S. Chrysostom) si elecmosinas damus, Homil
21. in Cap. 9. Actuum.
etsi ille indignus sit, nobis Deus placatior erit: If we pray for the dead,
and bestow alms for their sakes, if he be found unworthy, yet God will the
rather be merciful to our selves. And sure it is, that who so ever be found
so gracious, as with much compassion of the deceaseds misery, to procure with
study and care Gods merciful pardon toward them, that such a one especially
shall find grace and favor at the time of need, and be marvelous apt to
receive benefit by others procurement again. Who be most apt to receive
benefit by the prayers of the living.
For as it is certain, that no man can receive benefit after his departure by
any work or will of the living, saving such as in their life deserved the
same, so must it needs be, that where these remedies be needful and
profitable, that yet more or less they shall work upon the party for his
relief, according to the more or less devotion and deserving in this life.
Therefore this truth of mutual participation of the dead with the live,
gives no man occasion of idle rest or careless affection in his own time and
cause, when he may be assured to lack the relief of others, to whom in his
liefe by well working he would not join before.

But I had rather ye heard S. Augustine uttering expressly this meaning of
mine, in his own words. Enchir. cap. 110.
It can not be denied (says he) but that the souls of the deceased be
relieved, when the sacrifice of our redemer is offered for them, or alms
bestowed in their behalf in the Church. But in deed these are profitable to
none, but to such as in their life deserved that those things after their
departure might do them good. For there is a state of life that is neither so
perfect but it may well have need of these helps after death, not yet so very
evil, but such things may well succor them after their departure. Mary there
is a kind of conversation so virtuous, that it requires no such ayed, and an
other kind so wicked, that those which passed their former life therein, can
have after their passage no relief by such means: for by our merits in this
life we do obtain, that after our deaths we may either atteine to remedy, or
else be void of all helps. For it is a very vain hope, that any man should
presume to win that at Gods hand after he be passed out of this world which
when he was in the world, he never sought nor deserved. And a little after thus
he makes all plain: When the sacrifice of the altar, or else any kind of
alms be offered for all men departed being baptized, for the very good they
are thanks giving, for the indifferent that be not very evil, they are a
merciful deliverance. For the wicked and very evil, all though they be no
succor for them which be departed and dead, yet they are confortable for
those that be alive, And to such as receive benefit thereby, either comes
full forgiveness, or else their judgment and damnation is made thereby
somewhat more tolerable. The which sentence, almost in like words, for that it
merueillously opened this matter, this author repeteth in the fourth question
ad Dulcitiu^, and else very often. Whereby the faithful man may learn both
how much, and whom these remedies do relieve. And then that the Church in his
days offered sacrifice for all those that were baptized, and in the faith
thereof departed: both for that it was uncertain who had need thereof, and
also, because even then when the parties were not, nor could not be partakers
thereof, that Gods glory notwithstanding was excedingly set forth, and man
comforted thereby. Therefore Gods Church in a true sense may be said to offer
sacrifice even for the holy and blessed martyrs, who no doubt by sheeding of
their blood for Christ's name, and defense of unity, be fully purged in this
their death, and so perfectly released of all sin and pain that might
otherwise have deserved punishment, and some expectation of Gods mercy in the
life to come. Lib. 4. epist. 5.
For so S. Cyprian and other of his Church offered sacrifice, for Celerne,
Laurence and Ignatius as he testifies him self: Sacrificia pro eis semper vt
meministis offerimus, quoties martyrum passiones and dies anniuersaria
co^memoratione celebramus: For them we offer sacrifice, as often as we
celebrate the yearly memories of martyrs. For which kind of perfect men,
sacrifice is thanks giving unto God for their glory and gifts of grace, and a
kind of intercession to them in our necessities. Tractat 84. in Ioanne^.
For which cause S. Augustine affirms, Quod pro martyribus non oramus fed
ipsi oran^ pro nobis: We pray not for martyrs, but they pray for us. Now the
sacrifice often celebrated for the wicked also, that be not known to the
Church so to be, is not beneficial to them neither, because their naughty life
and death makes them unapt to receive comforth thereby: yet these holy
appointed remedies are both comfortable and meritorious to the geuers and
procurers, as blessings which are not lost, How prayer which takes no
effect in the departed, is profitable to the procurer.
but turn again to the bestowers. For the profit of other, or the only will
to relicue other, is a singular deserte and means of merit to a man's self.
Full truly said Damascene, that this careful help and serving of others
men's lackes, is much like to the pain which one takes in anointing with a
precious baulme an other man's body, which as he tempereth in his hand to
bestow upon an other, it first redoundeth in verdure and virtue to him self,
and then passes by him, to the use of his neighbor, for whom principally it
was prepared.

3 These matters stand all upon a false supposition, that any prayers are
auailable for the dead, which when it can not be proved, it is in vain to
show who takes profit by them, who not, who more and who less, and what
becomes of those prayers that be offered for either them that need no help,
or that can not be helped. We learn out of Gods word, that what so ever we
do pray for according to Gods will we shall obtain. 1. John. 5. therefore
this one hatchet shall cut asunder all these knottes, prayers for the dead are
not according to the will of God, and therefore they are not heard at al, for
immediately after death, as M. Allen him self confesses, follows judgment,
but prayers either need not or boot not, when the party is either acquitted or
condemned by the sentence of the judge, which as Augustine says can not be
indifferent between reward, and punishment. De libero arbitrio. lib. 3. cap.
23.

4 But notwithstanding this free procurement and liberal grant of common
helps in the departeds case, even there where it is uncertain whether they
take effect or no, the Church yet does not only abstain from sacrifice and
request for such as do openly appear to sin unto death, as the Apostle
says, but some times for punishment of certain contemptes and disobedience in
some persons, she forbeareth these means, even there where she might proffet
the departed, and peradventure clean discharge him of sin and pain with
all. Which she does by merueillous grave authority, to the great terror of
offenders. That by the grievous punishment of certain, many might learn to be
careful and wise.

Great is the authority of Gods ministers suerly, and heavy is their hand
often upon sinners, always to edify and never to de^troie. What a strange
force had Peter's words, Act. 5.
that drove ^owne to death for dissimulation man and wife, almost both at a
lap? what a horrible and dreadful judgment practiced Paul, 1. ad Tim. 1.
1. Cor. 5.
^n giving up some to Satan him self, for sin? how sharply ^id the
primitive Church execute judgment upon grievous of^enders, whom some times
after many years separation from the comfortable receiving the sacraments,
they would hardely admit at their last end to the fellowship thereof. But no
where could the majesty of Gods Church appear with more terror, then in this
case: when she discharges certain for their punishment, of all common help
by prayers, oblation, and sacrifice after their departure: though they
otherwise dyed in the favor of God, as I take it, and might be of the chosen
company that shall be saved. And that punishment was nothing else but a keeping
of them in longer correction and pain for their sin, under Gods scourge in
the next world, for the admonishment of others in that case to beware, whiles
she would not use her ordinary means for their release. A notable example we
have thereof, out of a Council holden in Affricke: Concilium Aphricanu^.
Epist. 9.
the decree of which assembly, S. Cyprian him self with a practice in the
execution thereof, reports in the first book of his epistles. Where he
wills that one Victor, who had made Geminus Faustinus being a priest against
the order taken in the Council of Aphrike, the executor of his testament,
should therefore have no prayers of the clergy, nor sacrifice after his
departure said or done for him. For in that time of great persecution, such
instant prayers, so often sacrifice, the scarsity of ministers, the peoples
necessity required, that the priests should perpetually, with out all
exception of worldly affayers, serve the altar. But you shall hear this
blessed Martyrs, or rather his words together with the Counsels ordinance.
Victor cum contra formam nuper in consilio a sacerdotibus da^a^, Geminum
Faustinum presbyterum ausus sit actore^ constituere, non est quo pro dormitione
eius apud vos fiat oblatio, aut deprecatio nomine eius in ecclesia
frequentetur, vt sacerdotum decretum, religiose and necessario factum, seruetur
a nobis: simul and caeteris fratribus detur exemplum, ne quis sacerdotes and
ministros dei altari eius and ecclesiae vacantes, ad seculares molestias
deuocet. In English thus: Seeing Victor against the order taken of late in a
holy Synod of priests, has made Geminus Faustinus the chief doe^ in the
execution of his will and testament, let it be provided that there be no
oblation there with you for his rest, nor yet any prayers in his behalf in
the Church: that the decree of the priests before said, may be religiousely
observed and executed by us. That thereby all other our brethren may beware
by his example, how they withdraw such as should serve the author, to
entangle them selves with worldely affairs.

4 Now comes a cumbersome case, that whereas he had affirmed before in the
beginning of this capter, that there is no crime so grievous that man may
commit in the course of this life, but the Church uses prayers accustomably
therefore, in which affirmation he includes sin against the holy Ghost also,
now he finds in Cyprian, a place, where prayers and sacrifice as he
thinks, were denied to him, which had committed but a small fault in it
self, and such as Priests do now adays commonly incur, namely to be an
executer of men's testamentes. But the matter seems to be far otherwise then
M. Allen does take it. Cyprian in the 6. Epistle of his first book, reports
that there was a decree made in the assembly of the Church, before his time,
that no brother departing out of this life, should name any of the clergy to be
his executor, or ouerseer of his will. Ac si quis hoc fecisset non offerretur
pro eo, nec sacrificium pro dormitione eius celebraretur. Neque enim ad altar
Dei meretur nominari, in sacerdotum prece, qui ab altari sacerdotes and
ministros suos Leuitas auocare voluit, and ideo, etc. And if any had done so,
there should be no offering for him nor sacrifice for his falling a sleep (so
they called departing out of this life) should be celebrated. For he is not
worthy to be named at the altar of God in the prayer of the Priests, which
would call away his Priests and ministers the Levites from the altar. And
therefore seeing Victor, contrary to the form given by the Priests in
council was so bold to make Geminus Faustinus an elder his executor, there is
no cause that oblation should be made among you for his falling a sleep, or
that any prayer in his name should be frequented in the Church, etc. By these
words it appears first that Cyprian in these terms, sacrifice, Priest,
altar, alludeth to the sacrifices of thanksgiving in the law, because he
uses also that name of Levites by which he calls Gods ministers. For as for
the sacrifice propitiatory, was offered in the law, only by the high Priest
once in the year. So that he means no other oblation or sacrifice for the
dead but the sacrifice of thanksgiving, which was for their godly departure.
And therefore he calls it not a sacrifice for their sins, but for their
falling a sleep. And by prayer he means nor prayer for delivery of the dead
out of purgatory, but as Origin says for the faithful living, to have the
like godly departure as he had that was fallen a sleep. And therefore he says
not, that such a one is not worthy to be prayed for, but he is not worthy to be
named in the prayer, which was made for them that remained to end their days
happily, as such a one, or such a one whose names were recited in those
memories, had already fulfilled their course. For otherwise, what so ever M.
Allen iangleth of the severity of the churches discipline, if they had thought
the souls of the departed to be in so great torments, and that prayer and
sacrifices had been such a necessary help for them, it had been ^o much
cruelty for one offense and that not so great, either to condemn a man to so
horrible punishment, or to deny him utterly all manner of help and comfort. The
discipline of the Church when it is most severe, is to bring to repentance
them that are in life, not to rage against them that are dead which can not
repent. Nor to reject any man utterly, but him that is certainly known to be
utterly forsaken of God. But this Geminius Victor of whom Cyprian thus writes,
was a good Christian, in so much that Cyprian him self calls him his brother.
Geminius Victor frater noster de saeculo excedens. Our brother Geminius Victor
departing out of this world, etc. Wherefore if the punishment had extended to
the torment of his soul, or the hinderance of relief unto his soul being in
torments, the Church would not have been so rigorous against a faithful
brother, for mayntenance of their own decree, which was not expressly forbidden
by the word of God. Wherefore it may appear that this punishment, was only a
note of ignominy to Victor him self for his transgression at his departure,
and especially an example for the rest of the brethren (as Cyprian says) that
they call not away the ministers of God from his service, to worldly affairs,
lest they be likewise noted of infamy when they are dead.

5 And here now our adversaries must be called upon, and asked how they can
away with this gear, whether this light of truth be not over vehement for
their bleared eyes? The heretics called upon to aunsvvere.
owl light or moneshine I trow, or mirke midnight were more fit for their
dark works and doctrine, our way is over much trodden for thieves. All this
course of our cause, so agrees with it self: so stands with reason: so
vpholden by scripture, so ordered in all points, The whole matter ordered to
our hands.
that Momus him self could practice no art, nor pick no quarelles here. For
such we must pray: for those we must not pray: in this case the sacrifice of
Gods Church relieueth the departed, in that case it is comfortable only to the
living: some men need help after their death, others help we need, and not
they ours: for open infidelles and heretics prayers are not used, for all
secret offendres, because their case is not known to the Church, of charity
toward her children, she openly prays: some she punishes, some she
pardons, for all she merueillous tenderly cares. This doctrine of truth is
purposely ordered by our elders, every point is touched and tried to our
hands. What time of the day was it in Gods Church, say truth, and shame the
devil, when holy Cyprian wrote these things? when the Council of Aphricke
decreed these things? when Victor was punished by lack of sacrifice and
prayers at his departure? does your time of ignorance which you have limited
for your walk, reach up so high in Gods house? but I will spare you to anon,
your answer is not ready.

5 And here now our adversary must occupy his goose quill, like the gooses
trumpet to awake us to answer him, as though we were a sleep, or he so well
appointed to fight against us, we must be asked how we can away with this
gear. Surely as the sun is not obscured with the dust that a cock casts
up when he scrapeth on the dunghill, no more is the son of righteousness our
only full redemption, or the light of his holy word darkened by all the myste of
men's devises, which Allen or his accomplices can raise out of the whole heap
of superstition and error, to deface the glory of his truth. The Lord is our
light and salvation, therefore we will not be a feared of purgatory. The word of
the Lord is a light unto our steps and a lantern unto our feet, therefore
we will not walk in the darkness of men's traditions. Our works and doctrine
shall one day be tried before God, and therefore we make no account how we be
judged by man's day, and lest of all by such a man's dome, as has his tongue
more ready to rail and sclaunder, then his heart instructed to discern and
judge. your way is your own way, and not the way of the Lord, and because you
take an other way unto salvation, then the only right way Jesus Christ,
therefore by his own sentence, you are all thieves and murderers. But because
you gather your forces together to show the strength of your cause, I will also
generally show your feebleness, to the overthrow of your purpose. The course
of your cause you say so agrees with it self. What else? To prove that there
is purgatory, you urge the satisfying of Gods justice so extremely, that beside
the suffering of Christ and forgeuenes of sins, yet there must needs be a
suffering of the party that offended. But when you will show by what means
this suffering may be either mitigated or clean taken away: you clean take
away the extremity of Gods justice which before you so earnestly maintained. O
worthy agreement of your cause with it self. Beside the agreement with it
self it so stands with reason. Suerly how reasonable so ever it seems to
you, that the merits of men should win, that which the merits of Christ
could not win: that the suffering of men should satisfy, for that which
the suffering of Christ could not satisfy with the justice of God, to them
that have there reason rightly reformed it seems altogether unreasonable, (
So vpholden with scripture.) Never once mentioned in scripture, and so
confessed by Tertullian, one that leaned to some part of your cause: (so he
ordered in all points.) So patched together like a beggars cloak with so many
peeses of so many colors, one patch out of Tertullian, an other out of
Augustine, an other out of Gregory, an other out of Damascene, many stolen out
of the monks cowle, and said to be given by Clemens, Athanasius, and such
like, some rent away violently against the owners wills, as from Origin,
Cyprian, the Counsels of Vase, and Carthage, and no small peeses out of drousy
dreams, and mockadoe miracles, narrations, and relations etc. I promise you a
goodly ordered cause. But of Cyprians time we must say the truth and shame
the devil, so we will and shame the Pope to, his eldest son. It was such
time M. Allen, as Cyprian bishop of Carthage, thought him self equal with
Cornelius and Stephanus bishops of Rome. 1. lib. epist. 1. cap. 4. de
simplicitate praelatorum etc. It was such a time that Cyprian taught, that
faith only does profit to salvation, To. 2. ad Quirin. cap. 42. And that he
believed not in God at all, which places not the trust of all his felicity in
him only. De duplici martyrio. Yea it was such time, that Cyprian would have
nothing done in the celebration of the Lords Supper, and namly in ministering of
the cup, but that Christ him self did. lib. 2. epist. 3. And yet it was such
a time also, as Cyprian and all the bishops of Africa decreed in Council,
that those whcih were baptized by heretics, should be baptized again. And
therefore it was no such time, but that he and all his fellows though they
held the foundation of Christ, yet might and did err in some opinions,
contrary to the truth of Gods word. And where you ask whether the time of
ignorance, that we limitte for our walk, does rech so high as Cyprian his
time, I would you knew we walk not in ignorance of any time, but in the
known path of Gods word, which is higher then Cyprians or any mortal man's
time. But the time of ignorance which is limited for your walk, that call
ignorance the mother of devotion, first is all beside the path of Gods word,
and then even from the time that the mystery of iniquity began to work. 2 Thessalonians. 2. Even until the time that Antichrist was openly showed in the full
power of darkness, in all times when so ever, and where so ever was any peese
of miste, or dark corner (though all the rest were light) there were the
steps of your walk. As even in the Apostles time, when the superstition of
Angels began to be received, there was one step of your way, which you
hold even to this day Colos. 2. And from that time the devil never left to
set in his foot, for his son Antichrists dominion, until he had placed him
in the temple of God, and prepared the wide world for his walk.

What that holy sacrifice is, which was ever counted so beneficial to the
live and dead. The punishment of our sins by the heavy loss thereof. The
great hatered which the devil and all his side, has ever borne toward
Christ's eternal priesthood, and the sacrifice of the Church. And that by the
said sacrifice of the Mass, the souls departed are especially relieved. CAP.
VIII.
1 ANd now we must fall in hand with the good Christian Catholic, for the
search of this so often named sacrifice, so comfortable to the live, so
profitable to the dead: and what that oblation is, which the holy Catholic
and Apostolic Church has ever used through out the world for the sins of
the departed, in place of the offeringes of the law, and that sacrifice which
Judas Machabeus made and procured at Jerusalem, for the offensies of his
people that perished in battle. Surely it is no other but the sacrifice of our
Mediator, as S. Augustine terms it, and the offering, upon the altar. It is
no other then that oblation which so fully and lively expresses the death and
passion of Christ Jesus: Who being once offered by the sheeding of his blessed
blood for the redemption of man kind, has wrought such a virtuous effect, not
only in the holy sacraments for the giving of grace and remission of sins,
but also has left in a merueillous mystery his own holy and blessed body and
blood, as well to feed upon for the especial strength and comforth of our
souls, as to offer up the same for the remembrance of his death, and
cleansing of ou^ sins. Not in that wise as it was done upon the Cross by
the painful sheeding of his blood, but as it was instituted first in the
last Supper: Where Christ our God and Redeemer according to the order of
Melchisedech, gave to his Apostles, and offered to God the father that body
which afterward was betrayed, and the same blood which was shed after also
for the remission of sin, being with all termed by him, the blood of the
new and eternal testament: as that which in the new law should succeade the
bloody offeringes of the old testament. VVherof, God almighty being (as a man
would say) lothesome or full, has instituted this by his only Son, as a
most pure and precious oblation and sacrifice, to be continued in the Church
through out the costs and corners of the round world: Which being
celebrated in the blessed memory of his Sons passion, and having no other
host nor oblation then that which then was offered, can be no other sacrifice
then that which there was made for the forgiveness of sin, and redemption of
the world. The which worthy action of Christ's Church, so fructefully applies
unto us the benefit of our masters death, that thereby we may have
comfortable hope of remission of all such misdeedes, as most justly deserved
Gods wrath, and terrible indignation against us.

CAP. VIII.

1 Now the good catholic shall have wholesome doctrine taught him, concerning
the sacrifice of the mass, which first comes in place of the sacrifices of
the law, and that sacrifice which Judas Machabaeus procured to be made at
Jerusalem. Well said M. Allen, shall the sacrifice of the mass shoulder out
the sacrifice of Christ his death. The Apostle to the Hebrews teaches us an
other lesson. cap. 10. that Christ offering but one sacrifice for our sins,
and that but once. cap. 9. has made perfect for ever those that are
sanctified: that our sins are taken away by that sacri^^ce, and therefore
there is no more sacrifice for sins left. Wherefore it excuses not, but
increases your blasphemy, that you say the sacrifice of the mass is all one
with the sacrifice of Christ his passion, which was but one sacrifice, and the
same but once offered, and by that one oblation has made perfect all them that
receive any benefit by it. But Christ (you say) has instituted this sacrifice
to be offered up for the remembrance of his death, and the clensing of our
sins. Show one word M. Allen out of the Scripture of any sacrifice instituted
by Christ at his last supper, or else you are a most horrible and blasphemous
liar. The holy Ghost says we are sanctified by his will, thorough the offering
of the body of Christ once made for all, and where remission of sins is, there
is left no sacrifice for sin. Heb. 10. But you are not content to join your
sacrifice of the mass, as an appendix unto the only once offered and no more
offerable sacrifice of Christ his death, except you proceed and utterly deny
all the force and benefit of the oblation of his bitter passion. For you say,
that Christ in his last supper, not only gave to his Apostles, but also
offered to God his father that body which was after betrayed, and that blood
which was shed after also for remission of sins, being that sacrifice which
should succeed the bloody offerings of the old testament. what place have you
here left for the passion of Christ? O intolerable blasphemy. Christ offered up
but one sacrifice, and that you affirm to be before his death: Christ offered
but once and that you affirm to be at his supper. By that one sacrifice which
Christ did once offer, he redeemed us from all our sins, and that you affirm
to have been offered in the sacrament. Do you not now plainly exclude the
death and passion of Christ and all the merits thereof? who can abide to hear
you afterward, when you say that the sacrifice of the mass, is an application
of the benefits of Christ his death unto us, when now you affirm that it is
the continuance of that sacrifice which Christ offered and instituted before
his death, who never offered but one sacrifice and that but once. O Lord these
blasphemers are more worthy to be beaten down with thunderbolts, then their
blasphemies so directly contrary to the holy Scriptures have need to be
confuted with words.

2 Now this is that blessed sacrifice, which S. Augustine with fear and
reverence terms in a thousand places of his works, the sacrifice of the
Altar, the sacrifice of our Mediator, the sacrifice of our price, the
sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ, the wholesome and profitable
sacrifice, the sacrifice of Melchisedech, the new sacrifice. S. Chrysostom the
reverent sacrifice, the honorable Mysteries, the Fearful sacrifice, The
common names of honor given to the holy Mass in old time.
Athanasius the propitiatory sacrifice, the unbloody Host. S. Cyprian the
sacrifice of the Church, the perpetual sacrifice, the meat offering, the
medecin for our infirmities. Irenaeus the pure sacrifice, the new sacrifice of
the new testament. Clement again, the unbloody sacrifice, the rationable
sacrifice: and so does the holy Counsel of Ephesus call it. Dionysius the
sacrifice most excellent of all sacrificies, and the host of hosts. The
Latins altogether afterward named it the holy Mass, S. lib. epist. 33. epist.
and praecat. prima praeparante ad Missam.
so did S. Augustine call it, super vndec prouer.
Ambrose: Histor. tripartit. 24.
Hierome, cap. li. 10. d
Epiph. scholastic, with all the posterity both in Latin, and other barbarous
languagies. Besides many other excellent high and peculiar callinges, which can
agree to no other common worship of God internal nor external, but only to
this most worthy and honorable sacrifice: which by the virtue that it has
received by the first examplar thereof, and by the might and mercy of the Lamb
of God, which under the cover of bread and wine is there the appointed host
and oblation, is profitable both to the quick and the dead. And therefore is
and has been used ever since the Apostles age, and by Christ's own prescription
and theirs, The force and institution of the holy Mass.
commanded to be religiously observed, and of all faithful people honored as
the principal protestation of our religion, as the ground of all true
worship, as the badge of Christian peace, as the bond of holy society betwixt
the head and the members, as the love knot betwixt Christ and his spouse, as
the uniting of the live with the dead, the holy saints with us poor sinners,
Angels with men, heavenly things with earthly, and the Creator of all with his
own creatures beneth, as the plentiful condeth to derive the grace of
Christ's death and merits of his passion, to the continual conforth of our
souls, as the only practice of his eternal priesthood according to the order
of Melchisedech, and as the only effectual memorial and comfortable memory,
of the sheeding of his blessed blood, and sufferance of so dear and painful
death for our redemption.

What altar so ever be erected against this altar, it is nothing else but a
waste of Gods worship, a canker of religion, The nevve communion is here
described.
a token of dissension, a separation of the holy society of the Christian
communion, a larome toward schism, a departure from Christ, an open badge of
heresy, a saulsy shouldering with Christ's Church and ordinance, an open
robbry of his honor and priesthood, a plain stop of the passage of his
gifts and grace in his loving house, the only way to paganism and eternal
oblivion of his death and passion.

2 Now we shall hear how many of the old writers call it a sacrifice, but he
need not take all that pains, for we confess, that the celebration of the
Lords supper, is commonly, but improperly called of them a sacrifice: Howbeit
they meant nothing less, then to set up a blasphemous altar, and new
sacrifice, and priesthood against our Savior Christ the only priest, altar,
and sacrifice of our redemption, as Augustine calls him, but only there
meaning was, that it was a remembrance and memorial of that only sacrifice
with thanks giving for the same. Augustine de fide ad Petrum Diaconum cap. 19.
showing the difference of the sacrifices of the old law, the only sacrifice
of Christ, and the sacrifice of bread and wine, which the Church offered
says. In illis enim carnalibus victimis figuratio fuit carnis Christi, qua^
pro peccatis nostris ipse sine peccato fuerat oblaturus, and sanguinis que^
erat effusurus in remissionem peccatorum. In isto autem sacrificio gratiarum
actio, atque commemoratio est carnis Christi, quam pro nobis obtulit, and
sanguinis quem pro nobis idem Deus effudit. For in these carnal sacrifices,
there was a figuring of the flesh of Christ, which he being with out sin,
should offer for our sins, and of his blood, which he should shed for
remission of our sins. But in this sacrifice, there is thanks giving and
commemoration of the flesh of Christ, which he offered, for us, and his blood
which the same God shed for us. In his 23. epistle to Bonifacius, he shows,
that sacraments, take the names of those things whereof they are sacraments,
by a certain similitude and liknesse that they have unto the things, them
selves whereof they are sacraments. And so the sacrament of Christ's sacrifice
is called a sacrifice as after a certain manner the sacrament of Christ's body
is the body of Christ, and the sacrament of Christ's blood is the blood of
Christ, even as the sacrament of faith is faith etc. Chrysostom upon the
Epistle to the Hebrews in cap. 10. Hom. 17. after he has showed at large, the
force of the only sacrifice of Christ once offered for all upon the Cross,
declares plainly how the sacrament of Christ's death in that time was called
a sacrifice, which one testimony is sufficient to declare what all the fathers
meant by abusing the name of sacrifice for the celebration of the Lords Supper.
Hoc autem quod nunc facimus in commemorationem quidem fit eius quod factum est.
Hoc enim facite inquit, in meam commemorationem. Non aliud sacrificium, sicut
pontifex, sed id ipsum semper facimus, magis autem recordationem sacrificij
operamur. This that we do, we do it in remembrance of that which was done.
For do this (says he) in remembrance of me. We do not make an other
sacrifice, as the high priest, but the self same always, yea rather we work
the remembrance of a sacrifice. The same thing in effect declares Cyprian
lib. 2. epist. 3. Et quia passionis eius mentionem in sacrificijs omnibus
facimus (passio est enim domini sacrificium quod offerimus) nihil aliud quam
quod ipse fecit facere debemus. And because in all sacrifices we make mention
of his passion (for the sacrifice which we offer is the passion of our Lord)
we ought to do nothing but that which he did. Here it is manifest that Cyprian
calls the sacrament a sacrifice, as he calls it the passion of Christ, and
the remembrance of his passion. Irenaeus also shows that by the name of the
sacrifice of the Church, he means not the sacrifice of the Mass, which they
call propitiatory for the sins of the quick and the dead but the sacrifice
of thanks giving and prayers who writes these words. lib. 4. cap. 34. Igitur
non sacrificia sanctificant hominem, non enim indiget sacrificio deus sed
conscientia eius, quae offert sanctificat sacrificium, pura existens and
praestat acceptare deum quasi ab amico. Therefore these sacrifices do not
sanctify a man, for God needs no sacrifices, but the conscience of him that
does offer being puer, does sanctify the sacrifice, and causes God to accept
it as of a freinde. Justinius martyr also Dial. Cum Tryphone aduersus Iudaeos in
plain words affirms, that the sacrifice of bread and wine which the Church
offers, is the sacrifice of thanks giving in remembrance of the passion of
Christ. The like places might be brought out almost of all the old writers,
but for tediousness, and yet to show how improperly some of them used the name
of sacrifice, I will cite one place out of Ambrose, Ad virginem lapsam. Si
fuisses communi sort defuncta flessent te modicum propter desiderium parents,
sed exultassent granditer quia immaculatam praemiseru^t virginem hostiam viuam,
domino, propitiatricem suorum videlicet delictoru^. If thou had dyed by the
common lotte, thy parents would have lamented a little for desire of thee, but
they would have greatly reioysed, because they had sent before them an
immaculate virgin, a living sacrifice, propitiatory to the Lord for their
sins. Here is the death of a virgin called a sacrifice propitiatory for
sins, but very improperly. Therefore if the fathers have spoken any thing
improperly of the celebration of the Lords Supper in calling it a sacrifice or
by any like term, which have in other places expounded their meaning, to be
only a remembrance, a commemoration, a thanks giving for the only true
sacrifice of Christ's death which is the propitiation for our sins, we must
not contrary to their meaning upon couller of their words set up a new and
blasphemous sacrifice to deface the only sacrifice of Christ, much less
break out into such open blasphemies, as this Allen does, that affirms this
sacrifice of the Mass, to be the only practice of Christ's eternal
priesthood, according to the order of Melchizedech which the Apostle comparing
Melchizedech with Christ in all things in which he was comparable, never
teaches as any part of his priesthood Heb. 7. For that which they build
upon, which make any resemblance of Melchizedechs offering of bread and wine,
with Christ's institution, is a false ground, for Melchizedech did not offer
but bring forth, not to God, but to Abraham and his company, not a sacrifice,
but a refectio^ of bread and wine: Hieronym confesses that Melchizedech
protulit panem and vinum ad Euaginum. and in Quaest. super Genesim. so does
Ambrose de misterijs initiandis ca. 8. so does Augustine super titulu^ Psalm.
33. Melchizedech brought forth bread and wine, yea the very vulgar
translation has proferens bringing forth. And that he brought it not forth to
sacrifice, but to refresh the souldeirs of Abraham: Beside that it is plain by
the text that Melchizedech being both a king and a priest, as a king liberally
entertained Abraham and his army, and as a priest blessed him: we read also
in scholastica historia. cap. 46. At vero Melchizedech rex Salem, obtulit ei
panem and vinum quod quasi exponens Josephus ait: Ministrauit exercitui xemia,
and multam abunda^tiam rerum opportunarum simul exhibuit, and super epulat
benedixit deum qui Abrahae subdiderat inimicos. But Melchizedech king of Salem
offered unto him bread and wine which Josephus expounding, says, he ministered
unto his army gifts of enterteinment and gave them also abundance of things
necessary, and beside that feast he blessed God which had subdued unto Abraham
his enemies. And out of doubt if the bringing forth of bread and wine had been
any thing perteining to the priesthood of Melchizedech, the Apostle to the
Heb. 7. would not have omitted to have compared it with Christ. But of all
others folies this is the greatest, that when the Papists have prated never so
long of the sacrifice of bread and wine, at the last, they will have no
bread nor wine at all in their sacrifice: wherein they are not only contrary
to those of the old writers which compare the celebration of the Lords
Supper, which sometime they call the sacrifice of bread and wine (and yet but
a sacrifice of thanksgiving) with Melchizedechs bread and wine: but also they
are contrary to them selves.

As for the rest of that railing, which he calls a description of the new
communion, might aptly and truly be verified of the new sacrifice of the
mass. And that I may answer words with matter, I will urge the Papists to
tell me, what we say or do in the celebration of the holy communion, which
Christ commanded us not to say and do, or what Christ did or commanded us to
do, which we do not therein? If all the dogged Papists in the world, be not
able to show our default herein, as we have showed their infinite abuses and
blasphemies, of their mass, then is our celebration the very true communion of
the body and blood of Christ, and theirs a very wast of Gods worship, a
canker of religion, etc. and a very blasphemy of all blasphemies, that ever
were uttered since the beginning of the world, whereby every scalde hedge
priest, is made not only equal, but also superior to Christ him self, whom he
presumes to offer, who could not be offered by any, but by him self.

3 The devil which is the old serpent, knowing by long experience and often
proof, that the holy Mass is the chief bane of sin and his wicked
kingdom, has ever from the beginning shot at this mark by all the cursed
endeavors of wicked heretics, to root out that strong guard of virtue, and
pillour of devotion and religion. How so ever they dissemble at their first
interaunce, the devil has that fetch in his false head in all times of such
toil and perturbation of religion. To which horrible endeavor though he has
for our sins and deserving put greater force, and wroght with more advantage
then ever before, yet till the latter day and ^onne of perditions appearing,
which is unknown to him, he shall not bring it to pass. The law, the
sacrifice, the priesthood, the altar of the new and eternal testament
prefigured by Melchizedech, and perfected by Christ, shall stand with and in
the holy Church, till the worlds end. It is not your bare bread and board,
Heresy with her disordered ministers, shall not out face Gods, church and
Christ's eternal priesthood.
not your Ministers, nor your Seniours, nor Elders, nor your Nuper intendents,
nor what so ever you lift be called, that shall out face Gods Church. She has
by the spirit of God beaten down your proudders, the Arrians: the
Macedonians: the Anabaptists, and all your predecessors. And now I tell you,
and be bold of it, as old as our mother waxes, as contemptible as you make
her, so little as you regard her, she will once yet in her old days give the
Zwinglians, the Lutherans, or of what other strange soldier so ever your
camp stands, an open overthrow. For if Hell were broken loose, and the
gates open, Psalm. 100. Mat. 16.
it could not prevail. We have our Priesthood confirmed by a fair oath, we
have our mothers righ^ by an open promise established.

3 This part of the chapter, conteyneth nothing but blasphemous boasting and
more then ruffianlike railing. First that the devil which loves the mass
better then he does holy water, shall not abolish it until the last day and
son of perditions appearing. I doubt not but the devil will do all that he
can to uphold it, to the end of the world, and whether he shall prevail or
no I will not dispute, but this I will boldly affirm, because I have good
warrant, that the son of perdition, who long ago appeared and is now already
greatly wasted and consumed with the breath of Christ's mouth, which is his
holy word, shall together with the mass, and al them that obstinatly defend
it, be utterly abolished at the glorious appearing of our Savior Christ in the
end of the world, and from thence forth with him be cast into the lake of fire
and brimstone, there to be burned with the devil and his angels world without
end. 2. The. 2. Apoc. 19. and 20. Secondly he says that our bare bread board
ministers, etc: shall not out face their Synagoge of Satan, which he calls
the Church of God. But the Lords table with the bread and wine which we
minister in remembrance of Christ's death, and blood shedding, which our
ministers, Seniours or elders, and Bishops or superintendents, when they shall
be all approved by the word of God, shall be able to abide the judgment of God
and be allowed for disposers of his mysteries and ministers of Christ: when
your altar, transubstantiation, renting of the Sacrament in pieces, robbing
the people of the blood of Christ, worshipping of creatures, etc: with your
Pope, Cardinals, Priests, Monks, Friars, Chanons, Nuns and all the rest of
that romish rabble, having no testimony out of the word of God, either of their
names, or of the signification of their names, shall be condemned of heresy,
hypocrisy, Idolatry, and blasphemy, and have the reward that to such horrible
profaners of Gods holy ordinance, apperteyneth. Thirdly you boast that your
church has beaten down our prowders the Arians, Macedonians, Anabaptists. It
was the Church of Christ, that overthrew those heretics, and not your
Antichristian assembly of heretics. And therefore I tell you and be bold of it,
that old rotten whore of Babylon your mother, in whose name you threaten us,
as one privy of her mischievous and malicious devises, shall never bring to
pass that pestilent plat form which was concluded against us in the
conspiracy of Trent. The Lord shall mainteyne his Church, as he has done
hitherto, in spite of the devil and the Pope for all their cruelty, treason,
perjury, truce breaking, and most unnatural murdering. But of all other
blasphemies who can abide this? that your priesthood in the devils name, is
confirmed by a fair oath, Psalm. 110. O Lord who would ever have thought that
any which professed the name of Christ, would ever have challenged unto them
selves against Christ that which never any Turk or Jew durst presume to boast
of. What will you leave to Christ O you hell hounds? when you take from him
both his kingdom and his priesthood, yea his eternal divinity, and
everlasting nativity. For unto whom so ever the priesthood is confirmed by
oath, of him that said, Thou art a Priest for ever according to the order of
Melchizedech, to him is confirmed an everlasting kingdom and an everlasting
priesthood: of the same it is said: The Lord said unto my Lord sit thou
on my right hand until I make thy enemies thy foot stool: to the same it is
said that The scepter of thy power: The Lord shall send out of Syon rule
thou in the midst of thine enemies: finally take the priesthood confirmed
with an oath and take the whole Psalm unto you. O Lucifer whether will thou
clime? will thou not be content with the old Lucifer to be like unto the most
highest, but will thou thrust down the most highest him self even the son of
God from the right hand of his father, and sit at the right hand of God thy
self? O ye that would see how Antichrist sits in the temple of God
boasting him self to be God, and exalted above all that is called God or
worshipped as God, draw nere and harken what he says of him self, by one of
his blasphemous mouths. Our priesthood is confirmed unto us by a fayer oath,
Psalm. 110. For seeing he alleges the Psalm. 110. to confirm his saying, he
can not excuse or qualify the matter by that general royal priesthood which
all the children of God have through Christ their head, to offer up spiritual
sacrifices unto God. 1. Pet. 2. Apo. 2. For that priesthood which he
challenges by oath, is to offer a sacrifice propitiatory, which he affirms
the Popish priests to do in their Mass. But lest I might seem to do them
wrong in denying unto them that priesthood, which is confirmed by oath Psalm.
110. Let us here what the holy Ghost says thereof Hebr. 7. And in as much as
Christ was not made priest with out the oath (where as they meaning the sons
of Aaron were made priest with out an oath, but he with the oath by him that
said unto him, the Lord has sworn and will not repent thou art a priest for
ever after the order of Melchizedech) by so much is Jesus made suertie of a
better testament. And among them many were made priests because they were not
suffered to endure by reason of death, but he because he abides for ever, had
such a priesthood as passes not by succession. Wherefore he is able
perfectly to save those that come unto God by him seeing he lives for ever, to
make intercession for them. For such an high priest it became us to have, which
is holy harmless, and undefiled, separated from sinners, and made higher then
the heavens which needed not daily as those high priest, to offer up sacrifice,
first for his own sins, then for the peoples: for that did he once for all
when he offered up him self. For the law makes men high priests which have
infirmity: but the word of the oath that was since the law, makes the son
who is consecrated for ever more. Mark well the plain words of this
testimony, and judge indifferently, whether I charge them with greater
blasphemy, then ensues this there assertion, That there priesthood is
confirmed by oath Psalm. 110.

4 And yet nevertheless, good Catholic Christian, The holy Mass taken away
for our sins.
let us thus persuade our selves, that we have so long lost the inestimable
treasure of this holy sacrifice, for our grievous sins: it is our sins I say
(woe is us therefore) which have deserved this plage, which have set us at
variaunce with God and our merciful redemer, which have taken from us, as
unworthy of so great a treasure, the daily sacrifice, the help of those which
are a live, the comfort of those which are departed, the only ground of all
religion and acceptable worship of God. And our misery is the greater because
few feel the sore.

The lack of this sacrifice for the departed only with the godly prayers
therein, Men that were grievous offenders in old time punished by lack of the
sacrifice.
was counted when Gods truth and Church flourished, the greatest and extremest
punishment that could be devised, and ever enjoined for some notable crime to
the terror of other, as for horrible desperation, for wilful heresy, for
contempt of the decrees of Gods holy ministers, as by the late alleged place
out of S. Cyprian may be very profitably noted. Allasse we have now in a
manner lost that wholly, which then was denied only to such for their grievous
punishments, as were heinous offenders. Otherwise in earnest consideration of
our case can not I think, but that this blessed iuell is now denied us of
almighty God generally for our grievous offensies, which then was denied by his
ministers to some one offender, for the due punishment of sin and
wickedness. O good reader what would that holy martyr have said if he had
lived in our days, when to have that oblation either for the quick or dead,
which once was esteemed so necessary that no Christian man neither could in
his life nor after his death lack it, is now if it self odious to most men,
and (which abhors me to speak) punishable by the laws of the spiritualty,
and condemned well near of all men? what ween you this blessed bishop
would have said, if he had seen the holy host and offeringe to have been
taken away, De Coena domini.
which he once affirmed to be so necessary, that if it were taken away or
wasted, there were no religion nor worship of God at all? would not he think
you, with fervent zele of Gods house have cried out upon the sins of the
people, the blindness of the preachers and pastors, the unworthiness of
these our doleful days? and bewailed his own misery as we should do ours,
crying out with an old blessed father? Ita Policarp. ex Iren.
O Deus bone in quae me seruasti tempora, vt ista blasphemia sustineam, O Lord
that I should be reserved for these times, to abide such blaspemie. Victor
reports in his history of the persecution of the Vandalles that were Arians,
Victor de persecut. Vandal.
that the Governor of that cursed company of cruel heretics, would not
suffer the Christian men whom he had slain, to be brought home with service,
and sacrifice: but then the good people wounderfully bewailed their case,
seeing them practice cruelty upon their souls also: in that they would not
suffer them to enjoin at their departure and burial, the rites of Gods
Church. Thus says that Author. Quis vero sustineat atque possit sine lachrymis
recordari, dum praeciperet nostrorum corpora defunctorum, sine solemnitate
hymnorum cum silentio ad sepulchra perduci? O Lord who could have found in
his heart to behold then, or could yet once think of it with out tears, how
he gave in charge, that the bodies of our brethern departed, should be brought
to the grave and buried with out all solemnity of hymns in silence and sorrow?
It was ever given to wicked hard hearted heretics, to prohibere gratiam
mortuis: to be unmercifully, Eccles. ca. 7.
and to stay the favor of good men from the departed. Nouatus as S. Cypria^
charge him, Epist. 8. li. 2.
noluit patrem fame defunctum sepelire: would not bury his own father dead
of honger bane.

4 This collorable and hypocritical complaint contains nothing for us
needful for to answer, for the place of Cyprian, is answered already. But
this may be demanded of him, seeing he calls the sacrifice of the Mass the
only ground of all religion and acceptable worship of God, what religion or
worship God had before the Mass came into the world? But this is the
howling of the merchantes for the decay of Babylon, because no man byeth their
ware any more: what so ever they pretend this is the cause of their mourning,
and this lamentation shall be continued even unto hell fire, where there is
weeping and gnashing of teeth for ever.

5 But to let such men pass with the present bewayling of our unhappy days,
let us with more comfort behold the steps of good men past: how kindly and
brother like they have principally procured the holy sacrifice for their
freindes and fellows gone before. For seeing the only prayers of good men
have been proved so profitable, and the representation of some holy works of
alms, has often moved God to pity (as we have proved) toward the release of
the departed his pain, what may we not hope to obtain for our brethern
deceased, when we shall join in prayers with the holy Angels, with the
blessed saints, with Gods holy ministers in the representation of Christ's
most blessed body and blood before the face of his father? when the whole
Church of God in that honorable action prays, and Christ him self is both
the sacrifice and the priest, both the asker and the geuer of pardon, when the
majesty of God the blessed trinity, is passingly pleaced by the merits of
Christ's death so lively set out in these honorable, but unspeakable mysteries,
what may we not here procure for the soul of the Churchies child? what shall
be denied to so humble askers in the presence of Gods own son and begging
mercy for his deaths sake? And so does S. Chrysostom assure the faithful,
Homil. 3. in Epistola^ ad Philipp.
in these golden words: Non frustra ab apostolis sancitum est, vt in
celebratione venerandorum mysteriorum, memoria fiat eorum, qui hinc
discesserunt: nouerunt quippe illis multum hinc emolume^ti fieri, multum
vtilitatis. stante siquidem vniuerso populo, manus in coelos extendente coetu
item sacerdotali, verendoque proposito sacrificio, quomodo deum non placaremus
pro istis orantes? It was not for naught that the Apostles decreed and
ordained, that in the celebration of the honorable mysteries there should be
an especial memorial of the departed: for they right w^ll knew great
commodity and benefit to arise there upon. For the whole multitude holding up
their hands toward heaven, together with the company and quiere of priests,
and the dreadful sacrifice set forth before all men, how is it possible but we
should appeace Gods wrath praying for them? look ye what this man's judgment
was, and see from whense he had it, even of the holy Apostles* I warraunt you,
and no worse nor later founders. But of that point, for the full deriuing of
our Christian usage from the first fathers of our faith, more convenient place
shall be given herafter, Now I will serve the cause and the readers desire,
first with certain peculiar examples of most learned and godly fathers worthy
of all credit, in the godly provision for certain of their dearest friends by
sacrifice and prayer, both made by them selves and procured by others. That we
may have here not only whom to believe teaching the truth, but whom to
follow practicing the same with devotion, which they preached with constancy
before.

5 Not altogether out of hope yet, to find some foolish merchantes that will
pay dearly for unprofitable wares, you comfort your self after your
complainte, exhorting men to procure the holy sacrifice for their freindes and
fellows. why M. Allen if there be either such necessity or such profit of that
sacrifice, wherefore do not your priests with out procurement offer it up to
the uttermost advantage that may be had by it? But you must have procurers,
yea you must have good pay masters, or else the old proverb must be true: No
penny no pater noster. As touching the place of Chrysostom I have showed
already by his own interpretation, that although he allow prayers for the dead
used in time of the celebration which he calls sacrifice: yet he allows no
sacrifice in deed, but only a thanks giving in remembrance of the sacrifice
of Christ. But where he says it was decreed by the Apostles that in the
celebration of the holy mysteries, a remembrance should be made of them that
are departed, he must pardon us of crediting, because he can not show it out
of the acts and writings of the Apostles. And we will be bold to charge him
with his own saying Hom. De Adam and Heua. Satis sufficere credimus quicquid
secundum predictas regulas Apostolica scripta nos docuerunt, vt prorsus non
opinemur Catholicum quod apparuerit prefixis sententijs contrarium: we think
it suffices enough, what so ever the writings of the Apostles have taught us,
according to the fore said rules, in so much that we count it not at all
Catholic, what so ever shall appear contrary to the rules appointed. And
again In Genes. Hom. 58. Vides in quantam absurditatem incidunt qui diuinae
scripturae canonem sequi nolunt, sed suis cogitationibus permittunt omnia. Thou
see into how great absurdity they fall, which will not follow the canon of
holy Scripture, but permit all things to their own cogitations, but if we be
further urged we will allege that which he says, In Euan. Joan. Hom. 58. Qui
sacra non vtitur Scriptura, sed ascendit aliunde: id est, non concessa via, fur
est. He that uses not the holy Scripture but clymeth an other way, that is by
a way not allowed, is a thief. We may be as bold with Chrysostom, as he said
he would be with Paul him self, in 2. ad Tim. ho. 2. Plus aliquid dica, ne
Paulo quidem obedire oportet, si quid dixerit proprium, si quid humanum, sed
Apostolo, Christum in se loquentem circumferenti. I will say somewhat more, we
must not be ruled by Paul him self, if he speak any thing that is his own,
and any thing that is humane, but we must obey the Apostle when he carries
Christ speaking in him. Wherefore seeing it is certain by testimony of Justinius
Martyr, that there was no mention of the dead in the celebration of the Lords
supper, for more then an hundredth years after Christ, we must not believe
Chrysostom without Scripture, affirming that it was ordained so by the
Apostles.

That the practice of any point in religion makes the most open shevve of the
fathers faith. And that all holy men have in plain words and most godly
prayers uttered their belief in our matter. CAP. IX.
1 ANd I take the open practice of any point, to be a more pithy protestation
of a man's faith, then by words can be made. Therefore if a man were doubtful
either of the truth of any article, or of the meaning of some doctors words,
look the same man's practice, and it shall put him out of doubt thereof
straight ways. as for an example: seem some words of S. Augustine to make
for the sacramentaries heresy, that Christ is in the honorable sacrament but
by figure? or Theodoretus, or any other ancient fathers declaration? are their
words doubtful to the reader? leave the words then, if thou sincerely seek
for truth with out contention, and seek out if thou can, some practice of
those same men, and that Church where they lived, for the same point. But what
way of work in this matter consisting in doctrine, may assure us of their
belefe, of whose words we doubted before? Mary sir this: Theodor* dial. 2.
Aug. super psalm. 98. Dionis. ecclesiast. hierarch. cap. 3. Basil. de spiritu
Sanct. cap. 17.
look how they behaved them selves in the receiving of it, in the ministering
of it, in the careful keeping of it, whether they did adore it with godly
honor, whether they solemnly showed it to the people to be worshipped,
whether they praide by solemn and formal words unto it, whether they taught
their children to call it God and Christ: yea so far that Augustine affirms
that the children in his days till they were after instructed, thought that
God appeared in the shape of bread: as all these yongers, seeing the honor
and reverence of their elders, Lib. 3. de Trin. c. 10.
and them selves nurtered to hold up their hands and knock their breasts,
must yet needs meruail how these outward forms came to so holy an use.
further whether the Christian people were not sclaundered for worshipping and
doing sacrifice to Ceres and Bacchus, Lib. 20. contra Faustum cap. 13.
when the wicked infidells saw their behavior toward the holy Host:
whether it was not used in working of miracles, in driving away devils, in
dangerous times of tempests, of traveling, of sickness, and in other
necessities. Well these be plain practices, no heretic can deny but they
have been so used of the whole Church of God, with many such other like in that
holy action: which can not in any case stand with bare bread, or any other
way of presence, but only the proper, true, and bodily presence of Christ's
own person. A doctors words may be misconstrued, may be picked out of place:
may be writhen and wastred by false teachers, but a man's example can not
lightly be misconstrued. And therefore heretics, whose purpose is always by
sutteltie to deceive the simple, will never make discourse by the practice of
the Church, or exercise and example of the ancient learned men through out the
Church of Christ: having enough for their meaning, to rack a place or two out
of the fathers whole works, that may seem to the ignorant to set forth their
error. So if thou would know whether that place that our adversaries
impudently do allege out of Gregory the great, against the sovereignty of the sea of Rome, was in deed written for their seditious purpose, behold the
practice of the same father, and thou shals find him self exercise
jurisdiction, at the very same time when he wrote it, in all prouincies
Christianed through out the world: both by excommunication of bishops that
governed not well, by often citation of persons in extreme prouincies, by many
appeals made unto him, by continual legacies to other nations, sent either to
convert them to the faith, or to govern in their doubtful affairs, and by
all other exercise of spiritual jurisdiction. Is it not now a very false
suggestion to the poor people, that this blessed man in so plain vtteraunce
of his meaning by works and not by words, should yet be brought as a
witness to condemn him self? though the words being well understand make
for no such meaning in deed, as by others it has been sufficiently declared.
The like impudency it is, to allege S. Bernarde against the Mass or the
presence of Christ in the blessed Sacrament. Good man I dare say for him, he
said Mass every day, if he were well at ease: For other business, did not
commonly let them in those days, from that work of all other most necessary.
So the reciting out of S. Ambrose for the improuing of invocation of holy
Saints, is no more but an abuse of the simples ignorance: knowing well, that
he and all other of that time did practice prayers both often to all holy
martyrs, and sometimes peculiarly to such, whom for patronage they did
especially chuese of devotion amongst the rest. I speak not this, that any
might hereby judge the doctors words to stand against their own deeds: but
that every man may perceive, that where the works and practice of all men be
so plain, their words in some one place found dark, can not by any means be
prejudicial to that truth which in all other placies they plainly set forth
by words, and by the evident testimony of their own practice, to the world
proteste the same. Therefore I would exhort all men in Christ's name, for
their own saluations sake, to take heed how they give credit to these
libelles containing certain wrasted places out of the doctors works, against
any truth, which by the further discourse of usage and practice, they are not
hable before the learned to justify. And therefore that all mistrust of untrue
dealing may be far from us, I will, as I said, let them have the feeling
and handling of our cause thoroughly. They shall behold in examples of most
noble personagies, both for their name, virtue, and learning, the peculiar
practices in praying and Mass saying for the dead both in the ancient Greek
and Latin Churchies.

CAP. IX.

1 Now shall we have the practice and examples of the old fathers, concerning
sacrifice and prayer for the dead. And here M. Allen before he comes to the
matter, makes much a do to show how much more certain, the practice is, then
the words of any doctor: because the words may be mistrusted, or wrested, the
practice can not be altered. As though he could show us any practice, but that
which is uttered in their words, in which if there be any obscurity or
improprietie, there shall be as great controversy of their works as of their
doctrine, as they used the name of sacrifice in their teaching, so they use it,
in declaring what they did practice according to their teaching. And therefore
it is not worth a straw that M. Allen thinks, we may know their meaning
rather by their practice then by their words: except he could either in
picture, or in vision, describe unto us every thing that they did. But let us
consider the examples of those things, which he brings in to prove that
practice is more certain then words. First he can not deny, but the words of
Augustine and Theodoretus stand with us, that the sacrament of Christ's supper
is a figure of his body and blood and not the same naturally. But the practice
must expound the words, not to stand with us. For they did so carefully keep
it, adore it, show it to be worshipped, prayed to it, yea they taught children
to call it God and Lord, which they would not have done, if they had not
believed it to be the very body of Christ. For this is cited 1. Theodoret. Dial.
2. in the margent. His words be not set down because they be directly against
transubstantiation, and nothing favoring the gross imagined presence of
Christ's body in the sacrament: for he calls the sacrament signa mystica, the
mystical signs, and the divine mysteries which represent the body of Christ,
that is a true body and not fantastical or absorpt of the divinity as the
Eutichians dreamed, wherefore it is plain that the adoration he speaks of,
is nothing else but the reverent estimation of the sacrament, to be that which
by Christ it is ordained to be, and not any knocking or kneeling as M. Allen
would have us believe. Augustine also upon the 98. Psalm is cited, belike to
prove the adoration, who in deed, allows the adoration of the body of Christ
whereof that is a sacrament, but neither can you prove out of that place, that
he would have the sacrament honored, nor that the sacrament is the very body of
Christ, but even in the same place speaking of the sacrament, he says in the
person of Christ, non hoc corpus quod videtis manducaturi estis, and bibituri
illum sanguinem quem fusuri sunt qui me crucifigent. Sacramentum aliquod vobis
commendaui, spiritualiter intellectum viuificabit vos. You shall not eat this
body which you see, not drink this blood which they shall shed, which shall
crucify me. I have commended to you a sacrament, which being spiritually
understood shall quicken you. As for Dionysius because he is a cou^terfect
antiquity I will not vouchasafe to answer him. Basil in his book de
spiritu sancto, cap. 27. has these words: The words of invocation when the
bread of thanks giving, and the cup of blessing is showed, which of the
holy Apostles has left us in writing? Before we go any further, I will take
this by the way, that what so ever it was, that he spoke of, it is not tought
by the scripture, no more then many other ceremonies that he rehearses in the
same place. Howbeit it is plain enough, that he means not, that the words
of invocation were said unto the bread, or the cup, but unto God who was
called upon to bless those his creatures, that they might be sanctified to the
holy use of Christ his institution. The showing of the bread and the cup*
was not to adore it (as M. Allen dreameth) for then he would have called it
the body and blood of Christ, but either to stir up the people to pray
effectually, or to admonish them that all things were ready that they might
prepare them selves to communicate. And whereas he alleges out of Augustine
De Trinit. lib. 3. cap. 10. that children were taught to call it God and
Christ, he shamefully abuses his reader, for no such thing can be gathered
out of Augustins words, which are these: Illas etiam nubes etc. Now as
touching those clouds or fire, how the Angels did make them, or took them
upon them to signify that which they did bring message of: Although the Lord
or the holy Ghost was showed in these forms what man a live does know? even as
young children know not what is set on the altar, and when the celebration of
piety is finished is spent out, whereof or how it is made, whereof it is taken
into the use of religion? And if they should never learn by experience of
their own, or of others, and never see that show of things but in the
celebration of the sacraments, where it is offered and given and said unto
them with most grave authority whose body and blood it is, they would believe
nothing else but only that the Lord has appeared to the eyes of mortal men
in that liknesse, and that out of such a side being stricken that the same
liquor did flow. These words are plain that Augustine affirms that no man
knows more of those shapes, in which the Angels did appear, then young
children would imagine of the presence of Christ in the sacrament, if they were
not otherwise instructed, then in telling them when they receive it, that it is
the body of Christ. whereby the clean contrary to that which Allen affirms is
plainly gathered, that children were otherwise instructed, first by
experience, because they saw bread else where, then in the celebration, and
also by doctrine, when they were able to understand that it was not the Lord
him self in the shape of bread, but only a sacrament and representation of
him. And by the way note here, one practice of a notable error in Augustines
time, that the sacrament of the Lords supper was given to children, which wist
not what it meant, contrary to the word of God, who requires men to examine
them selves before they receive it, wherefore if any other practice were in his
time, or allowed by him contrary to Gods word, we are no more bound unto it,
then unto this, which even the Papists them selves will confess to be
erroneous. Finally what the Christians did by that they were sclaundered with
all, is a sorry proof, they were sclaundered to have worshipped an Asses head,
to kill men and eat them, to use all manner of beastlines in their metings. The
rest of the practice that M. Allen names, with out show of proof, I pass
over as unworthy of answer. The practice of Gregory, although it were much
more modest then of his successors, yet can it not be excused, but it was
contrary to his doctrine whereby he reproved an other in that he was not
altogether clear him self. Bernarde was but of late time, wherefore although
he might note some abuses of the Mass, yet he might also say it him self,
but how often I can not tell. Touching Ambrose, which was sodeinely made a
bishop, before he was a perfect Christian, if some steps of hethenishe
invocation or rethoricall apostrophees and prosopopees appear to be in him,
and some other also about his time, yet was not that generally received of all
the Church in his time, nor agreeable to the doctrine of S. Paul who shows
that we can invoke none but him in whom we believe, which to all true
Christians is God only.

2 And where may we better begin, then with this famous Chrysostom? he bare
the last wittenesse with us for the relief of the departed by the prayers and
holy oblation, therefore the practice of that excellent benefit shall first be
showed upon him self. This blessed man therefore being banished, by the means
of the Empress Eudoxia, for the defense of the Ecclesiastical discipline, and
there in exile departing out of this world, was after her death by the happy
and gracious child Theodosius* Lib. 10. Histo. trip. ca. 18 and 20.
the younger, translated from his obscure resting place, to Constantinople which
was his own seat, there with meet honor to be buried, where with grace and
wonderful dignity he ruled the Church before. The History reports, that the
people of that city, as thick as men ever went on ground, passed the waters
of Bosphorus, and covered that cost wholly with light and lamp, with tapers
and torcheis to bring that blessed bishops body that was their own dear
pastor, home again. The which passing treasure, being with all reverence laid
up in the said city, then lo the gracious good Emperor, earnestly beholding
the grave of S. Chrysostom, Theodosius Iun.
made most humble prayers to almighty God, for his father and mothers soul,
the late Emperor and Empres: beseching him of pardon and forgiveness for
banishing that good Catholic bishop, because they did it of ignorance: and so
the words may well be taken, that he asks Chrysostom him self mercy also,
for his parents offense unjustly committed against him: and withal full kindly
prays for their deceased souls. And so being buried in his own Church, he
was then by Atticus a worthy man his second successor, written in the roll of
Catholic bishops to be praide for at the altar every day by name. Cum
Ioannitae (says Cassiodorus out of Socrates) seorsim apud seipsos sacra
solemnia celebrarent, 12. Lib. tripartit, ca. 2.
iussit vt in orationibus memoria Ioannis haberetur, sicut aliorum dormientium
episcoporum fieri consueuit. When Chrysostoms partakers said Mass by them
selves aside, Atticus gave in commandment that a memory should be had in the
prayers of the Church for him, as the custom was that all bishops after
their death should have. Here is now open practice of that which by words we
proved before, here is an evident testimony of the usage of the Greek Church
for the burial of bishops, and general custom of keeping their memorial in
the public prayers and service of the Church. It were not needful to recite
out of Eusebius the form of Constantinus his funerals, Eusebius. in vita
Constantini.
kept in the same Church with solemnity of sacrifice, singinge, lights and
prayers. Nor the burial of the Emperor Constantius: who as Nazianzenus
writes, was brought forth with common praises of all men, with singing,
lights, and lamps, 2 Orat. in Julian.
all the night long very honorably: with which things, says he, we Christian
men think it a blessed thing to honor the memories of our freindes departed.
And if the adversaries would here contentiously reason that these solemn
rites of Christian burialls be nothing profitable, or if the simple ask why
they be profitable, S. Chrysostom may instruct such as list learn, In 2. Cap.
ad Heb. hom. 4.
and correct the other that list reprehende in these words. Tell me says he
what all these festival lights in the burial of the deceased mean? what all
this singing of Hymns and Psalms signifies? to what end be so many priests
and musicians called together? to which in fine he thus answers: do we not
all these things to give thanks to God and everlasting glory, that he has
delivered the departed from the troubles of this mortal life? do we not this
to our comfort, and honor of the departed? And in the burial of the Noble
matrone Paula how the priests did sing, how the bishops of Jerusalem, Hierom.
Epitap. Paulae.
and of all Palestine and Syria for the most part carried torches, how the
religious both men and women, did the rites of the dirigies, how her alms
folks showed their cotes to procure mercy, even as they did at Dorcas
departure in the Acts of the Apostles, how they continued their singing and
saying seven days together at the Church in Bethleem where she was buried, S.
Hierom him self a true record thereof bears witness in the like words as I
have recited, and many more which the fear of weereing the reader causes me
full sore against my will, to omit. They so set forth not only the substance
of the thing, which stands in prayer and sacrifice, but also do prove
against the enemies of good order, that the smallest ceremonies that our
Churchies of late have used, were not lately taken up by our covetousness and
superstition, but with more abundance, and number, and continuance, and
solemnytie, practiced in the flour of Christ's Church, in diverse principal
parts of the world: as at Jerusalem and Constantinople: by the praising and
approving of the grauest fathers of our faith.

2 Why M. Allen? what a mockery is this? do you make brag in the title of
your chapter, that you will show the practice of all holy men in words and
prayers for the dead, and now begin your examples no higher then at
Chrysostomes translation, which was well near 400. years after Christ? The
people with great plenty of lights, brought Chrysostomes body to
Constantinople. Well this ceremony in carrying torches at burialls being taken
of the Gentiles, they used to honor the memory of them that were dead, as the
ceremonies of the Heralds are used for the same end. What more? The Emperor
prayed for his fathers and mothers souls, and as M. Allen thinks (but the
story says not so) he prayed to S. Chrysostom for them. What else? Atticus
caused mass to be said for him, that makes up all. But where is any mention
of mass or sacrifice of the mass M. Allen? Are you such a cunning
interpreter, to expound celebrare sacra solemnia to say mass? In deed such
interpretations will help you well to find that, which else you might seek
long enough in the old writers and go without for all your labor. It is all
one with M. Allen, to celebrate holy solemn service, and to say mass. But you
will say, memory was made of him in the prayers, so might there be and yet his
soul not prayed for* but how agree you with your self, M. Allen? your opinion
is that Theodosius prayed to him as to a saint in heaven, how then did
Atticus cause him to be prayed for as one lying in purgatory? I wisse you
forget your self to much to utter things so contrary, so near together. And
as for the funerals of Constantinus and Constantius, what so ever you say,
have no mention of Mass, nor sacrifice of Mass. In the burial of
Constantinus, there is mention of prayer for his soul according to the error
of the time, and in the funerals of Constantius, there were lights, but there
is also showed the use of them, as I have touched already together with the
necessity of some of them, because they were lighted in the night. The saying
of Chrysostom, with the example of the burial of Paula, show nothing either
of Mass, sacrifice, or prayer for the dead. And whereas you babble of the
rites of your popish dirige, Ieronym says, al was singing of Psalms and
giving thanks for her godly life and happy departing: Hebraeo, Graeco, Latino,
Syroque sermon Psalmi in ordine personabant. Psalms were song in Hebrewe,
Greek, Latin, and Syrian language, by course as there were diverse nations
that came to honor the solemnity of her funerals. Finally if your doctrine
of purgatory were true, yet Ieronym describes her to be so perfect a woman, as
no prayers needed to be said for her, her life was so full of good works, and
her end so full of faith. And therefore M. Allen, here is nothing for the
sacrifice of the Mass, whereof you made your promise to show the practice, in
the chief parts of the world, naming Jerusalem for one, when Paula was
buried at Betheleem and not at Jerusalem.

3 And now S. Augustine being of Aphricke, so far from the other in distance
of place, yet ronneth jointly with them in religion. He purposely writing of
the solemn rites of Christian funerals, in that golden treatise De cura pro
mortuis agenda, De cura pro mortuis agenda.
thus after long consideration of the whole cause determines: that the pomp
of burial, with all such solemnyties as there unto be in Gods Church joined,
is very seemly for that body which was the vessel of a Christian soul, and
an instrument or companion in well working: whereunto it shall be also united in
the resurrection, for to receive together the inheritance of the everlasting
kingdom. But the lack of these, where they be not arrogantly contemned, or
can not be had, is nothing hurtefull to the good, nor the having any thing
profitable to the wicked, as the examples of Lazarus and the Rich man may well
prove. Therefore, it is the sacrifice and prayers which properly do help or
relieve the departed. De ciuit. 1. Lib. c. 12. and 13.
Curatio funeris (says he) conditio sepulturae, pompa exequiarum, magis sunt
viuorum solatia quam subsidia mortuorum. Non tamen ideo contemne^da and
abijcienda sunt corpora defunctorum, maxim que iustorum and fidelium, quibus
tanquam organis and vasis ad omnia bona opera sanctus vsus est spiritus.
Curious provision for the burial, and the pomp of the solemn obittes, be
rather done for the solace of the lieue, then for help of the dead:
nevertheless the bodies of the departed, namely of faithful folks, may not
be contemned or cast forth, the which the holy Ghost used as vessels and
instruments of well working,

By all which things it may well be noted, that some things have been usually
practiced in funerals for thanks giving to almighty God, as Hymns and
Psalms: other some, for decent comeliness and solace of the living, as the
place of the burial, the lights, the ringing and such like? although even
these things proceeding of love and devotion, be after a sort meritorious to
the doers, and a help to them for whom they be procured, and good motions and
memories of man's duty. For which causies those and the like have been
uniformly used through out the whole Catholic Church from the beginning. But
the principal things perteining to the iustes of the departed, be prayers and
sacrifice, and other such like, whereby they are assuredly much proffited, by
release of their pains. So says S. Augustine in these words. Non
existimemus, Cap. 18. de cura pro mort.
ad mortuos pro quibus curam gerimus, peruenire, nisi quod pro eis, sieve
altaris sieve eleemosinarum sacrificijs, solemniter celebramus. Let us never
think that any other thing properly apperteineth to the relief of the
departed, saving the solemn sacrifice of the altar, alms and prayer. And
therefore as the said holy doctor confesses, The saints pray for the
souls in purgatory, and we pray unto saictes for them. Cap. 4. de cura pro
mort.
the worthiness of the place where man is buried of it self profits not at
all, but in respect of the holy prayers which be there rather made then else
where, and the patronage of holy martyrs and saints, to whom he nothing
doubts but intercession may profitably be made for the deceased: for which
cause, as it may appear by Paulinus, men were very desirous ever in the
primitive Church to be buried by some blessed martyrs body. And so must we
think also of burial by the reverent holy sacrament, that it wonderfully
helps man, not for the placeis sake (although the devotion of the desirer is
therein comme^dable) but because the living may there effectually commend the
departed to God in the time of the holy sacrifice, and may be put in
remembrance to call upon Christ's blessed person there present, for the soul
of that man, which with care and study laid his body in the hope of
resurrection, by the sovereign holy body that is already risen again. And
this was the cause that our forefathers from Christ's time till our days have
had respect and desire, as occasion served, to be buried there, where by
order, prayers and sacrifice were daily had, and where the patronage of holy
saints might best be procured. It is a high point of wisdom surely (good
reader) only to see what godly wisdom our fathers used, in show of their
zele, faith, and Christianity. As it is an intolerable arrogance and a
singular sign of infidelity to laugh at, and blaspheme those things, whereof,
not the prowdest heretic that lives, has any intelligence at all: Obcoecauit
enim eos malitia eorum. For their own malice has blinded them.

3 But let us now follow you into Africa. First you allege Augustine in his
book de cura pro mortuis agenda, wherein he is so full of doubts, that he
knows not him self, what to determine but that he will hold the common
opinion received in his time. But this pasteth (M. Allen) that you will content
your self with Augustines authority, that the pomp of burial, etc.
profits not the dead, but that you will have lights, ringing, etc.
proceeding of love and devotion, to help them, for whom they are procured. If
you may go beyond Augustine, why may not we come short of him? But in the 18.
chapter, he names the sacrifice of the altar, to be profitable to the dead.
This sounds somewhat like the matter, but if it be well marked, it makes
nothing for the propitiatory sacrifice of the Mass, for even in the same
place, he calls it the sacrifice of alms, which is but a sacrifice of
thanks giving. And that by this sacrifice he means not the body of Christ,
nor a propitiatory sacrifice is manifest in his book de fide ad Petrum
diaconum, cap. 19. where he says, that Christ offered him self for us, that
sacrifice whereby God was reconciled, and that the Church offered to Christ the
sacrifice of bread and wine in faith, and charity, which is a thanks giving
and memorial of his death. The body of Christ is not offered to him self, but
thanks giving is offered to him for the offering of his body for us. His
words are. Firmissime tene and nullatenus dubites, ipsum vnigenitum, etc. Hold
most steadfastly and nothing doubt then, that the only begotten son of God,
being made flesh, offered him self for us a sacrifice and oblation for a
sweet favor unto God to whom with the father and the holy Ghost by the
Patriarchs, Prophets and Priests in time of the old Testament, beasts were
sacrificed: and to whom now, that is in the time of the new Testament, together
with the father and the holy Ghost, with whom his divinity is all one, the
holy Catholic Church, throughout all the world, cease not to offer the
sacrifice of bread and wine in faith and charity. For in these carnal
sacrifices there was a figuring of the flesh of Christ, which he him self
being without sin should offer for our sins. But in this sacrifice there is
thanks giving and commemoration of the flesh of Christ which he offered for us
and of his blood which the same God shed for us. Now for the other point of
invocation of Saints, M. Allen affirms, that S. Augustine never doubts
but intercession may be made unto them for the dead, who so ever will take
pains to read the treatise de cura pro mortuis agenda, shall find nothing
else but doubts and questions of that matter, as cap. 5. Cum ergo matter
fidelis filij defuncti corpus desyderauit in Basilicam martyris poni, si quidem
credidit eius animam meritis martyris adiuuari, hoc quod ita credidit
supplicatio quaedam fuit, and haec profuit si quid profuit. Therefore when the
faithful mother desired the body of her faithful son departed to be laid in
the Church of the Martyr, if she believed that his soul might be helped by the
metites of the martyr, this that she so believed was a certain supplication,
and this profited if any thing profited. Here Augustine doubts whether
supplications to the Martyr profit any thing or no. Moreuer he can not tell,
how the Saints departed should know our necessities or hear our prayers,
cap. 15. Proinde fate^dum est nescire quide^ mortuos quid agatur, sed dum hic
agitur, postea vero audire ab eis qui hinc ad eos moriendo pergant. Wherefore
it must be confessed, that the dead truly know not what is done here, while
it is a doing, but afterward do here it of them, which by death do pass
from hence unto them. Wherefore if we will have any thing unto them, we must
tarry until some dead may carry our passage, and it must be such a one also, as
knows our case, or else we are never the near. Possun^ and ab angelis qui
rebus quae aguntur hic praesto sunt audire aliquid mortui. It may be also that
the dead here some what of those Angels which are present at such things as
are done here. cap. 16. Quanquam ista quaestio vires intelligentiae meae
vincat, quemadmodum opitulantur martyrs ijs quos per eos certum est opitulari.
Although this question passes the strength of mine understanding how the
martyrs help them whom it is certain to be helped of them. These places and
the whole discourse of that book, does prove, that although Augustine were
willing to meinteine the superstition that was not thoroughly confirmed in his
time, about burialls and invocation of Saints, yet he has nothing of
certainety out of the word of God, either to persuade his own conscience, or
to satisfy them that moved the doubts unto him.

4 But leaving the things not principally intended, as sufficiently by use of
the Church approved, let us turn to the practice of the oblation and prayers,
in the dirigies of the ancient: that seeing them both pray and say Mass for
their dearest freindes souls, thou may be bold to use the same for thine.
That do I call Mass, which they call sacrifice: Because S. Hyerom uses it in
the same sense, in these words: Sunt qui de leuioribus peccatis cum quibus
obligati defuncti sunt post morte^ possunt absolui: Super 11. cap. Prouer.
vel poenis videlicet castigati, vel suorum praecibus and eleemosinis,
missarumque celebrationibus, etc. There be some, which after their death may
have absolution of their lighter offensies, in the debt whereof they passed out
of this life: either after just punishment for the same suffered, or else
through the prayers and alms of their freindes, with the celebration of
Masses. So says S. Hyerom, or else as some think, the reverent Beda. either
of their grave judgment weyeth more with me, then any one man's alieue. Well
therefore, Mass, oblation, Mass alvvaye said for the departed.
or sacrifice, call it as you will, all is one for our purpose, and like hated
of heretics: how so ever it be named, it was practiced with prayers for the
rest of the departed through out the Christian world. S. Ambrose exhorts
other men to do it for their freindes, he did it for his own. VVriting
therefore a letter of comfort to one Faustinus that over much bewailed the
death of his sister, thus with comfort he gives counsel: Non tam deplora^dam
quam prosequendam orationibus reor, Ambros. epist. 8. l. 2.
nec maestifica^dam lachrymis tuis, sed magis oblationibus animam eius Domino
commendandam arbitor. I suppose thy sisters case should not so much be
lamented, as she by thy prayers ought to be relieved: Thou must not sadden her
soul by tears, but by oblations commend her to our Lord. If the new
bishops were like S. Ambros. their teaching would not be contrary to his.
How many bishops now in England of the new gise, would follow this kind of
consolation by letters? How many would exhort their freindes to got Mass
said, or prayers for their lovers rest? So many as be like good Ambrose
surely would so do: that is never a one: make their account as near as they
can. But will you see how he practiced upon his own prince the Emperor
Theodosius? Da requiem perfecto seruo tuo Theodosio, Super obit. Theodosij
Imperatoris.
requiem quam praeparasti sanctis tuis. Illo conuertatur anima eius vnde
descendit: dilexi, and ideo prosequar cum vsque ad regionem viuorum, nec
deseram, donec fletu, praecibus, inducam virum quo sua merita vocant, in montem
Domini sanctum. Give rest good Lord unto thy good servant Theodosius, even
that rest which thou have prepared for the holy Saints. Let his soul ascend
from whense it came. I loved him, and therefore I will prosecute him unto the
land of the living, I will never leave him, till with tears and prayers I
bring that man according to his deserving, to the holy hill of God. This man
knew his duty toward his prince, whom he loved a lieue, and forsook not
being dead: Super obitu Valentiniani.
So did he pray and offer for Gratianus and Valentinianus: so did he use the
same for his own dear brother the worthy Satyrus, in these words much to be
noted. Now Lord almighty to thee do I commend the good soul of my brother
Satyrus now lately departed, to thee O Lord do I make my oblation, accept I
besich thee this due office of a brother, In oratione funebr. super Satyr.
and mercyfully look upon the sacrifice of a priest. See lo, this good father
used of brotherhood prayers, and because he was a priest he did sacrifice, in
that respect, and said Mass for his brothers souls rest. Whom in his
funeral oration he sets forth with many singular praises and commendations,
especially that he was both Christianed and buried in the unity of the Roman
Church, that is to say (as him self expounds it) of the Catholic faith.

4 All this while we have weighted for dirige, and Mass, according to your
promise, and now belike we shall have it out of S. Hieronyme I trow. But who
will grant you, that the comme^tary upon the proverbs out of which you
allege your testimony, is Hieronyms work? The old coppies in parchment, as
Amerbachius confesses, declare that Beda was the author of it. Which you can
not utterly deny your self, but all is one with you. But so it is not with us,
to brag of S. Hieronyms authority and then to allege one that is 400 years
younger then he. But either of their judgments weyeth more with you, then any
one man's a live, beware what you say, do you not esteem the Popes judgment
more than either Bid or Ieronym? but perhaps you will answer me that the Pope
is no man. Nec Deus es nec homo quasi neuter es inter vtrumque. Thou art
neither God nor man, but a neuter between both, you know who writ this verse
unto the Pope, and how it is allowed for catholic in the book of the Popes
canon law. Well passing over Bid, we will come to Ambrose, who in deed
allows prayer for the dead, as it was a common error in his time, but not
the sacrifice of the Mass, in that sense the Papists do. I have showed
before, how improperly he uses the name of sacrifice, as in his book de
virginibus, lib. 1. Virgo matris hostia est, cuius quotidiano sacrificio vis
diuina placatur. A virgin is the oblation of her mother, by whose daily
sacrifice the wrath of God is pacified. But speaking expressly of the
celebration, he shows that Christ is not offered but by him self, and that
the oblation which is here made of him is but in an image and representation
Officiorum cap. 48. Hic in imagine, ibi in veritate vbi apud Patrem pro nobis
quasi aduocatus interuenit. Here he is offered in representation, there in
deed, where he makes intercession for us with the father as an advocate. As
for the oblations which he names in the 8. Epistle to Faustinus, be nothing
but prayers. For as he does but vary his words, where he says weeping and
mourning which are all one, even so it is all one where he says prayers and
oblations. And whereas you say there are none of our new Bishops will follow
Ambrose in such kind of letters, they can show better reason not to follow him
where he went amiss, then your popish Prelates can show not to follow him
where he writ well. which of your Prelates will follow him in his commentary
upon the epistle to the Romans? where he so often affirms that a man is
justified before God by faith only. Or in his commentary upon the Apocalypse,
where he interprets the whore of Babylon to be the city of Rome, or where he
affirms that not Peter but the faith and the confession of Peter, is the
foundation of the Church: and that the primary of Peter was a primacy of faith
not of honor, of confession not of authority, or higher order. De incarnat.
Dom. cap. 4. and 5. or in an hundredth places of his writings beside. The other
places that you allege out of Ambrose and Paulinus, do not so much help your
purpose with prayer for the dead, as they are contrary to your doctrine
concerning purgatory. For Ambrose praying for Theodosius, calls him a perfect
servant of God, but you hold that perfect men come not at all in purgatory,
and therefore you have qualified the matter by translating perfecto famulo to
thy good servant. Gratianus was not baptized, and therefore by your doctrine
he should not come in purgatory, but strayt to hell As for the words that
Ambrose speaks of oblations for his brother Satyrus, you do shamefully wrest
them contrary to his meaning. For he was so far of from believing his brother
to be in purgatory, that he prays to him as a Saint in heaven, and the
oblation and sacrifice that he offers to God, is the soul of his brother,
and not prayers or masses for his soul. Tibi nunc omnipotens Deus inno xiam
commendo animam, Tibi hostiam meam offero, cape propitius ac serenus fraternum
munus, sacrificium sacerdotis, haec mei iam liba praemitto. To thee now O
Almighty God I commend his innocent soul, to thee I offer my sacrifice,
receive mercifully and favorably this gift of a brother, and sacrifice of a
Priest, this sacrifice as a part of my self, I now send before me. By which
words as it is evident that he means not the sacrifice of the mass, so it
is manifest how licentiously he used the name of sacrifice and oblation, that
we may know when he speaks of the sacrifice of the body of Christ, he means
not so grosely as the Papists take it and use it them selves.

5 Paulinus one of the same time and Bishop of Nola, declares him self to be
of the same faith, by the like practice. He prays bitterly him self for a
brother departed, and besecheth Amandus, a holy man of his acquaintance, to
join with him for the help of the departed soul. By his words the pain of
Purgatory is noted, and the benefit of our prayers is proved* thus he says.
Impense rogamus, vt quasi frater vnanimos fratres iuuans, In Epist. 1. ad
Amandum.
and hanc meritis fidei tuae mercedem accumules, vt pro eo infirmitati nostrae
compatiaris, and orandi ab ore conspires, vt misericors and miserator Deus, qui
facit omnia in coelo and in terra, and in mari and abyssis, refrigeret animam
stillicidijs misericordiae suae per orationes vestras, quia sicut ignis
accensus ab eo ardebit vsque ad inferni nouissima, ita proculdubio etiam ros
indulgentiae inferna penetrabit, vt roscido pietatis eius lumine, in tenebris
ardentibus aestuantes refrigeremur. I heartily beseeke ye, that as one brother
helping an other, you would increase the deserts of your holy faith, by
taking compassion with me, and joining prayers with me for the departed soul:
that the God of pity and compassion, who works all things in heaven and
earth, in the sea and the depthe, would at the contemplation of your prayers,
refresh and cool his soul with some drop of his mercy. For as the fire
kindled by him will burn to the bottom of hell beneth, so doubtless the dew
of his grace and mercy, shall pass down to the neither parts, that by the
comfortable lovely light of his piety, the souls broyling in burning
darkness may be refreshed. And writing also to Delphinus, he alludeth to the
fervent heat that the rich man suffered in Hell when he craved for Lazarus
help. And prays him to refresh the man's soul deceased, Epist. 3.
with some drop of pity, and his holy prayers. This man was very dear to
Paulinus in his life time, for whom he was so careful after his death. he
doubted not of his salvation, though (as he says) he went out of this world a
debtor, and therefore feared him to be in great pain. So certain was the
doctrine of purgatory in the primitive Church, and so profitable were the
prayers counted, for the deceased in Christ.

5 The words of Paulinus importe, that he thought those whom he prayed for
were in hell, how so ever you dissemble it by translating inferna the nether
parts, and dare not rehearse his words unto Delphinus: where he judges them
that were prayed for to be. where the rich man was that desired refreshing of
Lazarus. For purgatory in those days was but even a breding, and yet not
thoroughly shaped out of prayers for the dead, and such other superstitious
ceremonies as were used about the departed.

6 But if you will have, an examplare, and a full waraunt of your duty and
devotion, with understanding the usage of the ancient Church, in such
abundance of many the like, you shall (I think) be fully satisfied for this
part by S. Augustine, Ex lib. 9. Confess ca. 11.13. and vlt.
in the goodly history of his mothers death, a blessed woman and worthy of
such a son. Her name was Monica, well known in Gods Church, and numbered
amongst the saints. This good matrone provided especially, by her testament
that she might not be forgotten at the altar of God, when the names of the
faithful departed were in the sacrifice remembered. For that was common in all
Churchies, as partly is, and yet shall be better declared anon, The which her
worthy will, her son Augustine so allows, that he sets it forth in the
ninth of his confessions to her eternal memory, in these words. My mother
(says he) when the day of her passing hense was now at hand, much regarded
not how her body might curiously be covered, or with costly spice is powdered:
neither did she count upon any gorgious tumbe or sepulcre: these things she
charged us not with all. But her whole and only desire was, that a memory might
be kept for her, at thy holy altar good Lord. Note the whole History, and
fear not to follovv it.
at which she missed no day to serve thee: where she knew the holy host was
bestowed, by which the bond obligatory that was against us, was cancelled.
Mark good reader as we go by the way, what that is which in the blessed
sacrifice of the altar is offered, how clear a confession this man and his
mother do make of their faith and the Churchies belefe, concerning the blessed
host of our daily oblation: behold that women in those days knew by the
ground of their constante faith, that which our superintendents in their
incredulity now a days can not confess. Consider how careful all virtuous
people were in the primitive Church, both learned and simple, as to be present
at the altar in their life time, so after their death to be remembered at the
same. Whose worthy endeavors as often as I consider (and often truly I do
consider them) I can not but lament our contrary affection, which can neither
abide the sacrifice, the host, nor the altar in our days, and therefore can
look for no benefit thereby after the day of our death once come upon us, as
our fore fathers both looked for, and out of doubt had. But leaving the
peculiar consideration of such things to the good and well disposed, let us go
forward in the fathers paths, and see whether this so well learned a clerk
counted this zele of his old mother, blind devotion, as we brutes think of
our fathers holiness now a days. The cursed Cham has many children in our
days.
For which matter we shall find, that first even as she desired, the sacrifice
of the Mass was offered for her, not only for the accomplishment of her godly
request, but because the Church of God did that office for all that was
departed in Christ, as we read in sundry placies of this man's works, and as
in the same book of confessions he thus declares and testifies: (I leave the
Latin, because the treatise grows to greater length then I was aware of, at
the beginning, if I corrupt the meaning or intent of the writer, let my
adversaries take it for an advantage) thus he says therefore. Neither did I
weep in the time of the prayers, when the sacrifice of our price was offered
for her: Cap. 13. lib. 9. and vltimo.
not yet afterward when we were at our prayers likewise, the corpse standing at
the grave side, etc. Whereby every reasonable man must needs acknowledge that
both prayers and sacrifice was made for her, as her meaning and godly request
was before her passage. she being thus therefore brought home with supplication
and sacrifice solemnly, was not yet forgotten of her happy child. But
afterward he thus very devoutly makes intercession for her quiet rest: M
Grindall look in your grammar what figure S. Augustine used he^^.
Now I call upon thee, gracious Lord, for my dear mothers offensies, give
ear unto me for his sake that was the salve for our sins, and was hanged
upon the cross: who sits on the right hand of God, and makes intercession
for us, I know she wrought mercyfully, and forgave those that did offend her:
and now good God pardon her of her offensies, which she by any means after
her baptism committed, forgive her merciful God, forgive her, I humbly for
Christ's sake pray thee, and enter not into judgment with her, but let thy
mercy pass thy justice, because thy words are true, and have promised mercy
to the merciful. And in the same chapter a little afterward, he thus both
prays him self for her, and earnestly inuiteth other men to do the same, in
these words: Inspire my lord God, inspire thy servants my brethern, thy
children and my masters, whom with will, word, and pen I serve, that as
many as shall read these, may remember at thine altar thy hand maiden
Monica. And her laite husband Patricius, through whose bodies, thou brought me
into this life and world. Thus was that holy matrone by her good child made
partaker after her death, of the thing which she most desired in her life. And
him self afterward in his own see of Hippo in Aphrike, had sacrifice said
for him at his departure, though the day of his death fell at the pityfull
havoc, which the Vandalles kept being Arians in those parties, commanding
the christian Catholics to be buried with out service as I said before. This
blessed Bishop departing out of this life in the besiege of his own City, had
notwithstanding, oblation for his rest, as Possidonius writing his life, and
present at his passage, does testify. Augustinus, Possidonius in vita August.
membris omnibus sui corporis incolumis, integro aspectu atque auditu, nobis
astantibus and videntibus, ac cum eo pariter orantibus, obdormiuit in pace cum
patribus suis, enutritus in bona senecture: and nobis coram positis, pro eius
commendanda corporis depositione sacrificium deo oblatum est, and sepultus est.
Augustine (says he) being sound in his limbs, neither his sight nor hearing
failing him, I being then present and in his sight, and praying together with
him, departed this world in peace unto his elders, being continued till a fare
age. And so, we being present, the sacrifice for the commendacion of his rest
was offered unto God first, and straight upon that was he buried. Thus lo all
these fat^e^s taught: thus they practiced, thus they lived, and thus they dyed:
none was saved then but in this faith, let no man look to be saved in any
other now.

6 I have sufficiently already declared what Augustine means by the sacrifice
of the altar, the sacrifice of our price, the sacrifice of bread, and wine,
and what so ever name he gives it beside. He means nothing else, but the
sacrifice of thanks giving for the only propitiatory sacrifice of Christ,
whereof the celebration of the sacrament is an effectual memorial, and lively
remembrance. In Celebration of which sacrament although the superstitious
error of that time allowed prayers for the dead generally, or special
remembrance of any in the prayers, yet is it not the belefe of S. Augustine,
nor of any other in that time, that the sacrament was the natural body and
blood of Christ, nor that the natural body of Christ was there sacrificed, as
a propitiation of the sins, either of the living or the dead. Seeing
therefore that he has so plainly expounded, what he means by the name of
sacrifice, as I have showed in the beginning of this chapter: it is to much
folly, upon these improper, but yet in that time usual terms, to go about to
build such blasphemous doctrine, as afterward g^ue to be maintained (perhaps
by occasion of such improper speech as then was used) of the sacrifice of the
Mass, and propitiation both of the quick and the dead. But that I may
consider these places particularly, whereof you make so great account: First
where you will us to take our advantage of your translation, I say you have
falsyfied Augustines words and meaning in the latter end of the first
sentence, to make fools believe that the private Mass was said in Augustines
days, as it is among you. First you call memoriam sui fieri ad altar which is
that remembrance of her should be made at the altar: that a memory might be
kept for her, as though she would have her son to be a chauntry priest to
sing for her, etc. Item you translate vnde sciret dispensari victimam sanctam,
where she knew the holy host was bestowed, as though she had meant nothing, but
that the host was laid upon the altar where as you should have said, from
whence she knows the holy sacrifice was dispensed or ministered, by which
words it is manifest that the communion was daily received not of the priest
alone, but of all them that were present. You are as bold as one of your
wisdom may be with such a man, to will M. Grindall to look in his grammar
for Augustins figures, but if I may be so bold with so profound a clearke as
you are, I would desire you to look in the etymologies of your grammar,
whether sui, be, for her, and vnde where. And if you can not prove these
significations, by that part of grammar which is called Etymology, that you
would defend them by that part of cunning where in you are better learned,
called Pseudologia: but to the matter of this testimony, we have in this first
remembrance of her, in the next we have the sacrifice of our price offered
for her. In deed this sounds more like the matter you would have: if S.
Augustine had not before in plain words expounded his meaning, which is
nothing else, but that the communion was celebrated, in ministration of which
there was special remembrance of her in the prayers, as there was of all
dead in the says a general memory. And if you ask me what figure S.
Augustine used, though I could refer it to diverse figures, yet it may best
be excused by Acyrologia, which is an improper kind of speaking, to call that
the sacrifice of our price, which was but a thanks giving for the sacrifice of
our price, which Christ only offered once for all upon the altar of the
cross. As Augustine him self when he speaks properly will confess. The
other two places prove nothing but prayer for the dead used by Augustine. But
that you may see all this was but superstition or will worship in him: he him
self in a manner confesses as much in the same place, where he prays most
earnestly lib. Con. 9. cap. 13. Et credo quod iam feceris quod rogo, sed
voluntaria oris mei approba Domine. And I believe that thou have done already
that which I pray for, but Lord approve this voluntary offering of my mouth.
His meaning is to allude to the free will offerings of the law, but in deed
he declares that he prayed not according to the rule appointed by God, but
according to the corrupt motion of his own mind. As for the place of
Possidonius proves plainly, that it was the sacrifice of thanks giving that
was offered for the commendation of the godly and quiet deposition or putting
of, of his body, which he before describes. In steed of which M. Allen
translateth, for commendation of his rest as though he had been out of rest,
and says, that not withstanding his holy life and godly departure, yet even
that day the city was taken, had oblation for his rest, But if the men of
those days had been of M. Allens opinion concerning purgatory, they would not
both have compted Augustine for a perfect man, and yet after his death to doubt
of his rest. Finally, where he boasts, that none were saved in those days,
but in this faith, he follows his own vain of lying, and not any proof of
ancient writing. For although they were in that time infected with some
errors, and that not so great as he charge them withal: yet was the faith
of their salvation in the only foundation Jesus Christ, and not in merittes or
Masses, pardons or pilgrimage, but in the only mercy of God. Tota spes mea
(says Augustine) non nisi magna valde misericordia tua. Da quod iubes and iube
quod vis lib. con. 10. cap. 29. Al my hope is nothing else but thy exceeding
great mercy. Give that thou commaundest, and command what thou will.

That we and all nations, received this usage of praying and sacrifycing for
the departed, at our first co^uersio^ to Christ's faith. And that this article
was not only con^irmed by miracle amongst the rest, but severally by signs
and vvounders approved by it self. And that the Church is grown to such
beauty by the fructes of this faith. CAP. X.
1 MAny more examples of these matters might be brought out of S. Gregory,
diverse out of Damascene, enowe out of what writer so ever you like best: such
choice we have in so good a cause, whereof every man's works are full. But I
will pass over the rest, that I may only report one history out of our own
Church, in the pure spring whereof, the Apostolic faith abounda^tly ishued
down from the principal pastors of Gods Church, with great spread of
religion, which since that time has bewtified our country in all Gods gifts
with the best. And amongst many evident testimonies of this truth, with the
practice thereof, both to be found in Gildas and in holy Beda, there is a
strange and a very rare example, not only for the plain declaration of the
usage of our Church in the first foundation of our faith, but for an open show
by miracle in this liefe, how God releaseth of his mercy, by the holy oblation
at the altar, the pains of the departed in the world to come. It shall be
comfortable to the Catholics, to consider this part of our belefe to be
confirmed by the miraculous working of God, as all other lightly be, in placies
where the faith is first taught. And that our whole faith which our nation
received of S. Augustine the monk, was so confirmed by the power of God, not
only our own histories do declare, but S. Gregory him self affirms it,
writing his letters to Augustine in this sense: Beda lib. 1. cap. 31.
that he should not arrogate any such wounderous works to his own power or
virtue: which then God wrought by him, not for his own holiness, but for the
planting of Christ's faith in the nation where those signs were shewde.

Beda therefore, Lib. 4. hist. cap. 21.
writes this notable history of a miracle done not many years after our
people was converted, in the beginning of his own days: that in a foughten
field betwixt Egfride and Edeldred, two princies of our land, it fortuned that
a young gentleman of Egfrides army, should be so grievously wounded, that
falling down both him self with out sense, and in all men's sightes stark
dead, he was letten lie of the enemies, and his body sought with care to be
buried of his freindes. A brother of his, a good priest and Abbate, with
diligent making search for his body, amongst many happed on one that was
exceeding like him (as a man many easly be deceived in the alteration that
straight falls upon the souls departure to the whole form and fashion of
the body) and bestowed of his love, the duty of obsequies, with solemn
memorialls for the rest of him, whom he took to be his brother deceased,
burying him in his own monastery, and causing Mass to be done daily for his
pardon, and souls release. But so it fortuned, that his brother Huma (for so
was he called) being not all out dead, with in four and twenty hours came
reasonably to him self again: an^ gathering with all some strength, rose up,
washte him self, a^^ made means to come to some freinde or acquaintance,
whe^^ he might sallue his sores, and close his wounds again: But by lack of
strength to make shifte, and by misfortune, he fell into his enemies hands:
and thereby the Capitane examined of his estate, he denied him self to be of
name or degree in his country. Yet by the likelyhoods that they gathered of his
comely demeanure, and gentleman like talk, which he could hardly dissemble,
they mistrust (as it was in deed) that he was a man of arms, and more then a
common soldier. Therefore in hope of good gain by his raunson, they thought
good after he was full recovered, for fear of his escape to lay yrons upon
him, and so to make sure work. But so God wrought, that no fetters could
hold him: for every day once at a certain hour, the bands brake loose with
out force, and the man made free. The gentleman maruailed at the case him
self, but his kepers and the captain were much more astonished thereat, and
straitely examined him by what cunning or craft he could with such ease set
him self at liberty: and bare him in hand, that he used characters or
letters of some sorcery and wichcrafte, with the practice of unlawful arts.
But he answered in sadness, that he was altogether unskillful in such
things. Mary (que he) I have a brother in my country that is a priest, and I
know certainly that he says often Mass for my soul, supposing me to be
departed and slain in bataile. And if I were in an other life, I perceive my
soul by his intercession should be so loosed out of pains, as my body is now
from bonds: The captain perceiving so much, and belike in some awe of
religion, seeing the work of God to be so strange, soulde him to a Londoner:
with whom the same things happened in his bonds loosing every day. By which
occasion he was licensed to go home to his freindes, and procure his ranson,
for charging him with diverse sorts of surest bands, none could salfely hold
him. And so upon promise of his return or payment of his appointed price, he
went his ways, and afterward truly discharged his credit. Which done by
freindship that he found in the same country, afterward returned to his own
parties, and to his brothers house: to whom when he had uttered all the
history of his strange fortune, both of his misery and miraculous relieuing,
he enquired diligently the whole circumstance, with the hour and time of his
daily loosing: and by conferring together, they found that his bonds brake
loose especially, at the very just time of his celebration for his soul. At
which times he confessed, that he was otherwise in his great adversities often
released also, Thus has that holy writer almost word for word, and at the
end he adds this: Multi haec a praefato viro audientes, accensi sunt in fide
ac deuotione pietatis, ad orandum, vel eleemosinas faciendas, vel ad offerendas
Domino victimas sacrae oblationis, pro ereptione suorum qui de saeculo
migrauerant. Intellexerunt enim quod Sacrificium salutare, ad redemptionem
valeret, and animae and corporis sempiternam. Hanc mihi historiam, etiam hi qui
ab ipso viro in quo facta est audiere, narrarunt. Vnde eam, qui aliquando
comperi, indubitanter historiae nostrae Ecclesiasticae inserendam credidi. Many
hearing thus much of the party him self, were wounderfully inflamed with faith
and zele, to pray, to give alms, and to offer sacrifice of the holy oblation,
for the delivery of their well-beloued freindes departed out of this life. For
they understood that the healthful sacrifice, was available for the
redemption of both body and soul everlastingly. And this story, did they that
heard it of the parties own mouth, report unto me. Where upon having so
good proof, I dare be bold to write it in my ecclesiastical history. And
thus much says Beda about eighte hundred years ago, when our nation being
but young in Christianity, was fed in the true belefe, by sundry wounderous
works of God.

CAP. X.

1 THe examples out of Gregory or Damascene, you may spare for your friends,
there is none of us, that makes great account of them, and yet neither Gregory
nor Damascene, were so gross in their error of prayer for the dead and
purgatory, as you: but where you brag of such choice, that you can bring
enowe out of what writer so ever we like best: you should passing well provide
for the credit of your cause, and the discredit of ours, if out of so great
store, you would help us with some thing out of Justinius Martyr, Irenaeus,
Clemens Alexandrinus, or any Authentical writer, which lived within one
hundredth years after the Apostles age. But when you begin with Chrysostoms
burial, and yet can not prove that which you pretend, all men may well
think, and they which have read the old writers know, you can not reach so
high for all your proud promises. But you will do that, which shall be as
good, you will show that we and all nations received these vsages of praying
and sacrificing for the departed, at our first conversion to the faith. you
shall do a great piece of work, and such as no Papist yet, was ever able to
do. You shall be a Cardinal if you can do it, yea you shall convert all the
Protestants to the Catholic Church of Rome. Go too man, begin. Take the
history of the Acts of the Apostles into your hands, in which mention is made
of the conversion of many nations to Christ's faith, show that the usage of
praying and sacrifycing for the dead, was received of them or any of them. Come
of quickly, or all the world will say you are but a prating merchant. But
you will begin with the conversion of our nation. Go to take Gildas into
your hand, which testifies that the Gospel was preached in this land in the
reign of Tyberius the Emperor: prove unto us that Paul or Simon or Thaddeus
or Joseph or who so ever first preached the Gospel in this Island, tought
prayers or sacrifices for the dead, Prove it I say, and the day is yours for
ever, if you prove it not, as neither you nor the devil for you is able to do
it: the world may see, your swelling bragges to be nothing but blown bladders
or bubles, in which there is nothing but air, as your words are nothing but
wind, yet are you not ashamed, to name Gildas, who, as about the first
conversion of the Britaynes to the faith he has no word of any such matters,
so where he complayneth of there ruin and decay, he accuses the priests of
his time for sieldome sacrificing, but of sacrificing for the dead he speaks
not, although the error of praying for the dead were received in other places
and whether this country were free from it I am not able to say, nor you to
prove, that it was infected with it. And therefore having nothing to show for
six hundredth yeare^ almost, in which this land was never void of Christians,
you come in at last with the peruersion of the Saxons, by Augustine that proud
cruel and unlearned monk, of whose pride and cruelty our stories do testify
at large: his ignorance and unskillfulness is bewrayed by him self, in his
writings to Pope Gregory. I force little what miracles he wrought to confirm
his errors, neither do I way worth a fly that long tale you tell, out of
Beda, of him that had his cheines fallen o^ in Mass time. That credulous and
superstitious age, had many such feigned miracles. 500 such tales are toulde in
vitas patrum, sermon. discipuli, legenda aurea, the festival etc. But make you
no more account of Beda his grave authority then of those feigned fables? suerly
I make this account of Beda, that if he had reported the matter of his own
knowledge, I would have credited the fact done, and yet tending to the
maintenance of false doctrine I would never the sooner have been moved from
the truth of Gods word. But when he reported it only of hear say, and that
not of the parties them selves that might have been witnesses, but of them that
heard this one man tell it by him self, it caryeth small credit with it. I
believe that such a tale was told to Beda, but what if they added some what to
it that told him, and what if he that told them lied? if Beda had not been
over light of credit him self, he should not have put it in writing, before
he had perfect intelligence, not only of the party him self, but also of that
Londiner and gentleman, and those that kept him in prison. But how so ever the
matter wear true or false, it is no proof nor prejudice against the truth of
God uttered in the holy scriptures. Let Augustine speak for us in his book ae
vnitate ecclesiae, against the Donatistes, which boasted of miracles, as the
Papists do, but Augustine will not allow them for sufficient proves with out
the authority of the scriptures, non dicat verum est quia ego hoc dico, aut
quia hoc dixit ille collega meus, aut illi collegae mei, aut illi episcopi vel
clerici, vel laici nostri, aut ideo verum est quia illa and illa* mirabilia
fecit Donatus vel Potius vel quilibet alius, aut quia homines ad memorias
mortuorum nostrorum orant and exaudiuntur, aut quia illa and illa ibi
contingunt, aut quia ille frater noster, aut illa soror nostra tale visum,
vigilans vidit, vel tale visum dormiens somniauit etc. Sed vtrum ipsi ecclesiam
teneant, non nisi diuinarum scripturarum canonicis libris oftendant etc, Let
him not say it is therefore true, because I say it, or such a one my companion
said it, or those my companions, or those our bishops, or clerks, or lay
men, or it is therefore true because Donatus or Pontius or any other did these
or those miracles, or because men pray at our dead men's memories and are
hard, or because these or these things do happen there, or because this our
brother or that our sister saw such a vision waking or dreamed such a vision
sleeping, etc. but whether they hold the Church or no, let them show none
otherwise but by the canonical books of the holy Scriptures. This place M.
Allen if it might take place with you, might serve to cut of all controversies,
not only of purgatory, but of the Church it self and what so ever is in
question between us. But you are wise enough, you will never venture your cause
upon that trial.

2 We must here stay a little, and ponder in our minds, how our forefathers
and people of our own land were taught in this article, That faith is the
true faith into which our nation was first converted from infidelity.
when they were first delivered out of Satan's bondage, and converted to the
fellowship of Christ's Church and let us nothing doubt, but that which our own
Apostles both by word and work, by miracle and by martyrdom first proved
unto us, is the very true and unfallible faith of our Christianity. For if
that were not true which at our first conversion was preached unto us, then we
received not the faith, but falsehoode at their hands: then the histories do
make a loud lie, in testifying we were turned to the Christian faith both at
that time and by such men, then it were no conversion from heathen Idolatry to
the worship of Christ, but it were a change from one superstition to an other:
and this latter so much worse then the other, because under the name of Christ
there were practice perpetual of execrable sacrilege, in instituting of a
sacrifice to the defasing of our redemption, in adoring bare bread as the
host of our salvation, in offering it up to God for the sins both of the
quick and dead, in practice of unprofitable prayers for the souls deceased,
with the like false worship of God in all points. Then their preaching was
highly to Gods dishonor, pernicious to the people, and damnable to them
selves. Then have all that ever ran the raze of that faith and doctrine, till
this day, which they taught, perished with them: then are they found false
witnesses, whom we have accounted as our undoubted, true and lawful pastors:
then God has purposely deceived us with feigned miracles full many, with
numbers of vain visions, then all our labor is lost till this day. The
holiness of so many good princies and priests is praised in vain, the blood
of Martyrs shed in vain, the exercise of all sacraments in vain: and because
all devotion consisted in our fathers days in the earnest zele of so false a
religion, as they think this to be, then the more devotion the farther from
Christ, the less religion, more near to salvation: then happy was he that was
the worst, and cursed was he that was counted the best: then is our case most
careful, then are we worse then all other nations, that never received the
name of Christ: then are we worse then we were before our conversion, then (to
be short) there is no religion, no Christ, no God, no hope of salvation.

2 I am content to stay with you, and ponder as much as is meet, the
conversion of the Saxones unto the faith of Christ. And first I say that you
reason both falsely and foolishly, to prove that either all opinions were true,
or else all false, that the Saxones received at there first conversion. For
though prayer for the dead, and other superstitious opinions then received,
were false, yet does it not follow, that all that then was taught them for
Christianity was false. For although Augustine had been void of all true
articles of the faith, yet the bishops and christian teachers of the Brytish
nation, in whose aid they required, and at last obtained, to the converting of
the Saxones, retained the foundation of faith Jesus Christ, and the only
sacrifice of his death. And this was the faith that was received even of the
Saxones, as appears by those homylies that yet remain in the Saxon tongue,
appointed to be read unto the people for their instruction, and namely in that
printed Saxone homylie, which was appointed to be read at Easter, where in is
declared not only the faith of the Church at that time, concerning the
sacrifice of Christ his death, but also that heresy of popish
transubstantiation, and the real presence of Christ's body in the sacrament is
pithily confuted. And therefore it is altogether untrue that you say (M. Allen)
that they did institute a sacrifice to the defacing of our redemption, as you
do: that they did adore the sacrament, as the natural body of Christ as you
do: or counted it a ^^opitiatory sacrifice for the quick and the dead as you
do: although they used unprofitable prayers for the dead, and many other
superstitions, Neither does it follow, that all that taught or believed those
errors, so long as they builded upon Christ the only foundation, have
perished, or that all they taught was false, because some thing was untrue: or
that God has deceived us with feigned miracles, which Satan has showed to set
up the kingdom of Antichrist even in the temple of God, with all lying signs
and wonders, 2. These. 2. To conclude no truth is false, no virtue is vice, no
good thing is evil, because all was not true, all was not virtue, all was not
good, that was received and practiced among them.

3 All which things if they repugne to common sense and reason, and to the
comfortable hope of our salvation, which we have received from God by Christ
Jesus, and the assured testimony of the spirit of God, that we be a part of
his chosen Church, and sanctified in his holy name by the word of truth and
life, which we by the ordinary ministry of man have received (signs and
wonders confirming their calling and doctrine) then this religion which they
planted first in our country, must needs be in all points both holy, true, and
accep^able unto God. Then as by that religion our fathers were ingraffed first
into Christ's body mystical, which is the Church, in which till this day they
have kept the high way to salvation, so who so ever forsakes this, or any
principal article or branch thereof, Note and take heed betime.
and so leaves that Church into which we first entered at our conversion, he
leaves assuredly life and salvation, and without all doubt everlastingly
perishes. Amongst which points of doctrine, our adversaries can not deny,
but the saying mass and offering for the dead, the alms and prayers for the
departed, was taught with the first, and proved by miracles with the rest. The
which either to deny were over much discredit of the antiquity, and plain
impudency: or else to attribute them to the devils working, were open
intolerable blasphemy.

3 There is nothing that you say in this part, or that you can say in this
respect, to prove that the religion here received was in all points holy,
true, and acceptable to God, because it was in some and those the chief, but
it may be said by the nations of the Goths and Vandalles, which were first
converted from hethenish idolatry, to the profession of the name of Christ, by
the Arrian heretics, to defend that there religion was in all points holy,
true, and acceptable to God, or by them that were converted by the Donatistes,
Nouations, or any other heretics. For although the Arrians were blasphemous
heretics, yet they tought many things truly and soundly concerning the faith
of christianity. And therefore no more then the religion of the Arrians, who
first turned those nations was true in all points, though it were in many: no
more I say was every article that was tought unto the Saxons, which were
converted by superstitious Romanistes, in all points true, notwithstanding
that many things and the principal were true: So much therefore as may be
justified by the word of God of that doctrine, is holy, true, and acceptable
to God, but that which is cont^ary to the doctrine of the holy Scriptures, is
neither received from God, nor Christ, neither has it any testimony of his
spirit, by what presumptuous words, o^ apperance of signs and wounders so
ever it be uttered. Neither is it any greater offense for the English men, to
renounce the error of praying for the dead, or abusing the communion to the
similitude of a sacrifice, or any other superstition, then or at any time after
received: then it was for the Goths or Vandalles, to forsake the heretical
and blasphemous opinions of the Arrians, by whom they were first persuaded to
reverence the name of Christ, or for any other that were turned by any
heretics, to forsake their first errors, and give place to the truth after
reueiled unto them. And whereas you affirm, that we can not deny, but that
Mass, offering, alms, and prayer for the dead, were taught with the first,
and proved by miracle with the rest: we may be bold to deny, that they were at
ye first taught so grossly, as they be now maintained impudently. And as for
miracles, I mean such as were prophesied, to be the efficacy of error in the
kingdom of Antichrist, we will confess, that these and like errors had
always great plenty to establish them, as they which had no authority out of
the holy Scriptures to approve them.

4 Yea this doctrine has brought the Church to this bewtifull order in all
degrees as we have seen. All the noble monuments, not only in our common
wealth, but through Christ's Church do bear sufficient testimony of our first
faith herein. This doctrine (as the whole world knows) founded all
Bishoprikes, builded all Churches, raised all Oratories, instituted all
Collegies, endued all Schools, mainteyned all hospitalles, set forward all
works of charity and religion, of what sort so ever they be. Take away the
prayers and practice for the dead, either all those monuments must fall, If
praying for the dead were taken away, there should no step of religion
remain.
or else they must stand against the first founders will and meaning. Look in
the statutes of all noble fou^dations, and of all charitable works, ever since
the first day of our happy calling to Christ's faith, whether they do not
expressly testify, that their work of alms and devotion, was for this one
especial respect, to be prayed and song for, as they call it, after their
deaths. Look whether your Universities protest not this faith by many a
solemn oath, both privately and openly. Look whether all preachers that ever
took degree in the University before these years, All our superintendents
are deeply and daily perjured.
are not bound by the holy Evangelists, to pray for certain noble Princes and
Prelates of this Realm, in every of their sermons at Paul's, or other places
of name. And so often as these preachers do omit it, so often are they
perjured: so often as they either eat or drink of their benefactors cost, so
often bear they testimony of their own damnation.

4 This and almost all the rest to the end of the chapter, might be as well the
expostulation of the heathen men with the Apostles, or them that first preached
the faith of Christ. Were there not as goodly building of temples, colleges,
and universities among the heathen as are among us at this day? but all they
were builded and endowed by men of a contrary religion, does it therefor
follow, that their religion was good, which erected such noble monuments, both
of their commonwealth and of their religion? Although it is most false that
Allen affirms, that this doctrine founded all byshopprickes, builded all
Churches etc. but admit it were so, what argument were that to prove that his
religion were true? Our stories testify, that at the first conversion of this
land to Christianity, in the time of Lucius, that arch flamines of the
Paganes, were converted to archbyshopprickes. And the Pagane flamines, were
converted to Bishopprickes, and so the temples of the Paganes were converted
into the Churches of the Christians. Gregory also instructs Augustine, how he
should convert the temples of the Idolatrous Saxons unto the use of the
Christian Churches. If these stories be true, then is it both false that M.
Allen says that his doctrine of Purgatory founded all Bishopprickes, Churches,
etc. and also that all Bishopprickes, Churches, colleges, etc. must remain in
the religion of them by whom they were first founded: he proceeds further to
charge all our superintendents of perjury, for not keeping their oath made in
the university to pray for the dead. Let them that have made such oath
answer for them selves, I am sure he lies of many and of the most of them,
for that oath was only in Oxeford for any thing that I have heard which
university has yielded few to that place as yet. But it is certain, that
your popish Bishops of Queen Mary's time, almost every one and the chiefest,
Bonner, Gardyner, Heth, Hopton, Therlebye, etc. were manifestly perjured,
against that oath, which they took in K. Henry and K. Edward his days, to
maintain the kings supremacy against the usurped power of the Pope. This all
the world knows and therefore ye may be ashamed to accuse our superintendents
of periurye, of whom I am sure you can name but a few that ever took the oath.

5 Answer me but one question I ask you: Whether the first authors of such
benefits as you enjoy in the Church at this day, A hard question proposed
to the Protestant.
either of bishoppricke, or college, or any other spiritual lively hoode, say
your minds unfeignedly, whether they ever me^t that such men, of such a
religion, of such life, of such doctrine, should enjoy that alms which they
especially ordained for other men, and for contrary purpose? say truth and
shame the devil, thought they ever to make room in Collegies for your wives,
me^t they ever to maintain preachinge against the Mass, against prayers for
their own souls? when they purposely upon that ground began so godly a
work? if they in deed never meant it, as I know they did not, and as your
own consciencies bear witness with them, and against your selves that they
did not, how can you then for fear of Gods high displeasure, against their
own wills, usurp those commodities which they never meant to such as you be.
A less good men, they thought to make freindes of wicked Mammon, and full
dearly, with both lands and goods, have they procured enemies to their own
souls. But if there be any sense in those good fathers and founders (as there
is) and if they be in heaven, as their good deserving I trust has brought
them, then surely they accuse you most justly of wicked injustice before the
face of God, for deluding the people, for breaking their wills, for usurping
their commodities, against their professed minds and meaninges. Or if they be
in hell (which God forfende, and yet you must needs so suppose, for raising
the monuments of such superstition) then blotte out their memory and names,
that have not only in their life maintained horrible abusies, but also after
their death have left such open steps of superstition, to all posterity.

5 The same question you may demand of the fathers of the primitive Church,
and in deed the same question or the like was demanded of them, and it is not
so hard to answer as you imagine. Many of these Churches and colleges, yea
the most notable cathedral Churches in England, were builded for preachers of
the Gospel and there wives to dwell in. Our stories are plentiful in that
point, that they were the first inhabiters of them and afterward, as
Idolatry, and superstition prevailed, were with all violence and injury
expelled out of them, and monks placed in their steed. If you be so skillful
in antiquity as you make your self, you can not be ignorant of this, which is
testified by Ranulphus Castrensis, Mathaeus VVestmonasteriensis the story of
Peterburghe and many other. Now whether any meant to maintain preaching against
Mass or prayers for their own souls, as we know not whether they did or no,
so we count it not material. Such liuinges as are appointed by the prince and
the law for maintenance of them that preach the Gospel, we may enjoy with
a good conscience without regard of their meaning, that first builded the
houses or possessed the lands. For we must not seek to learn our faith and
religion out of their meanings and intentes, but out of the word of God. And
whether the builders of such places, be saved or damned, it pertains not to
us to judge, nor to enquire. Such things as were well done of them, we would
commend if they were heathen men, but if any thing were evil in them, we may
not allow it, though they were never so good.

6 Suppose I pray you, which yet I would be loathe should come to proof or
pass, but suppose for all that, that with the taking away of this old faith
of praying and offering for the dead, all the works of the same faith which
ishued down from that fountain, might shrink with all, or return to the
founders again, because there is no rowme to fulfill their wills, how many
Churches and Chappelles, what Colleges or hospitalls, would our new no faith
bring forth? Would not every bishops wife build a Church think you, or
found a College in such a necessity, lest their husbands should be driven
to serve in a reformed french barn?

6 Now as touching your vain supposing, if all such lands as were given to
maintain prayers for the dead, or other like purposes, either good or
supposed to be good should reuerte to the heyers of their first founders, for
not performing the intent of the founders, perhaps few monasteries, colleges,
or hospitalles, In Italy, Spain, France, or Flaunders, should enioy^ one
half penny worth of their lands, or revenues. They meant, not only to be
prayed for, but to be prayed for, by men of honester conversation then the
greatest part of those cloysterers are. They are too well known to the
world, to be taken for that they be called, holy, religious, and chaste. But
suppose as you said, that we had no manner of Churches to assemble in, though
bishops wives be not able to build them, yet we doubt not but in the time of
peace and tranquillity, under godly princes, we should have as many and as
fair builded Churches as the religion of Christ has need of. Have you not
heard of the Churches builded in Orleans and Antwerpe and other places by the
professors of the Gospel. But if it were in time of persecution and tyranny, I
doubt not, but all godly bishops, had rather serve in a french reformed
barn, then in a popish gilded minster. And how so ever you jest like a
scornful caytifie, of those holy assemblees of Gods children in France,
there barnes are more like those caves and vaultes under the earth that the
old Christian bishops were content to serve in, before the time of
Constantine, the^ your Idolatrous Babylonicall temples, are like those princely
buildings, that by Constantine and other Christian princes were first set up
for the public exercise of Christian religion.

7 One of these mock bishops complains very sore in a book of his, Super
Aggaeum.
that men be not now bent with such zele and devotion to prefer Gods honor,
in maintenance of his Ministers, as they were in old time, and as
Constantinus, with the like christian Princies in the primitive Church, were.
But the good man marked not whereupon this cold devotion arises: he
considers not, that this is the fructlesse effect of so idle a false faith,
as his own lordship preaches: he would not see that the maintenance of Gods
honor, both by liefe, lands and goods, in the peculiar fructe of that
charitable loving faith, which the Catholics do profess: he weyed not well,
that the great grauntes of Constantinus, were made to Syluester Bishop of Rome,
and not to the married Bishop of Duresme. He remembered not, that the like holy
works of the noble kings of our own country, were practiced upon such as
would^ profess the truth, and serve the altar, and not upon false pastors,
that were destroyers of all altars. Such honorable portions were parted out for
Gods lot, and not taken from the world, to go to the worldely again. Think
you any man were so minded, to take from his own wife and children, either
lands or goods, to bestow on priests babbes or bedfellowes? No no God
knows: it was separated from them selves to the sacrifice, to the
priesthood, to the honor of Gods Church and ministry. The which things by
your own preaching (my lords) decaide, would you have the Prince or peoples
devotion toward you, as is was, and would be still, if you were like your
predecessors, and served the altar as they did? I wisse if the old S.
Cuthbert, Wilfride, and William, whom they compare in holiness to horsies (so
good is their opinion of their holy auncieters) had been of the same religion
that the occupiers of their roumes now be, all the Prelates in England might
have put their rentes in a halpeny purse. Come in again, come in for Christ's
sake, come in to the Church again, serve the altar, and then you be wort^^ to
live of the altar: follow our fathers, and you shall be loved as our fathers
were, confess that religion which our own Apostles first taught, and we all
have believed, and all the works of Gods Church protest to be true, and then
you shall be blessed of God, and honored of men.

7 You are a priuileged person as your own talk does declare, and therefore
you may prate what you list, if he be a mock bishop, which beside his
excellent learning, is also a painful and diligent preacher of the Gospel,
what are those unlearned Asses, and rechlesse ruffians of your sect, which
have nothing of a bishop but a rotchet and a myter, or because I will not
charge you with the worst, what are they which if they have some more learning
then the rest (of which number there are but few) yet they count it the least
part of their office, to preach and teach, which S. Paul counts to be chief
part of a Christian shepeheard and ouerseer. But to leave the name and come to
the matter, you mistake that godly man's complaint, if you think he means of
superfluous buyldinges of Synagoges, whereof you speak, or the unnecessary
enryching of Prelates, whereof you mean, when he speaks of the necessary
sustentations of a great number of Pastors, which through the ravening of your
gluttonous Monks, be robbed of their portions. And whereas you answer, it is
the fruit of so idle a false faith, as his lordship preaches, your mastership
lies. For that faith which he preaches, is both a true and a working faith,
which if it were as generally received, in this land, as it is truly preached
by him and others, the ministers of Gods word could lack no livings, as God be
thanked they neither do nor can lack sufficient for necessity, among so many
of high authority, nobility, and wealth, as do unfeignedly profess the
Gospel, and daily bring forth the fruits of a true, lively, working, and
only justifying faith. The Churches of France in time of greatest
persecution, yet have always liberally sustained their Pastors, And as for the
great grauntes, that Constantine made to Syluester Bishop of Rome, of such as
he made in deed, he made to married Bishops of Rome, as some of them were
since Syluester time, rather then unto Syluester the coniurer, Hildebrand the
hell hounde, Julius the warriar, or any that succeeded Boniface the third,
which beside their abominable life, were all heretics and Antichrists. And
touching such benefits as were received at the hands of princes, and noble
men of our cuntry, if they were meant to be bestowed upon ye professors of the
truth, and such as serve the altar of God, they are now bestowed according to
their founders intent. For they that serve the altar of God, must needs pull
down the aultars of idols. And if any portions that were taken from the
world, be gone to the worldely again, I mean the Abbeys and their lands, it
is the just plague of God upon them, that under hypocrisy of forsaking the
world, lived not like men of the world, but like devils of hell. And whereas
you ask again, if any man would take from his own wife and children, to
bestow upon Priests wives and children, I have answered before, that the
chief collegiat Churches in England, were first inhabited of married Priests,
which taught sounder doctrine and lived a more chaste life, then the Epicureous
Monks that succeeded them. I might ask of you M. Allen if they meant not to
mainteyne Priests wives and their children, whether they meant rather to
mainteyne Priests whores and their bastardes, Bishops brothells, and their
minions. Sodom and Gomor of Monks and Friars, it was neither Cutberd,
William, nor VVilfryde, wether they were holy or superstitious, but the
providence of God, that appointed such portion as the Church now enjoys, and
if the same by any means should be taken from them, yet God has appointed
that they which preach the Gospel, shall live of the Gospel. We are not so
careful of worldly liuelihood, as you (knowing your own disease) imagine that
we should be, that we would come into your filthy Synagoge, to win Cardinals
hatts, or Archbishops palls, some of us if they had sought worldly promotion,
by abusing their learning and wits, to ye maintenau^ce of your horrible
heresies, needed not to have come from you, to seek preferment among the
Protestants, which you know is neither so great, nor so easy to come by as
among the Papists.

8 But let them on think on these matters them selves. I will turn again to
my purpose, although I can not go far from my matter, so long as I am in
the beholdinge of that faith which our first preachers brought unto us at our
first conversion, or in any step of the antiquity: which we well perceive to
be the fructe only of that doctrine which we have declared, and an evident
testimony of so undoubted a truth. I think there is no way so certain for
the contentation of a man's self, in this time of doubting and diversity in
doctrine, as in all matters to have an eye toward the faith which we received,
when we were first converted. And for that point, I would wish that S. Bedes
history were familiar unto all men that has understanding of the Latin
tongue, and to all other if it were possible: for there shall they plainly
see, the first beginning, the increase, the continuance, the practice, the
works proceeding out of the catholic faith: fear not that is the truth, for
that was the first, and that was grounded by Gods word, and openly confirmed
by miracle. And that point must be considered not only for our own country,
but for all others that be, or has been Christianed. For into the self same
faith were they first ingraffed also: as by the peculiar practicing of every
good man toward his freinde and lover, I have already declared, and now for
the general usage of Gods Church the reader shall at large perceive, that
nothing may want to our cause, whereby any truth or light may be had.

8 The conclusion of your chapter, is a recourse to the beginning, you think
it is the suerest way, to look to that faith in all points, which this land
first received. If men should follow your counsel, as in some things they
should follow your faith which you now teach, so in many points and namely in
that which you count the chief, (the real presence of ye natural body of
Christ) they should go as far from that you teach, now, as you would have
them come near some things that were received the^. And whereas you wish that
Bedes history, for that purpose were made familiar, and some of you in deed
have taken pains to translate it into English, they that list not to be
deceived but to see into what faith all nations were converted, that were
turned by the Apostles, they were better to consider the word of God and the
history of the acts of the Apostles, which if you durst abide the trial
thereof, you would exhort men to read it, at least wise that understand
Latin. And if you were as zealous to set forth the glory of God as you are
earnest to mainteyne your own traditions, one or other of you which have so
long found fault with our translations of the scripture, would have taken,
pains to translate them truly your selves, as well as to translate Bedes
book, or else to write such bables, as you do M. Allen and all the pack of
you, but all in vayn^, to shadow the same, whose right should easily discuss
all clouds of dark doctrine and the more it is impugned, the more bright
shall it show, and the more it is compared with darkness the more glorious
it shall appear.

That in every order or usage of celebration of the blessed sacrament and
Sacrifice, through out the Christian world, since Christ's time, there has
been a solemn supplication for the souls departed. CAP. XI.
1 THerefore let us see how the Church our mother, of her piety uses general
supplication in all service, and solemn administration of the blessed
sacrament, even for those whose freindes have forgotten them: whose pains and
travel worldely men remember not: whose obscure condition of life or poverty,
would not suffer them to procure prayers, by their known deeds of charity or
alms. Those men I say, that do lack singular patronage of their freindes,
those has she remembered in the rites of celebration, used in all countries,
and in every age since the Apostles days. Which ordres of divine service,
as they have been diverse in form of words, so they perfectly and wholly agreed
in the substance of the sacrifice, in praying and offering for the dead, and
supplication to saints, as thou shall straight ways by their used order of
words perceive.

And as we go forward herein, ever let us bear this rule in mind. Quod
legem credendi, lex statuit supplicandi, in that sense speaks S. Augustine
often against heretics: the order of the Churches prayer, So says S.
Augustine often against the Pelagians.
is ever a plain prescriptio^ for all the faithful what to believe. And the
motherly affection that the Church bears toward all her children departed,
the said doctor thus expresses: De cura pro mort.
Non sunt praetermittendae supplicationes pro spiritibus mortuorum, quas
facie^das pro omnibus in Christiana and Catholica societate defunctis, etiam
tacitis nominibus quorumcu^que, sub generali co^memoratione suscepit ecclesia:
vt quibus ad ista desunt parents, aut filij, aut quicunque cognati, vel amici,
ab vna eis exhibeantur pia matro co^muni. That is to say in our tongue. Prayer
must not be omitted for the souls departed, which the Church has customably
taken in hand for all men passed in the Christian Catholic society, by the
way of a general commemoration, their names not particularly expressed: that
such things may be provided by our common kind mother, to all those which do
lack parents, children, kinsfolk or freindes, for the due provision of such
necessary duties. By this holy man's words we may see the difference betwixt
our own tender natural mother, and the cursed cruel step dame. The one
follows her children with love and affection into the next world, with full
sorrowful sighs, many devout prayers, and all holy works: which she uses to
their needful help: the other being but an unnatural steppemother, and all
the children of that adoulterous seed, has them no longer in mind then they
be in sight: whether they sink or swim she makes no account: she has no
blessing of her own, she hinders the mercy of other.

CAP. XI.

1 THe arguments of your chapters be like the gates of Lyndum which being but
a very little city, had exceeding great gates, in so much that Diogenes willed
them to shut them up, for fear least their city went out of them. Even so your
titles are merueillous large, but the matter of your treatise, is wonderful
straight. In the last chapter, we should have had prayer and sacrifice for the
dead, with the conversion of all nations, but a lack we could not obtain so
much, as the same altogether in one poor nation of the Saxons, and them (as
some think) not so much converted from Gentility to Christ, as perverted from
pure Christianity to superstition. Now shall we have every order of
celebration, sense Christ's time, with solemn supplication for the souls
departed, but our probation shall not begin until three or four hundredth
years after Christ's time, saving that for a preamble, we shall have a cople
of players come upon the stage, the one to counterfect Clemens the ancient,
the other to bear the name of Dionysius the Areopagite. But such disguised
doctors, have been already to often shifted out of their players garments, and
showed to the world in their own apparel, that any which has wit should not
be now deceived by them. And as concerning the diverse forms of Liturgies,
which you say do perfectly and wholly agree with your mass, as they be
corrupt, and falsely bear the name of them to whom they be inscribed, so
notwithstanding, being of some antiquity, they differ almost as much from your
mass, as your mass differs from our form of celebration of the communion.
But to follow you at the heels, as far as you dare go: I will agree with S.
Augustins rule, that the law of believing, should make a law of praying, but
faith if it be true, has no other ground but the word of God, therefore
prayer if it proceed of true faith, has no other rule to frame it by, but the
word of God. And though Augustine prove against the Pelagians, which allowed
the prayer of the Church, that the Church would not so pray, except she did
so believe, yet it follows not, neither does he mean to defend, that what so
ever the visible Church receives is true, if it be not agreeable to the word
of God, and therefore all other persuasions set a side, he provoke only to
the scripture, to try the faith and doctrine of the Church. Which rule if he
had as diligently followed, in examininge the common error of his time, of
prayer for the dead at that time, as he did in beating down the schism of
the Donatistes, or the heresy of the Pelagians, he would not so blindly have
defended, that which by holy Scripture he was not able to maintain, as he does
in that book de cura pro mortuis agenda and else where. And where as you
compare our Church to a step dame, and your Synagoge to a natural mother, we
may more justly wringe back that comparison upon your noses. For our Church
herein approves her self to be a natural mother, that she neither keeps
back from her true children that heavenly inheritance, which their father
has appointed them, nor dissembleth the eternal abdication of them that be
obstinate and rebellious. But your malignant church, shows her self to be a
cursed step dame, both in feeding the wicked with a vain hope of release of
pains after this life, and in tormenting the well disposed with a false fear
of pains which God has released, to al them that truly turn unto him. So
her terror tormenteth the vertous, deceives the wicked, her hope flattereth
the ungodly and disquieteth the well affected. The Church of God sends her
children into the everlasting blessing of their father in heaven, the Church of
Rome sends her bastards out of the blessing of God, not into the warm son,
but into whot burning cooles of purgatory to be thence delivered at leisure, as
she promises, but never to come out of hell fire as they shall find.

2 But let us vewe all the orders, that we find extant or used through the
Christian world, for the celebration of the blessed Sacrament and sacrifice,
which now commonly in our vulgar speech we call the Mass, and see whether as
Augustine said, there has not been in all ages an especial supplication of
the priest and people, for the dead as well as for the lieue. First S. Clement,
the Apostles own scholar, reports how they prescribed this solemn prayer in
their holy ministry for the departed: Constitut. l. 8. cap. 47.
Pro quiescentibus in Christo, fratres nostri rogemus. etc. Let us pray (says
the deacon) brethern, for all those that rest in peace, that our merciful
Lord, that has taken their souls into his hand, would forgive them all
their offensies, whether they were willingly or negligently committed: and so
having compassion upon them, would bring them to the land of the holy ones,
and happy rest with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: and all other that pleased him
from the beginning. where there is neither sighing, sorrow, nor sadness. And a
little after in the same holy actio^, the Bishop prays him self, in this
form. O Lord look down upon this thy servant, whom thou have received into
an other life: and pitefully pardon him if either willingly or vnweetingly he
has offended. Let him be guarded by peaceable Angels, and brought to the
Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, and the rest of all them that have pleased
thee since the world began. Thus reports Clement, being one of the Apostles
company, and continually present in the celebration of their mysteries.

2 S. Hieronyme in his cataloge of Ecclesiastical writers, reherseth all the
books that either were known to be written by Clemens, or said to be his,
and were not. First a profitable epistle to the Corinthians, being like in
style to the Epistle to the Hebrews. Also under his name went a second
Epistle, which was rejected of the ancients, like wise the disputation of
Peter and Appione written in a large treatise, which Eusebius in the third of
his Ecclesiastical story reproves. This is all that S. Hieronyme could
find concerning his writings. Who then has raised from hell these other
Decretall epistles and constitutions, that M. Allen and his companions would
flappe us in the mouth with all, being nothing else but impudent lies and foul
forgeryes.

3 Again, Eccles. hierarch. c. 17.
Dionysius Ariopagita of whom mention is made in the Acts (so ancient be the
records of our faith) has not only left in writing what he thought in this
matter, which had been enough, but also what the Church Apostolic in that
spring of religion and pure devotion, taught and ordained to be used, and that
by the Apostles prescription: whom he there tormeth the heavenly gides and
capitaines of truth. For in the last chapter of his book, titled of the
Ecclesiastical soueraintie, he tells in order, how first the body is placed
before the holy altar, how the solemn mysteries with heavenly psalms and
sonets be song and said over the corpse, how the holy Bishop gives thanks to
God, makes comfortable exhortation to the assembly, to continue in assured
hope of the resurrection: how he anointeth the body with holy oil, and last of
all makes prayers for him, and so commits him to God. The which whole order
of the sacrifice, ceremonies, and mystical prayers, exercised as well in
burialls, as at other times in the reverent mysteries, this author would not
fully set out in writing, for their sakes that could not for the weakness of
faith atteine to the worthy holiness of so high matters, as he him self
professes, in these words: Praecationes quae in misterijs adhibentur nephas
est scripto interpretari, and misticam eorum intelligentiam aut vim, quae in
eis, deo authore, efficacitatem habent, ex abdito in publicum efferre: sed
quemadmodum a maioribus nostris traditum accepimus etc: The prayers which be
used in the mysteries, may not in any wyes be set out to the world in
writing, neither may the singular efficacy and grace of them be made common
to all men: but even as we have received by the hands of our elders. And as
long as this order was religiously kept in Gods church, the solemn secrets of
the blessed sacraments, were not so contemptible as our news open communion
has of late made them, where there is nothing so holy but it may abide the
sight and handeling, of who so ever is the worst. The holy and heavenly
mysteries of Christ his spouse, were not then profaned by the presumptuous
babbling of every idle head: Then were not the sovereign weighty matters
handeled in alehouses, but used at the holy altars. Then the idle, contentious,
ungodly, and unprofitable quirkes and questions, had no other solution but
sharp discipline, and worthy correction: then were not the Gides of Gods
people controwled by every restless fellow, that could crack of Gods word:
but it was enough for a faithful man's contentation to say with Basil the
great: Dominus ita docuit, In homil. contra Sabellian. Athan: ad Epitectum.
apostoli predicauerunt, patres obseruauerunt, confirmauerunt martyrs,
sufficiat dicere ita doctus sum. Our Lord taught so, the Apostles so preached,
our fathers observed the same, the holy martyrs have sealed it, It is
sufficient for me to say: so was I taught. O Lord, that this simple sincere
fidelity might once take place again in our days, for the comfort of the
poor faithful flock, that are now so burdened with questions of infidelity,
that the sely simples souls can not tell how to turn them selves, nor find
means to keep their faith inuiolated, in such a multitude of misbeleuers.
Which I surely hope the earnest and pityfull prayers of so many good men that
do bewail this misery, shall at length after due punishment of our ^innes
obtain at Gods gracious hands. But what s^ifte do the adversaries here make,
with this evident testimony of this so ancient a writer? mary sir they
endeavor with all their might, to rob this excellent ancient and divine
writer of all his works, which have borne the title of his name ever since
they were written: Ita Suidas testatur.
which challenge their own author by that grave style that no other man, as the
skillfull in that language do testify, could ever lightly atteine unto:
which so sauore of the antiquity, and the Apostolic spirit, that thou would
deem them to be indicted by some of the continual hearers of Christ Jesus. But
it were vain to stand in contention for this matter, for we should never
have end, if we should be put to prove that every man made the books which be
extant in his name: it were to much miscredit of antiquity, and uncertainty of
all things. Although this man's works have been both named, Origin. Athan
Damascen. Nicenum. 2.
and certain sentences alleged out of them, by most ancient doctors and
counsels. With whom, the adversaries if they list be busy, shall wrestle,
for I will seek out as my purpose was, whether in other times and vsages of
celebration, this kind memorial of the dead, has not been kept.

3 If Dionysius the Aeropagite, had written any thing, or any Dionysius had
written any books entitled de ecclesiastica Hierarchia before S. Ieronyms
time, or in his time, he would not have left him out in his Cataloge of
Ecclesiastical writers, which he continues from the passion of Christ unto
the 14. year of Theodosius the Emperor, or if any such writer, or writing had
been known in the Church two hundredth years after, Gennadius which adds, if
any were omitted by Ieronym, and continues his cataloge unto the reign of
Zeno or Anastasius, in which time he lived, he would not have passed him in so
deep silence. yea the man him self, even in the words that M. Allen
rehearses, plainly declares, that he was not that Areopagite converted by S.
Paul, for then he would not have said. Quemadmodum a maioribus nostris
traditum accepimus, as we have received it of our ancestors. But as we have
received of the Apostles them selves, of whom Dionysius him self was turned to
the faith. As for Suidas is to late a witness, to know that Ieronym and
Gennadius and before them Eusebius knew not. But M. Allen thinks, he has
made a witty defense for these books, to be written by Dionysius the
Areopagite, when he says we should never have end, if we should be put to
prove, that every man, made these books, that be extant in his name. But what
if we should receive all books to be authentical, that bear the name of some
worthy person, should we not think you have many goodly treatises in the name
not only of ancient doctors, but even of the Apostles them selves? But Origin
and Athanasius both name this Dionysius and allege sentences out of him, Show
that M. Allen and you have won the field, for Dionysius credit except it be
out of such Origens and Athanasiusses as this Dionysius is or as Damascene and
the second Nycene council allege, to whom what so ever could be counterfected
to serve their purpose, was welcome and well received.

Epist. 9. li. 1.
4 S. Cyprian shall not be called to record for the Church of Aphrike or
Carthage, because we heard his judgment before: who plainly commanding the
priests under his jurisdiction not to celebrate for certain notorious
offenders, gives us to wit, that of right and custom it belonged in his
province to others that passed hense in obedience and piety. The which was
continued in that part of the world till Augustines time, being about C C.
years after him. Thus breefely he tells you the practice of his Church. In
praecibus sacerdotis quae domino deo ad eius altar fundu^tur, De cura pro
mortuis. and alibi saepe.
locum suum habet etiam commendatio animarum. In the prayers of the priest,
which are made to our Lord God at his altar the commendation of the departed
has a place.

4 S. Cyprian should be called to record, if you could tell what to make him
say. He plainly commanded the Priests under his jurisdiction not to celebrate
for certain notorious offenders. He writes to the Elders, Deacons, and people
of Furnitanes. It were hard for you to prove, that all they to whom he did
write were under his jurisdiction. But I have answered before, that neither
prayer nor sacrifice for the dead, can be proved out of that place, but thanks
giving for the departing, and sleeping in peace of the godly, and prayer for
the living to make the like godly end. As for that which was done in
Augustines time, does not prove what was done 200. years before him.

5 Now for the Greek Churchies and the East, S. Chrysostom and Basil in
their Massies (for so now the word Lyturgia is used of all the divine
writers, and so Erasmus translateth it, and so it must needs be taken) bear
sufficient witness of the Apostolic tradition in this point. For in S.
Chrysostoms service thus the prayer is made for the dead: Lyturgia Chrysosto.
Remember good Lord our spiritual father and all the brotherhood in Christ, and
all those that are departed hense in faith, our fathers and our brethern etc.
And again in the same Mass afterward, thus he prays: Remember all those,
good Lord, which have taken their sleep in the hope of resurrection, and life
everlasting: Cause them to take rest, where the light of thy countenance is
showed. Lyturgia Basilia.
In S. Basilles Mass which the Syrians use, there is also prayers for the
departed: in which the minister desires God to remember all them which be
passed out of this world: and that he would refreshe them in his holy
tabernacle, saffely lead them through the horrible and fearful dwellings,
and place them in quiet and joyful abidinge: that he would deliver them from
the land of darkness, troble, and sorrow: that he enter not into judgment
with them, finally that he would mercyfully remitte and pardon, what so ever
they committed through the vesture of the flesh, that was worthy punishment.
This prayer was pithy, and touches the placies of punishment and purgation in
the next life.

5 Now come in the Liturgies under the name of Chrysostom and Basil, which M.
Allen will needs translate masses, and who can let him, seeing he says the
word is so used of all divine writers, and Erasmus him self translateth it
so. This man is very general, always, all men, all divines etc. But why is
Erasmus brought in? who as he translateth Lyturgia for Mass, so he judges
that Chrysostom and Basil were not authors of those Lyturgies, but some later
men. But be it that Chrysostom and Basil did write these Lyturgies the oldest
fathers that can be given them, I would know, what Lyturgies they had in
those Churches, before Chrysostom and Basil devised those forms that are
said to be theirs. And why Chrysostom, Basil, Gregory, or any other that
prescribed new forms of service, were not content with the old forms, that
were used in their Churches before their days. undoubtedly because they were
to simple for their curiosity, to sincere for their superstition, savoring of
the ancient truth, not favoring their lately received errors. They had in
deed in elder time as appears by Ephiphanius the name of oblation, but it
was for the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and martyrs, which plainly
shows, that it was but an offering of thanks giving, as Cyprian does
declare, that they offered sacrifice for Laurentius and Ignatius martyrs, when
they did celebrate the yearly days in commemoration of their suffering Lib. 4.
epist. 5. Of which ceremonies and form of speaking, as the error perhaps took
strength, so the authors of these Lyturgies thought to confirm it by public
authority, which was before but a blind error with out a head.

6 So there is extant an other order of divine service and Celebration of the
communion, Vniuersalis Canon.
called the general Canon, used in Aethyopia: which lately with the rest was
set forth in Latin: in that so general an usage, there is supplication made
to God for the souls also. Remember Lord (says the minister) all those which
are a sleep, and rest in the faith of Christ, place their souls, we besich
thee, in the bosom of our fathers Abraham, Lyturgia Armenioru^.
Isaac, and Jacob. So likewise in the service of the Armenia^s, consonant for
the most part to the Greek usage, after supplication in the time of the holy
oblation for the living, straight way prayers be devoutly made for the dead.
First the deacon says. Rogate dominum pro animabus quae requiescunt in pace,
in primis episcoporum hic quiescentium. That is to say: pray unto our Lord for
the souls which rest in peace, namely and before all other, for the Bishops
resting in this place. And then he prays thus: Remember Lord and have mercy,
and show thy favorable grace to all the souls deceased, pacify and
illuminate them, adioyne them to the company of holy saints in heaven, and
make them worthy of thy love.

6 For the Lyturgies of the Aethiopians and the Armenians, as they are with the
other before rehearsed, a great deal more modest then your masses, so are they
not of such antiquity that they can prescribe by continual clame, up to the
Apostles time, nor with in a hundredth years and more of their time, they
sauoure plainly as you confess of the Armenians, the usage of the Greek
Church, which follow these Lyturgies which bears name of Chrysostom and
Basil.

7 But S. Ambrose in his preparatory prayer toward the holy oblation, In
prima prece praeparatoria ad missam.
gives us an excellent token of his Churchies faith, and a singular example to
follow in the time of the dreadful mysteries, when we remember our freindes
departed: thus he says. Rogamus te sancte pater, pro spiritibus fidelium
defunctorum, vt sit illis salus aeterna ac perpetua sanitas, gaudium and
refrigerium sempiternum, hoc magnum pietatis sacramentum* A notable solemn
prayer of S. Ambro^e for the souls departed.
domine Deus meus sit illis hodie magnum and plenum gaudium de te pane viuo and
vero qui de coelo descendisti, and das vitam mundo: de carne sancta and
benedicta, agni videlicet immaculati, qui tollis peccatum mundi: and potare de
font pietatis tuae, qui per lanceam militis de latere emanauit crucifixi
Christi, domini nostri, vt consolati exultent in laud and gloria tua sancta.
This in English: we beseech the most holy father for the souls of all faithful
departed, that this high and great sacrament of piety, may be unto them health
and salfty for ever, joy, release, and perpetual refreshing: O my Lord God
give them this day great and perfect comfort of thee, which art the bread
that came down from heaven, and geuest life to the world. Let them take joy
of thy holy and blessed flesh, that is to say of the lamb that takes away
the sins of the world. Give them to drink of the spring of thy piety,
which by the prick of the soldiers spear, did abundantly ishue out of the
side of our Savior Christ and Lord crucified, that they being so comforted,
may rejoice in thy laud and glory everlastingly. To be brieefe all the
Christian world agreeing, as Isiodorus says, upon one way for the
celebration of divine mysteries, De Ecclesi. officijs lib. 1. Cap. 15.
makes intercession for the faithful departed, that by the blessed sacrifice,
they may obtain pardon and remission of their sins.

7 It is a world to see that you have nothing in a manner but forged evidence,
to prove the antiquity of prayer for the dead, in public service of the
Church. Who is so ignorant in antiquity, but he that will needs be
obstinate, that knows not those preparatories to that mass, to be none of S.
Ambrose his doings. Otherwise it were not hard to prove, that by the name of
sacrifice, he means thanks giving for the sacrifice of Christ, as the manner
of that vnpropre speech was to term the holy sacrament, which is but the seal
of our salvation and not the matter thereof it self. To be brief what so ever
Isidorus says, if all the world agreed, that intercession and sacrifice
should be offered for the dead, seeing it disagreeth from the word of God,
and the practice of the primitive Church so long as it followed the rule of
Gods word, it is no whit to be regarded.

8 For I assure the good reader, that all realms which now by Gods grace are
in true faith, and their Christianity continuing, or else before have been,
and now by schism do forsake the same, that all those nations as they
received one faith, so in substance they have ever agreed uniformly in order
of service, which they received at their first conversion from the way of
gentilitie, by the good provision of such, as wrought under God in their happy
turn to the Christian faith, and religion. The same men that brought in the
faith of Jesus, with all brought in this way of worshipping Christ in the same
faith, take away then this order of worship, and solemn supplication which
they planted, thou must needs overthrow the faith which they taught also.
This I say was ever found, in the celebration of the fearful mystery of
Christ's body and blood, besides the oblation of that holy host for the quick
and dead both namely for certain, and generally for all departed in Christ, a
solemn prayer and supplication. Which no doubt Christ instituted at his last
supper, which the holy Ghost afterward secretly suggested to the Apostles,
which they again faithfully delivered to the nations converted by their
preaching, and to diverse of their own disciples: by whom the same was derived
down to our days, taught in all nations, and carefully practiced of all
people. Whereof we have worthy witnesses for all countries almost. For so the
godly doctors Tertullian, Cyprian, Augustine, both taught and worshipped in
Afric, the same does Hierom and Damascene in Syria, Origin and Athanasius in
Egypt. Denyse the ancient, and Bernarde in France, Chrysostom in Thrase,
Basil and his brethern in Cappadocia, Ambrose and Gregory the great in Italy,
Augustine our apostle and Bid in our country of England: with the rest of all
nations baptized, whom I named before, and might do yet a number: what
should I say a number? all that ever were counted Catholics since the
beginning, were of the same sense in that cause. And to name the residue where
these do not serve, it were lost labor. For whom they can not move, I can not
tell what may persuade him in any matter. Or if he dare not bestow his credit
on these men's doings, whom may he salfely trust? If the communion and
faithful fellowship, of so many godly and gracious men so uniformly
consenting both in the teaching and practicing of this matter, can not sattell
and quiet a man's conscience, who can appeace his disquieted vnsteadfast mind
and cogitation? If in the construing of Gods word and scriptures, so many of
such grave judgment, of so approved wisdom, of so passing learning, of such
earnest study in trial of the truth, of so virtuous a life, of so heavenly a
gift and grace in the expounding of Gods word, may not be salfely followed
in this our search, whom should we follow, or to whom should the simple
addicte them selves, in so great a turmoyle of learned men: one sort craking
so fast of scripture, and the other sort, when the matter commes to trial,
alleging so many, with so ancient and grave testimony for the true meaning of
the same? to which I say, is it wisdom to give consent and credit? if not to
such as faithfully both follow and recite the scripture with the agreement of
the world for the true sense thereof. Lib. 2. cap. 3. Contra epistola^
Parmeniani.
S. Augustine writing against Parmenianus the Donatiste, much woundereth in
that clear light of truth and the Churches doctrine, the heretics could be
blind, or not see the evidence of that, which all the world but them selves
saw. And in many places he reckeneth the most horrible punishment in the
world, to be the cecity and blindness which God strikes the stubborn man's
heart with all, in forsaking the fellowship of the Churches children. But he
that considers the process of our cause, may a thousand times more maruaill
and fear Gods heavy judgment, in the blinding of the disobedient men's hearts
and senses for sin. If they them selves were of their consciences examined,
what else they would wish for the trial of any doubt, I am sure they could
name no one point, nor any means in the world, which our cause would not
suffer and admit. For by what way so ever, any truth in Gods Church was
severally in the ancient times avouched against the adversary heretic, I am
sure we have the same with the advantage. And for this last point of prayers
in the Masses of all nations, it is so evident, that no man can gain say it:
and so generally practiced, that the usage of praying could in no matter ever
so clearly set out the certainty of our belefe, as in this.

8 If you will take M. Allens assurance in so weighty a matter, that uses so
commonly to lie, in every tryfling matter, you are worthy to be deceived. And
that you may see I do him no wrong, see I pray you how shamefully he lies in
this matter, whereof he makes such impudent assurance. He says the same men
which brought in the faith, brought in the same order of service, and planted
the same supplication, wherein they have uniformly continued, etc: take away
the same order, and overthrow the faith which they taught. But who does not
know, that Chrysostom, Basil, Ambrose, Gregory, which he names to be the
first auctors of those orders of service and forms of supplication, which
before he commended, were not the first, that brought in the faith into
Cappadocia, Thracia, or Italy. But ye Apostles them selves, and that those
Churches continued more then 300. years with other forms of public prayers,
and celebration of the sacraments before these men were borne. And where he
says there was ever found in the celebration of the sacrament, beside oblation
of the host for the quick and the dead, both particularly and generally, a
solemn prayer for all departed in Christ: You must take it, as the rest of his
assertions, which be ever more general then their probations. But to reprove
his vanity, the order of prayers and administration of the holy mysteries,
described by Justinius Martyr in his second Apology, and of Tertullian also in
his Apologetico do sufficiently declare, what was the usage of the Christians
in those purer times. And although there be not set forth unto them, what form
of words they used in their liturgy, yet is it expressed for whom and what
they prayed. Oramus etiam (says Tertullian) pro Imperatoribus, pro ministris
eorum, and potestatibus saeculi, pro rerum quiet, pro mora finis, We pray also
for the Emperors, for their ministers and the powers of this world, for the
quiet state of things, for stay of the end. Likewise he shows, to whom they
made their prayers, and what was the chiefest sacrifice that they did offer.
Haec ab alio orare non possum, quam a quo sciam me co^secuturum, quoniam and
ipse est qui solus praestat, and ego sum cui impetrare debetur famulus eius,
qui eum solum obseruo, qui ei offero opimam and maiorem hostiam, quam ipse
ma^dauit, orationem de carne pudica, de anima innocente, de spiritu sancto
profatam. These things I can not require of any other, but of him of whom I
know I shall obtain. For it is he alone, which grants, and I am he which
should obtain, being his servant, which worship him only, which offer unto
him that principal and great sacrifice, which he him self commanded, namely
prayer proceeding out of a chaste body, out of a harmeles soul, and from the
holy spirit, This he speaks comparing the prayers and sacrifice of the
Christians, with the prayers and sacrifices of the Gentiles. But that I may
return to M. Allen which refers the institution of prayer, and sacrifice
for the dead to Christ, at his last supper, to the secret suggestion of the
holy Ghost, to the faithful delivery of the Apostles, and the constant
continuance of all nations. Of whom will he be a feared to lie, when he
fathereth such a blasphemy, upon the Apostles, upon the holy Ghost, and upon
Christ him self? But let us consider your Sorites. Christ you say no doubt,
did institute it: where is the warraunt of this undoubted institution? you
answer secret suggestion of the holy Ghost, how come we to the knowledge of
this secret suggestion? By tradition of the Apostles: who is witness that
this is the tradition of the Apostles? Tertullian, Cyprian, Augustine, Ieronym,
and a great many more. But if it be lawful for me once to pose the Papists,
as you do often the Protestants, I would learn why the Lord would not have
this doubtless institution, and as you take it, the most necessary use of the
sacrament, plainly, or at least wise obscurely set fo^th by Matthew, Mark,
Luke or Paul, which all have set forth the story of the action of Christ, the
institution of the sacrament, and the end or use of the same. If it were not
meet at all to be put in writing, why was it disclosed by Tertullian, Cyprian,
Augustine, etc. If it were meet to be put in writing, why were not those
chosen Scribes Matthew, Mark, Luke, Paul, worthy of all credit, rather
appointed for it, then Tertullian, Cyprian, Augustine and such as you name? But
against this counterfect institution, secret suggestion, and feigned tradition,
S. Paul crye^h with open mouth to the Corinthians. 1. Cor. 11. That which I
delivered unto unto you, I received of the Lord, that the Lord Jesus the same
night, etc. In which words he declares without color or couerture, what was
the true institution of Christ, of what witness he received it, with what
fidelity he delivered it, what the sacrament is, and what is the right use of
it, to condemn all manner of abuses what so ever may rise either to corrupt
this only true substance, and only right order of ministration, or to pervert
this only right use and proper end thereof. I know the Papists will fly to
those words of the Apostle, the rest I will set in order when I come, but that
is so manifest to be spoken of matters of external comlines, and not of
doctrine of the sacrament, as prayers and sacrifices, that no man which
understands what (...), does signify, can doubt or make any question of it.
Now touching the credit and worthynesse of these, whom he so highly extolleth,
as I would not go about to diminish it, if they were to be compared with us,
so when they are opposed against the manifest word of God and the credit of
the holy Apostles, the instruments of the holy Ghost, there is no cause that we
should be carried away with them. But the controversy is not (as M. Allen
says) of the authority of the scriptures in this matter, but of the true
meaning of them, which it is more like, that they being such men, then we so
far inferior to them, should know, I answer, they them selves for the most
part confess, that prayer and oblation for the dead, is not taken at all out
of the scriptures, as Tertullian, Augustine and other, the rest that would
seek confirmation in the scriptures, as Chrysostom and such like, do so
manifestly wrest them to their purpose, that the Papists them selves are
ashamed to use those textes of scripture for their proofs. And as for such
places, as the later Papists would violently draw unto their error, they have
few or none of the old approved writers which though they allow their error
yet that so interpret them, as the place. 1. Cor. 3. and Matthew. 5. And what a
shameless creature is M. Allen, to say the controversy is about the true
meaning of the scripture, when he him self in the next leaf before, affirms
that prayer and sacrifice for the dead, was instituted by Christ at his last
Supper, which the holy Ghost afterward did secretly suggest unto the Apostles,
and they as secretly delivered to the nations. For, no word nor half word
thereof is contained in their writings, which are to us the only true testimony
of their tradition. Thus have these heretics no ground of their heresy, but
shifte from the word of scripture to secret tradition, from tradition to the
meaning of scripture, from the plain meaning of scripture, to the unconstant
opinions of men, from the variable and contrary opinions of men in times past,
to their own obstinacy and continuance in error in time present and yet he
woundreth, that we are so blind, that we can not see the clear light of the
truth. If Satan transforming him self into an angel of light, has so dasled
their eyes, that they can not see the true light, they are justly plagued,
because they have refused the faithful testimony of Gods word, which only
gives true light unto the eyes (as the Prophet says) and given heed to
spirits of errors and doctrines of devils, by whom they are blinded in utter
darkness, though it be with false imagination and dreaminge of light. Yet see
the confidence of the man, he is suer, that if we were examined of our
conscience, what trial of this doubt we would wish, there is none we could
name, but his cause might well abide it. Why M. Allen, we have testified of our
conscience long ago, that the only authority of Gods word written, shall
satisfy us, as well in this as in all other matters, if you were as desirous
to satisfy us, as you pretend, and as able to perform, as you are to promise,
we should have heard before this time some sentence of scripture to maintain,
prayer and sacrifice for the dead, not standing upon voluntary collection,
but either in plain words or necessary conclusion. For there is nothing that
we are bound to know, nothing that we are bound to do, but either in
express words or in necessary collection, which is as good as express
words, it is set forth in the holy Scriptures. Beside this, you should bring
a great prejudice against us, if you could bring the consent and practice of
the primitive pure Church for the space of an hundredth years after Christ. But
neither of these do we look to see, we before see with our eyes the
certainety of those things, whereof now we contend in words and writings.

The heretics of our time and country, be yet further urged with the practice
of prayers for the deceased, their contrary communion is compared with the
old usage of Celebration: They are ashamed of the first original of their
Christian faith, they are weary of their own service, they are kept in
order by the wisdom of the Civil magistrates, and are forced flatly to
refuse all the doctors. CAP. XII.
1 THe chief argument, that the Church of God used in old time against
Pelagius the enemy of Gods grace, was this: that at the holy altar the Priest
prayed to God, for to convert heretics and infidells to the faith, and evil
livers wicked conversation to virtue and honesty: the which prayers had been to
no purpose, if the grace of God had not borne the principal stroke in the
changing of man's heart. But being assured of this as a ground, that the
prayer of the Priest in the whole Churches name at the altar, can not but bear
singular strength and truth, it is necessarily concluded, that seeing the
public minister so prays, that we must needs believe, that God has man's
heart in his hand, and may turn it to the belefe of his word, or love of
his will, as he likes and lists: notwithstanding the perfect freedom of
man's will, which by Gods grace is never perished, but always perfected. And in
this assured foundation of the public prayers, S. Augustine who then was the
soldier of grace, so triumphed against one Vitalis a Pelagian, that he ringeth
him this peale, Exerce contra orationes ecclesiae disputationes tuas, Epist.
107. contra Vital.
and qua^do audis sacerdotem dei ad altar exhortantem populum dei orare pro
incredulis, subsanna pias voces ecclesiae, and dic te non facere quod hortatur:
and homo in Carthagiensi eruditus ecclesia, etiam beatissimi Cypriani librum de
oratione dominica condemna. Hold on fellow, exercise thy contentious talk
against the usual prayers of Gods Church, and when thou hear the Priest of
God at his altar exhort the people to pray for the misbeleuers, scoff at the
holy words, and make him answer, thou will not pray as he biddes thee: And
being brought up in the Church of Carthage, condemn withal, S. Cyprians work
upon our Lords prayer, wherein he teaches the same. I tarry now the longer on
this point, that thou may learn to keep an heretic at the bay: and to
fasten thy stroke so surely upon him, that which way so ever he shifte, he
shall bear thy blow upon his neck and sho^lders. It is not for our cause
taken in hand, that I now so much travel, for that is long since made sure
enough, for all the devils in Hell, or their followers in earth. But I would
in this one example of praying for the dead, give the studious a taste of all
such ways, as the truth of all other points in controversy, may be both
surely defended, and so plainly proved and vpholden, that the adversary shall
not be able to say baffe unto any one of the least of all the grounds,
whereupon Gods truth stands. Handeling then our good men as S. Augustine did
the like, say to them boldly: that the same Church which exhorts the people
to pray for the misbeleuers, does give us example to pray for the souls
departed: Vitalis and Pelagius were heretics for withstanding the one, they
must needs be as very heretics for refusing the other. It was the greatest
extremity that Pelagius could be driven to by force of Augustines argument,
to mock at the priests prayer made at Gods altar, and that which then was so
foul an absurdity for those false teachers, can it be borne out of ours with
honesty? Vitalis the Pelagian had a foul foil by S. Augustine, ^hen he
charged him with the contempt of S. Cyprians authority Bishop of Carthage,
being him self a ^hield of the same Church. And shall they go away so
smouthly now a days, not only with contempe of their own English patrons and
Apostles, but with impudent denial of all the doctors at once, that ever were
gydes of Gods Church since Christ's faith was taught? It was of Augustine
counted a singular arrogance not to pray in that form as Gods Church and
ministers at the altar both pray them selves, and exhort other to pray: and
shall it be such praise for our preachers to erect a new service to be check
mate with the old, to controele the rites and vsages of solemn supplication
in all countries Christianed, and with the true worship to banish together our
fathers faith?

CAP. XII.

1 IN this chapter, where he vomiteth out nothing but railing and lying, he
does rather bewraye his own infirmity, then touch the strength of our cause.
For being trobled with a sore laxe of the tongue, which I take to be a like
disease in ye mouth that it is in ye womb, he gusheth out nothing but
bragging, and faceing, scolding, and sclaundering, tauntinge and trifling. And
therefore I will but breefely confute his vanity and turn him to his matches
to contend in that kind of quarreling. The chief argument (he says) that the
Church in times past and Augustine the Churches champion, used against the
Pelagians, was to show that their heresy was contrary to the public prayers
of the Church: what should I use many words? I appeal to the judgment of
all Papists, that have not lost all use of natural reason, and indifferent
judgment, which either have read, or will take pains to read, so many
works as Augustine did write against the Pelagians, whether of an hundredth
arguments, that he uses, this insultation be not one of the feeblest: which
took no hold of the Pelagians by force of truth that is in it, but by their
own concession and grant, of that prayer to be godly and them to be of the
Church that so prayed. But now the controversy is not only of the substance
of doctrine, but of the Church it self also. And therefore when Augustine had
to do with the Donatistes that challenged the Church unto them selves, he
sets all other tryalles aside, and provoke only to the scriptures.
Therefore (M. Allen) if you will teach your scholars to keep us at the baye as
heretics, you must not teach them to bark and baule, nothing but the Church
the Church, like tinckers curres, but you must instruct them to open conningly
out of the scriptures how our doctrine is contrary to the truth, and yours
agreeable to the same. I do not blame you if you would feign have that argument
of the Church, without trial which is the Church, to take place, for it would
ease you and your fellows of much pain, it would serve you both for a sword
and a buckler, all other books, arguments and reasons, might be laid a side
and keep silence. The Church says it, and we are the Church, therefore it is
true. The scriptures them selves are altogether needelesse, where this argument
may stand for payment. This is so plain a proof, that the adversaries shall
not be able to say baffe unto it. In deed they were but sorry whelps that
could not say baffe to the bleating of such a calfe as you are, which think
that such a foolish cavil, can carry credit with them that have any cromme of
brain in their heads. The Church prays so, therefore it is true. Nay Sir,
you pray, and practice to control the word of God, therefore you are not the
Church of God. Prove that you do not so, or else prate as long as you will. And
think not to dorre us with Cyprians name, where as if you had his judgment,
we might be bold to say as the same Augustine has given us example: Nos nullam
Cypriano facimus iniuriam, cum eius quaslibet literas, a canonica diuinarum
scripturarum auctoritate distinguimus. Neque enim sine causa tam salubri
vigilantia canon Ecclesiasticus constitutus est, ad quem certi Prophetarum and
Apostolorum libri pertinent, quos omnino iudicare non audeamus, and secundum
quos de caeteris literis, vel fidelium vel infidelium libere vindicemus. Contra
Cresconium Gram. lib. 2. cap. 31. We do Cyprian none injury at all, when we
put difference between any of his writings, from the canonical authority of
the holy Scriptures. For not without a cause with so wholesome diligence is the
ecclesiastical canon appointed, unto which certain books of the Prophets and
Apostles do perteyne, which we dare not judge at all, according to which we
may freely judge of all other writings either of faithful men or infidells.
And again in the 32. chapter. Ego huius epistolae auctoritate non teneor, quia
literas Cypriani non vt Canonicas habeo, sed eas ex canonicis considero, and
quod in eis diuinarum scripturarum auctoritati congruit, cum laud eius
accipio, quod autem non congruit, cum pace eius respuo. I am not bound to the
authority of this epistle, because I count the letters of Cyprian not as
canonical scriptures, but I consider them by the canonical scriptures, and
what so ever I find in them agreeable to the authority of holy Scriptures, I
take it with his praise, that which agreeeth not, I reject it with his leave.
Judge here (gentle reader) whether Augustine would or should with any
indifferency, bind either men to the absolute admitting of Cyprians authority,
wherewith he would not be holden him self, and know Allen for a Iangler on
Augustines words against the meaning of Augustine, or any reasonable man.

2 I would learn by what Churches example they have left out of their new
fangled fantastical service, the offering and praying for the departed. One
of them was so impudent, to say in an open book that the Lyturgies of the
fathers made all against the Catholics, and for the proof of their false
assertions. Wherein sir I pray you tell me? I would call you by your name, if
I knew who you were there you were ashamed of your own name, I guess it was
M. Pilkinton of Duresme.
therefore ye shall lack the glory of your assertion. But who so ever you be,
I pray you what affinity betwixt their office of celebration and yours, do
you find? they offer the holy host, they worship it, they show it, they pray
unto it, which of all these do you? they bless it with the sign of the holy
cross, they practice the action upon an altar, how well follow you these? they
pray for the dead, they make invocation solemnly to saints, they join with
all catholic Churches in the world, where is your cause here amended, or ours
not plainly proved? If their service like you so well, or at least better the^
S. Gregory's Mass, you might with more honesty have chosed for any one of
them, then have forged a new one of your own: which in deed is directly
repugnant to all other rites in the Christian world. Which you may well term
the service of contradiction and damnation, as one that neither communicates
with the saints in heaven, with the souls in purgatory, nor with the
faithful a live. And being ashamed of the Latin Church, you challenge an other
origin of faith out of the East part: as though your matter were well
amended, if you might shake of that faith and worship which our country in her
conversion first received, and in which till this day she has happily lived,
and make the head of our holy tradition uncertain, by referring us unto an
unknown origin.

2 He would know by what churches example, we have left out of our service,
which he tormeth like him self, prayers and sacrifice for the dead, as though
he has not been often told by the example of Gods Church* whereof w^ have
sure warrant out of Gods word by example of the eldest Church, and nearest to
the Apostles times, as we have showed out of Justinius Martyr and Tertullian
before he became an heretic. And as for him, that affirmed the old Liturgies,
to make against your mass, though he be better able to answer for him self,
yet have I showed also, that there are none so full of blasphemy, as your mass
is. And it is easy to be gathered by Epiphanius, that the old form of
liturgy was, but to make mention of the dead, to have them in remembrance.
And because they used to make memory of all sorts of men that were dead in
Christ, he expounds it according to the error of his time, that this memory
was a prayer for the sinners, for the just, as Patriarchs, Prophets, etc. a
signification that they were inferior to Christ. A simple cause why they should
be remembered, but this shift he is driven unto, because he did not consider,
that the memory and oblation which the old fathers made for all departed in
Christ, was a sacrifice of thanks giving and not of prayers for them. The same
order and error do all the later liturgies follow, making memory and prayers
for all them that are departed in the faith. In the memory of all departed they
follow the old order, in praying for all, they follow the latter error, which
had changed the sacrifice of thanks giving into the sacrifice of prayer. But
herein they declared, that they had not yet generally received your new
doctrine of purgatory, because they prayed not as you do, for them only that
are in purgatory, to whom only you confess the prayers to be needful and
profitable, but for all that are departed in the faith of Christ from the
beginning of the world. And now Sir I have showed, wherein they make against
you. But where as you taunt at the author of that book, because he sets not
his name unto it, you show your wit, and bewray your disease. You can neither
tell what to speak, nor yet how to hold your peace. In the margent you guess it
was M. Pilkington of Duresme: you would feign have such a man to be your
adversary, that though you took the foil, yet you might boast, that you were
so bold as to fight with him. But it is an easyer matter for such a desperate
dicke to beginning a fraye, then to end it. If I may be as bold to guess as
you: I guess that he which made that lusty challenge of the Papist against the
Protestant, promising to recant at the end of every article, if he cold be
answered, was such a tried Thraso as M. Allen? if you ask me what is the
ground of my guess, to omit the style somewhat like, I will answer as one in
Plautus does: Credo te esse ab illo, nam ita nugas blattis. I take it to be
even you, you are so full of bracing and facing. But who so ever he was, was he
ashamed of his name because he set not his name unto it? and was the man of
Chester ashamed of his name because he sets it not to his treatise? Finally
be all those Papists ashamed of their names, which have written so many petty
pamphlettes to be carried abroad in Popish fellows pocketts? O intemperate
tongue, which can not spare such tauntes, as redounde to him self and his own
good masters reproach. Your lies of offering, worshipping, and praying to the
host be reproved already, you say we might with more honesty have coped for one
of those Lyturgies, if we liked not Gregory's Mass, rather then to have forged
a new. I answer we have with more honesty reformed our Lyturgie according to
the word of God, and example of the oldest Church, then Gregory, Basil,
Chrysostom, (if they were theirs) or who so ever were authors of those
Liturgies, did leave the ancient Lyturgies that were used in the Church before
their time, because they did not sufficiently express their errors and
superstition, and forge them new of their own contrary to the word of God.
And where as you prate of the Latin Church and the East part, we neither
refuse the Latin Church while it was pure, nor receive the East Church where
in it was corrupt, but the scripture is a rule unto us to judge all Churches
by. Although it were easy to prove by that controversy, which the Britaynes
and the Scotts had against the Saxons, about the celebration of Easter, that
our country first received their conversion from the East Church, whose
ceremony they did then defend, even as the East Church did long before
against Victor Bishop of Rome. By which it appears that this land did
never receive the doctrine and ceremonies of the Latin Church before the time
of the Saxons. And whereas you slander us for referringe our faith to an
uncertain and unknown Origin, the contrary is manifest, when we refer it
to no judgment, or company of men, but to the authority of Gods word and all
them that will be subject thereunto. But I tarry to long in these trifles.

3. Every man in the primitive Church counted the spring of his faith more
pure, and a great deal more clear, if he could against an heretic declare
by good testimony that his belefe did at length by just count, fall into the
Roman Church. So does Irenaeus against the Valentinians, so does Cyprian
against the Nouatians, so does Tertullian and Vincentius against all heretics,
so does Augustine and Optatus against the Donatistes, so does Hyerom and all
the rest, against the Arians. All these thought they had a great vauntage, if
they could by plain account prove against an heretic that their doctrine
ishued from the Bishop of Rome. De prescri. aduers. haereti.
Go whether thou will (says Tertulian) and thou shall find some Apostolic
seat to instruct thy conscience: thou have hard by the Philippos, or Ephesus,
or Rome, Epist. 165.
and there lo fetch we the authority of our faith. S. Augustine that knew
best how to fetch an heretic over the coals, urges him ever to reduce his
doctrine to some Bishop of Rome: when he had him once at that strait, then lo,
he goes through the whole rank of holy Bishops by name, to the number of
forty well near. Bring me once an evident declaration that your faith ishued
from any one bishop of that Sea, and then you may pass throw the long line of
that succession with out bracke, or any rupture in the world. I could make
account (says Irenaeus) of many successions of Apostolic Churches: but that
were to long, only Rome shall serve, that is the greatest, the auncientest,
and best known, and by the tradition of that Church confundimus omnes eos,
Lib. 3. cap. 3
we utterly confound all heretics. It is a strange thing, that the fathers
having store of Apostolic successions, did ever choose out for the warrant of
their faith from amongst the rest, the Roman Seat: And now when there is no
apostolic Church left in the whole world but it, Note.
that they will seek to Churchies whereof there is neither certainty, nor
succession: when by plain open dealing we may reduce, and must needs refer
our faith to that, which was ever of all other most far from falshoodde.

3 Every man in the primitive Church, compted the spring of his faith more
pure, if he could derive it out of the holy Scriptures, and show the
continuance thereof, in any of the Apostolic Churches whereof Rome was but
one. And condemned all heresies of nouelty or later string, which could not
bring the first author of their heresies, either from any of the Apostles: or
apostolic men which continued in the doctrine of the Apostles: as Tertullian
does in that book De praescriptionibus aduersus haereses. The like does
Irenaeus. And that these men specially named the Church of Rome, it was because
the Church of Rome at that time as it was founded by the Apostles, so it
continued in the doctrine of the Apostles. And these heretics for the most
part had been sometimes of the Church of Rome, as Valentinus, Marcion,
Nouatus. But none of these fathers, as M. Allen would have it appear, was
such a sclaue to the Church of Rome, that what so ever pleased the Bishops of
that Sea, they were ready to accept. For then would not Irenaeus so sharply
have reproved Victor, as Eusebius declares of him Lib. 5. cap. 25. Cyprian
would not have taken up Cornelius and Stephanus as appears by his epistles.
Hieronym would not have been so bold to call Rome the purple whore of Babylon
Praefat. ad Paulinu^ in lib. Didym. Nor to compare the bishop of Eugubium
with the bishop of Rome Euagrio, nor to make the Church of England equal with
the Church of Rome: Nec iam altera Romanae vrbis ecclesia, altera totius orbis
existimanda est. Et Gallia, and Britania, and Africa and Bersis and Oriens and
Indiae and omnes barbarae nationes vnum Christum adorant, vnam obseruant
regulam veritatis. Si authoritas quaeritur, orbis mayor est vrbe. Neither must
we think that there is one Church of the city of Rome an other of all the
world beside. Both France and Britayne and Africa, and Persia, and the East,
and India, and all barbarous nations worship one Christ, keep one rule of
truth. If authority be sought, the world is greater then one city etc. Lo
Sir, here is a Church and christianity, and a rule of truth, with out the
bishop of Rome, with out the Church of Rome, yea, and contrary to the church
of Rome. For to them that alleged the custom of the church of Rome, he says:
Quid mihi profers vnius vrbis co^suetudinem? what bring you me the custom of
one city? and Augustine him self, that knwe so well to fetch an heretic over
the coals, I trow fetched Zosimus, Bonifacius, and Coelestinus bishops of
Rome meetly well over the coals, when he and his fellows the bishops of
Africa, took them with plain forgerie, and falsification of the canons of the
council of Nice. Consilio Milebitano and Africano. As for that which M. Allen
compteth so strange, is for lack of skill and right judgment. For the same
cause that moved those ancient fathers to appeal to the judgment of the
church of Rome, moves us now to condemn the church of Rome of heresy.
wherefore did they reverence the church of Rome? Ask Tertullian, he answers
because it had by succession retained even until his days, that faith which
it did first receive of the Apostles: Therefore it was a true Church, therefore
it was an apostolic Church, which because it does not now, neither has done
of many years, and has nothing to boast of, but the empty names of many good
bishops, but thrice as many more of cursed Antichrists, therefore it is now a
false church, and a company of heretics, departed from the ancient Romans
true and apostolic faith.

4 Bring my faith once to S. Gregory, and the very stream shall drive me to S.
Peter and Paul, maugre all their beardes. In which order of Bishops, find me
one that set forth by decree any practice of contrary doctrine, to that which
his next predecessor did before him maintain, and I will go seek with the
stray, a new mother Church to found my faith upon. If all be in this
succession salfe and sound, what a folly were it to forsake our own mother,
and spring of our belefe, to seek other which have often erred when they
stood, and now be almost wholly decaide. But yet it is wisdom for false
teachers with all force to fly from so great light, as may arise to the
truth by the recognizing of that sound succession, and going the just
contrary way from the old doctors faith, it is not to be thought strange,
that they directly seek to overthrow that bulwarcke, which they ever leaned
unto in the storms of schism and heresy. The shrewes do know full well the
might of truth in that Seat and succession, to have beaten down all their
forefathers, the heretics of all agies. They fear their fall, whose steps
they follow. They utter much malice, and torment them self in every sermon in
vain: that Church feels no sore, but in sorrow of compassion toward her
forsakers: she has bidden greater storms then this, first by tyraunts, then
by heretics, last and most by the evil life of her own Bishops. In all
which she yet stands, and ever rises to honor, as she is most impugned.
Their own preaching has singularly opened the might of God in the defense of
that Seat of unity. When they first began to touch and taunt the Pope in
every sermon, in every play, in book and balate, men that before living in
faithful simplicity much meddled not with his matters, nor often heard of his
name, began straight upon their busy ralinge, to conceive by reasonable
discretion, that there lay some great ground of matter and weight of truth
upon that point which they could not digest in so many years bauling and
barking at his name: they saw the Pope ever in their way, never out of their
mouth, and they doubted not but that singular hatred grew upon some great
importance: and so admonished luckely by the adversaries, they sought the
bottom of that perfect and deep hatered, and found that it was the old sore
of the Arians, and disease of the Donatistes, and common to all heretics: they
perceived by S. Cyprian that the first attempt of such men, De simplicit.
praelatorum.
was to drive away the pastor, that they might with out resistance devour and
destroy the flock. And which was the prick of all their endeavors, to take
from us the acknowledging of the great and singular benefit of our conversion
to the faith: that in stopping the head of that condeth, and plentiful well
of our faith, they might in heat of contention and heresy, casely dry up the
whole ishue thereof. By heretics preaching many are become Catholics.
And this earnest consideration causes many at this day to forsake their
heresies: and to be a great deal mo at this time, which know the truth of
this matter, then when they began first to preach thereof.

4 Bring this man's faith to Gregory, and then the stream shall drive him to
Peter and Paul, Nay M. Allen bring you your faith from Peter and Paul by good
testimony of their holy writings, and then you shall not need to row in
Cockelaurels bote, neither with stream nor against it. But you offer us fair
play, we must bring you one Bishop of Rome, that did set forth by decree, any
practice of contrary doctrine, to that which his next predecessor did before
him mainteyne, and you will seek a new mother Church. If I should bring you
Sabinianus which controlled the decrees of Gregory: or Stephanus that condemned
the decrees of Formosus, from which time the story testifies, that it grew
unto a custom, that every Bishop would condemn his predecessors decrees, you
would answer that all this was without your compass. So will you say if I
name Honorius, who was an heretic of the sect of the Monothelites, condemned
both by his successor and by a general council. I bring no small proofs M.
Allen, but such as you can not with for greater. Look in the sixth general
council, holden at Constantinople. Acti. 13. there shall you read that the
decretall epistle of Honorius whereby he confirmed Sergius in his heresy, was
read, and burned, and Honorius him self anathematized, as an heretic. Look a
little further unto the 18. action, there shall you find the decretall epistle
of Pope Leo the second, written to the council wherein he condemns Honorius
his predecessor for an heretic, and his doctrine for heresy. But what say you
to Liberius and Felix whereof either one, or as Ieronym affirms, both were
Arians? how were their decrees liked of their successors? how did they allow
the decrees of their predecessors? Finally where as you say, that our earnest
and often preaching against the Pope has won you so many Catholics, we will
by Gods grace continue to gratify you still by that means, and give you good
leave when you have counted your cards, to boast of your winnings.

5 But I will not press them over sore: suppose I grant them that which they
would so gladly win: that we had not our faith first from Rome, though it be
as false, as God is true. But suppose it were not so, and I give you leave to
father your faith where you will. If it be not upon Latimer (whom a foolish
fellow, in the book of conference betwixt Latimer and Ridley, terms the
English Apostle: as one more worthy of that name (as he says) then Augustine,
but else where you will: and when you have done, prove me that your mother
Church prays not for the departed in her Mass and solemn service, and you
shall be exalted up for ever. And at your next change frame your new
communion after that old usage on Gods blessinge: If you can find any form
of celebration far enough from ours, follow it and spare not.

But I am sure, you shall never be hable to find any old service in the
world fit for your new diet. Our Mass is all one with the Masses of a^l
other cuntries and times.
They be all to much like our Mass for your purpose, as in deed alone in
every point of importance with ours. As the Churches to whom they belonged,
perfectly before their decay, in faith and unity agreed with ours.

5 Although we account Latimer for a worthy teacher, and more worthy of the
name of an Apostle for his apostolic doctrine, then Augustine the Monk, yet
build we our faith (as you know) neither upon him, nor any other, but only
upon the word of God. And as for our mother Church, is no certain place, or
company of men in any one place upon earth, but Jerusalem which is above, is
mother of us all. Galat. 4. And who so ever were children of this Church, would
never find fault with our communion, which can not be condemned by the word of
God, and therefore cares not for the comparison of the custom of other men
which whether they used the like or not, in form of words, which is not
material, so they used not other substance of matter except they did it beside
the word of God. How like your Mass is to other country masses, when there was
never any mass but yours, I leave it to consider and compare to all them that
had rather see the truth them selves, then to be deceived by you.

6 I am sure when you can not like your own communion, ye would not be
pleaced with one of an others making. But an other you must needs have, and
further you must go from us, walk forward you will to the extreme end of
heresy, and utter denying of Christianity. All the world can not stop your
falling from the hill of Gods Church, till you come in the bottomless pit of
Hell. I would be loath to sclaunder them with the brute of the world, which
though it be in every man's mouth, that they like not this communion, yes upon
that rumor I would not have said so far, but that they have uttered their
own meaning, in a treatise of their own making, in these words: In marriage
as in all other thinge^ beside, Against the Chester man.
we are but to much like unto them: that is our ^ault generally that we differ
not more from them in all our ministry. These words utter their grief that
they can got no further from us in their service: and that you be not deceived,
the author of this book where this complainte is made, knows well the
meaning of his fellows herein, and how glad they would be shiftinge
forward. They sit on thorns till they be doing with a new gise. It is no
worse man then the B. of Duresme that takes cold in so long a stand of their
communion. My simple head could not devise how they might possibly go
forward, and keep them with in any bond of Christianity. What they cast in
their brain for their further proceeding I can not tell, the serpent is suttel,
and our sins be great.

6 If any man mislike the form of our service, as not differing sufficiently
from yours, he shows his greater zeal in detestation of your idolatry and
blasphemy. In the mean time what need this great wondering, for once or twice
alteration in the form, where the matter is still retained, when if we shall
believe your own stories, your service has not had much less then an hundredth
innouations, so often as one piece or other was added or patched to it. And yet
in this one cuntry of England, how many diverse forms of service had you? so
that you could never grow to uniformity? York, Salesbury, Bangor, Hereford,
etc.

7 I much maruaill not now, to see the temporal Magistrates of their
wisdoms, to hedge these men's wantonness in all their order of life: for they
are so dronken and drowned in heresy, that they have no sense of common
reason. What a do had the magistrates to make these wild men go in
priestelike apparel, to keep their Rotchettes, to observe some step of
antiquity in their manners? How they were driven to tempre their lusts in
provision for some ordrely choice of their wives: that seeing them have no
respect on what women they light, Look the Iniunction for the marriage of
Priests and other things.
that by Justices of peace yet, they might be bestowed, if not well, yet with
their less dishonestie, upon persons not openly infamous. Such fellows are
more fit to be governed, then to bear rule over other: in whom without
constraint you shall neither find comeliness in manners, order in life, nor
constancy in religion. God of his mercy give them some light to see their own
misery, and spirit of humility to subject them selves in time to Gods Church,
that is so careful over them, though to their own great harm, they so deadly
hate her. They can show no cause in the world, why they need in any one
point of all those which at this day be in controversy betwxit them and
their own mother, rather to credit their own fantasies, then her grave
authority: which only without farther questioning, with obedient children
makes more, then all argument or eloquence of man, in the earth.

7 If the civil Magistrates have thought good in some outward ceremony or
usage, to bear with the infirmity of the weaker sort of your side, in hope to
win them, it is a small matter for you that are the obstinate of that sect
to triumph upon, when all your blasphemous doctrine is abolished, and nothing
left but a few rags of your robes to look upon. And as for the iniunction
for Priests marriage, was either to stop your slanderous mouths, when godly
ministers wives should have testimoy of their honesty by men of such credit,
or else to bridle the lust of your own tounebulls the popish Priests, which
when license of whordom is denied them, and liberty to marry permitted them,
would make no better choice perhaps of their wives, then they did before of
their women. We can show no cause in the world you say, why we need in any one
point of controversy depart from your Church: yes M. Allen, this one cause
shall serve for all, because your church is departed from the truth of Gods
word, and dare not abide the trial thereof, but will sit like a proud dame
in a chair, and control the Scriptures, the ordinance of Christ, and the
commandments of God him self. But how so ever you boast of her fast sitting,
she shall down, she shall down, even to the bottom of hell.

8 And for such as may for their simplicity be soon deceived by following
other men's errors, with whom the names of doctors, or the only bare brag of
scriptures, are as good as the allegation of places: The youngers, must thus
pose their masters.
Let them ask of their teachers how they can shifte them self when they see
the practice of Gods Church generally so plain for all Catholic assertions,
as for the article of praying for the dead, amongst many other the like, is
now before proved. Call upon them, and ask them in earnest, because it lies
upon thy salvation, whether thou must give any credit to the perpetual
agreement and consent of all ancient doctors? If they say yea: desire them to
answer first to all these places, so evidently confirming our purpose, that
they can not abide any cloud or cover of man's sutteltye, for their shifting to
any forged sense. If they can not, yet let them allege some place of any
ancient writer them selves, which do expressly deny purgatory or prayers for
the dead: as we for the confirming thereof have done in plain terms with out
craft or color many. If they be not able to do so much, yet go further with
them: ask them whether they have any express words in scripture that deny
prayers to be profitable for the dead, not by a fond guess of their own
heads, corrupt consciences, or preiudicate minds, expounded to that purpose,
but I say by express words: or at least (which is liberty enough) expounded
for that meaning by any one man of all the antiquity. If they can allege thee
but one word of scripture construed of any one, I say in all ages, to confirm
their understanding to be current, and not framed for their fantasy, to serve
the necessity of their cause, be bold to follow them. I would not put them
to the pains to make discourse throughout all ages, churches, times, and
doctors, as we have done: but only let them to keep their credit and scholars,
and to save their honesties, bring but one or two of all that ever wrote in the
compass of Gods Church, and thou may with less danger, and better reason,
follow their doctrine. But there is no one such place, I assure the good
reader, neither in scripture, doctor, nor council, nor country, nor age since
the world began. I will go so far in this point: where there was ever
step of any true worship of God, there was prayer found for the dead also.
They can not show me any form of ministration in the Christian world, that was
approved, which has it not expressly: if it be known that it was in deed
the service of any ancient Church, not corrupted by them selves. The same I
dare be bold to avouch for the law of nature, and Moses, because it is
proved already. All their bragging of the example of the primitive Church, the
masses of other countries, of the doctors, of the scriptures, of the counsels,
is but an intolerable delusion and abuse of the simplicity of such, as be not
skillfull in the authors whom they name. For when the matter comes to an
ishue, when they be hard holden, either in this or in any other matter: the^
the doctors, (whom they challenged before the simple for their partakers) were
but men, then they might err, then they have learned only to credit the holy
Scriptures, then there is nothing but Gods word and book with them: which else
full feign would have the doctors consent, out of whom it were but a mean
place which they would not allege for their purpose, if it might be found.
Then if denial of all the doctors judgments serve not their turn, In
accusationem ipsarum sc^ipturarum conuertuntur: Irenaeus Lib. 3. cap. 2
they will not stick boldly to condemn the holy Scriptures with all.

8 Now the youngers must pose their masters (as M. Allen a passing good
Logician does teach them) yea and that is more, he will teach us what to
answer also, but saving his wisdom, he must give us leave to answer for
our selves. First if we be asked how we can shifte our selves against the
general practice of Gods Church, for all popish assertions, and namely this of
praying for the dead: we answer, that we deny the practice to be general,
because we find it not in the holy Scriptures, nor in the most ancient
writers, that lived with in an hundredth years and more after the time of
Christ. And to the particular practice of the later times, we answer, that it
is not sufficient to control the ancient doctrine, and primer practice. If we
be required to show some place of any ancient writer, which denies purgatory
or prayers for the dead, we have already showed that Augustine some time does
doubt whether there be purgatory, some time affirms there is no mean or
third place, but heaven for the elect, and hell for the reprobate, likewise
for praying or satisfying for the dead, we have alleged Cyprian and others:
your own common law, out of Hieronym, says, that the prayers of the living
profit not the dead. 13. quaest. 2. In praesenti saeculo etc. In this present
world, we know that one of us may be helped of an other, either by prayers or
by counsels, but when we should come before the judgment seat of Christ,
neither Job nor Daniel nor Noe, can entreat for any man, but every man must
bear his own burden. Yea Gelasius the Pope says, that no man can be
absolved of the Pope after his death 24. q. 2. C. legatur. Wherefore serve the
Popes pardons then? To that which is required of the express word of God,
forbidding prayers for the dead, we answer, that all places of scripture,
that forbid prayers without faith, forbid prayer for the dead, for faith
is not every man's vain persuasion, but an assurance out of the word of God,
which because we can not have in praying for the dead, therefore we are
forbidden to pray for them. If it be against the hope of Christians to morn
for the dead, much more it is against the faith and hope of Christians to
pray for them. For by our prayer we suppose them to be in misery whom the
word of God does testify to be in happiness, to be at rest, to be with Christ,
John 17. Apoc. 14. And as for a place so expounded by an ancient writer, I
will seek no farther then the place of Hieronym even now alleged out of your
own canon law upon 2. Cor. 5. referring the reader to many other places
alleged in this answer, as out of Cyprian, Origene and others, by which the
intolerable lying, bragging, and railing of this miscreant, shall be better
confuted, then by any contradiction of words. And where as he says we
challenge the old doctors before the simple, for our partakers, whether they be
simple or wise before whom we speak, as we speak not always before the
simple only, but often times and commonly before as wise and well learned men
as M. Allen, we never make any such challenge of them as the Papists do,
which offer to stand to their judgment in all things, and yet in most things
yea in the cheifest points of religion, that be so in deed, or be so compted
of them, they are contrary to the doctors and old counsels, for which cause,
and not for confirmation of truth, we allege the authority of men, for we
have learned, as Augustine says, to give this honor, only to the canonical
scriptures, that we must believe them with out controversy, and all other
writings we receive so far as they agree with the scriptures and not other
wise, wherefore we do not only say that the doctors have erred like men, but
we have proved it, so that the Papists them selves can not say nay for
shame. But to that he says, we do boldly condemn the holy Scriptures, that
it out of all measure impudent, and sclaunderous. And that which he cites out
of Irenaeus, belike as he had it of some foolish priest, that fed him with
notes of doctors, or as he is impudent enough, to peruerte the fathers meaning,
him self, so if he had alleged the whole sentence he might well have taken him
self, and the rest of his fellows by the noses, for heretics, by the
judgment of Irenaeus, whose words be these. Cum enim ex scripturis arguantur,
in accusationem conuertuntur ipsarum scripturarum, quasi non recte hab^ant,
neque sit ex authoritate, and quia vary sunt dictae, and quia non possit
inueniri veritas, ab his qui nesciant traditionem, non enim per literas
traditam illam, sed per viuam vocem. When they be confuted by the scriptures,
they are turned into the accusation of the scriptures them selves, as though
they were not well, nor of sufficient authority, both because the truth can
not be found of them which know not the tradition, for that was not delivered
by writing but by word of mouth. How say you M Allen, who is an heretic by
Irenaeus judgment? who accuses the scriptures as though they were not of
sufficient authority, who says the scriptures are like a nose of wax? who
say the truth can not be found in scriptures without tradition of unwritten
verities? In good sooth M. Allen, you have the worst grace of any that ever I
knew, in alleging the sentences of the doctors, for you allege few or none,
but either in whole or in part they make against you.

9 But if you think that I feane of them, you shall see what shameful shifts
the masters and captains of the contrary assertion have devised for the
defense of them selves: I dare say if the studious be but any whit indifferent,
he will leave their s^hoole for ever. The chief Captain of all these
contentious heads, like an unshamefast child, affi^meth that the doctors
praised and followed the common errors of the ignorant people, in alms and
prayers for the departed.

Brentius answers, that Tertullian making mention of yearly oblations for
the deceased, took his error of the hethen usage of the gentility. And
Augustine (he says) affirmed purgatory, In confessione VVittember.
prayers, and alms for them, for the affiance that he had in men's merits
toward the remission of sins. Melancthon (as though he were no man that
might orre him self) says the doctors were men, In Apologia.
and discented amongst them selves. As for the usage of any celebration in the
world, what room can it have with these champians, when C^luin confesses in
plain terms, Instit. de Coena.
that the celebration of the Sacrament has been contaminated even in a manner
since the Apostles time, and first planting of our religion? and to reduce it to
the purity again, the man frames a new one of his own: so far from
superstition, that it has no step of religion or true worship of God. But
well, the word of God is yet safe with them, there a man may hold them. No
surely: they are as ^alsie with the very scripture it self, when so ever it
makes against them. Brentius before named, is not ashamed to say that he
pardons the author of the Machabeis of his error and ignorance. And that thou
may see the perfect image of a proud heretic, Calvin says thus: as for the
book of the Machabeis I will not vou^hsalfe to make answer to it. Merciful
God what faithful heart or ear could abide these blasphemous tongues^ who
of intolerable arrogance do so deface the examples and doctrine, not only of
the pillours of the whole Christian Church, whom they impudently for lack of
a more reasonable answer, condemn not only of simple ignorance: and error
in this point, with the residue of the whole faithful people, which surely is
over much to say of such learned and godly men as they were, but also of
wilful error and superstition, in bearing and maintenance of the common
ignoration, and ethnicke perswation of the world in their days: and following
the heathen usage of the gentilitie. And yet not content therewith, these lying
masters of their mere mercy be content to offer a pardon to the author of
that book for his error, which book the whole catholic Church of God
through out Christiandome takes for canonical scripture, Which arrogance and
passing boldness, although I persuade my self no virtuous man will in them
allow, since they now being put to their shifts, utterly do condemn those
fathers, whose names with great oftentation they often to the simple repeat to
make them suppose they be not with out scripture or doctors for the proof of
their wilful heresies, yet even the very a^nswere it self which they imagine
here in to disgrace the doctors, and delude the ignorant, is contrary to it
self in sundry points. For they one while affirm that S. Augustine and others
allowed that error which the people by their superstitious devotion had before
their time brought in to the prayers of the Church: and an other while, that
Judas Machabaeus did institute it, who was before these authors diuars
hundreths of years: and somewhile that they borrowed it of the gentilitie, all
which points be repugnant each to other. For neither could that begin in
our Christian doctors days, which was used before Christ's birthe: neither
need they to borowe it of the heathen which was in estimation and praised
amongst the Jews.

9 We need no shifts M. Allen for the authority of the doctors, whom we
never allow for canonical Scriptures, and therefore we may boldly say, as
Augustine says of Cyprian, what so ever we find in them agreeable to the
Scriptures, we receive it with their praise, and what so ever is disagreeable
to the Scriptures we refuse with their leave. Now by what means they fell into
this error that maintained prayer and alms for the dead, I shall have better
occasion to show in the answer to the 14. chapter, although it be not greatly
material, to know how they came into error, when it is sufficiently proved
that they did err. As for the abridgement of Jason, ye Cyrenians story, which
M. Allen makes such a precious jewel, I have answered enough before, that
the author him self, desiring pardon of his readers, has testified
sufficiently, that he was no scribe of the holy Ghost, as also by many other
unavoidable reasons, with the consent of the Catholic Church, which it were
superfluous here to repete. Finally whereas you say, that our answer is
contrary to it self, you seek a knot in a rush. For all may be true. First
the devil suggested superstitious devotion into the Gentiles, by perverse
emulation of whom, Judas might be deceived, and his fact give occasion to the
ignorant people of error, and their ignorance first winked at, because it had
a show of piety, confirmed by custom, might at length be allowed of Augustine
and others who never weighed the matter by Scriptures, but by the common
practice. And this I think is the right degree of prayers for the dead and
purgatory.

That the praying for the dead was appointed to be had in the holy sacrifice,
by the Apostles commandment and prescription: And that our doctors by the
majesty of their name, bear down our light adversaries. CAP. XIII.
1 But that this falsehood may better appear in these men, we will by good
testimony try out, when and by whom, the oblation and sacrifice with other
ordinary reliefes of the departed were so uniformly used through the
Christian world: as like wise it shall be profitable to consider, who were the
first authors of the contrary opinions. And that the holy Ghost by the Apostles
own preaching and prescription, was the first author of this solemn
supplication in masses of all vsages for the departed, I might first prove by
this general rule of S. Augustine. Quod vniuersa tenet ecclesia, Epistol. ad
Ianuar. and de Baptis. contra Donatist. lib. 4. cap. 24.
nec concilijs institutum sed semper retentum est, non nisi authoritate
apostolica traditum rectissime credimus. that which the whole Church observes,
and has always so been kept, being not instituted by any Council, it can
not otherwise be had, but by the Apostles authority and tradition. And so by
the like saying of Leo the great. Dubitandum non est, quicquid in ecclesia in
consuetudinem est deuotionis retentum, Sermon. 2. de ieiunio.
de traditione apostolica, and de S. Spiritus prodire doctrina. It can not be
doubted, but that what so ever is in the Church by general custom of devotion
kept and maintained, it came out of the Apostles tradition, and doctrine of the
holy Ghost. But I will seek with them by certain demonstration, and plain
order of reason that it must needs so be. Praying for the dead was invented
by no man since the Apostles days: A sure way to try the beginning of any
doctrine.
there can no one be named by the adversary, before whom I can not name an
other that praide for the dead. Let him say where he list: this man or that man
was the first that ever praide for the dead in Christ's Church: if I can not
show an other before him so named, to have praide also, we will take him for
the first author, and then he fully stops our course that we can not bring
this observation so high as the Apostles days. But if the adversary can apoint
me out no time nor person that began this usage, before which I am not able to
prove it was practiced, then they can not let us but we must needs drive it
upward, to the Apostles and Christ's own institution.

CAP. XIII.

1 IF prayer for the dead was appointed by the Apostles commandment, why is
there never a word thereof in their writings? there is warrant ^or lesser
matters then this is made of, why is this and all other popish trash counted
their tradition, which can not be warranted by their writing? If I were
disposed to pose you, this question would make you clawe your poll an hundred
times before you could imagine any coulo^able answer. for right answer you
shall never be able to make. But I take not upon me to pose but to answer,
first your authority of Augustine, serves not your turn, for prayers for the
dead have not been always observed, namely in the Apostles times, nor long
after. The saying of Leo the great, may be backed with the writing of Leo the
great. Epi. 10. Sed in hanc insipientiam cadunt, qui cum ad cognoscendum
veritatem aliquo impediuntur obscuro, non ad propheticas voces, non ad
apostolicas literas, nec ad euangelicas auctoritates, sed ad semetipsos
recurrunt. Sed ideo erroris magistri existunt quia veritatis discipuli non
fuerunt. They fall into this folly, which when they be hindered by any
obscurity, to know the truth, have not recourse to the words of the Prophets,
nor to the writings of the Apostles, nor to the authority of the Gospel, but
to them selves. But therefore are they masters of error, because they have not
ben scholars of truth. In these words Leo as great as you would have him.
makes ye Scriptures, and not customs or traditions, the rule of truth. But I
will come to your demonstration, which you call a sure way to try the beginning
of any doctrine, yet under correction of your demonstratiue Logike, I may be
bold to say it is not the proper way, nor the way by which all doctrine may be
tried, and so you break 2. of those principal rules, that Aristotle gives for
demonstration (...) and (...) for the proper way to try all doctrine is by
co^ferring it with the word of God Again the first author of every heresy can
not be named. There was one heresy of them that were called Acephali, because
there was no head known of them. It is hard to name ye first author of the
Manichees, whom the heretics them selves call an Apostle of Christ. The
Chiliastes, the Oph^tes, the Caineanes, ye Sethoites, the Adamianes, the
Melchezed^chianes, the Apostolic, the Hemerobaptistes, and an hundred more
heresies, shall they be thought to have their heresy from tradition of the
Apostles, if the first author of them can not be named? and yet I ween it will
be hard for him to prove out of any authentical writer, that any before
Tertullian, either named or allowed prayer for the dead, who was almost 2.
hundredth years after the incarnation of Christ.

2 If they answer me, that this usage is crept into the church since the
Apostles time, though the first author can not be known: I will also provide,
that there no shift shall serve them. Therefore I ask them whether that man
which first preached it, was resisted by the rest of Gods Church which before
his preaching believed the contrary, or no? That is it say, this doctrine of
praying for the dead when it first came into the church, did any of the true
pastors free from the same error, bark like a good shepherd against the
beginner of that, which they count so great a corruption of truth? Or all the
Church was corrupted with it on one day? say what you think likest in this
case, answer with any probability or reason if you can: say plainly, was
our doctrine ever prea^hed against, or never? if it never were preached
against, then it never began as any novelty or new doctrine? For it could
not be that the Church being free from that doctrine, should straight without
contradiction allow that, which they liked not before. How can any man arise
in the commonwealth, and bring the utter decay of all the old ordres which he
finds, and erect up a new devise of his own, and never man speak a word
against him, but all in one moment allow and like the same, and that without
all record by memory or monument of any change? But this thing is most far
from the Churches and Gods pastors diligence, that never received false
doctrine without open contradiction, and plain noting the party that first
began it, as we shall pluck our gentlemen by the slieue a none. All those that
have any skill in the antiquity, will bear me record, that the pastors did
never hold their peace when any wolf did but once open his mouth against the
sheep. They can tell, that she did never bear the preaching or practice of
any false and erroneous doctrine for one day together. then it must needs
consequently follow, that the doctrine of purgatory and oblation for the
departed with still consent of all nations received in the Catholic Church,
had no beginning after the first institution of our faith and worship of God,
but has joined from the first ground of our Christian institution in Christ's
faith, with that sacrifice and due honor of God which the Apostles by the
suggestion of the holy Ghost planted in all nations with the same faith. Thus I
make my argument: Note.
every falsehood was preached against, and withstanded when it is first
entered, but this doctrine of purgatory and praying for the dead being always
used: was never controwled nor gainsaide in Gods Church, therefore it is no
falsehood, nor ever had any later institution then the Apostles own
prescription.

2 Supposing that this error crept into the Church, though the first author
thereof can not be known, he demands whether any man preached against it
when it began first to be received. I answer if the Pastors of the Church had
done their duty to the uttermost, it could not so easily have prevailed, And
yet it is not to be thought but that some of the true Pastors in that time,
opposed them selves against it, although the history of the Church in that time
when it began to be spread, is to brief and imperfect, that we should be able
to name, who they were that preached against it. Of so many heresies as
Epiphanius names in his time, it were hard to require and impossible to show,
who preached against every one of them, at their first entrance, and yet they
be damnable heresies. In S. Augustines days, of whose time the history of the
Church is largely set forth unto us, who preached or writ against that error
which he and Innocentius Bishop of Rome, and all the church as he confessed did
hold, that infants must receive the holy communion or else they should be
damned? Who preached against this error, except perhaps the Pelagians that were
horrible heretics? Was all the Church corrupted with it in one day? If every
heresy had been beaten down as fast as it sprang, Antichrist should never have
set up his throne in the temple of God. If God had not sent into the world the
efficacy of error, that they which refused to believe the truth, should be
justly condemned to believe lies: the man of sin and son of perdition, had
never aduau^ced him self above all that is called God. 2. Thessal. 2. And
therefore M. Allen pluck not us by the sleue, but your self by the nose, you
are the heretics that refuse to believe the truth, you are they that turn away
your ears from truth to fables, you are they that attend to spirits of error
and doctrines of devils, forbidding to marry, and abstayning from meats which
God has created to be received with thanks giving. There is the brande mark
of Romish religion, that all the water in Tiberis nor in the Ocean sea, shall
not be able to wash out. Must we find out the authors of your heresies? Nay
justify them your selves by the word of God if you can. And because you bring
in a witty example of the common wealth, I will answer you with the like.
Must the Magistrate either justify a theefes possession, or else bring out the
author where he had it? Nay the thief must bring out good proof, how and by
whom he came by such goods, or else he is worthy to be served like such a one.
So shall you not compel us to tell you, where, when, or how your heresy came
in, seeing it is sufficient for us to show, that it came not from God, nor by
the Apostles, nor through their doctrine. But you do well to conclude your
reason in a syllogism, for then by the weakness thereof does appear your mayor
and minor be both false, or at the least wise unable to be proved of you. For
every falshod has not been preached against, at the first entry. And how are
you able to prove, that purgatory and praying for the dead has not been
preached against? therefore your conclusion is as true and as certain as your
premises.

3 But what needs all this a do? by their own consent we shall drive this
doctrine thirtene C. years upward. For so near was Tertullian the Apostles
days, whom they confess to have practiced that point of oblations for the
dead. And ask him where he had it (for surely he invented it not him self)
and he appoints us to his forefathers: De corona militis.
he names the Apostles for the authors and founders thereof, as of many other
things, which he there reckeneth beside, that were generally received, and
now be of heretics likewise contemned. We might yet step two C. year
forward, and find amongst the Apostles own hearers, the same doctrine both
allowed and practiced, but that they will make exception of Dionysius and
Clements works (such shifts men must find that will defend falsehood.) Other
I will name, that be out of their exceptions: Who I think as well for their
time, knowledge, and credit, as their excellent virtue, both can and will
better tell the origin of that thing, the authors whereof were more nigh
their time then ours. If they would believe S. Augustine, as they often
profess they will, the matter might soon be ended: but because I fear they
stand so much in the corrupt conceit of their own singularity, that they
will be bold to reject him, I shall both lay him to their charges and diverse
other of greater antiquity that shall in express words affirm this usage to
come from the Apostles own school. That thereby they may either acknowledge
their errors, or else by such grave and vncorrupt judges, be condemned of
wilful malicious blindness. Thus S. Augustine writes. Ser. 22. de ver:
Apost.
By the prayers of the holy Church, the profitable sacrifice, and alms
bestowed for the souls departed, out of all doubt the deceased be releued, so
that thereby almighty God may deal more mercifully with them the^ their sins
required. For this practice delivered unto us by our fathers, is observed
universally in Christ's Church, that for such as be departed in the communion
of Christ's body and blood, when at the sacrifice they be orderly named,
prayers should be made, and the same sacrifice mentioned to be done for them.
Here, by his words thou understands, that the profit rising by the prayers or
sacrifice to the departed has no doubt in it. They were through the world
used, not in the Church which they say has been for nine C. years corrupted
by supersticious ignorance, but in that Church, which our aduersaires do
confess, maugre their heads, to have been holy, Catholic, and Apostolic.
And it was not then begone, but received by the provision of Gods holy spirit,
of the Apostles: whom he calls the fathers of our faith.

3 It is not denied, but Tertuillan makes mention of oblations for the dead,
but what kind of oblations, it is not yet agreed upon, but such they were, as
were offered for men's birthes, for they be joined together. Oblationes pro
defunctis, pro natalitijs, annua die facimus, we make oblations yearly for the
day of men's death, and the day of men's birth. Now it is not like, they offered
prayers but thanks giving for men's birth, and even so for their death. For
those places, out of the other books, where he speaks of prayers for men's
spirits, I will consider afterward. But in this book de corona militis, if
oblations were prayers, which he says came from the Apostles, he utterly
denies that they came from the Scriptures. Therefore by Tertullians judgment,
you do abuse the Scriptures, which would wrest them to prove out of them that
which he says can not be proved by them. But think you, prayers for the dead
came from the Apostles, because he says so? If you answer yea, then must you
likewise think, that it is a wicked thing to fast on Sunday, or to pray on
your knees, for in the same place, he says that these opinions came also from
the Apostles. If you answer, he says untruly of these, so do we answer of
the other. Now come back of your 13. hundredth years, to seek your apostolic
tradition where you can find it. All is not Gospel that Tertullian has said.
As for the works of Clemens and Dionysius you know full well, they be not
current, and therefore I marvel at your modesty, that you will not now
oppress us with them. But it is because you have store enough beside. Howbeit
if the most ancient fail you, it is not for the later sort to help you. If
Tertullian had no ground of his saying, when he affirmed that oblations for the
dead came from the Apostles, what ground can Augustine have which was 200.
years farther from the Apostles time then he? But where you charge us to
confess, that the Church in Augustines time was holy, Catholic, and
Apostolic, you must wit, if you will, that although we may so confess, in
respect of the substance of true doctrine, which then was taught, yet we do
not thereby justify every error and superstition of that age. But as Augustine
says, in his retractations lib. 2. cap. 18. he does not mean, that the Church
is pure and perfect in this life, with out all spot of blemish, for even the
whole Church by reason of certain ignorance and infirmities of her members,
has need to say every day: Forgive us our debtes.

4 Athanasius (me think the adversary part should quake when I name him) who
was in his days terrible to the wicked, odible to heretics, and to all
virtuous me^ an especial stay in the troblesome times of the Church, whose
grace was so great that he abbrigeth our whole faith into a brief psalm
called the Creed of Athanasius: which is believed of all Christian men no less
then the holy Scriptures of the new Testament. Who as he right well knew how
to defend him self against the wicked Arrians by the doctrine of the Catholic
Church, so he has left us in writing how to arm our selves against the like
aduersaires of truth, with his mind in such other points of weight, as in his
days were not doubted of, which yet might fall in question, by the contentious
wits of many, that can not quiet them selves in the wholesome doctrine of
Christ's Church. Amongst other things, what this holy man's mind was
concerning the vtility and usage of prayers and sacrifice for the dead, and
who were the institutors thereof, thou shall now hear. I will recite but a
part of his heavenly talk, though the whole make wholly for our purpose.
Although (says this holy doctor) he that Christianly is hense in faith
departed be hanged in the air, and his body unburied, yet after thy prayers
made to God, stick not to light lamp and taper at his sepulcher: for these
things be not only acceptable to God, but are rewarded. For the oil and wax
be to him as an holocaust or a sacrifice to be consumed by fire, but that
unbloody host is a propitiation and remission to the party.

It may seem by his words, that when by occasion of punishment, or otherwise
any person was unburied, yet there was made some hearse or monument where his
friends lighted tapers, as they do at this day, and procured the holy Mass,
which Athanasius calls the Unbloody host or sacrifice, Hostia incruenta.
to be celebrated in his behalf, for so I take that when he says that a man
being hong in the air may have tapers and Mass at his sepulcher: though some
seek an other meaning, which may well stand too, and it skilleth not for our
purpose: for so much is plain, that in Athanasius his days, the sacrifice was
called and counted propitiatory even for the dead. But now a little afterward
in the same oration, he instruteth us for the first authors and institutors of
this usage in the unbloody sacrifice, The Apostles be the orderers of our
sacrifice.
and in the burialls of Christian men. All these holy things (says he) the
Apostles of Christ, those heavenly preachers and scholars of our Lord, the
first orderers of our sacrifice, charged to be observed in the memories and
anniuersaires of the departed: etc. he calls the Apostles, Curatores
Sacrificiorum, as you would say, men appointed to take order for all things
perteyning to the solemn ministry of the great and high mystery. As in the
Psalm, Psalm. 49.
the spiritual governors are named. Ordinatores testamenti Dei super
sacrificia: The prouisours of Gods testament touching the sacrifices. The
residue of his holy words thou may find in Damascens oration of the departed,
where he recyteth both the Gregory's of the Greek church, S. Denyse and S.
Chrysostom too: which writers do rather serve my turn now then the Latins,
because they may put us out of doubt for the usage of the Greek, and other
Churches, The end of schism.
which afterward by schism fell together from the true worship of God into
diverse errors. That we may know, those same countries under the government of
these excellent blessed men, to have observed the same things, which to their
own eternal misery, and decay of their Church and countries, they
afterward contemned. For their dissension and division both in this point and
others of no less importance, has procured Gods vengeance so much, that
now they have almost no Church at all: as we may have right good cause to
fear what will become of us, that follow their steps in such points, as in
them have duly deserved Gods grievous plaques.

4 When you name Athanasius, and think we should be so sore afraid of his
name, you have good reason, for you allege nothing else of him but his name. I
have often told you, Damascens report, either for his corrupt judgment, or
his cracked credit is nothing regarded of us. And even the authority of
Athanasius without the word of God, is the authority of God. And as Augustine
says of Cyprian, we count not all his writing for canonical Scriptures, but
we judge them by the canonical Scriptures. The creed commonly called
Athanasius creed, although it be very godly and agreeable to the holy
Scriptures, yet by the judgment of the best learned, was complied by some
later writer, then Athanasius. As for the plague of the Greek Church, which M.
Allen judges to have fallen upon them, for their departing from the Church of
Rome, he judges both falsely and unreasonably. For what schism was the Church
of Africa first plaged by the Vandales, that were Arians, and afterward utterly
subverted by the Saracens? I doubt not but justly, for their sins, but not
for leaving the Romish Church.

5 Amongst other, for that Chrysostoms authority is exceeding grave, I will let
you see his opinion for the institution of these beneficial relieuinges of the
departeds pain. These be his words: Let us sieke out all means whereby we
may best help our brethern departed, let us for their sakes bestow the most
present remedy, that is to say alms and oblation: for thereby to them
ensues great commodity, gain and profit: for it was not rashly nor without
great cause provided, and to Gods Church by his disciples full of wisdom
delivered, and decried, that in the dreadful mysteries there should be
especial prayers made by the priest for all those that sleep in faith. For it
is a singular benefit to them. These were Chrysostoms words, whereby not only
the truth of the cause and first authors of the practice be opened, but that
there is wounderfull benefit to the parties for whom prayers be so made in
the holy sacrifice. The which thing our forefathers well knew, when they were
so earnest after their departure to have a memory at the holy altar. Now adays
heresy has cankered even the very devotion of Catholics, who although they
think it to be true that Gods Church teaches herein, yet the zele of
procuring these means is nothing so great as the importance of the cause
requires. But if they note well those careful admonitions of all these
blessed fathers, they shall perceive that every time that Christ's holy blood
is represented unto God in the Mass for the departed, they feel a present
benefit and release of their pains: they do rejoice (says holy Athanasius)
when the unbloody host, is offered for them. The old fathers to put a
difference betwixt the sacrificing of Christ's own body upon the cross,
Qu^st. 34. ad Antioch.
and the same upon the altar in the Church, do lightly term this way of
offering, the unbloody sacrifice: and the thing offered, which is Christ's
own blessed body, they call likewise the host unbloody. And Chrysostom never
putting any doubt of the first authors of offering for the dead, proves that
it is exceeding beneficial to the deceased, because the Apostles full of Gods
spirit and wisdom, would else never with such care have commanded this
holy action to be done for them. A less a less for our dear freindes
departed, that they must lack this comfort: But woe everlasting to them that
are the cause of so much misery.

5 Chrysostom can no more prove, that prayer for the dead came from the
Apostles, then Tertullian could prove that oblation for the dead came from
them. To detest fasting on Sunday, and to pray kneeling, with diverse like
superstitions, Tertullian refers to the Apostles, as well as prayer for the
dead, deny one and doubt of all the rest. And whereas M. Allen upon
contemplation of Chrysostom words, falls into a hidden agony, and cries
alas alas, if he would consider what the same man writes upon the Epistle
to the Philip. Hom. 3. he would not make so great moan, the loss is not so
great, Procuremus eis aliquid auxilij, modici quide^, attamen iuuemus eos. Let
us procure them some help, in deed but small help, yet let us help them.
Lo (M. Allen) your own doctor confesses it is but small help that can be
procured by prayers, alms, or remembrance of them at the celebration of the
holy mysteries. You will say that soon after he says the Apostles that
instituted such memory, knew that much commodity came to the dead. Then see
how soon he forgets him self, when he follows not the rule of holy
Scripture. Again how like you M. Allen that he allows not prayers nor the
said memory to help them that were Catechumeni, which were learning their
catechism, and dyed before they were baptized? S. Ambrose you say cap. 9. of
this book did pray and offer for Gratianus which was but Catechumenus and dyed
before he was baptized. Again how agrees this with your catholic doctrine
which you boast is so well ordered to your hands, that Chrysostom denies
them prayers, and allows them alms for their help? Catechumenos vero neque
isto solatio dignamur, sed omni huiusmodi destituti sunt auxilio, vno quodam
dempto, quo nam illo? pauperibus illorum nomine dare licet, vnde illis non
nihil refrigerij accedet. As for them that be Catechumeni we count them not
worthy of so much as this comfort, but they be destitute of all such aid,
except one. What one is that? we may give some thing for their sake to the
poor, whereof some refreshing shall come unto them.

6 But hear I pray you what notable words S. Damascen has for the utility
and institution of these things. The holy Apostles and disciples (says he) of
our Savior Christ have decried, Ibidem.
that in the dread sovereign, undefiled, and lively Sacraments (^o he calls
the Mass) there should be kept a memorial of those that have taken their
sleep in faith: the which ordinance, until this day without gainsaying or
controwling, the Apostolic and Catholic Church of God, from one cost of the
wide world to an other, has observed, and shall religiously keep till the
world have an end. For doubtless, these things that the Christian religion
which is without error, and free from falsehood, has so many ages and worlds
continued vnuiolably not without urgent cause, those things (I say) are not
vain, but profitable to man, acceptable to God, and very necessary for our
salvation. Thus far spoke the doctor, setting forth not only his own mind,
but the faith of a number of the peers of Gods Church: wherein to prove this
doctrine to be catholic, he fitly follows the same way which Vincentius
Lyrinensis gave us once for a rule to try truth by. The rule of truth.
Proving that it has antiquity, as a thing that came and has continued even
from the beginning of the Christian religion: declaring that it has the
consent of all nations, because it is and has been practiced through out all
the costs and corners of the wide world: and last, that it has the
approbation of the wisest and holyestmen that ever were in the Church of
Christ. And more then all this, that it shall so continue till the end (though
it be for a time in some peculiar nations omitted) because it is received into
a part of that worship of God, which in the Church can not perish.

6 As for Damascene, I know not wherefore his authority serves, but to fill
up the number, for neither is his credit nor his antiquity comparable with
the former, we refuse not the rule of Vincentius Lyrinensis, concerning
antiquity, so you can prove that it has God to be the author, the Prophets and
Apostles. As for witness under this antiquity, that which had an erroneous
beginning shall have a shameful ending.

7 And this prescription of truth our aduersaires can not avoid, but with
such unseemly dealing as I trust they them selves now be ashamed of, as all
other reasonable men are. For now let them come with brazen facies and
blasphemous tounges, and say that prayers for the dead be unprofitable, that
the rites of the burial be superstitious, that to say the Mass and sacrifice
to be propitiatory for the souls departed, is injurious to Christ's death,
that the doctors praised the errors of the ignorant people of their days,
that they all erred and were deceived, that the Church of Christ has been
led in dark ignorance till these our days: let them bestow these vain
presumptious words where they may take place, for now all wise men do
perceive that all these have their holy institution by Christ and his Apostles,
practiced universally in the primitive Church, embrased of all godly people,
and approved to be wholly consonant to Gods word by the pillors of Christ's
Church: who so consonantly agree together in this point, as well for the
practice and proof, as for the beginning thereof, that to dissent from them and
trust in these reeds of our days were mere madness, that are pufte to and
fro with every blast of doctrine, that care not what they say, so that they say
not as other their forefathers said, that had rather then they would give
over a singular opinion of their own imagination, refuse and deny the
authority of so many notable, wise, ancient, godly, and well learned fathers,
whom we have named. Although we have left out many of no worse judgment,
plainly auouching these things to come into Christ's Church, and worship, by
the ordinance of his holy Apostles. All which things if our adversaries have
read, then they are in a most miserable and heavy taking, that do withstand an
open known truth, and as I fear against their own consciences too. Or if
they have not read these plain assertions of all learned men since Christ's
time, Heretics do against their own consciences
then they are most impudent that so vainly brag in a matter whereof they
are not skillfull. But I trust God will open their eyes, and break their
proud hearts to the obedience of his holy Church.

7 Nay M. Allen, your prescription is not yet proved, that this gear came from
Christ and the Apostles. The oldest witness, that you have alleged, fathered
manifest fables upon the institution of Christ, and the Apostles, as you your
self can not deny, if you have any conscience at all, and therefore not
sufficient to be credited for that you allege him. Wherefore you may bestow
where you list these swelling bragges, of Christ's institution, the Apostles
tradition, the universal practice of the primitive Church. And what so ever
great words beside you have streyned your lunges, to pronounce, you have said
nothing for oblation or prayer for the dead, to be the institution of Christ,
and all this geere, but I may say the same for the drinking of milk and honey
after baptism, for not fasting on Sunday* or prayer on knees, etc: by like
universality, antiquity, consent, authority.

8 If the authors be past hope, yet their followers shall take goodly occasion
to forsake such wicked masters, and be ashamed of all their indecent dealyng,
if they note and consider with me, that the first preachers of this perverse
opinion, were such, that none of all their scholars durst ever for shame for
the proof of their assertion, name their own doctors. Note.
And truly a man might well marvel why heretics having some that did plainly
profess their opinions, had yet rather pick out some dark sentence of any
one of our holy fathers, whom they know to be directly against them, then out
of those same doctors of their own, which in express words make for them.
You shall not lightly hear an heretic that denies praying to saints, or
holds with open breach of holy vows, allege Iouinianus, or Vigilantius.
Nor a Sacramentarie, seek for the authority of Berengarius, or Wicleffe,
though they be of some antiquity, and without color plainly do maintain
the doctrine that so well lyketh them. But they will travel to writh with
plain injury to the author, Note the gile of an heretic.
some sentence out of Augustine, or Ambrose, or some other that by their whole
life and practice open them selves to the world to believe the contrary: and
all this by some show of words for the bearing of their false assertions.
Mark it well (I say) in heretics that they can not for shame of them selves,
Note.
ever name any of the plain auouchers of their own opinions. The cause is,
that the only upholding of their opinions made them infamous to the whole
posterity: And if any honor grew unto them amongst the simple, because they
lacked not the ways to procure the peoples consent, with admiration of their
eloquence, or other plausible and populare qualities in their days, yet truth
following time, their same raised upon so light causes easily decayed, and the
ground of perpetual infamy sattled in wise men's hearts by the wickedness
of their attemptes, remained for a testimony to all posterity of their shame
and ignominy. And this I speak not only of the authors of our common sects,
for they never atteined to any shade of famous report in their days, because
they could deceive none but simple women, but I mean by Arius him self, and
Pelagius with the like, who in their own time being of great esteem amongst
many whom they deceived, yet after their death more and more they grew to
shame and infamy: so far, that who so ever were of their opinions afterward,
durst not yet for shame use their name or authority for proof of their own
doctrine. See you not in our days how fresh the name of Luther, Calvin,
Bucer with that rabble, was amongst the rude people, whom they had won
either with speech, or pleasure of licentious doctrine: and lo now it
decays in a manner or their bones be could. The peoples sensies raueshed with
the present pleasure of such as they heard last, like them so long as they
hear them, afterward their memory remains only to malediction. Psalm. 36.
Vidi impium superexaltatum and eleuatum sicut Cedros Libani, transiui and ecce
non est: quaesiui and non est inuentus locus eius. I have seen the wicked
exalted and set up as the Cedre trees of Libanus, I passed by, and lo out of
hand he is no body: I sought him, and his abiding can not be found. Who so
ever shall seek for our glorious preachers with in this C. year, he shall
find them in such estimation then, as their forefathers be now: that is to
say, to be unworthy the naming of their own adherents, if any of that sect
live and last so long. For let them never look to come to the infamous fame
of Arrius, the best of all these sect masters not worthy to be scholar to a
hundredth of his followers. Thus lo is the case of heretics, liked of fools
when they be alieue, contemned of all men when they are dead.

8 M. Allen marueileth and gives a special note, that we name not Iouinian,
Vigilantius, Berengarius or VVickleffe to be the authors of our doctrine but
rather hang upon some sentence of Augustine or Ambrose, and thinks we are
ashamed of the other. In deed if we depended upon any men's authority, or that
any man or men were the authors of our faith as it fares with ye popish faith,
we should be injurious unto them if we did not acknowledge our fou^ders, as
they do some of theirs. But seeing God him self is the father of that
doctrine, which we have received by his holy word, we neither boast upon
Augustine, nor Ambrose when they dissent therefro, neither are ashamed of
Vigilantius nor Beringarius, when they agree therewith. We refuse not ye truth
that Tertullian and Origin have taught, because they taught heresies also,
neither do we receive ye errors of Cypria^ and Augustine, because they taught
many points of true faith. Only the canonical Scriptures are the rule, by
which we judge of all men and their writings, of all doctrine and the teachers
thereof. It is a ridiculous thing, that M. Allen like a cold Prophet, takes
upon him to tell what shall be thought of our preachers names, within these
hundred years. But what so ever he prateth, the memory of the righteous shall
remain for ever, neither shall they be afraid of any evil report, their
names are written in the book of life which are ordained unto eternal glory,
howso ever they be accounted of by the wicked of this world. And yet there is
no cause, why we should not think that the names and writings of Luther,
Calvin and Bucer, shall remain in good account with Gods Church even until
they them selves shall come with Christ, to judge the world when in the mean
time Eccius, Pighius, Cocleus, and such other shall not be remembered, but as
obstinate withstanders of the truth and enemies of the Gospel.

9 Now in the doctors of Gods Church it is clean contrary, and no less
worthy to be noted for our purpose, for their honor and estimation rising upon
the sure infallible ground of Gods truth, by years and time gathers such
force, that not only their memory is in perpetual benediction before God,
but their works follow them in the minds of their posterity, to their own
eternal praise, and benefit of all their followers. And which is much more to
be woundered at, they have so passed envy and malice of man, that even those
which deadly hate them, dare not but praise them. And such as mislike their
doctrine, and know of their own conscience that they be directly against
them, yet dare not openly charge them with falsehood, as they do us their
scholars, but rather (as I said) seek some sentence out of them to help their
own cause, then with their plain condemnation of falsehood to refuse their
authority. S. Augustine busyed much with the Pelagians: and charged by them in
disputation that he defended the Manicheis doctrine concerning original sin,
for his defense and warraunt, proves unto them that S. Ambrose taught the same
doctrine that he did, and yet they durst not be so bold to call him a
Manichie. Lib. 2. contra Julian.
Dic huic Ambrosio si audes, quae mihi tam petulanter obiectas: Thou heretic
(says he) say the same by S. Ambrose, if thou dare for shame which thou so
sausely and wantonly obiectes to me. Look I pray you, Ambrose was but new
dead when his only name did fear the heretic, Lib. 2. contra Julian.
when other alive of as good learning, was contemned of him, and by words of
reproach charged with the Manicheis sect, who was a wicked man of horrible
sects not long before those days. Pelagius out of doubt thought no better of
Ambrose and Cyprian dead, then he did of Augustine and Innocentius a live,
because their doctrine was all one: but yet the men departed were of more
authority in Gods Church, then the living: of whose continuance to the end men
were uncertain before the proof thereof: and their words being dead might
easily be wrasted to some show of their purpose, when the authority of the
living could not admit any such false dealinge, them selves bearing witness
of the meaning of their own words. Well then our doctors of Gods Church, being
all of holy estimation and blessed memory, do so dase the eyes even of their
own adversaries, that being of the very same doctrine that we (who by Gods
grace be members of the Catholic Church) be of, yet they are past the malice
of those which like not their doing and doctrine. For the heretics well
knowing them to be the authors, or at the least especial mainteiners of this
our assertion of the value of prayers and the holy sacrifice for the departed,
yet they dare not but clokedly reprehende them, when they flow against the
poor Catholics now alive, with words of infinite blasphemy, and
sclaunderous reproach.

Therefore I now will call upon them with S. Augustines words. Come on all
the pack of you, who so ever is the prowdest Protestant upon the earth, call
if he dare S. Denyse, S. Clement, Athanas. Chrysostom, Ambrose, Gregory, Bid,
we are not ashamed of their names as you be of your Masters, Call these
Papists for praying for their freindes, call them Idolaters, call them
superstitious, call them enemies of Christ's passion: say they be injurious to
his death by providing a new sacrifice for sin: tell them they invented
Anniuersaries, months minds, and yearly offeringes, for their own gain:
call them mass mungers, call them blind gydes. No you dare not for your
ears, you dare not disprayse our heavenly gydes: you dare not once name your
own.

9 M. Allen sta^ ^our wisdom, there is no man will grant you that the
doctors of Gods Church Augustine, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Basil, etc. are al
together yours, because they have allowed some one or two things that you do,
and have condemned the whole substance and principal grounds of your
religion. Nay rather count upon ye Popes to be the pillars of your Church,
doctors of your learning, and fathers of your faith, that have been within
these seven, or eight hundredth years, and see whether we might not with more
honesty, brag of Iouinian and Vigilantius, then you in your conscience, can
glory in a whole hundredth of them almost. And whereas you babble of Augustine
and the Pelagians, if you were posed to answer upon your conscience: do you
defend Gods eternal predestination with Augustine, rather then free will with
Pelagius? the only grace of God to be the whole cause of man's salvation as
Augustine does? or the merits of works as the Pelagians do? And whereas you
allege that saying of Augustine, dic huic Ambrosio, etc. to prove that Ambrose
may not be gain said, what so ever he writ, you shall hear what Augustine
him self says of the same Ambrose, when he was pressed with his authority by
the Pelagians, as though he defended freewill in his book de gratia Christi
contra Pelagium, cap. 43. Beatus inquit Ambrosius Episcopus in cuius praecipue
libris Romana elucet fides, qui scriptorum inter Latinos flos quidem enituit,
cuius fidem and purissimum in Scripturis sensum, ne inimicus quidem ausus est
reprehendere. Ecce qualibus and quantis praedicat laudibus quamlibet sanctum
and doctum, nequaquam tamen authoritati Scripturae canonicae comparandum.
Blessed Ambrose (says the Pelagian) that Bishop in whose books specially, the
Roman faith does shine, which glistered as a certain flower among the Latin
writers, whose faith and most pure sense in the Scriptures, no not his enemy
durst reprehend, etc. Behold (says Augustine) with what and how great praises
he extolleth him, which though he be never so holy and well learned, yet is he
not to be compared with the authority of the canonical Scriptures. Lo here
the authority of Ambrose, or any man. And by the way note here the heretical
brag of the Roman faith. Finally where you stand forth, like a peevish
quarrel picker to dare us with S. Augustines words, we may well say unto you,
as to such a busy body: good fellow thou make more a do then thou need,
here is no man disposed to strive with Clemens, Dionysius, Athanasius,
Chrysostom, nor Augustine, if they have spoken any thing that helps the
matter, bring it forth where due trial may be had, in the mean time, brag
of them as much as thou will, thou shall never be able to prove, that of 20.
errors which thou defendest, they did hold one. If they have spoken otherwise
then truth in any matter, they must be told of it as well as other men. But
thou must not think, that for one error common with them, thou must hold an
100. contrary to them. Thou do them wrong, to make them thy partakers, as
thou shall well know when the trial comes, therefore quiet thy self, and
talk of thine own mates, as for those men, thou have little to do with them,
nor they with thee, but for sclaundering of them to be altogether on thy side.

10 Such force has the truth, and such fear there is in falsehood: and yet
these doctors must needs be in a thousand times worse case then we be, if the
doctrine of purgatory and prayers be not true. We may be saved or at least
reasonably excused, by following: they in leading us in falsehood, can have no
excuse of their impiety. But how glad may all we Catholics be in our
hearts, that have the full consent of all them in the proof of our believe,
out of whose works the adversaries would be glad of one likely sentence. And
whose life and doctrine are so glorious in Gods Church, that their own
adversaries raling at us alive, yet dare not but with great fear once blemish
their names departed: Though sometimes it brastithe out in some one of them to
their own miscredit. So beutifull is the light of truth. And on the other
side, how miserable is their careful case that follow and defend that
doctrine, the authors whereof they dare neither acknowledge nor name: whom all
good men with open mouth boldly do reprehend, and their own scholars dare
not defend. Such a glorious majesty this doctrine of theires bears, that
pricketh up with pride those that be alive, and blotteth out of honest memory,
her doctors that be dead.

10 Nay M. Allen, though those doctors build some hay or stuble, upon the only
foundation Christ, their case is ten thousand times better then yours, which
build nothing but dirt and donge tempered with hay and stuble upon no
foundation at all except it be the sand, and seek by all means to dig up
the only true foundation of our faith Jesus Christ, making him nothing better
then a common person: except his bare name: and woe may be to such Catholics,
as can find nothing but hay and stuble, where such store of precious matter
is, and the most precious corner stone the foundation of all excellency. And
happy be those, which not regarding the streams of waters, that run through
the veins of earth, but seeking to the only fountain of heavenly truth,
contained in the holy scriptures, have certain comfort of salvation while they
are alive, and sure possession of felicity with Christ, as soon as they are
dead, yea which dye not at all, because they believe in Christ which is life,
nor enter into judgment, but pass from death of this body, which is
temporal, unto life of body and soul which is eternal.

The first Author of that sect which denies prayers for the departed is
noted, his good conditions and cause of his error be opened, what kind of men
have been most bent in all ages to that sect. And that this heresy is ever
joined as a fit companion to other horrible sects. CAP. XIIII.
1 But yet, because they have diffamed our practice in praying and offering for
the dead, by referring it to a later origin then the Apostolic authority and
tradition, seeing we have fathered our usage upon such as the adversaries dare
not blame, we will help them to seek out the fathers of their faithles
persuasion, lest by the fear and bashfullnesse of their own scholars, they be
unkindly forgotten. Mary to find out these obscure loyterers it will be
somewhat painful, because as thieves do, they keep by ways: and lightly
tread not in honest men's paths. For the finding out of records for the
testimony of our truth, we kept the day light, the high way of Gods Church.
All the known notable personages, in the holy City of God offered them selves
both to witness, and prove with us. We drove this truth from our days
through the midst of that holy community which S. Augustine calls the
City of God: and our adversaries will not say otherwise but they were the
lively members of that happy and heavenly fellowship. We brought the practice
of it to the holy Apostles by plain account, we went with the truth of our
cause to the law of Moses, The high way of truth.
from thense by like light to the law of nature. But now for the other sort,
we must leave the city of God and the fellowship of these noble personages, of
doctors, Apostles, Prophets, and Patriarchs, and seek on the lift hand in
the other city, which is of Augustine named the city or commonwealth, as a
man might call it of the devil: in which body, all practice of mischief and
origin of error, ishuing from that unhappy head to the corrupt and deadly
limbs thereof, is to be found. We shall hear of the adversary persuasion
then, in the company of Anabaptists, The by way of heresy.
of Arrians, of Saduceis, of Epicures: where so ever the weeds of the common
enemies corrupt seed grows, there shall we find amongst breares and
brembles, this choking weed with all. For as the true preachers, the Apostles
of Christ Jesus, did sow in the beginning of the Christian church, which was
the spring of the word of life and truth, amongst other heavenly seeds of
true doctrine, that profitable practice for the relief of such, as were hense
departed in the sleep of peace, with the decent order which ever fithens the
Catholic Church has obediently followed, Math. 13.
even so, Inimicus homo superseminauit zizania: the common enemy came
afterward and ouersewe darnell, and cockle, either for the utter choking, or
else for the especial let of that good seed, which the Master of this field
by his household servants had plentifully sown before. This common
adversary, as our master him self expounds it, is the Devil: who, as he
in all other things beneficial to mankind is a great stay, so Christian
men's commodity in this point he notably hinders by his wicked suggestions
and deuilish devise, whereby he provoke many under the show of Gods word or
bare name thereof (for that is the lambs cote which this wyely wolf boroweth
to mask in) to be unkind, unnatural, and with out all godly affection toward
their departed friends. The which contrary corrupt seed of false doctrine we
right well know came of the said adversary, because it was long after
ouersowen: learning further of Tertullian, Tertul. de praescript.
Id verum esse quodcunque primum, id adulterinum quod posterius. That to be
true that was first taught, and that to be false and forged, which came latter.

CAP. XIIII.

1 WHen the Apostolic writing, can not be showed, it is but the point of an
heretic to boast of Apostolic tradition. So did the Valentinians, although
their heresy were new, when they were confuted by the Scriptures, shrowed
them selves under the name of traditions, as we have showed before, out of
Irenaeus lib. 3. ca. 2. And therefore it is but vain bragging, that you promise
to seek out any other fathers of our persuasion, then the Apostles of Christ,
by whose holy writings, we never refuse to be judged. what if any heretic have
affirmed some thing, that is true? is truth worse in an heretics mouth? The
devils them selves confessed Christ. Their confession was true, their
testimony was refused. So if any heretic have confessed the truth, we may
receive the truth and yet reject his testimony. For truth has testimony of God
his word and whether it be affirmed or denied by the devil, it is all one. The
high way that you prate of, is a bye way, for the Scripture is the only high
way to the truth, with the guidance of Gods spirit. And yet that way which you
have taken, has so many hills and holes, woods and thickets, that you have
rather flyen over it in a dream and imagination, then travailed through it in
deed when you walked through the city of God, which Augustine describes. I
marvel you could not see the western Babylon, Rome, to be the city or common
wealth of the devil. lib. 16. cap. 17. lib. 18. cap. 21. cap. 22. cap. 27. The
mother of all abominations of the earth, which either invented or tempered of
others invention that golden cup full of abominations and uncleanness of her
whordoms, with which she made drunken all the Kings of the earth. And
therefore that we can not read out of the word of God, we shall hear of
Purgatory, among the Paganes, Carpocratianes, Heracleonites, and Montanistes,
of whose heresies and pestilent practices, the whore of Babylon has patcht up
her purgatory and sacrifices for the dead, as by and by I shall declare. In
deed the envious man the devil, has sowed these wicked sect masters. And that
doctrine which is first, agreeable to Tertullians rule is undoubtedly true, and
that which is later is false. But how shall the first doctrine be known but
by the word of God, wherein all ye doctrine of God is taught. But by ye holy
Scriptures, which are able to make the man of God perfect and prepared to all
good works. And seeing, praying, and offering for the dead as Tertullian him
self confesses, is not taught by the Scriptures, it is no good work whereto
ye man of God should be prepared. And for as much as you have given me example
of a syllogism in Baroco in the last chapter, I will frame you the like now.
All good works are taught by the Scriptures, oblatio^s for the dead are not
taught by the Scriptures, therefore oblations for the dead are no good works.
The mayor is S. Paul. 2. Timot. 3. The minor is Tertullians de corona militis.
Deny the conclusion if you dare.

2 And yet besides that general and most certain instruction, learned
Damascen, helps us to the trial of this peculiar case. Doubting not to
affirm, that all such cogitations as do enter into man's head against the
prayers or charitable works for the departed, be the devils envious and
subtle suggestions, for the hinderaunce of our brethern departed from the
heavenly joys. For thus he writes in a sermon for the same purpose. That old
serpent (says he) whose endeavor is to corrupt and deface the good and
acceptable works of God, and to lay snares for the entrapping of men's souls,
who is much perced through brotherly love, and brasteth in sunder for the envy
that he bears toward our faith, and finally is madded by our natural
compassion one toward an other, as one that is the utter renouncer of all
good laws, he enspireth to some a feigned and false imagination clean contrary
to the holy constitutions: that is to say, that all good and acceptable
works, before God, should no whit proffet the departed souls.

If this writers judgment be good, as it is sure most sound, Our Protestants
be inspired by Damascens judgment.
then must all our unnatural and unkind preachers have an especial inspiration
of the devil him self, so often as they hinder favor and grace from the
dead. For as he reduced our origin to the Apostles, so he doubts not to
auouche, the contrary persuasion to be evidently moved by the old serpent, of
especial envy toward man's salvation. And now if thou list know in whom
this subtle suggestion took first place and root, Of the author of this new
sect^.
after the long usage of the other, according to the Apostles planting: we
shall make thee for thy especial comfort partaker thereof also. We will not
use the adversaries, as they do us: charging us with later preaching or
doctrine then the Apostles planted, and yet can neither tell, where, nor by
whom it began. But we shall by open evidence call the woolfe by his name. Let
an heretic but set out foot, and once open mouth, though he do no harm at
all, yet the watcheman of Israel has him by the back straight. The dogs
were never so dumme in Gods Church, but they would bark at the first
appearance of any strange cattle. For that, the notation of his arising and
name, was not only a warning to the present time to take heed to their faith,
but an admonition to all the posterity to beware of the like. And it was ever
counted a refutation of an heresy to the full, to reduce it to a latter
infamous author, by the certain record of the Churches history. The which
kind of reason both amongst the learned has singular strength, and is
sensible for the people, and of the adversary utterly invincible. Irenaeus
uses it against the heresies of his time, as a demonstration of much force.
What, says he, before Valentinus there was none of that his false sect, Lib.
3. cap. 4.
and he came in with his seed, after the first preaching of our faith a good
while. I can tell when he began, how he increased, how long he continued.
The trial of false preachers.
Both he and that other Cerdon entered first under the government of Hyginius,
grew upward under Pius, and continued till Anicetus time: and so making the
like account of other archeheretikes, at length thus he concludes: all these
rose up in their apostacy long after that the Church was ordered in faith and
doctrine. In this sense spoke Irenaeus.

2 Damascene your doctor, which knew the depth of Satan so well, should first
have reproved that persuasion by Scripture, and then it had been easy to have
found out the policy of the devil. But when we learn by Scripture, that your
doctrine is contrary to the faith, and hope of Christians, it is not hard to
judge, that the devil invented it, under color of charity to overthrow
faith, and under show of help of me^, to dishonor God. You spend many words
in vain, to prove that the first author of an opinion being found, the opinion
is found to be an heresy. It shall be granted with all favor, but so that no
man shall be counted the first author of an opinion, that is able to prove his
opinion out of the word of God. And withal, that who so ever is not able to
prove by the word of God, any opinion that he holds obstinatly, though he
have many authors before him yet is he nevertheless an heretic.

3 But the rule is common and certain as any can be in the world, and I
would stand upon the ground thereof against all false doctrine in the
world, A general rule to know heresy by.
and thus it is: Any opinion, that may be truly fathered upon any private
man, that was long after the truth was first preached by the Apostles, if it
be upon a point of our faith, and contentiously maintained, it is an heresy.
And thus again: who so ever was withstand in his first arising and preaching,
by such as were in the unity of the Church, he was a false teacher, and his
abettours be heretics. And the force of this conclusion is so great, that the
heretics them selves if they can get any likely show of raising of any
doctrine, or practice of Gods Church in these latter days, they think they
have a good argument against the Catholics. Therefore they would father
transubstantiation upon this Council, the adoration of the Sacrament upon that
Pope, indulgencies upon that bishop, etc. For they be as saulcie with Gods
Church, Counsels, and chief governors, as we be with the Jack strawes of
Geneua. And yet when they have traualed to their hearts ache, they can find no
one thing first invented by any of them, whom they falsely name to be the
authors thereof. But well seeing it is so strong an argument of heresy, to
have the offspring of a later author, with plain prouiso of Gods Church for his
markinge, let us add so much strength to our cause, to have the father of the
contrary falsehood known, and noted of the antiquity, by his name.

3 If you have not a better understander, then you are a rule giver, your rule
is false, for though you hedge it in with many conditions, yet you leave out
the chiefest, which is that the opinion it self be contrary to the truth, first
preached by the Apostles, or else it is no heresy, though it may be truly
fathered upon any man private or public, sooner or later. And here I muse why
you put in the condition of a private man: belike if the Pope invent a new
doctrine, because he is a public person that can not err, it must not be
taken for heresy. In your second rule, except you understand that the opinion
of him which is withsta^ded, be new and of his own invention, the withstanding
thereof, no not by good men, makes it not false. They that defended that
heretics should not be rebaptised, were withstoode by Cyprian and all the
Bishops of Africa (who were notwithstanding their error in the unity of the
Church) yet were they not heretics nor their opinion heresy, because it was
not of their invention but of the word of God. And whereas you affirm, that we
can not find any of those things invented by them by whom we say they were
invented, though we trauail until our hearts ache: I answer though you seek
until your head ache and lie until you have worn your tongue to the stumpes,
you shall neither find those things in the word of God, nor to have any other
authors, the^ ye writers of your own sect have named to be ye fathers of most
of them. And that you charge us with like saucines toward your Prelates, that
you use toward ye Jack strawes of Geneua, if you had not thereby confessed
your self to be a saucy Jack, you might have given us occasion to think no
less of you. For although perhaps you count the chief teachers of that Church
for Jack strawes, yet the world can testify, that there is more gravity and
modesty in the lightest persons of all that Church, then has appeared of many
Popes and Cardinals of your Church of Rome.

Cap. 75. li. 3. In Anacephal.
4 Epiphanius that notable man in his book that he wrote for the confutation of
all the heresies that were before his time, and in other of his works too,
names an obscure fellow one Aerius to be the first author of this heresy,
that prayers and sacrifice profits not the departed in Christ. But what manner
a fellow he was, and how lickely to be the founder of such a school, thou
shall perceive best by the writers words. When Aerius could not obtain the
byshopricke of Eustathius deposed, after that he was once perfectly well
skilled in Arius doctrine, he invented new sects of his own: affirming that
there should be no offering for the departed, and of him lo the scholars were
called Aerians. Let not the simple (whom I would help in this cause) be
deceived by the liknes of these two names, Arius: and Aerius: Arius. Aerius.
for this later was the author of their sect, and was a follower of the first
called Arius in his doctrine beside. And of the same sect and sectmaister, S.
Augustine thus says, following Epiphanius: The Aerians were so named by one
Aerius, In lib. de haeres. ad Quod vult.
who taking snoffe that he could not get a byshopricke, fell into the heresy
of Arius first: and then added thereunto, other heresies of his own making:
saying that we should not offer sacrifice for the dead, nor observe the
solemn appointed fastes of the Church, but that every man should abstain when
he list. And there both he and Epiphanius do reckon more of his holy opinions,
which I omit. For it is enough for our purpose, and to confunde all the
heretics of our days, that this opinion was noted as it spronge up in the
primitive Church for heresy, One that has forsaken the Church is indifferent
to what heresy you will.
and the authors not only condemned as heretics in that point, but in many
other things beside. For I never read of, nor yet knew any heretic, but if
he once mistrusted the catholic Church, the Devil was hable to persuade with
him as well in a number of matters as in one. And that is the cause that any
man seduced, falls from one falsehood to an other, till he wholly be drowned in
the waves of tempesteous doctrine. And therefore they call their doings,
Proceeding. Prouer. 18.
And when he comes once at the bottom, then (God knows) he sets light by
the matter, contemns it, and is often past recovery, as it is said: Peccator
cum in profundum venerit, contemnit. Even so did this Aerius, first through
ambitious pride fall to the Arians sect, but because he counted it nothing
glorious to be a scholar, he would be a master, and that of a misheuous
matter, and a matter repugnant to the sense of all Christ's Church, which
before his preaching, generally as after, received and faithfully used prayers
and oblation for the dead. Of which consent of the universal world, and the
heretics follye in withstanding the same, the said Epiphanius says thus: I
will report his words in Latin, because they sound very well, though him
self wrote not in that language: Assumpsit ecclesia in toto mundo, Vbi sup. 13.
assensus est factus antequam esset Aerius, and qui ab ipso appellantur
Aeriani: quis autem magis de his nouit, hic ne seductus homo qui etiam superest
nunc, an qui ante nos testes fuerunt? etc. Thus in English. The Church has
received this truth through the wide world, it was sattled in all men's minds
before Aerius was borne, or any of his sect that be now called Aerians. And
who I pray you is most like to know the truth of these things, this false
wretch yet living at this day, or else the faithful witnesses that were
before our time? Behold here you worshipful master* you may suerly take
great cause of comfort in his lively word: mary Sir he might have been an
Archbishop in our days, for he loved neither fasting nor praying. He was
feign to be an heretic for anger, because he could not be made a bishop
then, who now if he were in this happy age, when the light is more plentifully
powered upon the people, might have been promoted at Caluins decease to the
ouerlooking of Geneua. But his opinion was so notorious false, that it grew to
no great head at that time, or else it was not so much regarded because it
was joined to that horrible falsehood of Arius, against the blessed Godhood of
Christ Jesus our Savior. Note well.
Every great wast of religion has many false opinions knit together, amongst
which one being as principal ground, shadoweth the other lesser branchies: as
now the blasphemy of the holy Sacrificie and Sacrament being the fountain of
their heresies, in a manner covers the meaner puddells of their stinking
doctrine. And amongst other, this unnatural affection of forbidding the
relief of the parted, seems ever to be joined as an appendix to other
falsehoods. For in holy Damascens days this sect appeared again with other
false doctrine, Damascen in oratione pro defunctis and de haeres.
as a companion of all mischief. And to prove it to be an heresy, he seeks
out the first founder thereof, and finds even as before, that under the
devil this Aerius was the father of that faythlesse assertion. Whom he
bayteth well fauourdly in a whole oration and so drives the woolfe in to the
woodde again.

4 Now at the length comes the author of this heresy by the testimony of
Epiphanius and Augustine. But neither of them confuteth it by the Scriptures,
but by the common error of their time. I could prove out of Irenaeus and
Epiphanius, that the first that brought in estimation the figure of the cross
and images were the Valentinians and Carpocratianes. But that is no answer to
this matter, I have promised to prove that the opinion of purgatory, had the
same original that the most notable heresies had. Tertullian though him self
an heretic, yet truly describes the original of heresies in his book de
praescriptionibus aduersus haereses. That as true doctrine was received from
Christ by the Apostles, ^o heresy from the devil by Philosophers and
Gentyles. Also in his book de anima he shows that all Philosophers which
granted the immortality of the soul, as Pythagoras, Empedocles, and Plato,
assigned 3. places for the souls departed, heaven, hell, and a third place of
purifying. Carpocrates as Irenaeus does testify, was a great admirer of
Philosophy, in so much that with the imagies which he made of Christ, he
joined the imagies of Pythagoras, Plato, and Aristotle. This heretic learning
out of Plato his philosophy, that men's souls must be purified after their
death, invented a kind of purgatory out of the opinion of Pythagoras, and
proved it out of that place of S. Matthew. Thou shall not come forth until
thou have paid the uttermost farthing, even as the Papists do Iren. lib. 1.
ca. 24. The Heracleonites as Augustine witnesses, came yet a step more
toward the Papists, for they would redeem their dead after a new manner,
namely by oil, balm, water, and invocation said over their heads in the
Hebrew tongue. But Montanus of whom Tertullian received his heresy, had in all
points the opinion of the Papists. First that the Patriarchs before Christ's
coming were in hell, that Abraham's bosom was in hell, or in the lower parts
(as M. Allen had rather speak) that only Martyrs and perfect men are
privileged, of God to go into Paradise, that all small offenses must be
punished after this life, where the prison is and the uttermost farthing to be
paid, witness of this is Tertullian in his book de anima. ca. de inferis, etc.
vlt. an aliquid patia^tur animae apud inferos, etc. His words are these, after
he has proved that souls may suffer after their death. In summa, cum carcerem
illu^, quod Euangeliu^ demo^strat inferos intelligimus, and nouissimu^
quadra^tem modicum quodque delictum mora resurrectionis, illic luendu^
interpretamur, nemo dubitabit anima^ aliquid pe^sare penes inferos salua
resurrectionis plenitudine, per carne^ quoque. Hoc etia^ Paracletus
freque^tissime co^me^dauit, si quis sermones eius ex agnitione promissoru^
charismatu^ admiserit. To conclude, when we do understand that prison which
thing the Gospel shows, to be hell, or the lower parts, and do expound that
the uttermost farthing, which is every small fault, must there be punished with
delay of resurrection, no man shall doubt, but that the soul in hell does
suffer something, saving the fulness of the resurrection by the flesh also. And
this the comforter has often times commended, if any man will admit his
sayings, by acknowledging of the promised gracious gifts. By the comforter he
means the spirit of Montanus, whose heresy he defended. And therefore it is
not otherwise to be thought, but that the Montanistes upon the ground of this
opinion, not content with the oblations for the dead which the Church then had
by perverse emulation of the Gentiles, and yet were but oblations of thanks
giving, as they could be no other for the birth days, they added also prayers
for the spirits of them that, were dead, whereof Tertullian makes mention in
his books de castitate and de Monogamia, which were both written to heretics
of his sect, and by those prayers laboreth to prove, that second marriages are
not lawful. Also in his book de anima before named, though for an other
purpose, he rehearses a miracle of a woman whom he knew of his sect (for none
other he counted of the Church) which after she was dead and prepared to
burial, by prayer of the Priests, at the first beginning of his prayer, she
took up her hands from her sides, and held them up as they that use to pray,
and when the office of burial was ended, laid them down again. This miracle
I take to have been an illusion of Satan, to confirm that new opinion, that
prayers profited the dead, as that also which he reports of hear say, of
some of his sect, that when two bodies should be buried in one grave, the one
lay further and made room for the other: which was no doubt a sleight of
Satan, to commend the unity of heretics. And that the practice of the Church
for oblations for the dead at the yearly day of their birth, were taken from
the Gentiles, it appears by this, that Tertullian counts them of all one
origin with the oblations pro natalitijs, that is for the birth days. which
Beatus Rhenanus a Papist, and a great antiquary, does confess, affirming that
by the canons of the Nicene council and other councels, which he has seen in
libraries, those oblations pro natalitijs with other superstitions, that
Tertullian fathereth upon tradition of the Apostles, were abrogated. And the
oblations them selves, which were at burialls, marriages, and birth days, he
affirms were money that was offered in alms, to the relief of the poor.
Origin to much a Philosopher was not content with Plato his purification, but
he must bring in Platoes fire also, and that he would build as the papists
do, and as he had better reason then the Papists have, out of the 1. Cor. 3.
but because the Apostle said, that every man's work, should be tried by fire,
he thought that all men should pass through his purgatory, and at length be
saved. Afterward when prayers for the dead were grown out of memoryes for the
dead, which were without prayers in Origens time, as appears in his words
in Job. lib. 3. but kept with alms to the poor and rejoicing for their rest,
about S. Augustines time, the name of purgatory was first invented, by some
mediatores and conciliatores of Origens error, with the erroneous practice of
the church. And this was a great corruption of those ancient times, that they
did not always weigh what was most agreeable to the word of God, but if ye
Gentiles or heretics had any thing that seemed to have a show of piety, or
charity, they would draw it into use, with such correction as they thought was
sufficient. So they took the sign of the cross from the Valentinians,
oblations for the days of death and birth of the Gentiles, prescript times of
fasting and unmeasurable extolling of sole life, in the ministers of the
Church, from the Maniches, Tacianistes, and Montanistes: prayer for the dead
of the Montanistes: purgatory fire of the Originestes, yea Ieronym was almost
fallen into the heresy of Tertullian in condemning second marriages: yea eue^
the name of sacrifice which was commonly used for the celebration of the Lords
supper, they took up of the Gentiles. Finally it appears that the faithful
in Tertullians time, which were not of his sect, believed not that the souls of
Christians departed, came into his hell or lower parts, where he makes so
many mansions, but that they were placed in heaven where Christ is, against
whom he reasons after his brawling and taunting manner, that he uses against
the Catholics libro de anima, cap. de inferis. And they that so believe, allow
no prayers for the dead. Wherefore it is left that Montanus and his followers
were the first that taught prayers for the dead to be profitable, because that
the souls of the faithful that were not made perfect by martyrdom or other
straight penance, must pay the uttermost farthing in prison, and suffer the
least offenses in the lower parts, if they were not helped with prayers.
Therefore Aerius was not the first that held our opinion but Montanus before
him was the first that held your opinion thoroughly, against the Catholics of
his time. Wherefore you are welcome home for heretics by your own rule.

5 Then for many a day together this doctrine was dashte till the time of holy
S. Bernard and Petrus the reverent Abbate of Cluny, by which two notable
housekeping dogs, that were never dumme in the Churches need, this woolfe
appearing once again was both noted and oppenly vanquished. Note well how
this falsehood ever joins it self to other horrible sects.
And in their days, this falsehood that before was a compagnion of the Arrians
(mark well the course of things good reader) was now matched with the
Anabaptists: who in that time, as the said writers do record, did call them
selves Apostolici, that is to say Apostolic or followers of the Apostles, so
they would be termed to delude the ignorant by the bewty of that glorious
name, as now their offspring call them selves, Euangelici: that is to say,
gospellers, and the pure preachers of the word, and gospel. S. Bernard touched
them to the quick in a sermon, by these words, Lo (says he) these
miscreants, lo these dogs, they laugh us to skorne that we baptize infants,
Sermon 66. super cantic.
that we pray for the dead, that we require the help of holy Saints, they
exclude Christ's grace in all sorts and every kind, in old and young, in
the live and in the dead. Look you now, with their Gospel like name they
were counted no better then profane dogs of this holy father, that laughed so
skornefully at Christ's Church for praying for the dead and invocation of
Saints: and shall we make such Jewels of their scholars now a days? In all
ages since this wielde seed was first sown, the true preachers, the workmen
of Gods harvest, have ever plucked it up, as it first appeared: The which wede
was better knowene from the corn, because it ever grew amongst the bundels
of briers and brembles, and was of that waisting nature, that it could not be
tolerated without the utter choking of the wheat.

5 Barnard was but a late writer to speak of, and whether those that were
called in his time Apostolici, were sclaundered for denying of baptism to
infantes when perhaps they denied only some of your popish ceremonies which
you use, about baptism, I am not able to say, certain it is that the godly
called pauperes de Lugduno and Waldensis, which were about that time, were
sclaundered with many detestable opinions, which it is now well known that
they never did hold. But how so ever it were, that which they affirmed of
truth, must not be condemned because of that where in they erred: the Arrians
were the first that added unto the Symbol the article of descending into Hell:
shall we think worse of that article which is true, because of there heresy
which is false?

6 This doctrine (I say) being of it self very pernicious, yet it is ever in
company of other mischief. For the principal author of this sect was an
Arian, then the followers as Bernard witnesses, were Anabaptists or worse. To
whom all men much marvel that God should rather reveal such mysteries of
truth, then to other that were sownde in faith. And in deed I would gladly
meet with some one good fellow or other of that sect, that were learned with all, that he might resolve me in this doubt, why this conclusion of not offering
or praying for the dead, of not keeping the ordinary fastes, of contemning the
Saints help in heaven, and the residue of your new Creed, why God (seeing
all light of truth comes of his grace) opens these mysteries always and
only, to such as you your selves can not deny to be heretics. I trovve no
Protestant ca^ answer with reason to thi^ point.
Why did he reveal in the primitive Church that doctrine to an Arian, being
an open enemy of his holy name, and not to Athanasius or Epiphanius, or some
other blessed men of that time? I stand the longer upon this point, that the
world and who so ever is the simplest, may behold your misery and shame:
for I know you can say nothing in this case for your defense, but even bear
with black blotted consciencies the infamy of wilful blindness. How say
you, did not your doctrine afterward appear again amongst wicked
Anabaptists, that deny amongst other things, the baptising of infants? it was
neither reveled to Bid nor Bernard I warrant you. Here this sect joins with
the sacrame^taries and the rest of miscreaunts.
But come lower yet to our own time: you know full well we have store of
Anabaptists, of Arians, of Saduceis, of Epicures, and of all other sects that
the devil ever devised (such light of truth has our happy age by your
preaching) tell me truth now, be not all these whom you count heretics as
well as we do, be they not all I say of your opinion in this matter and not
one of them of our?

6 I may by the example of Christ answer one question with an other: why was
it first reueiled to the Arians in council holden against Christ? that the
article of his descent into hell, was meet to be added to the creed and
confession of faith, which was not reueiled to so many godly me^ as set forth
the Symbol, nor to the holy Nicene Council. Answer me if you can, or any
Robin good fellow of your sect* learned or unlearned, is it any prejudice to
the truth of that article? or to the right that it has to be placed in the
creed, that it was first added by the Arrians? why was the truth reueiled to
heretics concerning rebaptisation, rather then to Cyprian and so many
catholic bishops? why was it reueiled to the Pelagians, that infantes might
be saved without the participation of the sacrament of Christ's body and blood
rather then unto S. Augustine, Innocentius bishop of Rome, and as Augustine
says all the catholic fathers of that time? which thought it was as
necessary for them to receive the communion as to be baptized. If heretics
should not affirm something that were true, they should never deceive any
man. And sometime Satan affirms the truth, not because he will have it
believed, but rather that proceeding out of his lying mouth it might the sooner
be discredited. And therefore sometimes Arrians, Pelagians, Anabaptists and
such like, by the subtilty of Satan, have affirmed something that is true,
either to win credit to their manifold lies, or else to drowen the credit of
that truth, among so many errors.

7 Nay I will pose you further, is not your preaching the very ready way to
all such extreme blasphemies, as they boldly maintain? did ever man fall
from the Catholic Church to those further heresies then you yet openly
profess, but he took yours by the way, as a plain passage to extreme
infidelity? yea your opinions do so well stand with the other, that they
need not afterward to refuse any one point of all your doctrine to maintain
their own. There is no article of Catholic doctrine, but it is as much hated
of them, as of your selves. Help your selves here my masters, or else all the
world will take you to be in your hearts, Mark well.
of the same sects whereunto your faith is always so dearly joined. Put your
heads together, and tell us why your doctrine is so dear to the Aria^s, and
all wicked men, and so hated of the holy fathers of Christ's Church? If you
frame not your answer well, you liese your credites, your scholars, and your
honesties. Well, thus have I pointed out your author, his name was Aerius: you
must be called Aerians: you may keep the name of Protestaunts or Evangelists
beside. For a holy new calling is lightly joined to such men. Whereby though
some simple be deceived, yet w^se men be warned. Or if the old authors of this
sect be not so glorious as these new reuiuers, if they list and like so, they
may call them selves Lutherans, or Caluinistes, or what they will, but
Catholics. Although Martyn Luther granted purgatory and prayers, with this
error: that such as were there, might yet by their diverse deseruinges, win or
loose life everlasting, as men of doubtefull state, as they were before in the
world: plain against our Saviors admonition, and careful warning, Vide
Hiero nimu^ sup. 3. ad Galatas. Joan. 9.
veniet nox quando iam nullus operari potest. Work whiele the day lasts,
for the night shall come when no man can labor. But I need not to stand upon
this point, which of neither part is much regarded. Neither will I spend any
more time in getting them an author of their sect, seeing they have choice of
diverse. Let them go out of the City of God, from amongst the holy company,
and turn on the lift hand, and look amongst the outcastes of all agies,
and they shall have freindes and fellows enowe.

7 That you say of our preaching to be the way to so many heresies, might
have been said of the Gentiles and Jews, to the whole Church of Christians.
The Gentiles continued constant, so did the Jews without schism in their
errors, when the professors of Christianity were rent and torn into an
hundredth sects and heresies. There were no heretics but they hated Jews, and
Gentiles, as much as the true Christians, was therefore the religion of the
Jews and Gentiles better then the religion of the Christians? Yea there never
was since Christ any heresy, or heretic, but they agreed in many more
things, with the Christians then with the Gentiles and Jews, was therefore
the Christian religion false? or the Paganes and Jews superstition true? It is
therefore, no d^s^redit of our doctrine, that Arrians or Anabaptists of our
time, either have any thing of yours, or praise any thing of ours. Neither our
credit, scholars, nor honesty, are in danger for their errors, which they
learned not of us: neither are your wit, learning, or heresy the greater, for
uttering this foolish conceipte, which no more touches us, or defends you,
then it carpeth the religion of Christ and mainteineth the Idolatry of the
heathen. The world sees what vain reasons you lean unto, being destitute of
the word of God. An heretic held this opinion, therefore it is, false. The
devil believes there is one God, therefore shall not Christian men believe so?
why would God reueile any truth to heretics? why did the Pharizees, which
otherwise were heretics, defend the resurrection of the dead? This vain
frothe of words, and smoke of foolish and unlearned questions, will even fall
down and vanish away of it self, though it be not blown away by us. The
latter end of this chapter, has one croppe of his old custom, to charge
Luther with defending of Purgatory, which either was while he remained in
ignorance, or else it is but a fained fable, as many other of him and others
are devised by the Papists: who as they err from the truth of God, so they
delight in sclaundering of good men: but they shall not prevail, their madness
is made known to all men.

That their falsehood is condemned, and the Catholic truth approved by the
authority of holy Counsels. Their pride in contemning, and the Catholics
humility in obedient receiving the same. And a slight whereby the heretics
deceive the people, is detected. CAP. XV.
1 ANd for our part it is sufficient, good reader, that we know the first
founder thereof, and that we be now right well assured, that he in his time,
and his scholars in theirs, have been noted, called, and condemned for
heretics, in this as in other fond perverse opinions beside, not only by the
singular judgments of diverse learned men, but by the common sense and consent
of the world, and by ancient Counsels both general and particular, as we
may read in the Counsels of Carthage the iiij. of Bracharense, and Vase. the
Decrees of which, by occasion we rehearsed once before. Cap. 79. Cap. 34. Cap.
2.
They are both ancient and of great authority, and honored with the presence
of many notable fathers, as Augustine and other. But especially for the
approving of our faith, and condemnation of the adversaries part, the whole
process of the great Council of Florence must be noted. for there the
question of purgatory and prayers for the dead, was fully handeled, by the
most learned of both the Latin and Greek Church, the Patriarche of
Constantinople him self, with the Legates of Armenia and other nations of that
part, being present: and fully condescending with the Roman Church upon the
truth of purgatory, and other grave mysteries: into the doubt of which, that
part of the Church by schism and miscredit of their forefathers, had fallen
into, not long before: and so made perfect protestation of their faith, with
the abiuring of the contrary, as heresy. Note.
But omitting that long process and large treaty of the matter, for the
establishing of every man's conscience, I will conclude up all the matter with
the Council and the holy Ghosts determination of all the whole cause, in these
words: Si vere poenitentes in Dei charitate decesserint, antequam dignis
poenitentiae fructibus de commissis satisfecerint, and omissis, eorum animas
poenis purgatorijs purgari, and vt a poenis huiusmodi releuentur prodesse eis
viuorum fidelium suffragia, missaru^ scilicet sacrificia, orationes, In initio
Concilij Florentini.
and eleemosynas, and alia pietatis officia, quae a fidelibus pro alijs
fidelibus fieri consueuerunt, secundum ecclesiae instituta, We define and
determine, The holy Council of Trente has also determined the same against the
heretics of our times.
that true penitents departing in the favor of God, before they satisfied for
their negligencies or faults committed by worthy fructes of penance, shall be
cleansed by purgatory pains: and likewise for the release thereof, the prayers
of the faithful, the sacrifice of the blessed Mass and alms, with other
things customably practiced by the faithful for their freindes decessed,
according to the ordinance of Gods Church, to be profitable.

CAP. XV.

1 ANd for our part it is sufficient, that we know God in his holy word to
be the first founder of our doctrine, and therefore that they lie
blasphemously, which would make any heretic the author of it. And as for the
authority of Councels that is alleged against us, we have showed before, that
the decrees of 95. Can. of Car. the forth and second of Vase are flatly
falsified, which speak not at all of oblations for the dead, but oblations of
the dead, that is, such money as the departed have bequethed to the use of the
poor. The 79. Can. of the forth Council of Carthage decreed, that if
penitents dyed before absolution, they should have their memory commended with
prayers and oblations. The Bracarense decree Can. 39. prescribes how the money
offered at such commemoration of the dead, should be distributed. The 34.
Can. of the same Council, whereunto he points us in this place, decrees
that for them that kill them selves, no commemoration should be made nor that
they should be buried with Psalms. But wherefore trow you did he omit the
next Canon to it? which decrees that neither the commemoration of the holy
oblation, nor the office of singing Psalms, should be bestowed upon them that
were cathechised and dyed before they were baptized. Either he saw not the
book him self, or else he misliked that phrase, the commemoration of the holy
oblation, whereby the Bishops of that Council expound, what they mean, when
they named the holy communion to be a sacrifice. That is, they did not take it
to be so properly, but only a commemoration of the holy sacrifice of Christ.
As also when we read in the old writers or counsels, oblation for the dead,
we must not always understand the celebration of the communion as the Papastes
imagine, but that monye which first was offered for alms, and afterward
superstitiously was taken to be a kind of redemption for their sins. As in
the 11. Council of Toledo. cap. 12. is declared where they decree of such
penitents, as dyed before reconciliation: Placuit nobis, vt and memoria talium
in eccles^s commendetur, and oblatio pro eorum delicto a presbyteris
recipiatur. It pleases us (say the Bishops of that Synod) that the memory of
such may be commended in the Churches, and the oblation for their offense,
may be taken by the priests. This office that was bestowed upon the dead,
which so generally of the old writers and counsels is called a memory,
undoubtedly took the name of that which it first was. Namely nothing but a
memory with thanks giving, which after was corrupted to a prayer for them.
Likewise the oblation (as Origin testifies) at the first was nothing but alms
to the releife of the poor, for joy of the rest of them that were departed,
and for comfort and godly exercise of them that were a live. But afterward it
grew to be compted a redemption for the sins of the departed, and the name of
oblation was drawn further to the celebration of the communion, and to be
compted a sacrifice for the quick and the dead. But before this Council,
there was an other Synod held in Spain at Toledo, called Toletan. 3. cap.
21. Where it was decreed, that they which by Gods calling departed out of this
life, should be ca^yed to their graves, only with singing of Psalms.
Forbidding that funeral song which was wont to be song to the dead, and all
other unseemly gestures of morning. If you say this does not exclude prayers
and oblations: they add, that it must be thought sufficient for the burial of
Christian men's bodies, that the office of singing of godly Psalms is bestowed,
in hope of the resurrection. And so throughout the Canon they would have men
comforted by the hope of the resurrection, affirming that Christian men's bodies
throughout the world ought to be no otherwise buried. As for the decree of the
Council of Florence, is but a mere mockery. For it was held not past seven
score years a go, when at the same time, there was an other Council holden
at Basil against it, in which the Pope Engenius the fourth, who gathered that
mock Co^ncell of Ferraria and Florentia, was deposed, and an other Pope chosen
against him. So there was one Pope and his council in Italy, and an other Pope
with his council in Germany. Goodly gawdes for fools to play with all. As
for the holy council which was held the other day at Trent, you did well to
put in the margent, for it was not worthy to come in the text. If the
determination of that council be so holy, why do you Papists daily break a
nombre of canons decreed therein, which conteins scarce a-shadow of
reformation? But you can dispense with counsels as you list. To omit all
other canons, why do not your bishops and parish priests, as often as they
minister the sacraments to the people, declare the effect of them to such as
receive them in the mother tongue? Session. 8. c. 7.

2 The which grave determination if any man be so wilful to contemn, Let him
know, that he despises, being but a mortal frail man, the grauest judgment
that God has left in earth for the determination of any matter. Let him be
ashamed that he being but one man, takes upon him to control diverse
hundreths of the most chosen for virtue, for learning, for experience in the
whole Church of God: yea let him if he have any affection of grace, tremble and
fear to deface the dealing of that honorable and universal parliament, that
represents unto us Gods holy whole Church, having the assured promise of the
holy Ghostes assistance for their guiding in all truth. Yet I see before hand
the adversaries will not admit the iudgem^^t of these or any other Counsels:
neither in such men do I much marvel to find so little humility, and so much
impudency. For all heretics condemned by counsels did ever condemn, as they
could, the same counsels again. So were the first 4. counsels which all
Christian men with S. Gregory accept as the holy Gospells of God, All heretics
do condemn councils.
utterly refused by the parties in them condemned: The Arians by great force of
worldly Princes and many assembles, deuilishly withstoode the Council of Nice,
the Macedonians rejected the council of Constantinople the first, the
Nestorians nothing esteemed the council of Ephese, Eutiches and Dioscorus little
regarded the council of Chalcedon: in which they and their followers were
condemned of heresy for sundry points, which now were ouerlong, and not for
our purpose to rehearse. Then by refusing the heavenly sentence of the Churches
judgment, they win nothing else but the assured mark of an heretic. They
declare them selves, that as they be in heresy as deep as the best, so they
in pride and boldness, be not behind the worst.

But all Catholics and faithful beleuers, as soon as they know the
determination of such a number of so well learned fathers gathered in the
unity of Gods Church and spirit, The humble obedience of Catholics to the
governors of Gods Church.
straight way they receive it, and submit them selves, as to the judgment and
revelation of the holy Ghost. For so the Christian brethren that were molested
by the contentious clamors of certain troublesome heads at Antioch, being once
certified by the letters of that first Christian council, what was decreed and
enacted concerning the matters called in question, they then regarded no more
what the adversaries thought therein, but out of hand Gauisi sunt super
consolatione, they reioysed in that comfort of their agreement. And Ruffinus
writes, Ruffin.
that when Constantinus the great understood the determination of the doubts
proposed in the great council of Nice, he received it as the oracle of God:
Defertur ad Constantinum sacerdotalis concilij sententia, ille tanquam a Deo
prolatam veneratur: the decree (says he) of the priests was showed to
Constantine, and he straight with all reverence accepted it, as Gods own
sentence. And if our adversaries could learn a little humility, they might
quickly be dispatched of a great deal of heresy. The which as it first
began with the conceit of singularity and contempt of other, so it
proceeds with maliperte boldness, and ends in plain disobedience of the
Church, of the Counsels, of the scriptures, and Gods own spirit. Whom
without more words I would now give over unto God, having (as I trust)
already given them sufficient occasion by the evident proof of my matter, to
remember their misery and heavy condition, but that I must remove out of the
simples way, such stoombling stocks, as perhaps might somewhat trouble the
unlearned, who for lack of deep judgment, be most subject to the
adversaries deceites.

2 It is true humility that all men should submit them selves to the
authority of Gods word, and it is horrible presumption, that any man or
multitude of men, should take upon them authority to define against the
word of God. As the council of Constance which decrees in plain words that
notwithstanding Christ instituted the sacrament to be received in both kinds,
and that the faithful in the primative Church did so receive it, yet the
custom of the church of Rome shall prevail, and whosoever says contrary is
an heretic, etc. The counsels that are received are therefore received,
because they decreed truly, and not the truth received because it was decreed
in counsels. Else why is Nicene council received and Arriminense rejected? why
is Ephesinum primum embraced, and Ephesinum secundum detested? Finally, why is
the determination of Nicene council which is but one believed, against 10.
counsels holden by the Arrians, but that the Nicene council decreed according
to the word of God, and all the rest against it? wherefore if any council
decree according to the scriptures as the council of the Apostles did Acts
15. and the council of Nice with diverse other, we receive them with all
humility, as the oracles of God. But if any council decree contrary to the
authority of the scriptures, as many did, without all presumption or pride, we
may justly reject them.

3 And with such thus they lightely practice: first by lofty looks and high
chalengies, How they practice with the simple.
they crake and boste with passing boldness, that the learned men of the world,
the sage fathers of the ancient times, all the grave Counsels, the whole
usage of the primitive Church, with plain Scripture, to be on their part. And
as for the contrary teaching, Gre^^ impude^cy in heretics.
that it came in of late with the decay of learning and light of truth, in
these barbarous times when superstition and da^ke ignorance had wasted the
doctrine of the years past. And in this brag they stand, till some
Catholic man encounter with them. By whom when they see them selves so driven
from the standinge which they kept with great glory before, that they must be
wholly naked and destitute in the face of the world of all such helps, as they
accounted to have for the outward show of their deceitful doctrine, then in
plain words they confess their teaching not to hang on the antiquity, not
on counsels, not on Doctors, nor on any man, but on Gods holy spirit and
word, which can not deceive them. And so at the end, the old use of the
primitive Church, the fathers, and the general Counsels arrogantly contemned,
or rather unworthily condemned (mark well their pretty conceits) they make
then a match between them selves with Gods word on the one party, and the
doctors and fathers with out Gods word, on the other party. The sophistry of
heretics.
Affirming that they be not bound to believe them but where they agree with the
scriptures of God. And then turning their talk to the simple, thus they
preach unto them by a captious and foolish demand, whether they think it
more reason or convenient to believe the scriptures, or doctors: the
determination of the true and lively word of God, or else the decree of a
general Council: which deceitful wreasting of the state of our question,
somewhat troubles the unlearned, which can not perceive hereby that they betray
them selves, and deface their own doings, in so rude a defense. For who sees
not now, that they renounce all that help of Counsels and Doctors which with
vauntes they clamed before, whiles they impudently make a division or
contrariety betwixt them and the holy scripture? And we take it at their hand
as an open acknowledging of their lack, there where they pretended greatest
store. The which thing if they likewise would confess openly in pulpit and in
plain words, as they mean nothing less when they show the people that they
were but men, that they might err, that they followed the custom of the
common people in their time, that they are not to be received but where they
agree with scripture, and that them selves must try whether they be consonant
to the word of God or no: if they would, I say, without such cloked words
bouldly pronounce as Luther their master did, that they cared not for a
hundredth Augustines or Hieroms, that they esteemed not the consent of all
nations, that they would be tried by the judgment of no counsel, that they
would purposely run contrary to the Counsels decree in all causes, that they
would take that for thonely truth which is contained in the holy Scriptures,
and that for Scripture which them selves thought good, and last of all, that
for the true meaning which agreed best to the upholding of error and heresy,
then would the people leave these lewd masters on the plain field, which now
they keep with them, one while by the praises of the doctors and antiquity,
and somewhiles by thabasing of them again, and deceitful referring all to the
only Scriptures, to which they say credit may safely be given, where the
doctors without danger can not be further followed, then as they be not found
to disagree with Gods word. So that the cause seems now to be driven to this
ishue in the eyes of thignorant, whether men should rather believe the Scipture
or the doctors, the word of God that can not be false, or the fathers that were
but men, and therefore might err, deceive, and be deceived.

3 But that you love to spend many words about a thing of naught, you might
have spoken as much in three words as you have done in three leaves. But that
I may breefely cut of your lauesh lip labor: whereas you use in deed as
great impudency as you charge us withal in words, first you would make our
challenge contrary to it self, as though one while we boast of the doctors, and
then being driven from them, we fly to the Scriptures. They that daily hear
our preaching, and with any diligence peruse our writing, can bear us witness,
that you do falsely and shamefully belie us. For we stand for authority only
to the judgment of the holy Scriptures, and whatsoever we say of fathers,
counsels, or the most ancient primitive Church, it is either for testimony of
our truth, or for conviction of your lying. For it is, you M. Allen, the
Papists, that boast of all antiquity, all fathers, all doctors, all counsels,
all Churches, to be all together on your side, among whom as we will not deny,
but you have some Patrones, of some of your errors, so will we affirm, that
you have more enemies, in the greatest of your heresies. And therefore this
ishue is rightly joined, and without any Ieofayle upon this point, that the
Scripture is to be credited rather then the doctors, the word of God rather
then the writings of men.

4 But this is not the state of our controversy, nor of any question betwixt
the Catholics and them. And that they know full well, though they craftily
cloak it with change of words. for we acknowledge most gladly, that if any
Doctor, Prophet, Apostle or Angel (if it were possible) preach unto us any
thing against the word and truth of Gods Scripture, that he is accursed of God,
and to be rejected of men. But here is the stand, and the point of all our
doubts in general (note it well Master Protestaunt) whether the ancient
fathers, some of them being in Christ's time, diverse of them scholars to his
Apostles, Here lies the doubt and diversity betwixt heretics and Catholics
many within one hundredth or two of years afterward, most of them more the^ a
thousand years since (I speak of such as we have named in our cause) and all
wonderfully learned as well in the knowledge of the secrets of Gods mysteries,
as the tongues: all mercifully endued with great gifts and graces, all
exceeding studious in the Scriptures, all having the same testament and written
word of God that we now have, all using marvelous diligence in the conference
of diverse places, for the true meaning and understanding of the same, all
having fervent zeal in teaching the Christian people, all at times appointed
resorting together from diverse parts of the world to some one general search,
in which, by humble conference together and prayer, they doubted not to obtain
the spirit of truth, as it was by our Master promised: the question is now
then, I say, whether those holy men, thus helped by nature, diligence, time and
grace, be not more like to understand the Scripture then these men, which
either lack all these helps, or most of them. Secondly it follows
thereupon, whether we should rather give credit to them, affirming purgatory
and prayers for the dead to be not only consonant, but plainly proved by the
Scriptures, or else to our new adversaries, auouching these things to be
against the Scripture. Whereby you see, we must not now reason, whether we
ought to believe the doctors or the Scriptures better, but whether for the true
sense, we must not believe the old fathers, better then these new fools.

4 In words you grant our ishue, because you know that all the cuntry of
christians, would otherwise go against you. but in deed you deny it. For ye
ishue which you would join upon is both captious and doubtful. Captious,
because it disioyneth those things which are not to be separated, namely the
Scripture and the true meaning thereof. Doubtful, because it stands upon a
likelyhoode and not upon a certeinty. For thus you join: whether the old
doctors be more like to understand the Scriptures then the Protestants. I have
answered before, we will make no comparison with them. Neither will we
challenge the likelihood to us, neither will we leave it to them, for whether
so ever we do, we shall be never the more certain of the truth. But this will
we set down as a most certain principle, that no man can understand the
Scriptures, but by the same spirit by which they were written. What then?
shall we arrogate the spirit as proper to us and deny it to them? God forbid.
They had their measure of Gods spirit, and (we humbly thank his majesty) so
have we. How then? is the spirit of God contrary to it self, because they and
we agree not in all things? God forbid. Cyprian and Cornelius were both endued
with Gods spirit, and both Martyrs, yet they agreed not both in one
interpretation nor judgment of the scripture. what then? there remains but
this second principle as certain as the first. That the spirit of God has a
meaning in the scriptures, which is not to be sought out of the scriptures, in
the opinions of deceiuable men, but only in the scriptures, where is nothing
but the spirit of truth. These 2. commandments, search the scriptures, and
try the spirits: teach how to attain to certainety of truth. For the
scriptures are not understood but by the spirit, and the spirits are not
tried but by the scriptures. Therefore that the spirit may declare his own
meaning, one place of scripture must be expounded by an other. All other
ordinary means and healpes, of wit, learning, knowledge of tongues, diligence
in hearing, reading, and praying, are subordinate and serving to this search
and trial. And who so observes this search and trial most precisely, shall
come to the knowledge of the truth most certainly. And who so ever is
negligent in this search and trial, though he have otherwise never so many and
excellent graces, and gifts, may easily be deceived, yea even when he thinks
he follows the authority of the scriptures. I could allege for confirmation
of this truth, the testimony of diverse of the ancient fathers, which if they
had always followed that which some times they so highly commended, they
should not so lightly have passed over some things, and other things so
slenderly have maintained. But my thinks, the testimony of the Pope should be
a per se with all Papists. The Pope him self in his canon law (for Cayphas
some times does prophecy) has allowed this to be the only way to expound the
scriptures. Affirming that no where else, but even out of the scriptures
themselves, the true sense of the scriptures is to be taken. Ascribed to
Clemens did. 37. cap. Relatum. Lex Dei cum legitur non secundum propriam
ingenij virtutem, vel intelligentiam legatur, vel doceatur. Sunt enim multa
verba in scripturis diuinis, quae possunt trahi ad eum sensum, quem sibi vnus
quisque sparte praesumpserit, sed non oportet, non enim sensum extrinsecus
alienu^ and extraneum debetis quaerere, vt quoquo modo ipsum ex s^ripturarum
authoritate confirmetis, sed ex ipsis scripturis sensum capere veritatis
oportet. When the law of God is read, let it not be read or tought, after
the force or understanding of a man's own wit. For their be many words in
the holy scriptures, which may be drawn to such sense as every man of his
own head shall presume to make, but you may not do so. For you ought not to
seek forth without, any forayne or strange sense, that you may confirm it by
any means by authority of the scriptures, but you must take the sense of
truth out of the scriptures them selves. And thus much for the true
understanding of the scriptures and now to your false superstition. First I
deny that any of the ancient fathers in Christ his time, or scholars to his
Apostles, or within one or two hundredth years after Christ, except one that
had it of Montanus the heretic, as he had more things beside, in any one
word maintained your cause, for purgatory or prayers for the dead. Secondly
of them that maintained prayers for the dead, the most confessed they had it
not out of the scriptures, but of tradition of the Apostles and custom of the
Church, therefore they are not to be compared unto us in better understanding
of the scriptures, for that point, which they denied to be received of the
scriptures. Thirdly those of the ancient fathers that agreed with you in any
part of your assertion (for none within four hundredth years was wholly of
your error) notwithstanding many excellent gifts that they had, yet maintained
other errors beside that, and about that discented one from an other, and
sometime the same man from him self, and that is worst of all from manifest
truth of the holy Scriptures. Therefore neither is their erroneous
interpretation in this matter to be received, nor M. Allens wise judgment of
us to be regarded.

An aunsvvere to such arguments as the heretics do frame of the holy
scriptures not well understood, against the practice of Gods Church, in
praying for the dead, or the doctrine of Purgatory. CAP. XVI.
1 THerefore to stop their way at every turn, and because they talk so
fast of scripture, full feign would I hear what scriptures they have, that
make either expressly against purgatory and prayers for the dead, or else by
any one learned man in all the world, was ever expounded for any such sense.
And lo now (good reader) what scriptures they allege that can ab^de nothing
but scripture. First out of Ecclesiastes. The tree whether it fall to the south
or the north, Cap. 1.
it lies ever where it lights. Then they allege out of S. Matthews Gospel,
that there be two ways, one to bring to heaven, Cap. 7.
and the other leading straight to hell. And then out of the second to the
Corinthians, they bring in, how we must all stand before the judgment seat
of Christ: Cap. 5.
there to receive each of us according to our works and life: and that by
other men's labor, our state can not be amended. Again they allege this
sentence of the Apocalypse. Beati mortui etc. blessed be the dead that dye in
our Lord, Cap. 14.
for after that, the spirit says, that they shall rest from trauells. All
which textes, and the like of that sort, make no more against purgatory, then
they do against hell or heaven: except, that as Anaxagoras the philosopher
said, all things were in every thing, Phisic. 1. l.
so these divines can find every text of scripture to make for what purpose
they list: and yet if the Catholics allege a number of scriptures, and them
with the mind and judgment of the whole world, that doubts not but they
prove that, for which they be recited, yet they set light by them, and
impudently with clamors bear men in hand, that they have no scriptures at
all. Which things as they smell of much arrogancy in all men, so in these
folk that so mal^pertly controwle others, where them selves have no scripture
at all, it is intolerable.

CAP. XVI.

1 THis chapter is but pro forma tantum to make a show of a confutation, where
neither the tenth part of our arguments are rehearsed, nor those that are
named with any couller of reason, and lest of all with authority of scriptures,
are confuted. First he will allow us but 4. textes of scripture, because he
will not take pains to wrest any more. And those make nothing for us except
all things be in every thing as Anaxagoras said. It should seem M. Allen,
that you your self dreamed so with Anaxagoras, else would you not find
purgatory in every one of them, which we say is in none of them, but rather
excluded by them all. But who can prescribe the devil a measure in lying? when
he is disposed to lie? we have no scriptures at all, the Catholics have all
the scriptures, and the judgment of the whole world upon them: you have said
enough, M. Allen, to win the whet stone, if it were as big as any mountain
in the world.

2 And for these, which they here or else where allege, I ask them sincerely,
and desire them to tell me faithfully, what doctor or wise learned man of the
whole antiquity, ever expounded these textes recited, or any one of them, or
any other which you bring in else when, against Purgatory or practice for the
dead? If they did not, how can you for sin and shame dissent from the whole
Church of Christ, upon so light grounds? Or how dare you be so bold, that
seek in every controversy express scripture, to allege these places, which
wise men, nor I think your selves take for any such purpose? Or how may you
for shame reiecte the evident word of God, by us truly reported for the
trial of our matter, your selves having almost nothing, that can be wrasted to
your sense?

2 Before the heresy of Purgatory was planted in the world, how could the old
doctors interpret these places, by name against that which they never heard
named? yet have they so interpreted some of them, that their interpretation can
not stand with purgatory or prayer for the dead, as I will show in their
particular aunsweres. When we require express Scripture for every
controversy, we do not require that every thing should be named in Scripture,
but necessarily concluded out of the true meaning of the Scriptures and purpose
of the holy Ghost in them. As for the evident word of God, which you report for
trial of your matter, is yet to show, and shall be for ever. You shame not to
boast of that to be your trial, which you dare as well eat a faggot as abide
the judgment of i^, in any lawful conference or disputation: your great
bellwethers and Bishops declared before ye whole world in the conference of
Westminster, what they durst abide, when they came to handestrokes. It is a gay
matter for such a chattering pie, as you are, to make a fond flourish a far of
in words of common wrangling, to please your patrones and exhibitioners, it is
an other thing to stand to the proof in deed.

An answer to the first place.
3 If you stand to the trial of our alleged testimonies, you will be much
abashed I know. For how can you imagine, that the place recited out of
Ecclesiastes, should further your intent any thing at all? Seeing, that even
then when the wiseman spoke those words, the soul of man straight after her
departure, and the fall of the body, continued not where it first fell: for the
just had a place of abidinge and rest in the inferior parts, which was
called of Ezechias the gate of hell. Esaias. 38.
In the Gospel Sinus Abrahae, the bosom of Abraham, and now Lymbus Patrum: in
which they all abode till they were delivered by the blood and travel of our
Savior Jesus. With whom, they after were translated to the eternal joys of
heaven. Bern. ser. 4. de fest. omniu^ Sanct. Amb. super 5. ad Romanos.
Which thing if it be true, as it can not but be true and certain, which the
whole course of scripture, the article of our faith in Christ's descension into
hell, and all the ancient fathers do constantly setforth, what blindness be
they in then, that bring this place against Purgatory, which as it is a stay of
certain for a time from heaven, so the other before Christ, was the stay of
all. And therefore, it is plain, that this fallinge of the tree meanith
nothing less, then that every man should straight upon his departure be
conueide either to hell or heaven.

Or if any wedded to Caluines blasphemous and unfaithful paradoxes, do with
Purgatory deny the fathers place of abode, before the coming of Christ, and
impugn the belief of Gods Church so much, that he withstand the article of
our Creed, for Christ's descending into hell, to turn the cause of his going
into hell, to some other purpose then the loosing of their captivity that there
were in expectation of his ioyefull appearance, yet I would demand so much of
Caluins successor or scholar, Caluins absurd doctrine is refuted.
seeing he will of this figurative speech of the trees falling gather so
grounded and general a rule, that with out delay every man must to heaven or
hell straight after his death, there to remain in perpetual state of his fall
in the next life, either good or badde, I would ask of him (I say) what he
thinks by all those, that were by the Prophets, Apostles, or Christ him
self, raised up again from death to life. Who receiving by death that fall,
by their account must needs abide where they first fell: and so not in case to
be revoked, by this their false conclusien they diminish the power of the
spirit in working their raising again. Or else they must impute deceit to
the holy men, and our master Christ (which abhors me to speak) for that
they raised them not being perfectly dead, but in some deadly trance, or
appearance of death.

But because the soul of Lazarus, The state of such in the next world as by
Gods omnipote^tie were raised to life again.
was now four days out of his body before Christ wroght upon him, it is
sure and most certain, that it had some place of abiding after the separation
from the flesh. I can not think that his soul was in heaven: nor it is not
like, that our Savior would so much abase the happy condition of him whom he
loved so well, as to reduce him to the uncertain state of this life. I will
define, in this my ignorance, nothing touching the secrets of Gods wisdom
herin. But very like it is, that the parties raised from their fall and death,
were not in the joys of heaven. As before Christ's death, I am sure they were
not, but I speak of Tabitha also or other revoked by the Apostles hands, that
then after Christ's passion might full well, dying in perfect state of life,
go straight to heaven, of such I say it is very reasonable, that they were not
in the joys of the elect. For else Tabitha should not have had such a
benefit by her alms, as the fathers do witness she had. And they use her
for an example, of the benefit which may rise to one after departure, by
charitable works done in this life. It had been a small pleasure to have
plucked her from heaven to this mortality again, and misery of our common
life: and I trow no man may auouche with salfety of his belefe, that she or
any other raised again mira^ulously, was revoked from the desperate estate of
the damned souls, then she must necessarily be called from some mean
condition of her present abode, and perhaps from pain too, to this former
state of life again. But as in this secret of God, no man without just
reprehension may deeply wade, so it may reasonably be gathered that the fall
of the tree before mentioned, can not induce with any probability, the
necessity of the souls abiding in all respects, where it first light. Mary we
freely grant with diverse of the ancient fathers, that the fall of the tree
into the Southe part, may signify unto us the departure of man in the happy
state of grace, and the North side likewise, the cursed and damnable state of
the wicked: and tha^ he which passes hense in either of these estates and
conditions (as every living man does) can not procure by other, neither deserve
by him self, the change of his happy lot, or his unlucky hap, otherwise
then in his life time he deserved. That is to say, if he pass this world an
elect person, in the love and grace of God, he is out of doubt of all
damnation, or rather out of possibility to be rejected: and so the case of the
forsaken is utterly remediless. And further by that figurative speech you had
not best on your own head to be over bold, least some Saducete of your sect,
gather the perpetual rest of the body, without all hope of resurrection. I
can not tell how it falls, but yet so it does, that your doctrine and
arguments minister over much occasion of error, and that to the deceived in
the depest matters of our faith. But I will rub you no more on that sore. I
warned you before, to take heed to the resurrection.

3 If we had no stronger testimonies, then these, and you no better aunswers
then you make to these, yet should not we have so much cause to be abashed at
our allegatio^s, as you to be ashamed of your confutations. Your first answer
is, that the souls of men at that time continued not where they at the first
fell, but went first into the inferior parts, which you call Lymbus patrum,
but neither Ezechias nor the Gospel, knew any such place. For Ezechias
speaks of the grave, the Gospel of that place of comfort, where the souls
of the faithful are in happy estate, even where Christ is. But O learned
Logitian, that answers one controversy with an other, as much controuers^d.
Nay, stay a while, the article of Christ's descending into hell makes all out
of doubt. If that be so, why do we not say that Christ descended into Abraham's
bosom or into Lymbus patru^, or seeing Christ said he would be in Paradise,
why say we not that he descended into paradise, and seeing he commended his
spirit into the hands of his father, why say we not he descended into his
fathers hands. But because these be no absurdities that follow of M. Allen,
and that papisticall assertion, you shall hear Caluins absurd doctrine,
refuted by the said famous Clerk M. Allen with famous reasons. He will ask
(for his aunsweres be questions) what is it to be thought, of those that were
raised from death to life, seeing they received their first fall. This were a
pretty question for a Sophister in Oxeford to demand in their parleis. But the
poor man tormenteth him self in vain, they which deny prayers to be
profitable by that place of the wise man, understand the fall of the tree to
the South or to the North, to be the judgment of God concerning every man,
either of reward or of punishment, which can not be altered after a man's death.
This restreyneth not God from working miracles, and sending some to life
again, but shows what the ordinary state of men is after their departure.
This place is of them that dye and remain in death, unto the day of the
general resurrection, as for the other, although they were dead, yet they were
appointed to live again, they fell in deed, but to have a particular rising,
but when they fell to abide the general rising, they were in the same case
with the rest. But examples will make the matter clear. The soul of Lazarus
was 4. days from his body, M. Allen thinks he was not in heaven, for Christ
loved him too well to bring him out of heaven: and not that only, but to
reduce him to the uncertain state of this life. As though it were injury to
Lazarus to forbear the joys of heaven, for the short time of this life, to
become such a glorious example, of the majesty of Christ's power, and as
though Christ, which brought him to life temporal, was not able in the
incerteinty of this life, to preserve him to eternal life. O profane
heathenish Sophister, of Gods high mysteries. But seeing you think M. Allen he
was not in heaven, where think you in your conscience he was? in hell, or in
purgatory, or in Abraham's bosom? for you have store of diverse places, if he
were in hell, you hold there had been no redemption. And it is not like that he
whom Christ loved so well was 4. days in torment. If you say he was in
Abraham's bosom, yet he was in comfort and certeinty of salvation, then by your
own reason, it is not like that Christ which loved him so well, would abase
his happy condition to bring him to the state of this life which is miserable
and as you say uncertain, yea he had been better in purgatory: for you hold
he should have been in certainety of salvation, but so he was not when he
returned to the uncertain state of this life, the like may be said of
Tabitha. But these be foolish and unlearned questions M. Allen, which the
Apostle wills us to avoid, as gendring strife rather then edificatio^. And
yet when you have questioned about them all you can, you shall never prove the
common case of the departed in Christ, by these few peculiar cases. For when
so ever and how so ever it pleased God, that their souls remained, it was
determined of God that they should be restored to their bodies. And although
there souls were in heaven and in happiness, as I do not doubt but they were,
yet was it no injury nor hurt unto them, to serve the glory of God. For I
doubt not but as all the Godly in this life, confess it to be a part of
angelicke felicity, to be obediente to the will of God, so those that were so
raised from death, so long as their second life continued, carried in their
hearts, a heavenly fruition of the glory of God shining in their restitution:
and of their thankful obedience, submitting them selves to the will of God.
But when these matters passes the reach of M. Allens sophystrie, as of which
he can prate much, and define nothing, he falls to an other shifte: that the
fall into the southe, signifies the certainty of salvation, that the elect be
in, after this life, and the fall into the North, the certainty of damnation,
that the wicked are in. For though the elect be in purgatory, yet they be in
the favor of God, and certain of salvation. But this gloss corrupts the
text, for then they should always lie in purgatory, which is a warm south
(if it be as they say) for the certeinty or uncertainty of their salvation, is
as great before they were borne, as after they be dead. It can not be
therefore that the wise man speaks thereof. And because you crack of the
exposition of the fathers, Hieronym in his commentary upon this place,
expounds the North and the Southe not for the states of grace or wrath, but
for the places of reward or punishment of them that die. Si dignos Austro
fructus attulit in plaga iacebit Australi. Nec est aliquid lignum quod aut ad
Aquilonem non sit aut ad Austrum. If it have brought forth fructes worthy of
the South, it shall lie in the Southe cost. Neither is there any tree but it
falls either to the North or to the South. As for your babbling of the Saduces
sect, and doubting of the resurrection, bid your Popes and Cardinals take
heed of it. Pope John the 23. was condemned for it in the Council of
Constance. Epicureisme and Saduceisme is more common at Rome then Christianitye.

4 Now for the other text recited out of S. Matthewes Gospel of the double
way, An answer to the second text.
the one to perdicion, and the other to salvation: there is almost none so
simple, but he sees that it makes no more for your purpose, then the other.
For there, as our adversary can not but know (though to deceive he list
dissemble) mention is made, and the meaning is only of these two ways in this
world and life, in one of which, being full of ease and liberty, the wicked
walks toward hell or damnation: In the which way, the rich man and
unmerciful took his time: of whom Abraham said, that he had received good in
his days. In the other, being both strait and hard, the small number of the
chosen take their journey toward heaven. And yet if you think good, you may
join the place of temporal punishment for sin in the world to come, to the
strait and painful passage of the elect, though perhaps all they enter not
thereby. And so shall you find this place not only nothing to further their
cause, but somewhat to help ours.

4 If there be but two ways in this life, there are but two abiding places
after this life. If there be more then two after this life, then there be more
ways then two in this life. Control our Savior Christ's partition as
imperfect, if you list. You will say, that needs not, for purgatory after
this life is that straight gate or a piece of it. what else? It is not enough for
our English Anaxagoras, to exclude our opinion out of these places, but he must
find purgatory in them also. This is plain to make quidlibet ex quolibet. But
the commandment of Christ marreth the market of this interpretation, unless
you think when Christ wills us to strive to go in by the straight gate,
that he bids us strive to go into purgatory.

An answer to the third argument.
5 And so for the other taken out of the fifth to the Corinth: S. Augustine shall
answer you, and bear me witness, it makes nothing for you, his words be
these in his Encheridion: This practice that Gods Church uses in the
commendations of the dead, CX.
is nothing repugnant to the sentence of the Apostle, where he says that we
all shall stand before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may
receive according to his deserts in the body, either good or evil: for this
in his life and before death he deserved, that these works after his death
might be profitable unto him, for in deed they be not profitable for all men,
and why so? but because of the difference and diversity of men's lives, whilst
they were in this flesh, etc. And this same sentence the Doctor often repeteth,
almost in the same form of words in diverse places, both to correct their
ignorance that mighe take a way prayers for the dead, because they find the
sentence of Gods judgment to be executed on man according to the deserving of
this liefe: and no less to give monition to the careless, that they omit
not to do well in this life, upon hope or presumption of other men's works
after their decease: which as they be exceeding beneficial to many, so they
help none such, as in their own life would not help them selves. The like
declaration of this point has S. Denyse in the 7. chapter of his
Ecclesiastical sovereignty: which I omit, lest in this point, by S.
Augustine sufficiently avouched, I weerye the reader without cause.

5 And S. Ieronym with your own canon law shall answer you, that prayers
prevail not after this life 13. q. 2. In praesenti, In this present world we
know, that we may be helped one of an other either by prayer or by council, but
when we shall come before the judgment seat of Christ, neither Job nor Daniel
nor Noe can entreat for any man, but every man must bear his own burden.

6 The last objection, of the Angels words in the Apocalypse, An answer to
the last scripture.
a^firming the state of all those that dye in our Lord to be happy, to be past
travel, and in rest and peace: they be properly spoken there, of holy men
that sheede their blood in the times of persecution for Christ's sake: to give
them assured comfort, after a little toleration and patience in the rage of
Antichrist, of blessed and eternal rest, and so the circumstance of the
letter plainly gives, and so does S. Augustine expound it. And for such
holy Martyrs it is needless to pray, Cap. 9. lib. 20. de ciuit.
as to pray unto them is most profitable. Albeit the words are true, and may
be well verified of all that pass hense in the happy state of grace, being
past the cares of this troblesome world, and which is the greatest travel of
all other, utterly dispatched of the toil that sinners take in their ways of
wickedness: with freedom from sin, and all fear of sin and damnation,
for evermore. So that this rest from labor, is no more but a happy joy of
conscience, with security of salvation and peace in Christ Jesus. For which
cause in the holy Canon of the Mass, it is said, Christianos dormire in somno
pacis, and in Christo quiescere, That Christian folks do sleep in the sleep
of peace, and rest in Christ, though for all that, in the same place, we ask
Requiem and refrigerium, rest and refreshing for them. And this holy peace
from all toil of the world, and worm of tormented conscience, the elect
children of God in their fathers correction, being assured of his eternal love
do blessedly enjoy. But the wicked be in contrary case, of whom it is said,
non est pax impijs, there is no rest or quietness to the wicked: no not in
their days of joy, much less in their infinite misery of their everlasting
torments in the world to come. Of whose unhappy state, the Prophet warns us
thus again. Isay. 57.
Impij quasi mare feruens quod quiescere non potest: The wicked be right like
unto the tumblinge and tossinge sea, that never rests. The place of S. John
then, being namely spoken of holy Martyrs that straight with out all pain
after this life pass to heaven, may yet very fitly stand with the happy case
of all those that dye in the favor of God, and assurance of their salvation:
though they abide sharp, but sweet pain of fatherly discipline, for their
better qualifying to the joys prepared for them and all other the elect. So
that now, the moving of these doubts has so little aduantaged our
adversaries, that it has somewhat given occasion of further declaration of our
matter, then otherwise perchance we should have had.

6 The last objection that you list to trouble your head with all, is that
voice which was heard from heaven. Apoc. 14. of the blessed state of them that
dye in the Lord, in the meaning of which you wrest and wrigle, like a snake,
that is smitten on the head, but you can not avoid the strife. First you
understand it only of Martyrs, that dye in the Lord, and call Augustine to
witness thereof. As I will not deny but Martyrs are specially comforted by
that voice, so I will affirm, that it is to the common comfort and reward of
all the faithful in Christ, who as they live in Christ so they dye in Christ.
And witness hereof I will not take of flesh and blood, but of the holy Ghost.
Rom, 14. None of us lives unto him self, neither does any dye unto him self,
for whether we live, we live unto the Lord, and whether we dye, we dye unto
the Lord. And the Apostle 1. Cor. 15. names the faithful that are a sleep
in Christ, and 1. These. 4. them that are dead in Christ. Wherefore in despite
of the devil and the Pope, this blessing apperteyneth to all them that dye in
the Lord Jesus Christ, as true members of his body, and not to them only that
shed their blood for Christ. True it is, that all they that would live godly
in Christ Jesus, suffer persecution, but not all to the death, else who are
those innumerable Saints that no man can number of all nations and tongues,
which S. John saw, Apoc. 7. who are likewise in happy and blessed rest,
without all manner, lack or hurt, hunger, thirst or heat? but when you are
weary of that interpretation, you wring out an other: that they in purgatory
also be happy, because they be sure of salvation at last, and the rest from
labors, is either the rest from sin, or else no more but joy of conscience.
witness of this exposition is the canon of the Mass. The witness, the matter
and he that uses it, are all of like credit. But if I might pose your
conscience M. Allen, can you call that a happy rest, which is joined with such
torment and misery, as you bear men in hand is in purgatory? Have you
forgotten that you said year while of Tabitha and Lazarus, that it was a
benefit for them to be delivered out of purgatory into this life, and is it
now a blessing to be dispatched out of this life into purgatory? And as for
that which you allege out of the canon of your mass, declares that your mass
was patched together of many pieces of diverse colors. For you pray for the
rest of them whom you confess to be at rest in Christ: you wish easement for
them whom you affirm to sleep in peace. As though in Christ were not perfect
rest, as though in peace there were torment, and this exposition you your self
are weary of also, and turn again to your former and then back again to the
latter. An unconstant man is uncertain in all his ways, yet all were little
worth, if this place helped not to prove purgatory also. For the pain of
purgatory is a sweet pain, a happy rest, a fatherly discipline. And yet as
Augustine says, it is but for small faults, or as you say, for great faults,
that by penance are made small. And is God such a merciful father, to punish
small faults so extremely in his children, whom he pardons of all their
great and heinous sins? O blasphemous helhoundes.

An aunsvvere to their negative argument, with the Conclusion of the book.
CAP. XVII.
1 But yet one common engine they have, as well for the impugnation of the
truth in this point, as for the sore shaking of the weak walls of the
simples faith, almost in all their fight that they keep against the
Catholics. Which, though it be not strong, yet it is a marueillous fit
reasoning for so fond a faith. For if thou cast an earnest eye upon their
whole doctrine, thou shall find that it principally, and in a manner wholly
consistithe, Their new no faith is vpholden by a negative argument.
in taking away or wasting an other faith that it found before: so that the
preachers thereof, must ever be destroyers, pluckers down, and rooters up of
the truth grounded before.

Will you see then, what a Protestants faith and doctrine is? deny only and
make a negation of some one article of our belefe, and that is a form of his
faith, which is lightely negative. There is no free will, A Protestants Creed.
there is no works needful to salvation, there is no Church known, there is
no chief governor thereof, there be not seven sacraments, they do not
confer gratiam, give grace. Baptism is not necessary to salvation, Christ is
not present on the altar, there is no sacrifice, there is no priesthood, there
is no altar, there is no profit in prayers to saints, or for the dead,
there is no purgatory, Christ went not down to hell, there is no limbus,
finally if you list go forward in your negative faith, there is no hell,
there is no heaven, there is no God. Do you not see here a trim faith and a
substantial? look in Caluins Institutions and you shall find the whole frame
of this wasting faith. There is nothing in that blasphemous book, nor in their
Apologies, but a gathered body of this no faith. For so it must needs be that
teaches no truth, but plucketh up that truth which before was planted. Is it
not a pretty doctrine that Calvin makes of the sacraments, when he tells not
the force of any of them all, but only stands like a fearce monstrous
swhine, rooting up our fathers faith therein?

CAP. XVII.

1 IT vexes you at the very heart, that we require the authority of the holy
Scriptures, to confirm your doctrine having a plain commandment out of ye
word of God, that if any man teach otherwise then the word of God allows, he
is to be accursed. And therefore you run to a childish kind of Sophistry to
say that our argument is negative. A perlous point that almost all the Papists
think them selves more then Chrisippus, or Aristoteles, when they tell us that
our argument is ab auctoritate negative. Alack poor logic. All knowledge
that christian men have of heavenly things, is grounded upon the authority of
Gods word, therefore as it is no good logic to conclude negatiuely of one
place or book of Scripture, this is not contained in it, therefore it is not
true: so of the whole doctrine of God, wherein all truth necessary to salvation
is contained, the argument is most invincible that concludes negatiuely thus.
All true doctrine is taught in the Scripture, purgatory is not taught in the
Scripture, therefore purgatory is no true doctrine. And this conclusion M.
Allen him self made of man's authority, cap. 13. purgatory and prayers for the
dead were not preached against, at their first entry, ergo they are true. But
of all men's authority it is false, whereas he says we are ouerthrowers and
destroyers, we confess we are so, of all false doctrine and heresy. For the
word of God is appointed not only to teach truth, but also to overthrow error,
not only to build faith but to destroy falsehood. But it is a proper conceit
wherein he pleases him self, as other of his sect do, to tell us that all our
faith stands upon negatiues. I could frame the Papists as wholesome a creed
all upon affirmatiues if they will receive it. This is more then boyish babbling.
All truth is to be affirmed, all falsehood to be denied. Therefore it is not to
be looked what is affirmative and what negative, but what is true or false that
is affirmed or denied. But to run through the articles of that creed, which
he has framed for us, we truly believe that man after his fall has not free
will, no not aptnes of will, to think any thing that is good. 2. Cor. 3. we
believe truly, that a man is not justified by works, but by faith only. Romans
3. And yet we believe that good works are necessary to be in every man that is
justified. Iac. 2. we believe that the Church is not always known to the
wicked upon earth, neither the universal Church seen at all of men, because
it is in heaven, Gal. 4. we believe that the catholic Church has no chief
gouerner upon earth but Christ unto whom all power is given in heaven and
earth Matthew. 28. we believe there are but 2. Sacraments of the new testament,
baptism and the Lords supper instituted by Christ, 1. Cor. 10. we believe that
they give not grace of the work wrought but after the faith of the receiver,
and according to the election of God. 1. Cor. 10. Baptism is necessary for all
Christians to receive, that are not by necessity excluded from it. 1. Pet. 3.
Christ is present at his Supper, but not after a gross and caparnaiticall
manner, but as he was present in Manna to the fathers. 1. Cor. 10. There is no
sacrifice propitiatory for our sins, but only the sacrifice of Christ's
death once offered for all. Heb. 10. There is no priesthood to offer sacrifice
propitiatory but only the priesthood of Christ according to the order of
Melchizedech Heb. 7. The spiritual priesthood is common to all Christian men
and women. 1. Pet. 1. we have an altar of which it is not lawful for them to
eat, which serve the tabernacle, and other beside we have none. Heb. 13. we
call not upon Saints, because we believe not in them, for how should we call
upon them, in whom we believe not? Romans 10. There is no prayer for the dead
nor purgatory after this life, because they that live unto Christ dye unto him
and being dissolved are with him. Joan. 17. Christ descended into hell to
redeem us out of hell, by suffering the wrath of God for our sins Heb. 5.
There is no Lymbus, for the fathers were at rest with God, where they are now:
whether we call the place Abraham's bosom, or paradise, or heaven Luke. 16. and
23. 2. Cor. 12. The rest which you add, may be the beginning of the Popish
creed, which you may as you list continue negatiuely or affirmatively after
this manner. God a lone knows not the hearts of all men. God only is not to
be worshipped and served, for Saints have both the one and the other. God
only is not true, for the Pope can not err. Christ is not our only mediator
and advocate, for Marie and the Saints are also. Christ's death is not a
sufficient redemption for us, for we must satisfy for our selves. Christ's
death has not taken away both our sins and the punishment of them, but the
Popes padon may. Christ is not only our high priest according to the order of
Melchizedech, for every hedge priest is of the same order. Christ has not made
them that are sanctified perfect by a sacrifice once offered for all. For y^
greatest part is left to the mass. Our sins are not freely forgeuen us by
Christ, for we must satisfy for them. A man is not justified by faith without
the works of the law, for every man must merit for him self. The scriptures
are not sufficient to teach us all truth, but we must have unwritten verities.
The word of God is not of sovereign authority, for the decrees of the Pope
and general counsels be equal with it. This is the Papists creed both in
the affirmative and in the negative. But in that you exhort the Papists to
read Caluins institution, and there to see whether he teaches any truth
therein: I would to God that all Papists in England would follow your
counsel and pray unfeignedly that God would open there eyes, that they may see
his truth if it be taught in that book.

2 This negative faith has no ground nor confidence of things to be hoped
for, nor any certainty of such things as do not yet appear, but it is an
evident overthrow of all our hope, and a very canker of the expectation of
things to come. This faith therefore of these pluckers down, must needs use
a convenient instrument to destroy, and not to build: to pluck up and not to
plant, to improve and not to make proof. But what way is that? Like faith
like argument.
mary by way of negative proof, they confirm their negative and no faith.
Purgatory, say they, nor prayers for the dead be not so much as once named in
all the scripture, ergo there is neither of them to be believed. Which form of
argument served the Arians against the consubsta^tiall unity of God the
father, and his son our Savior. It helped the Anabaptists against the
baptism of infantes, it was profitable to Heluidius against the perpetual
virginity of Gods mother: and it helps all pluckers down, but it never
serves a buylder. The vanity whereof is so well known, that I will not stand
to talk thereof: namely, seeing it has no place in our cause, for which we
have brought diverse scriptures, all construed by most learned fathers for that
sense: and some so evident, that they drove our adversaries to the open denial
of the holy canonical scripture.

2 What ground or confidence of things not seen and yet hoped for our faith
has, it is not for infidells to judge, no more then for blind men to judge of
colors. And as for our negative argument, it is stronger then your
affirmative error can abide: and there of grows the spite. But when as you
say we frame our argument, of the name of purgatory only or prayers for the
dead, you follow your customable course of lying and sclaundering. And yet we
may say it is a great prejudice against your purgatory and prayer, which you
make so necessary, and about which no small part of your religion is occupied,
that it is not so much as once named in the scriptures. But we say, and truly
say, that neither the name nor the thing it self, is taught or can be proved
by ye scriptures, and so of all other heresies. All truth may be proved by
scripture, either in plain words, or by necessary conclusion, which is all
one. And therefore the Arians, or Anabaptists have no more help of this
argument then you Papists. As for the perpetual virginity of the mother of
Christ, as we can think it is true, so because the scripture has not reveled
it, neither pertains it unto us, we make no question of it. what scriptures
you have alleged, and how falsely you slander us, for denying the canonical
scripture is set forth at large already.

3 But yet one of these ouerthrowers frames (as he supposes) his negative
argument, M. Grindall in his funeral sermon.
to the more sure shake of our faith herein, after this sort. In the old
law, all sacrificies and expiations both appointed and reckoned even for the
smallest offensies that man could commit, yet there was never no sacrifice for
the purgation of the dead^. How Lord like Master Grindall made his Argument
here? Where he should plainly have inferred the contrary after this sort.
There was no sin so small unpardoned, but there was some sacrifice of release
or expiation thereof in the old law, ergo if any man were bound with sin,
were it never so small, whether he were alive or dead, there was some
appointed purgation therefore. For there is no consequence nor any appearance of
right deductio^, to infer upon the naming or rehearsal of all sins, the
peculiar mentioning or plain rehersall of such persons as may be burdened
with those sins. There were sacrificies then in the old law for women as
well as men, for the Princies no less then for the poor, for the priest and
for the people, for the dead as well as for the live. And where there was no
difference nor respect of persons, in that point there was no peculiar mention
to be made, for the distinction of states. The peculiar rehersall therefore,
was only made for the diversity of offensies, and not always for the
difference of persons. And now the departed in faith being but distincted by
state of life, and not by bond of sin from those that be alive, must needs
in the case of like sin, for the unity which he is in, have the like remedy
as the lieue has for the same sin. And therefore to help your ignorance
some thing, thus you must learn: Note.
that there was no peculiar sacrifice for the dead, as though they were not of
the common body with the living, but they had the same sacrifice done for them
that the living in this world in the like case of sin, or punishment for
offensies, had. Do you not see Gods Church, Master Grindall, sacrifice for
the dead? but not for them by a peculiar means of offeringe, One sacrifice
for the live and the dead.
but the very self same oblation she ever uses for her Children departed,
that she practices for her faithful flock a live. And in all other
practices, there is a perfect community of all benefits betwixt the deceased
and their brethern remaining yet in this world. And therefore when you seek
for sacrifice in the old law, look not for any distinct way of handeling
their offensies, which is not common with the living. But consider what there
was practiced for the release of the smaller trespassies, and that was used for
both the live and dead, without distinction. Mark what sacrifice was for the
abating of any pain due for great offensies, and the same shall be well
understand, to be with out difference practiced, for the live and dead
together. That thereby we may by good reason conclude, seeing sacrifice was then
offered for purgation of every light offense, that it was done for all states
of persons that were either in this life, or after their death to be perfectely
cleansed from the same. Although the fact of Judas Machabeus be a plain proof
that there was a common known order of sacrifice: for else how could he have
conceived any such sacrifice never heard of before? how could he limite the
value of procurement thereof, by a certain sum for every soul deceased? how
could he gather in pretense of a thing never used before, the peoples alms
with out their murmr or motion therein? Why would he have sent money to
Jerusalem to procure that, which had no example in the law, or use in the
Church? was he so ignorant that he knew not their order herein, or so unwise to
have sent his money for nothing? Lib. 2. de Orig. Animae Cap. 11.
S. Augustine aunswering an heretic, that by the authority of the fact of
Judas, would have proved, that by sacrifice men might be saved though they
died unbaptized, or in deadly sin, says unto him: that he is not hable to
prove, that Judas or any other in the law, offered for his freinde, or any man
else being uncircumcised, no more then the Church now practices for any man
not baptized. Whereby he plainly confesses, that the law had a sacrifice
for the dead: which, being urged by that heretic, he might have denied with
good help of his cause, and answer to the adversary: but that the contrary
case was so clear, not only by that book which he took for Canonical
scripture, as before is proved, but also by the full consent of all the Church
of God, which both by plain practice, and most grave ordinance, had from
Christ's time set forth and approved the undoubted truth thereof.

3 To pass over your saucines and scurrilitie being as agreeable to your
profession and leuitie, as unmeet for his gravity and dignity whom you name,
the argument is of more force then you have wit to understand. But to beat it
smaller, that it may enter into your head, or at least wise that they which
have any brain in their heads, may conceive the strength of it, I will use
your own figure and mode. All lawful sacrifices were prescribed by the law,
sacrifice for the dead was not prescribed by the law, therefore it was no
lawful sacrifice. you answer that the rehearsal of sins proves not the
peculiar persons that may be burdened with those sins. And with this foolish
distinction you think you have broken out of prison. But you that so like a
proud fool, take upon you to help his ignorance, bewray your own intolerable
arrogancy and more then beastly blindness. For if you had read the law whereof
you make your self such a Rabbine, Leuit. 4. and 5.12. and 15. you should have
seen the peculiar mentioning and plain rehersing of all such persons for
whom sacrifice was to be offered, both men and women, the Princes and the
private persons the Priest and the whole congregation, yea and special regard
of the oblations of the poor. And in the particular rehearsing of diverse kind
of persons, and the form of the sacrifice, named according to every particular
state, it is so far of, that the dead shall be reckned that such things are
enjoined every of these particular persons to do, as it is plain that none
but the living could offer, or have sacrifice offered for the^. What law was
appointed touching lamenting for the dead, you may read Leuit. 21. how the
Priest was forbidden to lament for any, but special persons, also Nu. 19.
diverse ordinances concerning the dead yet never any sacrifice or prayer for
the dead. When Nadab and Abihu were slain, their father and brethren were
forbidden to mourn for them, the people were permitted. By all which it
appears, not only that no sacrifice for the dead, was offered, but that they
were so separated from the living, that the Priests might have nothing to do
with any of them, but in special cases. And as for your common shift of the
common body of the living and the dead, helps you nothing, for although all
the faithful make one body in Christ, yet there is one state of them that
work, an other of them that are judged according to their works, and to put no
diversity between them, is not to make a communion but a confusion. But of all
other it is a clerkely conclusion that you send M. Grindall to look upon the
example of your mass, whith is a sacrifice both for the quick and the dead,
and thereof will prove that the old law, had but one sacrifice for the live
and the dead. In deed there you were to good for him, if ye practice of ye
popish church be a good president for Moses to follow in his law, we will
reason no longer. But the fact of Judas Machabaeus puts all out of doubt.
Surely then the fact of every man that transgressed the law, shall be
sufficient to prove what the law was and not the book of the law. For else
how could he have conceived any sacrifice which he never heard of? How did
David conceive the carriage of the arc in a new cart, which he never heard of?
except it were of the Philistians that sent home the arc in a cart. And even
so it is like, that Judas Machabaeus, if he devised not that sacrifice of his
own head, yet took it by imitation of the Gentiles, whose studies and
practices, your own author confesses were more frequented in those days
among the Jews, then the preaching or keeping of the law. Finally to all the
other howes and whyes, I answer with one word, he had no warrant of his fact
in the law of God. Neither does S. Augustine sufficiently answer ye heretic
that would prove by that fact, that men dying in deadly sin might be saved by
sacrifice. For though they were not uncircumcised for whom Judas sent an
offering, yet they dyed in deadly sin, and such sin, as for which they were
justly slain, as your own author confesses, for the idolatrous jewels, that
they had every one in their bosoms. Concerning the authority of that book
and how it was taken by Augustine, I have answered enough before.

4 But here will I now make an end, desiring thee (gentle reader) with such
indifferency to weighe the doing and dealing of both parties, as the
importance of the cause, the love of truth, The conclusion of the whole book,
with an admonition to the reader.
the necessary care of thine own salvation, and thy duty toward God and his
Church requires. There is none of all those points, which the unfaithful
contention of our miserable age has made doubtefull, in which thou may
better behold how upright the ways of truth and virtue be, and how
pernicious, double, and deceitful, the dealing of heresy is. The one is
vpholden by the evident testimony of holy scripture, the other mainteineth her
train by bold denial of scriptures: the one seeks with humility the
meaning at their mouths, whom God has undoubtedly blessed with the gift of
understanding and interpretation, the other by singular pride foundeth her
unfaithfulness, upon the fantasies of light and lewd persons, that are pufte
too and fro with every blaste of doctrine. The one rests upon the practice of
all nations, the usage of all ages, and the holy works both of God and man,
the other holds wholly by contempt of our elders, flatery of the present
days and unhappy waste of all works of virtue, religion, and devotion: the
one follows the governors and appointed pastors of our souls, whose names
be blessed in heaven and earth, the other joins to such, as for other
horrible heresies and wicked life, are condemned both a live and dead, of the
virtuous, and can not for shame be named of their own scholars. The one has
the warraunt of Gods whole Church, the other stands on curse and
excommunication by the grauest authority that ever was under God in earth. To
be short, truth is the Churches dearlinge, heresy must have her maintenance
abroad. This one, holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church is it, whereunto we
owe all duty and obedience both by Gods commandment, and by the bond of our
first faith and profession. There is no force of argument, no probability of
reason, no subtelty of wit, no deep compass of wordely wisdom, no
eloquence of man, nor Angel, nor any other motion that can be wrought in the
world, that should make a man doubt of any article approved by her authority.
And if thou yet fear to give over thy whole sense, and thine own self to so
careful a mother, in whom thou wast begotten in thy better birth, compare our
Church with theirs, compare her authority and theirs, her majesty and theirs.

4 In Gods name let the readers way indifferently, the doings and dealinges
on both parts, the cause, the truth, their salvation, the Church, and the
glory of God above all things. And as they see this point handeled, so let
them judge of the rest. The truth is vpholden by evident testimony of
scripture, the error, by custom, practice, and judgment of men. The truth
seeks understanding of the scriptures, of the spirit of God in the
scriptures, error at the mouths of mortal men. The truth rests upon the
only authority of God, error upon the maintenance of carnal devises. The
truth is founded upon the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, the other
upon Gentiles and heretics. Truth is embraced of the pure and primitive
Church of Christ, error is continued from a corrupt state of the Church of
Christ, unto a plain departing away into the church of Antichrist. To be
short, truth is tried by the word of God, heresy by the invention of men.
The holy Catholic and Apostolic Church is that which humbly obeys the
word of God, and the Synagoge of Satan is that which arrogantly challenges
authority above the word. The true Church shall never decay but always
reign with Christ, the false Synagoge shall daily more and more decay until
it be utterly destroyed with Antichrist the head thereof, and last of all be
damned with the devil and his angels. And who so would make choice of a true
mother Church, from a whorish Synagoge, let him compare our church with the
church of Rome, the authority of our church which is the authority of God in
his word, with the authority of theirs which is the opinions of men, the
majesty and glory of our church which is spiritual, and the whorish outward
bravery of theirs which is carnal. And where he finds the true church, let
him know that in the communion thereof, he received his second birth, and not of
the place, time, person, or element, where, when, by whom, or with which he
was baptized, either among them or among us.

5 Ours is that Church, that has borne down hethen Princies, that has
destroyed Idolatry, that has converted all nations to Christ's faith, that
has waded in blood, that has lived in wealth, that has been assalted by
hell, by evil life, by heresy, and yet she stands. Take away all this,
compare her constancy in doctrine, with their inconstant mutability: compare
the noble army of Martyrs, the holy company of Confessors, the glorious train
of so many blessed, wise, and learned Doctors, of many thousand Saints that
ever accompany her majesty: compare (I say) all these with the rascal
souldiars of the contrary camp: Math. 24.
Vbicunque fuerit corpus, illic congregabu^tur and aquailae. I warraunt thee,
gentle reader, fear nothing, for where so ever so honorable a personage is,
there is the kingly company of egles. Behold her grace of miracles, her
works, and her wonders, her authority in discipline, her wisdom in
government, her equability in all estates: and I am sure thou shall confess
Quod dominus est in loco isto, and ego nesciebam. Our Lord suerly is in this
place, Gene. 28.
and I was not aware thereof. For Christ's love, if thou have followed, or yet
have any fantasy to the severed company, grope with out flatery of thy self,
the depth of thine own conscience: feel whether God has not suffered thee to
fall for some sin. Come into this Church, and at the same time thou shall be
healed to thy eternal rejoicing. Touch once the hemme of Christ's garment,
adore his foutstoole, cleave unto the altar, and if thou find not comfort of
conscience, ease of heart, and light of truth, never credet me more. Prove
once what is In horto concluso, Cantic. 4.
and font signato, in the garden enclosed, and the wellspring so surely sealed
up. Join with the Saints in heaven, with the souls in Purgatory, with the
fathers of thy faith in earth, with all holy

THE ARGVMENTES OF every Chapter of both the Books.
Of the first Book.
THe Preface, where in be noted two sorts of heretics: the one pretending
virtue, the other openly professing vice. And that our time is more troubled by
this second sort. With a brief note of the Authors principal intent in this
Treatise. Pref. argu. page 10. of the ancient fathers judgments upon the
same. 132.
THE ARGVMENTES OF THE Chapters of the second book.
THe preface of this book, wherein the matter of the treatise, and the order
of the authors proceeding, be briefly opened. 180 he^uy loss thereof. The great
hatred which the devil and all his side, has ever borne toward Christ's
eternal priesthood, and the sacrifice of the Church. And that by the said
sacrifice of the Mass, the souls departed are especially relieved. 288.
FINIS.

