IOANNIS PALSGRAVI LONDONIENSIS, ECPHRASIS ANGLICA IN COMOEDIAM ACOIASTI.

THE Comedye of Acolastus translated into our english tongue, after such
manner as chylderne are taught in the grammar schole, first word for word, as
the latyne lies, and afterward according to the sense and meaning of the
latin sentences: by showing what they do value and counteruayle in our tongue,
with admonitions set forth in the margyn, so often as any such phrase, that is
to say, kind of spekyng used of the la^yns, which we use not in our tongue, but
by other words, express the said latin manners of speakinge, and also Adages,
metaphores, sentences, or other fygures poetical or rhetoucal do require, for
the more perfyte instructynge of the lerners, and to lead them more easilye
to see how the exposition gothe, and before the second scene of the first
act, is a brefe introductory to have some general knowledge of the diverse
sorts of meters used of our auctour in this comedy. And before Acolastus balade
is showed of what kinds of meters his balade is made of. And before the syxte
scene of the fourth act, is a momtion of the Rhetorycall composytion used in
that scene, and certain other after it ensuynge.

Interpreted By John Passgra^e.

ANNO. M. D. XL.

TO THE MOST EXCELLENT PRINCE AND OUR MOST REDOVB ted sovereign lord, HENRY
the. VIII. by the grace of god king of England and of France, defender of
the faith, lord of Irelande, and supreme heed in earth immediately under
Christ, of the Church of England, his most humble and most obeysaunt
Chapleyn, John Palsgraue, bacheler of divinity, desires perfect felicity
and prosperous success in all his noble affairs.
WHEN I CONSIDER with my self most high and most redoubted Prince, and to me
of al your humble subjects most benygne and gracious soueraygne lord,
amongst other the great and weyghty affairs which lie under the moderation
of your Scepter royal, how hyghly your grace does tender the well bringing
up of your youth in good letters, in somoche, that where as it is clearly
perceived, by your most prudent wysedom, how great a damage it has heretofore
been, and yet is, unto the tender wits of this your noble realm, to be
hyndered and confounded with so many diverse and sundry sorts of precepts
grammatical: you have for the redress thereof, wylled one self and uniform
manner of teaching of all those Grammaticalle ensygnementes, to be used through
out all your hyghnes domynions, and committed the dysposyng of that matter unto
such syngular personages, both of exact judgment, and thereto of excellent
lyterature, that I for my part do not a little hereof rejoice, and ernestly
do I wyshe, that I at these present days (which in that exercise, have
dispent no small time of my life) had observed but some one vaylable document
to bring to this Gazophilacium, some thing to help to the furtherance of
this your noble graces so goodly, and thereto so godly and much fruitful a
purpose. Whereupon as it fortuneth among the loving and well wyllyng subjects,
when they here of any gracious and benefyciall purpose, by their sovereign
lord intended, whereby his common welthe might receive so great a furtherance
and advancement (especially tendynge to any such effect, as they themselves
have been most exercysed withal.) I hervpon took occasion thus to reason and to
debate with my self. Now shall the great variety used before time in the
techyng of the grammatical rules of the latin tongue in this realm, whereby
hitherto no small hyndera^ce has ensued, herafter utterly cesse and be put to
silence. Whereby undoubtedly shall ensue a great commodity and furtheraunce,
both to the masters, and alsoo to the young begynners, which shall hereafter
succeed. For now is it intended, that every schole of your graces realm,
should begin to wax one self schole, as far as to those said pryncyples
does belong. But as yet unto my poor judgment (semynge to be a thing very
much requysite) for the more effectual and spedy furtherance of your graces
said youth, I wyshed, that unto this much expedient reformation of your schole
masters vnstayd (...), which hitherto have taught such grammers, and of the
same so diverse and sundry sorts, as to every of them seemed best (and was to
their fantasies most approved: might thereto also follow and succeed one stedy
and vnyforme manner of interpretation of the latin authors into our tongue,
after yt the latin principles were by your graces youth ones surely conned and
perceived. Upon the want and defaute whereof, besides the great and euydente
inconvenience (of which the effect is to much in every place espied) that
is to say, the plainly apparent ignorance and want of a required sufficiencye
of many, which in private places take upon them to teach, before they be
their crafts masters. To whom the best grammatical rules, that ever were
or could be devised, can not vaylably be sufficient: I have by experyence
learned, that there be diverse other occasions, rysynge upon the schole masters
parties, whereby your graces youth is not a little hyndered. For some
instructers of your hyghnes youth, for want of a perfyte judgment in this
behalf, so much desire to seem affectately curiouse, that having no due
consyderation to the tender wits, which they take under their charge to
teach in the stead of pure english words and phrases, they declare to their
chylderne one latyne word by an another, and confound the phrases of the
tongues: And thus not a little do hinder their young scholars, while they would
seem for their own parts to have a knowledge and erudition above the common
sort. And somother again there be, which having undoubtedly, lernyng
enough, vaylable and sufficient, yet while they by sundry ways and manners of
speaking used in our tongue, labor to express such latin auctours minds, as
they do take upon them for the time to interprefe, and for to seem therein more
dilygent, than the common sort, dyspende in manerhole forenoones and
afternoones, in the declarynge of a few lines of such latyne authors, as
they for the season have in hand (as to confess the very truth, the schole
masters hole dilygence tends in manner chiefly to that effect and purpose)
they do by that means not only right little for the time further their young
audience, but also by that ways do oppress and ouerlaye the tender wits,
the which they would so feign further, with their multitude of sundry
interpretations, confusedly by them uttered. So that finally their young
scholars, to help their memory with, be forced to fall a glosynge, or rather
a blottyng of their latin books, and as their chyldyshe judgment does for the
time serve them, of diverse english words in our tongue being synonymes, or
of diverse manners of interpretations used by their master, they choose most
commonly the very worste, and therewith scryble the books of their latyne
auctours. And sum other furthermore there be, which though they have by
their greatte study, at your graces Unyuersyties, so much prouffyted in the
Latyne tongue, that to show an euydente tryalle of their learning, they can
write an Epistle right latyne like, and thereto speak latyne, as the time shall
mynyster occasyon, very well, yea and have also by their diligence atteyned to
a comely vain in making of verses: yet for all this, partly because of the
rude language used in their natyue countries, where they were borne and first
learned (as it happened) their grammar rules, and partly because that coming
straight from thense, unto some of your graces universities, they have not had
occasions to be conuersaunte in such places of your realm, as the pureste
english is spoken, they be not able to express their conceyte in their
vulgar tongue, ne be not suffycyente, perfectly to open the diversities of
phrases between our tongue and the latin (which in my poor judgment is the
very chief thing that the schole master should travail in) In so much
that for want of this sufficient perfection in our own tongue, I have known
diverse of them, which have still continued their study in some of your graces
universities, that after a substanciall increase of good learning, by their
great and industrious study obtained, yet when they have been called to do any
service in your graces common welthe, either to preach in open audience, or to
have other administration, requiringe their assiduous conuersantynge with your
subjects, they have then ben forced to read over our english auctours, by
that means to provide a remedy unto their evident imperfection in that
behalf. And when it has fortuned any such for their good name and estimation
to be called from your universities, to instruct any of your graces noble
men's children, then evidently has appeared their imperfection in that case to
be notable, and that to no small detriment and hinderaunce of such as they have
taken charge to enstruct and bring forward. Being therefore, for my part
desirous, that these inconveniences might also be provided for, and thereupon
taking, occasion, more attentively to bethynke me upon this matter, than began
the great difficulty of the well atchiuinge thereof, the more plainly to appear
unto me, not only because the like thing has not yet hitherto (that ever I
could know of) ben throughely attempted of any clerk within this your
gracis noble realm, but also for so much, as that to be Ecphrastes in their
mother tongue, upon any laten autours, has never hitherto (so far as I can
yet perceive) ben assaied in any other regio^ of Europa: except perchance that
some such as be lettered, have for their own ease and the more brief and
spedye furtheraunce of their scholars, used such kind of interpretation in
their own tongue upon some excellent latin auctour, which they would never
suffer to pass the bounds of their private houses. The not attemptynge of
which kind of interpretation in other regions, has not proceeded of any
notable perfection or furderaunce, which the other regions have in their
langages, over and beyond your noble graces subjects. For how much the phrase
of the french tongue is different from the pure latinitie, may appear by a
book of late years made by Robertus Stephanus, which he entitleth, De
corrupt sermonis emendatione. And how much the Spaynes be with this self
imperfection intached, may appear by the restimony of Nebrisensis, which with
many words does lament the notable corruption of the latyne tongue amongst his
country men, rysyng upon this occasion, and ernestly does exhort them to be
more diligent in thobseruynge of the perfect and approved laten auctours. And
as for the Germaynes not withstanding the great excellency that they now at
these days be come unto, yet is there no doubt, but that there is no vulgar
phrase used within the bounds of Europa, that more swarueth from the exact
latinitie, than this does. So that when I consider, by how ernest manner
Bebelius called upon the Germaynes, to leave their own phrase, and to take
them to the assiduous reading and obseruyng of the good latyne auctours, the
which was but a lyttel before Rheuclines days, and how prosperousely the
thing has syns that time amongst them succeeded, I take, that Bebelius was in
manner to the Germaynes, as was Laurence Ualla unto the Italians, by whose
first exhortation and setting on, so many excellent writers have risen
amongeste the Italians within the time of memory. Being therefore in this
behalf not a little perplexed, whether I might be so bold, to assay how
this thing might take effect, if it should fortune by me to be attempted, I
had recourse unto your noble graces hye counsaylour, and ever my synguler good
lord, the lord priuye seal, unto whom as the time and place did serve me, I
declared my pore desire, and with right humble instance besieched him, that I
might (to make a trial of this my purpose) dedicate some latyne auctour
interpreted after this manner, which I have here described, to his lordeshyppe,
not only to make a proof and experience of the thing, which I so much
minded, but alsoo to be a testimonye, and a recognysynge on my party, toward
his lordeshyppe, of the manyfolde and syngular humanities showed unto me, and
that of no small continuance of years. But his lordeshyp wylled me expressly,
thereto adding both a right wise and also honest consyderation, to dedicate
my poor labors unto your noble grace, my most drad and most redoubted
soueraygne lord, whereby my great solicitude and care is now much more
redoubled, than ever it was before, lest I should in any manner case offend,
where I would faynest my tender zeal should according as I do mean, most
euidentelye and fruitefully appear. How be it calling in this behalf good
hope unto me, for the manyfolde experiences that I have had, in the great
clemency and benignity, which I have ever found in your noble grace, I have
chosen for my latten author, to be Ecphrastes upon, the comedy entiteled A
colastus, not only for because that I esteem that little volume to be a very
curiouse and artificial compacted nosegay, gathered out of the much excellent
and odoriferouse sweet smelling gardeynes of the most pure latyne auctours,
but also because that the maker thereof (as far as I can learn) is yet living,
whereby I would be glad to move into the hearts of your graces clerks, of which
your noble realm was never better stored, some little grain of honest and
virtuous envy, which on my party to confess the very truth unto your
grace, has contynually in all the time of these my poor labors taking,
accompanied me, and styred me onwardes to achieue this matter, on this wise by
me attemted. For thus have I thought to my self. Shall Fullomus an Hollander
born, thus many hundred years, after the decay of the latyne tongue by the
Goths, Uandales, and Longobardes. iii. most barbarous nations, utterly
corrupted, through the dylygent observation of the pure latin authors, be able
to make so fine and so exact a piece of work: And I shall not be able at these
years of mine age, to do so much, as to declare what he means, in my natyue
tongue? Seeing that he (regard had to his country) can challenge no more
propretie of the latyne tongue, than I can, saving that through his great and
industrious labor, he has maystered the latinitie, and forced it to serve
him, to set forth to all clerks his intent and purpose. Thus do I, my most
redoubted sovereign lord, speak to your grace, whose pure and clear judgment I
ought most hyghly to fear, as though I were fully persuaded to my self,
that I have not all holy dispent my labors in vain. But in very deed I shall
think my self not only very well suffised, but also much fortunate, if this
mine enterprise, or at the least first setting on, may give occasion unto
other your graces well learned clerks, to fall in hand with such of the latyne
auctours, as in the judgment of all men be most excellent, and to this purpose
most necessary and expedient. So that by their dilygente labors may be made
such an establyshed marriage, between the two tongues, as may be unto such of
your graces subjects, as shall succeed hereafter, not only stedy, agreed upon,
and parmanent, but also an incredible furtheraunce, to atteyn the pure
latinitie by. So that though I have not obtained to the thing, which I have
desired, yet do I humbly wish of god, that mine ignorance and imperfection
should be no manner hynderance, to stop that the things self should not go
forward, and take his prosperous effect. For how so ever Minerua has
assisted and aided me to my iourneys end, yet still to persist in the opening
unto your noble grace of my poor and simple judgment in this behalf, I
suppose verily that among diverse other profytes and aduancementes of your
graces subjects toward good lernyng, there should six great and much
vaylable commodities of this thing ensue. First, for if this kind of
interpretation may take effect, and be put in execution, not only the
speech of your graces subjects should by that mean have a great advantage
to wax uniform, through out all your graces domynions, but also the
english tongue, which under your graces prosperouse reygne is comme to the
hygheste perfection that ever hitherto it was, should by this occasion remain
more stedy and parmanent in his endurance, not only by the well keeping of his
perfection already obtained, but also have a great occasion to come to his most
highest estate, and there, by that means long to be preserved. Second, for
after this, there should never be no utter ill schole masters within your
graces realm. for if such as would take upon them that office, were not
better then their english interpretations, yet very shame would drive them,
that they should not be worse, except they would stand in danger to be reproved
of their own scholars, which if they were but young babes, yet might their
parents casily controlle them, which might well enough perceive, wha^ they
did notably amysse. Thirdly, for than should the willing scolers, which had
all ready gotten their grammatical principles, be so evidently encouraged to go
forward, that they should be great callers upon their fellows, which by their
negligence would dragge, besides that the masters them selfs should have no
small provocation, to use for their own parties a good dylygence, lest their
scholars of their own mind should call for more of their au^tour to be
declared unto the^, then perchance they had prepared to read unto them before:
where as now the scholars, be they never so well willing to be furthered,
they have no manner remedy, but utterly and holly to stay upon their masters
mouth. Fourthely, for than should all such as be already departed from the
grammar schools, and afterward be taken with a repentance of their young time
negligently by them ouerpassed, which aforetyme were forced to despair,
though their wylles afterward wared never so good, now by this means
caselye recover them selfs again. Fyftely, for than should young scholars,
with small pains, engrose the hole arguments of the latten autours in their
memory, where as heretofore, after they have read the latyne auctours in the
schole, they have not perceived what matter they entreated of: yea and than
their furtherance and spedy increase should be so notable, that with pleasure
in manner, and with bannyshynge of all servile rudenes out of grammar schools,
they should sooner be able perfytely to go, then they could before times be able
to creep. Syxtely, for when the schole masters, and also the scholars, should
by this means be eased in manner of. iii. parts of their pains, than should
the masters have both time and better occasion, to open their farther lerning,
and to show unto their scholars the great artifice used of the auctors, in the
composition of their workis, which before time they had no such opportunity to
do. But what mean I my most redoubted soueraygne lord, which knowing the
inestimable clerenesse of your graces judgment, seem here to be thus far
abused, as to be about to show light unto the bright shynynge son? I do
therefore clearly and utterly submytte me, and these my poor labors, unto your
noble graces disposition and order, auaylinge them no more, nor none otherwise,
but as by your noble grace they shall be approved, only on this manner wise
fynishinge my simple epistle, that it is and shall be to my last day amongst the
chiefest of my desires and wyshes of almighty god, that I may receive of him
the grace and possybility, to do the thing, that may be acceptable to your
noble grace, whose felicity and prosperous success in all your noble
affayers, I beseech almighty god to mainteyne, increase, and with encreasynges,
long to continue.

A declaration what the names used by the auctour in this Comedy, do signifye.
PElargus Ciconia, a Storke, which name our author has given to Acolastus
father, to warn us of the natural kyndenes used amongst that kind of fowls
by them that be brought forth, toward such as have brought them forth,
according as Plinius witnesses in his. x. book, which natural property
has given the greeks occasion to form a verb antipelargein, which
sygnyfieth to acquit kyndnesse showed in time and place convenient.

Eubulus, Pelargus counsailour, for of him Pelargus asks advise and counsel,
how he should order him toward his son Acolastus, soundyng in latin been
consulens, or bonus consultor, for ev signifies been and (...) consilium.

Acolastus, Pelargus son, to whom the auctour has given that name. For
Acolastus signifies in latin prodigus mendicus, intemperatus, immodestus,
lasciuus, libidinosus, incastigatus, that is to say, a stroy good, a beggar,
wantynge temperance in his diete, wantinge mean and measure, wantonly inclyned
to bodily lusts, and one that will endure no correction: all which conditions
may appear in this comedye to be in Acolastus, Pelargus prodygall child.

Philautus, Acolastus counsaylour, which gives him advise to dysobey his
father, and to live after his sensual apetite, which signifies amans seipsum,
For wha^ one stands to much in his own conceit, or loves himself more than
all the town does after, than waxes he stubburne, and will follow no good and
substanciall counsel, nor be obediente to his father or parents, but run
on the brydell at his own pleasure.

Pamphagus and Pantolabus be. ii. mete servants to wait upon a worldly shames
child, that is left rich. for Pamphagus signifies omnia uora^s, for when a
fellow has spente all the goods, that has been left him by his friends,
upon his dainty mouth, than is he mete to wait upon a young yonkar, to
flatter him, and hold him up with ye and nay, and so to feed dayntily upon a
prodygal young man's cost. And Pantolabus signifies omnia capiens, one that is a
swepestake and all is fysshe that comes to the net with him, for such a
fellow with his gestynge and lewd scoffing, is mete to have charge of
Acolastus money, to provide him of things according to his appetite, and to
help to undo him with mysse reckenynge and false dyce, and such other means.

Sannio comes of Sa^na, a mockyng or a laughinge to scorn. For such a man as
can mock Acolastus to the hard tethe, is mete to be his host, and to (...) him
of fair wenches, and to send for (...), to come and bankette with him.

Lais was one of the most bruted common women that clerks do write of, whom
they call also Corithia, for she was borne at Corinthe, and all the youth of
Greece resorted unto her, for her great beauty, and she demanded of her wowers
no more but what she listed

So that these names Pelargus, Eubulus, Acolastus, Philautus, Pantolabus, and
Pamphagus, the auctour has taken to serve to his purpose, of which the like
be not used of the old Comicall poets, but as for Sannio, Syrus, Syra, and
Chremes, be used of Terence, and taken of our Auctour, because he brings in
persons of like conditions unto such as Terence describes in Eunucho and in
Adelphis. and Bromia is brought in of Plautus in Amphitrio, which in like
manner shows what things were done in Amphitrios house, as she does here, how
Pamphagus ordered her, while she was dressyng of her meat in Sannios house.

PROLOCVS CONSTANS SENARIIS.
VOS nulla captet obseero admiratio.
Quod hlc uidetis optimi ^iri, nouos
In apparatu scaenico ritulos nouam.
Qui nos daturos esse fabulam arguant.
Haud me latet, quanto odio uo cabul^
Noui laboret, ueru^ eniuero hic nonis
De dogmatis ne (...) quidem, paradoxa nos
Nullo loco dignabimur, Notum omnibus
Est argumentum quod palam tractabitur,
Sed comicis strictum metris. Ne nescias
Euangelion nota parabola prodigi
Vitam recenset filij, illam scilicet
Nunc exprimemus ludicra actiuncula,
Cuius sub inuolucro habes mysterion.
Sed audio inter uos susurria, nescio
Quae, de noua impudentia and cornicibus.
Sane, impudens non sim, quod artem musicam
Tractare iudicauerim omnibus quidem
Licere, cuius palma uel Terentio
Test, in medio sit posita. Laudi non pote^^
Non esse, quod rudes tyrunculi uelint
Virtutis edere specimen uel per iocum,
Vt serio ausint hostibus concurrere.
Tum, nolo quisquam nos putet cornicibus
Configere oculos, quod domi nostrae recens
Nata action, gratiam nobis bonam
Venemur a uobis, probatis fabulis
Plauti, atque item Terentij, uelut simul
De ponte deiectis. Nihil nos Zoile
Vel dente uel liuore tuo commoueris.
Etenim Terentio atque etiam Plauto suas
Lauds ut optimis poetis stare, qui
Nolir, meretur is quidem probra omnium.
At nos poemate hoc etiamnum a follibus
Calente, nemini suam ademptum gloriam
Venimus ipsi inglorii, tantum id studet
Grex histricus, uobis leuare nauseam
Quam plurimam accepistis, ex ijs fabulis
Quas uel panis frusto exciti quidam exhibent
Frequentius quam doctius, palmarium
Sibi pollicentes inde, quod bonas male
Semel atque iterum recoxerint comoedias,
Quibus suam seabiem affricant illi, haud minus
In explicando quam exhibendo. Ringitur
Ibi nescio quis. Heus tu? quid ardent lumina?
Ecquid caput motas, quasi iratum admodum?
Vah, an hulcus est tactum tibi? Credo, quia
Malum uidere interminari. Sed tibi, en
Vnguem hunc medium. Placere enim tantum bonis
Studemus, (...) nunquam uitio uertent sui,
Quod senserint studio fieri, si non satis
Foeliciter per omnia, sedulo tamen.
Quod restat, o spectator optime, ne grave
Tibi sit, silentio fauere literis,
Dum intenditur grex noster, actiun culae
Quam suscipit, tibi ut operam suam probet.
Quod si placebit interim, nil amplius
Memineris, atque debitum plausum dare.
In prologo haec satis. Perio cha sic habet.
THE PROLOGVE. I. THE Graeca uox. Prologus quid the forespeakynge.
FORESPEKYNGE, THAT IS TO SAY, THE declarynge of the auctours mind, before he
enter into his matter, to opteyne the good will of his audience, or of such as
shall read his book. This prologue is made, Ex uersu iambico Senario, that is
to say, of six fete, accountyng. ii. syllables, to make a foot. i. of. xii.
syllables, and sometime mo.
IBESECHE YOU INstantlye, or I pray you for Goddis Phrasis. Optimi uirl.
sake, O you best men. i. right worshypfull masters, or most honorable
persons, let no marvel take you. i. Figura. Hypallage.
take you (it for) no marvel, that you se here new titles, that is to say,
new or unaccustomed Titulus qui^
names of places and men (other. s. than Plautus and Terence use in their
co^medies.) In this sceny Apparatus ^caenicus quid. Graeca uox. Scaena and
scena, a bowthe or a tent. Phrasis. Fabula^ dare. Phrasis. Haud me latet.
Phrasis. Laborare odio, qua^to odio uocabulum noui laboret. Adagium. (...) my
quid^ (...)
she apparaylynge. i. the setting forth or trymming of our scenes, that is to
say, (our places appointed for our players to come forth of) which show us
shortly to give a new fable. i. which declare, that we shall forthwith play
(before you) some new matter or commedie. It is not hid or unknown unto
me,. i. I am not ignorant, by how much hatred the name of novelty labors.
i. how much the name of novelty or newfanglynes is behated. But in very deed
here of these new teachynges. i. newely decreed doctrines, not my or mu
truly. s. (dare I make). i. I dare not do so much as put my hand to my
mouth, and say mum, is counseyle. Nor we shall not wytsafe any Phrasis.
Dignari aliqd aliq^ loco. Paradoxum bevo^d the common opinion.
Paradoxes in no place. i. we shall not wytsafe (to speak or make mention of,
or to bestow or set in any place of our matter) any things, that be above or
beyond the common oppynyon of men: the matter which shall openly be treated of
is known to al men but it is here strayted by comycall meters. i. drawn
together by such kinds of meters as be mete for comedies, and that thou do
not, not know. i. and to the intent (...) (...)
that thou be not ignorant. The gospel reherseth the life of the prodigal son.
i. of the wastful spendyng (...) (...) a (...) (...) unlike (...) ges togider.
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
child by a known parable, that is to say, by a known comparison or
resemblance, that same by goddis leave, or in deed as it were, shall we now
express by playenge gesture. i. that same will we now set out before you
(with personages) in our play, under whose wrappyng in, thou have a mystery.
i. under whose covert or dark meaning, thou haste a secret sense or hid
intent. But I here whysperynges amongst you, I wot not what, of a new
shamelessness, and (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
of the chowghes: surely, I am not shameless, for that or for because that I
have thought it leful for all men to meddyll with, or to be in hand with the
craft of music, whose palm (that is to say, the price worn in toke^ of
opteyned victory.) for y^ palm tree. i. the date (...) (...) (...) (...)
pro(...)tas.
tree has this property, y^ being thrown into the water or otherwise
stressed, the more weight is laid upon it, the more it ryseth higher or
resists, yea Terence bearyng wytnes, is set forth in the mids. i. set forth
(...) (...)* Phras^^. Pon(...) in medio. Ph^as^s. Laudi no^ po^est no^ esse.
free for all men (catch who catch may) it can not, not be to praise. i. it
can not be but praise worthy, that our young rude soldiers. i. our new
begynners in learning, would show some proffe of their virtue. i. Phrasis.
Virtutis ede re specimen. Vel eleg.
towardnes (in good letters) though it be but in sport, that they may hereafter
be the bolder in ernest wise to rounne against. i. to mete hand to hand with
their Phrasis. Concurrere hoftibus. Adagium. Cornicu^ oculos configere.
enemies (that shall hereafter challenge them in matters of lernyng)
farthermore I will not that any man should think, that we would pecke out the
choughes or crows eyes. i. that we would by our new inventions put ancient
men out of conceyte, or would seem to see farther in a myll stone, than
excellent auctours have done before us, for because that we would hunt,.
Phrasis. Venari bona^ gratiam ab a liquo.
i. as the hunter seeks for his game, seek to win unto us good favor of
you. i. would seek to attain your good favor by an action. i. by mean of the
setting forth of a matter mete to be played, being newly Enallage. Recens
prorecenter.
begone at home at our house. The approved fables. i. comedies of Plautus and
also of Terence, being as it were at ones or together thrown down Adagium.
S^xag^narios de pontedeii ^^re.
from the bridge. i. as who says, that we would for our new inventions drive
she comedies of Plautus and Terence from the high deasse, down behind the
skryne, or cast them out at the carts ars (as things which now wax
unprofitable, by reason of their great ancientie) or dyscharge them from bearyng
any manner office any longer, for this adage took his beginning, Ritus Ro^
manorum.
for because that the youth of the Romans used to cast old men down from the
bridge, wha^ they would Adagi^. Zoili.
have them lose their voices. Thou zoilus. i. thou Philyp find fault, which
(take upon the to correct Magnificat) thou shall nothing or right naught
Adagiu^ Dente theonino rodi.
amoue us either with thy (tauntynge) toothe. i. with thy sclanderous tongue, or
with thyn envy. for why, he that will not let the praise of Terence and Plautus
(...). Velle a^r nolle alicui lauds suas stare
stand still untouched or unremoved, or to be out of all question, as the best
poets (. s. that ever were in the latin tongue) surely he is worthy or
deserves reproaches or reprouynges of all men. But we come not with this
poesy. i. feigned matter of ours, which is Adagiu^. A follibus e^^anu^ calore.
yet hot for new coming from the bellows. i. which comes straight
hyssyng hot or pypyng hot Phrasis. (...). (...) suam (...) g^o (...)mus.
from the forge, to take any man's glory. i. renoume or good estimation from
him. We our self being glory less. i. without glorious fame or renome (. s.
because of our pore or mean hauiour) only our flock. i. company of players
goth here aboutes, to case your great lothynges. i. wamblynges about your
stomakes. i. tedyousnes, (...)sis. (...) nause(...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
which you have much taken. i. greatly had or conceived of these commedies,
which some men styred. i. allured or provoked unto, with a lump or cantell of
bread to play unto you. i. before you more often than learned like, promisyng
to them selfs (...). (...) sibi (...).
therefore Palmarium that is to say, a sign or token worthy for such as
opteyne vyctory (. s. in some great enterprise). i. thynkyng in their own
conceytes, or making them selfs sure in their own minds, y^ they be worthy to
have the best game, or thynkyng. s. to themselfes, that because they have
hopped best, that they be most worthy to have the ring. for so much or for
because that they have sodden ones or twyse. s. (in ill (...) (...) se (...)
sosse) good co^medies. i. that they have marryd good commedies with their ones
or twyse ill setting forth of them, by which their so doing, they clawe of
their Adagium. Suam scabie^ affricant illi.
own skabbe. i. their new gathered scurfe, thereby making their skin raw
again, or thereby fleinge of their skin, that began to gather. i. they
bewraye or plainly set forth to men's eyes their own ignorance, no less in ill
vtteryng of them by leude or barbarous pronuntiation, than by mysse setting of
them forth (. s. to the show of the people.) There is one, I wot Phrasis.
Ringitur ib^ nescio quis.
not who, that fretteth inwardly. i. that chaffeth in the gylles, or that
smoketh (. s. at this gear) how thou,. i. hark. s. hither, thou fellow) why
burn thy lyghtes. i. why glore thyn eyes. s. in thy head? Why waggest
Antiptosis. Quasi iratu^.
thou thy heed, as though thou were very angry? propt have men touched thy byle
to the. i. have men Adagium. Hulcus ta^gere.
rubbed the on the galde back, or have men hytte the upon the thombes (that.
s. thou begynnest to wynche or to startle on this facio^) I believe (. s. that
it is so) for because thou seem to threatten ylle. i. for because thou
threatnest to do sum men a shrewde turn. But lo here to the this myddel
nail. i. the nail of my Adag. Medin^ digi^^^ ostendere.
myddell finger, in token. s. that I despise the, and do show the, how little
I do set by the. i. lo here is a pot for the, the which at these days we make
to a person Nostri (...) consu^tudo.
by puttyng of our myddell finger into our mouth, and point with the same
finger to him, when we have Phrasis. Nunquam uitio uertent. Phrasis. Aliquid
fire* studio alteri*
done.) For we care or go about only to please good men, they will never
turn to vice. i. they will never find fault at the thing, which they shall
feel. i. perceive to be done for study of them. i. for good will toward them,
or for the good will that men bear Elegan. Per omnia. Elegan. Sedulo tame^
Phrasis. Quod restat.
toward them, if it be not in every condycion done sufficiently enough, yet
for all that done with a diligence. That rests behynd. i. for the rest or
residue (. s. of this our prologue,) O thou most worshypfull beholder, let it
not be grievous. i. displeasant unto the to favor letters. i. to bear thy good
mind to lerning ^
by thy silence, while our company is busye or occupied about our play,
which they take in hand, or enterprise, to the intent that they may commend
their labor to the. i. that their labor may be the more commendable unto the,
that if in the mean while our comedy shall please the. i. shall be acceptable
or agreeable unto the, call to thy mind. i. remember (that we demand no more
of the) but that thou give a dew reioysynge, according to our deservings.
i. but that thou show the to be well apayde (with our doings by some
outward sing) as by clappyng of thy hands together, or by making of some
gladsome shout, for our prologue. i. for our forespeakynge (to prepare your
minds to perceive our matter here e^sewinge, this is suffycient or enough. The
Periocha. i. the argument has so. i. the sum of our matter is such as
follows.

ORGVMENTVM COMOEDIAE.
DVO^ quum haberet filios pater, abdicat
(...), (...) (...) patre accepta^ substantia^,
(...) (...) (...) (...) perditissimis
(...) (...) nebulonibus, mox alea^,
(...) luxu^, foede^ rem prodigit.
(...) hinc eo calamitatis incidit,
Vt rebus exutus, siliquis and glandibus
(...) eximeret, cum pertaesum inediae
Esset, paternam regreditur supplex domum.
Pater reducem sibi gratulatur filium.
Amplectitur, sub haec epulatum prouocat.
ACOLASTVS.
The argument of this comedy. i. the hole sum of this matter comprysed in
few words. The kind of meter like to the prologue.

WHERE as the father had two sons, he puts the younger away from him for
ever, or refuses him for his son, he. i. this son after he had received of
his father his substance. i. his childs part, in Phrasis. Peregre proficisci.
Phrasis. perditissimis ses^ applicat nebulonibus Phrasis. Foederem(...)digit.
Phrasis. Eo calamitatis incidit,
continent or forthwith, taking his journey into far countries, he applies
him self to most lost knaves. i. he falls in company, or does associate him
self with the most unthriftiness. i. the most ungracious knaves (of the world)
anon after he casts away his thing,. i. he spends in waste his goodis
shamefully, at the dyce, by wanton. i. vicyous or lascivious living and
prodigal expenses. from thens. i. upon this occasion he fell into thither of
mysery. i. he fell into such case of undoing, or he chanced to fall into
such myserye, that he being spoiled of his things. i. after he Phrasis.
Rebus exut^
was left naked, and tr^^ed away from al his goods, or bereued of all that ever
he had he releued his hunger ^ ^ ^. Phrasis. Cui quum (...) (...) (...) esset.
Phrasis. Pater redu^ce^ sibi gratulatur filium,
with peskod shales, or the husks of other graynes, and with akornes. Whom
after it had forthought of his hunger. i. after he had wared werye of his
famyne, he being an humble suitor returned home again to his fathers house.
the father reioyseth the son to be a safe home commer unto him. i. that his
son was come home again to him in safety, he takes him in his arms, or he
accolleth or enbraseth Phrasis. Supini in (...), Prouocare (...) lique^
epulalatum,
him. under. i. after these things he provoke him to eat at his feast. i. he
ledeth him (home with him) to eat with him, or take his repast with him at his
feast.

Actus primus. Scena prima.
PELARGVS LVBVLVS
Senarij omnes.
NVNC demum sentio quanta sit foelicitas,
Et quanta quies, habuisse liberos patri
Per omnia obseque^teis. Ego, quoad pro meo
Animo moderarer filium annis paruulum.
Praeterea ta^bene conditu^, ut nihil amplius
In eo desyderare posses, tum quidem
Viuebam uelut utranque in aurem dormiens,
Imo mihi plaudebam, qui gnatu^ habere^ praeditum
Tali ingenio and modestia, unde gaudium
Possem mihi polliceri perpetuum and been
Stabile. At nunc postquam detecta hypocrisi, malus
Aperte coepit esse, adeoque id institit,
Manu ut mea emittatur, uah, quae cogito?
Quibus nunc solicitor rebus? ne ille hinc sibi
Primam fenestram ad nequitiam patefecerit,
Neue seruus peccati euaserit ex libero,
Patris imperium lene dum male sanus abijcit,
Id quod de ipso speraueram nunquam fore.
Hoc illud est, quod uolgo consueuit frequens
Dici, penuriam multo melius feras
Quam saturitatem. Nam illa multos continet
In officio, haec uero ad proteruiam meum
Perpellit filium, quandoquidem malit
Errare quolibet ex sua libidine,
Paterno quam sinu fouerier amplius,
N^^ ille haud scit, quam praesens sibi accersat malum
Sed quid? sinam uero a me abire filium,
Quem destinaueram haeredem regno meo?
Id Eubulus forsan meus non suaserit,
Quo consule semper usus sum foeliciter.
EV. Non possum (quod meu^ ingeniu^ est) quin sedulo
Agam, laborem, in officio sim, pro meo
Pelargo, cui ceu Theseus quispiam Herculi
Co^^uctus sum, idque ob morum similitudinem,
Quae ut inter nos est f^re consentane^,
Ita mutuum amorem conciliet oportet, hinc
Adeo nullum elabi diem patior, meum
Quin illi deferam officium. Illuc scilicet
Mihi iter est.

PEL. Cuius hic uocem audire uideor?
Number Eubulis is est ipsus, per tempus aduenit.
Videon te Eubule m^^ meo animo maxim
Nunc expectate?

EV. Eho, quid tam quaeso tristis es?

PE. Haud simplex est malum, quod me sollicitu^ habet?

E. Quidnam est?

P. Eubule minihil.

E. Quin dic quid est?

PE. De filio number nam audisti?

EV. Quid is studet?

PEL. Alienum sese facere a patria domo.

EV. Tuus ne filius?

PE. Meus.

E. Quid audio?

PE. Minor ille natu hanc mihi mouet tragoediam.
Qui utinam ex me natus non esset.

E. Bona uerba. Sed
Vnde istuc quaeso huic uenit in mentem? nisi
Indignis ille abs te sit tractatus modis.

P. Imo ne nimis dignis uereor Eubule.

EV. Qui?

PE. Dicam: Istunc ex me natum eduxi a paruulo,
Habui, amaui ut meum, in eo me oblecto, illius
Salutem curo, nil pretermitto, ut queam
Prodesse. Studium omne meum illius commodo
Consecro. Denique uelut in sinu meo
Eum foueo, unice charum, nunquam ut meam
Benignitatem fenserit in seclaudier.
Optare quicquid ausus est, habuit, meis
Bonis uoluit frui, uoluit recto pede
Incedere, liberum illi ^actum est, quo libet
Mentem suam inclinare, quo libet manum
Extendere, tantum ne rebellaret mihi.
Dedi mandatum, huic par eret iussi. Vbi
His studijs illum mihi firmissime puto and
Perpetuo deuinctum fore, euenit, bonae
Conditionis taedium ut acciperet, hinc uiam
Occoepit comminisci, quase emancipet
Paterno iure. Philautus eam glaciem secat.
Meditatis rationibus, illinc proficiscitur
Recta ad me. Heus tu pater, inquit, aetas quae meae
Sit, ipse uides. Satis sub imperio tuo
Egi, ualet mihi iudicium, ualet ingeni
Vigor, meas uires uolo experirier.
Tum grandem detinerime, patris iugo,
Inscitia est, aequales qui sunt mei ordinis,
Ad unum omnes, gaudent, dudum repudium
Dedisse patribus, quorum iniustitia grauis
Est filijs. Per me satis sapio, nihil
Custodis egeo. Proinde, uolo debita
Substantiae mihi scribatur portio,
Nisi nullis legibus teneri te putas.
Haec illius erat luctuosa oration.

E. Satis superbe omnia. Quid tu ibi?

P. Primum, uelut
Attonitus haesi, post mihi reditus. Adeon,
Inquam, uel inhumanus tibi, uel durus fui,
Vt te mea iniustitia eijciat? Ocij
Credo, tibi obrepsit saturitas, hinc tui
Te poenitet, hinc praesentis te sortis piget,
Nunc uis conscribi a me substantiam tibi.
Nunc uertere solum uis, uide, ne quam tibi
Istuc sedet cordi, tam multum in commodet,
Solent enim subita consilia ducere
Secum, comitem praesentem poenitentiam.
Non desunt exempla, quibus quod ago, comprobem.
Nisi si patrem non audias, frustra audias
Exempla. Porro, quis tam confidens fuit,
Qui te corrumpere sit aggressus? Aut male
Odoror, aut Philautus consultor fuit
Is frigidam suffudit Strenuus quidem
Ille, and cordatus monitor, been si quid monet,
Qui te ad scopulos etranquillo inferat. Nocens
Profecto pestis (...) malum,
Quod, quo magis, fuco quodam suo tegit
Venenum, hoc est no centius, Quam blandulus
Siren Philautus a front, at post senseris
Dulcis ueneni aculeum, long hinc fuge
Mi fili, si modo tua tibi cordi est salus.
Sic dixi.

EV. Quid number his ille quietus redditur?

PEL. Nihil minus. Imo coepit hinc magis
Atque magis ius suum urgere, and leges bonas
Inclamare, quibus contendunt ephebiam
Transmissos solui iure patrio.

EV. Sed quibus
Tandem uerbis conuenit inter uos?

PE. Nihil
Conuenit, hoc tantum respondi, me amplius
Super his deliberare uelle. Nunc mihi
Quid consulis faciundum esse Eubule optime?

EVB. Dicam. Principio, quando obstinate fugam
Parat, memineris hoc uere dictum a Sophois
Inuitum si retineas, exire incitas.
Sine eum modo suo animo obsequi, ut sibi notior
Paulo post redditus, uideat, proteruia
Sua quo reciderit malorum, dehinc tuas
Sub alas si recurrerit, atque supplicem
In gratiam tum admiseris, certe hinc magis
Tibi filium alligaueris ac dudum fuit.
Sic sentict, quanto sit praesidio pater
Ei, qui uel tandem resipiscat perditus,
Vt taceam, quod bonitas tua hinc euaserit
Long commendatissima, si sese exerat
In immerentes, and facilem, and piam, and bonam.

PE. Quid? censen igitur numerandam pecuniam
Qua ablegetur?

E. Scilice^.

P. Os durum.

E. Postulat
Istuc, res ipsa, ratio, iuraque publica.
Faciundum est.

PE. Quid? non mihi ius est lasciuiam
Illius obsecro retundere?

EVB. Non habes
Necesse, pro imperio tuo omnia agere, quin
Sine, abeat.

PEL. Quando ita uis, faciam, inagis tibi
Credam quan animo meo.

EV. Sed heus ne saeuius
Gnatum tractes, tantum obiurgato amantius,
Pariterque moneas, quid cauere oporteat
Periculi.

PE. Meminero, modo adaerarium
Illum expectabo, dum redeat. Quid tu interim?

E. Domum eo.

P. Quid, quod te oro?

E. Quid?

P. Vt ne sit mihi
Te consultore diu carendu^*

E. Vah quasi
Vnquam diu carueris.

PE. Dij boni, ut sapit
Eubulus, ut prudenter consulit, ut uidet omnia*
Ianum bifrontem hunc uere dixeris.
Tamin occipitio quoque oculos multos habet.
Huius consilium ut ex animo meo parum
Sit, fecisse tamen non pigebit forsitan,
Nunc ut diei gnato dictae tempus est.
Rations omneis concinnabo ad calculos.

Of the first act the first scene, for the kind of meter all the versis of
this scene be Senarii, like the verses of the prologue.
PELARGVS, EVBVLVS.
NOw at the last do I feel. i. perceive, how great a happynes or quietie (it
is) to a Phrasis. Habere liberos per omnia. Eleg. ob sequentes.
father to have his children by all things. i. in every condycion obediente
(unto him). i. for a father to have his chyldern in all points, or at all
assayes made to the beck, or to be ruled with a wynke Phra. Eleg. Ego quoad
(...) meo animo moderarer.
I so long as I had in governance, or ruled my son being a young babe in
age. i. being tender of age for my mind. i. according to mine own mind or
desire, farthermore so well facioned in his condytions Adagium. In ^tramui^
dormire aurem.
(that thou could desire nothing more to be in him.) Than truly lived I
like one that sleapeth on both his ears. i. than had I nothing to break my
sleep with, but that I might take my golden sleep in the morning, and turn
me on the other side to round with my pyllowe. i. I lived quyetly, and took
Phrasis. Imo mihi plaudebam.
no thought for nothing, yea I was passing well pleased with my self. i. I
reioysed much in mine own conceyte, which had a son endewed with such a
wit. i. towardnes to virtue, and such a sobernes, Phrasis. Policeri mihi
gaudiu^ ^petuu^ and been stabile. Enallage. Been pro ualde Phrasis. Detecta
hypocrisi malus aperte coepit esse. Graeca. Hypocrisis* simulatio^ o^
counterfayte dealing. Phrasis. Adeoque id institit. manuut mea emitta^.
whereof I might promysse to my self an everlasting and very stedy joy. i.
whereby I thought, I might be safe and sure of a joy, that should last for
evermore. but now after that through the dyscouerynge of his hypocrisy. i.
counterfayte and only outward, or without forth apperynge honesty. i. after
that his counterfayt dealing was bewraid (and) that he has begone openly to be
lewd. i. ill or noughty, and more over y^ he has so sore called upon this
matter, that he might be set forth from my hand. i. that he might be set
at his own liberty, and be discharged of the right, which I being his
father, have over him. Helas, what things think I* with what matters am I
now troubled?. i. brought into pensyfenesse or care, Adagium. Ne pr^ma^
fenestra^ ad nequitia^ patesfecerit.
lest that he upon this occasyon should set open his first wyndowe unto
vnthryftynesse, or unto sinful pastyme. i. lest that the setting of him at
liberty should be the first occasion and beginning of his undoing, through
his vnthryftye living, and lest that of one, which is free borne, he should
become or wax or grow to be sins bondeman. While he ill hole. i. not well
in his right mind, or evil or not well Elegan. Male sanus.
aduysed, casts away from him. i. refuses the mylde or soft and gentle
commandementes of his father, which thing I had well hoped never to be
hereafter of him. i. should never have betyde him. This is it, that is wont to
be often said of the common people, thou may much better suffer scarsety of
things, the^ (...).
plentye. For she. i. scarsity of things keeps many one within their bonds.
i. makes them to do their Phrasis. Multos in of (...)cio conti^ere. Phrasis.
(...) ^rrare ^uolibet ex ^ua libidine. Phrasis. Pat^rno sinu ^ou^rier. Figu.
Paragoge.
dewty. This trewly. i. plenty of things at the full, drives my son to a
wantonness or stubburnesse. For why, he had rather wander at his own pleasure,
whither so ever it lyketh, or should like him. i. whyther so ever should chance
him to become, than to be brought up any more. i. any longer in his fathers
bosom. i. tha^ to be dandlyd any longer upon his fathers knee, or to be any
longer taken for his fathers cockney, or minyon, or darlyng: surely he wotteth
not. i. he wotteth full little, how present. i. how redye a myschefe (at
Phrasis. Qua^ praesens ^^bi accersa^ (...).
hand) he calls to him self ward. i. how busyly he procures his own
destruction. But what? shall I in very deed, suffer my son to go his way
from me, whom I had appointed the heir to my kingdom?. Phrasis. Destinauera^
herede^ reg(...).
i. to enherite my kingdom. peradventure my (friend) Eubulus will not persuade
that thing. i. will give me no such council, whom I have ever used to ask
council of luckely. i. to speed well, when I followed his council.

EVBVLVS. I can not that my condition is, i. I can not chose, for such is my
condition, but I must do dilygently. i. the best I can, I must labor, Phrasis.
Quin sedul^ agam. Phrasit. Quin in officio sim. Adaglu^. Cui ceu Theseus
quispiam Herculi coniunctus su(...).
I must be in office. i. I must do some service, according to my duty for my
Pelargus, whom I am joined with. i. coupled unto (by amity) as it were an
another Theseus unto Hercules, or as and if we were sworn brethren together,
and that for our likeness in manners or conditions, which (resemblance in
manners) like as it is in manner sutyngly or thoroughly agreinge between us, so
must it needs cause mutual Phrasis. Mutu^ amorem co^ciliet oportet. Phrasis.
Quin illi defera^ offic(...).
love between us. i. cause us to love to gyther one an other very hartyly. For
this cause without doubt, suffer I no day to over pass, but that I do
offer him mine office. i. my service, thytherwarde, and god will, or as it were
is my journey. i. my way or my journey lies thytherwarde.


PELAR. Whose voice is this here, which me thinks I hear, is it not Eubulus
voice? it is even he. i. it is even the self and the same, he comes betyme.
i. at his turn, or in dew Phrasis. Per tempus aduenit.
time, or in very good season: Do I not see the my (friend) Eubulus, now most
wyshed for to my mind. i. most looked for at this present time, of all men
living?


EVBVL. Eho. i. ay, or Jesu mercy, what is the matter I pray the, that thou
art sad. i. thus heuye.


PELAR. It is no simple. i. light or small matter, that Phrasis. haud simplex
est malum q^ me sollicit^ habet.
has me troubled or careful. i. that troubles me (thus or on this wise)


EVB. What manner thing is it?


PEL. Nothing my Eubulus.


EVB. But tell (me what it is.)


PEL. Have thou not herd tell or herd speaking of my son?


EV. What studyeth he. i. wheraboutes Phrasis. studet alien^^ sese facere a
patria domo
gothe he?


PEL. To make him self a stranger from his fathers house. i. to banyshe him
self quyte out of his fathers house.


EVB. Who thy son?


PELAR. ye Phrasis. Minor natu.
mine. i. my son.


EVB. What thing is this I here?


PELAR. That lesser borne, or that lesser of birth of Adagi^. Ha^c mihi mo ^et
tragaedia^
mine. i. my younger son moves this tragedy unto me. i. brings me into this
great or excedyng trouble (worthy for a tragedy to be made upon it). i.
raises this peryllous smoke in my house, that would to Phrasis. Vtin^ ex me
nat^ no^ esset. Phrasis. Bona uerba, Bona uerba quaso.
god he had never ben borne of me. i. that I had never begotten him (into this
world.)


EVB. Give good words (I pray the). i. thou myghtest say better than thus, if
thou would: or take god in thy mind man, or mary god shield, or god forbid,
that thou should think as thou say, or say these words. but I pray the,
how came this thing. i. this fantasye into his Phrasis. Nisi indignis sit
tractatus modis.
mind or head, except that he has been entreated of the by unworthy means.
i. that thou haste mysse entreated him, or faren foul with him.


PELAR. Nay mary, I fear lest that by to worthy (means I have entreated him).
i. that I have entreated him to well Phrasis. Nasci ex pa(...)* ^legan. Haber
ealique^ amar ealique^ pro suo. Phrasis. Oblectare se ^n aliquo. Phrasis.
Salutem alicuius curare. Phrasis. Nil praetermitto, ut que am prodesse.
Phrasis. Studiu^ in all culus co^mod^ consecrare.
or better than he deserved, or is worthy, Eubulus.


EVBV. How so?


PELAR. I will tell the, I have brought up this same (young manne) borne of
me. i. whom I have begotten from a little one. i. of a young babe, I have had
him. i. I have taken him or regarded him, I have loved him. i. tendered or
cherysshed him as mine own. In him I delyted me. i. in him was all my pleasure,
or all my delight or pastyme was on him, I cared for the health of him. i. I was
chary, and had mine eye contynually upon his welfare, I over passed nothing
that might profyt him,. i. that I might do him good, or auance him in, I
consecrated all my study. i. I applied all mine hole mind and diligence, to his
commodity ward (to do him good thereby.) for a conclusyon I brought him up,
Phrasis. In sinu foueo unice charu^. Phasis. Sentire benignitate^ alicu ius in
se claud^
being only dear unto me in manner as it had been in my bosom. i. I brought
him up as tenderlye as I could have done mine own heart, so that he never
perceived my goodness to be shut up toward him or my gentylnesse to be
slack toward him. i. in such wise that he never desired me of any thing,
that I said him nay of, he has had (of me) what so ever he Eloquent. Bonis
frui.
durst wyshe for, he would enjoy my goods. i. he desired to have the use of my
goods (at his pleasure) he would go with a strayghte foot. i. he desired leave
of Phrasis. Recto pede incedere.
me to walk or go whyther so ever him lysted (at his own pleasure) it was
made free to him (and) he was put to his own choice and liberty, to set or
enclyne his mind, to what thing him lysted (and) to stretch or put forth his
hand, to what thing so ever lyked Phrasis. Liberu^ alicul esse quolibet manum
exte^dere.
him. i. to leave or take any thing, that his mind stood unto, only I gave
him commandment, that he should not rebel. i. ware stubburne against me: here
unto I commanded him, that he should obey, (but) Phrasis. Deuinctu^ esse
alicui.
where as I supposed by these studyes him to be here after most steadfastly
bound unto me. i. where as I thought, that by these means, he should most
fermly be knyt unto me, and that for ever more, it has chanced, Phrasis. Bonae
conditionis taed(...) accipere. Phrasis. Viam comminisci. Phrasis. Emancipare
paterno iure
that he should take weariness of his good condition. i. it has happened, that
he has waxed weary of his good estate or welfare, from h^s. i. from that time
or upon this occasion, he began to forge out. i. to divise or to invent the
way, by which he might deliver him self. i. set him self at large forth of
his fathers right. i. jurisdiction or authority. i. to do what him lysted,
without his fathers controllement. Philautus Philautus amat or sui. Adag.
Clacsem secare.
(I wot well, cutteth asonder that ice. i. the un dew love he has to him
self, breaks the way before him. i. provoke him or sets him on to take
this way: Thus, after he has thought his reasons. Phrasis. Rations me ditari.
i. after he had made or cast his accomptes (with himself). i. after he had
bethought him what he would do, or what way he would take, From thens he takes
his Eclypsis, Via recta proficiscitur.
journey. i. he comes the straight way unto me. How thou my father quod he,
thou see thy self, what mine age is. i. what age I am of, I have done. i.
lived or Phrasis. Agere sub imperio ali cui Phrasis. Iudicium ali cui ualere.
Apocope. Ingeni. Phrasis. nires suas experirier. Paragoge.
passed my time long enough under thy rule or governance, judgment is
vaylable to me. i. I have sufficient perceyuance, or I am come to my years of
discretion, force of wit is vaylable to me. i. I have wit able (to rule my
self) I will experiment my forces or strengthes. i. I will prove or assaye
what I am able to do (by my self) it is a want of knowledge or wit, me so
great to be holden down with my fathers yock. i. it is a lewdnes for me being
of this greatenesse or Phrasis. Inscitia est. Elegan. Acquales mei ordinis.
Elegan. Ad unum omnes. Phrasis. Dare repudium ali cui.
stature, to be kept under the awe of my father, my companyons al unto one be
glad to have given alredye forsakynge to their fathers. i. my fellows that be
of mine age all the meyny of them, or euerychone of them do rejoice, that they
have all redye forsaken or given over their fathers, whose vinustnes is grievous
to their sons. I savor enough by me. i. I am wise enough of mine own
accord, I need nothing of a keeper. i. I have no need of a guyder. Wherefore I
will that the dew portion of substance may be written Phrasis. Debitam
portionem ali. cui scribi.
to me. i. I will, that my chyldes part, which is due unto me, be assigned me
out, and delivered to me, but if thou wene the to be holde^ by no laws. i.
except Phrasis. Legibus teneri. Latini dicto, nos appellato ut imur.
Aposiopesis. Satis superbe omnia. Aposiopesis. Quid tu ibi? Phrasis. Reddi
sibi, post mihi redditus.
thou think that thou be lawless, or not bounden to obey any law. This was
his moneworthy communication. i. this was his pituous tale worthy to be
bewailed or lamented.


EVB. Al things enough proudly. i. all thy sons tale was metely proud, what
thou there. i. what saydest thou than (to him ageyn?)


PEL. First as astonyshed, I douted (what was best to say) after yielded to me.
i. afterward, when I was come to my self again. Have I ben quod I, so
ungentle to the, or so hard, that my unjust or vnvpryght dealing should cast
the out (from my house or company?) I Phrasis. Saturitatem alicuius rei
obrepere.
believe ouermoche fullenesse of ydelnesse has crepte into the. i. I believe,
that thou art glutted with over much ydelnes, from hens it repents the of
the. i. by reason hereof, thou art ashamed of thy self, or thou Phrasis.
Aliquem presentis sortis pigere. Phrasis. Substantiam conscribi alicui.
set little by thy self, by reason hereof, it greueth the of thy present
lot. i. this estate or condition, thou art now in, lyketh the not. now thou
will thy substance to be written together to the of me. i. now thou will have
me make the a byll, or set in a byll, what thy chyldes part comes to, and
to deliver it the, Phrasis. Solu^ uertere.
(out of hand.) Now thou will turn the soil or ground (thou art in or
dwell in). i. now thou will flee thy ways hens forth of this country, or
now thou will change thine habytation or dwelling place. See lest by how
much this thing sytteth to Phrasis. Sedere cordi
the to heart, that by so much it disprofite the not. i. look that this thing
do the not as much damage, or turn Elegan. Quam, tam. Phrasis. Comite^ sec^
ducere.
the not to as much displeasure, as thou haste set thy heart or thy mind
much upon it (to do it.) For why sudden counsayles be wont to lead with
them for their fellow present. i. ready at hand, repentance. i. Sententia.
when men do things in a haste, or a hedde, or in a geere, shortly after they
do repent the^, or they be wont to forthynke them. There want none exaumples,
by Phrasis. Vt quod ago comprobem.
which I could or might prove the thing I do. i. the thing I go about,
saving if thou here not thy father. i. give no credence to thy father, thou
may Phrasis. Patre^ audire
here examples in vain. i. it boteth or avails the not or little, to have
examples showed the. But who has been so foolehardy. i. who is he, that has been so bold Eloquens. Confidens. Aggredi corru^pere alique^
or fearelesse of any law, which might attempt to corrupt the. i. which
durst goo about to mar the (with his ill conncell) either I sinelle ill. i.
either my smelling fails me. i. I deem or judge amysse, orels Philautus has been a counselor. i. has given the this council, or has been a counseyle with
the, he has poured under cold (water). i. he has priuyly or by Adag.
Frigida^ aqua^ suffundere.
secret menes stered the, or set ye on (to do this thing). i. he has
whyspered the in the ear, or taught the thy lesson in a corner. Surely he is a
stout and a hartye monysher, if he monyshe any thing well. i. surely he were
a gaye gyuer of warning, if his advise were ought worth, which could bring
the forth of the calm (see) to amongst rocks. i. can bring the forth
Adagium. Etranquillo ad scopulos. alique^ infer. Sententia. It Is philautias,
of loving of ones self. Elegan. Quo magis. hoc.
of stedye surety into dangerous peril. For a surety, the myschefe of
loving of ones self, is a noyeng or hurtynge pestylence, which (ill or
myschiefe) the more it covers his venym with a certain gay gloss or farde,
such as women paynte them with, herein he is more noying or noysom. i. the
more the love, which one has to him self, does set a fair face upon such
things as he gothe about, and would pretend that they be grounded upon right
reason, so much the El^. Graec. Siren uel Siren, blandulus a fro^te. Graeca.
Philautus, he that stands to much i his own co^ceyte.
more hurteful is that inordinate love to his master. How flattering a
holder back. i. a meremayde. i. a monster of the sea, which allureth men, by
their sweet syngyng, to be assotted on their love, Is Philautus. i. the love of
ones self, from the foreheed. i. on the for part, or while her face is
toward the. i. at the first beginning, but after. i. at the end, or in the
conclusion, thou shalt feel the stynge of his or her sweet venyme: flee from
hense my son. i. flee or avoid this vice, if now. i. if that, or so that
thy health be to the to heart. i. and if thou tender derelye, or set any store
by Phrasis. esse alicui cordi, si tua tibi cordi est salus
thy health. So said I. i. thus said I (to him)


EVB. What? is not he yielded quiet (with these words). i. was he not appeased
or quieted (in his mind) with Phrasis. Nihil minus.
this good lesson?


PELAR. Nothing less. i. he was worse than he was before. ye mary from hens.
i. after this he began to force or constrayne his law more Elegan. Magis
atque magis. Phrasis. ^us suum urgere. Phrasis. Leges inclamare. Phrasis.
Ephebia^ tra^s mittere. Ephebus, a hobyldehoy,. i. a berdlesse boy. Phrasis.
Solui iure patrio. Phrasis. Verbis co^uenire inter aliquos.
and more. i. he began to claim or challenge his right more and more, and to
call in good laws. i. and to desire to have the benefit or the succor of the
laws, which (were good and reasonable) by which they strive. i. men uphold
or maynteyne such as have over shot. i. over passed their first part of
youth. i. their hobledehoye time. i. the years that one is neither a man nor a
boy, at which years our voice cha^getij. i. that such as have passed their
nonage, and be no longer berdelesse boys, be to be loused from their fathers
right. i. that their fathers have no longer the guyding or correction of them,
but that they be set at their liberty.


EVB. But by what words at the last was it agreed between you. i. what point
or what agreement fell you at at the last, or in conclusion?


PEL. Nothing was agreed. i. we fell to no point at all, Phrasis. Amplius
super hiis deliberare.
only I answered this thing. i. I made him this answer, me to will to
deliberate more upon this thing,. i. that I would take a farther delyberation,
or advise me better, concerning these matters, or that I would Archaismos, uel
antistoecu^ Eaciundum.
take a farther brethe in the matter. Now what counsaylist thou to be done. i.
what counsel gyuest thou me that I should do, O my best Eubulus. i. Eubulus
the best man (living).


EVB. I will tell the. i. I shall show the (my mind) at the beginning. i.
first of all, or first and foremoste, When he makes ready, fleing obstinately.
i. syns he prepares him self after a stubburne manner to flee his way (in to
some other Phasis. Parare fugo. Sophoi, wise men. Sophois diaeresis. Figu.
country) thou shalt remember this thing to be truly said of wise men. i.
thou must remember, that this is a true saying of saage or ancient wise men,
If thou hold abacke one against his will, thou prouokest him to go out. i. he
that keeps a man against his will, makes him the more gredy to go his way.
Suffer him now to follow his mind. i. let him take Phrasis. Animo obse qui.
Phrasis. Reddi sibi.
his pleasure for this time, that he a little time after yielded again to him
self. i. to the intent that when he shall within a short space hereafter be
better come to him self, he may se, whither of ylles he is fallen, Phrasis.
Quo reciderit maloru^.
through his frowardnes. i. into how great inconveniences he is fallen,
through his own wanton or lewd demeanor. from hense. i. after this, if he
shall run Adagium. ^ub alas recurrere. Phrasis. Supplicem in gratiam
admittere.
again under thy wings. i. if he shall come to the for succor, as the young
chycken runs under the hens wynge, and thou shalt admytte him being a
suter into thy grace. i. and when he shall make humble suite unto the, thou
shalt take him into thy favor again: surely from hens thou shall bynd thy
son Elegan. Magis ac du^ du^ alligabis tibi filiu^.
unto the more than he was lately. i. by this means, thou shalt make thy
son more bound unto the, or more beholden unto the, or bring him more in
thy danger, than ever he was before. so he shall feel. i. thus Elegan.
Resipiscere uci tandem.
shall he think or consider, of how much help a father may be to him that
is lost, which in conclusion or at the last, may return again to his perfyt
understanding. i. how great a succor a father may be to him. i. to that
son, which yet at the last, begins Phrasis. Vt taceam
to come to him self again, that I may hold my peace. i. to pass over or to
speak nothing hereof, that from hens thy goodness shall mow escape or declare
it self far most commended. i. that by this means, men shall most hyghly
commend thy gentylnes, or most highly Phrasis. Bonitate^ alicuius cuadere
co^mendarissimam. Durum. Exerere sese in immere^te facilem. Phrasis. Pecunia^
numerare. Latini dicto nos appellato. Phrasis. Os durum. Regul. The participle
in dus includes a necessytie. Metaphora. Satis dura. Lasciuiam alicuius
retundere.
brute or report thy goodness, if it show forth it self both easy and
fatherlyke toward his child. i. pyteous and thereto bou^teous toward him,
that has not deserved it.


PELAR. What? supposest thou therefore money to be told, wherewith he may be put
out of my house or family. i. supposest thou than that it were best for me to
tell out ye money, that he should or might be sent away quite from me with, or
sentaway from me for ever?


EVB. Ye mary, or what else, or what a question is that?


PEL. A hard mouth (thou have). i. thou art past shame, or I marvel thou art
not a shamed to say thus.


EVB. The thing it self, reason, and the publyke. i. common laws as^e or
demand this thing. i. require of duty, that it must or should be thus, it
must nedis be done, or it can not be chosen, but it must be done.


PELAR. What? Is it not right to me, I beseech the on goddis behalf, to stryke
back again his wantonness. i. is it not lefull for me to keep him under, or
to break him of his wanton will, or of his wantonness, or froward conditions?


EVBV. Thou have not necessary to do all things for thy rule. i. it is
Phrasis. Habe(...) se uel non habere.
nedelesse, or there is no necessity for the to do all things according to
thine authority, or to use thy power in every condition, but rather suffer
him. i. let (him go his way) or depart from the.


PELAR. When thou will so. i. syns this is thy mind, or syns thou wylt have
it thus or so, I will do it, I will believe the more than my soul. i. I will
give more credence to the, than I will to mine own self.


EVB. But how or but hark, entreat not thy son more cruelly. i. be ^ ^ ^.
not to hasty or to rigorous with thy son, only chide him more lovingly. i.
only take him up, or rebuke him after a very loving sort, and together. i. and
therewith or thereunto warn him, what of peril might behoue him to beware of. i.
give him also warnyng what peril Elegan. ^ (...).
or danger he should beware of, or ought to eschew or shonne.


PELAR. I shall remember me, or I shall ^ ^ (...). (...). Prop(...) ^. (...)
Apo(...). Quid (...) ^ Regul. The participle in dus includes a necessytie.
Phrasis. Vt ne sit mihi carendnm te.
call it to my remembrance (well enough) now I will tarry for him, or look for
him at my treasure house, while or until he may come or return home ageyn.
What thou in the mean while. i. what will thou do therwhyles?


EVB. I go home. i. I will goo home to my house.


PELAR. What that I pray the. i. what thing is it that I would pray the (to do
for me?)


EV. What.


PEL. That it be not to me the to be wanted long a counselor. i. that I
should not be forced or driven (by thine absence to want thy counsel or
advise long.)


EVB. Propt as who says, thou have ever or at any time wanted it long.


PELAR. Good gods. Elegan. Vt sapit, ut consulit. ut uidet.
i. good lord, how Eubulus sauoureth. i. how wise a man is Eubulus, how
wisely counsels he. i. how wise counsel gives he, or can he give: how he
sees all thing. i. how clearly he sees or perceyueth (what is to be done)
thou may say truly this man to be Janus two forheeded. i. thou may for a
troth call this man Janus with his. ii. forhedes, whom (the Adagium. Ianus
bifro^s Ianu^ bifrontem hunc uere dixeris. Elegan. Tam in occipitio quoque.
antiquity did so paynt, to represent the son, which on the first day of
January looked with one regard toward the year passed, and with an another to
the year coming, or to represent a great wise manne named Janus, which was of
so clear judgment, that by co^sydering of things passed, he coniected or did
foresee what things were to come) he has so many eyes also in the hinder
part of his heed (to se things to come) this man's counsel, like as it is
lyttel of my Phra. Esse parum ex animo.
mind to have done it. i. like as it is but a little according to my mind.
i. like as or though I have but little mind or fantasye thereunto, yet
peradventure I shall not be sorry to have done it. i. I shall not forethinke me,
if I do it, now as the time Phra. Diem dicere.
is of the day, said to my son. i. now as the time requires of the day
assygned or appointed to my son, I will trymme al my reasons Phra. Rations
ad calculos concinnare.
to counters. i. I will cast al my small parcelles to gether in order, into a
great sum, or I will cast my counters, or with counters, make all my
reckenynges.


A brief Introductory to have some general knowledge of the dyners sorts of
meters used of our auctour in this Comedye.
THOUGH IT BE as much dyfferent from mine intended purpose, to set forth the
diverse kinds of meters used of our auctour in this present comedy, as to seite
forth the analogy and eiymologie of every latyne word declynable within this
work comprysed, or to show the Syntaxis and the concorda^ce between the words
gouernynge, and them that be governed, orels exactly to show all manner sorts
of fygures used of him, as well Rhetorical as grammatical, of which he
wants none in places where they should add any beaultie to his matter: all
which things to entreat of, and remytte to the dylygent tea^^ynge and
examynyng of such as do profess to bring up our youth in good letters, as
things mete for the schole, and unto their office belongyng, and of me
(consyderyng mine intent and purpose) not to be required or looked for. Yet for
so much as I do take upon me to be Ecphrastes, upon this auctour, it is my
part to translate into english, all manner words contained within this
comedy, whether they be greek or latin Wherefore syns I have declared in
english all manner words of this auctour, and have so often as any greek word
was to be englished, set over him in my notes in the margyn, Graeca uox, it
might give the dyligent reder occasyon, to stand in doubt, what it should
mean, when he should read written over every scene of this comedy, one of these
words, Senarij, Septenarij, octonarij, trimetri, tetrametri, Trochaici, or
Trochaici Catalectici, and have no manner declaration, set out by me upon
them, other than I have used upon this word Senarij, written by the auctour
over his prologue, which in deed is to general, and not so sufficient or
vaylable, as might be requisite. I think it therefore much congruent, to ease
the reader by some general precepts belonging to the art metricall, to the
intent that wha^ he shall have some perceiving, what these words mean, it
may encourage him to require of his master, to be better instructed in this
said art. Which thing to do, masters had never the fordraunte that they
have at these days. for besides Diomedes, Phocas, Seruius, Donaius,
T^rentianus, Priscianus, Aldus, and Despanterius, there be now at these days
a great number of clerks, which have trauayled in this art metricall: to
whom I remytte the masters, and now to ensewe my purpose.

FIRST it is so be noted, that the kinds of meters, most conuenyent to be
used in comedyes, and which be set forth by Terence, whose diligent
composition, our auctour does chiefly follow, be these twain: Senarij, and
Octonarij, which self meters for an other consyderation be called Trimetri,
and Tetrametri. These meters be called Senarij, and octonarij, upon this
occasion, Where as every Versus senarius, if he hail his just number, has.
xii. syllables and every Versus octonarius, having his just number, has. xvi.
syllables, The poets, to scanne or try these two sorts of meters, have
diuysed two sundry ways. One is, to try them by their fete: an other is, to
try them by their syngle meters. If they try or scanne any such verses by
their fete, than because that the meter of. xii syllables can be made of no
foot, that is less than. ii. syllables, and that in deed the fete that be
only of ii syllables be metest for these kinds of meter, because of his syx
fete, he is called Versus Senarius. And in likewise because the verse of. xvi
syllables, if he shall be tried or scanned by his fete, must have. viii. fete,
therefore he is called Versus octonarius. But if they scanne or try any such
meters, of. xii. or xvi. syllables, by the leest syngle meters that they be or
can be made of, which kind of scannynge is in deed most used and most
required in allmeters, syngle or compounde, that be Iambici, or Trochaici, than
because that the meter of. xii syllables, has three syngle meters, of. ii fete
a piece in him, he is for that reason called Versus Trimetrus. And in like wise
the meter of xvi. syllables, sca^ned by his. iiii. syngle meters, is called
uersus Tetrametrus, that is to say, a meter copou^d of. iiii. simple meters. It
is also to be noted, that though the poets do use in these meters some time
fete of. iii. syllables a piece: yet the fete, which be most mete to make these
meters of, be but of. ii. syllables a piece, of which there be. iiii. diverse
sorts, thus named, Pyrrichius, made of. ii. short sillables, Iam bus, made of
a short syllable and a long, trochaeus, made of a long syllable and a short,
and spondaeus made of. ii. long syllables. And for because that of these.
iiii. sorts of fete, of. ii. syllables a piece, the metest fete to make
comicall meters of be iambus, and trochaeus, but specially Iambus, therefore in
all the tytles, written over the scenes, where trochaici, is not written, we
must understand, iambici, as Iambici Senarii, Iambici trimetri, Iambici
octonaii, Iambici tetrametri. Not that al these meters have none other fete in
them, but be made all holly of Iambus, but Iambus, is the most used foot in
them like as in them that be called Trochaici, Trochaeus is the foot most
used. And by these. ii. sorts of meters, Senarii, and Octonarij, the resydue
of the sorts of meters, used of this auctour, may be known and tried. For
where as he shall find written over any scene, Scazontes, those verses be
Iambici Senarii, but because, that their last foot is ever Spondaeus, and
that he has in his fyft foot Iambus, which because it is contrary to the
common sort of Iambici Senariit therefore such meters be called Scazontes, or
Choliambi, that is to say, halting verses. For Scazein, is to halte. And in
like wife, where he fyndethe written over any scene Septenarii, that
sygnifieth, that the meter is made of. xiiii. syllables: but where as he shall
find written over any scene, Trochaici, that signifies unto him, not only
that Trochaeus, the foot, which is contrary to Iambus, has most domynion in
the verse, but also he must note, that so often as he fyndeth added to him
Catalectici, that sygnifyeth, that the meter wants oone syllable of a just
Versus octonarius, and thus over all scenes, where is written trochaici, he
must understand octonarij, or tetrametri.

It is also thyrdly to be noted, that there may diverse things cause, that a
verse shall not have his just number of syllables. One thing, because that
poets do take in to their verses of the sorts above rehearsed, fete of three
syllables. An other, because they use sometime solution of a long syllable
into. ii. short. Sometime they elyde a consonant: sometime they divide the
last word, and set a syllable or mo to the next verse following. But this
is to be noted, that if a meter be of his just syllables, than he is called A
catalecticum, If he want a syllable, than he is called Catalecticum, If he have
a syllable over, he is called Hypercatalecticu^. And let this as now suffice
the young begynner. Exhorting him to take pleasure, to experiment, how he can
by the help of this brief advertisement, scanne the verses of this comedy of.
xii. syllables, or. xiiii. syllables, or. xvi. syllables: Which though he do
not find at al times to come even just unto his reckenynge, yet let him
consider, that syns he shall ever come nere aboutes his just number, within a
syllable or twain at the most, either over or under, that this auctour uses
no small science, in the making of his scenes, which he shall ever find of
this number of syllables, except Ellipsis and Synaloepha, should fortune to
deceive him. for they cause ever one vowel to be drowned so often as they
chance in a verse: and yet shall the verse have his just number of syllables
never the less. For the declarynge of which. ii. fygures, it is to be noted,
that when a word in a verse ends in m, and the next word following
begins with a vowell, the vowell that comes before, m, and them, also,
shall be left vnscanned or sounded, by this figure Ellipsis. And when so ever
a word ends in a vowel, the next word following beginning with a vowell, or
dypthong, or h, a vowell following him: than shall the vowell that the precedent
word ended in, be drouned, and not accounted in scannynge, by this figure
Synaloepha. And for an example of this thing, let the lerner practice to
scanne this meter, which is the last verse of the second scene of the
first act.

Est tu intro irrumpe ad senem, expectabo te domi meae.

By all which things here briefelye of me touched, it may appear, what great
diligence this auctour has used, in the artificial composition of his scenes.
but for so much as precepts, without example, be very hard and dark, let
us take. ii. of the first verses in our auctours prologue, for an experience
of the premises, which I will first lowse into their. xii. several
syllables, and after that bring them into their. vi. feet, and thyrdly into
their. iii. syngle meters.

The. xii. syllables of these. ii. meters aparte. Vos, null, la, cap, tet, ob,
se, crad, mi, ra, ti, o,
Quod, hic, ui, de, it is, op, ti, mi, ui, ri, no, uos,


To scanne or try these. ii. meters of. xii. syllables by their. vi. feet, by
reason of which manner of scanrynge, they be called Versus Senarij. Vos null,
lacap, tet ob, secrad, mira, tio,
Quod hic, uide, it is op, timi, uiri, nouos.


To scanne or to try these ii. meters by their iii. syngle meters, by reason
whereof they be called Versus Trimetri. Vos nullacap, tet obsecrad, miratio,
Quod hic uide, it is optimi, uiri nouos,


And this example may be sufficient, for Septenariis, and Octonarijs, and
Scazontes, and Trochaicis, as well Catalecticis, as Acatalecticis, or
Hypercatalecticis.

Actus primi. Scoena secunda. ACOLASTVS. PHILAVTVS.
Trochaici Catalectici.
ME nisi animus fallit, omnia succedent been.
PHI. Sed patris
Vim and facundiam, uereor. ut fortiter feras.

A. Egon?
Obfirmato animo meam rem agam.

P. Tantu^ cave suis
Ne te saeuis dictis protelet.

AC. Proteler? omnia
Mea mihi meditata sunt, nihil formidem congredi,
Vel cu^ tribus oratoribus.

PH. At iam credo satis diu
Rem tuam deliberasse patrem. Quid respondeat,
Vise.

AC. Aggrediar.

PH. Hem, macte animo, i sane quo tua te uo cat
Virtus. i pede fausto. Miror-sires ex sententia
Huic cesserit. Aut fallor, aut repelletur ne causam agat
Tam meas rations omneis hic Pelargus abijcit.
Quare, cu^ illo fatali pugno odio.

A. Philaute mi, heus
Heus Philaute?

PHI Quis me?

ACOL. Cor mihi salire iam incipit.

PH. Hem quidum Acolaste?

ACO. Quia pater aerario assidet, suum
Censum supputans, ut opinor. Quippe, auribus meis
Hausi tinnitu^, ad fores placide assistens nostras.

P. Been
Est. Tu intro irrumpe ad sene^, expectabo te domi me.

Of the first act, the second scene. The kind of meter Trochaici
Catalectici. Interlocuiores.
Acolastus, Philautus.
BUt if my mind begyle me. i. except my heart misgyue me, al things shall
succeed well. i. shall come Phrasis. Been succede^e. Phrasis. Forty forre.
well to pass.

PHIL. But I fear. l. I am a frayde, how thou can bear strongely. i. how
thou canste stoutly endure, or abide, or away with the force or the brunte and
the eloquent speech of thy father.


ACO. Not I. i. who not I? I will do my things with a fully Phrs sia Obfirmato
animo rem agere.
purposed mind. i. I will handel my matters with a full set, or fully
determined courage.


PHIL. Only beware (hereof) lest he may drive the away afar Metaphora.
Sauis dictis aliquem procelare.
of, or that he may shake the of or ever thou come to his speech, or to
reasonynge with him, with his cruel sayings or words.


ACOL. Shule shake Phrasis. Omnia (...) mihi medita sunt.
me of, or drive me away from a far of. i. or ever we come to ioynynge, or
to hand strokes, al my things be bethought to me. i. I have bethought me (what
I will say to him) in or concerning all my matters, Phrasis. Co^gredi uel
cu^tiibus oratoribus.
I would be nothing a frayde to coope, yea and need were, with. iii. orators.
i. to take. iii. orators for a need, to task.


PHIL. But now I believe thy father Regula. Latini dictonos appellato semper
utimur.
to have delyberated thy thing long inoughe. i. but I believe, that thy father
has now debated and determined thy matter long inoughe with him self. Go se
what he may answer. l. beware of his answers, that he may make the to thy
demandes.


ACOL. I will go to him. i. I will upon him.


PHIL. Hem, be Phrasis. Macte animo
of good courage, or to it, or upon it man, or to it with a bold spyrite, saint
George to borowe. go surely whither thy virtue calls the. i. go safely thither
as thy heart or courage serves the, or whyther thy mind Phrasis. I pede fausto
gives the. go with a lucky foot. l. go, god send the good luck, or good
speed in thy journey. I marvel if the thing shall happen to this man of
sentence. l. I marvel me, if this man's matter shall chance or Phrasis. Ex
sententi^a cedere.
succeed, according to his mind or desire, or shall come to a good effect, other
I am begyled, or he shall be put or driven back, that he shall not do his cause.
i. that Phtasis. Causa^ agere.
he shall not have audience, or be herd to say his mind. i. to purpose his
matter, or to tell his tale, so much does this Pelargus cast away. i. shake
of all my reasons. i. all the resons I can make against him. Where Phra Fugnare
cu^aliquo fatali odio.
fore I fight with him by a fatal hatred. i. wherefore he and I be mortal
enmyes together, or we be at such deadly food, that it is our destenies one
of us to kill an other, or we never mete together, but we be at Figu.
Aposiopesis. Properantibus conuenit Cor alicui salire.
daggers drawing.


ACOL. How my Philautus, how.


PHI. Who me. l. who is that that calls me thus hastyly.


ACOL. My heart begins to skyppe to me. l. my heart begins to leap (in my
bealy for joy.)


PHI. Ha why foo Acolastus?


ACOL. For my father sytteth in his treasure house, recknyng as I suppose Phra.
Censum supputare. Phrasis. Tinnitum au rib^ haurire. Phra. ad fores plaude
assistere.
his revenues. i. how much he may dispende by year. For why I did draw up.
i. I hard the tynkynge of his counters, as I came softly, and stood by our
door, or as I came softly and stood lystnynge at our door.


PHIL. It is well, break thou in. i. rushe in to the old man, I will tarry the
or for the at home at my house.


Actus primi. Scoena tertia. Trimetri.
ACOLASTVS. PELARGVS.
NVn^ quod futurum est, colligo, nunquam dabit
Pecuniam pater, nisi moneat prius,
Vt ne profundam, perdam, confringam male
Rem omnem, idque aget uero uultu, tam mihi timet.
Sed nescit quam sur no narrabit fabulam.
Ego faciam tamen, ut pulchre respondeam,
Illius uerbis, alia quam cogitem loquens,
Meus dum dinumer et mihi argentum senex.
Sic illuden di sunt patres isti. nimis
Rigidi in nos iudices, Sic imperium cadit,
Quod ui magis quam beneuolentia asserunt.
Vt sim omnibus gratus, pro frugi nomine,
Mihi quod pater inditum uoluit, ex re, meus
Philautus aliud subdidit concinnius.
Acolastus siquidem and esse and dici gaudeo.
Satis adhuc cessatum est, adire eum uolo.
Adsum pater, ut quid uel tandem respondeas,
Audiam. Ita ne rations studiose conficis
Omneis, ut portionem conscribas mihi?
PE. Nempe, ut hariolare fili.

AC. Amo te plurimum,
Et non neglexisse habeo imprimis gratiam.

PE. Quodo cum salute tua fiat.

AC. Fiet pater,
Ne quid time. Sed obsecro quantum dabis?

PEL. Ade on tibi in pecunia est animus, nihil
Vt imperes isti tuae libidini?
Fili, id adeo edico tibi, nisi quieueris,
Reducam calculum.

AC. Recte pater, obsecro
Perge.

PE. Vt pergam? ne me obturbaris pessime,
Concede istorsum aliquantisper, dum te uo cem.

AC. Faciam. Hem, quid egi? nunc male metuo miser,
Nenon aes omne reddat, uel, quod auidior
Est ad rem, uel, quod est commotus. Ineptias
Hominis, nescis tractare aegrotum animum patris,
Quem debebas meminisse tam irritabilem.

PE. Eho dum ad me fili. Nunc utrumuis sub meo
Praesidio degere, an peregrinari foris?
Fac cordate respondeas.

AC. Pater, for as
Me animus uocat.

PE. Prauus sane. Quid si sinas
Te exorari, ut maneas domi, meis bonis
Fruiturus perpetuo? Certe patrem foris
Tu nusquam inuenias gentium.

AC. Credo pater,
Sed proficiscendum est, decretum stat, me feras.

PE. Non possum tam blande mi fili dicere,
Vt animum mutes.

AC. Operam omnem ludis pater.
Potius tentabo, quid possum uel legibus,
Vt istuc tua dicam pace interim,
Siquod rogo non impetrem cum gratia.

PE. Quando obstinate operam uideo te dare, meum
Vt tibi iugum excutias, alioqui amabile,
Age, non libet tecum pugnare, sed habe
Hanc zonam tibi, december talentum rem tenet.
Ea est substantiae tuae aequa portio.
Quid gestis gnate mi? Ah, nescis quid gaudeas,
Creed hoc mihi, si quid unquam monui been,
Acerbius flebis, quod temere niteris.
Ego saeculum hoc noui, quibus sit moribus,
Tum te pernoui, quo sis ingenio, tuum
Si animum uicisti, potius, quam animus te, sino
Vt gaudeas, uerum, quoniam uideo secus
Te esse habitum, non possum, quin deplorem tuam
Stultitiam, pariterque do leam, te abscedere.

ACO. Pater obsecro, ne quid te excrucies mea
Causa, nullam peperero tibi aegritudinem.

PE. Vtinam.

A. Certe pater, Nunquid me uis?

P. Puer
Hem aegre propter me consistis, uideo, pedes
Tibi pruriunt, ardentque fugam. Sed haec prius
A me si imperia capesses, multa in pectore
Tuo bona considebunt. Principio tuam
Mentem fac nullis artibus imbuas, nisi
Quarum in me exemplar aduortis, meis item
Fac uiuas moribus, ut qui poenitendum habent
Nihil, uolo, tuo animo haud quaquam seruias,
Quem praestat semper habere suspectum. Cave
Diuertas ad nequiora a praeceptis meis.
Postremo, habe hoc tibi monumentum ut regulam,
Ad quam mores, uitam, and mentem instituas tuam.
Haec sedulo uerses, haec mente tractites,
Haec pro Cynosura quapiam limet oculus.
Haec sint tibi ^^ulapis Lidius, ad quem probe
Tete explores, ut qui sis noscas intime.
Abns enim si quid uel uita, uel animus
Deliret, peccatum id quidem esse memineris.

ACO. Est praeterea quod uis?

PE. Vt perpetuo been ualeas.

ACO. Valebis igitur mi parens.

PE. Vale
Vale inquam gnate mi, Gnate aeternum uale.
Quae haec est miseria? proh deum atque hominum fidem
Itan diuelli a me, quod erat charissimum?
Oh, quem luctum paras, quas curas inijcis
Patri, ipse securus nimis, pulchre quidem
Tuam rem abiens stabiliuisti. Sed nescis, ah
Nescis, serus quos exitus uesper uehat.
Sane illud demiror, qui fiat ut mihi
Quom maxim peccet gnatus, nequeam tamen
Acerbiore in eum esse animo. Vt nunc res ferunt,
Vtinam, tam possem filij obliuiscier
Quam ille, o dementiam, me auersatur libens.
Huc huc calamitatis scilicet tuo
Philaute consilio inferor, o dolor grauis.

Of the first act, the third Scene. The kind of meter. Interlocutores.
Acolastus, Pelargus.
Now gather I together the thing that shall be Phrasis. Quod futuru^ est
colligere.
hereafter. i. now reason I or coniecte with myself, the thing which is to
come. for surely my father will never give me this money, but he will first
warn me (or give me warning) that I shall not Phrasis. Rem profu^dere. Phra.
Rem per dear Phra. Rem male co^fringere.
waste it prodigallye. i. power it out or lade it out by shouilles full, that I
shall not lose it. i. cast it away, that I shall not ill break to gether all
my thing. i. that I shall not bring to naught or consume lewdly al my
substance or all the good, (he will deliver me) yea and this will he do after a
true countenance. i. yea and this will he do. i. this shall be done of him,
Phra. Tam mihi timet. A dagium. Surdo fabula^m narrare.
after an ernest facion or manner, he fears so much to me. i. he is so sore
afraid of me, that I will bring all to naught. but he wotteth full lyttel to
how deffe a man he shall tell his tale. i. he wotteth full lyttel how deffe an
ear I intend to give him, or how I entende to say to him, in my mind,
would to god I Phra. Faciam.
herd you (for in deed he were as good to tell his tale to a post) but yet
will I do. i. I will so fascion me. that I may answer fayrelye. i. I will
give him a Phrasis. Alia qui cogit^ lequi.
goodly answer to his words, saying, other things. i. other wise than I
think, while mine old man numbreth silver to mc. i. while our old Joachym shall
Phras Argent^ dinu(...)e. Sentintia. Phra^s. Imyerium (...). (...)s. Imp(...)
as(...).
be a telling out of my money to me, so should these fathers be laughed to
skorne, that be to cruel judges upon us, thus falls the rule. i. thus
decays or comes to naught, the authority which they challenge (upon us)
rather by violence tha^ by benevolence. i. ge^tyl intreting of us. and because
or to thentent I would be acceptable. i. welcome to al me^ for my name of thrift
or thriftines, which my father would should be given me, Phrasis. No(...) frugi.
P(...)s. N(...) (...)ditum. P^ra N^m^n subdidit concin ^aus. Graeca. Acolastus
(...) by good. (...). (...) ces (...). Elegan. (...). Phra^s. Rations co^
(...)re. Phrasis. Portionem alicui con(...)bear.
Philautus has given me, of the thing. i. fyt for my manners an other meter
name. for why, I rejoice both to be (in deed) and also to be called Acolastus.
i. a stroygood, or a prodigal fellow, I have hitherto lingard or tarried long
mough, I (now) will go to him. Father I am here present, to thentent that I may
at the least way, now at the last here what thou wylt answer. i. what answer
thou will make me, do thou thus studyouslye cast to gether all thy
reasons. i. accomptes. i. doste thou thus diligently cast together al thy
sinal parcelles into a gross sum, that thou may write together my portion
to me. i. that thou may assign me out in writing, my chyldes part, or that
thou may deliver me a byll in writing, what my portion or chyldes part
shall come unto.

PEL. In very deed even as thou gessyste or deuisest my son so (do I.)


ACO. I love the very much. i. I have good Phras^s. Non neglexisse habeo
gratiam.
cause to love the, and most chiefly I have thank, that thou have not ben
negligent. i. and above al things I thank the that thou haste not forgotten
me, or ben slack or negligent concerning my bysinesse or Phrasts. Quodo cum
salute tua fiat
matters.


PEL. That o it might be with thy health. i. that I pray or would to god it
might be to thy profit.


ACO. It shall be done father. i. it shall turn to my welthe, father, be
nothing a frayde, but I pray the for gods sake how much (money will thou
give me). i. shall I have of the?


PEL. Is thy mind Phrasis. Animus est. in pecunia. Phrasis. Libidini imperare.
Phrasis. Id adeo edico tib i. Phrasis. Calculum reducere. Aposro pesis. Vt
pergam. Phrasis. Co^cede ^stor sum aliquantisper.
so sore in money to the. i. is thy mind so sore set upon money? that thou
can nothing rule this wylfulnesse of thine? son I tell the this (oone
thing plainly) but if thou be still or be in rest, I will pluck back the
counters. i. I will break mine account, and take up my counters.


ACO. Well father, I be seche the for goddis sake hold on. i. go to (thy
busynes.)


PELAR. That I hold on? (byddest thou me go to my business)? look thou
trouble me not, thou most worste. i. thou most ungracious young fellow
lyuinge. walk, or pycke, or get the hense this way ward for a little while
till I shall call the.


ACO. I will do so. How what have I done? Now am I sore a frayde, wretch
(that I am) that he will Phras. Nunc male metuo miser Phra. Ad rem est auidior.
Phra. Aposio pesis. Ineptias hominis.
not yield. i. pay me all the brass. i. al my hole money, either because he
is more gredy to the thing. i. that he is more covetous upon money or his
profit (than he should be). i. either because he is to sore set, or to gredy
upon the world, or his thrift, orels because he is amoued. i. angrye. lewdenes
of a man. i. what lewd fellow that thou art, or see the lewdenes or folly of
the man, thou canste not handel or daly with the sick. i. Phra. Tractare
aegrotum animu^ alicuius.
the vnoquiete mind of thy father, whom thou should have remembered, how easy
he was to be angryed. i. to be provoked to anger.


PELAR. Come hither Phra. Tho dum ad me. Phra. Sub alicuius praesidio degere.
Phrasis. Peregrinari foris. Phrasis. Fac cordate respendeas. Plita. For As
animus (...). (...). (...) (...)as (...). (...). (...)bonis (...)s. (...).
(...) ge^ (...).
to me my son, now whither will thou pass thy life under my tuition, or
wander abroad (in or into far countries?) make that thou may answer heartily.
i. look that thou give me a ready answer (as thy heart serves the)


ACO. Father, my mind calls me out of doors. i. my heart serves me to go
abroad (to se the worloe.)


PEL. Surely a soory mind. what if thou suffer the to be entreated. i. what if
thou be contented to be overcome by my prayer, or to do so much at mine
instance, as that thou may tarry at home, to emeye the use or to be part
taker of my goods contynually, or for ever. Surely a father without forth
canste thou find no where of folks. i. no where else or no where in the
world.


ACO. I believe that father, but I must needs be goinge or walking (on my
journey) that decree stands. i. I am at a point, or my mind is fully set,
bear me. i. suffer me or be content (with my doing.)


PELAR. Can I not speak (...) (...) sta^. (...). (...). (...). (...) (...) (...)
so fair unto the my son, that thou may change thy mind?


ACO. Thou plaiest all thy labor father. i. thou laborest al for naught, or
spendest thy labor in vain, I shall rather assaye or attempt, what I may
do, if there be none other remedy, or if need be, or if I shall algates, by the
laws that I may say (...) (...) (...)s. Phras. Vt (...) dicam pa(...)
in(...) Phras. Qu^d r^go cum gratia impetrare. Phras. Obstinate opera^dare.
this with thy peace in the mean while. i. no dyspleasure taken with my
saying therwhyles, if I can not opteine the thing I ask with grace. i. with
thy good will.


PELAR. Syns I see the obstinately give. i. bestow thy labor, or to go about,
that thou may shake of my yocke away from the. i rydde thy self of my
power, which I have over the, which for all this, or this not withstanding, is
to be beloved or set by, Eleg. Alioqui. Phi asis. Age, non libet tecum pugnare.
Phrasis. December tale^ tum re^ tenet Phrasis. Quid gestis?
go to, I list not. i. I am not dysposed to fight. i. to strive with the: but
have this gyrdel to the, it holds the thing of. x. talentes. i. but hold or
take the this gir dell, it conteyneth in it the value of. x. talentes, that is
the even portion of thy substance. i. that is justly thy childs part. why
whyppest thou or skyppest thou about thus my so^nne? Ah, thou wottest fulle
little whereat thou reioysest. believe this thing to me. i. believe Phrasis.
Acerbius flebis quod temcre niteris.
me herein, if I ever warned any thing well. i. if I ever gave (the any good
counsel or wholesome aduertysement) thou shall weep more bytterly. i. thou
shalt weep full bytterlye (for this gear) that thou now go about
foolyshely. i. fool hardyly. I know this world. i. I wotte what a world this
is, of what manners it is. i. what manners people be of now adays. Phrasis. Te
pernoui quo sis ingenio.
Farthermore I know the throwly, what mind thou art of, if thou have overcome
thy sensual mind, rather than thy mind has overcome the, I suffer. i. I
wytsafe that thou be merry or glad, but for so much Phras. Video secus te esse
habitu^
as I see that thou art other wise had. i. that the things or the world goth
otherwise with the, or that thou art otherwise set, or that thy case gothe
otherwise to Elegan. Par iterque d^ leam.
warke with the, I can not, but that I must weep, or bewail thy folly. i. I
can not forbear weping for thy folyshenes: and farthermore, or and thereto, I
can not but that I must be sorry. i. I can not forbere sorowing the to go away.
i. that thou go or departest thy way Phra. Ne qdte crucies mea cau sa. Phra.
Nullam tibi peperero aegritudinem.
(from me.)


ACO. Father, I beseech the, vere or trouble thy self in nothing for my
cause, I will bring forth to the. i. shape the, or cause the to have no
dyspleasure of mind for my cause.


PEL. Would to god thou would not.)


AC. for a suertie father I will notwylt thou me?. i. wylt thou command me any
more Phrs. Number quid me uis? Phras. Aegre propter me consistis. Phras. Pedes
tibi pruriunt ardentque fuga^. Phra. Imperia capessere. Phra. Mentem fac nullis
artibus imbuas. Eloquen. Fac. Elegan. Vt qui. Phras. Tuo animo haudquaqua^
seruias. Phras. Que^ praestat habere suspectum. Phra. Cave diuerras ad
nequiora. Adagium. Cynosura oculos limare.
service?


PELAR. Well child, I se that with pain thou taryest or stand still nere
by me. i. well child, I se how pavnefull it is to the to stand still nere by
me, or I se how thou stand upon thorns: Thy fete do ytche to the, and
desire fervently flight. i. thy fete ytche (so that thou can stand still
upon no ground, and thou art passing desirous to be goone, or to be walkyng,
but if thou will first take upon the these commandementes (given unto the by
me). i. if thou wylt promise me to keep these precepts (of mine) many good
things shall rest within thy breast. i. thou shall have store of good
counsels in thy heart (by means of them) first and foremost, make. i. look thou
entache. i. indowe not thy mind with no manner crattes. i. facious of living,
but with such as thou perceiuest an example in me, look also that thou live
according to my manners, as those or such which have nothing in them, whereof
one might repent him. I will in no wise that thou serve. i. follow thyn own
mind, whom it is better for the ever to have suspected, look thou turn not
aside from my precepts. i. co^mandementes unto more wicked things. For a
conclusion, take ye this token or remembrance. i. this book of the bible, as a
rule, according unto the which, thou may ordeyn. i. govern thy manners,
life, and mind, cast these Limet pro collimet. Apheresis. Cynosura ur sa
minor, the dogs tail the lesser bear
things dylygently (in thy) mind, treat or entreat these things in thy
heart or mind, let these things in the stead of a certain Sidoniens
lodesterre dyrect thine eyes by a straight line. i. as wisely or as ernestly,
as the archer or shoter in a crossebow directs his eye toward his mark, so
ernestly look thou continually upon this book. i. like as ye Sidonie^s look
ever wha^ they sail by see on the night towardis the star, called the dogs
tail, or Vrsa minor, the lesser bear, or Experientia iter facienti^ Per
Arabiam desertam.
like as such as did pass the deserts of Arabia, were forced to pass them
by night, dyrectynge their course by Vrsa minor, because the wind would suffer
no path or tracke of horses or camelles fete to remain in the light sand) so
let thine eyes be ever toward the precepts contained in this book, to
lead the course of thy life by. Let these things be unto the, as it were
Adagiu(...), Ceu lapis Lidius. Phrasis. Ad qu^m probe t^^^ explores. Metaphora.
Animum delirare. Phra. Est praeter(...) quod uis. Phra. Vt perpetu^ been
ualeas. Phrasis. Valebis igitur mi pater. Phrasis. Vale inquam aeternu^ uale.
Phrasis. Proh deu^ atque hominum fidem. Phras. Itan diuelli a me quod erat
charissimu^? Phrasis. Luctum parare, curas iniicere.
a certain touch stone. i. a rule to try good and bad asonder, like as the
touch stone does show the goodness or fynenesse of one gold from an other,
and tries which is no gold at al. by the which (touch stone) thou may try
thy self by, that thou may know most inwardely. i. in the depest of the
within forth, who thou art. i. what manner of man thou art. For why, if thy
mind or thy life. i. thy conversation or thy thought, do go aside, or amysse,
or out of the way, from these preceptrs, remember the for a truth, that y^ is
sin.


ACOL. Is there any thing else that thou will, (with me?)


PELA. That thou may ever more farewell.


ACO. Thou shalt therefore fare well my father. i. my father I take my leave of
the then.


PELA. Farewell, or well might thou fare, I say my son, farewell for ever
and a day, or for ever more. What wretchedness is this, out the faith of gods
and men I call on. i. o merciful god, should the thing that is to me most
lefest or most derest in this world, be plucked away from me (by violence)
on this facion? O what mourning make thou redye, what cares casteste thou
into thy father. i. what mourninges and what care go thou about to set at
thy fathers heart? thou thy self being to much sewer. i. being more Eleg.
Ipse securus nimis.
careless (than thou have cause to be) surely thou have establyshed thy thing
fayrely, goinge away. i. suerly thou haste set a goodly order, or set a gay
direction Phrasis. Pulchre quidem tuam re^ abiens stabiliuisti. Adagium. Nescis
saerus quos exitus u^sper uehat
in thy matter or affairs, now at thy goinge away or at thy departing. But
ah, thou wottest full little what issues the late euyntyde may carry. i. what
may betyde the, er that it be dark night yet, or that the course of thine age
be spente. i. thou wotteste full little what sorrow thou may abide, or ever
thou have the holy candell in thy hand, or, or ever the priest have a penny for
the. Suerly I maruayle hereat, how it comes to pass, that where as my son
does tres Elegan. Miror qui fiat ut cum maxim tamen. Phrasis. Acerbiore in eum
esse animo. Phrasis. Vt nuncres ferunt. Elegan. Vtinam tam quam. O dementia.
pace against me so much as can be possible, yet cannot I be of more bitter
mind against him. i. yet cannot I (find in my heart) to be styffe stomaked
against him, as the things bear now. i. as the things chance now, or goo
now to pass, or as the case requires. would to god I could as well forget my
son as he forgets me. O what madness (is this of his) he is contrary to
me, wyllingely. i. he holds against me, or takes a contrary way from me,
even a set purpose, taking pleasures therein. O Philautus, hither hither a
goddis name of misery. i. into this misery am I brought, through thy
counsel. O grievous sorrow. Elegan. Huc huc calamitatis scilicet.
i. o what a grievous sorrow (is this?)


Actus primi. Scaena quarta. (...).
ACOLASTVS. PHILAVTVS.
NVm quis me uiuit fortunatior? Number quis
Fortunae filius dici magis debet
Ex merito, quam ego, cui contigere pro uoto
Omnia?
PHI. Quis hic beatum uenditat sese? Hem,
Aurum ne habes Acolaste?

ACO. Habea^ rogas? Zona
Vide ut tumeat.

PH. Ho ho, Talenta quot?

AC. Dece^.

PHI. Hui tantam ne auri uim?

AC. Tantam.

PHIL. Vnde, quaeso te,
Patri ista largitas?

ACO. Quia art tractabam
Virum, doli ignarum.

PHI. O lepidum caput, laudo,
Praesidium forte expugnasti hodie. quid restat?
Nisi ut triumphum agamus intus?

ACO. Accedo
Tuae sententiae.

PHI. Sed quid libri hic gestas?

ACO. Id pignoris pater mihi relinquebat.

PHI. Phy, bibliorum codex est, ualeat, insiste
Tuas tibi res curare. Nempe, quo pacto
Iter tuum instituas, peregre profecturus.
Codex non aeque inimicus, atque hic est nobis.
Ego tibi mox alia instillaro praecepta.

AC. Sed mihi grauiter pater est interminatus, ne
Haec a me amitterem.

PHI. Istaec uerba sunt, mitte.
Quin concedimus intro?

A. Impera, and puta factum.

Of the first act, the fourth scene. ACOLASTVS, PHILAVTVS.
Scazontes, haftynge meters. for though they be Iambici Senarij, yet they have
Spondaeum, in their last foot, and Iambum, in their fyfthe foot, contrary
to other Senarij.
ACOLASTVS. Is there any man lyuth more fortunate than I. i. is there any man
living more happy (than I am) is there any man that ought more of deseruynge.
i. worthyly to be called the son Adagium. Fortunae filiElegan. Magis exmerito.
of fortune. i. to be said of, that he is borne in a good hour, than I, to
whom al things have chaunsed of wyshe. i. as happyly as I could wyshe for?


PHILA. Who here happy sells him self. i. who is he here Phra. ^^^rum sese
uenditare.
that sets him self out to the sale, for a fortunate or lucky man? What?
haste thou thy gold Acolastus?


ACOLA. As kest thou whether I have it, see how my gyrdell swells. i.
stands a styrte? (for men were wont to put their money in lether girdylles,
as merchant To. Ritus. Phrasis. Hui tanta^ ne auriuim. Phrasis. Vnde patri
ista largitas?
men do now adays.)


PHI. Hoho, how many talentes (is in it?)


AC. Ten.


PHI. What, have thou so great a horde or so great a quantity of gold?


AC. So great.


PHI. Of whens I pray the, to thy father this largeness. i. how fortuneth
it, I pray the, or how happens it, that thy father is waxed thus lyberall?


ACO. For I handelyd the man by craft. i. cunnyngely, which is ignorant of
desceyte. i. which knows no desceyte.


PHI. O pleasant hedde. i. Phrasis. O lepidum caput.
fair fall that pleasant. i. merrily disposed heed of thine. I praise the. i. I
con the good thank, thou have this day won by assault or overcome a
strong garyson or fortress, what rests now behind (to be done) but that
we may make our tryumphe. i. keep Phra. Triumphum agere. Phra. Accedo tuae
sententiae.
our gaudyes, or let us set the cock on the hope, and make good chere,
within doors.


ACO. I goo to thy sentence. i. I hold on thy side, or take thy part.


PHI. But what book is this thou beryst here.


ACO. This of pledge my father left to me (for a token or remembrance) that I
should have of his words or lesson be gave me.


PHIL. Fie on it, it is the bible book, fare Phrasis. Valeat.
well it, or fair wether after it, procure to care thy Phrasis. Insiste tuas
tibi res curare Nempe. Iter istituere
things to the. i. solicit to care for thine own business, or go about, or
follow thine own affairs, that is to say, by what means thou may ordeyne
thy journey, now thou art goinge into far countries, Eleg. No^ aeque atque
or goinge forth on thy journey ward, there is no book more enemy unto us
than this is, I shall drop or pour into the. i. I shall teach the other manner
precepts a none.


ACO. But my father has greuousely thretened me. i. has given me a great
charge, and Grauiter interminari.
thretenyd me upon the same, that I should not leave Istaec nerba sunt. Quin
concedimus intro. Impera and puta factum.
away these things. i. let this book go from me.


PH. These be but words, let them pass, but go we in adores.


ACOL. Command and think it done. i. speak the word ons, and it is done.


Actus Secundus. PANTOLABVS, PAMPHAGVS.
Octonarij omnes.
NA^ miser ego sum, qui quod edam quaero, and id aegre inuenio, gulam
Habeo, extrema fame paene strangulatam, uenter inedia.
Exhaustus est, stomachus latrat, tum pendulae marcent genae
Pol dentes, pruriunt, me nullus est ieiuniosior,
Neque magis effractus fame, scabri rubigine
Dentes, labiaque incaua situ loquuntur me famelicum
Quare, hunc haberem praesentem deu^, placaret qui mihi uentre^ iratu^.
Parasiticae artis gnaru^ optem dari obuia^,
Quem sectari liceat, postqui^ in fumu^ cineremque uersa sint
Quae possedi oia, Vel e flamma non grauarer impiger
Cibu^ petere. O fortuna, ut nunquam perpetuo bonnes. Sed hic
Ne est Pa^phagus, meo que^ iuui beneficio toties? is est.
PAMP. Quis hic nouus subsistit hospes? Pantolabus est. Insolens
Istuc quide^ facit. No^ possum quin salute^, and colloquar.
O salve plurimu^ merito tuo uir optime.

P. Pamphage
Salve plus millies.

PAM. quid hic negotij tibi? An uenis
Obsonatu^ ad foru^ Cupedinis? Atqui ea est prouintia
Parasitorum.

PANTO. Memini. Sed eo res redijt, ut transcurso opus
Mihi sit ad ordinem uestrum.

PAMP. Ad nostrum ordinem quid audio?

PANTO. Sic fors fert.

PAM. Sed turpe est nimis a bubus ad asinos transcendere.

PANTO. Vt sit. Durum telum necessitatis.

PAM. Nihil ne est amplius.
Rei?

PANTO. Nihil quicquam, abliguriui omnia.
Hinc memet foro
Subducens, lateo domi hunc totum mensem, ibi uapam bibo, panem
Atru^ uoro, inedia ringor, co chlearu^ instar, uiue^s miser.

PAMP. O me ter foelicem, cui tam acre bellum cum
Penia haud fuit.
Qui suetus su^, ut mures, alienum semper arrodere cibu^.
Quid, an non te piget tam acerbae sortis?

PAN. Non tantum quidem.
Pigeret, si modo tuam disciplinam nunc sectarier
Liceret.

PAM. Forsitan liceret, si potis esses assequi.

PAN. Conarer ut posse^ Pa^phage, ue^ter, magister ingeni
Meos conatus iuuerit.

PAM. Sed nescio qui foeliciter.

PAN. Hem, me uide, ut prolixe agis? Rape me sodes collegio.
Tuo inauctorandum rape, postquam nullam plane artem calleo.
Qua possim uiuere (...).

PAM. Au non sunt illotis sacra haec
Manibus tracta^da?

PA. Satisne lotus sim, qui coruger fame?

PAM. Specimen tuae des artis oportet, dehinc nostris comitijs
Indictis, si uoles, nomen dabis cum plausu and gloria.

PAN. Ea lege, obsecro, me discipulu^ habe tibi, cui profui
Re salua saepe, nisi immemor es beneficij accepti.

PAMPHA. Immemor?
Age suscipio te parasitastrum.

PAN. Habeo pol gratiam. Quid est,
Quod me nunc uis facere?

PAM. Vt me observes sedulo.

PAN. Quidum?

PAM. Saeria
Curanda sunt.

PAN. Quid seria? securus quonam ferrer pede,
Seria curaui nunquam, nisi seria, uentris negotia
Appellites.

PAM. Scilicet.

P. Istuc persuadeas Catonibus
Rigidisque Sophois, si quid uales oratio^e.

PAM. Pro suo
Illi sapiant ingenio, no^ equidem inuideo, nobis item
Palatu^ neutiqui desipit, Hic and nos philosophi sumus
Aesopici Gnatonicique, cuius sectae plurimos
Clientes in foru^ producimus.

PA. Quibus sed ducibus
Fraeti?

PAM. Magnis Epicuro, Aristippo, Catiis, and Apitijs.

P. Duces illi haud sunt poenitendi per Geniu^, perdoctus es,
Laudo. Sed ad seria redi.

PAM. Recte. Nescis quae uiderim
Insomnia.

PAN. Falsa?

PAM. Non opinor. Post medium noctis ferunt
Vera esse somnia, quom sumus purgatiores scilicet.

PAN. Intelligo. Sed narra somnium.

PAM. Hodie constrato in thoro
Videbar ad me^sam plena^, lautusque unctusque accumbere.
Cereale^ dixisses coenam, hinc uelut e pleno cornu datu^
Et quod ederem, and quod potarem. Inde adeo, in digitos pedis mihi
Standum erat, ut de summo quicquam peterem. Vis dicam? Dis quidem
Videbar, cui adfluerent bonae undique deliciae.

PAN. Tam grata sunt
Quae memoras, ut dentes uenter que hinc gestiant mihi. Vigilans
Vix ausim optare dormie^s quae so^nias.

PAM. Tu^ nescio
Quid uisus talorum iactus portendat omnis boni.

PANT. Vah somnium hominis, quae narrat?

PAM. Quid hoc, satin tibi placet?

PAN. Vereor, ne laeuus hic augur sis.

PAM. Nil credis, nisi quod uides?
Abi in mala^ cruce^, dignus, que^ nunqua^ sancta saturitas
Beet, cu^ istac tua incredulitate.

PA. Obsecro famelicu^
Meu^ uentrem fac somniis tuis satures, si quid habent
Rei.

PAM. Irrides?

PA. No^ ridea^, q^ carbonarias opes
Pro Germanis ostentes, somnijs foelix? Ridiculum.

PAMPHA. Age,
Ridiculu^ sit, qua^do ita lubet. porro, qua^ no^ sim stultul?
Vates, uidebis, dum fiam hinc cellarius, cuiuspiam
Nummatioris domini; Opulentia cuius construxero
Ta^ largum uentri co^meatu^, ut si regum sim maximus.

PAN. Hic, credo, uigilans somniat. Pamphage, beatum me in tuo
Regno tum quaeso facias.

PAM. Vel primus eris apud me, si probe
Aduleris?

PAN. Sed unde plebiscita ordinis nostri petam?

PAM. unde rogas? a Tere^tiano illo Gnathone pri^cipe
Viro Pantolabe, Hinc te opus fuerit interpret optimo, nemo artifex.
Nascitur.

PAN. Operam meam tibi dico Pamphage.
Age doctoris suscipe
Parts.

PAM. Nolo arbitrum quemquam esse nobis,
Sed pone fabricam hanc,
Tutus locus est, ibi elementa dabo, fac te docibile^ probes
Discipulum.

PAN. En aurem utramque surrigo, ad magistri dogmata.

Of the second Act, the first Scene. All the meters of this Scene be
Iambici Octonarij. Interlocutores.
PANTOLABVS, PAMPHAGVS.
IN VERY deed I am a wretched fellow, Descriptio famelici.
which seek or prolle about (to get) the thing which I might eat, and
hardely. i. with much ado, or with greatte dyfficultie I find (it out) I
Phrasi. Gula^ habeo extrema fame strangulatam. Phrasis. Ve^ter inedia exhaustus
est Graeca. Stomachus latrat. i. uentriculus. Phra. Pendulae ma^cent genae.
have a throat bolle almost strangled i. snarled or quarkennyd with extreme
hunger. i. I am so soore forhungered, that my bealy weneth my throat is cut:
my belly or panche is all wasted quyte up or shronke to gether (with lankenesse)
for hunger or want of meat my stomach belcheth or cries out (for the fulness
of wind that is in it for emptynesse) farthermore my chekes that hanged side
down, do shrynke away. i. where as I was wont to be blobbe cheked or have
foggy chekes (that shaked as I went) they be now shronke up, or drawn to
gether, like flesh that does putrify or corrupt for extreme leanness (and)
by the church of Pollux, my teethe ytche, Phras. Effractus fam^
(for desire they have to be set a work.) There is no man more fasting.
i. more hunger storuen, or more gaunte belyed (than I am) nor more all to
broken. i. brought more low or made more fainte with hunger (than I am) my
tethe be rough with rust. i. my teth be Phrasis. (...) rubigine de^tes sicu
loquuntur Phrasis. Labia incaua ^^tu loquu^tur
al to furrid with flakes of skurfe (sticking upon them syns I washed them with
any merye go down) my lyppes waxen hollow inward. i. turned in to my mouth
ward, and (my chynne standing out like as aged folks lyppes do, that be
totheles) with filth about them, speak (if I would lie) that I am hungrye.
Wherefore I would have him a present god. i. I Phras. Quar^ hunc (...) (...)
sentem desi. Phra. V^n^^^m iratum placare. Phrasis. Opt^m mihi da^i obuiam
Adag. Que po^sessa fuere in fiammam and cinerem uerti.
would take him for a god, that could help folks forth out of hand, which
could appease to me mine angry bealy. i. could make my bealy be still (and
leave his crollinge.) I would now wyshe to mete with one that were skylled in
the craft of dysours or skoffyng fellows, whom it might be lefull for me to
follow, (in his craft^) syns that all the things that ever I did possede, be
turned into smoke and ashes. i. syns I have spent upon deyntie meat and
drink. i. pyssed against the walls, or dyspente on my deintye mouth, all
that ever I was lord of: and need were Adagium. Efiamina cib^ ^^tere.
out of flame, I should not be grieved diligent to fetch meat. i. it should not
grieve me, like a valyant or stout fellow to seek my living out of the light
burning fire, or to eat hot coals, or to scrape my living out of the hard
stone walls, with my nails. O fortune, that thou art never still continually
good (to no man.) But is not this same Pamphagus, whom I have so Sententia.
often helped with benefyt. i. with good tornes doing unto him? it is he.

PAM. what new gest have we standing here? it is Pantolobus suerly, he does
thus vnwontynge. i. he is not wont, or he is not accustomed to do Phra.
Insole^s istuc quidem facit. Phra. O salve plurimu^ meritotuo. Phra. Salve plus
millies.
thus. I can do (no less) but I must did him good morrow, and speak with or
to him. O god give the passing well to fare, most worshypfull gentylman, for
thy good deeds or benefits (toward me)


PAN. Pamphagus, God give the a thousand good morowes.


PAM. What here of busynes to the. i. what business haste thou here (a do?)
Come thou (hither Phras. An uenis obsonatu^ ad f^ru^ cupidinis*
to the pultry to bie cates?) but in very deed that (place is the prouynce). i.
the resorting place of dyssours (to harken where any good feast is toward,
or whoo makes any good chere in his house, that they may resort thither, to
get some living.)


PAN. I remember Phra. Transcurso mihi opus est ad ordinem uestrum.
that. i. I am advised thereof, but the matter is come hereto (now) that it is
nedeful for me to make a course over to your order. i. to become one of your
occupation.


PAM. To our occupation, or to our sort, what thing is this, I here the (say?)


PANT. So chance bears. i. such is my chance, or my luck, or thus stands
the case (with me now.)


PAM. But it is a Adagium. A bubus ad a finos transc^dere. Phrasis. Vt sit.
Sententia.
passing foul thing, to make a skyppe over from the oxen to the asses. i. to
leappe out of the halle, into the kytchyn, or out of Chrystis blessing in to a
warm son.


PANT. That it be. i. put case it be so, Necessity is a hard weapon. i. need
has no law.


PAMP. Is there no more of thing. i. is there no more ynke Phrasis. Nihil ne
est amplius rei. Abliguriui omnia. Phra. Foro se subducere. Eloquen. Vappa^
bibere
left in thy pen, or nothing yet left the?


PANT. Nothing at all, I have spent on my deyntie mouth, all that ever I
had, for this cause I withdraw my self forth of westmynster halle. i. of
all good company, or resort of people. I lie lurkynge at home all this hole
month long, there drink I refuse wine,. i. that has almost lost his
color, and is almooste Phras. Panem atru^ uoro.
ayger, and mounche up brown bread, I am pinched by the bealy (with hunger)
(living after the manner of snayles) which all the winter season keep them
Comparatio
within their shelles, living like a wretch.


PAM. O me thrice happy. i. O happy am I that ever I was borne, to whom so
sharp a battle has not ben with Cui tam acre bellu^ cu^penia haud fuit.
poverty. i. which have not had so sharp a battle against poverty (as thou
haste had) which am accustomed to gnawe other men's meat, as myse (do)
Comparatio Phra. Aliquem. Acerbae sortis pigere. Elegan. Non tantum (...) modo.
What does it not grieve the of so bitter a lotte. i. does not this so hard a
chance grieve thy heart?


PANT. Suerly it should not grieve me so much, so it might be lefull for me,
now to follow thy dyscipline. i. to be one of thy scoolynge.


PAM. Peradventure it might be leful for the, if thou were able. i. sufficient
to attayn (to it.)


PANTO. I would go about it. i. I would assay Sententia. Venture magister ing^ni.
as I might Pamphagus. The belly which is the master of wit, would help mine
attemptynges, or aid me in mine enterprtse.


PAM. But I wot not how Phrasis. Me uide. Phra. Vt prolixe agis. Eloquen.
Rape me tu^ collegio inauctorandu^. Phrasis. Nullam arte^ calleo. Graeca.
Oico^itos. Domi educatus. Adagium. Illotis manibus tractare sacra.
happily. i. how it would frame, or come to pass with the.


PAN. Hem se me. i. what look who I am, or who am I, how long art thou a
doing, or how toughe thou make the matter (to me that am of thine old
acquaintance?) take me hardely in all the have to be bound prentyse to thy
fellowship or crafts men of scoffars: Away with me, syns I plainly can skyll of
no manner craft (in the world) whereby I may live. i. get my lyui^g, for I have
ever be brought up at home. i. under my mothers wynge, and never learned how to
get my lyuinge.


PAM. Why be these holy things, to be meddled with, with unwashed hands. i.
why and thynkest thou this craft or science to be dealyd with without the
bestowynge of any labor, to learn the craft before?


PAN. Am I not washed enough. i. have I not taken pain inoughe. i. have I not
learned my craft or lesson well enough, which am drawn together (and it were
a purse) for hunger?


PAM. Thou Phrasis. Specime^ tuaedes artis oportet. Phras. Indicere comitia.
Phrasis. Dare nome^ cum plausu.
must show us a patron, or a proof, or an assaye of thy craft. i.
workmanshyp or cunnyng: afterward, or and that ones done, after we shall have
assembled our fellowship together (by the sendynge about of our bedyll, than
if thou wylt thou shall give thy name. i. we will haunse the or set thy name
into our fellowship book with clappynge of hands, and glory. i. great Phrasis.
Ea lege.
joy making.


PANT. By that law. i. on that condition or covenant I beseech the for goddis
sake, take me for thy scholar, whom I have been profitable unto often times, my
things being safe. i. when the world was welthy or prosperous with me, but if
thou be vnmind Phrasis. Prodesse alicuire salua. Phrasis. Immemor esse accepti
beneficii. Phrasis. Age suscipio te parasitastrum. Phras. Habeo pol gratiam.
Phra. Quid me nu^c uis facere? Eloquen. Obseruare alique^ sedulo* Phra. S^ria
curanda sunt.
full or vnremembrynge of a benefyte taken. i. except thou be forgetful when
one or a man does for the, or has done the a good turn (in time passed.)


PAM. Unremembrynge. i. vnmyndeful or forgetful? go to, I take the or receive
the for my scholar or disciple in skoffynge craft.


PANT. I have Pol thank. i. by the god Pollux, I con the good thank, what is
it that me now thou will to do. i. what thing is it that thou will have me
do now?


PAM. I will that thou mark me, or take heed of me diligently. i. I will that
thou take good head to me, and follow me, or lay to thy hand.


PANT. Whereto, or wherefore.


PAMP. Erneste things be to be cared for, or regardyd. i. we have an erneste
matter in hand.


PANT. What ernest matters, doste thou tell me of, being sure, whether
Phrasis. Sce^rus quo nam ferrer pede.
I should be carried with my foot,. i. for being sure where to become, or
whether to resort, or having a place to resort unto, at all times, I never
cared for or did regard any ernest matters, but if thou call the matters of
the belly ernest matters. i. to get a good meals meat, or to follow bealy joy.


PAM. That is ethe to wit or what a question is that?


PAN. Persuade this thing (than to the Catons, or to the sharp Diaresis.
Sophois pro Sophois.
or sour countenanced sage fathers, if thou be any thing worth in oration.
i. if thou can any thing do with thy fair tongue, make the. ii. Romayn
Catones Phrasis. Valere aliquid ^ratione.
(which so ernestly did rebuke gurmandyse). i. fedynge of the panche, or make
these sage fathers, that look so sowrely, when they do call upon men, being
in the pulpyt to fare hard, or to be contented with a small dyete, to believe
this thing, that to prolle about for to get good meals be erneste matters.


PAM. Let them savor. i. let them be wise for. i. according Phras. Ingenio
sape
after their wit. Surely I envy not at the matter, or them, to us also the
palate myssesauoreth or mysse Phrasis. Palatu^ al icui ^esipere.
tastes never a whytte. i. our mouths be nothing or never a whytte out of
taste here. i. in this matter be we also philosophers. i. lovers of wisdom,
after Clodius Aesopes sort, the Romayn player of tragedies,. Clodii Esopi
patris historia.
i. stage player, and Clodius Aesopus his son, of which the father was
served at his table of a dyshe of birds, which stood him in. vi. C.
sestertiums, as Plinius mencioneth in his. x. book, which amounts in our
sterlynge money after. iiii. li. iii. s. iiii. d. the sestertium, unto. ii. M.
iiii. C. vii. li. xx. d. And Clodius Esopus his son did at a bank ct ^ate a
perle, weak Clodii Esopi si^^s historia.
ned in strong by neyger, which as Horace witnesses in his. ii. book of
sermons, the. iii. Satyr, he plucked from his souerayn ladies ear, named
Metella, which perle far exceded his fathers dysshe of birds. For Plinius
in his. ix. book says, that the perle, which Aesopus did eat at Rome, passed
the perle, which Cleopatra did swalowe up in Egypt for Antonius Cleopatrae
historia. Gnathonis Cilici historia.
sake. And of Gnathons sort, not whom Terens makes mention of, but of Gnatho a
Cecilien (whom the Romans make mention of, because of his knavery, which he
used when he came to great men's feasts. For when he saw the dyshe that best
lyked him, he would throw the sneuyll of his nose into it, because no man
should have part with him) of whose sect. i. Phrasis. Clientes i^ forum
producere. Phrasis. Quibus ducibus freti.
suite or sort of profession, we bring forth or set forth abroad into the
market stead many clientes. i. men of our retinue, or that be suitors to our
court.


PANT. But to what dukes. i. capytaines do you trust. i. what capytaynes do you
bear you bold upon, or do you put your trust in?


PAM. Upon great or stout (capitayns) as Epicure, the Athenien philosopher,
which Epicurus philosophus.
maynteyned, that the felycitie of man, consysteth in dayntie fare, and wantyng
of pain, and Aristippus Aristippus philoso.
which maynteyned, that the felicity of man consysteth in the taking and
vsyng of all sorts of voluptuous plesures. And such as ve of Marcus Apitius
sort whom Plinius calls the most depest streme. i. the most sydest bealyed
fellow of all gluttons or stroye goods upon their deyntye mouth. This Marcus
Marcus Apistius.
Apitius did write many things concerning the contenting of dayntye mouths.
And of Catius sort, which was also a great glutton and master (of our craft.


PANT. Now by the god of good fare and Phra. Ducrs sunt haud poenitendi.
Phras. Per genium perdoctus and laudo. a^n somnia ui dear. Experientia.
bealy joy, those capitayns be not to be myslyked, or to be set light by, Thou
art passing well learned, I commend (the) but return or come again to our
ernest matters.


PAMP. Well said, thou wottest not what a dream. i. vysion I have seen (in my
sleep.)


PANT. A false dream (I fear me.)


PAM. Nay not so, as I wene or suppose, after mydnyght men say, that dreams
be true, that is to say, wha^ we be purgid (for after Phrasis. Esse pu ga^ior.
we have by reason of our first sleep digested our gross humors, which in the
beginning of the night ascend up to the hedde, than. i. after that time of the
night, our dremes proceed of some other secret cause, which commonly do chance
or take effect)


PAN. I understand the, what thou meanest, but tell thy dream.


PAM. To day. i. this morning I seemed. i. me thought Phras. Ad mensam p^^nam
lautus un^tusque accumbere.
that I washed (in a bayne or hot house) and anointed (with oil) after the
manner of the old time, did lie down by. i. did sit at a full table. i. a
table full (of good meat) in a bed bestrewed (with herbs and Ritus antiquorum
accuband^.
flowers, after the manner of the old time, when they did lie down at their
meals, and not sytte as we do now) thou would have said that (it had been) a supper of Ceres the goddess of wheat or corn (not such a supper as
the gentylles used, when they did sacrifyce unto Ceres, for in such feasts it
was a great Rel. Coena in sa(...)sis Cereris. Rel. Coena Cerealis. Adag um.
aliquid uelute pleno cornu alijeuidare
offense, to have any wine) but (such a supper, as the Cecilians were wont to
keep in their temple, dedycated to Addephagia. i. edacitati, to gourmandise,
for in that temple was an image of Ceres, with this title (...). i. to corn,
or to the gyuer or preserver of corn. as Celius mencioneth in his. iiii. book)
from hens. i. from this table, as it had been forth of the full horn of
plentye (called of the Latins Cornucopiae). because it was filled after the
gentylles manner, with all sorts of corns, graynes, and fruits, and so
plentuous of all things, that there wanted nothing (called in greek Ceras
amaltheas) was given or retched unto Ceras Amaltheas.
me, both what I would eat, and what I would drink, in so much that in very
deed, it was to me to stand Phra. In digitos pedis stare.
into the toes of my fete. i. in so much that I was forced, or I was feign to
stand a typ too, that I might seek any thing from the highest. i. if I would
reche Phrasis. De summo quicqui petere. Phrasis. Dis quidem uidebar. Phrasis.
Huic bonae undique afstuu^t deliciae.
any thing (that stood or was set at the higher) (end of the bourde.) Will
thou that I shall tell the (one thing) trewely I seemed a rich man. i. me
thought I was a rich man, or the god of rich men him self, unto whom good
delycates did flow from every where. i. unto whom plenty of good deynties
or delycate meats and drynkes, came tomblynge or walowyng in on every side.


PANT. The things that thou tellest me of, or make mention of to me, be so
pleasant or thank worthy, that my tethe and my bealy Phrasis. Dentes
uenterque mihi geseiunt.
delight to me from hense. i. that my tethe and my bealy rejoice in me herfore,
or by reason thereof (and would feign be at the gear) (or they be with child
till they be at this deyntie meats thou speakeste of) I dare scarsely wysshe
being awake, for the things that thou dreameste (upon) being a sleep. i. I
dare uneath wysshe for waking, that thou dreamest upon in thy sleep.


PAM. Farther more, I wot not what of good luck, the cast of the dyce which
I saw, does pronosticate or sygnifie a forehande, or to come. Phras. Quid
boni ominis portendat?
i. I wot not what good luck this cast of the dyse, which I saw (in my
dream) may betoken to come or to betyde or chance hereafter.


PAN. Propt what Phrasis. Vah somnia^ hominis.
(tales or things tells this dream of man). i. this drousye yoman (that
slepeth as he stands?)


PAMP. What does not this please the enough. i. what (say thou hereto?) does
not this gear please the metelye well?


PANT. I am a frayde lest thou be a left hand augur. i. a contrary or a
folysshe or false prophet or Phrasis. Vereor ne le ^us augur sis
sothesayer. i. I fear me that the birds, by syghte of whom thou haste taken
upon the to be a diuinour (of things to come) did appear on thy left hand
which (Augurium. i. auium garritus). i. chatterynge of birds Rel. Augurium
apud Romanos quid significet.
signifies ill luck, or that the thing shall not come to pass, like as when
the birds did appear on the right hand of the Romayne augurs, they sygnified
good luck, and that the thing should take good effect.


PAM. Beleuest thou nothing, but that which thou see (with thine eyes) Go
hens in to ill cross. i. walk or pycke the hens in the galowes name, or in
Phras. Ab^ in mala^ crucem.
the weniand, or in the. xx. devil way, with this incredulity, or want of
belefe of thine. i. mystruste of thine, whom holy belyfulnesse should never
make blessed. i. for you art worthy through thy mysdeseruing Phra. Dignus que^
nuti^ sancta iaturitas (...).
that holy saint fylgutte, or saint panchart, should never do good turn for
the, or make the happy (with sendyng the good meat and drink enough.)


PAN. I beseech the for gods sake, do so much, or find the means that thou
may saoule. i. satisfy to the full with meat and drink, through these
dreams, of thine, my hungry bealy, if they have any thing of thing. i. if
they be ought worth, or have any weight Phras. Si quid habe^t ^ei.
or pythe in them.


PAM. Do thou laughe at me, or laughest thou me to scorn?


PANT. Should I not laughe at the, saying thou show often. i. bostest
colyshe Adagium. Carbonarias opes pro germanis oftentas.
rychesses or treasours for true. i. seeing that thou set forth to the
show, or makeste thy vauntes or crakes of thy dreams for true tales. i. as
though they were matter in deed, according to the grekyshe adage, of Suidas
mentioned, whereby is meant that like, as he is dysapoynted, that looks for
treasoure, and finds coals: so would thou feed my bealy with vain hope, by
telling me of thy dreams. which adage we express in our tongethus, saying
thou set as good a face upon beans, as if they were blanched almondes,
thou being happy with dreams. i. thynking in thine own conceyte, that thou
art happy because thy dremes plese the. A mock. i. this is a scorn. Phra. Sir
ridicu^ quando ira lubet.



PAM. Go to, let it be, or be it a scorn or a mock, syns it lyketh so. i. syns
such is thy pleasure, but yt I am not so very foolyshe a prophet, or
southsayer, as thou would make me, thou shalt see by experience, when I
shall from hensforth be made the storer of some well moneyed master. i. the
keeper or ouerseer of the provision for householde of some man, that has goodis
plenty, or that shall have money goddis foyson, or at wyshe, through whose
richesse or substance, I shall gather together on heap, as large a prouysion
or Phras. Co^meatuna uentri construere.
store of vyttayles for my bealy, as if I were the grettest of kingis. i. the
greatest king in the world.


PAN. I believe this fellow dremeth being awake. I beseech the than, make me a
happy or fortunate man in thy kingdom.


PAM. Thou shall and need be, or as it were, be the Elegan. Vel primus cris
probe (...) aduleris.
first about me. i. the chefest person or chefest in my conceit, if thou can
flatter well.


PAN. But from whe^s shall I go seek or fetch the decrees of people of our
order. Phrasis. Vnde plebiscita ordinis nosiri petam.
i. the laws or ordynances made for them that be of our fraternity.


PAM. As kest thou from whens? from that Terentian Gnatho, a principal manne.
i. a chief ryngleader of our faculty. Here in this case need shall be to the
of the best declarer or setter forth. i. on this behalf thou shalt have need
of the most counnyng Phra. Hi^te op^ fuerit interpre te optimo. and ententia.
declarer or setter forth of (these Gnathoniens laws) that can be found: for
no man is borne a crafts man. i. no man is borne with any manner counnynge (and
therefore he must have a good master, and take peynes him self for it, or
ever he can come by it.)


PAN. I dedicate my labor to the. i. I offer my service to Phrasis. Operam
mea^ tibi dico.
the, or I proffer the my service, O Pamphagus, come of, take thou in hand the
parts of a teacher. i. come of, take upon the to be my master, to teach me.


PAM. I will not any arbitrour or of counceyle to be to us. Phrasis. Nolo
alique^ a^bitrum esse n(...)s. and ali(...) alloqui (...) motis arbitrum.
Phrasis. Ibi elementa ^^bo. Phras. Aure^ utra^^ surrigo.
i. I will not that any body shall be by, to here what we say, or se what we
do, but here behind this warke that is in building, or this work house,
there is a suer place, there will I give the thy first principles, of our
science, look thou prove. i. show thy self to be a disciple or scholar mete
to be taught.


PAN. Loo I lift up or hold up both mine ears. i. lo I harken with both
mine ears to my masters teachynges or chief lessons of his science.


Actus secundi. Scoena secunda. PHILAVTVS, ACOLASTVS,
Senarij.
QVid haec Acolaste, prae ut illa quae pater dedit?
A. Pater futilis est, somnium iners ualeat, magis
Tua me Philaute dicta stimulant.

PHI. Fac tibi
Fidas, quod cunque inciderit in mentem, uoles.
Te ipso fruere. Spes omnis in te sit tibi.
Sic uiues foelix ac beatus.

ACO. Altius
Haec cordi haerent, quam ut momento leui excidant.

PHI. Macte es uirtute.

ACO. Iam uale Philaute mi.

PHI. Vale longum uale. Acolaste optime maxim.

ACO. Quam me Philautus ui sua totum occupet,
Si maxim dicam, nemo credat tamen,
Adeo in illum uelut effusus sum pectore.
Quo fit nulla ut hinc capiar poenitudine
Mei, ut mihi ignoscam, and mihi placeam nimis.
Quis hoc statu me non beatum praedicet?
Superest, ut ingressus, haec mea gaudia
Tester, festiua quam paro cantiuncula.

Of the second Act, the second Scene. The meters of this scene be Senarii.
PHILAVTVS ACOLASTVS.
VUhat be these things Acolastus. i. what sayeste thou to these lessons in
comparison to them, that Elegan. Quid haec prae ut illa. Phrasis. Valeat.
Metaphora. Dicta tua magis me instimulant. Phra. Fac tibi fidas Quodcu^que in
ciderit in me^tem uoles.
thy father has given the?

AC. My father is a blab of his tongue, a dreamer. i. a trifler, a sluggarde,
fare well he. O Philautus, thy sayings prycke me more. i. set me more on, or
set me more a gogge than my fathers doctrines.


PHI. Do. i. find the means or provide that thou may trust to thy self,
and find the means what so ever shall fall. i. come in to thy mind, that
thou may will it. i. that thou may be willing or minded to put it in
execution, enjoy thy self, or take pleasure or delectation in thy self. i. (be
not Eloquen. Te ipso fruere.
to other men like a dog to the bow, or be not so made to other men's beck,
that it shall not be in thy power to live after thine own pleasure, let al thy
hope Phrasis. Spes omnis in te sit tibi.
in the, be to the. i. trust utterly and holely to thyn own self (and to no
man else) so shall thou live happy and blessed. i. so shall thou lead an happy
and a blystull life.


ACOL. These things cleave deper to my heart Elegan. Haec, qua^, ut. Metaphora.
Cordi uer bahaerere. Phrasis. Leui momento excidere. Phrasis. Macte es uit^ute.
Phrasis. Iam uale, Vale longu^ uale Phrasis. Optimus maximus no^ solum de deo.
Phra. ^i maxim di ca^, quam, nemo credat tamen. Phra Vi sua aliqu^ ^otum
occu(...). Phra. Esse in alique^ effuso pectore. Phra. Capi poenitudine sui.
Phrasis. Mihi ignoscere.
than that they may fall away by any light tryfle. i. I set these things
nerer to my heart, than to shake them of with a thing of naught.


PHI. Be thou more increased in virtue. i. go to it man, or play the man every
day better and better.


ACO. Now farewell my Philautus.


PHI. Farewell, farewell, and have good day, or farewell for long and many a
day, O my Acolastus, the best, the greattest. i. the best man living, and my
greattest benefactour, or the greattest in my conceyte.


ACOL. If I should say it most greatly. i. if I should say it and swear it
never so much, or never so fast, yet no man would believe it, how much
Philautus occupies me hole with his force. i. how much Philautus with his
strong persuasions, has won me holely or utterly to be his, so much I am
as it were powered out in him in breast. i. I have set or given my heart so
utterly or so entierly to love him, whereby it is done, that from hens I shall
be taken with no repentance of my self. i. whereupon ensues or follows, that I
shall never from hens forth repent my self, or take any repentance, that I
have followed (his counsels) which (is) that I may forgive my self. i. that I
may or need take no displeasure with my self, for any my doings, or for any
thing I do: and that I may excedyngly please my self. i. stand in mine own
conceyte Phras. M^hi placere
out of measure, who shall not say me to be happy in this state. i. who will not
say, that I am an happy Phrasis. Quis hoc statu me no^ beatu^ praedicet? Phras.
Iter ingressus Phras. Sua gaudia cantiuncula testari,
or fortunate man, standinge in this condition. rests behind, or this is the
surplus, that I being now onwards on my journey, may testify my joys. i. that
I may show some evidence or witness of this joy of mine with some pleasant
short song or balade, which I make in a redynes to sing.


Of what kinds of meters, Acolaftus balade is made.
AColastus balade is made of. iii. staurs and a pycke, of which every staff
has. xi. syllables, and the pyke is made of. v. syllables. The kind of meter,
used in the staves, is called Carmen Sapphicum, so named of one Sappho a
maiden, which was the inuentour thereof, made of. iii. dyners fete, and thus
dysposed, Trochaeus, Spondaeus, Dactylus, Trochaeus, Trochaeus. The meter of
the pike is called Adonicu^, made of Dactylus, and Spondaeus. And when these.
ii. kinds of meters be joined together, after such manner as they be here in
this balade, the pyke must make up the sentence perfect. And albeit, that
diverse of the last fete of the st^ues be Spondaeus, that is not materyall. For
the last syllables of all meters, as well comicall as other, be indifferent,
that is to say, if they be long, they may be taken for short: and if they be
short, they may be accounted for long, and so save the law of the meter
perfytly. And because that these. ii. kinds of meters, used in Acolastus
balade, be more precisely kept in their places, than Iambus, and Trochaeus,
observed in the places appointed for them in lambicis Senarijs, Sep^enarijs,
or octonarijs, or Trochaicis Catalecticis aca^alecticis, or hypercatalecticis,
therefore we will here scanne or try one staff and a pycke, to show the
lerner an example how to scanne all this hole balade by. O di, es fes, tus
niue, o la, pillo
Viuere, curis.


And though these. ii. kinds of meters be not comicall, that is to say, be not
used of such ancient auctours, as have written comedyes, and for that cause I
made no mention of these. ii. sorts of meters in the brefe introductorye,
which is set before the second scene of the first act of this comedy: yet
for so much as our auctour brings in Acolastus, to sing a balade, Seruat,
in this behalf Decorum, for he follows Horace in his Odes.

ACOLASTVS CANIT.
ODies festus niueo lapillo
Dignus, o lucis facies serena,
Qua licet demum positis suaue
Viuere curis.
Nunc iuuat laute Genium fouere,
Nunc iuuat sacrae Veneri litare,
Nunc iuuat ludos and amoena carni
Gaudia far.
Exulat tergo monitor seuerus.
Et iugum collo iacet o remotum,
Libero quouis pede iam licebit
Tendere gressus.
Qui tuli multos dominos iuuentae,
Qui iugo solui toties cupiui
Liber emissus manibus parentis
Viuo beatus.
Gestiens adsit iuuenum corona,
Plaudat, and sortem hanc mihi gratuletur.
Concinant Musae celebres canora
Carmina uoce.
Acolastus Balade.
O Festyuall day, worthy a snowyshe little stone. i. worthy to be marked with
a stone as white as Adaglum. Dics dignus albolapillo, ^el nigro lapillo Mos
antiquotum. Figura. Periphrasis ^erenae dici.
snow, in toke^ of prosperity and good fortune (like as in old time they
marked their troublesome days with a black stone: and at the years end they
used to number their stones, thereby to know, whether they had had in the year
more pleasure or sorrow, mo good days or bad.) O fair face of light. i. O
goodly and fair or bright shynyng day, in the which now at the last it is
lefull (for me) to live swetely. i. pleasantly, putting away cares. i.
setting care and thought a side: or Figura. Positis pro depositis aphaeresis.
A dagium. Fouere genifi indulg^re genio, defrauda re geniuin. Figura.
Periphrasis coitus. Phras. Nunc iuuat. Phrasis. Carni gaudia far. Figura.
Nunc nunc nu^canaphor^ Eloquen. Exulare. Iugum remo tu^ collo ia(...)
in which I may now say, care a way. Now delyteth it to nourysshe deyntily
my good spyrite (which has the keeping and preserving of my body). i. now
take I pleasure to nouryshe my body delicately, or to make much of my self:
now delyteth it, to do sacryfyce to holy Uenus. i. now take I pleasure to be
Uenus servant, and to set all my mind upon chamber work. Now delyteth it, to
bear pleasant joys and sportes to my flesh. i. now take I pleasure to give
unto my body all manner joys and sportes, or to take my bodyly solace in every
condition. Let this cruelle gyuer of warning or remembrancer at my back, be
an outlawe, or go into exyle. i. where as I was wont to have a master to
follow me at the heles, and ever to give me warnyng, how I should order or
behave my self, and that I should not take my pleasures: let him now go play
him (in far countrayes) and. i. for now my yocke lies afar of, removed
from my Phrasis. Te^dere gressus quo liber libero pede.
neck. i. now have I shaked of all manner of obedyence to any manner of body.
Now shall it be lefulle (for me) to stretche my paces. i. to take my journey
whither thou wylt. i. whither me list, with a free foot. i. at mine own
pleasure and liberte, without controllement. Phra. Multos dominos far.
Phrasis. Emitti manibus parentis.
I which have borne. i. suffered many lords. i. rulars of my youth, I which
have coueted so often to be lowsed from the yoke, I free sent forth of my
fathers hand. i. set at my liberty, out of my fathers authority, live happy.
Now come hither a company of young men, standing round about me in
compass, making sport with tokens of their bodily joy. Phra. Iuuenum corona
plaudat Eloquen. Corona Sortem bon^ alicui gratu^arl.
Let them clappe their hands (forioye) and rejoice with thanks to me this
lotte. i. let them rejoice for my sake of this good chance of mine. Let the
renomed Muses sing to gether in companies sowndfull verses with their voice.
i. let them sing joyous verses out a loud.

Actus secundi. Scoena tertia. PAMPHAGVS PANTOLABVS ACOLASTVS.
Octonarij.
QVid haec tibi uidentur?
PANT. Rara profecto mysteria.

PAM. Vide ut contineas

PAN. Accurate omnia, memorem me senties.
Sed unde escaria nobis est uenatio?

PA. Vbi cadauer est
Quo dad curramus uoltures? Na^ uel lupo esurientior
Sum. Quod de somnio iam ia^ dixi meministin obsecro?

PAN. Memini.

PAM. Hinc te been sperare iubeo.

PANT. Sperare autem quom nihil
Sit, quod edatur?

PAM. Mane, mane, non spem meram sed rem dabo.

PANT. Promissis quis non dives esse possit.

PAM. Offam faxo in os
Tibi obiecero, nisi enim me ome^ laetu^ fallit, na^ciscimur
Hodie heru^ quale^ uolumus, qui nos accipiat lautissime.
Hem, ad rostra te uoco.

PANT. Quid illo?

PAM. Vt uideam number qui uenerint
Legati, aut hospites nobis.

PA. Mali ad Cupedinarios
Vocarier, nam differ or fame.

PAMPH. Ah quam plumbeus es, lucri
Bonus o dorillinc adflauit nares meas.

PANTOL. Si odoribus
Et somniis uentre^ pascas, quid adhuc famescere mesinis?

PA. Heus tu, ne spera co^mune^ tibi sorte^, nisi sequeris.

PAN. Sequor, uel ad manes imos si iusseris.

ACOL. Nunc gaudeo
Superasse me, uiaru^ omneis crepidines, cedant graves
Curae, meror facessat, optato in portu quum nauigem.
Posthac quic quid libet, licebit protinus: sub pectore
Quic quid tacitus uersabo, id in lingua^, mox in manus
Licenter deriuabitur, neque obstrepet quisquam meis
Studiis, ut hactenus obstitit durus pater, a quo me exule^
Meapte sponte reddidi, ne sit corrector amplius.
Iam, id affectabo, ut assurgant oe^s uenienti, dexteras
Inijciant, commessatum ducant, denique delibutus ut
Viua^ perpetuis gaudijs, Tum uel multo auro adiu^xero
Oe^s mihi. Monarcha sic regnabo praepotens. Quid, an
Non albae filius gallinae iure censear, optimis
Plane prognatus ouis? nullis cessero, ne dijs quidem,
Postquam meus Philautus subie cit mihi boni and mali
Ratio^es omneis, quas ad ungue^ teneo. Porro au^t obuia^
Opte^ dari hospite^ amicu^, qui me magnifice tractet, uiru^
Sane oibus modis dignu^, cui omnes optata oia ferant.
Quod si me nosce^t, qui siem, gregatim ad me co^currerent
Cupedinarij, coqui, fartores, unguentarij,
Pomarius, piscator, auceps, leno cum scortis ualens.

PAM. Pantolabe, quem procul huc uideo aduentare.

PAN. Nescio, nisi
Ad mercatum uenit, hic peregrinus hospes, ut apparet.

PAMPH. Been
Habet, hic nobis, qquod spero, materia certi aucupij datur.
Ex promptanunc opus est astutia.

PANT. Mi Pamphage, zonam habet.

PAM. Zonam.

ACOL. Sed neminem hic uideo.

PAN. Audin quid dicat?

PAM. Volt noscier.

ACOL. Quonam diuortam cogito.

PAM. Et hospitem quaerit.

PAN. Cinaedus est.
Ex uoltu and filo corporis.

PAM. Praeda haec nostris est unguibus
Digna. A tergo me hinc inseram.

PAN. Quid me autem?

PAM. Fac uerbis meis
Subseruias, ut hic nostro in albo te dignu^ habeas locu^

PAMPH. Hospes bone, hospes clare, iubeo te saluere plurimum.

PAN. Propino tibi salute^ plenis faucibus uir optime.

PAM. Facete, laute, lepide, istuc tene.

ACO. Vicissim comprecor
Vobis laeta omnia, quicunque estis.

PAM. Magnam me hercle gratiam
Oe^s merito habemus tuae isti humanitati.

PA. Vir bon
Es ex habitu.

PAM. Sed in ijs quamobrem peregrinaris regionibus?

ACO. Huc me grauis te^pestas impulit meoru^ affectuu^

PAMPH. Ecquo destinabas iter?

ACO. Quoliber, ubi liceat meo
Pro igenio uiuere.

PAM. Istuc hic licebit co^mo dissime
Sin^s^is hic habita^t omnis generis Veneres and gratiae.

PANT. Hic oenopolia, myropolia, pharmacopolia stabulant.

PAMPH. Neque hic desiderabis Musicum concentum.

PAN. Gaudijs
Hic afflues.

ACOL. Sane auspicato, ut audio, huc tetuli pedem,
Vbi frontem exporrigam. Vobis nomen dabo.

PAM. Nomentuum
Quod est?

ACO. Nomen? Acolastus.

PAM. Acolastus? Vahnomen conuenit.

PAN. Hem, noster es.

ACOL. Certe, quod uoster sim repertus gaudeo.
Sed nulla nespes est, potiundi hic principatus?

PAM. Maxim,
Imprimis, ista corporis tui forma heroica placet.
Tum, mores, indoles, cultus, and disserendi gratia.
Magno te ortum loco arguunt.

PANTO. A capite ad talos pulcher es.

PAM. Imo du^te contemplamur fixius, diuina elucet in
Te quaedam maiestas.

ACOL. Nihil est in me, quin omnes plurimum
Idament, uiuo and regno.

PAN. Non sentit caudex palpum obtrudier.

PAM. Hem, regem hunc esse oportet.

PANT. Scilicet, tot clarum dotibus.

ACOLA. Si nosceretis quid mecum portem boni, tum istuc magis
Scio, diceretis.

PAM. Quidid est?

PANTOL. Virtutes omneis narratuas.
Vthinc orneris.

ACOL. Agedum, appendite zonam auro multo grauem.

PAM. Hui, tam graves auro loculos?

PAN. Quid audio? aurum ne habet?

PAM. Habet.

PAN. Ego te si nescis, auri encomion possim docere.

ACOL. Dic.

PAN. Pulcherrima aurum faustitas mortalibus. Hoc te dijs parem.
Facit. hoc qui habet repe^te honoratus, clarus, sapie^s, item
Rex splendidus fit.

ACOL. Periouem, haec dogmata Philauti dogmatis
Co^sensiu^t. Quid phiber, quin patiar me nomine regio
Salutari?

PAN. Ter maxim rex quin in clientela^ tuam
Nos suscipis?

ACOL. Suscipio. En uobis auctoramenta haec mea.

PAM. Nunc me to tum regi dedo.

PANT. Et ego quantus sum illi mancipor.
Sic inter luscos regnabit strabus. Pulchru^ spectacul^^.

ACOLA. Quid hic stamus? quid hic haeremus ieiuni? quin tendimus
Comessatum?

PAN. I am dudum est in patinis meus animus.

PAM. Vbiuis
Nihil moror.

ACOLA. Quo diuortemus?

PAM. Hospitem probum dabo.

PANTO. Dabit dignum patella operculum.

PAM. Vnde autem obsonabitur
Quaeso patron optime?

PAN. Recte.

ACO. Capelioc argentum and appara
Coenam, quae cum pontificali certet.

PAMPH. Curabo here.

ACO. Tum Venus.
Eacchus, Ceres nostris uolo intersint epulationibus.

PAM. Fiet, Tibicines number na^ cupis deducier e foro?

ACO. Etiam.

PAM. Propero ad macellu^. Heus Pantolabe, regem deducito
Cliens ad Sannionem nostrum, sed sublata sarcina.
Tenes?

PAN. Sic.

ACOL. Vbi manet ille uoster?

PAN. Ad Veneris phanum.

ACO. Been est,
Sustolle haec.

PAN. Quam pulchre procedo hodie.
O fortunatum hunc diem.

Of the Second Act, the third Scene. Pamphagus, Pantolabus, Acolastus.
The meters of this scene be Iambici Octonarij.
VUhat be these things seen to there or what seem Phrasis. Quid haec tibi
uidentur, Phrafis. Rara profecto sunt mysteria. Phrasis. Vide us contineas.
these things to the. i. what say thou by these matters?

PAN. In very deed seldom mysteries. i. for a truth (they be) secret matters
seldom (vttred or showed abroad.)


PAM. Look that thou hold. i. look that thou keep them (well in mind.)


PANT. Dilygently all. i. I shall keep all these things in mind Apostopests.
Accurate omnia. Metaphora. Escaria uenatio.
curyously, thou shalt feel me one that remembers. i. thou shalt parceyue
that I remember (thy words) but from whense is our meaty she hunting. i. why
there may we go a hunting or prollynge for to get some meat.


PAM. Where the carreyn is, which we (like) Adagium. Vbi cadauer est, quod
accurram uol tures. Comparatio Lupo esurientior.
eerons or aultours may run unto. i. where we can get any meat in the wind,
thither will we resort. For why, I am more hungry tha^ any wolf is, I pray
the heartily, remembryst thou not, what I said to the even very now of my
dream?


PANT. I remember (it.)


PAM. From hense I command the to hope well. Phras. Hinc to spera reiubeo. Spe
rare autem.
i. I will, that by reason thereof, thou live in good hope.


PANT. To hope truly. i. to live in good hope a goddis name, when there is
nothing to be eaten. i. seeing there is nothing at all, that we may eat.


PAM. Abide abide, or tarry tarry, I will not give the sole. Phra. Non spe^
meram, sed rem d^bo.
i. pure or shyre hope, but the thing. i. I will not give the shales, but the
karnelles, or I will not feed the forth with fair words, but give the, the
things self.


PANT. By promise, who may not be rich?. i. who may not be a rich man by
promyssinge (fast enough.) Adagium. Offam faxo in os tibi obiecero.



PAM. I will do, I shall cast the browesse soppe in mouth to the. i. I shall
do so much, or I shall find the means, that I shall cast the soppe made of
bread, stepyd in the browthe of the pot, and strowyd over with hard chese and
pepper, or cinamom, in to thy mouth. i. do thou but gape, and I shall make
larkes fall in to thy mouth. For why, except, or unless Nisi me ome^ laetum
fallit.
my gladsom word spoken like a prophecy, do begyle me, we get. i. we shall
obtain this day a master, or lord, such as we will. i. such as we would
wyshe for, P^rass.
which may take us most netly at meat and drink,. i. which shall receive us,
or entertayne us at his bankettes, in the most trymme and dayntye fashion that
can be. How, I call the to the forpartes of the ships,. ^hra.
i. to Poules cross, or to the bar, where sergeantes plede in westmister
hall. i. ho, go we to the place where most people do assemble (which they of
the city of Rome callid Rostra. i. the fore parts of ships, which place of
most resort in all the city of Rome, was so called upon this occasion. After
that the Romans had vanquyshed by war, by see, a nation called Antiates,
they did in memory of their vyctorye, hang up the forepartes of their e^^ies
ships in a temple and a market stead, belonging thereto, which was sytuate
before Hostilias court: in which temple and market stead, was the great resort
of strangers or ambassatours. and in that place the rulars of the Romans made
their orations to the people, as Liuius makes mention.)


PANT. What there (to do?)


PAM. That ^
I may se whether any embassators be come (to town) or any gestes or strangers
to us. i. to our profytte, or to our pay.


PAN. I had rather be called to the pulters. for I am plucked asonder for
hunger. i. for I am ^
lost or undone for hunger, or my bealye weneth my throat is cut for hunger.


PAM. Oh, how leadysshe thou art. i. what a dastarde or folishe fellow art
thou? a good smell of gain or wynnyng has blown from thens to my
nosethrylles. i. I find by my nose, or I have in the wind, some good savor
of gain, that is coming from yonder cost.


PAN. If thou canste feed the bealy with savors, and with dreams, why
suffrist thou me yet or still, to wax an hungered?


PAM. Hark thou (I say) hope not to the a common lotte. i. Phrasis. Ne spera
co^munem tibi sortem. Phrasis. Sequor uel ad manes imos si iusseris. Phras.
Gaudco me superasse uia rum omneis crepidines. Phrasis. Cedant graves cure.
Phrasis. Meror facissat. Adagium. Ego in portu nauigo. Sententia. Quicquid
lib^r licebit (...) tinus. Phra. In pectore quicquid tacitus uer sabo.
M^^aphora. In lingua^ uel manus licenter deriuati. Phrasis Studiis alicu (...)
obstrepere Phra. Durus pater hactenus meis studijs obst^tit. Elegan. Exulem me
(...) apt sponte me reddidi. Phra. Id affectabo, ut assurgant oe^s uenienti.
trust not to be partener or booty fellow with me, except thou follow.


PAN. I follow the, and need be, to the low spirits. i. place where dampened
spyrites dwell. i. to the dyuell him self, if thou will command me.


ACO. Now am I glad, me to have overcome,. i. that I have over passed all
stoppages of ways. i. all such lettes of passage, or all such crekes by the
waters side, or see side, as might let me on my way. Let heuye cares give
place. i. now grievous sorrow and care away, away with mournyng, or let
mourning be set aside, syns that I row in the haven wyshed for. i. syns I
am come to my iourneys end, as gayly as I could wyshe for. from hensforth
what so ever lyketh (me) or that me lysteth (to do) it shall incontinente be
lefull (for me to execute it) what so ever that I still shall turn up and
down under my breast. i. what so ever I shall think secretly alone by my
self, that shall incontinently be deryued. i. conveyed into my tongue (to speak
it) and into my hands (to do it) or to put it in execution, leauelyke. i.
without let or controllement: nor any man shall make a noise at my studyes.
i. nor than there shall no man cry out at my fantasyes or purposes, or, nor
there shall no dogs bark at mine ententes, or where aboutes I go. as
hitherto, my hard father has resysted or holden against (them) from whom I
have yeldyd me an outlawe. i. out of whose company I have banyshed my self of
mine own freewyll, or by mine own proper consent or accord, lest he should
any more be my correctour. Now will I affectuously seek or go about this
thing, or now will I set all my mind herevppon, Phra. Id artictabo (...)
omnes mi(...) dextras in (...).
that all men may rise to me, coming. i. where so ever I become, that all
men may rise against me, and do me reverence, that they may cast in their right
hands. i. that they may take me by the hand. i. that Phra. Id affesrabo, at
omnes co(...) me (...).
they may shake hands with me, or shake me by the fyste: or that they may
lead me to eat with them. i. to eat and drink with them, or to dyne or
suppe with them. In effect or conclusion, that I anointed (with (...). (...)
(...) (...) (...) g^^d^s. (...). (...) multo au (...) (...) (...)
oil, after the antyke manner. i. full of my parfumes) or lie bathyng of my
self in pleasures, may live in ever during joys. Farthermore, or. i. and it
be nothing but by much gold. i. though it be by none other means but
through much money, I will with my great plenty of money join all men unto
me. i. I shall make all men hold with me, or hold on my side. So being a
Monarcha. i. a sole ruler, that has none equal with me, nor knowledge no
superyour, I shall ^. ^. Adagium. Oprimis pro gnatus outs. Phra. ^ullis
cesse(...), n^ d^^s ^uidem.
reygne right mighty. i. like a mighty prince. What may not I by right be
esteemed the son of a white hen. i. may not men worthyly, or of good
right, think, that I was borne in a good hour, or that I was borne with a
syly hoffe on mine heed. For a surety begotten of the best eggs. i. coming
of a stock of the best sort, or coming of a cock of the best kind. I
will give place to no body, no truly, not to the goddis them selves. i. I
would be loathe, or think scorn, that god him self should be my cousyn, syns
that my (mynyon) Philautus has subdued unto me all the reasons of good and
bad. i. syns that the love Phrasis. Philautus sub iecit mihi boni and mali
ratio^es omnes.
I have to my self, has brought under mine own fantasy, the judgment of
good and ill: or syns that the love I have to my self tells me, which is
good and badde for me, and not the parfite judgment of right reason, which
raysons. i. whose perswasyons I hold to the nail. i. I know as parfitely as
can A dagium, Ad unguem tenere.
be, or point deuyse, or as perfytly as my Pater noster,. i. I know no less
all the perswasyons of Philautus, than men skylled were wont to know fine
polished marble by rubbyng of the nayl of their thombe Phrasis. Obuiam optem
mihi dari amicum.
upon the stone. Farthermore, or, and that more is, I would wyshe a stranger a
friend to be given against me. i. I would feign mete now with some friendly
stranger, Phras. Magnifice aliquem tractare. Phrasis. O mnibus mo d^s dignus e^
cui omnes op tata omnia ferant.
which might entreat me, or handyll me highly, or after some gorgious sort:
me (I say) being a man worthy by all means or sorts, unto whom all men might
bring all things wyshed. i. being a man worthy, unto whom all men should be
glad to do al manner of pleasure and service they could unto, and offer me the
cheffest pleasures and daynties that could be gotten. That if they, or if men
knew, who I may be. i. Elegan. Quod si me nose^nt, qui (...).
who or what manner of man I am, the pulters, cokes, puddyng makers, parfume or
oyntement makers, the costardemongar, the tyssherman, and the fowler, the
stowte baude, with her hoores: all these would run Phrasis. Gregatim ad me
co^currerent omnes. Phrasis. Quem procul hic uideo aduentare? Elegan.
Peregrinus hospes. Phrasis. Been habet. Metaphora. Hinc nobis materia certi
aucupiidatur
together to me flockemeale. i. all these would come ru^nynge to me on heaps,
or flock about me.


PAM. Pantolabus, whom se I afar to come. i. coming hytherwarde?


PANT. I wot not. i. I can not tell, but as it appears. i. it should seem
this stranger (being of some far countreye) comes to the mart.


PAM. It has well. i. it is well, or this comes well to pass. from hens I
hope a matter of sure batfowlynge is given unto us. i. by this man's means
shall we have an evident occasion of gain and profit, like as the byrder has
by birdlyme or grinnes, which be means to catch his birds with. Now it is
needful Phrasis. Exprompta (...) opus est (...). ^^gura. (...) (...) habet.
Phra^s. ^.
of a ready wylynesse. i. now it is requisite, to have some guyle ready at hand,
or not to be to seek of a wyle at need.


PANT. My Pamphagus, he has a gyrdelle with money in it, like as marchantes
have.)


PAM. A gyrdell?


ACOL. But I see no man here.


PANT. Herest thou not, what he says?


PAM. He will be known. i. he seeks to be aquainted, or seeks to have
acquayntance.


ACOL. I think whyther I turn me. i. I bethink me, where I may become, or
where I may take up mine June.


PAM. And he seekyth for some host (to lodge with.)


PANT. He is a bougour or one that is paste shame, or one of worldely shames
childern, of his contenaunce and threde of his body. i. as it may appear, or as
it should seem by his countenance or features of his body, he is oone of
worldly shames chyldern, or he is an ympe of the stews.


PAM. This pray is worthy for our claws. i. this is one as (...) Phras. Vt
hin^ nostro in ^bote digum ha(...) locum.
mete for us to season upon, as it is mete for any lion or pawed beast, to
season his paws upon his pray. I will sow me in. i. I will thruste me in, or
schole in, or (I will get me forth of this place) and preace in (again)
from hens on his backehalfe.


PANT. What me truly (command thou to do). i. what command thou, or
will thou that I shall do?


PAM. Do that thou under serve to my words. i. look that thou uphold or
maynteyn my sayenges, or look thou serve my turn, what so ever I say, that
from hens forth thou may have a place worthy for the in our white. i. to the
intent that from hensforthe thou may have thy name written in our book, at
the beginning amongst Omnis metaphora includit in se similitudinem. Album
praetoris quid.
the chiefest and principal scoffers. (Like as the pretours of Rome did set
those men's names in a table highest, whose causes should first be pleaded or
dispatched, before them in judgment, which table was called Album praetoris.
i. the white or table of the pretour.)


PAM. Good stranger or alyen, clear gest, I Phras. Iubeo te salucre plurim^^
command the to haylse or to be haylsed much. i. thou honest and well borne
new come person, god give the many good morowes, or god give the right well
to fare.


PAN. I drink before, or I quaffe to the gretynge Phrasis. Propino tib^
salut^m plenis faucibus.
with full. i. wide or open throat. i. I begin to speak louingely to the, or
to salute the, or greet the first with a loud throat. i. I make my words of
my first salutation of the, to sownde out and they were a belle, or as loud
as I may cry, o thou best man. i. Asyndeton. Facete, laute lepide, istu^ ^^ne.
Phrasis. Vicissim co^(...)r uobis ^^ta omnia (...) estis. Phrasis. Magnam gra
tiam habimus isti tuae hum a nitati. Phrasis. Vir bonus es ex habitu. Elegans.
Quamobrenm peregrinari^ in his regionibus? Metaphora. Grauis tempestas
affectuum.
right worshipful master.


PAM. Meryly or pleasantly (said) trymly (said) netely or clean, fynely
spoken. keep this. i. keep the here, or here hold the.


ACO. Semblably, or in likewise, I pray or beseech to you all things glad or
merry. i. and I for my turn, or my part pray god to send you all your hearts
desires, who so ever you be.


PAM. Mehercle, we all worthy have great thanks to this thy humanity. i. so
might the god Hercules help me, we all thank the greatly, or give the great
thanks worthy for this thy gentylnesse or courtesy.


PANT. Thou art a good man of thine habyte. i. by thy fascion and hauiour of
thy body, thou should seem to be an honest manne.


PAM. But wherefore come thou a wayfarynge into this country or parties?


ACOL. The soore or grievous tempest of mine affections. i. unlawful lusts, has
driven me hither, or into these costs.


PAM. Lo whither. Phrasis. ^^quo destiuabas ^ter?
i. whither a way dyddist thou appoint thy journey?


ACO. Every where, or unto every such place, where it may be lefull for me to
live for my wit. i. after Phra. Quolibet ubi liceat meo pro ingenio uiuere.
(...) hic lice (...) common(...). Phrasis. gines^is. Metaphora dura. ^^abulant.
or at mine own pleasure.


PAM. This thing shall here be lefull (unto the) the most commodiousely. i. as
thy heart could best wyshe. If thou know not. i. to do the this thing to
wit, or to do the one thing to understand, here dwell Venusis and graces of
al kind. i. here dwell al manner sorts of fair women and well spoken, or well
nurtered, or clean fyngered dames, here stand in order or in a row like as
cattle stand in their stables or stalles, wine tauernes, shoppes where sweet
oyntementes or parfumes be sold, potycaryes shoppes.


PAM. Nor thou shall not here want musical Phrasis. (...) hic de(...) derabis
mu(...) concentu^ Phrasis. ^aud^s hic affluit. Phrasis. (...) (...) ^edem.
Augurium apud Roma^os quid.
consent. i. armony of instruments of music, or singers.


PAN. Thou shall here ouerflowe. i. ple^tuously abou^d in joys.


ACO. Surely I have borne. i. set my foot hither as I here. i. as far as I
can here, bird lokyngly. i. luckyly or in a good hour. i. surely as far as
I can perceive, I came hither in a good hour or season. (For the Romans
looked upon the flieng gesture and hauiour of birds, and thereby judged
prosperous or adverse success to happen, concerning such matters as were
among them in question) where I may stretche out or spread abroad my
forheade. i. Phrasis. Vbi front^m exporrigam. Phrasis. Frontem co^^rahere quid.
where I may look up with a merry countenance (like as Contrahere frontem, to
draw the forheed to gyther, signifies to lowre or bend the brows: which
countenance we make, wha^ we be miscontented or angry.) I will give you my
name. i. I will show you what Phras. Vobis nom^ dabo.
my name is.


PAM. What is thy name?


ACO. My name? Acolastus.


PAM. Stroy good, propt, the name Graeca uox. Acolastus prodigus a stroy good,
or a vvaster. Phrasis. Nomen conuenit. Phrasis. Quod uester sum repertus
gaudeo. Phrasis. Sed nulla nespes est potiundi hic pri^ cipatus? Phrasis.
Maxim. Elegans. Imprimis t^. Enumeratio. corporis for ma, mores, (...) doles,
cultu^ dissre^di gratia. Magno (...) or (...) loco ar^ guunt. A capite a^ talos
pulcher es. Phras. A capite us(...) ad calcem. Phra. Du^ ^e conte^plamur fixi^
diuina quaed (...) in te elucet maiestas. Adagium. Viuo and regno solus. A
dagium. No^ sentit pa^ pum obtrud^ Phra. Regem hunc esse oportet.
agrees. i. this thy name is a fyt name for the.


PANT. What thou art ours. i. of our sect or sort.


ACOL. Surely I am glad, that I am found yours. i. I rejoice, that you take
me for one of your sort. but is there no hope (for me) to use or enjoy the
chief rule here?. i. is there no hope for me, to become a king or a prince
here?


PAM. Most. i. no doubt hereof (at all) in the best wise, this lordly shape
of thy body pleases (us.) Farthermore thy manners, thy towardenes to come to a
good proof, thy tr(...)ne decking or fresh apparayle, thy grace. i. comlynes
of talking or co^munynge, (All these) show the to be spronge from a great
place. i. declare, that thou art born of some noble house.


PAN. From the head to the ankles thou art fair,. i. from the top to the too,
ironice, from the heles to the hard ground.


PAM. Ye mary when we behold the more stedfastely, a certain divine majesty
shyneth or appears in the. i. thou semest rather some angel, than an erthely
man.


ACO. There is nothing in me, but al men do much love it. I live. i. I triumph
and I reign (like a king). i. I am a fellow alone, or there is no man worthy
to bear the bell, or to rule the roste, but I.


PANT. The stock feels not the flattering to be hid. i. the stock
parceyueth not, how he is secrettely or covertly mocked: or the dawe
perceyueth not, how he is mocked to the hard tethe.


PAM. This man must needs be a king (amongst us) or it behooves this man to be
a king, that is to say, he being clear by so many gifts. i. seeing he is
endewed with so many notable or excellent gifts.


ACOL. If ye did know, what of good. i. what good thing I do bring with me,
than I know. i. I am sure, you would say this thing more (than you do now).
i. if you wyste what good gear I bring with me, than I am sure you would say
this in deed.


TAM. What thing is that (that thou bryngest?)


PAN. Tell us Phras. Virtutes om (...) narra tu as* u^ hinc or (...)s.
Phrasis. Appendite, zonam suro multo graue^ Aposiopes. Hu^ tam gra^es au^o
locu^os? Graeca uox. A(...)comi on (...)u^ (...).
all thy good conditions, that thou may therefore be trymmed. i. that we may
set the forth accordynglye.


ACO. Come of, way me this gyrdel heavy with much gold. i. feel me this
girdell, how heavy it is with gold.


PAM. Out (haste thou) so heuye purses with gold. i. haste thou thy bag so
full of gold?


PAN. What here I. i. what thing is this I here? has he gold? (than.)


PAM. He has so.


PANT. I could teach the, the praise of gold. i. the song that is made in
the praise of money, if thou know it not.


ACOL. Tell. i. say it.


PANT. Gold is to men the most fair felicity. This thing makes the match
or equal to the goddis. He that has this thing, he is made. i. Phrasis. Ro^
te ^^s (...) facit. Phrasis. (...)oc qui ha(...), fit repen (...) splendidus.
lupiter iu(...) pater. Dog(...)a dogmatis co^ sentiunt. Phrasis. Quid prohibet
quin pati ur m^ no^^ regio salutari? Graeca. Trismegist^ (...) by(...) sondrye
(...)s most great or noble.
he becomes sodaynely honored. i. honorable, clear. i. known or renomed,
wise and also shining. i. a glorious king.


ACO. By Jupiter. i. by the helping father (which name the Romans gave to
their cheffest god) these doctrynes agree with the doctrynes of Philautus (my
cheffe counsaylour) what thing forbids or lets, but that I may suffer my
self to be saluted by a kyngly name?. i. what let or impediment is there, but
that I may take upon me to be a king, or suffer that men should say to me, Aue
rex, or god save your royal majesty?


PANT. O thou thryse most great king. i. O thou as worthy to be a king
amongst us, as Mercury was amongst the Egyptians, whom for his great
excellency, they surnamed in the Egyptian tongue, by a name, which
counteruayleth in greek Trismegistus. i ter maximus. But wolte thou not
Phrasis. Quin in clie^t^la^ tua^ nos suscipis. Phrasis. En uobis auctoramenta
haec mea. Phra. Nunc me totu^ regi dedo. Phrasis (...) ego quantus sum (...)
mancipor.
take us in to the number of thy clientes. i. amongst them that shall be of
thy retynewe?


ACOL. I take you, or I receive you: lo to you these mine ernest pens. i. se
here be mine ernest pens or money, (which I hyre you or retain you with.)


PAM. I give me now utterly for ever to our king, or I become holy servant
unto our king for evermore.


PANT. And I all that I am, or as much as I am, deliver me in bondage unto him.
i. and I with all that god has given me, or all that I may make, am become his
bondeman, or debt bondeseruant, so. i. thus amongst them that be Adagium. Sic
inter luscos regnabit strabus. (...)rasmus. Inter caecos regnabit (...)ra bus.
purblynde, one that looks a squint, or that is goggle eyed, shall raygne.
(Erasmus reherseth this adage thus, Inter caecos regnat strabus, which is
consonant to the Adage in our tongue. For we say, Amongst. xx. blind, an one
eyed man may be a king.) A fair spectacle. i. a goodly sight to look upon.


ACOL. Why Phrasis. Quid hic h^remus. quin ^^ndimus?
stand we here? why cleave we here fasting?. i. why stop we, or linger we,
or stay we here fasting, but rather bend we to eat. i. let us rather goo
eat (some meat) or why hold we not on, or keep not forth our Phra. Animus
^amdud^m est i^ patinis Phrasis. Vbi uis, nihil moror. Eloquen. Quo diuortemus?
Phrasis. Hospitem probum dabo. Ad^gium. Dabit dign^ pa^^lla operculum.
way to eat? (some meat.)


PAN. My mind is al ready in the platters or dishes. i. I am tharpe set, now
lately my mind is in the maunger.


PAM. Where thou will, I tarry nothing. i. when it shall please the, there shall
be no tariaunce or let on my behalf.


ACO. Where shall we become, or whither shall we go to take up our inn? or
where shall we be osted?


PAM. I shall give the a good host. i. I shall appoint the an honest host.


PANT. He shall give a lydde or cover worthy for the skyllet or little pan,
or a tarte pan. i. he shall appoint him out for such a scalde squier as he
is, a scabbed horse, or an host that shall be as mete for him as a rope is for a
thief, or he shall match him well and fitly, such a geste, such an host.


PAM. But where withal Eloquens. Vbi obsonabitur?
I beseech the our most best patron. i. our chief guider or ruler, shall men
by^ or make prouysion for our cates (to suppe with?)


PANT. Ryghtly. i. well (said.)


ACOL. Hold or take this money, and prepare us a ^aye hoc ar(...) and ap (...)
(...)am. Phrasis. (...) (...) (...). (...) C(...) here (...) (...) Ba(...)
(...) inter (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...). (...) n^ (...) (...) cupis de
(...) ^o^o Elo(...). (...) ad (...). (...) Regim (...). Ph^a. D(...)o ad (...)
(...) (...) ^ar ^i(...)? Ph^a. Vbi manet il(...) (...)? ad Veneris phanum.
supper, that may strive with a pontifycal or bishops feast.


PAM. I shall goo about (it) or prepare therefore my lord.


ACO. Than, or farthermore, I will that Uenus, Bacchus, and Ceres, be at our
feastyng or bankettynges. i. that fair women, good wine, and plenty of fine
breadde and vitayle be present.


PAN. It shall be done. whither doste thou couete any trompettours or shaulme
players to be led unto the forth of the market stead or not. i. haste thou any
mind or fantasy, that we should bring the any trompettours forth of the
market place?


ACOL. Ye mary.


PAM. I make have, or I have me to the bouchery. Hoo, thou Pantolabus, lead or
bring thou our king, being his retained servant. i. syns thou art retained
with him, unto our Sannions house. but bearing his burdeyne, hold thou. i.
but easyng him of his burdeyn. i. his girdel with money, perceyuest thou (what
I mean?)


PAN. So. i. ye well enough.


ACO. where dwells he ours. i. wheraboutes dwells this friend or ooste of
ours?


PAN. To the temple of Uenus. i. here besides Uenus temple.


ACO. It is well. i. that is well, bear up these things. i. this gear.


PAN. How fayrely. i. gaylye go I forthewarde, i. prosper I in my business to
day? or how happily rose I on my right Phrasis. Qua^ pulchr^ procedo hodie.
side to day, or blessed me well, er I came forth of doors this morning? O
this happy or lucky day.


Actus secundi. Seoena quarta. PAMPHAGVS SOLVS
Trochaici Katalectici.
HA ha he? Quam tutu^ hospitium confidentiae meae
Mihi paraui? Quam promptum nactus sum diuorticulum
Exercendis fucis, imposturis, and Sycophantijs?
Hinc mihi praesens lucrum est, abradi dimidium potest.
Causab or caram esse annonam, ut co^ueniant ratiu^culae
Accepti and dati. In rationibus nullis tenerier
Vinculis possum. Ad suffugia mill mihi rimae patent
N(...) iste totus desipit, qui nobis auscultauerit?
Per quos uelut in nassam illectus, ad uiuu^ usque ero ditur
Intra casses nostras, praeda est, quamusque uenati sumus,
Illa nostris unguibus frustillatim discerpitur.
Quippe sic pera^ illam nunc multo aere turgida^, ictibus
Vellicatin exenterabimus, uix ut in opi siet
Reliquus obolus emundo resti. Quantumuis gestitet
Auri in ^oculis, uniuersum id insumemus luxui.
Scilicet, triumpho serio, post quam cellarius
Euasi potentis domini, id quod futurum in somnia
Dudum praedicabant, omine laero. Nu^c tempus monet,
Vt pro curram obsonatum, prolixius fatur, mea
Post erumpa^ gaudia. Heus heus gestientem Pamphag^
Nemo lanionum uidet, nemo falutatum aduenit?
Faxo iam ostenso auro, quod me habere nesciunt, simul
Ad me non accersisse doleant obtrusis mercibus.
Of the second Act, The fourth Scene. Trochaici Catalectici.
PAMPHAGVS SOLVS.
HA ha he, how sure an June or restyng / place to Phrasis. Qu^tutu^ ho ^p^^ium
con(...) m(...) (...) Eloquen. Quam prom (...) sum (...) (...). Sycophant^a
(...) (...), a b^aring of (...). (...) quid, (...), false (...). Imposturaqd
S^llynge of (...) or faul(...) for ^ood, de^^i^^ing by fair (...) or (...)
pro(...). Phras. Hic mihi pr^sens luc^ (...) Phrasis. ^bradi dimi dium potest.
Phra. C^u^abor ca (...) esse ano* (...). Phras. Vt (...) ratificul^ accepti and
dati. Phrasis. In ratio^ibus nullis tenerier legibus possum.
my lawless boldness have I prepared to me. i. have I gotten me. i. where as
I am so folehardy, that I set by no law, how sure an (...)ne have I gotten
for me (to play my part in) how redye. i. how mete or how ready (at hand)
a resorting place, or startynge hole have I gotten me, deceytes or falsehodes,
deceiuynges, by uttering falls chaffer for good, and for falls accusations. i.
falls puttinge fault on other men, to be exercysed (by me). i. in which I may
put in ure my falsehodes and crafty dealinges (by giving of a false
reckenyng) (to this glorious fool) or by over prising of such vitayles, or
other things, as he would have bought, or by laying the fault upon other men,
if any fault (be spyed) from hens is to me a present gain, (...). by these
means have I (sp^ed) a ready or quick feate of gain or wynnyng, the half may
be shaven away, (...). I may or I can find the means, to polle him and shave
him of the tone half. I shall pycke or forge a matter, or make an excuse, that
bread corn or vitayls be dear, that my reckeninge or my small parcelles of
the thing taken, and the thing given. i. that my reckenyng of my receytes and
expenses, or sommes laid out (by me) may agree together. In accountes I may be
holden by no bonds. i. no man can challenge no bond of me, or say that I am
bound to give him a true accounte, for matters of account. (For he that
puts oone in trust, shall be feign to stand to his own harms, if he be
begyled) a thousand ryftes be Phra. Ad suffugla m^lle mihi ri m^ patent. Phra.
Nai iste tot* desipit. Metaphora. Auscultari.
open to me, to be places to flee under. i. a thousand hooles lie open for me
to escape out at, or I have a thousand blind shyftes to help my self by.
For a surety this (fellow) waxes all folyshe. i. does utterly or all together
dote, or is a very popyng fool, which has harkned. i. given credence unto
us, by whom being intyced or drawn in, or plucked in by pleasant Phrasis. Per
quos uelut in nassam illectus. A dagium. Ad uiuu^ us^ eroditur.
means, or by gaye tales, that please him, like (as it were) into a fysshers
we will or leap, he is gnawen up to the quycke. i. he shall be eaten up to the
bones, or he shall have his skin rubbed of to the quycke flesh, (...). he
shall be pollyd and shaven by us, till he shall not have a halfepenye left to
bless him with. Now is Enallage. Temporis. Allegoria. Enallage. Temporis.
Eloquens. Exenterar^. Frustillatim. Vellicatim.
the pray within our hayes or nets, which we have hitherto hunted for, that
(pray) is plucked asonder. i. shall be toren in pieces with our nails gobbet
meal. For why, we shall so pluck out y^ bowels or y^ nombles (of that scrippe
of his). i. we shall so bowel that scrippe or bag (of his) with strokes, by
pynchynge or nyppyng meal, being now swollen with much brass. i. which is
now borely or goordy, or stroutted out with Phra. Vix ut inopi (...) reliquus
obo^us emun do resti. Phra. Quantumuis auri gestiter in loculis uniuersum id
insumemus luxui.
much money, that scarsely there may be left a halfpeny to the nedy (person)
to a wythy to be bought. i. that the nedy (wretch) shall scarcely have a
halpeny left him, to bye a wythy, or a halfpeny halter (to hang him with.) How
so ever much of gold he may bear in his purses, that all together shall we
spend upon excessive charges. i. bear he never so much gold in his purses,
we will lay it out, or launche it out every whytte upon superfluous expenses.
i. for his bealye, back, and womb for him. In very deed, or for a surety, I
tryumphe ernestly, sins I have escaped the cellerar Phrasis. Scilicet triumpho
s^rio posiqu^ cella (...) ^uasi pot^ bis domini. Phra. Id quod futu ^um isomnia
p^^dicabant (...) l^to. (...). (...) tempus (...) (...) obso natum. Phra.
Pro^^^ius sa(...) m^^ post (...) gau^ia
of a mighty lord. i. sins or now that I am become the storer or storehouse
keeper of this puissant lord, that which my dreams of late did say before, to
be here after by a gladsome. i. prosperous pronostication. i. which thing my
dream did late show me should come to pass, by a happy or lucky sothe
saying, (to me ward) now the time warns. i. requires or exhorts me, that
I may rounne before to bye cates. i. to rounne before, and bye our cates, or to
make provision for all that we shall spend at supper, save bread and drink,
I being fulle with meats, I will hereafter more at the length burste out my
joys. i. here after, when I have my bealy full of good meat, I will declare my
joys with such loud voice and countenance as men use, when they have many
prosperous chances, that betyde unto them at ones. Hoo hoo is there Phrasis.
Nemo gestientem ^^de^. Nemo saluta (...) aduenit.
none of these bouchers that sees Pamphagus whipping it about for joy?
comes no man to him to salute him. i. to bydde him welcome, or to bydde good
morrow, or to speak to him? I shall do (so much) that they may sorrow, I
shall make them to sorrow, or Phrasis. Faxo simul ad menon me non ac(...)
dole^nt obtru^s mercibus.
be heavy, the gold now being showed, which they wot not me to have. i.
after I have now showed them this gold, which they know not that I have,
that they may sorrow. i. that they shall be sorye, not to have drawn nere to
me. i. that they have not drawn nere unto me, or come about me, their
merchandise being Phrasis. Merces alicul obtrudere.
thrust by force in to my hands. i. thrust their ware or chaffer in to my
hands, to bye whether I will or not.

Actus secundi. (...) Sc^^na quinta. ACOLASTVS, PANTOLABVS, SANNIO, SYRVS,
PAMPHAGVS.
(...).
VBi nam aedes nostri sunt hospitis? Lassum
Me longa reddidit profectio.
PAN. Nobis
En imminent here. Praecurram, ut fores totae
Pateant. Heus heus nemon hinc prodit? insistam
Pulsare, nisi aperit ostium aliquis actutum.

SAN. Quis ta^ prauiter pepulit meas forcs?

PA. uoster.

SAN. Quis?

PANT. Pantolabus.

SAN. Pantolabus? Mortuum pridem
Credebam, ut quem toto non uiderim mense.

PANT. Non est.

SAN. Id uiso. Hem uix te agnoscerem, uocem
Nisi noscem tuam. Vnde quaeso ades? number imis
Ex manibus?

PAN. Narrandi id nunc locus non est.

SAN. Quid non?

PANT. Quid? Hunccine uides obsecro?

SAN. Cuias
Est? unde adduxti, and quo, qua gratia?

PAN. Nostras
Est, atque a Pamphago huc adducitur, nostin?

SAN. Quem?

PANT. Pamphagus obsonatum abcessit, hic nummos
Dedit.

SAN. Euge introducatur commodus sane
Conuiuator. Sire, hem Sire? sarcinam hanc aufer
Intro, tum mox redi, plura habeo, quae mandem.
Optatus aduenis hospes optime. Accede
Ad nos. Omnis rei tibi copia hic fiet.

ACOL. Nullas ne habes Veneres?

SAN. Etiam.

ACO. Iube accersi.

SAN. Quanti praec^ mulieres?

ACO. Plurimi, forma
Modo sint praecellenti.

SAN. Primariam sane
Dabo f^minam. Hem Sire audi, Laidem accerse.

SIR. Iam?

SAN. Iam.

SY. Causae quid dicam?

SA. A desse amatorem.

PAM. Ocyus haec introducite, ut coquis dentur.
Vos me sequimini tibicines intro.

Of the second Act, the fyfte Scene. Interlocutores, Acolastus, Pantolabus,
Sannio, Syrus, Pamphagus.
Versus Senarij, Scazontes. i. claudicantes.
ACOLASTVS. Where be the housinges of our host. i. wheraboutes is our hosts
house? this Phrasis. (...) red (...) (...) Phrasis. En (...) no^is (...)ent
Phras. (...) (...) tot^ (...)nt. Phras. (...), (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) Phrasis. (...) gra(...) (...) (...)an. (...) gri(...) (...) toto (...)
(...). (...) ad locu^ Id (...). Elegans. Vix (...) agnoscere, uocem Nisi nos^^m
(...).
long walking forth has yielded me weary. i. this long way faring or iourneyeng
has made me weary.


PAN. Lo my lord, they be nere at hand to us, I will run before, that all
the doors may be made open. i. that all the doors may be set wide open
(against your coming.) Hao, hao, comes no man forth of the doors from hens?
I will hold on or continue still to knock (...). I will knock or rappe on
still, but if. i. except some body open the doors at ones, or at a tryce.


SAN. who has knocked or bounced so ill or lewdely. i. hard at my doors?


PAN. Yours. i. one of your acquayntance, or of your old acquayntance.


SAN. Who (is that?)


PAN. Pantolabus.


SAN. Pantolabus, I believed him to be dead of late. i. I wend, he had been
dead lately, as one whom I have not seen this hole month. i. for why, I
have not seen him all this monethe long.


PANT. He is not (dead.)


SAN. I will go see that. i. I will go se whither it be so or not. Ha I could
scarsely call the to remembrance, if I knew not thy voice. i. if I did not
know the by thy speech, I could scarsely know the now I see the again, if I
were not acquaynted with thy voice. From whens I beseech (the) come thou to
us. i. from whens come Phra. Vnde quae so ades, nu^ imis ex manibus?
thou I pray the? whither from the low damned spirits. i. come thou forth
of hell?


PANT. There is no place to tell that thing now. i. it is no time, or I
Narrandi id locus no^ est.
have no leisure to tell the of that matter now.


SAN. Why, or wherefore not?


PANT. Why. i. as kest thou why? see thou not this man I pray the?


SAN. Of whens is he, or what country man is he? from whense Cuias est, un de
adduxti, et quo, qua gratia?
haste thou brought (him hither) and whyther (bryngest thou or leadest thou
him?) and for what cause, or what to do?


PAN. He is our countreye man, or he is of our sort or acquayntaunce. i. he is
of our led, and brought hither from Pamphagus. Knoweste thou not, or wotest
thou not (what I mean?)


SAN. Whom (has Pamphagus sent hither?)


PAN. Pamphagus Phrasis. Supini in t^^. Pamphagus obsonatu^ abscessit. Euge
introducatur commodus ^an^ conu^uator. (...) mox redi plura habeo que mandem,
Phrasis.
is departed hens, or gone his way, to bie or make prouysion for ca^es. this
man (here) has given. i. laid out the money.


SAN. That is well, or well done, let him be brought in (a doors) surely he
(is) a mete or fytte feast holder or keeper, or maker of bankettes (for us.)
Syrus howh Syrus, bear away this trusse or fardell in a doors, than come
again anon or quyckly, I have mo things, which I may command the. i. I have
other things to command the (to do.) O thou most best. i. right
worshypfull geste, thou come Optatus aduenis hospes optime.
hither wysshed for. i. thou come to the place or house, where we wyshe (for
to have such worshipful gestes) draw nere unto us. i. come nere to our house)
here plentye of all things shall be made unto the. i. Omnis rei copia tibi hic
fiet. Metony. Nullas ne habes Vene^^s?
here thou shalt have plentye of all manner things (that thou can wish for.)


ACO. Haste thou no Uenusis. i. no trymme gyrles, or fair wenches?


SAN. yes forsothe.


ACOL. Command them to be sent for, or to be called.


SAN. Of how much price women. Eloquen. ^ube accersi. Phra. Qu^nti prae(...)
mulieres?
i. what price demandest thou to have thy women of. i. how much wylt thou
pay, or what price will thou go to for thy women, or to have any womenne?


ACO. Of a great (price). i. I demand to have them Phras. (...) modo (...)
su^t (...). (...). (...) sa(...) (...)
of a great price, so they be of excellent beauty.


SAN. Surely I shall give the a chief or choice woman,. i. I shall provide
the a woman of the chiefest sort, or one that is alone (for beauty) or one
that has no fellow or cousyne. Hoo Syrus harken, goo call or go for Lais.


SY. Now, or even by and by?


SAN. By and by.


SY. What of cause shall I say. i. what shall I tell her is the cause, or the
mattier (that thou doste ^ ^
send for her?)


SAN. (Thou shall tell her) that a lover is here present. i. a lover for her is
come (to my house)


PAMP. In with this gear at ones. i. bear in these ^ ^.
things very soon or quyckely, that they may be given or delivered unto the
cooks. you trumpettours ^ ^.
follow me in a doors.


Actus tertius. BROMIA ANCILLA.
Senarij.
AN nun quam cuiquam contumeliosius
Audistis fact a^ iniuria^, qua^ haec est mihi?
Venit ad me Pamphagus. Heus tu, inquit, Bromia cito
Reuise, quid moretur Laide^ Annus est
Prius quam perdeate gynecaeo proedes
Inquam, for as efferre uetant negotia
Culinaria. Mox corripit fustem, fugam
Ex aedibus ineo. Sane uero, quia
Hunc insignem decoctorem adduxit, satis
Pro imperio agit, neque quisquam eius mores potest
Tolerare. Sed faxo meminerit huius loci,
Atque diei. Secundas res superbiae
Decent, sino. Verum dum coeperit suum
Mutare uoltum fortuna, atque hic indigus
Opis nostrae factus fuerit, nai mortuo
Canet, dum quid supplex peter. Pol gratiam
Habeo tibi Pantolabe, qui intercesseris
Plagasque auorteris. Vt misera sum? cui quidem
Datum est in hu^c domu^, ubi tot sunt domini, ubi uix
December coqui suffecerint edulijs
Concinnandis, quae noster hic, si dijs placet,
Condus promus mo do attulit. Nunc affatim
Habet, quod plenis faucibus helluo uoret,
Habet, quod in foedissimam uentris sui
Proluuiem mittat, Harpya obscoenissima.
Perstrennue ille quidem officium facit, dum homo
Suauis, adducit cytharistrias sibi.
Ne non etiam, opinor, camelus saltitet.
Nam Pamphago nihil magis cum fidibus,
Quam graculo. Tum Lais scortum nobile
Magno quod moeret, accersitum est hospiti,
Hos tantos sumptus quis ferret uel Satrapes?
Quid Pamphagus? annon certa pestis, atque item
Communis pernicies est adolescentulum?
At at forte imminet hic cessanti quispiam.
Proin uiso, sicubi haeret in uia Syrus
Cum Laid. Vt utrunque male perdat Jupiter.
Per quorum nimiam tarditatem propemodum
Perieram. Pape, gregem ancillarum conspicor
Huc aduentare, aedes nostrae uix coeperint.
Ibo illis obuiam, ac quid uenerim eloquar.
Of the third Act, The first Scene. Versus Iambici Senarii.
BROMIA ANCILLA.
BROMIA. Have you ever herd (tell) an injury to be done unto any body more An
unq^ cuiq^ contumeliosius au^isi^s facta^ (...) (...) (...) (...) mihi (...)
quid (...) ^ai^^m. (...). (...) quid sit (...) apparet. Phrasis. Pedes inqua^
(...) fores (...) nego(...) culinar^a. Phrasis. (...) (...) (...) (...).
dyspitefull than this is (that has been done to me). i. herd you ever of any
body that has been more despitefully entreated than I have been? Pamphagus came
to me, Hoo thou Bromia quod he, go se or look at ones, what thing tarieth Lais.
i. what thing causes Lais to tarry thus long, it is a year before she can
come or get forth out of her secret parloure, or inner chaumber (where
after the ancient manner, nobody resorteth but only women) my kitchen matters,
quod I, forbid me to bear forth my fete out of doors,. i. my business, that I
have here to do in the kitchyn, let me to step my foot ones forth of doors.
Anon he takes hastily a cudgel. i. straight, or forthwith, he ^ ^ ^.
takes or catches up a staff in his hand. I go in to flight from the house.
i. I begin or take me to flee away out of the house, or I took me to my
legs, and run out of the doors. Surely in very deed, because ^ ^ (...).
he has brought (to our house) this notable stroye good, which (will spend
goddis coope, and he had it, upon hoores, and at the dyce) and is so notable.
i. well known, that all the world wondreth on him, he Phrasis. (...) pro
imperio agit.
does enough for his rule or preeminence in governance. i. he plays now
the lord, or the besy offycer all together, or he takes upon him metely well,
and Phra. Neque quisqua^ cius mores
he were a lord. nor there may no body suffer or endure his manners or
condicio^s. but I shall make (him). potest tolerare. Phrasis. Sed faxo me
minerit huius loci atque dici. Sententia. Hypallage. Secundas res superbiae
decent.
i. I shall do so much, or bring it to pass, that he shall have remembrance
of this place and day. i. that he shall remember or think upon this place
and day (so long as he lives after) prydes become prosperous things, ye
prosperous things become pride. i. when men be in prosperity, or have the
world at will, or that the things go as they would have them, it becomes, or
it is sittyng or fytte for them than to be proud or hautye. I suffer him. i.
well, I let him alone Synecdoche. Verum du^ c^perit suu^ mutare uoltum
fortuna. Phras. Atque hic ind^gus opis nostrae factus fuerit. Adagium. Mortuo
canere. Phra. Ab aliqui quicqua^ supplex petere. Erasmus. S^^do canis, thou
syngest a ^onge to a deaf man. Phrasis. Gratiam tibi habeo, qui inter cesseris.
(for this time) but when fortune shall begin to change her countenance. i.
but when fortune shall begin to look sour, or to glome upon him. i. when he
shall fall into poverty, or have need of poor folks help again, and that
this fellow shall be made nedy of our aid. i. that he shall have need of our
succor or helpyng hand: surely, or in very deed, when he, being a suitor or
a peticioner, shall ask or require any thing (of me) he shall sing to a dead
body. i. when he shall desire me with crouchynge and knelynge, to do ought
for him, he shall be as well occupied, as though he should sing a song to a
dead man, or to tell his tale to a post (for any answer he gets.) By the
church of Pollux, I thank the, or I conne the good thank Pantolabus, which
dydst make intercession for me. i. dyddest speak a good word for me, and dydst
turn away or bear of the strypes or strokes from me. How wretched a wenche
am I? Eclipsis. Vt misera su^, cui quide^ datu^ est in h^n^ domu(...) Supp(...)
dimini(...)
unto whom truly it is given into this house. i. whose chance or lotte it is,
to come into this house (to do service) where there be so many lords. i.
where there be so many masters, or where every man will be a lord, where.
x. cokes could scarsely suffyce, or be suffycient, Phras. Vb^ uix dece^ (...)
qui suffe^e ^it ^dul^^s co^(...)andis.
the meats to be dressed up. i. to dress up the meats, which if it please
the goddis. i. which a goddis name this our storer and pitancer. i. our
bestower or layer up of al provisions, that be brought to house, Eloqu^ns.
C(...) ^ro (...) quid. Phrasis. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^.
and the distributer or deliverer forth of the same, has now brought (to
house) now has this glutton. i. this flappe sawee (the thing) that he may
plentuously swallowe down hole. i. vnchewed for haste. i. now has this gredy
gutte meat enough to swalow down, by his wide throat, with a choppe and a
wallop. Now has this most loathsome, or most abominable Harpya. i. odyble
spoyler of meat, with his vglye nails or talandes, and with his most vile
draffesacke or puddynge bealy, and with his pale colored face for hunger, as
though he should never eat enough (for such were the harpies, as Uirgil
discribith them) the thing which he may send in or glutte down into the most
vile place of his bealy, being a fylthy synke for ordure to issue forth of.
Truly he does his office right ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^
strongely. i. he does his duty, or plays his part stoutely or like a
man, while the sweet man. i. the plesantly disposed wanton leads wenches,
that can sing to the harp to him self. i. brings harpynge wenches to the
house for his own pleasure or behofe. I suppose lest he a camel should not
skyp or whippyt about. i. lest he should want minstrelsy to dance by, which
(it be comes him as well to do, as to see a camel skyppe up and down, or a
cow to bear a saddel or a bear to pycke muskles, or to dance after a whele
barowe, or my lady the pigs mother to dance her pigs a dance.) For unto
Pamphagus, no more A dag. Nihil graculo cu^ sidibus.
with a harp or lute, than to a iaye. i. he can no more Nihil illi magis ca^
fidibus qui graculo. Phrasis. Lais scortu^ nobile magno qquod moeret accersitu^
est. Vel eleg. Hos tantos sumptus qui^ ferret uel Saetrapes?
skille of the stroke of the harp or lute, than a iay can, or than a gose can,
or than mine ars can. Farthermore Lais, that noble or notable hoar. i. that
common harlot, which is so much bruted or spoken of, by cause she takes wages
by a greatte (price). i. by cause she lets her self or her body to hire,
or plays the hoore, for a great deal of money: she is sent for (to come to
this guest) who could bear these so great charges, though he were a Satrapes.
i. though he were a ruler or Persica uo(...) Satrapes.
a governor of a hole countray, which the Persyans call Satrapes, what
Pamphagus. i. what manner man is Pamphagus (I pray you) is not he a certain. i.
a very An non certae pestis atque ite^ co^munis pe^nicies est adolescentum^
Phras. At at forte imminet hic cessanti quispi^m. Proin uiso (...) cubi haeret
(...) ui^ ^y^us. Phrasis. Vt utru^que m^le perdat lupiter.
pestilence and also the common death. i. destruction or undoing of young men?
At at, helasse paraduenture some body is nere at hand here, to me tarieng. i.
now that I tarry (or stop here on my way) peradventure some body follows me,
at the hard heles, and therefore I will goo se, if Syrus linger not any where
in or upon the way with Lais, that Jupiter might ^ese them both ill. i. that I
pray the helpyng father, send them both ill to fare, or a myschiefe, by whose
to much slowyshenes, I had almost be perished. i. by whose ouermoche
slownesse, I had almost ben undone, or cast away. whowe I behold a flock of
bondewomen. i. Metaphora. Gregem ancillarum conspicor huc aduentare. Phrasis.
Ibo illis ob^iam ac quid uenerim eloquar.
I spy a hole flock of women servants to come. i. coming hytherwarde: our
house shall scarsely be able to receive them, or to hold them. I will go
against to them. i. I will go mete them, and also whereto or wherefore I am come,
I shall speak out plainly. i. I shall show them, what is mine errande.


Actus tertij. Scoena secunda. LAIS, SYRVS, BROMIA.
Septenarij and Octonarij.
I Tan te misit Sannio?
SYRVS. Misit.

LAIS. Me accersitum?

SYRVS. Ita.

LA. Quis tam potens hospes uenit mei petitu^ copia^?
Quae grandem demereo pecuniam

SYRVS. Nescio, nisi quod uiri
Aduentum, herus meus excepit multo humanissime.

LAIS. Number quem coenae apparatum uidisti Sire?

SYRVS. Non, sed Pamphagus
Obsonatu^ co^cesserat, hospes omneis sollicitos habet.

LAIS. Sat habeo. Pamphagus non illicet quenquam nisi diuitem.
Sire, hem Sire? quidnam huc conari uideo Bromiam?

SYRVS. huc? Vbi
Ea est?

LAIS. Ad nos uiam affectat.

SIR. Certe demiror quid sit.

LAIS. Iubebit nos forsan regredi domum, grauari enim hospitem
Impendijs.

SY. Non opinor.

LA. Subsistemus parum.

BRO. Lais iamdudum conuiuatum te uocat herus, quin uenis?

LAIS. Hem Bromia uenio.

BRO. At iam uenisse oportuit.

LA. quid ita? cedo.

BRO. Quia omnes accubant, teque unam abesse indignatur tuus
Nouicius amator.

LA. Quid uiri est?

BRO. Quid eu^ tibi praedicem
Aut laudem Lais? dignum, sat scio te amica dixeris.

L. Recte Bromia. At desiderio mei number nam uere calet?

BRO. Caleat rogas? imo ardet te intime.

LAIS. Pro peremus ocyus.

Of the third act, The second Scene. LAIS, SYRVS, BROMIA.
Versus Iambici Senarij.
LAIS. Yea has Sannio sent the (to me?)


SIRVS. He has sent me. 1. ye mary he has sent me (to the.)


LAIS. What, to call me (to come to him?)


SIRVS. Ye.


LAIS. Who so mighty a geste is come to ask the Phrasis. Quis tam po tens
hospes uenit mei petitu^ copiam. Phrasis. Quae grande^ demereo pecuniam.
Elegan. Vir. aduentil excepit multo humanissime. Phrasis. Number que^ coe nae
apparatu^ uidini? Pampha. obsonatum co^cessrat. Phras. Hospes omneis sollicitos
habet. Sat habeo Pam. non illicet quemq^ nisi diuitem.
use of me. i. what great man is this, that is now come to have me, or to
retain me at his commandment, which deserve great money. i. which ask for
my hire or for my labor a great deal or a great sum of money.


SIRVS. I wot nere, or I can not tell, sauinge that my master took the
coming of the man most humaynelye by much. i. saving that my master received
the man, at his first coming, after the most gentill sort, that could be
devised, or after the highest sort that could be possible.


LAIS. Whether saw thou any making redye of supper Sirus. i. saw thou
any supper a making ready Sirus?


SY. Nay, but Pamphagus was gone to by, or to prepare cates, our gest has all
men busyly occupied. i. all that be in our house be occupied or troublid about
him (to serve him, or to please his mind.)


LAIS. I have ynowghe. i. I know enough of this matter. Pamphagus not thither
a where but rich. i. Pamphagus would wayne or bring no geste to Sannios house,
but he were rich. Sirus hoo Sirus, what manner thing se I Bromia to go about
hither. i. what thing is it, that I se Bromia gothe about (with her cominge
hither?)


SIRVS. Where is she?


LAIS. She ernestly or dilygentely seeks out the way to us ward. i. she
makes over, or Phrasis. Ad nos uiam affectat.
she takes her way over to us ward.


SIRVS. Certaynely, I maruayle much, what it may be. i. what the matter may
mean.


LAIS. Paraduenture she Iubebit nos forsan ^egre dl domum ^elspijs. Grauari eni
ke^p^tum im pepdijs diet ^^* (...) ^^usa(...)* Bioquens. Subsn^^mus pa^um.
Bioquen. I am duoa^ co^s ^^^^ru^ r^uoca^^^erus qui (...) ^^^^ uenisse ope^tuit.
Phrasis. a^^^bant. T^^^uni abs (...) (...) Nou^ius amuo^.
shall command us to go home again. for why (she shall say or allege) that
their gest is grieved or over charged with costs or charges.


SY. Nay I hope or I trow. i. I trust she shall tell us no such tidings.


LAIS. Let us stop or stay a little.


BROMIA. Lais, my lord calls for the now a late to feast or banquet. i. to
sit at his feast with him, or to keep him company at his banquet, but come
thou. i. will thou come or not?


LAIS. What Bromia I come.


BRO. But thou should all ready have been com. i. but thou shuldist have been
there already, or by this.


LAIS. Why so tell me (or speak?)


BRO. For they all sit to. i. for they all be set (at the table) and thy
new lover dysdayneth the alone to be absent. i. takes it displeasantly, that
thou only art wantynge.


LAIS. What of man is he. i. what manner of man is he?


BRO. Whereto should I boste him or laud him or praise him unto the Lais, I
wot enough, thou shalt say C^^^mpius car^^terrogarur p^r ge^^^um. ^hra. Quid
cum fi^^siua^nau^ pr edie^m? ^^^ae^s di^^um. A^ desiderio ^^snumna^ (...)
cal^t? (...), ye or n^^ma^y. P^^^^. ^m^^^det tentim^.
him worthy the a lover. i. I wotte well inoughe thou will say thy self that
he is worthy to be thy lover.


LAIS. Ryghtly Bromia. i. that is well said Bromia, but whether does he
verylye wax warm by the desire of me or not. i. but has he such desire unto
me, that he is hot in love with me. i. is he in love with me as hot as a
toste or not?


BRO. Ask thou whither he may be hot (in love with the) mary, or nay mary he
burns the most inwardly. i. he burns or is a fire most inly (for the love
of the) or he loves ye as hot as coals.


LA. Let us haste us more spedyly. i. let us have us the more quikly, or let us
make the more have.


Actus tertij, Scoena terria. EVBVLVS, PELARGVS.
Octonarij.
PRouiso quid reru^ gerat Pelargus, quo pacto ferat
Absentia^ gnati, que^ tenere adamat, gemitque forsita^
Nunc abdicatum, quippe, illum educauit maximo suo
Labor, post, curauit unice, sperans stabilem fore
Voluptatem, quam, ex illius praesentia acciperet, satis
Credo, patris ut est ingeniu^, iam misere sollicitarier,
Super salute filij. Id uiso moderetur ne suis
Curis nimis anxijs, uere sapientem quod uirum decet.
PEL. Parentis qua^ta sit sollicitudo erga absentem filiu^
Ex me disco. Gnatus quia abdicatus est dudum meus
Non sustinet animus quiescere, quin is sedulo mihi
Ob oculos, ob me^tem, uersetur, absente^ curo haud secus
Ac praesentem curaui pridem. Qua^ uellem Eubulu^ dari
Cum quo uolupe est, de absenti commentari filio.
Sed eccu^ in te^pore ipso aduenit. Eubule salve plurimu^.

EV. O mi Pelarge, no^ praeuideram te, si uales, been est.
Nam hac gratia ad te iba^, quo quid ualeret animus discere^.

PEL. Omnes mihi curae coeunt.

EVBV. In quo?

PEL. In quo censeas nisi
In gnato.

EVB. Number quid audisti de eo, quod nobis, tam cito?

PEL. Nihil. Sed quid ualeat miror.

EVBV. Been equidem spero.

PE. Vtinam.

EVBV. Quid est,
Quod te sollicitat autem?

PE. Gnatus.

EVBV. Minue uero have improbam
Curam.

PEL. Non possum Eubule, gnatus est.

EV. Vt sit, quorsum attinet,
Te excruciare?

PEL. Mihi sic est usus.

EVBV. Si istuc certum est tibi
Sic facere, abiero.

PELAR. Potius, quam te caream, quicquid iusseris,
Faciam.

EVBV. Imprimis, quod scio, tibi uidebitur durum, cave
Nimiu^ sis sollicitus, qua^do hinc nihilo meliore^ feceris
Gnati statum, quin magis, cum satis totum relinquito
Curandum, a quoru^ cura neutiqui exciderit. Nec audias
Epicureos, qui contendunt, Deos nihil mortalia
Curare, melius Homerus, qui (...) uaga^ quom nesciat
Soli decreto Numinis regenda credit omnia.
Tu filiu^ tractasti, dum tempus tulit, ut decuit patrem,
Nunc amandatus est, feras. Satis pro officio feceris,
Aequus si persiet filio animus, de quo, quicquid Numini
Visum est, decernere laudandu^ fuerit, utroque pollice.
Cum dijs quis unqui uel pie pugnauit, uel foeliciter?
Sane, haud uacabis impietatis crimine, si ultra fas, tua^
Extendas sollicitudinem, quando exitum futuri habet
Deus, in sua unius manu. Quid hic tantu^ trepidas miser?
An difidentia tua uoles mendacij reum
Facere deum, nostri qui curam se suscipere perhibet:
Qui capitis nostri etiam pilos oe^s in numerato tenet?
Ecquem te ipsum facis, ut ex aduorso, deo responsites?
An inuides ipsi (...) rerum mortalium?
Deos quaeso, ut tua^ tibi de^t me^te.

PE. Cogis tu quidem
Me ire in tuam sententiam, faciam. ut posihac quietior
Sim, dulcis interim commemoratio fuerit de filio.
Homo sum Eubule. Humani nihil a me est alienum.

EVB. quaeso, uide,
Ne stulto affectu ex hinc gnatum prosequare, quem quidem putes
Zelum illi debitum, quom sint, nolo erres, affectus mali
Recti specie co^mendati, unde expectes, no^ nisi noxiam
Imposturam. Verum gnatus quid dicebat nouissimu^?

PEL. Duobus uerbis iussit me longum ualere.

EV. Quid amplius?

PEL. Nihil.

EV. Number tristis abrjt?

PEL. Imo laetus
Eubule. hinc mihi
Lachrymas excussit ille, qui ta^ frigidus erat i patrem.

EVBV. Ita comparatum est natura, ut uirrutem praesentem minus
Anima duortamus, sublatam uero ex oculis mox inuidi
Quaeramus, quod gnatus minus uider, per adolescentiam
Et consulit parum, aetas id correxerit, quando malo
Accepto stultus sapiet. Quid ualetudo det commodi
Aegrotus post intelliget. Nunc illum poenitet sui.
Nimis impense liber cupiuit esse, quod hic erret modo
Posterius sentiet, quom ad te co^fugiet naufragus uelut
In tutum portum. Id quod futurum ominor.

PEL. Au mi Eubule, metuo
Ab omine.

EV. Nihil est qquod metuas, si istuc eueniat locus
Esto misericordiae.

PEL. Non usus ueniet spero.

EV. Spero item
Ego hercle. Neque eo dico, qquod quic qua^ illu^ se^serim mali
Dedisse, sed, si quid, ne quid, quae eius sit aetas peruides
In pessima sequax est, and in malum propendet pectore
Toto, idque maxim dum consilijs suis relinquitur.
Quid enim ualet, quod in eo est optimum? malum illud sonticum
Quod (...) perdidit patres, uiciauit ite^ istius
Mentem, quo non potest no^ sollicitarier ad cupidines
Malas, quas and pro consilio Philauti studeat exequi,
Nisi presens adsit corrector, qui hu^c ad meliora puocet.
Si nescis, optimus ille corrector Deus est. Cuius manus
Moderatur omnia, and in quo, ut summatim dicam, omnes uiuimus,
Mouemur, et sumus, quom sit solus reru^ oium arbiter.

PE. Credo Eubule, oia haec ta^ uere qua^ studiose orarier
Quod de Pericle ferunt Suadela in labijs sessitat tuis.
Cupere^ quide^, in totam curam gnati exulantis ponere,
Modo possem.

EVB. Fidenti sperata cedunt. Sed nunquid aliud
Me uis Pelarge.

P. Vt ad nos diuortas Eubule pijssime

EVBVL. Quando istuc uis fiat, nolo ullum in me tibi claudi commodum.

Of the third Act, the third Scene. EVBVLVS, PELARGVS.
Versus Iambici Octonarij.
EVB. I will go for to se what of things Pelargus may bear. i. what thing
Pelargus is a doing, by (...) (...) (...) gerat ^^argus. Ph^a. (...) (...)
(...) (...) gna^. El^gan. (...). Ph(...)us. (...) (...) (...).
what covenant. i. in what wise or under what manner he may bear. i. he takith
the abse^ce of his son, whom he loves tenderlye, and paraduenture he
bewayleth him now forsaken. i. he takes it heuyly, that he has put him away
from him. For why he brought him up or fostred by his most great labor: and
afterward he cared him only. i. he had an eye or regard to him chiefly or
principally hoping the pleasure to be in time to come stedy. i. trustyng that
the pleasure should in time to come be steadfast, which he should take of his
presence. i. of his being with him in company, or in his company, I believe
(well enough) as it is the wit (...) Id ulso mode retur ne suis curis nimis
anxiis.
of the father. i. as it is the fathers condition, or as a fathers heart serves
him (toward his son) him now to be careful. i. that he is now full of
care upon (...). for the health or welthe of his child. I go (now) to se that.
i. this thing, whether he mother or measure his cares to to much careful. i.
whether he take his passing great heaviness wisely, and temper or govern his
affections, which thing does become a very wise man (to do.)


PE. I learn by my self how much the care of the father is toward his son,
being absent, or being away from him, because my son is now lately put away
from me, my mind can not abide or suffer to Phrasis. Non sustinet animus
quiescere. Phras. Quin is sedulo mihi ob oculos ob me^tem u^rs^tur, Elegant.
Abse^tem curo haud secus ac presentem curaui pride^. Phra. Quam uelle^ ^um mihi
dari cu^ quo uolupe est de ^^lio co^me^tart. Phrasis. Eubule falue plurimum.
Phras^s. Si uales been est Phra. Hac gratia ad te ibam, quo quid ualeret animus
discerem. Phras. Oe^s cur^ mi^ hi co^unt.
be in rest or quiet, but that he diligently hanteth before mine eyes, and
before my mind. i. but that he continually or still is present or hanteth or
walks to and fro, before mine eyes, and in my mind (by reason of my much
thynkyng upon him) I take care or thought for him being absent, not otherwise.
i. none otherwise, or no less than I cared for him, or tendered him lately
being present. How feign would I Eubulus, to be given (to me). i. how fayue
would I (now) mete with Eubulus? with whom it is a pleasure (to me) to make
mention, or to speak of my son being absent, but lo him (here) he comes to
me in the self time. i. in the best time that can be. Eubulus, all hayle
much. i. god send the well to fare.


EVBVLVS. O my Pelargus, I saw not or spied not the before, if thou be well at
ease, or in good health, it is well, or all is well, for I went. i. I was
coming to the ward, for this grace. i. for this intent, by which. i. to the
intent that I might learn how thy mind might fare. i. how thou art quieted
in thy mind.


PELAR. All cares com together to me. i. I am wrapped in care on every side.


EV. In whom?. i. toward whom, or to whom ward?


PEL. Toward whom myghtest thou suppose, but toward my son?


EVB. Haste thou hard of him. i. haste thou herd any tidings of him that
Eclipsis. Quod nobis tam ciro? it offers.
to us so sone. i. that thou comeit toward us so shortly?


PEL. Nothing at all, but I marvel me how he may fare.


EVB. Surely, well I hope.


PEL. Would to god (he did so.)


EVB. What thing is it that troubles Phrasis. Quid quoth (...) ^ollicitat qutem?
Phra. minue ucro (...) improbam cu^am. Ecliplis. (...), quor^u^ (...) ex(...).
Phra^s. (...) (...). (...) (...) (...) ab^^o. P(...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...)
the thus. i. brings the into care?


PE. My son.


EVB. Minishe truly this wicked care. i. lesson or make less hardely, or a
goddis name, this obstinate or self wylled care of thine.


PEL. I can not Eubulus, he is my son.


EVB. That he be. i. put case he be so, or suppose he be, or what though he be
so, whereto belongs it to torment the. i. to what intent or effect avails
it to take on with thy self (thus?)


PEL. To me so is use. i. such is my custom, or it is needful or expediente
for me to do thus.


EVB. If this thing be certain unto the so to do, I will go my way. i. if thou
be fully determined, or if it be fully decreed with the thus to do, I will
depart hens.


PEL. Rather than I would want the. i. rather than I would want thy presence or
company, what so ever thou shall or wylt command me, ^.
I will do it.


EVB. First and foremost, which thing I wot (well) shall be seen. i. shall
seem to the hard (to be done) beware thou be not to much careful, syns that
by this means, thou shall make the estate of thy son by nothing the better.
i. saying that thy son shall be in never the better condition therefore, but
rather ^.
leave him holely to the destenies to be cared for, a. let god alone with him,
or leave him holly unto the ordinance or disposition of god, to be cured. From
the care or tuition of which destenies. i. disposition of god, he has in no
manner of wise fallen away. i. he is in no manner condition expelled or put
abacke or away from. nor here not the Epicures. i. nor give no credence to
those sort of philosophers, which strive the gods nothing to care mortal
things. i. which by great contention of words defend, that the gods do
nothing care or have no regard to mortal men's matters. Better Homere. i.
Homeres sentence Eclipsis. Mclius Homerus. s. sentit. Phra. Qui tychen (...).
fortunam uagam cum nesciat. Phrasis. Soli decreto numinis reg^ da credit oia.
Phrasis. Tuum filium tractasti dum tempus tulit ut decuit patrem Nunc aman,
datus est feras Phras. Satis pro officio f^c^ris, si animus per ftet aequus
filio. Eloquen. Numen.
is better, which sens he knows not, or has no knowledge of fortune, a
wanderer. i. syns he can not skyll, or is not acquayuted with fortune, seeing
that she is but a wandrer, that strayeth from place to place like a vacabunde.
i. does nothing stedyly or certainly, puts all things in trust, to the
only decree of the will of god, to be governed. i. commits al thingis to the
gouerna^ce or disposition of goddis pleasure. thou have intreted or handled thy
son, while the time did bear. i. while the time served or required, or was
conueni^t, as it did become a father, now he is sent away. i. now thou have sent
him away or put him away (from the) bear it (pacie^tly) or be content
therewith, thou shall do enough for thine office. i. thou shalt acquyte thy
self sufficiently for thy part, if thy mind stand still equalle to thy son
ward. i. if thy mind continue still after one, toward thy son, of whom
what so ever is seen to the godly power. i. of whom what so ever shall seem
to goddis pleasure, to decree or determyne, it should mow be to be praised, or
it were to be Adagium. Laudar^ u^que poll^c^.
commended with each thombe, or with both the thombes. i. it ought to be
accepted, and to be most thankefully, or with most high favor received. This
adage takes his beginning upon a common manner used Mos Roma.
of the Romans, which when they favored a matter or a person, they used to
declare it by thrustynge of their thombe down within their fyst, and when they
liked not, they closed their fingars together, and held up their thombe: but
when they would declare that they did most hyghly favor a matter or a
person, they would close both their tho^bes within their fystes, Mos Land.
like as ye citysens of London in token of favor, lift up both their hands at
the chosyng of their head officers at their yield hall. Who ever has foughte^
with ye goddis (...). (...) (...) quis (...) (...) ^Spanauit (...) (...)
devoutly, or luckily. i. who did ever strive or take pertie against the
goddis, but he came to a mischief (record the Tyranes gyauntes) which made
war against Jupiter, and he destroyed them with his lyghtnyng: or what devout
man, or well fortuned did ever yet strive against the pleasure of god, other in
weal ^.
or in woo, surely thou shall not be void of the crime of the hatred or
dispisyng of god. i. surely thou shall not be utterly or quite clear of the
offense of hatred to god ward, if thou extend thy carefulnes above that ^.
which is lefull before god. i. if thou be fuller of care than is leful for
the before god, or in the sight of god, ^.
syns that god has the issue of the thing, that is to come in his of one
hand. i. sens that god has the fynalle end or conclusyon of the things,
that be to come, in his only hand (to dyspose them at his pleasure.) Why here
fear thou so much wretch. i. whereto art thou so much afraid in this case
(sorry man that thou art) would thou through thy mystrusting make god guilty
or faulty of a lie. i. make god a liar? which says him to take the care of
us. i. which shows, that he takes the cure of us (upon him) which also
holds in a noumbred. i. in a sum, all the Phras. (...) capits (...) omnes
in ^^merato (...).
hears of our heed. i. which has noumbred (as the thing that he does
regard, and has taken the tuition of) all the hears of our heed. Look now
whom thou make thy self, look in to what inconvenience Phra. Ecquem te ip
sum f(...)s.
thou bring thy self, that thou may on the contrary side make or shape an
answer unto god. doeste Graeca nox. Monarchia, the soole or only governance.
Phrasis. Deos quaeso, ut tuam tibi dent mentem Phrasis. Cogis tu qui them me ire
in tuam sententiam.
thou envy to him the monarchye of the thing mortal?. i. enuiest thou at him
that he has the soole or only governance of the things transytory? I
beseech the goddis that they may give the mind to the. i. I beseech god to
set the, or put the in thy right mind.


PEL. Surely thou do constrayne me to go in to thy sentence. i. to be of the
mind thou art, or to think thy reason good, or to think as thou think: I
shall do. i. so demene me, that herafter I may be more quiet (of mind) in the
mean while or season, the calling to remembrance of my son shall be sweet
(to me.) I Sententia. Homo sa humani, nihil a me est alienum. Phrasis. Quae so
uide ne stulto affectu ex hine gnatum pro^ sequare.
am a man Eubulus, nothing of mannyshe thing is strange unto me. i. there is
nothing that belongs to man, which (I think strange to me) for (my part is
in it.)


EVBVL. I beseech the look, that from hens forth thou pursewe not thy son,
with a foolysshe affection. i. mind or fantasye thou bear toward him,
which (thy pursuyng by continual thinking upon him) thou may think to
be a zeal. i. a tender love dew unto him. i. which thou do owe unto him,
syns (I will not, that thou err or go besides Phra. Quom sint (...) fectus
mali recti specie co^mendati.
the right way) evil affections. i. inclinations of the mind (being errors
out of the way) be (oftentimes commended). i. approved or allowed (in men's
fantasyes) under the spice. i. similytude or lykenes of Phrasis. Vnde expectes
non nisi noxiam imposturam.
right. i. of the thing that is good in deed, of whens. i. of which mysiudgyng
thou can look for nothing but for noisome or hurtful deceyte or beguyling,
but what said thy son last of all?


PEL. With two words Phraf. Duobus uerbis iussit me longu^ ualere
he commanded me the long farewell. i. in few words, he badde me farewell a
great while. i. for a great while.


EVB. What more?


PEL. Nothing.


EVB. Went he not away heuye. i. was he not sorye or heavy, when he went his way?


PEL. Nay mary glad. (...). Phrasis. ^ excuisi^ ille, qui tam frigi ^ patr^m. ^
^ ^ Phras. ^ ^ ^ ^ Phra. ^ ^ ^ ^ Phrasis. Quod gnat^ ^ ^ ^ Phrasis. ^ ^ Phra. ^
^ A dagium. Quando (...) accepto ^ ^ Quid (...)do det co^mo ^ ^ Phras. Nenc
illu^ p^ ^^ter sui. Elegans. Nimis impe^se liber cupi^it esse.
nay mary he was glad Eubulus, from hens. i. upon this occasion, he which
was so cold toward his father, did shake out tears to me. i. made the
tearesstande in mine eyes, or made the tears rounne down by my chekes, or
made me weep (for sorrow.)


EVB. It is thus ordained by nature, that we do less regard virtue being
present. i. when virtue or goodness is present (before our eyes) we do litel
regard it, but when it is taken away or removed from our eyes, than anon, or
shortly after, we envious. i. desirous thereof do seek (therefore) which thing
thy son less sees. i. consydereth but a littell by youth. i. by rayson of
his youth or young age, and he counsels little. i. he little regards, or
pondereth it but smally by due consyderation, age shall amend that thing. i.
ripe age shall amend or correct (that fault) when he a fool shall savor
ill being taken. i. after that he being but yet a fool, shall afterward
wax wyser, when he shall have felt or suffered aduersite or trouble. What health
may give of commodity to the sick man, he afterward shall perceive or
understand, (when he has recovered his health again) now him repents of
him self. i. he is now penitent or repentfull of him self, or for his
misdedes, he coueted to sore or to to very much to be free. i. to be set at his
liberty, but what he may err herein. i. but what error or inconuenence he
may fall into (by reason of his setting at large) hereafter he shall feel. i.
perceive it, when he whose ship is gone to wrack, shall ^lce for succor to
the, as it were into a sure haven, that which to com hereafter I guess. i. the
which thing I guess or prophecye shall betyde hereafter.


PELARGVS. Hawe Phra. Au mi Eub^. metuo ab omine.
my Eubulus, I fear from thy sothesayenge. i. I fear me of thy
sothesayenges, (that it shall not come to good pass) or I fear me, that thy
sothesayinge means no good luck.


EVB. There is nothing that thou may fear. i. thou have no cause at all to
fear, if this thing do happen or chance, or in case this thing Phras. Si
istuc eueni at locus esto misericordi^ Phra. Non usus ue nict spero. Phras.
Neque co dico quod quicqua^ illu^ senserim mali dedisse.
come thus to pass, let there be a place of mercy. i. look thou be merciful,
or look thou have or take mercy with the, when the time shall come.


PELAR. The use shall not come. i. it shall not come so to pass I hope, or I
hope, I shall have none experience or proof hereof.


EVB. And I also by the god Hercules hope the same, nor I say it not to that
intent, or because that I have felt him to have given any thing of ylle,
(...). because I have perceived that he has done any manner harm or hurt (to
any body) but if any thing Phras. Sed si quid, ne quid.
or not any thing. i. but whether he have or not, or whi there it be so or not
so, or be as be may (for I take not upon me to judge, or to say the thing I
know not) Descriptio periculosi ^^a tus inue^tutis Phras. In pessima fequax
est. Metaphora. In mal^ propender pecto retoto. Phra. I dque maxim dum
consiliis suis relinquitur. Quid eni u^ let quod i (...) est optimum?
what his age is thou perfitly or thoroughly see in the warst thing it is a
follower. i. his age is given or enclyned to follow or imitate the worste thing
(that can be) and he hangs forward. i. he has an aptenes or is inclyued to
ill with his hole breaste. i. with all his heart and mind (and that now) most
chiefly or most of all while he is left to his own counsels. i. while he is
suffered to run on the brydell, or to do what he list, without any
restraynt: for why what is worth in him that which is best. i. how much is
the best natural gift worth that is in him (as who say nothing) Eloquens.
(...) ^onticuu^ Gr^ca. Protoplastus primus for(...) (...) item ^ Elegan. ^ ^ ^
^ Phrasis. Quas pro co^ ^ ^ ^ Nisi pr^sens ad sit correcto^. Qui hunc ad
^^liora pro^o^et. (...) philosophica.
that hurtful or noysom ill which did leese. i. did cast away our first formed
or shaped fathers. i. pare^tes, Adam and Eve (which by their disobedience had
lost their former perfections) has also defiled or corrupted the mind of this
(young man) whereby he can not, not to be provoked or entyced. i. he can not
chose, but be styrred unto ylle lusts or desires, which also for the
counsel of Philautus. i. according to the advise of Philautus, he must
needs study to execute. i. go about to put them in execution, onelesse that a
correctour or an amender by good advise or counsaylle gyuynge, be by present,
or ready at hand, which may call. i. provoke or styre this (young man) unto
better (deeds or doings.) But if thou know not (who that correctour or
redresser may be) that same most best redresser or reformer (...) God, whose
hand governs or rules all things, and in whom, that I may say it
summarilye. i. that I may say or conclude the hole Phrasis. Vt summa(...)
(...).
matter in few words, we all live, we all move, and we be. i. and have our
being, syns he alone is the disposer or orderer of al things, at his will and
pleasure. PEL. I believe Eubulus all these things to be spoken (of Phra. (...)
omnia (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
the) after the orators facion, as well truly as ernestly. i. I believe that
thou haste spoken al these things here in this open audience very eloquently,
and that as well according to the truth, as after an ernest manner. Phrasis.
Quod de P c^ ^icie ferunt.
which thing men bear. i. men report or tell of Pericles. i. which gift men
say was given to the orator Pericles, for (persuasion sytteth in thy lyppes)
Phra. Suad^la in la ^iis sessitat ^uis.
i. what so ever oration passes through thy lyppes, it is able to persuade
the audience. i. to cause them to give cr(...)ence thereunto, or to thy
sayenges. i. the gospel is in thy mouth. And how excellent an orator
Historia Periclis oratoris.
this Pericles was, may appear by Archidamas the Lacedemonien captain, which
being demanded, whether he was more valyant than Pericles, he made answer,
Though Pericles be overcome by me in battle, yet is he of so great eloquence,
that wha^ he reasons with me of the affairs between us, he seems not to be
overcome, but that he has got the victory, Phrasis. Cupere^ quide^ in totu^
curam gnati (...)nere, modo possem. Sententia. Fide^ti sper^ta cedunt.
and over come me. Surely, I would coueyte. i. I would feign put away in the
hole. i. utterly or holly the care of my son being in exyle or banysshed. i.
so it lay in my power, or so I might.


EVB. To him that trusts, the things hoped succeed. i. to him that hopethe
(well) the things, which he hops for, take their effect, or come to
pass. i. hope well, and have well. But wylt thou me nothing other. i. will
thou Phra. Nunquid aliud me uis?
nothing else with me, or will thou command me no more service?


PELAR. That thou may torn in Eloquen. Vt ad nos di (...)as. Phrasis. Nolo
ullum (...)me tibi clau di (...)modu^.
to us. i. I will that thou turn in to my house.


EVB. Syns thou will this thing, be it. i. syns this is thy will, I am
content, I will not any commodity to be shut to the in me. i. I would be
loathe, that thou should want any pleasure or service, that may lie in me to
do for the.


Actus tertij. Scoena quarta. BROMIA. SYRVS.
Trochaici Catalectici.
GAudeo me defunctam istius coenae laboribus.
Tam negociosa mihi suit culina, postulem,
Si liceret, me oppido lassam refocillare. Sed
Quid Syrus petitum ueniat, miror quom bellaria
Intro illata sint? Ecquid fit in coenaculo Sire?
SY. Quid fiat rogas? coena dubia sese exple^t, atque item
Proluti uino sedent conuiuae, solus Pamphagus
Ieiunas praetendit fauces, quas uix tandem complete.
Ventri auaro donat omnia.

BR. Credo, nil nouu^ facit.
Na^ (...) est si quisqua^ alius. At hospes quid rei
Gerit? an no^ in raram Laidis formam intentus stupet?

SY. Imo ait nescire se, quo pacto amoris sumpserit
Satietatem.

BR. Amor nec co^siliu^, nec ullu^ habet modu^

SIR. Vin tibi beneficium praestem Bromia?

BRO. Maxim.

SIR. Vide,
Quid tibi hoc uilli sapiat.

BROMIA. Hem, bromion est

SIR. Bibe largius.

BRO. Ha, ha. Nunquam quod seia^ uinu^ bibi meracius.
Hem Sire, uicissim dabo me tibi, qua^do usus postulat.

SYRVS. Postulat nune, and locus and res ipsa, and usus.

BRO. Qui Sire?

SIR. Non te clam est, quam parce hic obsonetur, dum quaestus iacet.

BRO. Scilicet.

SIR. Nunc contigit cuius praesentia menstruum
Nobis commeatum commode reponat.

BRO. Edoce Vnde id fiat.

SY. Si coniuncta opera penu^ nos clanculu^
Egeramus.

BRO. Vah, consilium callidum, si uerbera
Lucrifacere a Pamphago uelimus.

SY. Abi sis stultula,
Carptim singulas dapes truncabimus, ne sentiat.

BRO. Vulpes annosa laqueis ne erres, capi haud ullis potest.
Tum, quam iracundus, quam plagosus sit Pamphagus, scio,
Praes(...), (...) eum tents praeda fraudare escaria.
Ob dapes surreptas, ille coelum terrae misceat.
Nec bolum ca(...) famelico, haud unquam tuto auferes.
Proin cave, ne ullum tuo tibi iumento accersas malum.
si sapis. Sed heus? tibi autem.

SIR. Nam quid est?

BRO. Quid? respice
Lais una cu^ hospite interuenit.

S. Enimuero hercule
Intempestiue hic subsisto, postquam cubitu hos conspicor
Surrexisse, p^urramus intro Bromia.

BR. I, pr^, sequar.

Of the third Act, the fourth Scene. Speakers together Bromia, Syrus. The
kind of meter Trochaici Octonarij, wantynge a syllable.
I Rejoice me to have performed the labors of this Phra. Gaudeo me defuncta^
isticoen^ ^aboribus. Phra. Tam negociosa mihi fuit culina. Phras. Postule^ si
liceret me oppido lassa refocillare. Sup ni in tu^. Quid petitu^ (...) miror
Eloquens. Beliaria quid Phras. Ecquid ^^t i^ coenaculo Sire? Phra. Coena dubia
(...) exp^^nt.
supper. i. I am glad, that I have brought to pass, or made an end of the
labors of this supper, my kitchen was so full of business to me. i. I had so
much business, or so much to do in my kitchen, or my kitchen was so busy a piece
of work to me, I would desire or wyshe for, if it were, or might be lefull. i.
if I could bring it to pass, to refreshe, or to recreate me (being or which
am very much, or very soore forweryed) but I marvel me, what thing Sirus may
come to seek for, or to ask for, or to fet, sens or seeing that the issue of
the table. i. fruits and chese or wafers hypocras and march pains, or
comfitures be brought in. i. be served in. what thing is made in the parloure
Sirus. i. what are they doing in the parlour Sirus?

S^^. Ask thou what they be a doing? they fylle up them selfs with a
doutfull supper. i. they fylle them selfs up to the throat with a supper,
whereat be so many good and dayntie dyshes, that they stand in dout at which
dyshe they may first begin, and also the Phrasis. Proluti uino sede^t
co^uiuae.
gestes or they that be of the feast do sytte full or surely washed with wine.
i. having in all their cups, and mo to, only Pamphagus holds out or
thrusts Phrasis I^iunas prae^^ndit fauces Ele^an. V^^ tandem. Phrasis. V^ntri
au^ro do^at omnia Cre^auox. Folyphag^s A. mu^tum co^^n^dens oft^^ quis(...)
alius Ph^^f. Hospes quid (...) Ph^^^s. Anno^inta ^am Laidis (...) inten. (...)
Phras. Amo ait ^e^erre se quo pa^^amo^^s (...) sa(...). Senten. Amor nee^^
(...) ullu^ (...) modu^. Phrasis. Vin pro uis, (...)by benefici^ prae^tem
^^oqy^n. Ha^^^re. Pl^^^. Vide quid ti(...) u^lli lapiat. Creca. ^romion, a
fremendo alludit ad nomen ancille. Phras. Bibe largius.
out his fasting throat, which he can scars^lye, yet at the last fill up to
his covetous. i. gredy bealye he gives all things. i. all (that he may get
or lay hand on) or rappe and rende, he puts in or crammeth into his gredy
bealy.


BRO. I believe (well) he does no new thing. i. it is no neweltie for him to
do so, for he is an eat up all, if any be an other. i. if there be any other,
or any mo living: but of what of thing bears our gest. i. but what is our
gest a doing, or what makes our gest? Does not he, being hedeful or taking
head, wonder at the seldom beauty. i. the beauty that the like is seldom
seen, or has few fellows of Lais?


SY. Ye mary, he says him not to know. i. he says that he wotteth not, or
does not know by what covenant. i. by what means he shall mow take his full
of love.


BRO. Love another has counsel or any mean. i. love has (in it neither
advise nor measure) or in love is neither mean nor mesure, or neither ryme nor
reason.


SI. Wylt thou that I lend the a benefytte Bromia. i. will thou have me to do
the a pleasure Bromia?


BRO. Most of all. i. that would I the faynest of any woman living.


SI. Look what this of littell wine may savor to the. i. look or assaye how
this courtesye of wine may taste (in thy mouth) or assay how this sippytte of
wine may like the.


BRO. What this is Bromion. i. of the god of wynes him selfs nature, deryued
of vremeyn. i. to rore out. for Bacchus has diverse names amongst the
gentyles. i. this is wine walk a knave, or able to pluck one by the top, or
that will make one rore it out, and it were the thonder.


SI. Drink more largely. i. drink better (on it) or take a better say.


BRO. Ha ha, never that I wot of, have I dronk wine more Phra. Nu^qua^ quod
sciam uinum bibi meraci^. Phras. Vicissim dabome tibi quando usus postulat.
Polysyndeton. Postulat nunc, and locus, and res spsa, and usus.
wynyshe, or purer from any water put unto it. i. I never drunk a stronger or
a better cup of wine, that I wot of (in my life.) Hoo Sirus, I will on the
other side give me to the. i. I will for my part do some pleasure for the
again, when use asks. i. when occasion or opportunity requires or shall
serve (it) that it should be so.


SIR US. Now asks both the place and the thing self and use, that thou
should do a pleasure for me on thy party. i. now serves (very well both
the place and the thing it self) and the convenient season or time (to do a
pleasure for me.)


BRO. How (so Sirus?)


SI. It is not preuelye the. i. it is Phra. Non te clamest quam parce hic
obsonetur du^ quaestus facet.
not hid or unknown unto the, how scarsely or nygardly me^ make prouisyon
for cates here, while gayn lies. i. while or when there is no gain or wynning
Phras. Scilicet.
stirrynge.


BROMIA. That is true in deed, or that is as true as the gospel, or that is
matter in deed, or that is for a surety.


SI. Now is happened the thing. i. now is chanced the case, of whom the
presence Phrasis. Menstruum co^meatum re ponere.
or whose presence or redynesse at hand, may commodiousely put again. i.
may conveniently lay up in store a monthyshe vytayle to us. i. as much
vitayles, as would serve us for a hole monethe.


BRO. Teach Phra. Edoce unde id fiat.
me perfytlye from whense that may be. i. show me plain, how that thing
may be brought to pass.


SIR. If by labor joined to gither we bring forth preuily the store or
prouisyon (of cates). i. if we by castyng Phra. Si coniuncta opera penu^ nos
clanculu^ egeramus.
of our hedes together, or by laying to of both our handis, bring out of (the
buttery) or spence all the meat that is left (at this supper.)


BRO. Propt a wyly counsel, if we will win beatynges of Pamphagus. Phrasis.
Vah consiliu^ callidu^ si uerbe^a a Pamp^a. lucrifacere ^^limus Phrasis. ^bisis
p^o si (...), carp^im ^^pulas da(...) (...).
i. that were a crafty advise, if we would deserve of Pa^phagus as many
strypes, as our backs could bear.


SIRVS. Go away if thou wylt fool. i. pick the hens fool that thou art, we
shall cut of every daynty dishe one by one, by pyckyng out here and there. i.
we shall gold every dainty dyshe of them by pycking out of the dayntiest
morcelles here and there, lest he may feel (it). i. because he should not
spy it, or perceive it.


BRO. A she fox full of years, that thou may A^^gi^m. (...) anno (...)a p^^^
^aqueo.
not err and may not be taken with snares. i. because thou shuldestnot err or
thynk or judge amys: An old fox can not be taken by a snare (he is so full of
wyles, that if he have escaped ones, thou can not begile him agem). i. in our
adage it is hard haltyng before a crypie. Farthermore I wot (well enough, how
shortly angry, Elegan. (...) qua^qua^ (...).
and how full of stripes Pamphagus may be. i. how sone Pamphagus will be in his
fumes, and how sore he beats or lays on, or how many stripes he lays on
or ever he leave, cheffely if thou tempte to begyle (...) (...) ^sres ^reda
frauda (...). Phra^s. ^^dapus sur ^^^as ille ^^um terra mise^ai. A^agium. (...)
(...) fas ^^^ico au(...).
him in meatishe pray. i. namely if thou assay or go about to dysceyue him in
his pray of any meat, that he has gotten. For his daynty dishes stolen
away, he would myxte the heaven to the earth. i. for his meat brybed away, he
would take on, as if heaven and earth should go together, or he would fall in a
rage as if the dyuel were on him, nor thou shall not at any time be sure to
take away a morcel from a hu^gry dog. i. if thou snatche a bone from a hungry
dog, thou may be sure he will snarle at the. i. syns the fellow is storuen
for hunger, if thou would take his meat from him, he will straight be ready
to fight with the, and therefore beware, that thou call not any ill to thy A
dagium. Cave ne ulisi tuo tibi ium e^ to accersas malum. Aposiopesis. Sed heus
tibi autem. Aposiopesis. Na^ quid est? Phras. Quid? respice Lais una cu^
hospite interuenit. Phrasis. Intempestiue hic subsisto posq^ cubitu hos
co^spicor surrexisse.
bearyng or drawyng beast. i. beware, that thou get the not (by this means) as
many stripes, as thy back may bear, if thou savor. i. if thou be wise. But
hoo to the truly I give warnyng (to look behind the) for to see who is here
coming, or who is hard at thy back.


SIRVS. For why, what is it. i. why what is the matter?


BRO. What? look back, or look behynd the, Lais with our geste is come in this
mean while that we be talkyng to gither.


SI. In very deed by the god Hercules I stop or stay here out of due time..
i. in the croke of the moon, sins I se these folks to have risen from their
lyeng. i. now I perceive that these twain be risen up from the board, or from
their beds, let us run in a doors Bromia before. i. or ever Phrasis. I
prae, sequar.
they come hither.


BRO. Go thou before. I will follow.


Actus tertij, Scoena quinta. ACOLASTVS, SYRVS, LAIS.
Senarij, Septenarij, and Octonarij.
HEm seruule, quisquis es, adesdum, paucis te uolo.
SY. Quid me uolt hospes magnificus?

ACOL. Vt dum siet tempus uoces
Nos ad repotia, pro deambulabimus istic interim.

SY. Factum puta, nihil aliud uis?

LA. manda, lectum ut dapsilem
Concinnet.

ACO. Heus genialem insterni lectulum,
De hinc curato sodes puer?

SYRVS. Curabitur promptissime.

ACO. Non possum, quin te amplectar mea uita, mea uoluptas unica.

LAIS. Amplectere lubens animule mi Acolaste.

ACOL. Nunc iuuat
Demu^ uiuere, nu^c deleo ex animo omneis aegritudines
Postqui o faciem pulchra^te contigit uidere and alloqui,
Adesse in unis aedibus, cib umque una capere,
Da mihi suauium, si amas me delicium meum.

LAIS. Imo uel december o celle mi.

ACO. o lubentias uitae, o Deum
Voluptates? Quam uernant, quam leno cinantur oia,
Quae in te and quae circum te uideo, digna es, cui benefaxim lubens
Quicquid possideo tuu^ est.

LA. Habeo pol gratia^ tibi,
Passer cule mi.

ACOL. Number quid poscis? quicquid id est dabo. Vis aureum
Spinther, uis flammeum, uis armillas? dabo.

LA. Nihil Horum uolo.

ACOL. Vis aurum.

LA. Torquem istu^ mea mentula.

ACO. Et istue, and si amplius optes quicquam dari, dabitur, Mihi
Enim negare amicae quip piam religio est maxima.
En accipe torquem hu^c, aptandu^ collo tuo tornatili.

LA. Hem mi dull cis pusio, quid iam? satm placeo tibi?

AC. Tune? ctia^ si nihil adiume^ti ad pull chritudine^ siet:
Forma Venerem exuperas ipsam. Quid quod Lais mea rogo?

LA. quid
Acolaste?

ACO. Number me ames?

LA. ludis? potius me non amem
Qua^ tibi desit amor, hocta^ ueru^ creed, qua^ te uiuere.

ACO. Age. Credo. (...) foelix ego sum, qui Laidi
Placeam. Osculum mea lux. Hoc melle dulcius est, meus obsecro
Sis animus, quando ego sum tuus.

LAIS. Certe nullus mihi charior
Acolasto.

ACOL. Te uicissim amplector pro dimidio animae meae
O molles dactyli, o genae lubentes, eia ut elegans
Es.

LAIS. Quis te quoque spernat Veneris catelle?

ACO. At uror intime,
O mea festiuitas.

LA. Locus est, ubi ardorem hu^c tuu^
Extilles. Quid suspiras corculu^?

AC. Te faustitas mea.
Tu pol meum mihi ie cur ulceras amoribus.

SIR. Ita ut iussisti hospes, toros instruximus.
Quando uoles comessatum intro concede, omnia
Sunt apparata.

ACO. Ehodum ad me. Seruus tu quidem spectatus es.
Satis, cui res mea curae sit, cape hoc donariu^.

SY. Bonus
Hercle es uir, and perliberalis. Perpetuo me tibi facis
Deuinctu^, hoc beneficio tuo, deos quaeso, ut saluus sies
Nobis in multam aetatem. Quam saepe accidunt,
Quae non ausis sperare? furtum meditanti, in sinus
Illabitur aurum praeter spem, saluus sum.

ACO. Iam ne imus, meum
Nectar, meu^ mel?

LA. Qua^do uis nulla in me erit mora.

ACO. Abeamus, hanc solidam noctem consecratum
Veneri.

LA. Placet.

Of the third Act, The fyfte Scene. Interlocutores, ACOLASTVS SYRVS LAIS.
Versus Senarij, Septenarij, and Octonarij.
ACOL. Hoo thou little servant, who so ever thou Phra. Adesdu^, paucis te uolo.
be, be here present, I will the in few things, or with few words. i. hoo
thou fellow who so ever thou be, come hither a little, I would speak with
the a word or twain.


SIRVS. What will me our Quid me uult hospes magnificus?
magnified gest. i. what thing would with me, or what is your will with me, O ye
guest, that does great things. i. O you mighty or puissant guest?


ACO. I will that thou call us to the rere supper or banquet, where Eloquen. V^
(...) (...) te^p^ uoces no's ad repotia. Eloquen. Prodeambu labimus (...)
interim.
(men sit down to drink and eat again after their meat) when it shall be
time, we will walk up and down here before the door the whiles, or in the
mean season?


SIRVS. Think the thing done. i. this shall be done without fail, or ye may
be sure, or take no thought herefore. Wylt thou nothing other thing (...)
puta, ^ (...).
i. will thou nothing else with me, or will thou command me none other
service else?


LA. Co^mande that they may trymme a large bed. i. command the Phra. ^ ^ ^
Phras G(...) ster(...) de(...) (...) pu^^.
servants, to make or straw a bed with herbs and flowers (after the manner
of old time) that two persons may lie on it together, at their meat.


ACOL. Hoo thou boy, or young fellow, cause if thou dare (be so bold) or so
homely, from hens forth, or from this time (of the night) forthward, a bryde
bed to be strawe^ for us. i. to be made for us. i. make not a large bed strawe^
with herbs and flowers for Lais and me to lie upon (...). ^ ^ ^. ^ ^ ^ ^
Phrasis. Non possum quin te ample (...) mea uita (...) uoluptas unica.
Amplectere lub^^ animule mi. lasciue alicui blandientes diminu tiuis utimur.
Nu^c demum ^uuat uiuere.
and bankette, but procure or bring to pass or go about, that we may have a
bed made for us to lie in all night, such as is made for new married folks,
which the antiquity called Lectus genialis, because it was dedycate unto
their God Genius, which they supposed might forther between them generation.


SIRVS. It shall be gone about most redyly. i. in the quyckeit sort or manner
that can be.


ACO. I can not but I must needs or algates enbrace the my life. i. O my
leefekyn, I can not (forbear) but that I must needs take the in mine arms, O
my only lust or my lykyng.


LAIS. Enbrace on, or coll on at thy liking or full pleasure, my little
soul. i. my hartykyn Acolastus.


ACO. Now at the last delyteth it to live. i. now in conclusion is it a
pleasure for me to live, now Phras. Nu^c deleo ex animo omnes eg^ itudines.
Phras. Postqua^ o faciem pulchra^ te co^tigit uidere and alloqui. Phrasis.
Adesse i unis aedibus cibu^que una capere Eloquen. Da mihi suauium si me amas
delici^ meum. Imo uel dece^ oceilemi. Metaphora. Quam uernant, qua^
lenocinantur. Phra. Digna es cui benefaxim lubens.
put I a way from my mind all dyspleasures. i. now set I a side out of my
thought al manner cares, sith it chances (me) or is my hap to se the, and to
speak to the, O fair face or vysage. i. o sweet or fair visaged creature, and
to be present with the in one house. i. and to be together in company with the
in one self house, and to take meat together. i. and to eat and drink in
thy company, and to put my hand in the dysshe with the. Give me a kiss, and
if thou love me my sweet heart or darlyng.


LAIS. Nay or. x. o my little eye. i. ye take the ten kysses and need be, my
pigs nigh.


ACO. O the solace or pastyme of life, O lord god, what delectable pleasures
(be these) how do al things show pleasantly (as do flowers in May, or in the
spring time?) how do all things, which I see in the, or about the, allure
a body (to the, or say come kiss me) (as bawdes or hoores do to young
folks) thou art worthy to whom I may do well gladsome. i. thou art one that
art worthy, to whom I may do pleasure unto gladly, or with a good will. What
so ever I possede. i. am lord of, is thine. i. all that ever I have, is at
thy commandment.


LAIS. By the temple Habeo pol grariam ^assercule mi.
of Pollux, I have thank to the. i. I con the tha^k my little sparowe, or my
pretye crepemous.


ACO. Doste thou ask or demand any thing, what so ever it is or be, I
will give (it to the). i. do thou ask any gift of me, what so ever it is,
I will give it the. Wylt thou have a buckle of gold, or a golden Vis, uis.
uis. Repetitio in principio.
pynne? Such as in old time women used to fasten their upper garment with, on
the left shoulder. Stephanus calls it a tache, or a claspe. Perottus calls
it a bracelet. but the occasion of this variete amongst the auctours
collectours and declarers of latin Cur de latinis uocabulis tam uarie ^^ntiunt
recensiores. Vide Perottu^ ubi de me^tula loquitur pro vsu dimi (...) isti us
(...).
vocables, rises of two causes: one, because the antike manner of apparel is
changed, an other because the pure latin authors have left so small mention
of the thing, and the use thereof, that the said collectours be not fully
assured, what precyse name to give it, especially because the vocable is a
greek word, and that the thing self was no more in manner used commonly of the
Romayne women than of us at this time. Will thou have a kerchyeffe? wylt thou
have any bracelettes (if thou list) I will give the these things.


LAIS. I will nothing of these things. i. I will none of al these things.


ACO. Wylt thou gold. i. any pieces of gold?


LAIS. This chain my little prycke. i. I would feign have this chain (of
gold) my pretye pryncockes, (...).


ACO. Both this Elegant. (...) and si amplius op^^s quicqui dari dabitur.
Ph(...) Mihi enim ne (...) amicae quippiam religio est maxima.
same, and if thou would wyshe or desire any thing more to be given (the)
shall be given the. i. thou shall not only have this chain, but also any
other thing (being mine) that thou would wyshe for. For why to deny any
thing to my lover, is to me most great relygion. i. I ought to be most
highly aware, or to take thought and care therefore, or to have great conscience
upon it, or to think me greattely charged in conscience, to say my best
beloue nay (of any thing that she does desire me of) or to deny her her
petition. Lo, take the (here) this chain of gold, to be made En torquem hunc
aptandu^ collo tuo tornatili.
fytte or mete to thy neck turned with a tourners whele. i. to put about (thy
pretye neck.) Which is as round. i. as well proportioned, as if it had been
made of a tourners hand, at his wheel, or as if it had been made of wax.


LAIS. Hoo my sweet mannyken, Hem mi dulcis pusio, quid iam satin placeo tibi?
Etia^ si nihil adiumenti ad pulchritudinem siet pro sit Hyperbole. Forma
Venere^ exuperas ipsam. Quid quod Lais mea rogo?
or pretye boykyn, what now? Do I not please the enough. i. metely well, or
very well?


ACO. Thou not?. i. who not thou? also if nothing of help might be to
fayrenesse. i. ye and if thou had nothing at all (about the) to set the
forth, or to show forth thy beauty, thou ouerpassest Uenus her self in
shappe. i. in comely beauty (of thy body) or in comlynesse of thy person, O
my Lais, what that I ask?. i. what is it that I would ask the, or what
question is it, that I would demand of the?


LAIS. What Acolastus?


ACOL. Whyther thou love me. i. I ask the (by thy Eloquens. Ludis, potimeno^
amem tibi desit amor. Age credo, nai foelix ego sum qui Laidi plac^a^.
Comparatio Hoc melle dulcius est. Phrasis. Men's obsecro sis animus quando ego
sum tuus. Phrasis. T(...)cissim amplector pro dimidio anim^ meae. Epitheton. O
molles da ctyli, o genae Jubentes, ^ia ut elega^s es? Metaphora. Quis re quoque
spernat Veneris catelle?
faith and troth) whether thou love me or not.


LAIS. Thou mockest or tryflest with me, I would rather not love my self, than
my love should want to the ward, believe that to be as true, as the tolyue. i.
as that thou art alive.


ACO. Go to, I believe (the) in very deed I am a happy (man) which may please
to Lais. i. with whom Lais can be content or pleased with. A kiss, my light.
i. my heart of gold, or my bright and sheene, this is sweter then honye. I
pray the for all loves, be thou my mind, sens I am thine. i. let me have
thy heart, syns thou haste mine.


LAIS. Surely there is no body. i. no man living derer unto me, or more in my
conceyte, than is Acolastus.


ACO. And I on my part, enbrace the for the half of my soul. i. and I set as
much by the, as by the heart in my body. O soft or smothe fingerkyns, O
plesante chekes, or eye lyddes. Aye aye, how elegant. i. how fresshe or
gorgeously besene thou art, or what a fine piece thou art.


LAIS. And who would despise the also, O thou littell whelpe of Uenus. i. as
pleasant to play with as a littell spanyell mete for Uenus pastyme. i. and who
would cast away or set a side the, thou ladies morcell?


AGO. But I am burned most inwardely my At uror inti (...) o mea se(...)tas.
^^chrologia. Locus est ubi (...) dorem hu^c (...)s. Quid suspiras (...)? T(...)
men^ (...) ui (...) amoribus.
joy. i. but I smarte most excedyngly within forth, O my worldly solace.


LAIS. There is a place (where it is) where thou may stille forth this thy
burning hete. i. this burning hete of thyn. why or for whom syghest thou lyttel
heart. i. my hartykyn?


ACO. The. i. for the my worldly prosperity, thou by the temple of Pollux
woundest my liver to me with loves. i. the often thinkyng of thy love, which I
would emoye, and do not, hurts my liver. For like as the spleen is comforted
with joy and laughter, and hurt with sorrow and pensyfenes, so is the liver
of man and woman (...)ntia. Naturalis of ^^ctus. Phrasis. (...) ut (...) (...)s
in(...)s. ^^pini in tu^. Quando uoles comessatu^ intro co^cede Phras. (...) me
Phra. (...)us tu q(...)m specta^us et satis cui ^^s mea cu(...) sit. Cape hoc
do ^arium. Phra. Perpetuo me tibi facis deuinctum. Phras. Deos quaeso, ut
saluus sies nobis in mul tam etatem.
comforted, when they enjoy their love, and hurt and wounded for want thereof.


SIRVS. So as thou haste commanded, O thou gueste, we have trymmed or made the
beds, to lie and eat and drink upon, when thou wylt go in to eat and
drink or bankette with thy company, all things be made ready and prepared.


ACO. Hoo hither to me. i. come hither to me, let me speak a word with the,
truly thou art a servant enough perceived. i. thou art a servant well
enough espied (how dilygent thou art). i. I may well or soon perceive,
how diligent a servant thou art, to whom my matter may be regarded. i.
which regardest or take head, to my matters, take this gift. i. hold the
this reward.


SIRVS. By Hercules, thou art a good. i. an honest man, and a very liberal. i.
full of lyberalitie, thou make me bound unto the for evermore, by or through
this benefyte of thine, I beseech the goddis, that thou may be safe unto us,
in into much age. i. I pray the gods. i. god, to send to the good health,
and good life and long. How often Sententia. Qua^ sepe accidu^t quae no^
ausis sperare. Phrafis. Furtum meditanti in sinus illabitur aurum preter spem
salu^s sum.
happen the things, which thou could not dare to hope for. i. how often
come the things (so well to pass) that a man could not wyshe to have them
chance (better) to me bethynkyng theft, gold beyond hope ^^y death into my
bosom. i. where as I was minded or purposid to do some theft or robbery (for
pure need) gold is slypped into my bosom. i. I have gotten a good botye of
gold for my shaare, I am safe for ever, or I am a made man for this world.


ACO. Go we not now my drink of the goddis, my honey. i. shall we not go Greca
uox. Nectar ab ne and l^^ino, occido.
hens no we my (love) as sweet as metheglyn or honey?


LAIS. When thou will, there shall be no tariance in me.


ACO. Go we hens to consecrate this hole night Abeamus ha^c solida^ nocte^
consecratum Veneri.
to Uenus. i. to spend this hole night in bodylye solace.


LAIS. It pleases me, or I am plesed therewith.


Actus quartus. PAMPHAGVS SOLVS.
Octonarij.
ITan ad claru^ dormiui diem? nox multa adhuc meis
Est o culis, eij ciun dus hercle est iste ueternus ab animo.
Intendendi sunt nerui quaestui nostro. Sed nausea
Quae tanta stomacho? quidnam haec oscitatio uolt? extendere
Hos neruos nu^c demu^ iuuat, iuuat and oculis propellere
Somnum. Quid an ructas etiam Pamphage crapulam hesternam? insolens
Istuc quidem facis, ualens stomachus, cui and cruda conco quit.
Quid? an acidis opus erit inulis, quae mihi fastidia
Extu^da^t? Opinor latrare stomachu^ impra^so ut assolet.
Saburra enim uentris nunqua^ tantu^memini grauarier.
Vt came egerere stomacho esset opus, ubi ipsam aethna^ circunfero.
Sed ^eus? Panto labum ne? tam mane? qui heri tantum biberit? hem.
The fourth. act. PAMPHAGVS SOLVS.
Versus Octonarij.
WHither have I slept so to the clear day. i. yea have I slepte on this facion
till Phra. ^tan ad clar^ dormiui die^? Phras. Noxmulta adhuc meis est ocu^^s.
Phras. En^^u^dus est (...) u^^rnus ^bocu^^s. Eloquens. V^t^rn^ ^or bigenus
senibus infestum Metaphora. Intendendi ^u^r nerui quae srui nostro. Nausea qu^
tanta stomacho?
it be fair broad day light? It is yet much night to mine eyes. i. after mine
eyes, or as mine eyes tell me, or serve me, it is yet young nyghtes, or there
is yet much of the night to come, surely this sluggysshenes or drowsynesse,
that makes me, I can not hold up my heed, is to be cast out from my mind. i.
I must put away out of my mind, this desire I have to sleep, my synewes be to
be bended into our gayn. i. I must apply or follow our gain, or trade we be in,
to get a good pray, with all the strength and force of my body. But what so
great a wamblynge to my stomach. i. what means this great wamblynge, that I
have about my stomach. i. ironice, what a knauyng is this I feel about my
heart, which makes me have so great a desire to spewe or parbreake, what
wills to Phras. Quidna^ haec oscitatio uult sibi?
(it self). i. what means this gaspynge or gapynge, (that I make) now at
the last it delyteth. i. it is expedient Phras. Extendere hos neruos nune d^mum
iuuat. Phras. luuat and oculis pro pellere somnum. Quid an ructas etiam cra
pula^ heftern^ Phra. Insol^s i^tuc quide^ facis. Elegan. Cui ualens siomachus
and cruda conc^ quit. Graeca ^ox. Stomachus u^ triculus. Experientia. Medica.
An acidls opus erit innulis. Phras. Opinor la(...)e stoma(...)m impr^(...)
(...). Floquen. M^taphora. Saburra n^ u^n^ is nun^ t^tum memini grauarier.
or requisite (for me) to stretche forth (these synowes of mine). i. to
stretche forth my lymmes, and it delyteth. i. it is expedient or necessary
for me to put away from me or forth of mine e^es this sleep. what belchest
thou, or brekest thou up wynd Pamphagus? for thy surfeit, or because of thy
surfette of yesterday? not wont truly thou do this thing. i. thou art not
wont surely to do this thing, or to play this part or padgeant, to whom
the able or stout stomach digesteth al things. i. which have so valiant or
strong a stomach, that I can digeste (for need) raw meats, or horse shoo
nails (and need were) what shall I need or shall I have need of tarr or bitter
tasted Eliacampana, (which amongst other his properties is good for a raw
stomach, combred with crude humors, like as setuall is) which should drive or
thrust out these werynesses or lothesonmesses to me. i. away from me, I wene my
stomach to bark. i. I ween that my stomach does belche, or that my bealy
does cralle, as it is wont to do, before I have dyned. For why, I never
remember me to be charged or grieved so much with the balaste of my bealy, that
it should be needful to me, to throw it out, or to dyscharge it out again
(with vomityng) or parbrakynge, where. i. syns I bear about (with me the hill
self) of Aethna. i. for why I never do remember me that my stomach was so much
over charged with meat, which (lies in the stomach as balast of grauel or
stone lies in the holow of the ship) that it has been needful for me to
cast it out (by spewyng) because I had ouercharged my stomach with
Experientia. Nautarum.
to much meat, like as maryners throw out their balast, when they be
troubled with a tempest, seeing Comparatio per hypbole. Vbi ipsam Aethnam cir
cunfero. Experien. A^thnae mo^^is quantus a^ dor.
that I bear about with me a stomach as hot as the hille of Aethna in Cicile,
which burns continually, and so digesteth hard stones, when they be thrown
in to it, that they be blown out again light pomissis. but how? whither
Pantolabus. i. is yonder Pantolabus (that I se or not) what so yarlye. i. what
is he styrrynge so yarly (this morning) which drank so much yester night?

Actus quarti, Scoena secunda. Trimetroi.
PANTOLABVS PAMPHAGVS.
OSalue columen ordinis Parasitici.
PAM. salve o primum decus fecte Gnatonicae.

PAN. Mutuum muli seabunt sane festiuiter.
Mutuum dum testimonium inuic em damus.

PAM. Pantolobe? ecquid placuit hesterna epulatio:

PAN. Nunquam quidem coenaui, quod sciam, unctius.
Gulam oppleui meam, usque ad summum, dapsili
Luxu, quid tu?

PAM. Genio ipse indulsi maxim.
Non possum, summa quin circumlingam labra.
Mel Atticum sapiunt, hesterni iusculi
Reliquiae.

PAN. Pol dentes and mihiuolupe est iug^
Suctu macerare. Quin nidorem carnium
Vncti, supreme digiti offundunt naribus.

PAM. I nunc, and somnia irride posthac mea.

PAN. Non arbitrabar istuc mi Pamphage fore
Foelices, qui tam propicium habuimus Comum.

PAM. Quid, agnoscis etiam per quem huc promoueris?

PAN. Dis te patrono factus sum, mi Pamphage
Exme^dico.

PAM. Lubeus fec^.

PAN. Est (...) gestiam.

PAM. Est (...) triumphe^.

PA. Io liber pater.

PA. io, io
Ceres. Age, in eamus quaeso cantiun culam,
Qualem sonant Euanti Thiades.

PAM. Gaudia
Seruemus ista uespertinis horulis,
Quibus uoluptabitur hospes cum Laid.
Incoctus stomacho sic extundatur cibus,
In maximam coenam, ieiunos haud decet
Stultescere tripudiis.

PAN. Sapidissime mones.
Quid nunc fiet?

PAM. Quod somun portenderat
Pars reliqua.

PANT. Quid id est?

PAM. Nu^ meministi?

PAN. Nihil.

PAM. Dolosa ut alea huius loculos atteram.

PAN. Communi number nam id fiet sort Pamphage?

PA. Fiet.

PAN. Merito te amo and colo.

P. Fac interim
Curetur prandinm and cella penuaria.

PAN. Faciam. Quid hic habes?

PAM. Lucrosas aleas
Nostin?

PAN. noui and sensi talos been polypos,
Quibus facultatum bona pars pernt mihi.

PAM. Nisi fallor, audio sereantem Acolastum. Vale.

Of the fourth act, the second Scene. PANTOLABVS PAMPHAGVS
Versus Iambici Trimetroi.
PANTO. How all hayle. i. what good morrow Eloquens. Columen. Graeca uox.
Parasitus q^si iuxta frumentum. Phrasis. Salve, o pri^mum decus sectae gnatho
nicae.
the mayntener or vpholder of the order or fellowship of scoffers, or common
gesters, which be homely guestes, for they come vnsente for, and by flattering
and scoffing get their living. i. their meat and drink.


PAMP. All hayle. i. good morrow (to the chief or principal honor of the
gnathonical sect). i. of the fellowship or brothethead of gnatho (whose
profession is to mock al men by flattery, and to hold up ye and nay with all
men.)


PANT. Surely mules scratche of each other scabbes or scurffes merylye. A
dag^um. Mutuum mu li seabunt. Phras. Mutusi du^ testimonium in ^icem damus
i. so as it would make men to laughe at it, to se the manner, while we give
mutual testimonye to gether. i. while we bear witness between or amongst
our self one of us of a another. i. it is merye when such as be kind or stark
knaves mete. i. when knaves in grai^e mete, for then each of them will praise
other, and one of them will say well by an other.


PAM. Pantolabus, Lo what pleased yesterdayes feastynge. i. did F(...) plac^
(...) (...)rna e^ (...)io.
not the feastynge of yesterdaye please the well?


PAN. Surely I did never that I wot of, suppe more anoyntedly ke. i. surely I
was never better besmered, or (...)a. (...) quis (...) (...)i (...) s^iam
(...)ius. (...)s. (...)la (...) usque (...) (...) (...) luxu.
begreased at a supper, that I wot of, in all my life. I filled full my throat
unto the vpperyst with superfluitye, or abundant excess of daynty meats and
drinks. i. I filled me up to the hard throat (with crammyng in plenty of
meats and driukes) what thou. i. what dyddest thou (for thy part?)


PAM. I my self served my good spirits turn most gredely. i. I did Phras.
G(...) (...) in (...)i am Phras. Non possum (...)a quia (...) lingam (...)bra.
let my nature take his pleasure, or granted it all that it could desire or
require, on the highest facion. I can not (forbear) but I must (yet) lycke my
lips round about (with my tongue) those things, which be left of y^ broth or
good potages of yesterday, savor as honey of Athenes. i. the releuanith of the
brothes of the pottes Phras. M(...) A^^i^um (...)u^t hester(...) (...)li
re(...). M^ilis Atti^i ^^us.
of yesterday, which (stycke upon my lyppes yet) tastes, as sweet as any ho^y
growyng about the city of Athenes in Greece, where the honey was very sweet and
pure, which was much set by in old time before that the use of sugar was
found.


PAM. And by the temple of Pollux it is a delectable pleasure to me, with
continual suckyng, to make my tethe as Iowse in my Phras. Pol de^tes and mihi
uolupe est iugi, Suctu maces rare. Phras. Quin nidore^ carniu^ uncti, supreme
digiti offundu^t naribus. Phrasis. I nu^c and somnia irride posthac mea. Phra.
Non arbitra bar. Faelices no^ qui ta^ propiciu^ habuim* Comum. Comus deus
comessation^
heed as water. i. to suck (out the meat that is left between my tethe, syns
yesterdaye) till I make them Iewse with hard suckyng, and also my besmered
fingers, on their highest part pour about to my nosethrylles the savor or
smell of the flesh. i. and the tops of my fyngers ends, that (yet) be
besmered send up to my nosethrylles, the savor of the roste meat.


PAM. Go now. i. walk now (hardely) and hereafter laughe at my dremes.


PANT. O my Pamphagus, I supposed not this thing to be hereafter. i. I wened
not, or I wist full lytteli, that this thing should have come to pass. happy be
we, which have had ^omus the god of bankettynge or ryottynge and revelling by
night, nere at hand to help and succor us or to be so favorable or merciful
unto us. This Comus in the old time, young folks took for a god, and to do the
thing y^ might be acceptable unto him, they went about by night season, leapyng
and skyppyng with garlandes on their heads, and mynstrels before them, and
went about a horehuntynge and breaking up of doors. Dis te pa^^^ no(...)us
su^ ex mendic^.



PAM. What, do thou not also knowledge or recognyse him. i. do thou not
also confess, that he is good master unto the, by whom thou haste ben
promoted hitherto, or set thus forward?


PANT. O my Pamphagus, I am made, or I am become of a beggar a great rich
man, or a welthy man, thou being my Lubens (...). Phrasis. Est quod gestiam.
helper or mine aduancer or setter forward.


PAMP. I have done it gladsom. i. with a good will.


PANT. There is that I may iet. i. there is good cause why I should iet it, or
I have a good cause to whyppe or Phrasis. Est quod triumphem.
fryske it about for joy.


PAM. There is that I may triu^phe. i. there is good cause or matter, why I
should ride in a chariotte, after the Romans manner, like a conqueroure (for my
stout acts) done in this matter, or I have good cause to set the cock on the
hope, and Phrasis. so liber pater. Mos exulta^cium, io, io, ^^^^s Phra.
Ag(...)ns (...) canti(...). ^. ^ ^ ^ ^. (...) ista ^ (...) quibus hospes ^.
Phrasis. ^ ^ (...) cibus in maximam ^. ^. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^. Quid nunc ^ Eloquens.
Quod some(...) portende ^at pars reliqua. Phrasis. Dolosa ut alea huius loculos
attera^.
make gaudye chere.


PAN. Jo, or hoo free father. i. hoo the god Bacchus, which is called free
father, for he freith or delyuereth me^ from care (for when me^ be well
whytteled with wine, they take no care for nothing.)


PAM. Jo io. i. hoo hoo Ceres. i. the goddess of corn, go to let us enter I
pray the, a little song. i. let us begin or set up a pretty song or
balade, such as Bacchus women priests sound. i. singe or cry out unto Euan.
i. unto Bacchus.


PAM. Let us keep. i. lay up these joys. i. sportes for the small or little
hours of the evening. i. for sone at even, in which hours. i. at which
time, when our gest shall take his pleasure or carnal solace with Lais, the
vnsodden meat. i. the un dygested meat, which we shall put into our stomakes,
may the sooner by yt means be thrust out of the upper part of our stomakes into
a most great supper. i. wha^ we shall surfayte at supper with our latesyttyng
up, it becomes us not being fasting, to play the fools by daunsynges or
leapynges about.


PANT. Thou warnest most sauouredly. i. thou gyueste as wise or wholesome
counsel (as can be) what shall now be done. i. what shall we now do?


PAM. We will go about that thing, which is the left part. i. the part
that is left behind, or the resydue of our entreprise which my dream did
foresignyfie or betokened to come.


PAN. What is that?


PAM. Do not thou remember?


PAN. Nothing. i. no not a whyt.


PAM. That I may were the purses of this man with a deceytful dye. i. that I
may ryffell (to the very bottom) this man's bags with false dyce.


PAN. O Pamphagus, Phrasis. Co^muni nu^ nam id fiet sort. Eloquens. Merito te
amo and colo.
shall not that be done by a common lot (between us). i. shall we not be boty
fellows to gether in that matter.


PAM. It shall be done. i. it shall be so.


PAN. I do worthyely love the, and reverence the. i. I have good cause to love
the, and to do the reverence or honor. Phras. Fac interim curetur pran dium
and cella penuaria.



PAM. Do in the mean season, that the dinner may be looked upon, and the cellar
where our store of vitayles is. i. look the dinner be made ready there whiles, and
our store of vytayles left of yesterdayes prouisyon, at home be ordered.


PAN. I will do it, or I will do, Phrasis. Quid hic habes^lucrosas aleas. Noui
and sensi talos been polypos. Greca. Polypus multipes alludit ad nomen. Phra.
Quibus facultatum bona pars periit mihi.
as thou byddest me what thing have thou here?


PAM. Dyce to win by. i. dyce of advantage, or false dyce, or stop dyce,
know thou them not, or art thou not acqueynted with them?


PANT. I know them well inoughe, and I have felt them, being well many foted
dyce. i. I have bought the bargain, or I have said fie of the wynnynges by
them, which by reason of their eight corners, trotte as meryly upon the dyce
board, as a horse could do, if he had eight legs, or never so many feet, by
which the good part of my substance has peryshed to me. i. by means whereof
I Eloquens. Nisi fallor audio sereantem Acolastum. Vale.
have lost the most part of my goods.


PAM. But if, or except I be begyled, I here Acolastus spyttyng. i. I here
Acolastus spyt, or reche out fleme, fare well.


Actus quarti, Scoena tertia. PANTOLABVS SOLVS.
(...)
ABijt homo, ut istius pecuniam emungat
Omnem, tot callet arts, tot dolos nouit.
Principio, dum aleam ludit, satis fingit
Se ludi indoctum, nonnunquam and manus blande
Remittit, qua re, uelut hamo illicit pisces
Esca praetento. Mox ubi incalet lusor
Cupidini lucri auctioris incumbens,
Pecuniae omneis grumos aleae in lusum
Coniectos, iactu uno facit suos. Quippe,
Lucrosam presso pollice Venerem mittit,
Quoties uolt, Tum caniculae imperat, iactu
Vt ne cadat damnosa, id quod meo dudum
Didici malo, qui hic perdidi facultates
Meas, ictus piscator sapio, uerum hospes
Amissa re, protrudetur for as, dura
In quem fient exempla timeo, quid dixi
Timere me? Imo gaudeo, quod minus laedant
Communia mala. Quin adiutor accedam
Miseriae illius, quando res feret. Cur non
Mihi quoque liceat in alios, quod ipsorum
De me licuit licentiae? Sed heus exit
A nobis, nescio quis, si Leno sit miror.
Certe, ipsus est. Quid, quod commotus apparet?
Of the fourth Act, the third Scene. PANTOLABVS
alone. Versus Iambici senarij claudicantes.
THE man or fellow is gone, that he may wype Metaphora. Ab^t ut pecuniam
emungat omnem. Phra. Tot callet arts, tot doilos nout. Phrasis. Principio du^
^leam ludit.
away all the money of this man. i. to rydde him as clean, or as quite of his
money, as a man makes clean his nose, when he blows the sneuyll out of it.
He knows parfectly so many crafts, he knows so many sleyghtes or deceytes.
First and foremost when he plays at the dyce, he fayneth inoughe, him to be
unlearned of the play. i. he feyneth metely craftily, that he is vns killed of
the play, and oftentimes he slaketh his hands flatteryngely. i. he forbeareth
to set Phras. Non nunqua^ and manus bla^ de remittit. Similitudo. Velut hamo
illicit pisces esca praete^to.
or to take with flatteryng words and manner, by which thing or means, like
as by a fyshyng hoke held forth or stretched forth before, he entiseth or
draws fysshes with his meat or bayte. i. like as the fyssher draws fysshe
(to the hoke) by putting forth of the bayte before the hoke, so does he
bring in players, Phras. Mox ubi incalet lusor cupidini lucri auctioris
incumbens. Metaphora. Pecuniae omneis gru^mos Phra. Quippe lucrosam presso
pollice uenerem mittit quoties uolt.
to hold him, or set to him, by his crafty manner using, anon. i. shortly
after, when the player waxes warm. i. is hot in his play, leaning into.
i. setting his mind, or taking head upon a greatter or a more increaced, or
more plentuous gain, with one cast, or at one cast he makes all the small
hyllockes or heaps of money, cast in or put in, into the play of the dyce.
i. all the stakes and settynges that be set within the dyce board, which lie
on little heaps, to be his own. for why? by thrustynge down of his thumb,
he sends. i. he throws that winnynge or gaynynge Uenus as often as he will.
i. he can so set the dyce on Phras. Tum canicule imperat ia (...) ut ne cadat
damnosa
that facion, by thrustynge down of his thombe, that he can cast or throw
sins as often as him lysteth. then he commands to the hurtful lyttel
Bytche, that she do not fall or chance by castyng. i. he farther more (is so
cunning) that he can command almesace, which is hurtefull or loffull,
that it shall not fall or chance when he throws: and by these. ii. words,
Venus and Canicula, may appear, that the antiquytie Lufus ale^ ueterum
diuersus a nostro.
had other manner of dice to try their chances, by casting, than we have at
these days, which thing may be gathered of Plautus in his co medies, and
hereof has Erasmus written in his colloquies, and also which thing I have
lately learned, to my hurt Phrasis. Id quod meo dudum didi^^ malo. Adagium.
Ictus piscator sapio. Erasm^ sententia de hoc adagio uerior and graco (...)bio
magis con(...).
or hynderaunce, which hereat have lost my goods, I being a stryken fysher,
wax wise. i. when a fisher man has hurt his hand with a hoke, he goes
after ward more warely to warke. but Erasmus in his adages says, that this
adage began amongst the greeks, but upon a chance, which happened to a
fysherman, which layinge his hand upon a scorpyon, that he had taken
amongst other fyshes, was stonge by him, whereupon he had a lesson, to beware,
and to look better what he did a another time. which adage is expressed in our
tongue by these words, The Phras. Verum hospes amissa re protrudetur ^^tas.
burned child, fire dredeth, or he that ones falls into the dytche, will
after look better or warelyer or he lepe. but our gueste after he has lost
his thing. i. alter he has lost his goods, shall be thrust headlyng out of
doors, in whom I fear shall be made or done hard Phras. D^ra in que^ ^ (...)
(...).
examples. i. which shall be punished, to the example of all other, or which
I am a frayde shall be so hardly handled, that other shall take example by him.
what have I said me to fear?. i. why have I said, that I Correctio. Quid dixi
ti(...)re me? imo gaudeo. Senten. Minus laedu^t communia mala. Phras. Qui
adiutor acceda^ miseris illius qu do res feret. Cur no^ mihi quoque liceat in
alios quod ipsoru^ de me licuit lice^ti^?
am afraid thereof? nay mary, I am glad or I rejoice (thereat) that common illes
less hurt. i. for because it greueth men less, when they have other in pain
or trouble with the^, but I will also draw nere, a helper of his mysery. i. but
I will be an helper to set his mysery forward, when the thing shall bear. i.
when time or occasion shall serve therefore, why may not that of license be
lefull to me in other, which of them has been lefull of me. i. why may not I
be homely or play the knave with other men, as well as other men have been
homely to play the knaves with me? but there comes out from us, I wot not
who. i. but there is one that comes out of the house, I wot not who it is, I
mer Sed heus ^x it a nobis, nescio quis Aposiope. Quid quod commotus apparet?
uayle if it be the baude. Certainly it is he. what? that he appears moved. i.
what is the matter (trow we) that he should seem to be this moved.

Actus quarti, Scoena quarta. SANNIO, PANTOLABVS, PAMPHAGVS.
Tetrametroiomnes.
DII immortales, quod hoc proluuium est, que istaec tanta largitas?
Salus si cupiat ipsa, non possit seruare istunc uirum.
PAN. Mi Sannio, cuius quaeso uiri casum miseraris?

SANNIO. Hospitis.

PANTO. Quid ille.

SANNIO. Rem omnem amisit alea.

PANTO, Cuius captus dolis?

SAN. Cuius censes, nisi Pamphagi?

PANTO. Dixi^ fore? O uersutias.
Hominis uersipellis. Sed quid Acolastus?

SAN. Perplexus iacet
In fermento.

PAN. Censen uero hominem hic di^ durare posse?

SAN. Non
Equidem arbitror. Nam proximum est, ut uel miser hospes prae inopia
Fugiat aliquo, uel finiat uitam laqueo, non uiuere
Malens, quam miser e uiuere.

PAM. Iam ne erumpere hoc mihi gaudium
Licet? Proh Mercuri, qui dextro me aspexisti sydere?
No^quam satis uos collaudem meos talos. uobis enim
Debeo, meam quod tuear uitam ab inedia. Sic censeo
Capiundos esse adolescentes istos pecunia ebrios.

PANTOL. Quis hic tam procaciter insultat dulci fortunae ebrijs?

PAM. Sed ubi mihi nunc Pantolabus est, cogito.

PAN. Me nominat.

PAM. Vt huius gaudij ille particeps fiat.

PAN. Quid Pamphage,
Quid gestis obsecro?

PAMPH. Quid gestiam rogas? foeliciter
Cecidit alea. Viden loculos, ut auro multo turgeant?

PANTO. Festiuum caput. Amabo number nam lucrum tecum partiar,
Vt conuenit?

PAM. Non pugnabimus istic.

SAN. Meis in aedibus
Tibi partares est, quare, quod hic ius publicum est, read.

PAM. Accipe
Praedae partem, quo, post quea^ integrauti amicitia tua.

SAN. Quis soluet ius hospiti^:

PAM. Quid id autem mea?

SAN. In aedeis meas
Tu introduxti hominem.

PAM. Sunt ei uestes.

SAN. Quid tum?

PAM. Illas exue
(...) nebulonem. Quod si illinc nihil resoluitur
Redito ad me. Faciam ne quid querare.

SAN. Vbi decoctor est?

PAM. Ab alueo intro proruit commotus. Laidis nisi
Fallor fruendae gratia, dolorem complexu ut leuet.

SAN. Abeo ut meum ius postulem.

PAN. Age Pamphage, sortem mihi face
Diuiduam.

PAM. Ne nihil habeas, cape.

PAN. Tantillum.

PAM. Non amplius.

PAN. An haec promissa fides est?

PAM. Irritor ni desinas.

SAN. Pape
Rixantes audio, quos animis rebar coniunctos been.

PAM. Quos?

SANNIO. Deplumis amator surdae fit suplpex Laidi,
Vos adiutate me, precor, o boni, ut resoluat debita.

PAN. Agedum, fores stipemus, ne effugiat hodie nostras manus.

Of the fourth Act, the fourth Scene. Interlocutores Sannio, Pantolabus,
Pamphagus.
Versus Iambici Tetrametri omnes.
SANNIO. O goddis immortal. i. good lord, what Eloquens. Quod hoc ^^ luuium?
qu^istec tanta largitas? Salus si cupiat ipsa no^ potest seruare istunc uirum.
Phras. Cuius qu esouiri casu^ miseraris? Phras. Rem omnem amisit alea.
a launchyng out. i. what a prodygalitie or wastefull expendyng is this? what
this so great a layenge out. i. what so an excessive lyberalitie is this? If
the goddess of safegarde or preservation her self should couete or desire (to
have it so) she could not keep or preserve this man (from undoing.)


PANT. What, my Sannio? I pray the, of what man do thou pity the fall. i.
whose man's chance is it, that thou do thus pitre?


SAN. Of our guestes.


PAN. What he, or what is the matter, or how gothe the world with him?


SAN. He has lost all his thing at the dice,. i. he has lost all that ever
he had at the dyce, or all the Phrasis. Cuius capt^ dolis? Phrasis. Cuius ce^ses
(...) Pampha, Bloquens. Dixin fore? O utrsutias hominis uer sipellis.
substance he had.


PAN. Taken by the deceytes of whom. i. by whose deceites or crafts was he
brought in to the danger, or into the snare?


SAN. Of whom demest thou, but of Pamphagus?


PAN. Did I not say this, to be hereafter. i. did I not say, it would be thus?
O wylines. i. o the craftines of this fellow, or of this wily pie, that can
turn him as often as he list, in his own skyn. but what Acolaitus. i. but what
thing does or makes Acolastus now?


SAN. Being dout Adagium, Perplexus in fermento facet.
full. i. at his wits end (what is best to do) he lies in his own leven.
i. he lies and fryeth in his own grease for anger, or he stampeth and stareth
for anger. Phra. Censen uero homine^ hi^ diu durare posse?



PANT. Think thou trewly the man to may abide long here. i. demeste thou or
trowest thou for a suertie that the man may long abide here?


SAN. Surely I suppose not, or nay. For why, the next Eleg^ntia No^ equidem
arbitior, Na^ proximu^ est, (...) uel. (...). (...) (...) (...) (...) quam
(...) (...) (...). Phras. (...) (...) (...) mi(...) qudium (...)? (...) (...)e.
(...) (...) (...) q^^m dex(...) ^s^e(...) (...)?
is. i. the next part he has to play, is this, that other the sorry gueste
must flee away, or be feign to fie hens some whither, for need or poverty, or
else he must end his life with a halter, being lefer or better contented,
not to live (at all) thanne to live myserably.


PAM. Is it not lefull for me to burste out this joy, now. i. may I not
safely burst out on lawghter now? or this joy that I have (at my heart) may I
not safely buffe it out now? Oh thou god Marcury, which (art) the forderer of
all craft and sleyght, with how right hand a sterre, haste thou beholden
me. i. with how prosperous an influence, have thou favored my purposes? I
can never praise you my dyce enough. for why, I owe to you. i. I am bound to
you, or I (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) ^b in^soab^. (...). (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) esse (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...). Phras.
(...) hic (...) (...) in (...) dul^i (...) e(...)? (...) ubi nunc (...). est
^ogi^o? Quid gestis obse^ro? Quid gestia^ ^o^gas? Phras. Foeli^iter ce^ cidit
alea.
may thank you, that I may (from hense forth) defend my life from hunger.
thus suppose I young men to be taken, which be drunk with money. i. thus, or
on this facion, do I deem, should men catch (in a trap or handell like wards)
these young men, that have so much money, they wot not what to do with all.


PAN. Who is this here which so malapertely scorneth or speaks in the
reproach of such as be dronken with sweet or prosperous fortune?


PAM. But now do I think, or do I be think me where my Pantolabus is become.


PAN. He names me.


PAM. That he may be made partener or part taker of this joy.


PANT. What Pamphagus, I pray the for gods sake, why whippest thou it about,
or playest thou thy steracles (on this fascion.)


PAMP. Do thou ask me why I may whyppe it or skyppe about? the dyce has
fallen luckely. i. I have had good luck, or good chance at the dice, see
thou not my purses or bags Viden loculos ut auro multo turge ant? Phras.
Festiuum caput. Amabo number nam lucr^ te cum partiar, ut conuenit?
how they be swollen or stand a stroute with much gold. i. see thou not,
how my bags be full up to the hard eye with gold?


PAN. O festival head. i. thou art a pleasant fellow (tell) I shall love
the. i. tell me as I may love the, or do any thing for the, shall I not part
gain with the, as it was agreed. i. shall I not have my part of thy gain as
we were agreed upon, or shall not I be boty or party fellow with the, as it was
agrede between us?


PAM. We shall not Phras. Non pugnabimus isti^* Meis in aedibus tibi parta res
est. Phra. Quare quod hic ius publicu^ est read.
fight herefore. i. we will not fall at bate or strive for this matter, or
here about.


SAN. The thing is gotten to the, in my house. i. thou haste gotten this good
or substance in my house, or within my doors. wherefore yield to me that which
is here common law. i. and therefore give me, or deliver to me (for my part or
share) yt which the common law here (will give me.)


PAM. Hold or take here a part of my pray, whereof Phras. quo post queam
integra ^ti amicitia ^ua. Phras. Quis soluetius hospitii? Eclypsis. Quid id
aute^ mea. s. refert Phra. Su^t e^ uestes quid tu^? illas ^xue achrematon
nebulonem.
I may after use thy hole frenshyp. i. by mean whereof, thou and I hereafter
may be assewred friends, or friends for ever.


SAN. Who shall pay the right of the ynne. i. who shall pay the charges he has been at in his ynne?


PAM. What that truly me, Supple refert?. i. what is that to me? or what have
I to do therwithal, or what do I recke or care therefore?


SAN. Thou did lead, or dyddest bring the man in to my house.


PAM. Clothes be to him. i. he has clothes or garments (to his back.)


SAN. What then?


PAMP. Do them of. i. pluck them away from the monylesse knave (that has
never a cross left him to bless him Graeca uox. Achr^matos sine pecunia.
monylesse.
with) that if from thense nothing be paid again, come again to me. i. in
case thou be not paid (thy duty by that means) come then a gain to me, I
shall Phrasis. ^aeiam ne quoth quaerare.
do that thou may not complain any thing. i. I shall so do, or so order
the or handell the, that thou shalt have no cause to complain (of me.)


SANNI. Where is that stroy good (that has spent upon hoores ^^quens.
^biae^octor (...)?
and pyssed against the walls, all that he has.)


PAM. He amoued, from the dyce bourde rushed in a Abalueo in^ro pror^^ ^^mmotus
Phras. ^^sdis nisi ^asios frae^dae gratia. Dolorem co^ ple^^a ur le(...) Abeo
ur meu^ ^us posiulem Phras. Ag^^o^rem (...) di^^ duam. Ne ^^hil ha^^as ^^pe.
doors, but if I be begyled by grace of Lais, to be enjoyed. i. except I be
deceived because he would have his pleasure of Lais, that he might releue or
ease his sorrow with embrasynge (of her.)


SAN. I will goo hense, that I may demand or ask my right.


PAN. Come of Pamphagus, make the lotte, or the hoole sum divided in the half
to me. i. let me be half part of thy just or hole winning, or let me be
half partner of all thy hole gaynes.


PAMP. Lest thou may have nothing take. i. lest thou have nothing at all,
take the (this.)


PAN. So lyttel a much. i. so small a thing, or so little as this?


PAM. (Thou gettest or shalt have) no more.


PANT. Is this thy promised Phrasis. (...) pro(...) (...) nisi (...)
faith?. i. is this the faithful promise thou made me?


PAM. I am provoked to anger, except thou leave. i. thou will make me angry
(with the) except thou cesse.


SAN. Out I here them chiding, whom I wened Phra. R^^antes audio quosani
misrebar co^ ^^^os been
had been well joined in minds. i. I here them chyde together, whom I had
thought had been or to have been very great friends together.


PAM. Whom?


SAN. These same (Lais and Acolastus) the vnfethered lover, Phras. Deplumis
amator surdae sit supplex Laidi.
is made a besecher or an humble suter unto deaf Lais. i. the lover which is
pulled of all the feathers he had, or which has never a fether left him. i.
which is left as bare as a birds arse, is become a croucher and kneler unto
Lais, which plays the death woman, or which says, I would to god I hard
you. O you good folks, I pray you help me, that he may pay his dettes, or
that he may pay me that he owes me.


PAN. Let us goo to it, or step to it (like men) Aged^ sores stipemus ne
effugsat hodie nostra^ manus.
let us enuiron the door. i. beset the door round about or on every side,
lest he flee out of our hands. i. lest he escape our hands this day.


Actus quarti, Scoena quinta. LAIS, ACOLASTVS, SYRA, SANNIO, PAMPHAGVS,
PANTOLABVS.
Trochaicoi.
QVin soluis noctem sceleste?
AC. Quaeso te, Lais mea.

LA. Quid Lais mea? an tibi adeo digna uideor, quam dolis
Sic illudas, and speuana producas?

AC. Numerabitur
Aurum tibi.

LA. Quando? ad Graecas Kalendas?

AC Non, sed ad.

LA. Satis
Iam diu dedisti uerba nobis.

AC. Audi obsecro te.

LA. Quem audiam? Quid audiam?

AC. Quaeso paulisper.

LA. Hem Syra?

SY. Quid uis?

LA. Vestem huic detractam.

SY. Quid ita?

LA. Quia lubet. Cape
Vestem.

AC. Itan Lais?

SA. Mea hic res agitur. Hem Lais? satis
Hoc sit exuuium tibi, mihi cedant hae manubiae,
Ensis cum pileo.

PAN. Quod reliquom est praedae, no strum est, exue.

AC. Vis quidem est haec, obsecro o populares.

PAN. Quin os comprimis?

AC. Haeccine fieri flagitia in libera ciuitate? Vah.
Totus deglubor miser. Number nam relin quetis mihi
Amiculum.

PAN. I sane iam, quo uis.

SAN. Vapula.

ACO. Hei hoi uerbera
Insuper misero additis?

SA. Diuortite ad me omnes simul.

LA. Heus tu nebulo? respice ad me. Vestitu^ hunc depexum habe.

Of the fourth act, The fyfte Scene. Lais, Acolastus, Sira, Sannio,
Pamphagus, Pantolabus.
Versus octonarij, trochaici acatalectici, et quandoque Catalectici. i.
sometime of. xvi. syllables just, and sometime wantynge a syllable.
LAIS. But payest thou not thy night, thou wretched Quin soluis noctem
seeleste. Aposioposis, Quid Lais mea s. mihi narras. An adeo digna tibi uideor,
quam dolis sic illudas and spe uana producas? Phras. Numerabitur auru^ tibi. A
dagium. Quando? ad Calendas p^^cas.
person. i. why and will thou not pay for thy nyghtes lodging, or thye
nyghtes pastyme, thou wretch that thou art.


ACO. I beseech the my Lais.


LA. what my Lais. i. what rellist thou me of my Lais, whether am I seen to the
so worthy, whom thou may illude with desceytes and led forth with vayn
hope. i. seem I unto the so mete a body, whom thou should scorn with
deceytes, and fode forth with vain hoope (through thy fair words?)


ACOL. Gold shall be nombred to the. i. thou shall have gold told out to the.


LA. when, at the Grekish calendes. i. when, to morrow to mow, or a day after
domes day? For the greeks have no calendes in their days of the year, but use
a another order, by adding to of days, as the latins were wont to do, which
they called Dies intercalares, and of the greeks those days Aposiope. Non sed
ad.
were called Embolimei.


ACOL. Nay but at.


LAIS. Thou have now given words to us long enough. i. Phras. Satis ia^ diu
dedisti uer (...) nobis.
thou have long enough deceived me, and fooded me forth with fair words.


ACO. Here or hark, I pray the for gods sake.


LA. whom should I here? what should I here?


ACO. I pray the (tarry) a little while.


LAIS. How Sira.


SY. what wylt thou? or what is thy will (with me?) or what is thy pleasure
Dict (...). Volo uestem huic detractam.
with me?


LAIS. The garment to this man drawn of. i. I will thou pluck of this fellows
garment.


SI. why so?


LA. For it lists me. i. for it is my pleasure, take or hold his garment.


ACO. So Lais. i. will ye serve me so, or thus Lais?


SAN. Here my thing Phras. Mea hicres agitur. Exuuium. Noue dixit, na^ ueteres
ex uuiae sempr dixerunt. Phrasis. Mihi cedant hae manubia. Quod reliquum est
pre de nostru^ est.
is done. i. here is my matter or my profyt in hand, how Lais let this garment
or spoil taken from an enemies back when he is strypped of his harnes in the
field, be inoughe to the. i. be thou contented, or hold the contented with
this garmente, let these prays or shares gathered of botyes sold, which
have been won of enemies, give place to me. i. let this share come to me, or
fall to me (for my part) that is to say, his sword with his cappe.


PANTO. That is left of pray is ours. i. the pray that remains, or is left
behind, is ours, put it of, or of withal.


ACO. Suerly Vis quidem haec est obsecro, o populares. Populares qui. Quin os
co^primis? Aposiopesis. Haeccine fieri flagitia in libera ciuitate
this is violence or great wrong, I beseech you for gods sake help, O ye
worshyppefulle masters, (that be rulers of the city) or defendours of pore men.


PAN. why will thou not thrust or hold thy mouth to gether. i. will thou not
stop thy mouth, or leave thy cryinge out?


ACO. These shameful deeds to be done in a free cyty?. i. is it a syttyng
thing, for such shamfull acts to be done in a city, where all men that
come should be free, and have no cruelty or wrong done them? I am al pylled
to the hard skyn, Bonipastoris est condere pecus non de glubere. Number na^ reli^
quetis mihi amiculum? Phra. Vapula, Verbera insu per misero additis? Eloquens.
(...) ad me oe^s simul Heus tu nebulo, respice ad me.
wretch. i. I am all to gether left bare, or I am left stark belly naked, or
left as naked as my nail, sorry wretch that I am, will ye not leave me a
little garment, or asory wede (to hyde my tail withal.)


PAN. Go suerly now whither thou will. i. goo thy ways now whither thou
list (at thy pleasure.)


SAN. Be thou bet. i. you shall bear me oone whystersniuet, or gerte on the
bare buttoke.


ACO. Hey hoy, add you fardermore beatynges to me, a wretch. i. and do you
beat me to, sorry wretch that I am.


SAN. Turn you al to gether to me. i. turn ye al, or resort ye al together
home unto my house.


LA. How thou knave look to me (ward). i. se what I do for the, have. i. take
the this torn or thredebare garment (which is so well Eloquens. Ve^^^^um hu^c
(...) habe.
examined, that a louse can catch no hold upon it.)


Observation of the Rhethoricall composition used by the auctour in this scene
next ensuynge.
V^here as I have hitherto thought it unto my intended purpose sufficient,
only to be Ecphrastes, in our mother tongue upon this latin anctour, thereby to
give some light unto such as be lerners, the better to come to the true and
perfyte sense, what he means: when I consider the great artifice used by
Fullonius in this his syxt scene, of his (...) act, and hereafter in the
second and. iiii. scenes of his. v. act, in these which. iii. scenes, he
brings in Acofastus, to make his moon. In this syxt scene, to compsayn him
of the sodayn mysery, that he is fallen into, by his misordred life (...)
noughty gouerna^ce, and in the. ii. scene of his fyft act, to show how weary
he is of his life, seeing that he is forced, to be a swyneherde, and to endure
such penury, with hunger and cold, which but of late before lived in such
glory, and fed so dayntyly, besides his other sorts of pleasures: and in the
fayd. iiii scene to prepare in Acolastus, repentance of his miserable life,
with a hope to have forgyuenes of his merciful father, whereupon is grounded
the catastrophe of this come dye: he gives me occasion to after mine order, in
the settinge forth of these. iii. scenes, and not so much to regard to
show the phrases, Adages, sentences notable, metaphores, elegances, or the
eloquent words used of the auctour in these three scenes (except that they
shall be very expedyente to be noted, because of their excellence) as to
declare in the margyne of these three scenes englysshed, what schemes or
exornations rhetorical the auctour uses in them, and what auctours, as
Therence, Plautus, Vergile, Seneca in his tragedies, he does in these three
scenes follow and imitate, and to show what kinds of arguments he uses,
thinking also by this means to do some little service unto the lerner, to
his better increase of judgment, when he shall perceyne the great erudition,
that our auctour shows in this little work of his.

First therefore we must consider, that where as Horace says De art poetica,
Aliquando uocem comoedia tollit, that thing of all places of any comedy is
metest to be done, when the comedy is brought to his Ectasis, and draws
shortly after toward his catastrophen. and for this cause does Fullonius in
the setting forth of Acolastus complaynt, use all such rhetorical precepts,
as should serve to make his pronunciation fygurated, and most mete and
convenient for a person, that in delyberatyng with him self, fall th(...)
manner into extreme desperation: and therefore to move the audience unto
commiseration, the hole scene in manner is made of interrogations, sometime by
Acolastus left unanswered unto, part because of great difficulte to make any
answer, (...) part to move the audience to compassion, and part because they
need none answer, they be so evident, and sometime by demandyng of questions,
which he makes answer unto him self. He uses also in this syxt scene
specially anxesis, exclamation, dubitation, collation of contraryes,
simulation, precision, correction, exaggeration, argumentation, epyphonoma. And
in his composition and desposynge of these matters, he uses also these schemes
rhetorycal, as dissolution, interpretation, complexion ex repetitionibus,
subjection, and conduplication: and sometime uses evident imitation of the
auctours above rehearsed, in such places as they have used the like artifyciall
composition, all which things in the margyne, I shall set forth, as their
places shall give me occasion.

Actus quarti, Scoena sexta. ACOLASTVS SOLVS.
Senarij.
QVid nunc agam? quid clame^? aut unde exordiar
Telam quaerendi? O coelum, o terra. Jupiter,
Aspicis haec, and patere? quem dicunt hospiti
Dare iura. Tam multae res me circunsident.
Quae me afflictent male, ut ubi sim, quo eam, rei
Quid coeptem, nesciam. Perij, interij miser.
Ex rege nummato ampliter, repent inops
Mendicus? quis ferat? mirum ni lumina
Mihi exculpam. Vestitus ubi? perijt, meus
Vbi torques aureus? perijt, pecuniae
Vbi tanta uis? perijt. Valetudo nihil
Ne attrita est? haud lub et meminisse. Pauperem
Quis me tecto dignabitur? Hem, tandem mihi
Tellus fo dienda, aut stips mendicanda est? negant
Illud uires exhaustae, and hoc prohibet pudor.
Accedit and malis meis, quod durior
Fames, totam regionem occupet, ut nesciam,
Si quis me admisturus sit ad coenae suae
Micas. Famae inteream oportet. Sed cui malum hoc
Feram acceptum? Illis, qui me illexerunt nimis
Dolose in frauds? an mihi, qui auscultauerim?
An irato meo genio, qui me his malis
Conclusit? Quam nouerearis Rhamnusia?
Quam me decorum ira afflictat male? Hei mihi.
Sed frustra quiritor hic, ubi nemo audiat.
Id solum restat, fata ut quo me cunque agant,
Eo nunc errans subsequar, o dolor, dolor.
Vt dij uos male perdant lupae obscoenissimae,
Quibus seruiui turpiter. Sed commodum
A uilla rusticus uenit, istunc adoriar,
Pudore posito, ut qui mihi sit inutilis.
Of the fourth act, the syxte Scene. Versus Senarij. i. of. xii. syllables.
ACOLASTVS
alone.
WHAT may I now do? what may I cry. i. Phras. Ordiri telam quaerendi.
what an outcrye may I make? from whens may I begin my clothe of
complaining. i. at which Sic Vergil. Si non (...)eu quae me nunc tellus.
Interrog. ad commouendam miserationem. Auxesis. Sic Terentianus demea, o
coelu^, o terra, o Maria Neptuni. Exclamatio. Sic Verg. Hy arbas Jupiter
omnipotens. etc. aspicis haec? Ar guit ab auctoritate. Jupiter dicit apud
Graecis Zeus, Zennios. Dubitatio. Sic Terenti. G^^a tot res repent
circumualla^ ut. etc. Dissolutio. Vbi sim quo eam rei quid coetem nescia^
Interpretat. perij, interi^. Co^trarioru^ Collatio. Auget dolorem tam sub^ ^us
casus. Sic interrogat ut de re certa quasi dicat nemo. Simulatio. Insanie^tis
est sibi ipsi uim infer. Ex repetitio nibus. Complexio. Vbi, periit. Vbi,
periit. Vbi, periit. Praecisio. Haud lub^^ meminisse, Subiectio. Quasi
respo^^^at nemo. Secu^. Deliberando tandem dis^u^ ^^iuu^ infert i cuius
partibus (...)ur, quo reciderit malorum. Remotio. Vtru^sque par ris disi^ctiui
Exaggeratio Malorum ab ^iis quae foris accidunt. Dialecticus. ^ic formaret
argumentum dutior fames (...) regione^ (...)pat qua(...) ^gnotu^ ^n^ and nihili
^oiem nemo u^l f^nstri panis dignabit fame ergo inteream necesse est. Dubitatio
Orta ex statu rerum extra se. Fame itere^ oportet, ^ba de se ipso desperantis.
thing may I first begin, to set on, or to take my beginning of making of
my moan, or whereat may I begin to set my complaining a broche? O henen, o
earth, o helping father, beholdeste thou these things, and suffer them?
whom they say to give laws to an host. i. which as men report haste
appointed laws, how an host should entreat his guest. i. syns that thou
amongst thy other tytles, art called (...). i. Jupiter hospitalis, and
dyddest so sore punish Lycan for his cruelte shewid upon his guest, that thou
dyddeste not only bourne his house with lyghtnyng, but also dyddest turn him
into a wulfe, will thou se me suffer this wrong done to me, by mine host,
and by his consent, and leave it unpunished? (for the host should not
consent to have any wrong or violence done to his guest in his house) So many
evil or miserable things do beset me round about. i. do besiege me, which
afflycte or scourge or vex me, that I wot not where I may be. i. where I am,
whyther I may go. i. where I may be come, or what of thing I may begin. i.
what thing I may first begin to do. I have peryshed. i. I am undone, I am stark
dead wretch (yt I am) what of a king largely moneyed, suddenly (to become) a
nedy or a stark beggar? who could bear. i. abide or suffer (this?) It is a
marvel, but if I grave out. i. but if I put out my lights to me. i. both mine
eyes, where my clothing. i. where is mine apparel? (become) it is lost or gone,
where is my golden chain? (become) it is peryshed. i. it is shrunk in the
wetynge. where is so great a strength of money. i. where is so huge a sight of
money? (become) it is perished. i. it is gone every cross, my health, is it
nothing worn. i. is the strength and lustiness, or well lykyng of my body, is
it nothing worn (by excedyng or over much stressyng of nature?) it likes me
not to remember it. i. I am the worse when I think on it, who shall wytsafe me
a poor man his coueryng. i. who will wytsafe now I am come into this extreme
poverty, to let me have house rome in his house, to hyde me heed in, (saying I
am thus poor?) Out, now at the last is the earth to be dygged to me?. i.
shall I, or must I be feign to dygge in the earth? or to take a shouelle or a
mattocke in my hand, or is a halfepenye for gods sake, to be begged to me?.
i. or must I be fayn to go a beggyng, and to ask a halpeny for gods sake,
that (to do) deny my stre^gthes wasted up. i. now I have by mys living so
wasted or consumed my bodily strength, that I can not endure or away with any
bodily labor, this. i. to beg, shamfastnes forbyddeth me. i. shame does let
me or hinder me, and it draws nere to my ylles. i. among mine other
mischefes, this I have to for advantage or fordeale, A harder famyn occupies
the hole region. i. that a sorer hunger combreth all the hole countray (than
has been seen many days) or than has been of many a day, that I will not or
may not know. i. that I may stand in doubt, if any be, to admyt me herafter
to the crummes of his supper. i. if there be any man, that will hereafter take
me to him or to his company, to eat the crummes that be taken up from his
bourde. I must needs, or there is no shifte, but that I must needs dye, or
starve for hunger. But to whom shall I bear this ill taken?. i. but whom shall
I thank for this myschiefe? or on whom may I lay the wit or the fault, or to
whom may I impute this myschance (of mine?) unto them, which have entyced me
to to deceytfully into these perils. Illicientibus me i frauds.
i. which have allured me by to excedyng crafty means in to these dangers, or
to me, which have harkned An mihi?
(to them). i. or to mine own self, which have believed or given credence unto
them? or to mine angry Genius. An srato meo genio*
i. to my good angel, which is angry, or displesed with me, which has shut me
in, or compassed me round about, with these myschefes, and (for that cause)
suffers me to fall into these inconveniences. O thou Exclamatio. Quam nouer
caris Rhamnusia? Exclamatio. Quam me ira afflictatmale?
Rhamnusia. i. o thou goddess of indygnation, which (reuengist the upon
proud folks) how playste thou the stepdame with me? how sore or how
grievously does the ire of the gods afflycte. i. scourge or punyshe me? hay
to me. i. woe to me, or woe worth me, or Correctio. Du^ colligit se sibi.
woo is me (that ever I was borne.) But I complayn me, or make my moan, here in
this place, in vain, where no man, or no body may here me. This thing Figura
t^esis Quo me cunque.
only rests (behind). i. t here is nothing that rests or remains
behind to be done but this, that whither so ever the destenies drive me or
lead me, thither away wandrynge will I now follow. i. which way so ever my
staff falls, that way will I take. Conduplicatio, o dolor. dolor.
Fpiphonema per detestati^ onem.
O sorrow sorrow. i. o redoubled sorrow, or o sorrow upon sorrow, that evil
might the gods lose you, o you most vggly or abhomynable she wolfes, whom I
have vily served. i. that I beseech god send you an evil myschefe, you most
lothesome cut tayled bytches, whom I have become slave unto, thus shamefully,
But yet is there a more veheme^ce comprysed by Comparatio Lupae. i. scor ti ad
lupam.
the auctour, to lyken myswomen unto she wulfes, as diverse latin auctours do
testyfie, and Jehan de Phras. Inopina^ti offer^ been occasio spera^di ne
affectus excedant limits comoediae. Posito pu door ut qui mihi sit inutilis.
Meun, in his french Romant of the rose) but a husband man, or vplandysshe
man, comes from his ferme place or vyllage, in good or dew time, I will to
him, or I will upon him. i. I will assail him, or set upon him, or board him,
shame being set a side. i. setting apart shamefastnes, as which. i. as the
thing which is unprofitable unto me.

Actus quarti, Scoena septima. CHREMES, ACOLASTVS.
(...).
EX uillula mea tantum reportare
Solitus eram prouentuum, ut satis uitae
Necessitati illinc reponeretur. Sed
Quia nunc in partu ager est remissior, pingui
Porca tellurem censeo piandam esse.
Vt ruri cuncta prouenire det multo
Foelicius, quam dudum, quom boues omnes
Ad unum abortirent. Segesque constanti
Robigine uiciata, non daret messem.
Quae res peperit nobis penuriam annonae.
Omen sinistrum, hic magnus nebulo stat. Quid uolt:
AC. Colone, Salve plurimum.

CHRE. Satis dudum
Saluco, si non etiam tu mihi salutemdes.
Quid uis?

AC. Praecor, ut haedi, boues, oues, caprae,
Tibi faetus edant pro uoto tuo.

CHRE. Faxit
Ita Pan noster. Vale.

AC. Quaeso audias pauca,
Prius, quam abis.

CHR. Number quid te torquet autem:

ACO. Ingens.
Fames.

CHRE. Credo grassatur illa multorum
In faucibus.

ACO. Nunc te oro eam leaves pane
Atro uel furfure.

CHRE. Ociosus es totus,
Proinde indignus, cui uictus detur.

ACO. At nullus
Me uocat ad operas. Quod si ullo tuo ex usu
Queam esse, non detrecto manus meas duro
Operi lo care, pro tolerabili uictu.

CHR. Sequere me, ablega^dus mox ad meos porcos.
Vt eos agas, te dignum commeatum addam.

AC. Sequor. Vah, ab equis ad asinos, no^ magis credas
Fortunae uoltui, quam mobili uento.

Of the fourth Act, the seventh Scene. Interlocutores, Chremes, Acolastus.
Versus Senarij Scazontes. i. Claudicantes.
I Was wont to bear again so much of profyttes from or of this lyttel ferme
of mine. i. I was wont Phras. Ex uillula mea reporta re solitus era^ prouentum.
Phras. Vt satis uitae necessitati il linc reponeretur. Phras Meta. Sed qui^
nu^c in p^rtu ager est remis^o. Religio. Phras. Pingui porca censeo tellurem
^iandam esse. Phra. Vt ruri cuncta prouenire det multo foe^^cius qu^ dudum.
to receive so much yearly revenues, or yearly encreasynges of this little
ferme of mine, that from thense might be laid up ynowghe to the necessity of
life. i. that I might thereof lay up store enough, or sufficient for my
necessary living, or provision for the hole year. But now for because my corn
field is more slacker in or of increase, or bringynge forth of corn, then it
was wont to be, I deem or suppose the god of the earth. i. the ground or the
earth to be purged with a fat sow, that it (the earth) may give al things to
increase to my ground, where I exercise my husbandry, by much more happily,
then but late ago. i. seeing that my corn fields be slacker to bring forth
fruit (then they have been wont to be) I think it requysite to purge or to
cleanse the soil of the earth, with making or offering of a sacrifice of a fat
sow unto Tellus, whom the ancient gentylles honored as the god and the ruler
of the earth, like as for an other entente, the gentylles Religio. Cereri pr^sa
porca sacrificrabat antiquitas. Elegan. Cum boues oe^s ad unum abortirent.
Phra. Segesque constanti robigi neuiciata no^daret messem
offered a sow to Ceres, which they called Presaporca) to the intent that the
god Tellus may grant that all things may increase and come forward in my
countray or vplonde, much more plentiously, then it has done but late ago,
when all my kyne every one, or not one skaping, did bring forth their calves
before their time. i. did cast their calves, and my corn standing (upon the
ground) being taynted or infected with a constant blasting. i. being blasted
through out, or every whit of it, did not give corn, cut down with the
Metaphor. Quaeres pepe^^t nobis penuriam an nonae. Phra. Apofi. O^e^ sinistr^.
sith or sickle (for it was not worth the cuttyng down) which thing has
brought forth to us a penury of bread corns. i. which thing has caused a
darth of vitayles amongst us. A left hand luck. i. this is ill luck (I
fear to me ward) or god save mine eye sight, here is a great knave. i. a great
lyther luske, or a stout ydell lubbar, what wills (he). i. what means he?

ACO. Ground tyller hayle much. i. o thou husbond Phras. Colone, sal^^
plurimsi. Phras. Satis dudum saluco si non ^riam tu mihi salutem des. Phras.
Precor ut hae di. etc tibi foe ^us (...) pro uoto tuo.
man, God send the well to fare.


CHRE. I am saulfe enough, or I fare well enough all ready, though thou also do
not give me gretynge to. i. though thou do not also salute me, or bid God
speed me. what will thou? or what is thy will?


ACO. I pray god that thy he gotes, thine oxin or bulls, thy sheep, and thy
she gotes, thy kyddes, thy kyne, and thine ewes, may bring the forth their
young ones, or their young increase for thy wyshe. i. according, or as well as
thou would wyshe thy self.


CHRE. So might our Pan do (as thou say). i. I beseech the god Pan, which
is the god of shepardes, that it may please him so to do. Phras. Fax^^ ita pan
noster uale.
Fare well, or God be with the.


ACO. I pray the that thou may here a few things sooner then thou go
Phras. Nunquid te torquet aut^
thy way. i. I pray the harken a lyttel, or ever thou go.


CHR. Is there any thing that tormenteth the truly?. i. what, is there any
thing that nyppeth the by the stomach, as it were, which by an adage we do
express by these words, why? does thy shoe wrynge the, or pinch Credo
grassatur illa multorum in faucibus. Nunc te oro eam leaves pa ne atro uel
furfure. Ociosus es totus proinde indignus cuiuictus detur. Phras. At nullus me
uocat ad operas. Phras. Quod si ullo tuo ex usu q^a^ esse no^ detrecto manus
meas duro operi locare pro tolerabili uictu. Eloquens. Sequere me able gandus
mox ad meoporcos. Phras. Te dignu^ co^meatn^ add^. Adagium. Vah ab equis ad
as^nos. Comparatio Assimulatur fortuna mobili uento.
the any where.


ACO. Great or sore hunger.


CHR. I believe that (well enough) she. i. hunger is rife or styring in many
men's throtes.


ACO. I pray the now ease it, or releue it with black. i. brown bread, or
with branne.


CHR. Thou art all ydell. i. thou art all together given to ydelnes, and
therefore unworthy to whom lyuinge should be given. i. wherefore thou art not
worthy, that men should give the any living.


ACO. But no man calls me to labors or works. i. but there is no man, that
will set me a work, that if I may be of any thy use. i. that in case that I
may stand in any steed, or do the any service, I do not withdraw my hands to
bestow them unto hard labor. i. I will not shrynke to employe my hands upon
sore labor, for a tolerable. i. a mean or easy lyuinge.


CHRE. Follow me, or come after me, anon to be sent away from me.. i. whom I
will by and by dispatche away from me to my swyne, that thou may drive them.
I shall add a prouisyon of vytaylles worthy the. i. I shall let the have
such meat and drink, as shall fall for the, or shall be mete for the.


ACO. I follow (the or I come after the) Propt, or alas, from the horses to
the asses.. i. from the halle in to the kitchen, or out of crisles blessing in
to a warm son (now I am well promoted) Thou may no more believe the
cou^tena^ce of fortune, then the mouable wind. i. there is no more trust to
hold at fortunes chere or lokes, then to the chaungeable wind.


Actus quintus. PELARGVs. EVBVLVS,
Septenarij and Octonarij.
PRaesagit animus, nescio quid mihi imminere tristius.
EV. De quo?

PE. De filio Eubule.

E. Nimis suspiciosus es
Pelarge, quo, quid aliud, quam malum conduplicas tibi?
Neque enim formidine ulla arcere potes malum foribus tuis.
Quid autem est, quod te sollicitat, cedo?

PE. Ne ille algeat,
Neu uitam misere trahat in sordibus.

EV. Quaeso unde has colligis
Suspiciones.

P. Primu^, ominis tui nequeo obliuiscier
Hinc ante oculos meos, subinde astare uisus filius,
Pannosus, sentus, squalidus, (...) floetibus
Largis oppletus lumina, uoces unde hausi moestissimas.
Postremo, uereor quid sit, quod de ipso nihil audiam,
Nisi mortuus est, quid censes?

E. Proximu^ esse nunciu^
Statum gnati qui commemoret quis sit, proin desinas metum.

PE. Curae est mihi haud secus, ac oculi pupilla, quin pariter, cum hoc eo
Me affligi interpretor, quoties illi quicquam est aegre. Quia
Hoc inquam patriu^ est, communia mala bonaque ducere,
Hoc qui nescit, fateatur se indignu^ esse patris nomine.

EVB. Nempe, ut dicis. Sed modus est in re qualibet optimus.

PE. Est, si queam ass qui.

EV. Velis solum dolorem ponere,
Facile quieuerit.

PE. Alios nescio, sed euenit
Mihi quidem, ut aegritudo quotidie magis de filio
Augescat, tantum abest, dies ut adimat aegritudinem.
Nam quanto abest diutius, hoc magis cupio tanto and magis
Desidero.

EV. Pelarge, quod animus iamdudum dictitat
Haud long abesse nuncium, haud uanum puto, abiero
Igitur ad portitores, ex quibus forsan discam omnia.
Tu me interea domi operitor, moxhuc reuolauero.

PE. Faciam. Quam suspicioso nunc sum animo omnia timeo, neque
Quicquam timeo. Sediciosus plane cordis mei
Senatus est, in quo, nihil consilij consistere queat.
Ita ut fit, ubi* quod impense cupis, times ne non tibi
Aduorsum eueniat. Inter spem and metum haereo, huc me conijcit
Gnatus, cuius salutem quam accuro, uereornimis
Deploratam esse, ut omnia plena sunt periculis, dolis,
Labe, maculis, and pestibus, quo quo uorsum respexeris
Domi nunc desidere certum est, dum Eubulus redeat meus.

The fyfte Act. Interlocutores, PELARGVS, EVBVLVS.
Versus Septenarij, and Octonarij.
MY mind foreseeth, or feleth afar of I wot not what, more heavy to be nere
Phras. Praesagit animus n^ scio ^d mi hi iminere tristius.
at hand. i. my mind gives me there is some heavy tidings toward me, or
nere at hand, I wot nere what, or what so ever it be, or what so ever the
matter mean.

EVB. Of whom?


PEL. Of my son Eubulus.


EVB. Thou art to to mystrustful. i. thou Nimis suspiciosus es quo ^d aliud
qu^ malum co^dupiicas tibi? Sententia. Neque eni formid ne ulla a(...)re potes
malum soribus tuis. Phras. Quid autem (...) quod te so ^icitat cedo? Phra.
El^g. neille algeat Neu (...) misere trahat in sordibus. Phras. Quaeso unde has
colligis suspitiones?
art to much mystrustynge, or to full of suspicion, O Pelargus, whereby, what
other than thy ill redoubleth to the^. i. by means whereof, what other thing
do thou get, but that thy sorrow is double (more than it should be?) nor
truly thou may keep away or hold ill from thy gates by any fear. i. nor
in very deed thou canste not drive or put away sorrow from thy gate, by
being afraid (that it should happen) What thing truly is it. i. what is it
as it were, that does vnquyete the, or makes the fulle of sorrow or care?
say. i. tell me.


PELARGVS. Lest he be a cold, or may take cold, or lest that he draw his
life myserablye in fylthes. i. or lest he may trayle on, or linger his life
in fylthinesses (for want of tendyng or loking to.)


EV. I beseech the, from whens do thou gather these suspicio^s?. i. I pray
the, upon what occasion do thou cast these doubtful conjectures in thy
mind? Primum ominis tui neque (...) obliuiscier. Elegan. (...)ante oculos m^os
^^binde (...) uisus filius



PELAR. First. i. first of all, or first and formoste, I can not forget thy
saying or thy coniectynge words, which (I fear me to prove true) from hens my
son is seen often times to stand in presence before mine eyes. i. here upon,
me seems now and than, or at whiles, that my son stands in presence before
mine eyes thredebare or sorylye apparayled, forgrowen (for Graeca uox.
Monogrammos unius picturae of the first trasyng with a cole as paynters do
before they lay on any colors.
want of kemmynge rowndyng and shauynge) forfaren or slutty she (for want of
washyng and wrynging, and other trymmyng or clean keeping) of one only
drawing or of the first portrature or trassynge. i. as lean as a rake, or
having his color quyte gone out of his chekes, or so spare that a man might
thrust him through the chekes with a puddyng prick, or so lean, that he might
play death in a play) with large wepynges stopped the lyghtes. i. weeping so
soore, Syncedoche, Fletibus largis opplctus lumine. Metaphor. Voces unde hausi
moestissimas. Postremo uercor quid sit quod de ipso nihil audiam nisi mortuus
est quid ce^seo Proximu^ esse nu^cius statum gnati (...) co^memoret quis sit.
Phras. Proi desinas metum.
that his eyes stand ever or contynually fulle of water or tears. i.
resemblyng no more a man, in his well lykyng, than a paynters image resembles
the quick, when he does first trase it but with a cool. Whense I have drawn
most heavy voices. i. by reason whereof (me thinks) I have hard him, make a
most pituous moan, or as sorrowful a moan, as ever made person. Last of all.
i. for a conclusion, I fear what it may be. i. I fear me what thing may
betyde him, that of him I may here nothing. i. that I here no word or
tidings of or from him, except he be dead, what demest thou. i. what is thy
mind or opynion*


EVBV. The messager to be next, which may remember the state of thy son,
what it may be. i. my mind or opinyon is, the next messager (that comes to
the waters side) may tell us tidings or news how thy son does or fares.
Wherefore leave fear. i. and there Phra. Eleg. Curae est mihi haud secus ac
oculi pupilla. Phras. Pariter cum hoc eo me af fligi interpretor quoties illi
quic^ est aegre. Phras. Hoc inqua^ patrium est co^munia. mala bona^ ducere.
fore cease or put away this fear of thine.


PELAR. He is to care to me, not otherwise than the syghte of mine eye. i. I am
no less chary over him, or full of care for him, than I am over the sight of
mine eye, ye and likewise with this, thereby I declare me to be afflicted with
him, so often as any thing is to him displesantly or heuyly. i. ye and
farthermore, or over and above this, I do take it so, that I am scurged so
often as he has any manner dysplesure or grief. For I say, this is fatherlike.
i. sytting or convenient for a father, to lead the goods and the ylles common.
i. to esteem or to take good and bad, or weal and woe to be common between him
and his son. i. for the father to take his sons estate to be his own, he
that knows not this, Ho^ (...) nesch fa^eat se indi (...) esse patris nomine.
Elegan. Ne^pe ut dicis Senten. Sed modus est in re qualibet optimus. Phrasis.
Est si queam assequi. Velis solu^ dolorem ponere pro deponere facile ^cuerit.
Phrasis. Alios nesci o S^d euenit mihi quidem ut ^gritudo quo (...) magis de
fi^^o auges(...) tantum abest dies ut adimat aegritudinem. V^de Vallam de ta^t^
abest and de non mo do or no^ solu^ and ueru^ etia^ and ned^ vnde han^ sente^
(...) adhu^c (...) modu^ offerret Sed euenit mihi quide^ ut non soiu^ dies no^
adimat aegritudine^, ue rum etiam ut quotidie de filio magis augescat. Elegan.
Na^ qua^to abest diatius hoc magis cupio tanto and magis, desidero. Phras. Quod
anim iam dudu^ dictitat haud long abesse nun ciu^ haud uanum puto. Elegans.
Abiero igi^ ad portitores. Elegans. Tu me interea domi operitor. Metaphora. Mox
huc reuolauero. Phras. Quam suspicioso nunc sum animo? Phrasis. Oia timeo neque
quicqu^ timeo Allegoria. Seditios^ pl^ ne cordisme^senatus est in quo nihil
co^(...) co^sistere queat. Senten. Ita ut sit ubi quod im* ese cupis tim s ne
no^ ioi ad uorsum eueniat. Phrasis. Inter spe^ and metu^ haereo. Phras. Hu^ me
coniic^t gnatus. cuius sa^ute^ (...) accuro uereor nimisde plorata^ esse.
or wotteth not what (this means) let him confess him to be unworthy the
name of a father. i. let him knowledge or grant, that he is not worthy to be
called a father.


EVB. Now in very deed, or for a surety (it is as thou say) but in every
thing the mean is best, or but measure is a merry mean.


PELARGVS. It is (so) if I could or might hit it, or atteyne unto it.


EVBVLVS. So thou would or were willing to put away, or set aside thy
sorrow, it would easylye rest. i. abaate or assuage lyghtely.


PELARGVS. I know not others. i. I wot not what mind other men be of, or I
know not other men's hearts, but surely it happens to me. i. my chance is
(such) that this pensifenesse or sorowefulnesse of my son, does daily
encresse (more and more) so much it is away. i. so much is it out of my
way, or so far different is it from my case, that day. i. process of time
may take away dysplesauntnesse of the mind (from me). i. this pensyfenesse or
sorrow, which I have conceived of my sons absence, is not only by process of
time not taken away from me, but also the longer he is absent from me, the more
does this dyspleasure (I have of my son) daily more and more increase. for
why, by how much he is absent (away from me) the longer, hereby the more do I
covet for him, and by so much the more do I desire (to see him). i. the longer
he is absent away from me, the more would I feign (se him) and the more desire I
(so to do.)


EVB. O Pelargus, I think it not (to be) a vain thing. i. I think that it
is not all to gether for naught, or nothing to the purpose, which my mind
tells me, or gives me now lately a messager, not to be far from hense. i.
that some messanger is not far hense, I will therefore depart or go my ways
to the customers, or to such as set men a land from the ship, of whom
peradventure I may learn all things. i. I may knowal together, or all the
matter, tarry or bide thou in the mean time or season, at home for me, I will
flee again hither by and by. i. I will return or come hither again in all
the haste.


PEL. I will do (so.) Of how suspicious or mystrustynge a mind am I now, I
stand in dread, or I fear al things? nor I fear any thing at all. i. and
yet (I have no sure ground) to fear any thing at all, surely the senate of
my heart is sedicious. i. the grave council, whereby my heart should (be
governed) is full of strife, and at debate with it self, in which my heart,
nothing of counsel may stand stedy. i. I can not stedy or fyxe my heart upon
no good advise, so as it is done. i. so as it chaunseth, where the thing,
which thou couetest or desyrest very much, thou fear lest it happen not
against (thy mind). i. thou standeste in dread or in fear, that it should
happen contrary (to thy desire) or to thy wyshe, I stand in doubt or stand in
a mamorynge between hope and fear, hither has my son cast me. i. my son
has brought me into this case, whose health or welthe which I care for, I
fear me, to be to to much bewepte. i. to to far gone without any hope of
remedy or recovery, as (the dead corpses be, for whom their friends have left
weeping, because they see the thing to be without all manner remedy) saying
that as (now adays) or as the world goes at these days, all things be
full of perils, deceytes, blemyshes, spots, and pestilences. i. utter
Eloquens. Domi nu^c de sidere certum est dum Eub. redeat meus.
destructions, whither so ever ward thou shalt behold. Now am I determined
to sit to take my rest at home, while mine Eubulus may come again, or
return again (to me.)


Actus quinti, Scoena secunda. Trimetroi.
ACOLASTVS SOLVS.
QVis tam durae est mentis, quem non deiecerit
In luctum and lachrymas Fortunae acerbior
Casus? Argentum quod rebar dudum mihi
Fore immortale, uah, quam puncto temporis
Perijt? luxuria in opiae matter, quam mihi
Amicam habui unice charam, omnia abstulit,
Rem, nomen, amicos, gloriam, quid non? Quia
Vero nunc non est, unde ipsa alatur, suam
Mihi reliquit gnatam inopiam. Viuus, uiden^
Pereo. Vbi nunc tuceta sunt and splendidae
Dapes? Vbi uinum mire fragrans? Vbi
Tibicines, and omne genus modulaminum?
Vbi clientes? Profecto hoc uere dicitur.
Fortuna uitrea est, quae, quom splendet, frangitur.
Canistellum hoc, penum dedit par cissimum,
Et eundem sordidis^imum, quod cum siet
Exhaustum, quid reliquom est, nisi ut aqualiculus
Siliquas mihi det cum porcis communes, prius
Quam totus inteream Sagontin a fame,
Ita ne subu lcus hic regno Baeoticas
Inter sues, Rex pridem splendidissimus?
Miser nemo est, aeque atque ego. Nunc nunc postulem
Frugi esse, nisi nequicquam hoc postulem, bonis
Amissis omnibus. Quid faciam igitur? Quid? In
Sordibus istis, oportet sordescam magis
Ac magis, unde emergendi spes mihi nulla si^?
Vtinam in matris nixu, occubuissem infantulus,
Vtinam inuisam hanc lucem licuisset rumpere,
Potius, quam uitam in tantis aerumnis traham.
Neque sciam, si meliora etiam instent mortuo.
Ego mihi montis ardui casum imprecer,
Qui me perdat, tam non suaue est uiuere,
Mortis simulachrum qui uo let uidere, me
Contempletur. Quid enim uiuum in me aduortitur?
Quid sum praeter mutum pecus, and sine pectore
Corpus? Veh luci, ueh natalibus meis.
Taedet coeli conuexa contuerier amplius.
Nam ut unda superuenit undam, ita alij fluctui
Curarum insistit alius, aestuans mare
Pectus meum dicas ex uero nomine.
Number me deorum quisquam respicit?
Quibus tam sum neglectui? haud equidem arbitror.
Of the fyfthe Act. The second Scene. Versus lambici trimetroi. ACOLASTVS
ALONE.
ACOLA. Who is of so hard a mind. (...). who is Interro gat a seipso quis
suae sottis se posset continere a lachrimis. Exaggeratio a falsa opinione
concepta quod putabat esse immortale puncto te^pore periit.
he, that is so styffe stomaked, or so hard hearted, whom a more bitter case of
fortune. i. a passing grievous chance, or a great mysfortune should not cast
down into mourning or bewailing and tears. i. should not drive him, or force
him to mourn, or to bewail and weep the silver. i. the money, which I
supposed, but lately to be hereafter immortal unto me. i. which I thought but
late ago, would never have been spente? Out or propt, how is it peryshed in a
point of time?. i. how quite and clean is it gone, or ever a man could say
treyace, excess of fleshely pleasures, ^ocus ferme ad uerbu^ ex prologo
trinu^mi plauti. Vniuersalem explicat per sua particula ria omnia ab sculit,
articulus re^ nomen amicos, gloria^, quid no^? Sic Terenti. Phedria uiuus
uide^sque pereo nec quid ag^ scio. Recordatio uoluptatu^ amissarum per
repetitionem and (...) tionem.. Vbi, ubi, ubi. Vbi nsic tuce(...) su^t and
splen did dap^s (...) Vbi uinu^ mice fragrans? Vbi ribicines et omne (...) ^o
dulaminu^. Vbi clientes? Sententia de instabilitate fortunae. Ex cir^sistantus
colligit per eundum esse fame. Elegan. Canistellum hoc pen^ dedit parciss^mum
and eunde^ sordidissi mum. Phras. Quod cu^ exhaustu^ sit quid reliquum est*
nisi ut aquall culus siliquas mihi det cum porcis communes. Adagium. Priusqua^
totus inteream Saguntina fame. Adagium. Saguntina fames. Adagium. Boeoticas
inter sues regnare. Ex collatio^e prioris stat^ cu^ praese^ti auget miseriam
Elegan. Miser nemo est aeque atque ego. Resipiscere cogitat, sed impedit
despera tio. Phras. Conduplicatio. Nunc (...) postulem frugi esse. Elegan. Nisi
nequicqui, Hoc postule^. Quaerit and respondet fibi ipsi alludit ad illud. Apo.
22 Qui in sordibus est sorde scat adhuc. Metapho. Vnde emerge^ di spes mihi
nulla sit. Simulatio. Desperantis est fbi ipsima la imprecari. Potius quam
uitam in tan it is aerumnis traham. Extreme desperantis uerba. Phra. Ego mihi mo^
ris ardui casum imprec^r qui me perdat. Eicon. S^ipsum depingit ex forma and
habitu corporis. Simulatio. Verba tragica qualia apd Sen^cam. Phra. V^
natalibus ^^is. Phra. T^^det coeli conu^xa intuerier amplius. Comparatio
A^^tuans ma (...) me^ dicas ex uero nomine. Metaphor. Numme deo rum aliquis
respicit. Phra. Quibus tam sum negle^tui. Haud equide^ arbitror.
the mother of nedynesse or poverty, whom I have had a lemman only dear
unto me. i. whom I have kept or holden as my bestbeloue, has taken away all
things. i. has taken away or bereued me of all that ever I had, my thing. i.
my goods or substance, my name. i. my good name and fame, my friends, my
glory. i. my renoume or estimation, what not?. i. what thing is it that she
has not taken from me? and now truly because there is not. i. because I have
not where withal she. i. wastefull expenses may be nourished. i. fed or
brought up or meynteyned withal, she has lest me her daughter, need and
poverty, being alive and saying I peryshe. i. being quycke and quethyng I am
undone. Where be now these chopped meats, dressed with spyce and herbs, or
these meats dressed, and it were for kings? where be these shyninge deintie
meats? (that shyned so gayly or pleasauntely in mine eye) where (is become)
the wine being meruaylously of sweet savor? where (be) my troumpetours
become, and all kind of mynstralsie?. i. all sorts of melodyes? where be my
retained servants (be come?) For a suertie this thing is truly said. i. in
very deed men say trewely herein, Fortune is made of glass, which while it
shines most gloriouse, is broken a sonder. This lyttel hand basket, has
given me the most scarce provision of vitayles (that can be) and the same most
fylthy. i. they have sent me in this little basket, as scarce provision of
vitayles (as ever had any poor manne) and as fylthy or uncleanly (dressed)
which when it may be clean emptyed. i. when it it shall be clean wasted or
spente up, what is remaining behind. i. what rests than more, or what is
more else behind, but that the troughe may gyne me peasecoddes, common with
the swyne?. i. but that I must be feign to eat peskoddeshales, or the husks
of other graynes that grow, out of the trowghe with mine hogs, sooner. i.
rather than that I may all dye ^i. rather than that I should utterly peryshe,
or dye with a Sagontine hunger. i. as they of Saguntum in Spain did, when they
were besieged of the Carthaginens, whereof Titus Liuius makes mention, and
Erasmus reherseth the same, amongeste his adages. Do I raygne here on this
facion, being a swynherde amongst swyne of Boeatia. i. amongst a meyny of
jack hold my staves, or knock yldeboynyardes, being but of late a king
most shynynge (in glory or honor?) there is no man so much a wretch as I
am, or there is none so stark a wretch living as I am. Now now (at the
last) would I require or wyshe of god to be of corn. i. a thrifty person. i.
now would I wysshe to thryue, saving that I should so wyshe in vain or for
naught. all my goods being lost. i. now that all my goods be gone. what may
I, or shall I do therefore? what must I in these fylthyes, or shall I be feign
in these vylenesses, to wax filthy more and more? from whense there is no
hope to me to escape out again from drownynge. i. from whense I have no manner
hope to escape out of, or to be delivered of. would to god I had dyed, being a
young babe in my mothers travail. i. when my mother labored with child of
me. would to god it might be leful for me to break this light behated. i. to
fordoo my self, or to make an end of me, or to kill my self, rather than I
should trayle or linger my life in so many and so great infelycites. i. labors
and trauayles of my mind and body, nor I wot not if better things be nere at
hand to me, being deed. i. nor I am not suer whither I shall be in better case
when I am dead, than I am now in this life. I could find in my heart, to
beseech or to pray god, the fall of a high hill to me. i. that some stype vpryght
hill might over whelme me, which might lose me. i. make an end of me, so
much it is not sweet to live. i. so much my life is paynefull to me. He that
would see an image or a pycture of death, let him behold me. for why, what
lively thing is considered in me?. i. what sign or token of life may a man
perceive to be in me? what thing am I but a dombe be and a body without
breast. i. without heart or courage. out upon this light (that shyneth upon me)
out upon mine of spring or the bloudde, that I come of, it irketh me or
greueth me any more to behold these parts of the heaven that be next unto me.
i. this hithermost part of the sky. for like as one wave (in the sea) over
takes an other, so unto me one sowrge of cares presses in after an other,
thou may say my breast to be a rysynge see of his own true name. i. thou
may safly swear or maintain, that my heart may be truly named or called a
swellynge see, for the great storm I feel therein. Is there any of the gods
that beholds me or looks toward me. i. is there any of the gods that
regards me, or has any or takes pytie upon me? unto whom I am so much to
despisyng. i. which do thus much despise me or set this lyttel by me.
suerly I suppose it not. i. I suppose there be none.


Actus quinti, Scoena tertia. Trochaici Katalecticoi.
EVBVLVS SOLVS.
ESt istuc datum mihi, ut nusquam non recte consula^,
Atque uideam, non solu^ quae sunt ante pedes obuia,
Verum, et quae procul uentura sint, prospicia^ longius.
Veni ad portitores, ut quae de Pelargi filio
Fama narraret publica, cognoscerem, quando id patre^
Mire sollicitum teneret. Quid multis ago? comperi
Neutiquam falsa esse, quae nuper de ipso dedi omnia.
Scilicet, Acolastns ad paupertatem pertractus est
Adeo poenitendam, ut ad fruges non possit corrigi.
Taceo quae de eo grauiora audiui. Quid restat? nisi
Vt Pelargum repetam, qui curis se afflictat impro bis
Na^me (scio) sollicitus expectat, du^ ad se redeam domu^.
Of the fyft act, The third Scene. EVBVLVS
ALONE. Versus Trochaici Octonarij, wantynge a syllable.
THis thing is given unto me. i. this gift is given me, that no where I
council not right. i. Phras. Est istuc datu^ mihi ut nusqui non recte
co^sulam Phras. Atque uideam non solu^ quae sunt ante pedes obuia^ue rum and
quae pro cul uentura sunt prosoiciam longius
that I never give no counseyle but up right, or for the best, and that I may
se not only those things which be metyng before my fete. i. which I must
needs stumble at, because they be so plain in my way, or so straight before my
fete, but that I may also fore fee a far of, those things, which may be to
come. I came to the customers, that I might know those things, which the
open and common fame told of Pelargus son, syns that, that thing might
hold the father maruaylously careful. i. saying that his father took the
matter, passing heuylye. What do I with many. i. what make I with many
words? or Phrasis. Co^peri neutiq^ falsa esse quae nuper de ipso dedi o^a
Scilicet. Phras. A col. ad paup^r tatem p^r ^rac^us e^ adeo poenitendam ut ad
fruges non possit corrigi. Ad fr^^ges sa (...) du^^ dixit Occupario si (...)
pr^^^rito. Ta^^o quae de (...) grauiora (...). Metaph. Quid (...)? (...)
P^largum repetam (...) curis se (...)t improbis.
what need many words? I have well espied or perceived all things, which I
have lately given of him not to be very false. i. that all such things, as I
but late agoo did tell or report of him, (to his father) that they be not
all together false, that is to say, or which was this amongeste other, that
Acolastus is drawn (by mysguidinge or ill company) to a poverty, so much to
be ashamed of. i. that Acolastus is fallen into so shameful a poverty, that
he may not be corrected unto corns. i. that he can not be brought to thryfte,
or that he is past all remedy of thryfte or honesty. I hold my peace at, or
keep within me, or keep secret (those more greuouse things) which I have
hard (of him.) What rests, or what have I now more to do? but to seek out
Pelargus again, which scourges or tourmenteth him self with unreasonable.
i. endless cares. For why, I wot well that he being full of care, looks for
me, or taryeth for me, till I come again to him home.

Actus quinti, Scoena quarta. Senarij.
ACOLASTVS SOLVS.
SCeleratae mentis carnificina uah, quibus
Me excruciat modis? ut nusquam sit locus
Quietae menti. Plumbum gestare uideor
In pectore. Adeo graui intus pondere torqueor.
An nonquam desinent oculis meis mala
Mea, and quae admisi turpiter obuersarier?
Quae de inferis narrantur fabulo sa sunt
Omnia, si nonueros experior inferos.
Egomet me concoquo, exedo, atque etiam execror.
Dignus sum, quem ima tellus dehiscat, ob meam
Iniustitiam, quae tanta est, ut non audeam
Vnquam, mihi sperare ueniam a patre. Nam
Eius lene imperium reieci perfidus.
Vnde ab dicatus, mox diuorti ad pessima
Quaeque flagitia. Rem omnem confregi turpitet
Luxu, infami alea, quid, quod scortis dedi?
Merito quidem meo, hanc inopem uitam incolo.
Inglorius uiuo, patria careo. Add, quod
Eam maculam incidi, quam, nescio, si eluam
Vnquam. Vt taceam, quod sparsi genus meum
Infainibus notis, quod fabula sum omnibus
Notis, amicis. Tum, quid dicam de patre?
In quem tot nominibus iniurius fui.
Bonis quum corporis, tum animae, mihi datis
Datorem contra, fateor, abusus sum impie.
Vbi nunc Philaute consultor mihi es meus,
Dum consilium simul cum re amisi miser?
Vt iussa patris cum sacro uolumine
Legis contemnerem, id ne author fueras mihi?
Deos mihi iratos scio, qui auscultauerim.
Porro, super omnia intollerabilis est fames
Quam gesto in utero, ubi and dolores excitat
Magnos, morte omni atrociores. Nam neque
Siliquis, neque coeno quo immergor, sedare eam
Datur, dolor uteri manet, manet fames.
Adeo nonquam nisi deterius habebo in hac
Regione, non uideo, quid restet consili.
Heu me, quot mercenarij in patris aedibus
Abundant panibus, dum ego interim hic fame
Pereo? Quiduis possem illic facere, and perpeti.
Vt ex calamitate hac tanta me extraham.
Vel unus panis ibi hanc leuauerit famem.
Age, age, quid si patrios postliminio petam
Lares? Non ausim. Propterea quod exulem
Me illinc feci. Quid si tentem? tum nihil
Egero. Qua front enim, quo ore, quibus uestibus
Redeam ad patrem, nudus, sceleratus, impudens?
Of the fyft Act, the fourth Scene. ACOLASTVS
ALONE. Versus Senarij.
THE tybourne. i. the place of execution of a sinful Metapho. (...) (...)
me^tis carnificina uah quibus me exeruciat modis.
mind. Out by what means or ways does it tourment me?. i. the remorce of
consyence that is in me, for my sins passed, being so great, that it vexes
my mind as much as if my body should be tourmented, or as if I were put to
execution by an hang manne at tybourne, or any such place. Out by what means
or ways does it tourment me? so that there Vt nusquam sit locus quie rae
menti. Adagium. Plumbum ui deor gestare in pectore.
may be no where a place to a quiet mind. i. so that I have no time or space
to set my heart at rest, or to bring my mind to quyete. Me thinks I
bear lead in my breast. i. that my heart is as heuye (for sorrow) as any
lead, I am tourmented withinforthe, with so grievous a weight. i. with so
weighty a charge Phras. An no^quam desinent ocu l^s meis mala mea and que ad
misi turpiter obuersarier? Alludit ad eos qui secundum poetas apud inferos
torquentur.
of conscience. Shall these myschefes or synful deeds of mine, which I have
done or committed shamefully or vyly, never cesse to haunt or to go up and
down, or apere before mine eyes? all things which men tell or report of
hell, be but talyshe. i. be but fables or tales, if I do not experime^t true
helles. i. if I prove not by experience inmyne own self, the very peynes of
hell. I sethe all to pappe, or consume up by boylynge mine own self, I freat
or eat up my self, I Obtestatio. Cu^ desperati one. Dignus sum quem ima tell
lus dehiscat Ob meam iniustitiam quae ta^ta est (...) no^ audea^ unqua^ sperare
u^ns am a patre. Nam eius lene imperium reieci fidus Phra. Vnde abdicatus
diuorti ad pessima quaeque flagitia
curse and ban my self also, I am worthy, whom the low earth may gape wide
open for. i. I have deserved, that the ground should open and swallowe me
down to the deep pytte of hell, for my vntyghtuousenes, which is so great,
that I dare never hope any forgyuenesse unto me of my father. i. that I dare
never so much, as to hope that I should have any forgyuenes of my father. For
why, I that am false of my promysse, or which have broken my promysse, have
cast away or aside, his mylde or soft condyssyoned commandment. whereupon I
being forsaken of him, or put out of his house, shortly or incontinently
after, I have turned me to every most evil abominable offenses. i. unto all
sorts of deeds, worthy for one Phra. Universal. Rem oe^m co^ fregi turpi^
Membra. Luxu infami alea quid q^ scortis dedi?
to be whypped, or scourged. for I have broken together, all my thing fowly. i.
I have shamefully wasted or brought to naught all the good I had, by
prodygalitie or wastfull spendyng, by the dye of ill fame. i. at the dyce,
which be so ill bruted or spoken of. what which I have given. i. what a sum
of money, is Articul^s. Merito quidem meo ha^c inopem uita^ incolo. Inglorius
ui uo, parria ca reo. Metaph. Add quodea^ macula^ incidi quam nescio si elua^
un quam.
that which I have given, to hoores, or spente upon harlots? I lead this nedy
or pore life, truly through my deseruynge. i. I have well deserved to live in
this miserable poverty. I live without glory. i. without good renoume, and
want my countreye. add or put to. i. I may add or put to (this thing more
to my tale) that I am fallen into such a spotte, that I wot not if I shall
ever wash it out. i. I have so dysteyned my good name and fame, that I wotte
not whether I shall ever clawe it of again or not, that I may hold my peace.
i. to pass over this thing vndersylence Occupatio sieve pie^terito. Phras. Vt
(...) quoth (...) genus ^^um infa(...)bus notis. Quod fabula (...) omnib^, notis,
amicis. (...). Tum quid di(...) de patre, i^ qu^m (...) nominibus iniu (...)
(...)? (...) (...) quum (...) tu^ (...) mihi (...) (...) (...) fa^eor (...)
(...) (...). (...). (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
or to speak no word hereof, that I have sparkled my kynred with ill famed
marks. i. that I have shamed the kynred that I am come of, by my evil renoumed
padgentes, that I am a fable to all men, to such as know me, or be acqueynted
with me, and to my friends. i. that all men or all the world speaks shame of
me. Than furthermore what may I say of my father, against whom I have been
imurious by so many names. i. whom I have done wrong unto, or whom I have
offended by so many means or ways? goods as well of the body as of the soul,
being given unto me. i. where as I have had given unto me, many special gifts
of grace, as well of the body as of the soul, I knowledge or do confess it, yt
on the contrary side, I have abused. i. mysused the gyuer and graunter (of
them) wickedly. O thou Philautus my counselor. i. whose council I have
followed, where art thou now to me. i. where art thou now become? while that I
being a wretch, have lost my counsel together with my thing. i. while I sorry
wretch, yt I am (am left now) Phrasis. (...) author (...) mihi?
both redelesse and also goodlesse, wast thou the auctour to me. i. wast wast
thou the causer or the chief doer, that I should despise my fathers
commandments, with the holy volume. i. and the holy bible also? I wot well
the gods be angry to me. i. I know (...) m^hi i(...) (...) (...) (...)
a(...). (...) super (...) intollerabias est (...) quam (...) utero
well, that god is angry or myscontented with me, which have harkened or given
ear (to his counsel.) But over and above all things, the hunger which I
bear. i. feel in my bealy, is intolerable. i. is not able to be borne or
suffered, which I bear. i. suffer in my bealy, where it styreth up or
provoke great sorrows or peynes more cruel than death. i. than all sorts
or Nam neque sili quis neque coeno quo immergor seda re eam datur
kinds of death. For why, it is not given. i. men do not grant me, or be
not so good unto me, as to appease or cesse it. i. (my hunger) neither with
pescodshales, or the husks of other graynes or fruictes, nor with the very
myer, which I am drowned in. i. walowed in, the pain of the belly remains, my
hunger Phras. Adeo no^qua^ nisi deterius habebo i hac regione.
dwells. i. taryeth or remains still, in so much, never but worse I shall
have (me) in this region. i. in so much, that I shall never but fare or feel my
self worse and worse, in these parts. I se not what may rest or be behind
of counsel. i. I se not or perceive not Non uideo quid restet consilii. Heu
me. Quot mercenarii i patris aedibus abundant panibus Du^ interim hic fame peo
what reed I may take, or what may be best for me to do. Helas me. i. woo is
me, how many hired servants or journey men, or that be hired by the day, or
the hole year in my fathers house, abou^d with loves?. i. have loves of bread
in habundance or great plentye, while I in the mean while do peryshe or starve
for hunger. I might there (at home in my fathers Quiduis pos sem illic. face
re and perpeti, ut ex calamitate hac tanta me extraham. Phra. Age age quoth si
patrios posiliminio peta^ lares. Postliminio uocabulum iuris.
house) do and suffer to the uttermost, what thou will. i. what so ever it
were, so that I might draw me out. i. rydde me out forth of this so great a
calamytie or misery (that I am in) or. i. and it were but one lofe (of bread)
there it would releue or ease this hunger (of mine.) Come of, come of, what if
I seek my fathers house gods, (that have his house in tuition) after bounds
wise. i. what if I resort or go again to my fathers house, as one that has been in the hands of his enemies, and reckened for dead, and at the last come
home or into, within the precinctes or bounds of his house again. I could
not dare (do it). i. I dyrst not be so bold to do it, for because that I have
made my self an outlawe from thense. i. wylfully banyshed my Phra. Quid si
tentem? rum nihil egero. Qua fro^te. n. quo ore quibus uestibus redeam ad
patrem? Nudus sceleratus impude(...)
self. what if I assaye it, or prove it? than shall I do nothing. i. than
shall I be never the nerer, or never the better. For why, with what forehede.
i. with what countenance, with what mouth. i. with what face, with what
garments or apparayle, should I goo again, or return again to my father, I
being naked, synnefull, and shameless, or paste shame?

Actus quinti, Scoena quinta. Senarij omnes.
PELARGVS EVBVLVS ACOLASTVS
A In tu?
EV. Sic est.

PE. Obsecro te, quid audio?
Itane tandem famam, patriaque tibi bona
Acolaste tradidi, ut per flagitia perderes,
Mea uirtute partam gloriam? Viam
Feci facilem and planam ad uirtutis culmina,
Tu fecisti, ut difficilior nepotibus
Posthac tuis sit, qui libidinem malam
Virtuti anteposueris. An non equom fuit,
Meo ex praescripto uiuere te? Philautus hoc
Tibi adiutor fuit, ut huc corrueres mali,
Verissimastat sententia, ubi animus semel
Cupiditate se deuinxerit mala,
Consilia conscqui prorsus consimilia.
O me bis miserum patrem, tali filio.

EV. Pelarge mi, quin mittis has quaerimonias?

PE. Iustas parit quaerimonias, iustus dolor.

EV. Credo. Sed nunc res poscit, and locus monet.
Vt cogites de restituendo filio,
Pariterque affectum in eum induas prj patris,
Et re declares ipsa, quanti filium
Facias, aegrotus non nisi medica manu
Opus habet.

P. Habet, si spes sit uitae.

E. Est multa adhuc
In filio.

ACO. Nullus sum, si non quispiam
Deus mihi, ceu (...), appareat,
Nam malesibi consciae menti mors ingruit.

PE. Age, quae ille designauit mala, non iam puto.
Quin magis in hoc incumbam, uti honorem inglorio,
Salutem perdito, uitamque mortuo
Hinc Eubule apprecer.

EV. Pol te dignum facis.

ACO. Sed illud ecce subito aspiratur mihi,
Bonum esse patrem, facilem, placabilem, pium.
Vt attollam caput, illinc spem mihi ueniae
Affulgere. Hem quid si insistam ad patrem meum
Precaciunculam meditari supplicem?
Pater, peccaui in coelum and coram te, tuus
Posthac indignus sum, qui dicar filius.
Sodes pater, uel ut unum e mercenarijs
Tuis, me habeas, nihil operae quantumliber
Hinc sordidae recusem facere, ut in tuum
Municipium ascribar. Quid hoc? Oration
Placet. Euge surgam, and patris regiam mei
Recta petam, contemptis sordibus, id agam.

PE. Hem, quid? quid cogitas? Number fata filij?

EV. Quin dicam, quod libenter audias, tuum
Videbis hodie filium.

PE. Meum ne?

EV. Ita.

PE. Meum obsecro filium?

EV. Sic diuino.

PE. Deos
Quaeso. ut ne uana sint, quae nuncias. Enim
Vero, cupio ipsum iam uidere, and allo qui.

EV. Non esse eum procul a portu nunc arbitror.

PE. Age, ursamus, meus si redeat particeps.
In quem, affectum uere patrium modo indui,
Praeteritorum nihil reminiscens amplius.

AC. Quid? quo molior iter? ad patrem ne? maximum
Profecto facinus audeo. Nolo. Volo.
Ec quo fraetus? nihil referas pedem tamen.
Quis ille sibilus? quo me transuorsum rapit?
Praeter spem, in spem erigor, mihi instantis boni.

PE. Quando tandem uidebo te fili? nihil
Ne te miseret huius patris?

EV. Quid tam gemis
Pelarge? noli te macerare.

PE. Eubule mi,
Quid quaeso est, quod mea commouentur uiscera,
Ad istius occursum, quem prospicio procul?

EV. Pelarge? filius est.

PE. Est? Certe est, proruam
In illius amplexus.

EV. Sum uerus.

AC. Sed patrem
Video. Quid porro agam? adeon ad eum? Scilicet.
Pater peccaui in coelum, and coram te, neque
Posthac sam dignus, dici filius tuus.

PE. Hem, mi fili, o fili mi?

AC. Au, mi pater, fuge has
Meas sordes.

PE. Nihil quic quam offendunt, quia
Te amo gnate mi.

AC. Obsecro pater.

P. Donata su^t
Tibi omnia, bono animo es. Places, nunquam ut magis.

AC. O pietas patris.

P. Nu^c tollare humo.

A. hoccine
Est esse patrem? hoccine esse filium?

PEL. Heus, cito
Proferte stolam primam, and induite filium.
Deinde annulum date ei in manum, tum, calceos
Pedibus ipsius submittite. Subinde uitulum
Illum been saginatum adducite, atque item
Mactate, quo, sumptis epulis laetemur, and
Vno omnes imbuamur gaudio. Quia
Hic filius meus iamdudum mortuus
Erat, and reuixit: perierat, and inuentus est.
His ^is mi fili uestibus induere.

ACO. Sed o
Quid ego nunc te laudem pater, qui laudibus
Es omnibus superior? Hoc certo scio,
Nunquam tam magnifice quicquam dicam, tua
Quin id pietas long superet. Itan
Ex inferis and morte, ad uitam and gaudia,
Reuocasti me? prae gaudio, ubi sim, nescio.
Res nulla potest mihi tanta interuenire iam,
Vt aegritudinem adferat, tam gaudeo,
Me patrem habere te. Tibi me dedo libens.
Tibi me totum permitto, tu mihi pater,
Tu patronus, tu seruator, tu.

PE. Gnate mi?
Ex hinc eris mihi multo comunctissimus,
Vna salute foelix, conuiues mihi,
Age, age, intro epulatum concedamus.

EV. Scilicet.

Of the fyfthe Act, the fyfthe Scene. PELARGVS EVBVLVS ACOLASTVS.
All the verses be Senarij. i. of. xii. syllables.
PELAR. Say thou. i. say thou me that or say so?


EVB. So is it.


PEL. I beseech the for gods A^ostrophe. Phras. Ita ne tande^ famam patriaque
tibi bona Acolaste tradidi ut perfla gitia perderes mea uir^ tute partam
gloriam. Contentio. Via feci fecile^ and plana^ ad uirtutis culmina, tu ^^sti
ut difficili or nepotibus posthac tuis sit, qui libidinem mala^ uir tuti
anteposuerit. Phras. An non equi^ fuit meo ex praescripto niuere te?
sake what here I. i. what thing is this I here o Acolastus. have I delivered
the into thy hands or governance thy fame. i. thy good name, and thy fathers
goods, that by open crimes or offenses, thou should lose the glory. i. the
renome or fame, which I have gotten or won by my virtue. i. by my virtues or
worthy dealing? I made the way easy and plain unto the tops. i. the highest
degrees or perfections of virtue, thou have made or handeled thy self so, that
here after unto thy neuewes. i. successors, harder to come by which have put
before evil lust to virtue. i. which have preferred or more regarded or set by
nawghty sensual living than virtue. was it not, or was it not conueni ent or
sitting the, to live of my fore writing. i. that thou should live after my
appoyntement or manner assygned the? Philautus has been thy helper or given the
aid herein. i. in this matter, that thou myghtest fall down hither of ill. i.
that thou myghtest fall into this inconvenience or myschiefe, the sentence
stands most true. i. this sentence or saying is held to be Phrasis.
Verissima ^at sententia. Sententia. Vbiani nus semel cupiditare deuin^e rit
mala co^silia perrius co^sequi similia. Phrasis. O me bis miserum patre^ ^ali
filio. Pli Apheres. Quin mittis hinc quari^ moniam? Sententia. Iustas parit
qu^^ ^moni^s iustus dolor. Elegan. Sed nunc res (...), et ut (...).
most true, after that the mind has ones bound it self, or made it self
bound and subject with ill couetinge. i. by desyryng to execute any
myschiefe, counsayles to follow utterly like. i. that person seeks him out
counsaylours like to his appetite in every condition. O me a twyse miserable
father by such a soune,. i. woe is me double miserable father that I am, by the
means of such a son.


EVB. But O my Pelargus, leauest thou not these complayntes?. i. but O my
Pelargus, wylt thou not leave of, or set a side these complayntes of thine?


PEL. A just or rightuous sorrow, brings forth just complayntes. i. a good
cause to sorrow, causes a good cause of complaining. i. he hatha good cause
given him to sorrow, he has a good cause to make his moan, or to complain him.


EVB. I believe (the) or I believe it well, but now the thing asks. i. the
matter requires, the place warns. i. gyneth the monition, or calls upon
the, that thou should think of thy son to be restored. i. that thou
should bethynke the, how to restore thy son again. i. put him in the
state and right he had before (thou dyddest put him away from the, and
forsake him for Phras. Pariter. quod aff(...) men^ induas p^^pa tris. Phra. Et
(...) declares ipsa quan ^i fili^ facias. Sententia. Aegrotus no^ nisi medica
manu opu^ habet.
thy son) and also how thou may put on, in him the affection of a tender
loving or kind father. i. and thereto, how thou may take unto the toward
him such natural motion of tender love toward him, as for a kind father is
requisite, and that thou may declare or show plainly by the thing self,
how much thou make. i. how much thou estemest or set by thy son. a
sick man has not work but of a leachynge or healynge hand. i. the sick
person has Habet si spes sit uitae. Phrasi Nullus sum. Adagium. A
pomechanes ex machi na forth of a frame.
no need but of the physicians hand or help.


PEL. He has (need thereof) if there be hope, or any hope of life (in him) and
that he be not stark deed spiritually.


EVB. There is yet much hope (remaining in thy son).


ACO. I am no man. i. I am quyte undone for this world. If not some certain
god may appear unto me, as it were forth of a frame. i. except that god him
self, or some good saint apperyng to me forth of a cloud, do now help me at
a pynche, or forth lay to his helping hand, in this great dystresse of mine.
(What this adage means is declared by Souidas, Mos ueteru^ tragaederum ex
Souida.
for such as in old time were players of tragedies, when they had brought
the audience to have pity upon some great adversity or cruelty, which was
toward to be done unto some innocent person, and that they had brought such
persons into the hatred of the multitude, as were the procurers, or should
put any such cruelte in execution, which the people thought verily should
forthwith out of hand be put in execution, than to quiet the minds of the
auditorye, and to bring them sodeynely to a rest and peace again, there
should sum god sodaynelye appear from sum high place, nere unto the
Theater, by whose commandment and divine authority al parts should The like
manner used now at our days in stage plays. Phras. Na^ male sibi consciae
me^ti mors ingruit
at ones be put to silence. Of which the like thing is used to be showed now a
days in stage plays, when god or some saint is made to appear forth of a
cloud, and succoureth the parties which seemed to be toward some great
danger, through the Soudans cruelty.) For to my mind euylly acknowlegyng to
it self. i. being pryuy to it self of ill doing, death stresseth me. i.
for where as mine own conscience gives me, Eloquens. Age, quae ille
designauit mala, no^ iam puto.
that I am gylty, death preaceth fast upon me.


PEL. Go to the evil things, which he has trespassed in, lest the marks
behind him of, I do not now consider. i. the myscheuous padgentes which he
has plai Contentio. Quin magis in hoc incum bam, uti honorem inglo ^^o.
salutem perdito. ui(...) mortuo, hinc appre(...).
ed, I do not now pass upon them, I shall more lean into this thing. i. but I
shall rather apply my mind here unto, that I may from hensforth, O tubulus,
pray to him that is glorylesse, honor, to him that is lost health or
safety, and to him that is dead, life or recovery of life. i. but I shall
rather from henseforth set mine intent here upon, to pray to god, to send unto
him good fame, which is now without renome, and to send him safety, which
is now but a cast away, and in danger of utter undoing, and to send him
that is dead in soul, to recover his soul health Phras. (...) dignu^ facis.
again.


EVB. By the temple of Pollux, thou do a thing worthy the. i. thou do as
is syttyng for the, or as does become the.


ACOL. But lo, or behold this Sed illud su(...) aspiratur mihi. Word^ esse
patrem facilem (...) abilem (...).
thing is suddenly breathed unto me. i. suddenly inspired into me, my father to
be good. i. that my father is good, easy to be appesed or pleased, and devout
or tender hearted, and from thens does hope of forgyuenes shine toward me,
that I may lift up my heed. i. and by reason hereof, take I good hope unto me,
to opteyn forgyuenesse, and that courageth me to hold up my Vt attollam caput.
Phras. Quid si insi(...) ad patre^ meum preca(...)cula^ meditari suppli cmm?
Acoiasti pre catiuncula.
heed (which hitherto I hold down for shame.) What? What if I step to it, and
divise some humble prayer to my father?. i. what if I go upon it, and bethink
me of some lowly petition to my father? (and say to him on this wise) Father, I
have sinned against the heaven, and before the: after this. i. from this time
forewarde, I am unworthy, which may be called thy son. i. I am not worthy
to be taken for thy son. have Sodes.
me, if thou dare father, like one of thy hired servants. i. take me, if it
be thy pleasure, as one of thy journey men. from hensforth I will refuse to do
nothing Nihil operae qua^tum libet hinc sordidae recuse^ facere ut in tuu^
municipium ascribar. Vocabulum iuris municipium.
of warke, how so ever much thou wylt fylthy. i. from hens forward, I will
forsake no labor or toylynge, be it never so vile, so that I may be written
into thy free town ship, to whom thou do wytsafe to give thy gifts of
lyberalitie unto. i. I shall be glad to take any manner labor upon me, be it
never so sluttyshe, so I may be taken for one of them, who thou have in thy
tuitio^, and that I may boldly resort agein into thy house, Oration placet Euge
sur ga^ et patris regiam mei recta petam.
as one of thy accepted number. What this Acolastus, this prayer pleases. i.
what sayeste thou hereto Acolastus? this supplication likes me. have done or
come of, I will rise, and I will seek by a straight (way) the pryncely palayce
of my father. i. and I will go get me streyghte to my fathers pryncely palaice,
after I have despised. i. regardinge not these fylthynesses of mine, this
thing will I do. Pelargus speaking to himself. Ha Interrogatio. Hem quid?
quid cogi tas, number fata filii?
what?. i. what is the matter? what thing thynkeste thou. i. whereupon thynkest
thou? whether the desteny of thy son. i. what shall be^ide or become of thy
son or not?


EVB. But I shall say. i. but I will tell the a thing, that thou would
gladdely here of. This day shalt thou se or have a sight of thy son.


PELAR. Who mine. i. Whom my son?


EVB. Ye.


PEL. Of whom, of my son I pray the?


EVB. I prophecy so. i. I deem, or I guess so.


PEL. I beseech the goddis, Sic diuino. Deos queso, ut ne uana sint quae nun
cias.
that they be no vain things, that thou show. i. I pray god those
tidings thou tellest me, be no gee fa or a matter of none effect. For in very
deed, I couete now to se him, and speak to him. i. for of a suerty I would
now gladly or very feign se him, and speak with him.


EVB. I wene him now not to be far from the haven. i. I suppose he be not
far from the haven now.


PEL. Come of let us go se, if my parttaker Age, uisamus meus si rede^ at
particeps. Phras. In quem affectum uere patrium modo indui prate^it nihil
reminis^e^s amplius.
may become again. i. whether my partner (which should take part of such as god
sendith me) be returned home again, in whom I have now put on an affection,
truly fatherlike. i. toward whom surely well minded or tenderly affectioned as
a father should be toward his son, remembering nothing more of things
passed. i. having no more in my remembrance, or having clean forgotten all
things that be passed and gone.


ACO. What? whyther goo I about a journey. Phras. Quid? qo mo(...)ter ad patre^
(...) Simum profecto facinus (...).
i. whytherwarde take I my iourneye? or whyther ward am I going? whether to
my father. i. am I going to my father ward? In very deed I dare a most
greatte act. i. for a suretye, this is as mysse bold or as fool hardy an
enterprise as can be (ymagined) I will not, I will, where in trusting, where
^olo volo. Phras ^^quo feitus? Phra. Nihil, referes pedem tamen. Phra. Quis
ille filibus quo me transuor sum capit. Phras. Praeter spem in (...) erigor
mihi insi ^ris boni.
upon bearing of me bold, nothing remove thy foot for all this. i. yet for
all this matter, remove thy foot no where, or step not one foot forth of
this place (for all these fansyes of thyn). Haa, what a whisshynge of the wind
is yonder same. i. what a divine or godly inspiration is this same, that
comes from yonder place ward, which rauisheth me on the side half, or
perseth me ouerthwartlynge, beyond all hope or beyond all gods forbodde. I
am lift up in to hope. i. seeing no cause why, I should have any manner hope, yet
I take good heart, or good hope vnvnto me or some good being nere. i. that
there is some goodness toward nere at hand.


PEL. When shall Phrasis. Nihil ne te miseret huipatris?
I at the last see the my son? does it nothing pity the of this father. i.
haste thou no pitye of this father of thine (which looks so many long looks,
and with Metaph. Quid tam ge mis Pelarge? noli te mace^ rare.
so great desire, for the?)


EVBV. Why bewaylest thou thus soore O Pelargus?. i. why make thou this
pytuous moan, O Pelargus? will not to make lean thy self. i. take not on thus,
or fare not thus foul with thy self, that thou shouldeste for leannes thus
pine away.


PEL. O my Eubulus, what thing I pray Phras. Quid quaeso est qquod mea co^
moue^tur uiscera ad istius occursu^, que^ prospicio procul?
the, is it that my bowelles be stirred or moved to gether at the runnynge to
or against of this manne, whom I se or behold a far?. i. what means it I
pray the, o my Eubulus, that I feel al my blood to be thus styred, or that all
the blood in my body comes up or flashseth up into my face, at the coming
hitherwarde of this person, whom I see yonder a far of?


EVB. O Pelargus it is thy son.


PEL. Is it? surely Phras. Proruam in illius amplexus Phras. Sum uerus. Sed
patrem uideo.
it is, I will rushe forward into his embrasynges. i. I will step forth
toward him in all have, to take him in mine arms.


EVB. I am a true man. i. my words prove true.


ACO. But I se my father, but what now may I do? may I go to him? what else.
Father I have sinned into the heaven and before the, nor Acolasti precatiuncula.
here after I am not worthy to be called thy son.


PE. What my son, O my son.


ACO. Awe my father Hem mi fili o fili mi. Fuge has me as sordes.
slay these fylthinesses of mine. i. away away, or get the away from these
vilenesses of mine, my dear father.


PE. They do nothing at al annoy me, or displease me, for I do love the
entierly my son.


ACO. I beseech the for gods love my father.


PEL. All things be forgyuen to the. i. al these offenses and trespaces be
forgiven Phras. Donata sunt tibi oia bono animo es, places nunquam ut magis.
Phras. Nunc tollare humo.
the. Thou please so as never more. i. I am so much plesed with the, as I
was never more, or so as I was never better contented with the.


ACO. O the reverend and entier love or tender hartydnes of a father.


PEL. Now be thou raised or lifted up from the ground. i. arise now and stand
up son.


ACO. Is it this to be a father. i. is this the matter to be a father? is this
the thing to be a son?


PEL. Bring forth sone. i. shortly, or at ones the first stole. i. the first
long robe, and put it upon my son, than after give him a ring Phra.
Dein(...) anu^si dare (...) manum, tum coleros pedi(...) ipsius sub(...).
Phras. Quo sum(...)s (...) let(...)r, ^t uno (...) imbuamur gaudio Contentio.
M^rtuus erat and reuixit, pe(...)at and in^entus est. Phra. Sed o quid e(...)
nu^c te laude^ pater qui lau^ous es^ omnibus superior? Hoc certo s^i ^ nu^quam
ta^ magnifice qui^ quam dicam tua qui id pietas long superet.
into his hand. i. after that put a ring on his finger, afterward put shoes
under his fete. i. put a peire of shoes on his fete, and forthwith or while
these things be a doing, lead hither to me, or bring hither unto me, the
caulfe that is well fatted. i. that is set up to be made fat, and also kill
him, whereby, or by reason whereof after we have taken our meats. i. our repast
we may be merry or glad, and may be all endowed with one self joy. For why,
this son of mine was lately or but late ago dead, and he is revived or come
ageyn from death to life: he was perished or utterly lost or undone, and now he
is found. With these with these garments my son be thou invested or clothed.


AC. But Oh what may I now praise the father. i. Oh what laud or praise may
I now give the my father? which art more vpperer than all praises. i. which
far ouerpassest all manner praises (that can be given the) This know I for a
very suertie, I shall never say any thing so magnifykelye, but that thy
fatherlye pity may ouerpasse it. i. I shall never be able to say any thing
so hyghly to the setting forth of thy excellent benefits, but that thy
fatherly tender love does over Contentio. ^tan ex inferis and morte ad uita^
and gaudia reuo casti me? Phras. Res nulla potest mihi tata interuenire iam ut
aegritn dine^ afferat. Eloquens. Tibi mededo
pass it. Haste thou thus or on this wise called me again from hell and death,
unto life and joys? There is nothing so great that may now come to me
between. i. that may chance by the way, or happen unto me by any occasion, that
may bring unto me, or cause me to have any dyspleasure of mind. I do so much
joy me to have the a father. i. I do so much rejoice, that I have the for my
father, I give me gladdely or with good will holly or utterly as bounden
servant unto the, I suffer me holly to the. i. I give the full souerayntie
over me. thou art to me a father, thou art Repetitio. Tibi, tibi, tu, tu, tu,
tu. Phras. Ex hinc eris mihi multo co^iu^ctissimus vna salute foe lix conuiues
mihi.
to me a patron. i. a defender in my causes, to save me from oppression, thou
art my savior or my preserver thou.


PEL. My son from hense forth, thou shall he to me by much the most
conjoined. i. from this time forthwarde, thou shall be far or be much more
nerer about me, than any other person shall be, or from henseforthe there shall
no body be more nere about me than thou shall (for) being by one salvation
happy. i. being blessed by this one atonement, thou shall live Phras. Age,
age, intio epulatum concedamns Scilicet.
with me in company. Come of, come of, let us go in adores to eat and drink
together, or to make merry together.


EVB. be it on gods name.


PERORATIO.
Trimetroi.
NOlo putes spectator optime, hic nihil
Mysterij latere tectum, ludicra
Sub action. Quippe, perdito salus
Vt parta sit homini, reteximus, uelut
Imagine oculis prodita. Vnde discere
Facile potes qui hominis rebellio in deu^
Et contumacia, quam meritam accersat sibi
Mortem. Sed ex aduerso, habes, DEI patris
Sit quanta pietas, qui libenter redditum
Sibi filium recipit, neque exprobratsua
Ipsius impio commissa. Sed complexibus,
Sed osculis, in filium totus ruit.
Nihil moratus illius sordes, amor
Enim haud uidet maculam, and prompte mali
Pridem patrati obliuia accipit. Cito
Qui laeditur, parum amet oportet. Iam pater
Coelestis omneis citra citrouersiam
Vt amore uincit, ita and reponit filio
Suo beneficia summa, pro maleficijs
Summis, facitque, ut tota gaudijs domus
Nunc perstrepat, quae luctuo sa dudum erat.
Quaeso, uicissitudinem rerum uide.
Huc gaudiorum omnes quidem uo camini,
Qui astatis hic, si modo agnito malo
Resipiscitis, ueniaeque spem cum prodigo
Nepote, uobis a patre pollicemini,
In hoc adeo CHRISTVS parabola^ipse adhiber,
Vt quam dolemus nos DEO aduersarios
Iraeque nasci filios, tam nos iuuet
Contra, in patris long optimi quod gratiam
Rediuimus, per spiritus charismata.
Quae si fibi persuasa erunt, per nos satis
Spectator optime, nihil est, quod amplius
Sperabis, a nobis frui istis gaudijs,
Tibi datur, in omneis dies. Plaude, and Vale.
GVILIELMVS FVLLONIVS canebat, apud Hagienses suos. Anno. M. D. XXIX.

THE PERRORATION. i. the fynall conclusion of this present comedy, called of
the greeks Epilogus, made of verses trimeters.
Would not thou should think most Phras. Nolo putes hic nihil mysrerij
latere Iudicra sub action. Phras. Quippe perdito salus ur parta sit homini
reteximus uelut imagine oculis prodita.
best beholder. i. most worshypfulle loker upon us, nothing of mystery to
lurk covered here. i. that there is no secret sense or intent, which here
lies hydden in covert, under our playeng action. i. under the plaienge gesture
or setting forth of our present matter. For why, we have vnweaued. i.
discovered and made open (unto you) how health has been gotten to the lost
man. i. how mankind, which was undone, or cast away, has recovered his
salvation again, as by an image bewrayed to the eyes. i. as it were by the
setting forth or representynge of this matter before your eyes, whereby, or by
reason whereof, thou may easily learn, what the rebelling is of man to god
ward. i. how great the stubburnesse of man's heart toward god is, and how
well deserved death he may Phras. Quam meritam accersat sibi mortem.
call unto him. i. how justly mankind through his resystyng or styffenes of
heart, has deserved to dye euerlastyngly. But on the contrary side, thou
haste. i. thou may here perceive, how great the tenderness of goddis
benignity or mercyfulnesse is, which gladly receives his son yielded to him.
i. which with great reioycyng, receives his son again, so often as he does
yield him self unto him, nor he does not Phrasis. Neque exprobrat sua ipsius
impio cummissa.
vpbraide unto the sinful person his of him self, procedynge offenses. i. nor
he does not cast the sinner or the wicked person in the tethe, or lays not
before him, to his rebuke, the offenses, which he has committed through his
own iniquity, but he holly hastly steppeth Phra. In siliu^ totus ruit nihil
mo ratus illius fordes.
toward his son with halsynges and kyssinges. i. but he al together. i.
with his hole body falls upon his son, to take him in his arms, and to
kiss him, nothing tarieng for his filthynesses. i. stoppynge or stayinge
nothing for his vilitie or vnclenlynesses. For why, love sees no spotte. i.
For why, in Sententia. Amor enim haud uider maculam and prompti mali pridem
patrati obliuia accigit Sententia. Cito qui laeditur parum amet oportet. Phras.
Citro co^tro uersiam. Phras. R^panit fi^^^^ao been(...) (...) ma^efi^i(...)
summis.
love is no lack, and love redelye takes forgetfulnesses of the ill before
time done. i. and shortly or at ones it forgets the euyls ye late before
committed, he that is sone hurt, it behooves he must love but a litel. i. he
that is sone offended or agreued, it must needs follow, that he loves but a
lyttel. Now the heavenly father, like as on thy side controversy. i. like as
it is out of al doubt or question, or out of the case, for any strife or debate
to be had for the matter, that he ouerpasseth or surmounteth all creatures in
love, so lays he up in store to yield again unto his son for his most high
malfaytes, or my^dedes, most high benefytes. i. so recompenseth he his son
for his the most great and detestable offenses, that can be, with most high
and bontuous rewards, and he makes. i. he causes that all the house makes a
noise with joys. i. that all the house is on a rore, with making of noise for
Phra. Facitque ut to ta gaudiis do inus nu^c perser^pat. Quae suctuosa dudum
erat. Phra. Quaeso uicissitudinem retum uide.
joy, which but of late or but of a late while ago before was full of sorrow
and mourning. I desire the (O thou most gentyl beholder) se the turn of
things. i. I do beseech the, consider the mutual interchaungynge, from one
estate to an other of things: hither of joys truly be you al called, which
stand to here. i. all you, which stand here at this present time, be called
unto those joys, so now your evil being knowledged, you return to your
right judgment again. i. so that you after you be comme again Phras.
Simodo agnifo malo re sipiscitis ueniaeque spem cu^ prodigo neporo uobis a
patre pollicemini.
to your right minds, do acknowledge your misdeeds or offenses, and do
promise to your selves with the prodygall spend up all, or stroyegood, hope of
forgyuenes of your father. i. and make you fast and sure, that you shall have
remyssion, and pardon of your merciful father, like as this ryottous consumer
and caster away of his goods, did opteyu. Into this thing in very deed,
Christ him self gives this parable. i. Christ him self shows us this
parable for this intent, that by so much as we sorrow us to be adversaries unto
god, and to be borne the Elegan. Vt quam dolemus, tam nos iuuet co^tra.
sons of wroth. i. that by so much the more as we be sorry, that we be
trespassers against god, and to be born the chyldern of indignation, so much
against it might help us. i. so much on the contrary side, it might releue or
succor us, that we returned again into the Graeca uox. Charismata graces or
gifts.
grace. i. into the favor of the most best father, through or by the menes of
the graces of the holy ghost. Which things o thou most best beholder. i. o thou
most worshypfull loker upon us, if they shall be persuaded unto the. i. if thou
shall give perfyte trust and credence unto them, there is nothing more that
thou shall hope for of us. i. there is nothing more remaining behind for the
to be looked for (to be received by the at Frui istis gaudiis tibi datur in
omnes dies plaude and vale.
this time at our hands) but that it is given to the to enjoy these joys
into all days. i. (but that we here have showed the these gladsome tidings)
how god has given or granted unto the this synguler grace, that (so thou
confyrme the to his benign ordinances) thou may be partaker of these his
ioys for evermore Rejoice therefore by some outward sign of contentation, and
fare well.

VVYLLIAM FVLLONIVS THE MAKER of this present Comedy, did set it forth before
the bourgeses of Hagen in Holand. ANNO. M. D. XXIX.

Impress. Land. in aedibus Tho. Berthel. regii impressoris, Cum priuilegio ad
imprimendum solum.


