A myrrour or glass for them that be syke and in pain.

Translated out of Dutche in English.

Mathei. xi. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are lade^ and I will ease
you.

1, 5.36.

The translatour unto the Christian reader.
CHrist our savior in the.xxv. chapter of Matthew when he had warned us to
watch, contyne^tly after sets forth a parable of a rich ma^which (beyenge
purposed to go from home for a season) delivered his goods unto his
servants, saying: Occupe till I come again* Now as I did confer this
parable with the.iiii. chap. of the epistle to the Ephesians, I perceived that
Christ meant this by himself: For after that he had fulfilled his course or
time that he should be here in earth, he is mounted or ascended up in to
heaven, (as it is written in the.lxv, Psalm) and led captyue captivity, and
has given gifts unto me^, These gifts does Paui in process declare what
they be. And again in the.xiiii chapter, of the first epistle to the
Corinthians speaking of the gift of tunges says: When ye come together
eueryone has a psalm, has doctrine, has a tunge, has an interpretation.
Let al be done to the edyfyenge, Now when I considered these aforesaid places
of scripture, knowenge his ryghtuous requyringe again of his proper gifts,
being but lent unto me for a space: I have endeavored me self to delyuere yt
to the exchaungers, to the intent that when my Lord shall come he may receive
yt with vauntage. And that he may so do, yt shall be in thy good Christian
reader. And let yt not move thy that they be lay men that be the speakers in
this treatise, for so doing ye might be compared unto Christ's contremen Marc.
vi. which hearing his heavenly wisdom, and seeing his excellent myrakles,
said skornfullye: Where has he this wisdom? and what wisdom is this that is
given him? is not this the carpenter? the son of Joseph. etc. Do not thou I
say lykwyse, in estemynge the matter of less value, but wysshe rather that
such a world might be, wherein the prophecy of Jeremy in the.xxxi chap, be
fulfilled where as he says: I will be their God, and they shall be my people.
And from thence forth shall noman teach his neghbure, or his brother, and
say: Know the Lord But they shall al know me from the lowest vnte the
highest, says the Lord. Would God this world were come, for than shall the
lamb go fedynge with the wolf, that is the cruel with the innocent than
shall all the goodness of the holy cite of Hyerusalem come upon us, than shall
it be a golden world, than shall it be a time of peace in what time Christ
would be borne, Seeing then that so much goodness does follow the word of God,
let us with one accord pray the father of heaven saying. Bow down thy
head Lord, and behold the case that we are in, mark how great need we have
of thy mercy, se how far we are gone astraye leaving the ye well of life, and
drinking the modde of our pouddels. Give such mind unto our princes (whose
hearts be in thy hand) that the superstitiousnes of Baal be roted out by them,
and thy fotesteppes made easyer to be followed Paul says: What company have
Christ and Belial? Morouer where Christ will raygne there will he be alone. He
says he will not give his glory unto another, he will have no partyfelous.
Wherefore good Christen reader, that thou may fulfill Gods will the better in
geuynge him the glory praise and worship, I have taken in hand to translate
out of dutch in english this little book: whose worthynesse can not be
estymed, For in yt shall thou learn to fix thy mind unto God only, geuynge
him his dew honor, worship, and praise all other superstitions avoided: and
unto thy neghbure love and charity declared with outward deeds of the same,
Doing this ye shall have here quietness of conscience in God, and here after
fruition of glory with him: the which grant us he that is king everlasting.
Ame^.

Timothe coming from his vicare which refused to come to the poor sikman
Lazarus says on this wise.
Timothe. O CHRIST IESV very true heardma^ and bishope of our soull, how few
heardmen be there found which bestow their souls for their heard, as thou
have done earnestly: eue^ to ye end. Our heardmen do not now watch thy
sheep: They covet not to enter in to the shepfolde by the door: but rather
run away, as very hyrelinges wha^ they se the wolf come. Ye they themselfs
help to invade them. Ah they be not like unto thine wych thou sandest as sheep
among the wolves: seeing they be become as wolves among sheep. Is not this
greatly to be lamented.


Tobias. What is the cause neghbure of your sorrow, of your syghtes, and of
your co^playntes by the street?


Timothe. It pityeth me that we pooremen se so few ensamples of love, and that
of them which be our heardmen, and gwydes.


Tobias. Why so good brother, what is the matter?


Timotheus Ye know that our neyghbure Lazarus is very syke, whose grefe has
endured long. Insomuche that his impacience greueth me.


Tobias. It is true, I told his wife, I would come and visit him to morrow,
and teach him some good thing of dyenge, for he might dye ear long. But what
will ye tell me of him?


Thimotheus. I desired even now our new vicare for Christ's passion to come
and visit our poor Lazarus once, and to teach him some good thing of
patience, which he ought to have in his pains, But alas yt was song to a defe
man.


Tobias. Is yt so? what did he lay for himself?


Timotheus. You may think it welynough: what were they wont to lay for them
as they were moved to such a good deed? He said, I must say first my matins,
and then say mass: Verily I am not now at leisure, but as soon as I am, I
will come.


Tobias. What is yt that I do hear? I had went he had been a man according
to the gospel: for he behaueth himself so in the pulpet, that it is maruayl to
me. But I se wellynough he is but a dissemblinge hypocrite: For he was wont to
say in the pulpit, that noman should spare him ye he would rise if yt were at
mydnight.


Timothe. I reken the same, but it shall be for to mynistre the sacrament, or
anoylynge, and to gain thereby so^me money. Else will he remeue not one foot.


Tobias Yt is a marvelous case surly, for the man does reason sometime of the
gospel as if he were an angel.


Timotheus. He does as many one does besides, he bears the gospel in his
sleue, and vtereth it with his mouth, but another in his heart, nor his hands.


Tobias. It is to be lamented verily that we be so ready to use the lybertyes of
meats, clothinges, places, and times, which the gospel enyoieth. But we
endeuer not this liberty to the mortifyenge of our carnal desires, nor to the
service of our brother. But shall I tell you what you ought to have done?


Timothe. I pray you what?


Tobias. You should have strenghted the deuocio^ of our vicar with a groat, so
might you have optayned him best.


Timothe. It is sure so. And that appeared well last day by the aldermannes
wedowe wheare as it was no need to bid him come when she lay syke, for with
her was he daily, ye vnbydden, waytinge for the soull as a carmeraunte does
for the carien: and all was to obtain somewhat by testament, Be these feders?
be these pastores.


Tobias. No but rather wolves, whereof Ezechiel speaks saying: They have eaten
the milk of their floke, and with the woll they be clothed, but they keep them
not from the wolves. My thinks they be dissembling Hypocrites, and painted
graves, which with long bablinge, or service saying devour wedows housen:
wherefore they shall receive the greater damnation. I think also these be the
falfe prophets semynge outwardly sheep. But inwardly they be ravenous wolves.


Timothe. If these prestes (and as they call the^felf) religiousmen knew what
a christen dedeyt is to comfort the sorrowful to visit the syke, to help the
poor. They should prefer the helping of them before all other works. For
God shall esteem yt which is done to ye least of his as tough it were done to
himself. But prestes do not regard yt: for they say they have been long
enough with the syke, when they have ministered the sacraments.


Tobias. If they yett ministered the supper of our Lord to the syke dewly,
teaching the Christians what Christ has optayned for us: than might the
pacient give thanks to God of the victory, wherein he has overcome death to
the beleuynge. For that is the saying of Christ, wha^ he says: As often as ye do
ytt, ye shall do ytt in the remembrance of me, which is acordynge to Paul's
saying. When the death of our Lord is showed. But alas they do naught now but
only rehearse ye xii. artikles of the faith sleghtly to the syke. And so
mynister the sacrament without farther instruccio^ of yt, thinking all things
to be very well dispached. I pray God they have not of times more mind on the
yewel which lies perchance in the sight, than on the necessite of the poor.
Or that they mind not more a good testament.


Tobyas. They must be very blind seeing, they make less conscience of
leaving the bread of the poor (that is Gods work) onbroken: than of
leaving their mass matins, and other service onsay^^e, seeing it is hongred
so soore for. The Christe^man which is the lyuinge tempel of God must stand
by, and abide till the pressed has dispached his matyns, or vysited the dead
men's graves, has he never so great need. If Christ had the yongeman which
would be his disciple to luffre the dead bury the dead, and yt he should not
leave Gods word ondeclared for burieng: what shall he say the^ think you to
them which excuse them selfs with their rummelynge, and mummelynge of matyns,
euensonge, and such like popyshenesse that they visyte not the syke, or show
the kingdom of God where troubell and anguyshe is?


Tobyas. Yt has not avails the young man surely that he would have buried yt
dead: and much less shall it avail the^ yt be marked with the beasts mark to
leave their neighbor onserued, and onregarded, Ye Christ himself, and that
with the deeds of charity, which must be preferred before all the works of the
law, and promise, acordynge as Christ says that he is Lord of the Sabbath. We
also shall be judged after the declarynge of the deeds of charity toward our
neighbor.


Tymotheus. Yt is well said surely, and according to the gospel. Christ also
rebuked the scribes justly for their opinion of ceremonies, commaundynge them
to go, and learn what that saying of God is: I will mercy and not sacrifyce.


Tobyas. How understand you that saying? will God have no sacrifice then which
he him self commanded so earnestly to de observed? here seems Christ to be
contrary to the will of his father.


Tymotheus. I will tell you. All sacryfices and burnt offerynges of the law
were ordained, and institute unto the Jews for none other intent, save only
for their sygnifycacions. They did sygnifie the true offering of Christ to
come: which out of very pury heat of love, did offer himself unto death, by
sheddynge of his own blood, for us poor sinners, and thus is he become our
true and everlasting pressed. Seeing then we have Christ, al other offerynges
cease: and now we are come to the light all other shadows vanishe. For Christ
is the end and fulfillinge of the law, wherefore we need nomor the law with
her ceremonies, and ryghtwesnes as a teacher leadynge us to Christ: ye he
only comes to the father which has herd him, and is taught of him. For so
much then as the Pharisees did regard, and had confydence more in sacrifyces,
and works of ye law than they had respect to him yt was sygnyfyed thereby,
whose deeds of charity also they counted less then the ryghtwysnes of the
law: therefore warns Christ them to learn, that God will have mercy and no
sacrifyce, which he did loathe as Esaias does clearly express.


Tobyas. You have declared that very well. But what say ye to this word of
Christ. These ought to have been done, and not leave the other undone? for our
prestes and lawers understand hereby, that they may rather leave the works of
mercy undone, than to leave their mattens, pattens, masses, diriges, and such
other mu^blinges vnsayde.


Tymotheus. With this saying rebuked Christ the Scribes, and Pharisees which at
that time estymed their sacryfices, feasts, tithes, and offeringes, as hygly:
as our Papists count masses, saying of service, worshippinge of saints for
the most acceptable works. The tithes were lymited unto the prestes of the
old law and granted of God in the law: but seeing they sought their deuty
so narowly not willing to transgress the law in the same tythinge of mynt,
comin, and anyse, they declared their covetousness, and feigned love of the law.
For in that part of the law (wherein their advantage did consiste) they would
have no breach, but in other chief points of the law, namely where they were
comman^ded by the law to offer them selves to the service of their neighbor,
they were as negligent as though it had not pertayned to them. Therefore says
Christ: Woe unto you Scrybes, and Pharisees, ye ypocrytes, which tyth mynte,
anyse and common, and leave the wayghtyer matters of the law behind: namely
judgment, mercy, and faith. These ought to have been done, and not to leave the
other behind, that is, So long as the law has her course (as yet she has)
so long ye may receive your dewty of ye tithes, ye of anyse, mynte, and
common: but the deeds of faith, love, and mercy which ye law requires of you
as chefest may you not leave undone, but rather do them before all other.
Behold now we there this rebuke (which our spyritualty applies to their
excusation) does aptly serve to warn and to rebuke them: Seeing they be cursed
with the aforesade ypocrytes curse. For they curse and yaule more upon them in
their pulpet, that withdraw them their offering days, or prouent dewtyes
(which notwithstondynge God has not granted them in ye new testament, as he
did in ye old with the tithes:) than they curse those that transgress Gods
commandment in aduoutry, in dronknesse, and onmercyfulnesse. So that they
may well be lykened unto the ox in the prophet which go in the pastures of
Samaria, and eat up the poor. These be the prophets which deceive the
people* showing peace, and bytynge with their teth, in whose mouth if ye cast
not a piece of meat they raise an holy war against you, that is. They say ye
be a cursed heretyke, and that ye ought to be persecuted, and to be condemned.
As though such war and controuersye were acceptable unto God. Therefore
(says the prophet Micheas) your vision shall be turned to night* and your
prophecienge to darkness the son that go under over these prophets. But thy
people of God ^ save you forgive you your sins, and say ye prosper right
well, they deceive you: for there is no salvation in man. These ye (...)
devour meadows houses which in their (...) mawes ^^^^rgest all that comes to
them, gold, many* house^ gardens land, sonde, rentes, grauntes, pardons These
be they that justify the ungodly for gifts denuncynge peace, and all is for
their belys pleasure.


Tobyas. Soft brother Tymothe, conceive not such ra^cour against the wicked,
seeing their judgment does not tarry: let them go. They be blind and leaders of
ye blind. We may endeavor us to exhort the^ to come to the knowledge of
God, and to the love of their neighbor, if peradventure they would give ear
to us, and knowledge their sins.


Tymotheus. I pray the how will thou exhort them? seeing they say to the
saying, se not: and to the vndersto^dinge, perceive not: if they knoledged
their blyndnesse, they should have no sin (as Christ says). But now they
say, we se: wherefore their sin remains with them. As namely when we laymen
begin to exhort these anointed: laynge scripture before them then will they
hear by no means, taking great scourne to be admonished of us.


Tobyas. Surely I believe yt be evil enough, whearfore me seems it best for us
to walk hensforth in the way of the Lord discretely.


Tymotheus. You say south, If we can do better than our curates do, seeing
they be slak in their dewty shall we not do the same? For a servant that
knows his masters will, and does yt not, shall be beaten much. What is then
your advise, that we shall do?


Tobyas. Verily, that our eye be not so sore fyxed upon another man's fault,
but endeavored to follow the Lord, whereunto he calls us by a lively sterynge
of our heart with his sprete. Now if our guydes of the church do not rule well
the flock (as ye do say), yet will not we leave them, and forsake them as
though they were not pertaining unto us. For God has charged every man with
his neighbor as scripture testyfyeth. Therefore let us aid our neighbor
comfort him, counsel him, as we se his most need. Think ye not this to be
the best brother. Tymothe?


Tymotheus. Ye verily. And to this does the parable of the gospel featly agree,
where the Samaritan (which is an abiecte in the sight of the Jews) is praised
of Christ above the Leuyte or Pressed, because he showed mercy upon the poor
mamed: which also was therefore the Samaritans neighbor, because he chesfly had
need of him Although we laymen be reputed among the anointed, and Leuytes as
vile as the Samarytans: yet ought we nevertheless take cure of the poor, and
show all the service necessary, when all Leuytes, Prestes, Monks, Freres, do
forsake, and despise them. The deeds of charity ought we to charge none other
man withal according to your saying.


Tobyas. Now is the time that we ought to dysperse the grace which god has
given, us, and pour yt out upon our neighbor in helpinge, comfortynge, and
unselynge him. As Christ has given himself for us, he being in form of God,
and equal with God. Yt is now time to bestow our talent which God has given
us to the intent that we should bring it again with increace, and not to hyde
yt in the ground. He that is rich ought to make the poor rich also, for to
that intent has he received his chesse. He that is wise ought to teach the
folysshe, and to bring him to understanding, for to such intent has he
received his wisdom. He that is great of abylite ought to aid him* that is
vnabell, as the wedowe, fatherless and motherlesse, boninfances, for to that
intent has God given him superiote. Lo in such like cases ought we the one to
be an helper, comforter, savior, to ye other as our faith is that Christ is
our savior, comfort, and health. Therefore also does Christ command that
we shall so show the light of our faith before men, that they saying our
good works, may praise and glorifye the father which has given such mind*
and godli purpose in our hearts, through his holy ghost: that is that we be
glad to serve our neighbor not for thanks, nor for praise, but of very
love. For who so ever seyth his brother in necessite, and withdraws his heart
from him, how can the love of God remain in him.


Tymotheus. He that loves not his brother being present in his sight: how can
he love God whom he seyth not. We Christen men have none other declaracion or
boastinge that we be true Christians, but only love. Christ says: In that
shall men know that ye be my disciples if ye love one another. Wherefore the
life of a Christian is not a life of pleasure, offleshe, of wylthynesse, or of
sensual ap, petyte. Nor it is no life of ceremonies: church goynges, or like
supersticions but it is a life of the sprete, of treuth, of love and mercy, yt
is a life of mortifyed lusts, and peace of the sprete in God only.


Tobyas. That is the eternal Sabbath, and holy day, which is left to gods
people, which also they must keep perpetually by the layenge down of their own
lusts, and sensualyte, but all the trouble, labor, carfulness, and bodily
service, outwardly done with words, or deed ought to be redressed to nothing
else but to ye glory of God and to the profit of our neighbor: for else is not
God our king, and we do not seek the wealth of our neighbor then, but our
own, which is against the nature of the true and onfayned love which Paul
teaches.


Tymotheus. Ye say treuth, for though we have the name of Christ, and though
we be baptized i^ the same, though we go to church and receive the sacraments,
yet are not all things dyspached without faith, by workinge in us with
charity: For they all that say Lord, Lord, shall not possess the kingdom of
heaven, but only they that fulfill the will of the father shall go in to the
kingdom of heaven.


Tobyas. The one membre ought thus to help the other, orels are not we one
body gathered, whereof Christ is the head. Let us therefore bear echother in
declarynge brotherly love that we be incorporate one body in Christ, aydinge
the vylest, and least before all other. For that which we do to the least, of
our brethren yt have we done to Christ. Christ is even now sufferinge honger,
thyrst, he is naked, in presone, he is harbourlesse, he is like and dyseased,
let us go to him to serve him, to comfort him, to receive him, that we may
hear herafter: Come ye blessed of my father to possess the kingdom which is
prepared for you sense the beginning of the world. And treuly right
well-beloved Tymothe seeing we be called gospellyshe or Euangelycall, therefore
ought we to be the more diligent in doing Evangelical works, lest Gods word
be blamed trough our unruly be have our of the^ yt be ungodly. Tymo. Ye say
treuth: wherefore I would that in every town, cite, village, ye in every
co^gregacio^ or church there were a comune huche or cheste wherein should be
separate such goods as be given to the nedy acordynge as saint Paul teaches
in the i. Corinth. xvi. which now (alas for pity) is rather myspent in
foundacions of chapels, churches, and religyous houses as they call them, in
syngers, in coapes, belles, and images. I will not speak now of the great
prouentes, and re^tes, of vycaries, and such other foundacions which mount to
an innumerable sum yearly. With these goods, and such like that our
forefathers have founded to the sustayninge of the poor may every town,
cite, vyllage, or paryshe easily sustain their own poor people: so that there
should not one beggar or vagabounde need to go by the streets. And thus should
gods commandment Deuteronomy.xv. chapter be accomplysshed Morouer to this
excellent deed should be chosen certain honest men, fearing God, which like
true deacons should dispense, and dystribute these goods according the need
and conscience. Out of this aforesayed cheste also should scoules be founded,
wherein youth might be taught both Christ and other good learni^g For such we
comu^ly do sauoure as was putt in our fresshe vessels. Out of this cheste also
should all bonynfans, or fatherless and motherlesse children be brought up,
until they be abell to learn an occupatio^ or craft. Out of this cheste should
honest youth be married, lest through poverty they com to some mysuse. For to
bring all this to effect the before said goods be sufficient if they were
justly and treuly gathered together. The bag and staff, is an occasyon that
there is so much ydelnesse, whordome, dronknesse, theft, ye of all myschefe,
and evil manners it is the mother, which the aforesaid congregations might
easily avoid if the love of honesty, and mercy were fyred in their hearts.


Tobyas. Your mind well-beloved brother is good, if it were so accepted, and
fulfilled, than would I also praise yt with you: But these strong, and
valiant wallet knights will never admit yt, for their religion is founded
upon the same, and the sorowlesse bread sauoureth to well in their mouths.
They love much better to reap the harvest that they have not sowe^, that to
get their own food, with the sweat of their brows.


Timotheus. We have now co^playned enough, wherefore I will straghtly go to our
poor Lazarus, and teach him some good thing of sufferynge patiently for he
has great need of it. And from thence will I go to the hospital, to bring
thither yt which I have superfluous of my yesterdayes labor: For I am sure
they shall need it there.


Tobias. I pray you brother let yt be so, and let^ yt not grieve you to viset
ye syke, for thereby shall ye be strenghted in the faith according to the
scripture. But differ your goinge to Lazarus a little while, if perchance
our vicar come there, he shall not leave it for very shame.


Timothe. No no I know him to well, he would rather never come at him, than to
lose one penny of his other advantage, which of this poor man he can not have.
He speaks much of the cure of souls, but it seems that his mind is of the
purses souls: he besemeth all the rest. Wherefore I will thither ward, will ye
command me ought?


Tobias. Ye tell Lazarus that I will come to vyset him tomorowe before noone,
and teach him somewhat of dyenge, as I have promised his wife.


Timothe. I will do yt with a good will, and God grant us his mercy.


A declaration and exhortacion to suffer all troubell patiently and faith
fully, wether yt be anguishe, or syknesse, which doubtless be sent us of our
merciful father.
Timothe vysitinge ye poor man Lazarus lyenge syke in his bed, says thus
to him. Timothe. Peace be in this house.


Lazarus. Who comes in there?


Timothe. Yt is I Timothe your neighbure, how is it with you? is all things
well?


Lazarus. Alas no it is not well, for I lie here and can nether move nor
wre^che my self, my yointes be so full of syknesse and pain.


Timothe. I believe yt right well, for you have had a great time: but how ca^
ye quiet your self therein?


Lazarus. How should I quiet my self? I would I were dead such pain. I am
in, Amy


Timothe, I pray you neyghbure vex not yourself so much with this syknesse,
for treuly yt is not Christenly.


Lazarus. It is easy for you to speak of yt. For noman halteth of another
bodies grefe. If you did lie in such pains as I do, you would say otherwise.


Timothe. Ye be far wide from Lazarus sufferire so far as I can se, whose
name you have, which took his grefe patiently, and without grudginge against
God yt he might not obtain the crommes from the rychmans tabell, and that he
was feign to lie under the broad open sky, his body being full of sores and
pain, and finally to dye for very honger, for which thing also he was brought
in Abraha^s bosom by the angels. But you have an house to dwell in, ye have
yet God be thanked meat and drink: you have good neghbours yt would feign
comfort you, and help to bear your grefe which Lazarus had not,
Nevertheless he was always content, and so ought ye to be also.


Lazarus. Because I am none such as he was, therefore shall not I also be set
upon altars, and have an holy day kept for my as is done for him.


Timothe. Alas brother Lazare you be yet far from the kingdom of heaven,
seeing ye suffer your grefe with so evil a will you ought to remember that it
is the good will of God that ye thus suffer: is it not al good that comes of
him? be content therefore with his godly will, and your burden shall fall the
lichter for you.


Lazarus. I must needs be content the rewith for I can not remedy yt, nor yet
avoid it.


Timothe. Although you could remedy it against gods will would ye do it? I
think not: for you would not wrestle with the will of God.


Lazarus I shall tell you the very treuth, if I could be red of this pain, I
would not keep it one hour longer.


Timothe. Would ye then rather be an enemy of God, than to suffer a little for
his sake?


Lazarus. I can tell you nothing else but that I would feign be ryd of this
passion, for yt is to heavy for me.


Timothe. So long as ye suffer of compulsion and not wyllingly, than do ye
lose your reward of sufferinge: and ye strive against God like a rebellious
child that disobayeth his loving father.


Lazarus. I must suffer be yt wyllingly or not wyllyngly.


Timothe. Ye suffer grefe and pain but without deseruynge for yt, and therefore
the more one a flyer: for ye suffer onwyllingly and unfaithfully, ye suffer of
co^pulsion eue^ as a servant stondeth in awe of his master by yt reason of
his rod or wande that he castiseth him withal, A servant remains not is his
masters house, but must void Ihon in the.viii. Chapter: But ye son
remains as a true air. If ye now therefore were a son of ye heavenly
father: ye would receive this correction of his wyllingly, and with true love
in a sure faith, and understand yt to be his love toward you: seeing he ca^
send to his children nothing but ye best, nor procure ought else for the^ but
good.


Lazarus. This sounds very strange in mine ears, that God punishes me thus
greuely of very love, and sends me this for ye best gift that he can give
me, I would rather think yt to be a horsly love.


Timothe. Alas brother how fearcely do you run against the stone that is
Christ? How strange be Gods word and works for you to hear and understand?
man's wit can not attain yt that is spoken of God, The word of God is as it
were an hammer that bruseth the stones: Therefore must ye submit and captive
your wit and man's wisdom wholly, till yt be clean presoned and subdued to the
will of Christ and pacify yt self in him: before ye can perceive how great good
and mercy ye inward man receaueth in depressinge and mortifynge ye outward
carcass.


Lazarus. O Timothe your words be to high and pythie for mine vndersto^di^g,
my memory and wit is greatly swaged with this syknesse of mine: wherefore you must
order you otherwise if I shall learn ought of you.


Timothe. If ye hunger Gods word and can satle you so yt ye may hear yt, I
will so show yt you yt ye shall easily perceive yt of me.


Lazarus. Ye verily and that gladly, reach my another cussyne and lay yt to
my back for gods sake, that I may sit easlyer to hear, and answer you.


Timothe. Are ye well so? or will ye sit higher?


Lazarus. No, I sit now easly and I can not well suffer much tossinge and
wrenchinge, My tongue is the wholest and lythyest of all my members: begin
when ye please.


Timothe. That I may show you ye better ye meaning of mine aforesaid words
I will rote out your infidelite, and show you it before your eyes, that ye may
se how far a man is separate from God trough his infidelite: out of the which
all other sins do spring as branches and twigges out of an euel root. For
infidelite is ye chief sin whereof ye holy ghost shall judge the world, as
Christ says Iho^. xvi. Therefore is this now my question wether ye do use to
read your pater noster.


Lazarus. What a question is that? think you I be a Turk should not I read my
pater noster?


Timothe. How read you yt in latin, or engly she?


Lazarus. I read yt as I have learnt yt of my father: pater noster qui es.


Timothe. Ye ought to read it in english that ye may understand it the
better, seeing ye can no latin. Tell my then that I shall axe of you if ye
please: Believe ye well ye first word Pater, that is father?


Lazarus. Should I not believe that? Christ himself has taught us so to pray.


Timothe. If ye believe God to be your father, tha^ must you believe your self
also to be his son and air, else ye dissemble praynge contrary to your heart
and not justly. Seeing then ye call him your father, (with which lovely name
you admonish him to hear you his son) and you have not such a lively
perceiving of him as a good child ought for to have: than say you your
Pater noster without faith.


Lazarus. Without faith? how so? what is faith?


Timothe. Faith is a gift of God, which is not given to every man, without
which Roman is acceptable to God.


Lazarus. Have not all Christen men faith then?


Timothe. There is two sorts of Christian me^, like as there is two sorts of
children of Israel: some be Israelites after the flesh, some by promise: even
so be some Christian me^ by name, some by ye deed by reason they be gyfted with
the beleuynge sprete of Christ. These christians have al faith.


Lazarus. What is ye faith than, whereby we Christen men be called beleuynge?


Tymothe. Faith is a sure and lively feeling in our heart that we be acceptable
unto the father, and that he is merciful unto us through his son Jesus
Christ, in all what soever can betyde us, or that we do, wether it be in life or
death. This faith is better perceived inwardly of them that believe treuly than
it can well be expressed outwardly.


Lazarus. Is it a hid mystery? can not I perceive inwardly by no token
whether I have faith or not?


Timothe, Yes verily I shall declare that unto you by a symilitude or ensample:
A child has no perceiving inward, nor shows outwardly any behaueoure
wether he have a sure confidence toward his father or not, unto the time he is
assayd in this hyd faith: But wha^ this child is either beaten or misdealt of a
stranger, tha^ lyfteth he is voice in his anguysshe, preassinge to his father
through the mids of his enemies with a sure faith and confidence to be
delivered and saved. Ye in his flight and hastynge for rescue which he shall
surely obtain there, his mind is certified that he shall be rescued, and this
is a great quietness of conscience, and a special ease at his heart that his
enymyes shall no more rejoice over him. After this manner also is the matter with
the children of God: Our heavenly Father has given us power to be you children
of God, and that through beleuynge in his name, which by the fathers
commandment is become man for us, and has chosen us to be eyres with him. Now
we belyuinge this and knoleginge yt through the sprete of truth we wait for
all aid, comfort, and subsidy of our heavenly father, in what so ever
temtacion can assault us. So that yt is sure token and specialte that we be in
the favor of God if we abide steadfast in praysinge the name of God, and
rejoice inwardly wha^ we be in troubel or anguishe, though God seem to have
utterly forsaken us. Here lo must the Christen faith first apeare. The
sauegarde and quietness of conscience which we have inwardly in the mids of
troubell, is a fruit of the holy ghost, sustaynynge us lest we fall into
mysbeleue or blaspheminge of God, ye which our punishment might cause
ryghtwell. Wherefore we need not to shre^ke or to dread our Lord God when he
stryketh us, as a servant does fear and avoid his master. For God another ca^
be, nor is a scourger or tyrant unto his children. It is our dewty to reyoice
in him, and to praise him in all his godly works, knowenge that he is our
sauegarde in the day of troubell. Paul wrytinge to the Romans in the.viii.
chap. says: We have not now received the sprete of bondage to fear any more:
but we have received the sprete of adoption, whereby we call Abba, dear father
with a lusty courage and a sure faith. For ye sprete of God which works such
faith in us gives witness unto our sprete that we be the children of God.
Seeing then we be the children of God, our merciful father has such a delight
in us as in his well-beloved children. So yt where the most fear and yeopardy
is, there is he most nearest present. It is surely the nature of a good father
to be more ferue^ter in love toward his children, where the most need is. Now
when ye consydre this diligently, with a hartyfull lust toward God the father:
than may you believe, and say truly that God is your heavenly father, if not,
you say your Pater noster faynedly, as al other ypocrites do, whose heart is
far from their mouth although ye said your Pater noster a thousand times.


Lazarus. Is this the saying of Pater noster, tha^ did I never say yt dewly
in all my life. I have often said the.xii. artikles of our faith after the
pressed in the pulpet: But I could never hear so much concerning the pyth of
them as I have done now.


Timothe. Such hystoricall faith as ye be taught in the pulpet have ye deuels
also, for they believe that God is almighty, that ye son of God is become man,
that he is crucified and risen again, but they believe not that he is ordeyneth
to their salvation. The deuell believes and trembles: but a Christen man
believes and reioceth in it. The faith or knoleginge of the deuyls which they
have of God causes them to fear and tremble: but our faith causes us to
rejoice and be glad in God, whom we knoledge ever to be our father.


Lazarus. If he be our father why sends he such greueous pains to us then?


Timothe. Your aforesaid faith must be tried trough sufferynge, syknesse, and
aduersite, as yt is written: That we shall not maruayll nether be moved that we
be tried trough the fire of sufferynge, for yt is done to prove us. The lord
proves all the electes after this manner, that their faith may be found ^ore
precious than the gold that is tried through the fire. And the end of our
faith which is not anulled, is the health of our soul. Wherefore as ye believe
that God is your merciful father: even so must ye believe also. and by faith
be assured, that all that be tydeth you, is his fatherly will and pleasure.
Think not that his eyes be wythdrawen from us, for so greatly are we accepted
before him that he says. Whosoever touches you, touches the very appell of mine
eye. Ye we be so earnestly and tenderly, cared for and kept of God our
heavenly father, that there is not the least he^r of our head but yt is told:
no a sparowe does not fall on the ground without the consent of our heavenly
father. How much less can this syknesse come upon you without the consent of
the heavenly father, which has sanctified all troubell and sufferinges: By the
cross and humblinge did yt please God to exalte and glorify his own son. He
yt did take care and thought for you before ye were borne: shall lykwyse
provide for you being here: seeing he would you to be here. Wherefore all those
that suffer according the will of God, ought to commit the charge of their
souls unto the good creator of all creatures: in whose hands we are, as the
claye is in the potters hand. Pray therefore unto the father with your whole
heart, that his name may be hallowed in you, like as it is hallowed and glorified
through ye death and depression of his son But as for our name it is full of
dishonesty, shame and da^nacion.


Lazarus. By the meaning of your words I perceive yt not needful for me to
desire these pains of mine to be avoided: and to be healed other in soul, or
body.


Timothe. I could show you welinough that this praynge does come another of
the sprete of God, nor yet out of faith, but of proper love, which seeks
rather her own ease and profit, than the glory of God: But I fear lest it
would be to tedious for you, and also I reken ye can not well suffer many more
words.


Lazarus. No hardly, it shall not be tedious unto me, for even now have I a
great desire to it, wherefore show me why I may not pray so?


Timothe. A true faith will not cause you to pray so, for it is certified
always of the good will of God what so ever does chaunche: All that is not of
faith is sin (says Paul). Search the ground of your heart, and ye shall
perceive that ye desire to be healed for none other cause, but only to be at
ease. Therefore, seeing that through this wyked nature ye set more price by your
self than by God: ye had lever your sensualyte and will were accomplysshed in
optayning of health than that God in this syknesse should do in you, and with
you according to his pleasure. Wherefore I pray you what else do ye but rebelle
against God, and correke him in his judgment, because he works not according
your ymaginacion Where is your pater noster? do not ye pray and say: Father
thy will be fulfilled in earth as it is in heaven, that is in the earthy body,
as it is in the soul which is an heavenly body. How little doye rest hitherto
in the works of God? Hear how fully the kyngly prophet David was mortifyed
entyerly, and near in excess of mind, upon all yt which God would send him,
he being driven out of his kingdom by his own beloved sone Absalon did say:
If I shall find grace before the Lord, he shall fetch me again, and let my se
it again (meaning the arc) and the house of it. But if he say thus: I have
no pleasure in the behold, here am I let him do with me as yt pleases him.
Here was a mortifyed sprete, which kept the true Sabbath, that is the
everlasting resting day, from this be ye far wide for all your prayenge,
and flattering.


Lazarus. What good can I obtain by this wrechednesse, wherefore I should not
desire to be ryd of it.


Tymoth^us. It is still the old trade, ye will not suffer but for advantage,
ye will use batterynge with God. God will have no merchants, nor exchaungers
in his holy temple wherein he rests, as ye shall hear more herafter, if we
reason larger. As concerning the good which we obtain by sufferinge, we must
understand that God hatheth sin in that he se^deth mercy, and love to his
children, which he does chastyse. When ye pray God than to take away this
chastenynge from you than be not ye content, that he shall show this his
ryghtwysnes in you: and herein ye declare, and utter you to be a friend of
sin, and enemy to the ryghtuousnes of God. Be not you very blind and
perverse hearted, loving the^ that hate you, and hatynge those that love you.
To that intent sends God pain anguysshe, ye and death unto us, that the
body of sin and death should be roted out in sufferynge, and slayenge of the
old Adam with all his carnal concupiscences and desires. This work will not
ye to proceed in you, which notwithstondinge must be accomplysshed if we will
be acceptable before God. Paul says. Know ye not, that all we which are
baptized in to Christ Jesus, are baptized in to his death? The children of
Israel might not obtain the land of promise, except they first had passed
the reed see: Even so we also must come to the high Jerusalem through passinge
the reed see, that is troubell and syknesse. For this cause we must cleue to
the faithful words of God as the Israelytes did: which being oppressed, before
of the read see, and behind of Pharaos army, so that death was at hand wither
soever they turned their sight. Wherefore Moses comforted them biddynge not to
doubt in Gods behestes saying: Fear you not, stond still, and behold what a
salvation the Lord shall show upon you this day. Thus have they wentured it
upon Gods word, and passed through the read see without blemysshe. Be ye also
a true Israelyte going through this sufferynge with a sure faith, and ye shall
surely be delivered of i^ with a valiant power: For he is faithful that has
so promised you. Cease of your own will, and despise not that which comes of
God. When the waters of troubell sometime be to greueous upon you, so that
through them ye begin to wax feeble: than pray the heavenly father to give
you your daily bread, strenghtynge you with his wholesome word, whereby your
soul must be sustained.


Lazarus. But brother this pain endures to long, for my thinks it will
never have an end. It has so his recourse.


Tymotheus. Be not moved at that, for Christ himself did suffer before he came
in to his glory Is than a disciple greater than his master? is a servant
above his Lord? If there had been another way to come to the true glory and
life, Christ would have rather chosen it: but now has he first trodden and
chosen this way of sufferynge himself that we should follow him in yt. Lo this
is to take up the cross of Christ, and to follow him, daily to be mocked,
despised, depressed, like as he has boren his cross with all despysyng,
pain, and reuylinge. We be crucified with Christ when we mortifye our
pleasures and affections, which ought to be during our life. Now if we be
equal with Christ in sufferynge, and dyenge: when shall also be equal with him
in reioycynge, and rysinge to ye new life. Certifyed, that our old man is
crucified with him, to the intent the body of sin should be destroyed. If we
then be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with him. Paul
says Roman. vi.. For a grane of corn cast in to the ground can not bring
forth fruit hundredth fold, without it be mortifyed first, and avoided his
hard husk: even so we also being here in earth must first dye and refuse the
corrupcion of our flesh, if we will live with Christ, and bring forth
fruits of life. For this cause is the life of a Christian here in earth counted
to be nothing else (nor is none other) save a continual cross, death, and
deynge as Paul does specify.ii. Cor. ix. saying: That we which live are
always delivered unto death for Jesus sake, that the life also of Jesus might
appear in our mortal flesh: for as long as we live, we are delivered unto
death for Jesus sake, that the life of Christ be declared in our mortal body.
Dauyd also says: For thy sake we are killed all the day long, and are
counted as sheep appointed to be slain. If ye will say this trewly with
Dauyd, then must you be content with your punysshement, ye until the death as
the sheep is, which opens not his mouth in ye slaghting. I pray you how can
ye desire God to take from you this pain, if ye believe surely yt although your
outward man be corrupt and perysshe: yet your inward man is renewed day by
day. Paul says that this troubell, and sufferynge (which lasts but ye
tuynklyng of an eye in comparyson of the glory for to come) prepares
maruaylously for us the eternal glory: if we have not our sight fyxed upon yt
which is visible, but upon that which is inuysyble and everlasting: ye all
that we can suffer here in this transytory world is not to be compared unto
the glory which shall be declared in us. By this ye perceive that all those which
suffer with a sure faith, ought also to rejoice in their troubell, even as Paul
and other electes have done.


Lazarus. Me thinks ye preasse the meteyarde hard on: How can I rejoice in
troubell which is naught but waylynge, and yaylynge. It is hard to laugh and
to weep


Tymotheus. I shall enfourme you of it with a gross ensample: ye lie here now
sick and dysseased, ye would be feign cured of some good phisician, now
makes he a drinck for you which is very bitter and mispleasaunt to receive,
nevertheless through his informacion and promise of health thereby ye overcome
the bytternesse of it drinking yt with shoueringe and chau^gging of
cou^tenau^ce: though ye tears ru^ne down with drynki^ge of y^, yet endeavor ye
yourself to retain a courage. Were it not a folyshe fellow yt would be
displeased with the phisician because he does minister so bitter drink unto him,
which he gives you not for any hatered or evil will, yt you should feel the
bitterness of yt: but that ye might recover. Who would be so mad to desire
the phisician to avoid the bitter recepte, knowenge and steadfastly belyuynge
to obtain health by none other means?


Lazarus. As for me surely I would rather thank him, and drink his recepte,
though it were as bitter as regale if I knew to obtain health thereby.


Timothe. Lo then, no more ye ought to despise the highest physicio^ of your
soul, nor to refuse his medycines, though they be bitter and paynfull unto
your old Adam. But ye must have an eye to his promyses, and overcome that
which is payneful to you whereby nevertheless ye be saved. Thus have martyrs
overcome in sufferynge, and death, for dyenge they saw the true life, in
syknesse and disease of the flesh they saw the power of God, which is
fortyfied, and stabylysshed hereby. God of his nature is merciful, but that he
may work his work in us, that is to heal, to make safe and sound, he does
first a thing that is strange to his nature which seems unto us a token of
hatered, that is, he scourges and beats us with syknesses and grefe. Thus
does God a strange work (as says Esaye in the.xxviii. chapter) that he may
work his natural work. By this strange work of God that is the chastenynge
or scourgynge of the father we lose our courage, goods, blood, health, wealth,
and lyuelode, and come even in the mids, of the cross, despysynge, and
death. All things appear here before our flesshly eyes as though we were
enemies unto God, and wholly despised of God, and wot not to consider how he
shall deliver us. Yet do we perceive the hand of God inwardly which does so
sustayn us that we fall not in des^ayre, mystrusting or mumurynge against God:
without the hand of God it were impossible for us to stand the twinklinge of
an eye In the end of the work do we first perceive the council of God, than
se we that he will maintain and feed his sheep in his lap whom he will not
have to dye for hunger and disease. He can tempte the ryghtuous, and also
deliver them again. By faith may we be conquerers of all. Faith is of things
that be not apparent: now, where faith shall have a place, there must such
things be believed as be inuysyble. Thus is faith of the life to come chefely
contained, and declared in dyenge. Thus we believe that God relyueth us in
killing: that he saves us, and iustyfyeth us in synnynge: that he brengeth us
to heaven, wha^ he seems to thrust us down to hell in that he forsakes us:
and that he heals us in our soul when the body is vysyted with all manner of
syknesses For he hedeth his mercy under his wrath. How would have believed that
God would have dealte so peteousli with his good friend Job, in taking away
all his best beloved things: but only because he was minded to restore him,
all this again doubell? Let therefore your eye of faith preasse unto
salvation, and rejoice, though God show you not his foreparte that is a
cheerful countenance as he did unto Peter being on the mount Thabor: but his
hinder part like as he appared unto Moses. For when this work of his is past,
tha^ appear his fotesteppes. Wha^ this chastesynge is past, than shall he
smyle at you, and show you his fatherly favor: though in this anger he seem
to gerne, and look grymly upon you. Perceive you this?


Lazarus. I can not perceive perfectly so much at ones Nevertheless, I
perceive that in your words there is a Godly understanding, though I can not
comprehend so much at once. Therefore I desire you to declare me more earnestly,
and sleghtly which way our sins be mortyfyed in us by the cross and
sufferynge.


Tymotheus. I will do yt gladly. Whatsoever a man loves beside God, that is
his Idol, therefore is yt needful to declare what things we set stoare by
beside God, that we might endeavor us the better, to fulfill the first
commandment wherein we are commanded to love God, with all our heart, power,
and understanding. Some lean to much to temporal possessions, which be
withdrawn from them (as a pelowe from under a man's head) by extorcion, with
the fire, by war, or by some other loss: that his heart beatt the more
lyberte to be turned wholly to God. Another has his carnal affeccion fyxed to
sore upon his wife, children, father, and mother, or friends. These false
gods be withdrawe^ from them when they suffer, either in their name or fame,
goods or blood: or when they be taken from them by death, to rydde a man of
his carnal affection, and to open to a man his infydelyte, that God may
possess the heart wholly and alone, like a gelous lover. The third is wanton,
and full of pleasure, he sets great stoare by himself by reason of his bewty
strength, honesty, wisdom, puyssaunce unto such sends God troubell,
anguysshe, sykenesse, sores, onwholso^nesse, or folysshenesse, to the intent,
yt he might se how that all flesh is nothing but hey and all his glory as
the grass of the field: the grass wythereth, and the flore faydeth.


Lazarus. I can not perceive yet that God receaueth us in scourginge, al we
fly strokes


Tymotheus. Your mysbeleue is the cause of flyenge, which Paul rebukes in
the.xii. to the Hebrews saying: Brethren have ye forgotten the consolacion,
which speaks unto you as unto children saying: My son, despise not the
chastenynge of the Lord, another faynte when thou art rebuked of him: for whom
the Lord loves him he chasteneth, Ye he scourges every son that he
receaueth. If ye suffer his chastesynge, he offreth him self unto you, as unto
his beloved son. What son is he whom his father does not chastyse? If ye be
far from the chastenynge, which is comune to all children: then be ye no
children, but bastardes. Also if we have had carnal fathers of whom we
stood greatly i^ awe which chastysed us: how much more shall we be obedyent unto
the father of spretes, and shall live by him? Our carnal fathers have taught,
and enfourmed us after their best mind, and that for a little season: But this
father of ours teaches, and chastyseth us for our profit, that he may make
us partakers of his holiness. All this present chastysynge seems to be
nothing yoyfull but sorrowful: but herafter she gives a quyete fruit and
reward unto them, which be proved thereby. Are not these sayenges comfortable
unto them that be in pain? punishment is dew unto sin, and without sin is
noman living: wherefore good Lazarus receive all that is sent unto you, and
suffer, though it be greueous. Be pacyent in your depressynge. For as gold
and silver be tried in the fire: so is man tried in the furnace of temptacion:
Therefore, scripture exhorts us to estyme it above all other fruits. And there
is no fruit so true as if we be proved by many fold temptacions, knowenge
that temptacion in faith brings forth the fruits of patience. Behold all the
martyrs, and children of God in their sufferynge, and let their constant faith
be an example unto you, for as God has delivered them, even so shall he
deliver you also.


Lazarus. I may not compare my sufferynge with their passions. They did suffer
for their innocence: but I suffer for my sins.


Timotheus. Think you the saints were no sinners also? before God is no
flesh found ryghtuous. Say not that ye suffer with the wyked murderer when
ye suffer patiently, and when faithfully ye knowledge to have well deserved
such castygacion: which the good murderer did also. The knowledgynge of your
sin does iustifye you, if it be done faithfully, and trewly. There can no true
knowlegynge be, without the sprete of treuth, and your punishment is cause of
iustifycacion, if ye confess to have deserved yt well for your sins. The
martyrdom of martyrs was not meritorious unto them to to obtain the life
everlasting thereby for Paul says, that the pains of this world be not
sufficient for ye glory which shall be showed upon us. For the transytory and
faydinge things can not obtain durabell reward. But Christ has suffered
only for his innocence, by the which innocent sufferinge he has rydde us from
all our wykednesse. Christ's death has deserved life eternal for us this
have the marters believed constantly testyfyenge it until ye death, conqueryng
by faith: so that their faith (whereby they were justified before God) appeared
lively in knoleginge the name of Jesus, from the which they did not shrynke
eue^ at ye point of death. For this cause did all saints ever pray with the
prophet. Not our (Lord) not our, but unto thy name be glory.


Lazarus. You overcome me which so many strong and evident scriptures, that I
wot not what to answer. Nevertheless I would desire God once to cease
scourgynge, like as many saints have done And I remember I have herd preached
that there was a king whose life was prolonged fyftene years through his
prayer.


Timothe. We shall not follow saints so curiously in all their words, and
deeds: for we be not sure how well they have been accepted always of, god. In yt
they also have been me^, we may be deceived in their fotesteppes Therefore in
saints we ought only to be hold their strong faith, and ye gifts yt God had
given the^. But christ is set to be our sa^ple and copy after whose life words
and doctri^e we may live, and speak: for he could not err, nor cause other
to err, which saints have done ryghtwell. Paul says: Be ye ye folowers of
my as I am a follower of Jesus Christ. Now shall ye hear how Christ is our
sampel in this prayenge or wysshinge that ye speak of. When he prayed in his
agony he said Father: if this cup ca^ not be taken from but ye I drink of
yt, not my will, but thine be fulfilled. Pray ye lykwyse with Christ and ye
shall be strenghted also no doubt from heaven in your battayll, And now to
answer you unto your example of Ezechias which (being dead syke) optayned by
his prayer of God to be delivered of his syknesse: you must understand yt God
does punisshe us diversely with the rod of correction in our body, Sometime he
does it to punisshe our sins and wykednesses, yt our faith be strenghted
thereby, as Christ said to the sykema^ yt had lye^.xxxviii. years syke at
Jerusalem by ye slaughterhouse pole: Behold thou art made whole, sin no more
lest a worse thing happen unto ye. By these words he did give him knoledge,
that for his sins he suffered this long and grievous syknesse: for the which
he should suffreyt more greueously if he left not synninge. Sometime sends God
syknesse and troubel to his elect, which not withstondynge be in his favors,
that ye glory and honor of God may be declared thereby, as Christ says Ioh.
xi. that Lazarus syknesse was not unto death, but for the glory of God, yt the
son of God might be praised thereby. Christ say be also Ioh. ix. that the
blind was so borne, that the work of God might be showed upon him, Even so
daily does yet the glory and honor of God appear in many places, by
sufferinge patiently, and dyenge gladly of many virtuous and honest men: which
occasion other men to praise and to thank God, that sends such grace and
mercy unto men, so that they have cause to reoiyce, ye even in ye mids of
death, Somtymes God visits ye trespasses of the rulers, and pare^tes unto the
third, or fourth generation upon their subjects, and kynreddes: For wha^
David had nombred the people formere vanite and misbeleue, there were feign to
dye.lxx. thousand of his people with in three days.ii. Regu^. xxiiii. Hely also,
because he castised not his children, knowing them to do evil: God swear unto
the house of Hely that his wykednes should not be put away forever by no manner
of offering, and afterward was he punished by the death of his sons.i. Reg.
ii All this is done according justice, and dewly, for the ryghtwose God ca^ do
no wrong. When God suffers such as is said before to chance unto us, than
seems he and is said to be angry with us, where as he nevertheless is
immutable. Now when we read of some holy me^, which in their sufferinge have
prayed to be rid of their cross, and anguishe it is not to be thought that
they have done it of any hatered that they had to yt, because yt is oneasy
and paynfull: but yt they by this prayenge might once come to ye perfect
punisshynge of sin, which they hated and persewed. And so prayed king
Ezechias when he was admonisshed by the prophet Esaye the.xxxviii. chap. that
he should dye saying. What shall I speak or say, that he may do this? that
I may live out al my years ye in the bitterness of my life. (Lo the
bitterness that came of ye hatered of his sins). Verily Lord men must live
in bitterness, and all my life must I pass over therein: for thou raysest me
up and wakest me. But lo I wylbe content with this bitterness (mark that God
by punisshinge of sin relyueth a man: Mark ye faith causes Ezechie to have
peace, and to be at rest in the mids of his bitter sufferynge). Nevertheless
my co^uersacion has so pleased the, that thou would not make an end of my
life, but yt thou have cast al my sins behind thy bake. Behold, how royaly
the good king sets forth the mercy of God in his sufferaunce, that is that
Esaye says in his xxx. chapter: With still syttinge and rest shall ye be
healed, In quietness and hope shall your strength be. That is in the silence
and rest of your own will in Gods will, and the hope of mercy of God, which is
promised you: ye in all sufferinge shall your strenght be, so that ye shall be
able to suffer all grefe. Even so is that peticion of our prayer to be
understood, where we desire not to be led in to temptacion, not that we
desire to be rydde and fre of all temptacion, (which ca^ not be seeing, our
life is a perpetual battayll:) But the intent is that we be not led in to
such temptacion which might overcome, and so discomfite us that we thereby might
fall in misbeleue, despair, or blasphemy of the name of God: Which sins be
the greatest and most parelous, for they lie hid in the entrayles of the
heart. Vvherby we might synke to the botome of hell with Cayn, Judas, and king
Antioche, without ye sustaynynge and vnderproppi^ge of God. Therefore pray ye
holy prophets also: Lord put not me to rebuke in thine anger oh chaste^ my
not in thy displeasure. In which prayer ye spret of god comforts us, and
causes God to grant us yt he is ye health of al people Of what trouble so
ever we call to hi^ he shall deliver us and be our god for evermore


Lazarus. Your saying is confortable, and my thinks I am refreshed at my
heart, so yt I feel less grefe in my pains: Nevertheless I must reasone
so^what larglyer with you seeing ye teach my so well. Vvese daily with our
eyes, yt if a child being chastises of his father do yield himself to his
fathers will, axynge mercy, at the last he will leave of chastenynge I trust
that he which is a father of mercy will also be merciful unto my poor wrech:
how think ye?


Timothe. As concerning which be the best way to obtain mercy of God, therein
does your similitude like me verily well. For as a father that hates the
wikednesse of his child dewly, not withsto^dinge love, does correcce him with
fatherly pytie, when he seyeth him repyne at the chastesynge, he waxes more
furious and augmenteth the strokes. In like manner also God in scripture is
said to be wrothful, when we receive not the chastigation of his hand with
lowlynesse even as we read in Esaye the.ix. Chapter. After all this the wrath
of the Lord shall not cease, but yet shall his hand be streched out still,
For the people turneeth not unto him that chastises them, another do they seek
the Lord of hoostes. Therefore shall the Lord rote out of Israel both head
and tail, branch and ^uigge in one day By the which words the prophet
aforesaid means, that God stryketh us to the intent we should so much sooner
turn again to him, and that he strykinge us should occasion us to seek aid
and help of him. Now therefore, that we may swage the wrath of the chastesynge
father, we shall yield oureselfs like good children unto the strokes of our
father, knowleginge our fault, still pearsynge to his fatherly bosom,
endeuourynge to coll him, ye to seek all means whereby we might move him to
pytye. For ye which lowly rendrynge of our self God loves us more then he did
before. For ye prophet Abacuk says: When God is wroth than shall he remember
his mercy. Thus may we the^ pray with the prophet saying: All that thou have
done unto us O Lord, that have thou done of true judgment: for we have sinned
and disobeyed thy commandments. Lo such good will and yeldinge is of more
efficacite, and acceptable in the sight of God to obtain forgiveness thereby,
than all pylgrimages, vows, and other ways, which a man can take upon him of
his own brain, without any ground of evident scripture.


Lazarus. Good Lord what have I yet to demand which I rather ought to keep
close. Ye may say: One fool will demand more than al wise me^ can assoyle.


Timothe. You ca^ not are to much at me brother for I trust I shall certify you
well enough in all things by the assistaunce of God.


Lazarus. Ye cause me there to remember pelgrimages: wherefore my question is
wether they avail ought to obtain health thereby: For my friends will not
cease without I make a vow either to faint Leonart, or to our lady of
walsynga^, or to some other saint after their affeccion. But as for me I have
no mind more in this deed, for going of pelgrimage has pilled my if a good
lyuelod in my days, and yet have I found none ame^dme^t. If wysdo^ had been my
friend I might have spared that money But I gave to much ear unto these old
tothlesse mab^es, and pilergnawers They were so earnest in whysperynge these
things in mine ears, that I could never be rydde of them. But what say ye
of them Tymothe? if they be Godly I will cause more to be gone for me.


Timothe. First ye must well understand your own words where as ye speak
of pylgrimages. A plgrime is he yt wandreth in a strange country and from
home, and pylgrimage is such a wandringe or wayfari^ge. Now where find ye in
any scripture, that Gods word byddeth you to go and seek holiness in a
strange country or place? (seeing you be Gods temple if ye believe faithfully,
and seeing Paul will have men to lift up pure hands in every place:) Or where
be ye commanded to chose out one place more than another to offer prayer,
sense the shadow of ye law vanished? Ye how can you presusume such praynge
as is not agreynge with Gods word? and all what is done without his
commandment is not acceptable unto him, Another is it the glory and honor of
God or his saints to set such stoare by your man's wisdom and inuencion,
though yt seem never so godly and fair. But if ye (says Christ) that wylbe
my disciples pray, you shall not pray like as the Heythen do: but go in to the
chamber of your heart, shut the door upon you, that is: shut all wordly
troubell and co^brau^ce out of your heart, and pray unto God in secret, not
in ye corners of the streets, not in outchosen places, and your father which
seyeth in secret, and the entrayles of the heart, shall reward you openly.
Christ has sufficiently forbidden the going of pylgrimage in the.iiii.
chapter of John, where he teaches us that we should not go to pray in Salomons
te^pel, nor upon the renowned hills of the Patriarckes, but that we shall call
upon God in all places (not with wax or flax, not with silver or gold not with
corn or sede, no not with cryenge and whyninge as the prestes of Baal and the
Heithen do, which think to be herd for their cryenge and much bablinge) but
in sprete and treuth. For the father which is a sprete will have such
worshippers. The prophet Malachy also in his first chapter says: From the
rysynge up of the son unto the going down of the same, my name is great
among the gentyles: Ye in every place shall there sacrifices be done, and a
clean meat offering offered up unto my name: for my name is great among the
Heithen says the Lord of hoostes. What offringe does he require of us? wax or
flax silver or gold? No, but the mortifyenge of our carnal desires, and
sensual appetite. whereunto Paul exhorts us wryttinge unto the Romans in
the.xii. chapter. It is a great blyndnesse that we seek aid or comfort at
any saint, whom our ymagynacion is that we worship and serve the^ in their
similitud here in earth wherein we tra^gresse ye first co^mau^dme^t of God,
which forbyddth us all strange Gods, and to make any similitude or image. Will
ye know the cause and spring of the multitude of the Heythenishe Gods? and
why we Christen men ought to worship but one God? I shall show it you


Lazarus. Ye I pray you, for I am desirous of it.


Timothe Such men as were profitable to the comune wealth were counted Gods of
the Heythen, and worshipped after their death This has occasioned the
multitude of them. For health they called upon Esculapius, for he was a great
Phisician: Upon Hercules they called for riches: Upon Mercury they called for
luck of marchaundyse: Upon Bacchus for wine: Upon Seres for corn: Upon Venus
for lust of the body, ye the Egyptians God is become the storke, for he
destroyed the serpents: The Romans have worshipped a Gouse, because yt at ye
skrekinge of her, ye wachme^ yt kept the castle at Rome called Capitoliu^ were
awaked, and so warned of their enemies: of like co^modite and profit be ye
Son and Moan: water and earth made gods and worshipped. But we Christen me^
know nor worship none other God, save him only yt works all in all
things. It is written: ye shall serve your lord God and worship him only
Wha^ we trust in noma^ but him only maki^ge of him our sauegarde, redemption,
wysdo^, ryghtwysnes, hope and welfare: than do we worship hi^ only, wha^ we
cast us wholly down before him forsaki^g and despysyng our holiness, wysdo^,
abilite and natural strength reputi^ge our selves fools, wiked, and feeble, yt
seek mercy at hi^ only tha^ pray we to him. Mark wether they yt turn
themselves from the creator unto the creatures do so, seki^ge help with their
ru^ninge gaddi^ge hither and thither a pelgrimage. I am thy God only, and
without me is there is no redemer says the Lord God. To save belongs only
to him, but the gentyles and ungodly make a mokage of yt, yestenge and saying
as is written Deutxonomy. xxxii. Where are now their Gods wherein they had
confidence, let them rise now and help you, let them succor you in your
need. But ye Lord makes answer again saying: I am he, and without me there
is no God, I will slaye and relyue again: I will scourge and heal again: there
is no man yt can pluck ought out of my hands. Where shall these ydolatrers
tha^ and pelgromes remain: What Gods shall be able to defend them, when God
shall punish their misbeleue and ydolatry (which they have committed with
wood and stone) openly and before the whole world: Although he be now quiet
and long sufferinge


Lazarus Vvil ye take it in worth yt I shall ask of you, and I will show you ye
reasons, which mine hypocritishe cou^celers were wo^te to lay to me, wha^ they
entysed me to ye pelgrimages unto saints: Vvho^ I (God forgive me) have showed
to much honor in mine ydolatry.


Timothe. Ask what ye please, so yt I be not to tedious unto you, it would not
grieve me to sit thus an whole day with you treating of the scripture.


Lazarus. How fortuneth it then that saints will be worshypped, and sought more
in one place than in another, to heal such diseases as they be patrones of?


Tymotheus. Christ says in the.xiiii. chapter of Ihon I am the way, the
treuth, and life. If ye will not go astraye and err, than with draw you from
saints. Which have received all their holiness of him, that ye name of God
might be gloryfyed in the^. Walk (I say) in Christ for he is the way, who so
follows him shall walk in no darkness. If ye will not be deceived with any
lie or falshed, than hold you by Christ, abide by Christ's word, styke by yt,
for it is the treuth. If ye will not dye in sin nor peryshe in your own
wicked ways: than strive by the mortifyenge of the flesh to live eternaly
with him, for he is the life. Paul says that our life is hid with him unto
death. The way of sufferynge is narowe and straight, but you must go through
it if ye entende to come unto yoie. The treuth must deliver you of your
thraldom of sin, if ye shall be delivered in deed* Why do ye then seek another
^odye, another life, another saueour beside the way of treuth and life? As
concerning, that ye do say that saints wylbe vysitted more in one place,
than in another. I answer that if saints wylbe worshypped, and discern places
of worship and honor, that they be rather deuyls than saints: for they
desire honor and worship, which belongs only to God, that is supreme
head of all things. Morouer saints, that be heavenly saints say
constantly: Not unto us o Lord not unto us, but unto thy name give the glory.
Now how will you honor, and give unto saints this glory, which they do refuse
so earnestly? or think ye they show God this fair face, and yet
nevertheless rob him of his honor. Wherefore if yt be said unto you Christ
is here, there is pardon of all sins, there is a soul delivered out of
purgatory, here is an image of miracles, there be many reliquyes of saints
here is this or that saint worshipped, go not thither: seek the kingdom of God
within you: seek the king of glory in your heart, which all saints have
done. The kingdom which God has in our hearts is not decked with wax nor flax,
gold nor silver. The dekynge of it consysteth in things spiritual, and
inwardly as in meekness, patience peace, yoie, faith, and love: where such
gifts and orname^tes be perceived, their may you say boldly that Christ is
king, and that because in such ornaments he is found. Thus is it euydent to
be put vain yanglynge that they say: Saints will be worshypped more in one
place than in other, for it is without ground or stay of ye treuth of
scripture. Ye it is a more blasphemy to assygne unto every syknesse a peculiar
patron and saueour as ye pestyle^ce unto saint Roke, ye pockes unto Job,
saint Appolony for ye tothache. etc. Do these hypocrites think God to deuyde
his kingdom to princes and lords as mortal men do? No, for God says. I will
give mine honor, and glory to none other. If our God were such one as had
need of rulers under him than did not scripture right in calling him God
only, and king of all kings, Lord of all lords. Now if he need no help
with him, why do ye assign then unto the one saint the pestylence, unto
another the falling syknesse, and so forth to every syknesse a several
patron, yt is come so far (God amend it) that there is scarce a vyllage
of.viii. or.ix houses but there is either one Idol or other. Whereto is
Christendom come? what do ye make of the blessed company of electes? which be
planted and gathered in ye love of God with all faithful and beleuynge, which
were pacient here in their troubel, and have received a lovely sprete of God,
despysynge all honor, praise goods, and worldly preemynence, be they (I say)
now so impatient, wykedly dysposed, and covetous of honor that they must be
appeased and reconcyled again with gaddynge a pelgrymage, with offering, of
candels, or eggs? Is the salvation of saints become now a house of plages
wherout all mysery flows? All the diseases whereof ye make you sondery patrons
are natural, and were in the world before your saints were borne. Our
mysbeleue and great infydelite is the cause that we have feigned us so many
Idols. Because we have not known the only eternal, and true god but be
enclyned to blind ceremonies, though we should worship a calfe there with, as
the children of Israel did: therefore is it come to pas, that we have our
purpose in that we have done worship unto the calfskynne the popyshe bulls
stickynge candels to it. O Lord look upon the afflyction and punishment of the
daughter Syon: and have pytie upon the destruction of Joseph's heretage.


Lazarus. From hensforth will I set up not one little candell to any image what
so ever it be I have hitherto lyghted three candels to saint Anne every
tewsdaye, and on the thyrsdaye have I worshypped the holy sacrament with half a
pound of wax: but I am now so enfourmed of you, that hensforth. I will do it
no more: but rather give it to the poor and lyghten so the living temple of
god, wherein he dwells no doubt with his mercy. Is not that best brother
Tymothe?


Tymotheus. Ye it is a thousand times better, for Christ's saying is: Look
what ye have done unto the least of mine, that have ye done unto me. He says
not what ye have done unto my picture or image, or unto the picture of my
saints which I have forbidden to make or to honor. Wherefore, when these
saints spechme^ come to persuade you to your old superstition, than answer
you them: Is it not a great blyndnesse of you to seek the saints in wood and
stone contrary to the first commandment? Is it not a great folly to light the
Son at broad day with a candell? The saints will say to this: Lord in thy
light shall we behold the light. The light of the Godly vysage lyghteth the
electes always: how will ye then lyghten them with your light that is made for
the solace of darkness? Think ye they be in darkness that are lyghtened of
the son of ryghtwysnesse? If ye will needs set candels before them than give
them eyes also that they may se them: than may ye obtain thanks of them,
else do ye but lose your labor, and cost. Baruch also ye prophet does greatly
rebuke this ungodly honor, and worship of images. Now when ye have thus
rebuked them of this Idolatry, tha^ show them where they ought to bestow their
candels, offeringes, and other alms that they be acceptable unto God. Also if
they will go on pelgrimage, the^ show them a nearer way which they may go with
less cost, and say Seeing you be minded to visyte the saints, it is no need
to run to Rome, or to Jerusalem, or to saint Iannes in Spain, for that were
loss both of expenses, and time. Seek Christ in the grave of scripture: seek
him in the chamber, of your heart, there shall ye be most surest of him: Seek
the sprete of Peter, and Paul in their wrytynges, and Epystles. Seek James in
his strong faith that he continued in until his death. Morouer God is no
bodily thing, and therefore will not he be worshipped with bodily things: he
is a sprete, and regards no person, place, candell, or such good works: But
his desire is only that we put away the wicked thoughts, from our heart as
namely mysbeleue, despair, uncleanness, hate, envy, covetousness, and pride.
For they that have a clean heart from these, and a lowely sprete shall se God,
and be called the children of God where as all these holiness sekers shall
remain without: For God which is a sprete will not be worshypped but in the
sprete and treuth, where as these hypocrytes seek him in outchosen places, in
several days, with certain ointment boxes, to declare their good intent
toward him in bodily works: but they shall not touch him, for he is risen,
and lyfted above all that is outward, and in man's sight.


Lazarus. I shall keep well your declarynge, and as I can. But I know what
shall be their answer here unto.


Timotheus. What I pray you?


Lazarus. Why than do they miracles more in one place than in another? but
only that they wylbe worshypped and sought there.


Tymotheus. To that shall ye answer: where a sure faith is, there need no
tokens but only the token of Jonas the prophet? In the which token the life
and death of Christ and also the death and resurrection of every Christen man
is featly fygured. For with Jonas and Christ must we descend in to the whal
fyshe, and see of tribulacion and death before we can rise again in to the
life everlasting. Like as Jonas did not remayn in the sea, nor Christ in the
grave, but were relyued again: even so shall not God suffer us to be overcome
with no grefe, nor death, but shall raise us out of this mysery unto the
resurreccion of life. Therefore ought we to void our mind of all miracles,
all patrons, and behold this token of Jonas only, setting our confydence
upon yt only, saying with the prophet Psalm. lxi. My soul wayteth only upon
God, for of him comes my help. He only is my strength, my salvation, my
defense, so that I shall not greatly fall. Lo, to this Jonas shall ye send all
these myrakel gasers, as Christ has sent the^ away which of curiosyte desired
to se tokens from heaven. As for the miracles, which saints be said to show
by their images, they be but a mockage and gabbynge of the dyuell. There can no
myrakles be done of God against his holy word Treuth it is that Moses has
comfyrmed the then commandments, and law, and has made them autenticall
with wonders and tokens: It is treuth also that the Apostles after the passion,
and ascendynge of Christ to heaven, have comfyrmed their words, and
preachynges with some myrakles in the name of Jesus: (for that name being
despised as a malefactor and condemned, had great need of these). But these
miracles of saints or images can not confyrme the word of God nor they happen
not to that intent, but rather to a false Gods service. They cause nothing else
save a decyuerynge of Gods word, Idolatry: which being used and had in price
among the Christians has presoned their blyndnesse and mysbelefe. For by the
occasyon of myrakles, men ru^ne to the Idols ^r images as though they were
myndlesse: to the intent they might be healed of such syknesses, and dyseases
and be sent them for their amendment. Now where such faith, and confydence is
given unto images, and their miracles, there can it not well be believed that
this bitter chalyce of sufferynge be given us of the father as an acceptable
thing, and worthy to be received with a good will. Nevertheless that Christ
will have yt so to be received, is euydent by the words that he spoke unto
Peter, what time as he would defend Christ's cause with the material swearde
saying: wylt not thou that. I shall drink the chalice which my father has
sent me? as though he would say: Ye ought to seek no means nor counsel, nor
not once to say against ye drinking of this chalice or cup which my
heavenly father has sent me. Hereby is given us to wit that all our trouble
is sent us also of our heavenly father, to accept it wyllyngly, and with a
good will to drink it. How much less than shall we run a straye here or
there to seek this help or that, this counsel or that, to be redeemed, and
made fre of our burden. Moses warning us not to be moved at any myrakle
says Deuteronomy. xiii. if there rise up a prophet or dreamar among you, and give
the a token or wonder, and that token or wonder which he spoke of come to
pass, and than say: Let us go after other Gods (whom thou know not) and
let us serve them: Thou shall not harken unto the voice of such a prophet or
dreamer. For your Lord your God proves you, to wete wether ye love him with
all your heart, and with all your soul. For ye shall walk after the Lord
your God, and fear him, and keep his commandments, and harken unto his
voice, and serve him, and cleue unto him. These words do plainly despise the
serving or worshippynge of strange Gods or images: They cast away all
miracles and tokens that chance by Gods sufferinge to prove us wether our
trust, a^^ confydence be only in God. They show us to God of whom we must
hope al goodness. Wherefore regard not these pelgrymage goers, and miracle
gasers, for if ye follow their councels, ye testify you not to be a true
beleuer. It is a true proverb that is comunly used: woe to that land where
many miracles do chance, for that is a token that great unbelieve is there. And
where as ye think saints to choppe, and change so with miracles, that is not
so. For the deuell can also change himself into an angel of light as says
Paul. This is euydent in the first book of the kings in the.xxviii. chapter
where Samuel the good prophet being dead was conyured of the soythsayenge
woman at Saul's instaunce at the which charmynge the devil appeared in the
lyknesse of Samuel. Therefore also does Paul warn us saying, to the
Collossians the.ii. chapter. Let noman make you to shute at a wrong mark,
which after his own chousynge walks in humblynesse, and spyritualyte of
angels, things which he never saw. Wherein we are warned of all holiness of
men for theryn may we lyghtely be deceived. Morouer it happens sometime that
God takes his word out of his true preachers and prophets mouth and gives it
unto lyenge spretes, which lies the people does lyghtely accept by reason of
their error: as we read.iii. Reg. xxii. God said unto the lienge sprete that
he should deceive king Achab Go thy way thou shall deceive them, (said he)
and be able. This example teaches us not to rest nor trust in any man's
holiness, wisdom, or worthynesse. These and such like deceates change unto us
by the right wysnesse of God because we turn so lyghtely to strange Gods,
to saints, to false tokens, and miracles, which be set up by the occasyon of
some lyenge dream of a false prophet, or as comunly they be by ye wylynesse
of the dyuell. Wherefore look where Christ, and his word be showed, and the
faith accepted, though Christ be but new come in Egypt and yo^ge: there
decay incontinently such auau^tages, and yearly re^tes of pilgrimage goinges,
and miracles, which is daily to be seen. For gods word is a fire: and therefore
consumes it all such works as be nothing but stouble, straw, and hey, and
it self endures for ever. If such mokage of miracles and pylgrimages were
agryenge with the word of God, than should they remain doubtless: but saying
they be not, therefore must al pla^tacions which ye heavenly father has not
planted be roted out.


Lazarus. Yt is treuth, for there is not so much resort to the blood of
Hayles, our lady of Walsy mga^, to this or that saint as there has been: By
reason the myrakles have not now so much faith given unto them But how
happens it that the souls, and spretes of the dead desire of times such
going on pelgrimages? in so much that books also be made of it?


Tymotheus. Bring ye forth now your spretes, and dreams? Believe not every
sprete, but ^rye them wyther they be of God. Such spretes as will draw you
away from Christ, unto your own works or holiness, fly them as venyme. We
must abide in Christ that is his words, and doctrine if we shall be his
disciples, We must discern, and harken to his voice only, if we shall be his
sheep. All that which is not contained, and founded in the scripture shall not
ye believe. All bodily exercise which as ye say is required of you profyteth
little, but Christen vertuousnes, and godlynesses is profitable to all things.
The father poyntynge us to his son in whom he delyteth says, that we shall
hear him, and not the spretes: for the apparitions of spretes are wholly
against the scripture, wherefore they can be nothing but illusyo^s, of the
dyuels that be in the air We read in the gospel of the rich glutton, that he
desired his five brethren in earth, to be warned of the dangers, and pain
that he was in: but what answer was made him again? even such as is made to
every man, that is now living, Let them hear Moses, and the prophets. He
said no ^et them hear the spretes. Yt follows: if they will not hear them,
then will not they also believe if any dead rose again and appeared: we have
Moses, and the prophets, these will God have us give ear unto, and al curiouse
searchynge of spretes with their answers utterly to be despised. A pure faith
trusts only in Gods words coveting none other visyons or apparition to the
strenghtynge of him, save only the oath, which was made to Abraham, and his
sede in him, what time as God was minded to give himself unto us, which through
faith in God are become children of Abraham and heirs of God. This inward or
goostly sight of a pure heart passes all other certifyenges either of spretes,
angels, or deuels. For so much as God is faithful in his promise above all
other creatures. This illusion of spretes does God also rebuke by Esaias ye
prophet in ye.viii. chapter saying: And therefore if they say unto you: Ask
counsel at ye soythsayers, witches, charmers, and co^iurers, then make the^
this answer: Is there a people any where that axeth not council at his God
wether it be concerning the dead, or the lyuinge? If any man want light let
him look upon ye law and the testimony, wether they speak not after this
meaning. Therefore let us not regard dreams and fantasies, nor yet care for
no spretes, nor seek any certifyenge of truth through their apparitions for it
is forbidden in scripture. Let us turn rather to the law and his witness, for
in it is no deceate. But alas for pytie infidelite is roted so deep in men's
hearts by the reason of ignorance of Gods word that they believe rather the
visions of Tundall, the tales of legenda aurea, or such fantasies and dreams
in deed: than that which God will have learned of us as namely right wysnes
and judgment in crucifyenge of our sinful apetites, mercy in declaringe
service to our poor neghbure. In which two points be contained the law and
prophets.


Lazarus. Seeing I have begone to ask, I will lay to you all that I reken
may be objected unto me in this matter. Tell me tha^ good Timothe how chances
it yt many religious and holy men be canonisate for their myrakles and
approbate to be saints.


Timothe. The canonisation of saints which Popes and Cardinals do use is a
slecht and ungodly thing, wherein is manteyned great deceate and covetousness.
Trust not in ye canosation of men, not in ye worthynesse, holiness or wisdom,
of those yt be canonisate, for you shall be deceived therein. For the popes
kingdom which is grounded in all welthynesse, glory, riches, and pussaunce ca^
give no true judgment in godly things, or concerning Gods kingdom. But seeing
it is an outward kingdom whiich does consist in myters, crosyers, coapes,
albes, crosses, banners, shauynge, anoyntynge, singing, reading, ryngynge,
yanglynge, ye in horses and moyles, and other baggage, yt can not be judge but
in outward things, after which judgment spiritual things ought not to be
judged. The discretion or judgment between holy and unholy belongs only to
the son of God which does judge not after the sight of the eyes, nor after
the hearing of ye ears but according to the treuth: this treuth can not the
world comprehend, because she is full of lies, and (as John says) ye treuth
is not in the lie. This is ye cause why Christ warns us to beware of the
leven of the Pharisees, that is, for the hypocrysy, dissemblinge, and doctrine
of the Pharisees: for they deceive the simple hearts, and seduce them with their
lyenge which they do craftly utter. They seek not your salvation in the
canonisynge of saints, nor the honor and high reputation of them: for their
saints be not one hear the holyer for yt, nor we the nearer salvation, seeing
it belongs only to God to save. But they seek in this deed either their own
advantage, or their carnal glory: for by canonisynge they get much money. Nor
there is none canonisate without it be procured by a singularite or parcialte,
ye a folyshe gloriation wether it be of one town, cite, or any other
co^munaltye. Yt is to be doubted there be some whose bodies be canonisate and
worshipped here in earth, and their souls buried in hell. Sense the Pope has
used to make saints, the saint of all saints is set bakwarde: for as it is
said that a new brom swepeth clean, even so be the new saints the best in
the opinion of the comune people. Therefore may Jeremy complain ryghtwell upon
this, saying in the.vi. chapter. For among my people are found wyked
persons, that preuely lay s^ares and wait for me^, to take them, and
destroy them. And like as a net is full of birds, so are their houses full of
that, which they have gotten with falsede and deceate. Hereof comes their
great substance and riches, hereof are they fat and welthy, and are run away
fro me with shamfull blasphemies. (it follows continently) The prophets teach
falsely, and the prestes follow them, and my people has pleasure therein. What
will come thereof at the last. Will ye needs know wether there by any saints
canonisate? I will show you Of David says the Lord: I have found a man
according to my heart. Of Paul, says that he was a chosen and elect wessel.
Of Peter that he was blessed. Of Simeon the old pressed witnesses the holy ghost
that it was a just man full of the fear of god, plain, and one that abode the
delyuerau^ce of Israel. Of Steue^ that he was full of grace, and that he saw
Jesus stondynge at the right hand of God. Lo in the canonisation of these, and
such like saints are not ye deceived: to the proof of ye se canonisatio^s ye
have no need of Popish bulls, ye read of their myrakles sufficiently in ye
book of truth, Of their truth bears god himself record. In these saints
shall ye praise the Lord as says ye prophet, Praise and thank God in his
saints.


Lazarus If ye Popes matter be not better stayed by the scripture tha^ I have
herd of you I maruayll that it could endure so long. Nevertheless if some
had herd you they would have called your reasons new learning, and that they
follow their fathers.


Timothe. No use or custom can derogate the word of God, else might it be
said, Mahometes law has been so many hundredth years, and approbate by so
many learned men, and of so many nations I will rather abide by that law than
by this new learning. If ye will continue by an error because it has
continued so long, than abide by the original sin, which remaneth yet sense
our first pare^tes in every one that comes in to this world, If you will
needs abide with the old and say ye old is best tha^ shyft not your worn
garments, eat naught but stale and rotten eggs what blind answers do these
blind bytels bring forth? Behold says the Lord Esaye. lxv. I shall make a
new heaven and a new earth. And the prophet prays saying: Make a clean heart
(o God) and renew a right spirit within me. Paul also says: Be ye renewed in
ye sprete of your mind. Wherefore will you be bound thus to yt old? Do not
ye know that ye must be borne again before ye shall come in the kingdom of
God. The son must redeem you from the old devil, from his deceates, from
his old death before ye be redeemed in deed: Even as Christ said unto the
Pharisees, which gloried and reyoiced in their old father Abraham after the
flesh: If ye son deliver you from the thraldom of sin than be ye
delivered in deed, Yt is no new learning when ye be taught to trust in God, to
be ready to serve your neghbure, to suffer your aduersite pacie^tly, to despise
ye false Gods service: for that also have all ye prophets, al eua^gelistes, al
apostles taught more tha^ thousand years agone. They be new doctrines which
the Popets disciples and sworn servants have brought up within these three or
four hundredth years. That which Paul preached to ye Athenians was also
counted for new learnige, for they said: Lo here comes he the preacher of
new deuels. There is another old, nor new God, but there is an euer^stige God
which is, which was, and shall be. There is no new nor old learning of God,
Gods word endures for ever. Jesus Christ is yesterdaye and to day he endures
for ever. Stycke fast to his word and ye shall not be deceived, for his word
is truth. He has the words of life, suffer no doctor, no apostle, no angel
of heaven to draw you from him. Build your house sure upon ye rock Christ,
that ye may with stand all tempests and assaults. Be not lyghtely turned
from the good learning, which ye be taught in the faith according to the
scripture: what so ever ye be taught beside it let that be accursed. What can
we tell what our forefathers have believed or not? What ca^ we tell which
works he has imputed the^ for sin or not? are we sworn to their faith? are
we christened in ye name of our fathers? why will we then abide by their faith
so earnestly which is uncertain to us? Is not faith a gift of God? Perchance
god has poured yt also in them we not knowenge when, or who, for so much as yt
is a gift of God? He that believes in my (says Christ) though he dye, he
shall live. Her is not promised if he abide by the faith of his forefathers.
Who is so preuy of Gods iudgme^tes that he knows why God suffered the world
thus long to continue in this great darkness? It has chanced of times in
the old testament among the Jews that the true Gods service, and the
knoledge of ye law was forgotten for a great season: so that no man knew of
the law, nor cremonyes. As for the causes hereof or judgment we will refer
them to God, thanking him for his benefete in restorynge unto as again the
pure gospel, shall we not brother?


Lazarus. Ye verily brother with all our hearts. I am now (thanked be God) so
well eased in consciencie that I feel no heaviness nor troubell more at my
heart. Before was I never quiet, now would I do this, than that, now would I
have this pilgrimage gone for me, than that candell offered, which I have not
made you preuy of hethertho. I have also caused oftymes golden masses be said
for me to obtain health: I fear me I have offended also therein. I must make a
plain confession to you.


Timothe. What be these golden masses?


Lazarus. They be separate masses that profit greatly said against
pestilence, derth and such like plages, dyseases, and vrge^t grefes. They be
said or song for ye co^munalty and thereby they obtain gold of them that
they be said for. They have cost my large six pound se^ce my disase began,
though they have profyted my little.


Timothe. I perceive well enough ye have been a vessel full of superstition: ye
have so be^ laden with these pylergnawers and saints minions as saint James
with his moskelshelles. I pray you tell me were ye never in the brotherheade
of our ladies psalter? Were ye never written in the brotherheade of Caims
kynne, that is ye four orders of the popes souldyers?


Lazarus. I have not named the^ al yet: yet I was minded to have been buried in
a graye freres cote, to have been releast of ye third part of my sins. But
now I bid this brablynge fare well. I loath the hearing of them. Show me your
mind of the masles wether a man may cause them to be said for him when he is
in yeopardy? seeing Christ himself has institute them.


Timothe. I am not advised that ever I did once read the name of mas^e in the
whole scripture of God, I read of the supper o^ the lord, which Christ with his
apostles and the apostles with other beleuynge have kept and used. When I
entende to compare the mass and ye supper of our Lord together, I can not
perceive it to be one thing. But seeing yt will be to long to show the
difference between the^ I will defer that until our next metynge. As for
to answer unto your question, I shall leave the word mass untouched, and
answer you scripturely with words of the scripture. You have ared of the mass
and I shall answer you with the supper of our lord. The use of ye supper has
Christ institute for none other intent save only that the bread of our Lord
should be distributed, and the chalice of Christ's blood should be ministered
to every man, in a remembrance of him, which has offered his body unto death,
and shed his blood for us, for a forgiveness of sins: As he says himself:
As often as ye shall do this, (namely that which I do here to your ensample) do
yt in the remembrance of me (that is) that we shall show the death of our
Lord as Paul says. Than do we declare the death of our Lord, wha^ we
preach and show unto the comunalty or congregation how christ has offered his
body unto death for us, and that because we should not remain in the
everlasting death, and so is he become a death unto death, that we should be
taken from death unto life. If ye now cause the supper of our Lord to be used
for you to such intent as (Christ has ordained yt: than are you admonished to
despise this bodily death, which ye must abide after your syknesse, and to
thyrst the life tocome. Now if ye use yt to obtain health thereby, and to abide
longer in this sinful life: than do ye turn the use of yt and compel Christ
to daunse after your mynstrelsy, ye make a game of Christ's passion and
glorious death, whose fruit and operation ye spurn from you, seeking therein to
fulfill your sensualite, Think ye it be not a great folly and dyshonorynge of
God, that you will have the passion of Christ called upon and remembered for you
to obtain bodily health thereby or prosperity: Is it not a gross blyndnesse
and folyshnesse to require ye health of your sinful body of ye death of
christ? ye ought rather to consider the slayenge of your carnal appetite in
this present sufferynge through the cross, that now ye bear with Christ,
because yt through this sufferynge, and deynge wyllyngly ye may live eternaly
with christ. Ye seek ease and long life in Christ's cross, ye ought rather to
seek pacient sufferynge, and victory of death. What deed is this that ye hyer
prestes for gold or silver to say preuy masses for you? ye seek the kingdom
of God with marchaundyse which is spiritual and inward, and it comes in us
without any co^uention or co^tracte precedi^g yt. Know ye not that ye buyers
and sellers are chased of God? Or will ye have christ to come upon earth again
to bring life to you by a new way and manner and not through death and the
cross. We live and dye in God, what makes it matter than wether ye live or
dye in body? The father has given christ all power, both in heaven, and earth:
than has he also power over death, hell, and all deuels. If ye seek ease
another way, other this or that, more than of Christ, which is a true
physician of our soull, than shall ye be lykened unto the woman that had been
syke so long, and spent al her substance in phisyke to obtain health, and
yet had no ease, which she optayned most surest in Christ. It is a great
plage and an horrible work of Gods judgments, that he suffers us to walk
thus blyndfylde in our own invented ways, wherein we have more co^braunce of
conscience than rest or yoie. The cause no doubt is that we will not harken
to Gods word, but stop our ears when we be admonishes thereof, estimi^g it
as lies. Wherefore god says psalm. lxxx. My people would not hear my voice,
and Israel would not obey my. So I gave them up unto their own hearts lusts,
and let the^ follow their ymaginatio^s. Lest we come to this let us pray
earnestly with the prophet saying: Ordene me ways in thy presence my lord my
god. Wha^ ye seek delyuerau^ce and release with mass^s, and pilgrimag, than be
not your ways redrest in Gods presence: For these ways has not he showed
nor gone them himself. We repyne at his ways of the cross, of dyenge, of
hu^blynge, we shoue them from us with hand and foot. Our ways be easy to go
they please us best, all were well if we could obtain release thereby, ye
though the devil should help to it. Whereto is our Christendom become?


Lazarus. I have had now a full answer of al: I am sorry I am gone so far
wide from God My pardon letters, my reliquyes, my folysshe treatises of
meditation, my beedes, and all such superstitions, wherein I have had a false
confydence will I cause to be brent without delay in witness that I count it
abominacion which hitherto I have done with the^ I yield my self to my Lord
God, In him will I live, in him will I dye, he is the tower of my strength,
noman shall draw me out of his hands hensforth. Oh Lord remember not the
misdeeds of my youth, and ignorance. O Tymothe if I were now whole, if I
could go, and stand what lust should I have to serve God: how should I run
to them that lie bedryd, there to dystrybute mine alms: which now I can not do,
seeing I am Gods presoner.


Tymotheus. Lo, ye come forth again with your sensualyte, you begin to
dispute again with God, you will check him in his judgment, knows he not
how you may serve him best, in siknes or health? And if he knew it not, shall
ye teach it him? It is his will at this time that ye serve him with sufferynge
mekely, and that ye receive both this, and other aduersyte that he shall send
you without grudgynge. These be the purest and most acceptable works, of all
that can be done without our addinge thereunto, For all that is added to this
of men that is unclean and sin. Where we only do suffer, god workynge
without hynderaunce there is the most principal virtue, and the best work.
For as it is written: The obedience of the law, and the will of God is better
than al offerynges. and to be at his commandment is better than to offer all
fat sacryfyce. Be therefore idle, stand still, assaye, and se how good the
Lord is. If ye did consydre the botome of your heart a little while, you should
perceive what a false, and wylye fellow were hid there cloked: you should
find that in that ye say: if I were whole. I would serve God and my
neighbor, ye entende not the same: but your own love, which causes you to
wysh so for your own ease of this pain, and that ye might live somewhat
longer. It is now time to pray, and not only in ye time of health. He yt
needs is occasioned to pray. The hypocrytes do pray without need, for they
be full, and satisfied, they be holy in their sight. Ye pray dewly, when ye
offer your willing sprete unto God, and are ready to bear all that he
pleases to lade you wythall. This does also the word devotion sound for
Devotion is a yeldynge or geuynge over of himself to an other thing: Happy is
he that has a true devotion or yeldynge of himself to God Such a man has his
will always: for his will is fulfilled in all that can retyde him, by the
reason his will is wholly yeldeth to God. For yt cause is he ever so well
content, he would not starte though he saw the devil, no though he must
descend the hell. He that has such devotion prays without ceassynge, wether
he wake, sleep, go, stand, rest, labor, although his lyppes move not,
though he knock not his breast, though he ^alye not with God with his fysry
stykes, which all is but an hypocrytisshe game. It is great skyll to pray, and
to say much: To give over the heart unto God, and to make much rummelynge with
the mouth dyffer much. Paul had lever five words spoken in ye
vndersto^dinge: tha^ five thousand words spoken with the breath of the mouth.
God is a sprete, and in sprete and treuth will he be worshypped. The alms
deeds that you would give if ye where whole, does not God esteem for their
multitude, but he regards the lust, and will that ye have to them. A cup of
cold water shall not God forgette, not for cause of the water, but for the
good will of the geuer, which perchance is of no greater abylite. He that
gives one drawght of water unto a prophet, in the name of a prophet, shall
receive the reward of a prophet. And why? For God regards the heart, and
mind, but man regards the outward work. This testyfyeth the wedowe in the
gospel, that cast only cone farthynge in the Gods cheste: which
nevertheless had given more than they that gave great sums. Paul also
says: If there be a wil^inge mind, it is accepted according to that a man
has, not according to that he has not. The poorest creature living male
give as much alms as the rychest. Alms is a greek word and signifies a
mercyfulnesse, or declaringe of a pytyful heart. Can not think ye the poor
have a merciful, and compassionable heart toward the, that be in pouerte, and
anguysshe, though their power can not extend to declare it? If their heart be
thus moved to a lively compassion, than have they done alms enough before God.
All that ye give without such a redynesse of heart is not counted for an alms
before the Lord. Of this redynesse of heart (which love does cause) comes
outward geuynge of alms. Whom I love not, upon him have I no compassion, nor I
do no more succoure him than though his pouerte, and grefe were not pertayninge
to me. Wherefore Paul says though I gave all my goods to feed the poor, and
yet have no love, it profyteth me nothing. Thus be they not external
almesses, that make a man Christian: But by geuynge alms he declares him to
have the love of his neighbor and that he is a Christian. Be content to be
thus presoned in body acordinge the will of God* pray to God in spirit, give
alms, visyte ye poor with your heart, seeing ye can not do it with the body, and
God shall so accept it as though, ye had done it with ye deed. For he regards
the heart.


Lazarus. Would God I might do it so well as I would feign. This flesh is so
slothful. I can not bring it to the cross, and dyenge, which greueth me. Oh
where tarieth he that shall redeem me? Oh when I think this, how narowe is the
gate, and how straight is the passage unto death?


Tymotheus. Be not discoraged in this assault, and battayll, but rather
comfort you with the example of Christ saying: I must be baptized with another
baptyme, but Oh how tedious am I before I can fulfill it? This tedious baptyme
begins now to worcester work in you, that you being cleansed of your old
sinfulnes might become a new creature in god. As ye bodily birth of our mother
in this world is paynful: eue^ so ye going of it out again unto the life
everlasting is on easy. But it is a comfort again, yt like as a woman by
brynging a new creature in to this world, is delivered of her burden and
pain: eue^ so are we delivered of this body by death, which is knitte with sin,
and causes us alwaie to go astraie from go Morouer think (as it is in deed)
yt ye do not suffer this grefe alone, but that the Lord does assist those that
have a contryte heart, and the^ that be of a lowly spyrite shall he release.
The inward man (that is your sprete) does succure your sufferynge. Hear what
is contained in the Psalm. xc. Because he has set his love upon me. I shall
deliver him. I shall defend him, for he has known my name. When he calls
upon me, I shall hear him: Ye I am with him in his troubell, wherout I will
deliver him, and bring him to honor. Satle your mind, God is faithful of
his promyses: He shall not suffer you to be tempted above that ye may bear.
God sends every man temptacio^ with measure, and not above his power.
Therefore says the prophet David: you shall feed us with the bread of tears,
and give us tears to drink with measure. Considre the saying of the prophet
Esaye in his.^iiii. chapter. A little wyle have I forsaken the, but with great
mercyfulnes shall I take the up unto me. This knowleged very well the prophet
when he said: According to the multitude of my wounds, have the multitude of
thy consolations been yoyfull unto my soul. When ye be prayenge to the father
faith at your need, how can ye father give his son a stone? and if you
desired a fysshe how can he give you a serpent? Seeing he has promised to give
a good sprete unto the^ that require him Luc. xi. As the eyes of a handmayden
be continualy fyxed upon her maystres hand, so let ours also be upon the
Lord our God, until he have mercy upon us: Yt is sufficient that your
inward man co^senteth unto the law of God, that it is good, which correcketh
you in your sins, and causes you thus to sight. Paul also might not do ye
good which he would, but the evil which he would not.


Lazarus. Where says Paul the same I pray you? for I feel it in me.


Timotheus. In the.vii. chapter to the Romans.


Lazarus. I will cause the same chapter be red to me at leisure I pray you
show my byen samples how some are become stronger in faith by temptacion,
sufferynge, syknesse, and death: and again some offended and weaker: for
examples teach best.


Tymotheus I will do it gladly at your instaunce. It was promised unto Abraham
by God, that in his sede all kinreds of the world should be blessed, and yt he
would multiply his sede as the stars of heaven. Abraham like a father of the
faithful has accepted these promyses with a sure faith, trusting, it should so
come to pas as God said: though it was strange, because he was old and his
wife baren* Now because Abraham believed this, contrary to the hope of nature
(for who will look for fruit of a woman of.xc. years) in that hope of the true
promyses of God, was he counted ryghtuous, But wherefore is this written of him?
Not only for Abraham, but also for us as says Paul in the.iiii. to the
Romans. For it shall be rekened unto us also for a iustyfycatyon, if we believe
in him, which raised our Lord God Jesus Christ, which was betrayed for our
misdeeds, and is raised from the dead for our iustyfycation. This faith was
perfectly good before god, but it must be proved and assayed for our
instruccion, by the temptacion folowenge. It is written Genes. xxii. God has
tempted or proved Abraham, saying: Take thine only son Isaak whom thou
love, and thou shall (...) him upon an hill, that I shall show thy When this
commandment or temptacion was declared to him, he might have repyned, and
reasoned, saying: that God were not true in his promise: seeing he commanded
him now to slaye that sede, wherein he promised him that all the seeds of the
world should be blessed. But he did not so, his faith remained true, and sure
in God, went on streght with a sure confydence upon Gods word to offer up his
son, and to fulfill Gods commandment theryn. For he was sure that God would
rather raise him up a son again of the very sacrifice ashes, than that he
should be found a liar. After this manner also was Jobs faith tried, which had a
witness of God, that he was a just and simple man, fearing God. Now when this
goodman was stryken of Satan in his children, goods, and body, he fell to the
ground, and worshipped god saying: Blessed be the name of god: We have
received good of the hand of god, why should not we than also receive the
evil? As it has pleased god so is it happened: his name be blessed. Lo follow
the patience of this man Job in your sufferynge, and ye shall not sin with
your mouth. Morouer good Tobias was not moved at his blyndnesse, but abode
steadfast in the fear of God all days of his life, saying God be thanked. For
he perceived welynough that temptacion was a sure token that he should be
counted in the nombre of the ryghtwyse. The which Raphael the angel declared
openly saying: And because thou wast accept and beloved of God yt was
necessary that temptation should try the. Thus have they that pleased God ever
den proved for eure comfort that we also should not despair, when any
troubell is sent to us of our well-beloved fathers hand. The carnal wit can
not perceive nor comprehend, that trouble is profitable, and a trial of our
faith: but as soon as they get any troubell, they be offended with the works
of god, saying to all the ryghteous that suffer, as Jobs wife did: Do ye yet
continue in your perfectness? Curse god and dye As though they would lay: It
is plain now that he is no god that thus scourges you, and utterly forsakes:
why do ye trust him yet? Say much good of hi^ that brings death upon you,
for he is as worthy of your blessing as a wylfull murthurer to be saved.
Shrenk from him, deny him, and remember ye be mortal, and that with this life
ye pass all yeopardyes, trust ye yet to obtain good things of your Lord?
These and such like words enspyreth our wife sensualite into our minds,
when we be assaulted of troubel. For as than does not the flesh know nor
feel that god under correction, and under the shine of his wrath has hid
lovely countenance, and covers ye true life in death, The friends of the
before said Job also were offended through his great mysery saying: When did
ever the innocent perysshe? when were the ryghtwyse destroyed? Call, look
wether there be any body now to give you an answer, of the hope that ye had in
the Lord? Turn ye to any of the saints, and behold wyther such like did
happen unto them? Now se ye how the ungodly friends, which take part with our
flesh, judge our acceptabelnes to God, by these worldly prosperytes. Behold
how carnal wit estemeth that for a curse, which faith receaueth as a godly
reioycynge. The friends that loved Toby after the flesh, did also mock the
good man he being blind, even as those that understand nor the work of
pacyence, and the glory of the cross, saying: Where is thy hope, for the
which thou have done alms, and buried the dead? this is the reward that ye
have for doenge good. But harken how Tobyas rebuked them saying: Say not so,
for we are the children of holy men, and look for the life which God shall give
unto them, that never turn their believe from him. Behold this strong faith
of Tobyas: with such an answer shall ye shoue, and avoid the wicked in
speracion of Satan, that always entyseth you saying: Are ye wytlesse that ye
look for remissyon of sins by the blood, of Christ? and look for the life
by death? Ye shall be deceived, for who is risen from death? Do not ye se how the
faith of your Christ is denied? If he loved you as ye think, would not he do
you good? If he were a true sauyoure, and true god, he would not suffer you to
lie here thus, he would not order you thus. I counsel you to let this Christ
go, what have ye to with him seeing he does you no good, he does only fraye
you, with hell, and life tocome, herewyth would he feign led you as with a
line. It is not as he makes you believe. Eat drink and be merry, satle your
heart upon a sweet ground, as yt was yesterdaye, so shall it also be now.
Let us eat, and drink for what shall we have more, tomorowe must we dye. Be
not abashed with the folysshe faith of Christ, I can acco^lyshe al your desire
here on earth Do not ye se how my sort is exalted in the world, and live at
ease? they be welthy of riches, they have many friends their houses be without
care, and they be not scourged, their cattle increase, their flock
multiplyeth, their children play, and be merry, they play on instruments. What
do ye gain under the banner of the poor, wreched, naked, disfygured, and
crucyfyed Christ, save only poverty, anguysshe, and continual cross? Lo, How
his discyples go by the streets with sore hyles, the be fools, and nygardes,
they be not able to give a mouse a meals meat, and when they have long
enough served their master obeyenge his commandments, at the last they be
hewe^, and chopped, stykt, burnt, drowned, or come to such like shamfull end,
what victory has he the^ gotten? Where do ye se him rise again? where se you
the swearde shrenke from him? The fire consumes him, and water ouerwhelmeth
him, where abides his God, that shall not forsake him in ye point of death?


Lazarus. Ah brother how shall be able to escape these snares of the suttel
find? Verily such temptations have of times made me so doubtful and perplexe
of heart yt I wyste not wyther to shifte me self. If God had not sustained me
I might have been fallen into despair, and ben choked in mine vnbleue. I have
be^ often displeased with God seeing all things prospered so well with them: and
I, with them that be like me strove against the moon and seven stars,
labourynge and toylinge, coming out of the one cross into another My thought
if I were god I would have ordered the game other wise.


Timothe. Verily brother the devil with his fleshly pleasures (which he lays
before me^ to entyce them) has a pleasant beginning as a bye charged with
honey: but in ye end is there a stynge. If ye behold ye lusts of the flesh
before with the heithe^, than be they very pleasant in the eye, as a fair
woman trymly deckte: but if her bake be turned, than is it all horrible what ye
se. This is the broad lusty way whereof Christ speaks, saying that many
walk it yt, but she brings to eternal damnation. The children of this world
yt live so welthy, pass their time in yoie, it is true: but what follows?
suddenly they go down to hell says Job. xxi. david psalm. lxxii. says yt he
also was nigh overcome with beholdi^ge of ye worldly men and was nigh overcome of
the te^ptacion of wealth, as we all be sometime saying? My fete (that be the
thoughts where with the heart moves) were almoost gone, my steps were near
sleded. And why? I was grieved at the wyked, to se the ungodly in such prospyte.
For they are in no parell of death, but stand fast as a palace. They come in
no mysfortune like other men, another are they plaged like other folk. etc.
Wherefore brother I exhort you not to be moved at such inspirynges of the
deuell, and be not grieved not offended with ye ungodly: for ye shall se their
end, how that they shall wyther like hey, and decay as flores in the field.
Be renewed in the Lord, and he shall accomplish the desires of your heart.
Say always with the prophet It is good for me to continue by God, and to set my
hope and confidence upon my Lord my god. The children of god though they seem
here in ye sight of the ignoraunte to dye: yet is their portion and heritage
endurynge forever. This shall the wyked find true herafter, and complain when
yt shall be to late, and wan they shalke counted among saints, whom they
sometime have taken here for mad men as the book of Sap. ye.v. chapter does
plainly express. O Lazare if it should be after your mind, yt should not be
well. If ye should rule the wagen one day, yet one our, heaven and earth
should run on an heap, like as poets do fayn that Phaeton did. Enter not to
deep in gods judgments, Let him rule, he shall order it better than we can
devise.


Lazarus. Ye say truth, We will have a saying in the matter, and would feign
by Gods also: But if we perceived what yt means, we should let god alone
hardly Nevertheless I ca^ skant trust him to be my lord my god my father: for
he seems sometime so utterly to have forsaken me as though I were none of his.


Timothe. It is no strange thing yt God seems sometime to have forsaken you.
Christ him self has felt it in him, and suffered temptation wyllyngly to our
ensample and comfort, wha^ he hanging on the cross for very great
strayghtnesse of pain and sufferynge said: My Lord my God wherefore have thou
forsaken my? Not yt he was ever forsaken or destitute of the godheade: but this
disease has he taken upon him wyllyngly, that we (as he gives us here a
sample) should call to the father in our anguishe, which doubtless shall hear
us, ye has herd us already in Christ before we call upon him. For it is
written in the prophets that he shall hear us before we call upon him, and
before our prayer be finished shall he have herd us. It is not possible a
father ca^ leave his children in their most necessite, Though a mother may
forgette the child, that is borne of her body: yet shall not I forget you
says the Lord God. That witnesses the prophet saying: The Lord has not
wythdrawen his visage fro me, and when I called upon him he herd me. Mark in
the psalter how pyteously Christ co^playneth to his father his need, when he
was come in ye depeste of the sea of tribulation. Behold how David complayneth
his necessite before God. I have said in the excess of my mind, I am cast
away Lord. Therefore have thou herd the voice of my prayer when I called upon
the. Seeing your temptacion and pain is comune with Christ and all other
saints. Therefore render the^ to god: for he is more that is in us, than he
that is in ye world. Therefore may he also comfort, help, and aid more than
health, riches, or friends. Wha^ ye feel your faith wax feeble and slack, than
draw to christ with the apostles having a hearty desire and say: Lord augment
my faith, and all your syknesse shall not be imputed you for sin.


Lazarus. I thank you now brother Timothe of your virtuous and lovely
exhortation, which ye have showed my very brotherly Pray God instantly for me
wreched sinner that he will help mine unbelieve, and give my patience in all my
sufferynge: that I may set my heart at rest in him only, which is part of
mine heritage and passion, which shall also give me mean heretage again, though
by sin it is once taken away.


Timothe. I will do it gladly and with all my heart good brother, Pardon me for
I have be^ over long with you.


Lazarus No verily ye have not: Come again soon or to morrow to inform me
more larglyer of the mass.


Timothe. I will do yt. Our neghbure Tobias wylbe with you to morrow, to
teach you somewhat of dyenge.


Lazaarus Let be yt so, I pray you let that honest man come.


Timothe. He comes even now, God be with you


Lazarus. Fear well good brother Timothe.


A dyaloge between Tobias and Lazarus, wherein Tobias teaches the syke Lazarus,
that death is to be desired with a sure faith of the life for tocome.
Tobias coming before Lazarus bed says. Peace be in this house. How is it
with you Lazare?

Lazarus. Ye be welcome brother: for I did long for you: Take a stool and sit
by my if ye please.


Tobias. I will. How is it with you? Is it all after one?


Lazarus. No no brother, It is well amended God be thanked of yt.


Tobias. I am glad of yt surely: I trust it will amend once For the lord is
merciful, he forgeueth sin in time of trybulation, and is a defense to all
them that call upon him with true desire. When ye father has occupied ye rod
enough, than casts he her in to the fire. When God has stryken, than healen
he again. Do ye perceive any ease? your face pleases not me best.


Lazarus. I believe right well that ye carcass does rather fayde, ye I yield
it, for death is dew unto it: but ye spirit and faith be sure (thanked be God)
and augment daily, so that the longer I am syke the less grefe I feel: My
think I begin even to say with the prophet: Thy rod and thy wande have
comforted me.


Tobias. Good Lord how feign do I hear such witness of faith: Now speak ye
as a Christen man: I would not have believed that I should have found you so
virtuously disposed. I se well the hand of the lord is not shortened. He can
daily cause men to speak with new tunges as he did his disciples on the
wytsondaye. As I was last with you I departed sorrowful, because I herd
nothing of you but blasphemies and murmurynges against God, ye were so
impatient. But God has now so endued you with his mercy, yt ye may sing a
Christenly praise unto his name.


Lazarus. Treuly brother, that as than I was so wide from God, caused mine
unbelieve and the disquiete conscience of mine, for so much as I was presoned
and captyue with man's constitutions, and works of mine own choosing: But now
is the snare destroyed, and I am rydde of them: God has given increase unto
the word that our brother Timothe has ministered unto me.


Tobias. God grant you his full knoledge, yt he may be glorious in you
forever. God has given our brother Timothe a singular grace in expoundynge
scripture. I am sure he has given you many good exhortations of Christen
patience, and of mortifyenge of the old Adam.


Lazarus That has he done earnestly, and has rebuked my conscience of her
hypocrisy, and loosed her by the workinge of God. I se now the blyndnesse and
errore that I have been seduced wythall hitherto. I defye them in mine heart.
Will ye know what I did yet yesterdaye at even.


Tobias. What? I pray you brother?


Lazarus. I shall tell: As soon as Timothe was gone out of my house, I could
not keep ye joy of ye word longer close in my heart: But I caused al my
household be called together, and rehearsed before them all that I herd of
Timothe, insomuch th^^ they were stered therwyth, thanking God for his
workynge it in us. After that caused I be burnt all my pardon letters, my
folyshe treatyses of devotion. my beedes with all ye relics and goostly
gifts that freers and no^nes sent me, now one than another. These caused I be
burnt in the presence of al my household, because that they which were offend
by me in them, should se the witness of my faith, to their strenghtynge. Ought
I not to have done so?


Tobias. In that have ye done according to the gospel This was a true shryft,
and a true satisfaction for your sins, I doubt not but ye have received a
true absolution of him that only can forgive sins, that is God.


Lazarus. Now is my desire of you good Toby, that ye also will teach me some
good thing out of the holy scripture to despise death, and to receive it
wyllyngly by faith: For I have received the sentence of death. Fulfill that
which ye promised my by Timothe, and I will pray God entterly to give me ears
to hear, which hitherto have been stopped with the flesh, the which I fear
not but he will do yt.


Tobias Seeing ye hunger so ye word of God. I will break it unto you in the
name of God, so far forth as he shall send me sprete and vtterau^ce. Sit ye
eassy enough, or shall I raise you some what higher* ye ye may sit a^ more ease.


Lazarus No I pray you, for I was shyrted even now. Begin in the name of God
must ye will.


Tobias. The philosophers have had diverse opinions of death, But in this the
most part agrees, that death is a partynge of the body and soul. In this
natural departing shall not we Christen men six our philosophical eyes, nor
judge with a hethenishe judgment in this behalf. For as long as we ^esouie^ our
selves with such consyderation of (...) sight of death trayeth us, so that we
beg^nne to hate death thereby, because (...) takes away the body which we
love, and so causes us to hate death naturally. Of which evil will to ye
natural death (...) lefe the cause, which will (...) that naturaly death seems
to take away, as shall be more evident herafter (...) consydre the death in suc^
^ig^^^ (...) it were a passage from death to (...) consyderation or beholding
(...) in us, and that we sha^ not (...) in death, but shalb^ rather (...) Even
as Christ says (...) and trusts in the (...) shall live, For (...), is
counted life to the beleuynge: but unto the ungodly is it death everlasting.
By this is appears unto every Christian man to be a lyenge word yt the
Philosophers do say, namely: That death is ye most horrible thing of all
horriblenesses. The cause why they said so, was, that in their opinion by
death man is depreued of the most pleasant thing for evermore, which is not
true. For a Christen man has no greater charge, heuyer burden, nor more enmy
than the body of sin as ye shall hear more herafter. As superstition has
houghly fashioned ye deuell to refrayn synninge eue^ so has yt figured death
also fearful, as ye reward of sin Accordi^ge to ye desire of ye life to come
i^ us, is death acceptable unto us and pleasant. Put away ye opinion of death
from your heart, and you shall not fear death. The siknesses and the
febelnesses, which be tedious for our flesh to bear, and make ye flesh ever
weaker against the assault of death, they be not death: But the figure of
death, that pearseth in to us before death by reasons of unbelief, that is the
most greueous and heinous death. So that we cause death unto our selves, as
we cause other grefes also in our hearts. The very sufferynge and departing of
the soul from the body is not in the point of death: but that we by
considering of death we are drawn, compelled to leave the body, that we set
se great stoare by, and this causes death to be so bitter. Wh^rby ye may
perceive yt the death, of sinners is the worst, and most bitter: seeing they
mu^^ forgo the best beloved thing, that is the sels. Now is the Christen faith
which we as children of saints have confessed in baptyme) of such nature, that
it promyseth, and shows a sure faith of the life everlasting through
Chryst^^ death. Which faith and hope (...) in us all, that we sa^ great price
by (...) kept dylygently before time, le^t it might be taken from us by death.
This goodly ye well our body, that we made so great of are we willing (...)
to forgo by reason of ye ^oue that we have gotten to ye heavenly (...) has
swalowed up all worldy things: So that we do estyme it a great vauntage to be
delivered from this wreched body, that caused us to wander and be absent from
God. The sure waytinge for the glory tocome in us despises, ouercometh, and
refuses all paynfull grefes, whereof ye unfaithful (which fear death) be
astonyed, and all the ways possible they withstonde death. Wherefore it is a
true saying he dies well, that dyethyer he dye. As much faith as a Christen
man has of the life tocome, so much despises he this temporal death. And
again As much unbelieve as a Christian has toward God and love to himself so
much does he fear and fly bodily death. Lo this is the sum brefely touched
of all, that can be showed you of dyenge. By this shall ye also perceive
welynough that death is not to be feared, in so much as she is rydde of her
stynge and venym: yt is swalowed up in the victory of Christ, which has
overcome him that had power of death (that is the devil) to ye health of all
faithful which shall obtain heaven according to the abylite of their faith.


Lazarus. Alas brother ye have given me so much atonce to eat, that I can not
swalowe it all: ye must give it me by pieces, as Tymothe has done, that I may
come to the plain understanding.


Tobyas. That I may do it comely I must begin where Timothe has left. I
told you that he dies well which dies before he dye. This first dyenge is in
the mortifyenge or slayenge of the old Adam that is our sensual appetytes.
The sen, sual appetytes that live in you, and must be slayen in you are love of
thy self, lust to ydelnesse, pride and boastynge, appetyte to vengeance,
provoking to anger, inordinate love to your wife, children and friends desire
of bodily health wysshynge of temporal fortune, love of thyself, and bodily or
goostly work. In these things does our old man covet to live longer and
longer. These desires are mortyfyed, and slaye^ in us by the spryte of God, in
the new birth of the inward man, which rests in God, and is at once with God
what that ever betydeth him wether it be in body, in goods, in life or death,
in friends, in name or fame: Ye though his body were ground all to poulder,
yet would not he gaynsaye it, nor depart from God therefore, which causes him
to assaye inwardly, through the spyrite of faith, how sweet and good the Lord
is. To this dyenge exhorts us scripture. To this rest and Sabath draws us
the spyrite of God. So much as ye be crucyfyed in the aforesayed sensual
appetyte, so much goostly increase get you in the inward man, which does not
shrenke for all that, nor suffer the cross to overcome him, but aprocheth
rather nearer, pearsynge unto death, wherhy his trust is to gain life, which
faith, and hope shall not be gayn said as says Paul in the.ii. to the R^*
This understanding or diuynyte that ye have herd here is declared unto you,
in the scryptures folowenge* Namiy: Go forth with Christ Jesus your brydegrmoe
without the tents of your sensualyte, and bear the lowlynes of your
brydegrome with you in your body unto death: For if we dye with Christ, we
shall also live with him: if we suffer with him we shall raygne with him. Ye thank
the father yt he by this sufferynge has made you apt to enyoie one part with
all saints, that he has redeemed you from all power of darkness, and set you
in the kingdom of his beloved son, through whose blood we have obtained
forgeuynge, and redemption, of sins. Seeing then ye ^e become a party membre
of Christ, fulfill therefore in you that, which is wantynge of the passions of
Christ that the power of God may abide in you


Lazarus* How shall I understand that has not Christ suffered enough? what
(...) I fulfill that is lacking in his passions seeing there is no part of
(...) ^ounde, from the top of the (...) ^o the ^o^e of the (...) Yt is Paul
that says so, namely, that he did fulfill in his body that, which was
lacking of Christ's afflyction, ye he durst say also that he did bear the
marks of Christ in his body: Which be not the.v. wounds that Francis dreamed
to have received in his hands, and fete: But they were the marks that he
had received of the scourgynge, weerynesse labor, and the cross that he
was feign to bear patiently for the gospel. In which patience he was said to
bear Christ's passion, and to receive his wounds: for Christ had first boren
such pain, persecution, marks, and cross, In so much yt he was drawn out,
and emptyed with sufferynge, As says Esaye. liii. When we look upon him there
shall be no fayrnesse, we shall have no lust unto him. He shall be the most
simple, and despised of all, which yet has good experience of sorrows, and
infirmites. We shall reken him so simple and so vile, that we shall hyde our
faces from him. How be it (of a treuth) he only takes away our infyrmyte,
and bears away our pain. So that he might well ask wether there were any
pain like unto his pain? For he seemed a worm and no man. Seeing Christ the
head of ye whole congregation of Christen men took upon him to suffer, yt was
needful than that he should ascend the highest degree to the which great love
has dryue^ him that he should sanctifye his congregation being pure, and
washed with the fountain of water in the word that he should gloryfye it
having no spot, nor wrenkle, nor any such blemysshe but that it should be holy
and without blame The head Christ suffers yet daily in his members. This
passion shall he be feign to suffer, till the time that he shall have cast all
his enemies under his fete. That is: when he shall deliver up his kingdom unto
his father.ii. Corin. xv. Who soever therefore is crucified with Christ (that
is) who soever slays, and kylleth his carnal appetites, and persueth them
hatefully, as our sins be hatefully persued in Christ until death he does
supple in his body that which is lacking of Christ's passion. For Christ is
said to suffer that, which his members do suffer, or shall suffer. Even as
Christ said to the commune persecutor of the Chrystia^s: Saul, Saul, I am that
Jesus whom thou persecutest. How could he persecute Jesus, which sat at the
right hand of his father save only in his members.


Lazarus. I have understand that very well now that it is a passion which
first Christ as head, and so all other true Christen men as members have
suffered, or shall suffer: For when the head is syke, than mourn all the
members, and when the members be dyseased, the head is not well another.


Tobyas. You have understand me well, wherefore let it be for you consolation
that you be not forsaken alone, but that Christ himself as head, and all
Chrystians as members are sufferynge with you. In Christ's communalty is no
strife, nor parcialyte, but a communion or felowshyppe of all that is good or
badde, sweet or sour, the one membre cares for another. When the one
suffers, al do suffer, when the one is glorified than be they all glorified.
So great a thing is the communion of saints, that we may glory and rejoice
the one in the goodness of the other, as though they were our own. By the
glory of Christ shall our dishonesty be glorified. And by his fulness shall we
be losed of our pouert, his merytes shall put away our misdeeds. Who is he now
yt is in pain yt would not be merry, seeing man bears not his sins, or if he
bears the^ he bearethe^ not alone, for he has Christ himself to help hi^,
and so many children of God. Paul says.i. Corinth. x. One bread, and one
body are we many. This all comes upon us out of the spyrytuall marriage, which
God our father has made with his only beloved son, and us. For thereby are
we made one with God as man and wife are twain in body, and all other things
are commune. A child is borne unto us, and a son is given us Esaye.ix.
Wherefore he is our own Christ's victory: is our victory: Christ's rysynge is
our rysynge. Morouer yt which we are, we are not of our selves for we have
yeldeth to Christ our faith already. Paul says.i. Corin. vi. Know ye not
that your body is the temple of ye holy ghost? Whom you have of God, and are
not your own. For ye are dearly bought. Praise ye God therefore in your body
and in your sprete, which are Gods We be delivered over in writing unto the
law of God, and his promises, and he is again delivered in wrytinge unto us
to salvation and welfare. The bond of matrymony must be known on both parties
orels is it of none effect. Thus is it reasonable yt we bear Christ in our
body, even as he bears us, and makes us partakers of all his goods So that
the Chrystenly bryde may say. My love is mine, and I am his.


Lazarus. That same is very comfortable, that Christ has accepted us, and
given him self unto us. Whereby we have received his life for our death, his
strength for our weakness, his ryghtwysnesse for our sins. But when bear
we Christ in our body?


Tobias Where we be contrary to Christ and follow not his learning, ensample,
and spirit, there do not we bear Christ. There be we ryd of Christ* Paul
says.ii. Cor. xiii. Know ye not your selves, that Jesus Christ is in you?
Except ye be castawayes. Those than that through the spirit of God be obeyenge
in all patience, ready to obey Gods commandments, in redringe and delyuerynge
the^self to the will of God, compelled and made lusty hearted, They may say with
Paul: I live now, not I, but christ lives in me: Paul had also crucified his
flesh with his co^cupiscences, so that the world became him a cross, and he
a cross unto the world again. He was said to bear Christ in his body, for
his body was daily destroyed through the cross, like as the body of Christ was
slain by the cross and sufferynge. To such like mortifyenge exhorts us Paul
Romans xii. saying: I beseke you brethren by the mercyfulnesse of God, that ye
give over your bodies for a sacrifyce that is quyck holy, and acceptable unto
God which is your reasonable serving of God. This is an acceptable sacrifyce
which is consumed of the brande of sufferynge (which we do bear wyllingly with
Christ) like a true burnt offeringe. For in the day of trybulation we offer
unto God a true sacryfyce of praise (that is) the fruit of our lyppes in
knoledgynge his name. That we (as the pain of our body comes plentuous upon
us) knoledge the name of Christ, that is a token, that we be Christ's disciples
and guyded by his sprete by the which he has been obedient to his fathers will
unto the death of the cross. Orels should we be like them that believe so long
as all things prosper, but in time of temptacion than do they shrynke. The
spyryte of faith teaches, and assures us that Christ in our sufferynge is
our comfort, and in our dyenge our life. The sacrifyce of praise shall
worship me (says the Lord) and there is the way wheryn I shall show my
salvation. A dead, and mortifyed heart is a sacrifyce very acceptable before
God. He that has mortifyed his natural body here in earth, he that is dead in
his heart* he that bears Christ in his body, because he will go with Christ
without the tents of his heart, without the gate, bearing the rebukes of his
savior with him on his shulder: he shall not fear death, he shall not estymed
death his enmy, nor fly yt: For she takes not it, which he would rather keep
but she gives him that, which he would keep with all his heart. The life
temporal is sweet unto the flesh, but our life yt we shall led with Christ
is sweter.


Lazarus. Treuth it is, and therefore is death unto us passage to life. Wherefore
we ought to pray heartily that he let not us fall in such temptacion that might
ouercom us: but that he will deliver: in us that evil day, from all evil
that might draw us from the faith. For it is the mighty work of God to believe
that we be his, ye even in the point of death, the which as yet I do not feel
in me. For I feel yet another law in me which is contrary to the inspyracion
of the holy ghost. I look about for the flesh pottes of Egypt, whereupon I
was wont to sytte. When the figure of death offers it self from before, than
do I search wether, I can not escape behind out of this wreched life. Seeing
I am so bound with sin. I ought to be obedient at Gods calling and without
lokynge about depart: but I beseme the wife of Loath. I can not leave the
lokynge about, though my neke lay thereon. My wife the flesh wherewith I am
laden, is yet very feeble to withstonde such temptacion. Alas brother I can not
away with this wife.


Tobyas. Fear not good brother fear not, for such totynge and lokynge
backwarde, such battayll, and febelnesse did also Paul feel, when he beholdynge
his wrechednesse said in the.vii. to the Roma. O wreched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from the body of this death. It is necessary such assaults
come upon us. Victory comes by fighting against sin, and of victory
comes tryumphe, but noman shall be crouned save he that fight deuly. If ye
will triumph with Christ over sin, and death without battayl, that can not
be: for such way has not Christ showed you. Fight like a true souldyer of
Christ. That we fear death, and shrenck at it is natural weakness the cause,
Which is not damnable: for she is not imputed to us for sin. Ye Christ
hyemself has taken such weakness upon him for us, when he began to shouer,
to tremble, and to be heavy for the death tocome, saye^ge: My soul is heavy
until death. Mat. xxvi. Why did he so? seeing he knew death could not hurt
him. He knew well he should se no corrupcion. Why was he afraid? He knew his
death should bring life unto us all, and overcome death, why did not he rather
rejoice in that death, whereof should come so much goodness? what should it
grieve him than to dye? would he rather have had delaie of it? did not he wysshe
us such mercy and welfare seeing he seemed to covet to be loose of this
sufferynge. Alas no, that be far. But seeing he took upon him bare man head,
yt pleased him to assaye the weakness of manhood, because we should not faynte
if like temptacion arose against us: Whereof no man living (be he never so
holy) is fre. For how sore the inward man is lyghtened of the spyryte, yet
does the old Adam, the wife of Loath not forsake her kind in fighting, and
desiring against the spyryte. Which battayll and desires we overcome, and have
overcome by faith, that assures us to have a true bishop by God the father,
namely Jesus Christ, which has been tempted in all points, that he might know
how to help them that be proved. The Lord is true, for he can prove, and
deliver the good Christians out of temptations again. Christ which knew no
sin, is become sin for us, that we should be the iustyfycacion, or
ryghtwysnesse of God in him. Christ has damned sinfulness of sin in his
flesh. Sin is damned, and put away in Christ: she can not damn us she
must be auaylynge unto ryghtwesnesse, so far is she come. Christ iustyfyeth
us, and who can blame us? Christ discharges us of all sin, what deuell, or
what flesh is it than that can lay any sin or fault to us, The syknesses
and weaknesses that ye have after ye be Chrystened, have ye commune with all
saints, them shall ye feel other more or less, until the body of death be
whole, and clean put away. Be not moved at the small Babylonyans, that is the
worldly thoughts or his pleasures: but knock them against the true corner
stone Christ, whereby ye shall be saved. What do we look for after this life? What
pleasant thing perceive ye in it, that might cause you to desire a long
life? What is this life, save a contynuall battayll and cross, a deadly
enemyte, and continual hatred? What is it but a preson of sin? For the evil
that we hate, that we do: and the good that love, that we do not. The grace and
mercy through Jesus Christ must deliver us, orels shall we styck fast by the
fete. We have here no abiding cite, but seek and long for another that is
coming. For we know (if at the least we be beleuynge) that if the earthy
dwelling place of our body be corrupt, and destroyed we have a building
ordained of God, an house not made with hands: but everlasting in heaven. ii.
Corinth. v. That we now therefore sygh and groan, lokynge about before we can be
ryd of this body, that is because we would faynese, and covet to be clothed
with the heavenly duellynge place without putting of, and avoiding of this
earthy cloth and dwelling place. We would feign retain this fylthy sack,
because of the company that we have had with it, so that it which is mortal
might be swaloued up of the life immortal, without assaye^ge of death. But
that can not be: Seeing it is ordened for man once for to dye. And that we
should leave herein earth by partynge of the soul that, which we have received
of the earth. And well is us, that God seeing our mysery has pytyeth us,
making our death safe through his death: For he is become a death unto death,
so that death has no fearfulness in her, save only her vysure to fray them
that be chyldysshe in faith, and understanding But unto the faithful and them
that have understanding, is she depryued of her stynge, and venyme. If ye
avoid your mind of the grymnesse and utter appearaunce of her, than shall ye
find no death more in her. Go boldli to death, break open his yawes, look
what is in him. You shall find no life, no power or strength in him to byte
you. Provoke him boldly to mete you in the fighting place, and he shall fly
from you. Defye death with all them that can hold with him, for they can not
harm you, they can not mynysshe one here of you. Say hardely with the prophet
Ose. O death where is thy stynge? O hell where is thy gloriation or reioycenge
The death is swalowed up in Christ's victory. And therefore is death called in
scripture a slepynge more tha^ death. Of this have you a goodly figure, The
brazen serpent that Moses made Numeri. xxi. seemed afar of to have been a
serpent in deed, but if ye did aproche unto yt, than might ye perceive
welynough that it was a dead serpent, and that it had no venym, that it could
another byte nor stynge. Even so is it with death, outward it has a fearful
visage, but the power of it is take away by Christ: For he has overcome him
yt had power of death, ye devil, as ye shall hear more herafter.


Lazaarus Your declaration that ye have showed here is very spiritual, I
believe it be all as ye say: ye and I am well pleased there with. Yet do I
perceive that goodmen, which have such feeling and knoledge in themselves (that
is to wete that the death of Christ is death unto ye natural death) as well as
the evil and bad, do shrenke and wrenche at ye point of death as though death
had yet power upon them.


Tobias Treuth it is that the way which brings us to life is straight, and
the port of death narowe. Wherefore we ca^ not pass unto death by sufferinge
without strayghtnesse and pearsynge: but what is yt unto the life and health: The
body must fulfill his natural course, it ought not nor can do otherwise, it
ca^ but wrenche, pinche, shouer and kyke. Let ye ass bear ye trushe hardely,
it makes no matter, yet for all this will not we fear death. If death can do
naught more, what awayleth much repinynge and wrenchynge: it is light to be
overcome, this wre^chinge may be permitted him welinough, al is for one evil
hour, Let ye flesh perceive in it self ye testament of Ada^ unto ye last
hour. We have naught now to walk in save hope: this hope and abydi^g of ye
life tocome, shall cause us rightwel to overcome ye sorrow and woe of death, and
haystely to forget it. It is but yt byti^ge of a fle, yt hurts not ye soul.
The death is better for us tha^ we can think: she loses us of al misery, she
joins us to god, and sends us forth to everlasting life Let Heythe^ and
Turks fear death which have no faith of the life tocome: But our
conversation and thoughts are in heaven, for from thence do we abide our Lord
Jesus Christ, which shall restore our castawaye body again, making it
comfortable unto his glorified body. If we had not this hope of the partynge
of the body, trustinge no longer in Christ than during this life: than ware we
as says Paul. i. Corint. xv. the most abiecte and refuse of al me^: But now
is Christ dead and risen again, yt we should also rise again in hi^ in a new
life Death is our last enmy yt holds us from the life, this must once be
overcome me in us also. Christ dyed for naught if he has not anulled the power
and law of death. Christ is not risen from death if we must abide in death. If
Christ be not risen, than is our faith vain, than abide we damned in our
sins, than is scripture a lie, than be the apostles also and ye prophets
false witnesses of God, That be far. For Christ dyed and is risen again,
that he should have dominion over quycke and dead. Wherefore, as we all dye in
Adam, so shall we be relyued again in Christ, of which relyuyng again Christ
has made a proof in him self, Therefore says Paul: If the sprete that has
raised up Christ from the dead dwell in you, tha^ shall ye same sprete relyue
your mortal body, by the spirit that dwells therein.


Lazarus. Than will not I be moved, though the flesh do sometime sygh and moan
because of death, and the faintness of pain, but will abide always the
redemption tocome with a lyfted up head that is with a merry spirit. For if I
should consydre all things, what else is in this valley of tears save pain
and anguishe, sin and wickedness.


Tobias. The poets and Philosophers estymed death to be a good thing, because
yt is the end of all wrechednesse, and a rest of all evil. Many Heythen have
be^ less abassed for the death than we are. Socrates did drink his death
laughing. He tought yt death is not to be feared, yt which he did fortify with
the deed. If the fleshly affection, and hye mind of Socrates to fortyfy and to
strength his doctrine, might not overcome the natural fear of death: What
shall than do ye certaynte of our faith that be Christen men, (that is) they
that know they can not dye? Ought not than the hope of the life tocome take
from us the beholdinge of death? Though the just and faithful seem to dye in
the sight of ye ignorau^te, wha^ they be burned, drouned, beheaded, yet do not
they once se death: I will not say assaye ye death, for they dye in peace^
They were dead before in God by geui^ge themselves over to God, and he yt dies
in God, lives eternally. Happy are they that dye in the Lord, for their
dyenge is changed in to living. That is it that Christ says: He that keeps
my word, shall not dye forever.


Lazarus They have always made hell so whote unto us and the deuell so blake,
that we ^^^ste not whether to turn our selves. They made us so afraid of
death, and chefely in that they said that the deuell appears unto us very
horrible coming to tempte us of this or that evil whereby every man feared
death. But where was the word of God tha^ which promyseth: That we that believe
in Christ shall never assaye, nor se death. Have these false teachers, and
blind leaders never seen such evangelical scripture, nor red, nor herd the^.


Tobias. Though they have seen, herd, and red it, yet have not they believed
it: For the prince of this world has blinded their mysbeleuyng hearts. Where
is no faith there is a perpetual disquietnes of conscience, there is a hell, a
fearfulness, ye a see full of all fearfulness, remorse, and mysbelefe. There
is hell whote, and the deuell blake, there is a perpetual rackinge place of a
sinful conscience. In the way of the sinners is great trauayll and labor,
as witness they themselves saye^ge: We be weryed in ye way of wickedness, we
have trauayled many ways, and the way of truth has not ouershadoweth us.
That is it that the wise man says: The heart of the wyked man is like a see
tossed with the waves. And because these hypocrytes and workholyons seek peace
where as they find no peace, but great disquietnesse and troubell, for the
ungodly have no peace says the lord God: therefore think they it be so with
every man as it is with the^. They think every man be so doubtful and
unsteadfast hearted as they be, ye because they estyme them selves more holyer
and better than other, therefore think they other must feel whoter fire than
they themselves, and that other must feel the gnawenge worm more in their
consciences than they. Wherefore they augment and make the law, the deuell, and
death more heinous before men's eyes. They that be the most fearfullest (as
these be) unto them will they be more horrible and dredefull with words and
other things: whereby they be become nothing but rackers of the simple. I
believe their worm never rest, and their fire be never quenched. I believe right
well they go astraye, fyndyng no rest with ye manslayer Cayn. I believe they
run faythlesse with Judas to the prestes and freers to be shryuen, for
comfort and rest, but they abide still desperate. I believe right well they be
ready to do satisfaction for their sins with Antiochus, and of mistrust give
money to pray for the^: But al their fasting, prayenge, going wolwarde and
barefote, all their mulynge and babbling shall not help the^. Whether soever
they turn them selves, they find always sin present, they mete al way the
devil and death in the tethe. How can these teach otherwise than they find?
How should they preach ye gospel of peace yt never taysted peace? How should
they instruct another in Gods behalf of his atonement, of his rest and
victory of death, and his assurance from hell, which have no faith thereof?
Let none of these deuel martyrs make you thus folyshe, or wytlesse. If ye have
the word of God, yt shows you peace and forgiveness, you have God. Where
rest is there is God, there is an everlasting co^uenaunt. There is roted out
the fear of death, ye deuell, and hell. For fear is not in love, but she
excludes fear. Paul says: We that be justified by faith have peace by God.
He that is justified thyswyse by the true faith of Christ, though he saw the
deuell, death, and hell with his eyes, yet would not he be abashed, ye he would
rather fight against them and over come them, than he would fly one foot, And
why? for the gates of hell, that is ye power of the same, can not obtain the
victory of Peter's faith. Saints have overcome kingdoms by faith, wrought
ryghtwesnesse, and optayned the Godly promyses. The prophet says: Though a
battayll a rose against me in that will I hope. Though I must go through the
myddest of death, yet shall not I fear, for thou art with me lord. Thou have
prepared a tabel before me against mine enmyes. Be of good cymforte (says
Christ) for I have overcome the world. That is ye victory yt overcomes ye
world eue^ your faith says John. Lazarus you have declared me that so clearly
that! I even rejoice therein and fear death less than before. Let here come.
when it shall please God. I know by experience welynough, what fearful
conscience I have had in mine unbelief, and i^ my most virtuous works, ye need
not to make farther declaration in this behalf. Nevertheless this I require
yet of you, yt ye will show me how I shall behave my self best henceforth, wha^
the te^ptacio^ of syn, death, or hell shall assault me.


Tobyas In ye.iiii. of mat. is it eyude^t how ye ought to behave yourselfe
against te^ptacio^ of the deuell, or of synful desires, which also be one ki^de
of deuels. Lo how christ suffered himself to be tempted of glutony, of
presumption, of couetuosnesse, to prove yt we be daily tempted of the same
deuel or rather worse, and to an example and comfort yt such te^ptacio^ can not
harm us no more tha^ they have overcome Christ. Mark how Christ has overcome
and chased the same deuell with al his te^ptacions, to an example that we must
keep the same sure ground, if we entende also to overcome the deuell, and to
chase him from us wythshame. Christ has overcome with none other weapons save
only Gods word, all those that did withstand him other hell, death, or the
deuell, for all these have been enmyes to God as you may read in the.xvii.
psalm. The sorrows of death have compassed me, and the brokes of ungodliness
made me afraid. The pains of hell came about me, ye snares of death took
hold upon me. But what follows. Yet in my troubell I called upon the Lord,
and complained unto my God. So he herd my voice out of his holy temple. Learn
to take your flight to the Lord with Christ, which being man, and proved in
all things that he might succor them that be tempted, has done so before.
Learn to defend your selves with the weapons of Gods word: for as Christ
has overcome the deuell, so may you overcome him also with all his suttel
wyles. To this exhorts you Paul saying to the Ephesia^s. the.vi. Put on the
armoure of God, that ye may sto^de steadfast against the crafty assaults of
the deuell. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against rule,
against power, namely, against ye rulers of the world, of ye darcknesses of
this world, against the sprite of wykednes under heaven. For this cause take
ye ye armor of God that ye may be able to resyst in the euel day, and stand
perfect in all things. As these enmyes are spirttuall and invisible, even so
have we no need of fleshly weapons, but the weapons of the spirit, which be
mighty in God, to destroy al strong fenses and holds of the deuell,
pearsynge unto the partynge of body and soul. Wherefore put on the shylde of
faith, wherewith ye shall que^che the fyrie darts of the wicked enmy, and take
ye helmet of salvation, and the swearde of the spyrite which is the word of
God. And pray unto the Lord, calling always upon his name in the spyrite,
that ye may overcome Satan the tempter and enmy: which seeks all about
even as a roarynge lyo^ whou he may devour, but you must withstonde him manly
in faith.


Lazarus. You have opened now the case, and showed me the weapons therewith I
may overcome mine a foresayed enmyes. But seeing I am an inexpert souldyer, yt
has not ben used greatly to ha^dell such weapon: I pray you to separate my
the darts and arowes of Gods word, that I may shute every enmy severally,
namely sin, death and hell. And first show my how to defend my self, when
my sinful life comes to my remembrance.


Tobias. I will do it gladly, but I fear lest I be to tedious for you. The
sick ought not to be ouerlonge tarried withal. I will rather return again
another time, and proceed in this matter.


Lazarus. No good Toby, it is not to tedious for me, me thinks ye be come but
now. Timothe was.iiii. hours with me yesterday and yet seemed it me not to be
one hour.


Tobias. In the name of God. Nevertheless if I be ouerlo^ge with you, warn me
hardely. Or if ye desire ought I will reach it you.


Lazarus. No no, go on with your matter where ye left, for ye can do me no
greater pleasure.


Tobias. As concerning the first assault that ye shall be assayed with, namely
your forepast sins, which shall procure to bring you in despair: Against
them arm you with such scriptures that show you how the innocence and
rightwysnes of Christ has put away al your vnrightwesnesse and wickedness.
Even as God says Esaias. liii. of his son Christ through out the whole chap.
Cast ye multitude of your sins upon the lamb of God, which puts away ye
sins of ye world. Remember yt God has closed all under unbelieve, that he
might have mercy on all. Take hold upon the good Samaritane, which takes
cure of the soul. Take your flight with the prodigal son unto your merciful
farther, though ye be naked, seabby, and ragged: for he shall receive you
fatherly, with spread out arms, and put on you the garment of innoce^ty Though
you be lost by reason of sin, the Lord him self seeks after you. Though ye
go astraye with ye straynge sheep, yet does the good shepehearde take you upon
his shulder and brings you to ye shepetolde. Herke^ how swetely and louengly
God calls you unto him saying Math. xi. Come to me al ye that labor and
are laden, and I shall ease you of your sins. Remember ye Christ is become
our wisdom, ryghtwysnes, redemption, and sanctification.i. Cor. i. Remember
that he is a true physician of our souls. If ye were no sinner, what were
Christ needful to you? if ye were not wounded, ye should need no surgeon A
physician or surgeo^ is praised because he does an excellent cure. The kind
and natural work of Christ is to save his people, and heal the^ of al their
sins, for that is his profession: ye and he does yt in deed, so yt our
vnrightwysnes makes gods right wysnes be praised, as witnesses paul To. v.
Nevertheless where abu^dau^ce of syn was, there was yet more ple^teousnes of
grace. In that has god declared his love, that we, when we were sinners Christ
dyed for us. We shall be so much the more accepted before God, in that we be
cleansed by his blood, and justified. Happy is that man, not he that has no
sin, for he that says he has no sin, deceaueth himself, and the treuth
is not in him: But he is happy to whom sin is rekened no sin. The law,
that is the knowledge of our sin is given by Moses: but grace and true
Salvation by Jesus Christ. For he has anulled the handwrytinge that was
contrary to us, and fastened it upon the cross, whereby he has taken away all
power of the princes of darkness. Coloss. ii. and has triumphed over them in
his own person. The hye pressed of the old law might not offer any offering
for the peoples sin without he had first offered an offeringe for himself,
and without bloudsheddynge was no forgiveness, But Christ our true bishop
(which has an everlasting presthode after the ordinance of Melchysedech) had
no need to offer for his sins, (for he never sinned) nor he has not procured
forgiveness of sins by the father, by any strange blood, of ore^ or
calves, but with his own blood. Thus was he unspotted that has cleansed us
from all uncleanness. And seeing we have this Jesus that passed the heavens, let
us hold our profession, and go boldly unto the seat of his grace, that we
may receive mercy, and find grace to help in the time of need. Hebr. v All the ways of the Lord are mercy and treuth. He promyseth it mercyfully, that
which he shall give us treuly. Of this mercy has God left and given us the
word of atoneme^t Jesus Christ. If ye know the same promyser, and geuer of
mercy treuly, then may ye trust welynough that ye shall obtain forgeuenge,
and remyssion of sins. Which forgiveness you shall also obtain, that he be
found true in his words of promise, and that he may overcome your sin,
when he is judged of the ungodly to be no Saueour. The manheade of Christ shall
cover your misdeeds, so that the deuel your accuser shall find nothing in you
blameable. Forget with Paul that which is behind you, and covet to that which is
before, namely, to the token of this victory of sin and death tocome. To this
do ye great ensa^ples of mercy showed to peter, to mary magdalene to ye
murderer serve, I will leave of david, of paul, and many more Submit your
selves and render you to god confessing you to suffer worthily and justly for
your sins, and that Christ died unjustly. Believe yt in ye despising of Christ
is hid ye godly glory, and in ye death is hid ye kingdom of Christ, which
ye aforesaid murderer did and it shall be said unto you: To day shall ye be with
me in paradise. Consider your wickedness and Christ's goodness. Consider ye
damnacion that ye have deserved, and again the love of Christ, which has
reco^cyled you by the father. This doing you shall hear with Mary magdalene:
Many sins are forgiven you, for ye loved many, your faith made you safe:
Peter remembered ye words of christ by his lokyng upon hi^, and at ye coks
croe^g bewailed he his sins. The Lord almighty does now behold you with
this present syknes, and by sendynge of death, and perchance lets the
sou^de of the word come in your heart. Knoledge your sins, knoledge the
true judgment of God, that he lets pass upon your misdeeds in your
sufferynge, and he shall not forsake you in your calling and mourning: But
shall appear unto you with a comfortable word of his resurreccion which shall
make your conscience lusty, and to rejoice in hope of the life tocome, as he
has done with Peter. Happy are they that weep with Peter (bearing of very
love the yocke, and power of sin in their bodies with greueousnesse) for they
shall be conforted. This is the promise of God yt ca^ not lie unto you nor yet
will do. Look upon this, trusting to it, you shall rightwell subdue your enmy
sin.


Lazarus. O Lord give me thy godly grace, that I may believe thy wholesome
word, by ye which my heart may be purifyed of all sinful desires, which are
innumerable in me.


Tobyas. Amen. God grant you the same.


Lazarus. Instruct me now farther good brother, how I may behave myself in
ye death tocome when I begin to mystrust, wether death shall than wholly
swalowe my up?


Tobyas. The nature of the mysbeleuynge is such that they can not believe there
be a rysynge again of the flesh: by reason this bodily death seems to
consume a man wholly and all. Wherefore they say with mouth and heart as it is
written in the book of wysedom: The time of our life is but short and tedious,
and when a man is once gone, he has no more joy nor pleasure, another know we
any man that turns again from death: for we are borne of naught, and we
shall be herafter as though we never had been (and so forth). Over these men that
be of such faith comes damnation worthily: for as they live and their opinion
is so does it chance also unto them. The gospel is yet wholly hid unto them,
for the God of this world has blinded their hearts so, that the light of the
gospel, and the glory of Christ's rysynge can not shine in their hearts. Such
men were they of Athe^ that said of Paul that he was a declarer of new deuels.
Act. xvii. wha^ he declared them Jesus, and showed them of his resurreccion. Of
like natural blyndnesse did it come that they of Athen axed at Paul saying:
May not we know what new doctrine this is that thou teach? For thou
bryngest strange tidings, in to our ears: We would know therefore what this
means? Upon which questyon. Paul made a goodly sermon, concerning the faith
in Christ, and his rysynge again. The mystery of the resurrection of Christ,
is the chief, and princypall point of our faith. For what should it have had
auayled us that Christ dyed, and suffered for us, if he had not been risen
again. This resurreccion of the flesh that we also abide in Christ may not
be rekened a dream because we se it not: For if we saw it with our eyes than
were it no faith: for faith is of things invisible and not apparaunt Wherefore,
though all men seem to begin the life, and fynishe it again in this present
world: yet are we assured and believe that we all shall rise again from death
in the day of dome, even as Christ is risen first. This assurance of true
faith passes all sureties that can be persuaded by any sutelty of ma^s
ymaginacion. By this faith (Not by the outward opinion) speak we of the
resurreccion of flesh: even as the prophet says Psalm* ^^v. I believed and
therefore have I spoken. Paul takes up this word speak saying.ii. Corin,
iiii. Seeing we have the same sprite of faith (according as it is written: I
believed and therefore have I spoken) we also believe, and therefore we speak, for
we know yt he, which raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise us up also, by ye
means of Jesus and shall set us with you, (it follows) For ye things which
are seen, are temporal: but the things which are not seen, are eternal.
Wherefore all that we believe of god, all that we speak of the resurreccion, and
the life tocome seems not to be so. Even as God himself, and his honor, and
worship, be also inuysyble, and not appataunte to be true unto such carnal
wysemen that have not received the same spryte of the prophet and Paul. By the
before said sprite of faith speaks Paul of the resurreccion saienge: The body
is sown here in corrupcion, and shall rise in vncorrupcion: Yt is sown in
dyshonoure: and it shall rise again in glory: Yt is sowe^ in weakness, and
shall rise in pour: Yt is sown a natural body, and shall rise a spiritual
body. For flesh, and blood shall not possess the kingdom of God, and that
which is transytory, can not possess eternal heretage. Thus must the grane of
the flesshy body, that is sown here in eath first dye in the ground before it
can bring forth new fruit into life everlasting: which life we do abide
certainly by faith in the resurreccion of the flesh though it appear
impossible unto us. For because Christ is risen, therefore shall we rise also,
and not abide in death: For God is no God of the dead, but of the lyuenge
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.


Lazarus. I will grant it right well that we shall all rise again at the day
of dome, nor in that am not I tempted: but I am more afraid of the second,
and eternal death. Instruct my against that I pray you, that I may perceive
that I fear, and dread the second death by the reason of my great mysbelefe.


Tobias. Whereto think ye the resurreccion of Christ be stabylisshed with so
many tokens and wonders, but only that we should steadfastly believe therein? To
believe in the resurreccion of Christ, is to believe that he raygneth, and is a
king, and that in his rysynge, death, and sin be subdued unto him. Death is
the wages of sin. Saying than we be cleansed by the sheddynge of the blood of
christ, we are also assured of death, which else should have followed death.
Therefore all those that be yet mysbeleuynge, sad, and heavy hearted, and walk
before God in bytternesse, they be yet in sin. And because they believe not
the resurreccion of Christ, therefore can not they rejoice in Christ, nor come
to any hope of the life tocome. Harken how royally the resurreccion of Christ
is set forth unto us in scripture. Paul says in the.x. chap. to the Romans.
If thou knowlegest Jesus with thy mouth that he is the Lord, and beleuest in
thine heart that God has raised him up from the dead thou shall be saved. If
ye dye in Christ ye shall also rise in him and live forever like as he now
lives eternally. For God has begotten us again unto a lively, hope, by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead.i. Petri. i. Wha^ that which is
mortal in you shall have put on all immortalyte by the departing of death,
than shall death be swalowed up in the victory. For Christ has overcome him by
his death which had the lordshyppe in this world by the disobedience of Adam,
as Christ says himself: The prince of this world is come, but in me has he
naught. For so much than as Christ being ye true sede of Eua has destroyed
and bruised the serpents head, that is death, whereby the serpent raygned
myghtely upon all mankind: then may ye now hardely triu^phe inwardely saying:
Death, where is the stynge? o hell where is thy glory? praised be god which has
given us victory by Jesus Christ. Like as it was impossible, that Christ not
should please god in his ryghtwesnes: eue^ so is it impossible we should not
please God by faith in Christ. This confirms Christ saying. The father
loves you, for you loved me. Of this misery of the resurreccion, and hyd life
could I bring you forth many scripturely reasons and ensamples, but I fear
lest it will be to tedious for you being syke.


Lazarus. No brother, fear not. I love so well to hear ye ensamples of
scripture, which teach us how life is hyd in death.


Tobias. We have many figures and ensa^ples in ye scripture, which teach and
declare unto us, that life is first declared in dyenge. When the lord God had
first created Adam our father, he caused him to sleep, that out of the slepers
side he might make a living creature, namly Heua, to be a help unto man
(Gene. ii.) the which also he did. Lo how strange seem the works of God to
be in our ymagination? Adam slepeth, and is in the figure of death: for sleep
is very well compared unto death, and of him comes the life unto Eua, lykwyse
also in our dyenge appears our life first with Christ. Death of ye
Christians is called in scripture a sleep or a peaceable rest. Lazarus rested
in the bosom of Abraham. Steven the first martyr did sleep in the Lord, when
he was stoned. Is it not comfortable that the holy ghost does call our dyenge
here but a sleep or a rest? Steven did sleep in the Lord, (that is) he is
departed hence with a suete rest and ease at the heart, wherein he felt no
paynfulnesse at the heart as a man yt slepeth a natural sleep, slepeth without
any passion or feeling of ye same. That death is not paynfull to the beleuenge,
comes of Christ's death. The soul of a Christian being full of the living
word of God, feleth not death, nor regards it more than though she were
painted on the wall, which appeared by the apostles yt went meryly from the
judgment seats, because they were found worthy to suffer for the name of
Jesus. Act. v. Another ensample is this: What time as God had commanded Abraham
to offer his only son Isaac, he went three days journey upon the word of
God, leauenge his own understanding and wit, yeldynge himself wholly in the
hands of God, so that in ye mean season was Isaac dead and forgotten: For
Abraham was fully determined to offer his son upon the hill, which he saw
afar of on the third day But finally when Isaac was nearest unto death, and
Abraham drew the swearde to smite him, tha^ was the son wholly in ye heart of
his father, and fully delivered unto death. Where Abraham now saw the death of
his son in lyftynge up ye swearde, there appeared unto him the life of his
son: for the swearde was stayed by the angel, of the which he was not ware
dat it should happen, After this ensample also was Christ rekened dead of the
whole world, what time as he lay in the grave: But on the third day he rose
again, shewenge himself alive. This wise shall it be with us. Death seems to
take us wholly and put us out of man's remembrance: but tha^ shall first our
life appear, according as Paul says: Your life is hyd with Christ in God.
Farthermore you read that Moses was commanded Nume. xxi (when a great
multitude of the people was slain with the venymous serpents, because of
their murmuringe against God) to set up a brazen serpent in a token, that
whose beheld it, shulbe recover and live, which also chaunched. What is the
meaning of this? Christ Jesus is signified by this brazen serpent, which being
lyfted from the earth and hanged upon ye cross as a treue toke^ of
forgiveness, that whose beholdynge him with the eyes of faith, and sure
confidence and hope to obtain health, may be healed and relyue again in the
soul, be he never so sore wounded and bytten with the venyme of sin. This is
yt that Christ also said John. iii. And like as Moses lift up the serpent in
the wilderness, even so must the son of man be lift up, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. Take this
figure to your doctrine good brother. You lie here bitten of the serpents
your sins, which have killed with bytynge our forefathers with all their
progeny: For by the envy and venym of the devil is death come in the whole
world. Wherefore behold now your saueoure on ye cross: Behold the lyo^ of
the kynred of Judah that has overcome all. Behold this serpent as a sure toke^
of the good will of God to you ward, and ye need not to fear death, for it
gives you life. Jonas the prophet was rekened for dead, what time as he lay
three days in the whals belly dead drouned: But afterward was he alive again
showed ye Niniuytes, for he was sustaineth from death by god which relyued him
again. By this Jonas is Christ also fygured, wytnessynge it his own self in
the gospel to assure us that we shall also rise with him again, if we abide
steadfastly beleuynge unto the end. What more assurance can ye have of God,
than that he has not spared his own son: but has given him over unto death
for us, to overcome death, and to open again the gates of life. Fynalbeholde
how Christ declares his life in dyenge, to stabylishe our faith, that we
should not doubt in the life tocome no not in the mids of death. For Christ
hanging on the cross, geuenge up his spryte unto his father, testyfyenge with
the bowenge down of his head that he was even dead: he showed yet some tokens
of life that were hyd in him, when his blessed side was opened wherout ca^
runnynge water and blood Wherefore doubt not in ye life tocome: for ye have
received a pledge of this life by the love of Christ, which is poured in you by
the knoledge of God. Christ dyed and is crucified for our weakness, but he
lives by the power of God. We are also weak with him, and dye by reason of
weakness, but we shall live afterward with Christ by ye same power of God.
Search and prove yourselfe whether ye have also this hope, and faith in the
Lord, and in his promises, which shall give you his ryghtwesnesse for your
sins, and life for death.


Lazarus. Now as concerning hell what shall I say of it? Yt is a commune
saienge: it we good dyenge, if man knew where to become. Thus must also come
of a mysbeleuynge heart that we be thus abashed for hell.


Tobyas. Yt is sure so, great mysbeleue causes us to fear hell. But know ye
what is hell? Hell is nothing else save fear, and dread of death, and a
tremblinge against the judgment and ryghtwysnesse of God The ungodly, and
damned can never escape this death and hell, for they have no lust nor love to
God, whom they behold as a fearful judge, and fear his ryghtwysnesse. He is
said to be in hell, that perceaueth within himself how wicked and wreched he
is, whereby he is enfourmed, and persuaded the fear of death, and damnation. So
that the most damnation, and pain of hell, is the despysynge, and
blasphemynge of God. For so long as we have no lively witness inwardly of the
spryte of God, that we be the children of God: so long do we hate him, and can
not behold his ryghtwysnes, so does our heinous conscience of sin drive us.
By these before said words is it plain unto you, that the hell of the
vnryghtwyse begins here in earth, seeing the worm of their wicked
consciencie dies not, and the fire of their wrath is not quenched. Wherefore,
as the kingdom of God is justification, peace, rest, and godly courage: even so
is hell, sin, troubell, and raygne. In this hell was Caym, when he fled here
earth no man persuynge him. In this hell also was Judas ye traitor, and abode
therein to his damnation. Pether says Act. ii. that God has raised up Christ,
loosed the sorrows of death: for so much as it was impossible that he should
beholden of her (that is) Christ has redeemed us and made us saw from all our
enmyes. The deuell is a pussaunte Lord, and well weapened with all his
traynes, erroures, and fearfulnesses. Math. xii. But the son of God was a
myghtyer Lord, which has torn the powers of hell, for all things were given
him, in his hand as Christ says. Math. xxviii. Unto me is given all power,
in heaven and in earth. If al thing be given unto him, tha^ is also ye
ouerco^mynge of hell given him. Christ descended down to hell before, and has
troubled the ki^gdo^ of ye deuel he has also brought glad tydi^ges unto the^
yt were p^soned i^ hell: The gates of hell ca^ not withsto^d ye faith of Peter:
this was Paul sure of which caused hi^ to say to ye To. viii. I am sure the
another death, nor life, nor angel, nor rule, nor power, nor things present,
nor things tocome, nor heyght, nor, depth, nor any other creature shall be able
to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our lord. Christ
says in ye book of psalms. Lord, out of hell have thou drawn my soul.
This redemynge and delyuerynge of Christ, is happened to our profete For as
Christ was a conqueror of al: eue^ so shall we also be ouercomers and winners
through him, for so much as we be in corporate in him: Before we were sundered
but now are come near by the blood of Christ: For he is become our peace he
has made us cytesens with the saints, and of the household of God. Seeing we
are gathered in ye house of God, we have here altogether a kingdom, an heretage
a victory, and all salvation. To this serves the prayer of Christ, which he
made to the heavenly father John. xvii. I pray not only for the^. (meaning his
apostles) but also for them which shall believe by their preaching, yt they
all may be one like us thou father art in my, and I in the, that they also
may be one in us. Think ye this prayer is spoken for naught? Think ye God
the father has not herd his beloved son in the hour of his sufferynge? A
good father despyseth not the peticions of his children, Be of good cheer
(says Christ) I have overcome the world. In Christ shall we conquer suenge
that which is promised us in the prophet psalm. xc. Thou shall go upon the lion
and adder, the young lion and draggo^ shall thou tread under thy fete. that is
all power of the deuels and also hell.


Lazarus. I trust I shall mind and remember your exhortacions very well, so
far as God does not deprive me of my five wits.


Tobias. If it come so far that you be depryued of your five wits by
reason of the feruentnesse of your sickness, be not moved thereat, Let God
work his work until the end. Suffer God to accomplish his will, for he dies
not evil that dies in God. Yt is no force unto the beleuynge wether he dye
onwares or wares, for they abide the Lords coming always which shall come
suddenly upon the mysbeleuynge as a thief in the night. How bitter is the
remembrance of death unto him that has ease and rest in his substance and
goods?


Lazarus. How happens it that it is comunely said: life is happy: for so
far as I perceive death is more happy?


Tobias. The common by word is not to be understand of the bodily life,
which we never can led without sin, but you must understand it of such a
life, as we led in God, wherein we shall live for ever though we wandered in
death, Wherefore if ye require a long temporal life of God, than desire you to
sin longer, and to move god to more wrath. But that life which we led in God
by faith whereby the ryghtwous lives, that is happy.


Lazarus Now do I know nothing in mine opynion that can keep my back from
dyenge willi^gly, save only my wife and children, which yet have need both of
my help and counsel.


Tobias. Commit your wife and children unto the Lord almighty, which has
given or le^t you unto the^ to care for the^, so long as it shall be his Godly
will to suffer you to be a carer or prouyder for the^. But now does death
discharge you of this office and sorowfulnesse. Render god ye charge joyfully.
Go you forth now with Abraham in strange cou^tryes, leaving your kynne and
fathers house, and come in ye land ye God shall show you, Obey gods calling.
He yt loves more father, mother, wife, children, lo^des or possessions than
my, is not worthy of my, says Christ. As long as ye were able you have
showed love and good will unto your household: Of this may be boaste right
well, and that because ye would pass ye bonds of your commission of love. But
what mysbelefe is yt, that ye do not trust god with the kepenge of his own
children? What was your help care, and keeping without his ouersyght? if the
Lord do not build the cite: they labor in vain that build it. Put ye your
confydence in God that he shall help you? and trust ye him not the keeping of
your children? Though it seem that your children depart from you, in dyenge,
and ye of them, yet do they keep their heavenly father, which takes more care
for them than ever you could This will I tell you, your faith may be such,
that God will raise ten fathers or weldoers in stead of you of whom with
partynge of death, they be depryued. David says I never saw a ryghteous man
forsaken, nor his sede seek bread. Avoid now all sensualyte out of your mind
Commytte your wife, thylderen, and all that ye love, unto God, who only shall
keep them best. The mystrust and murmuring of parents, is of times correct,
and punyshed in the chylderen, as namely wha^ they myspe^de ye goods in riot,
or suffer losses, and domages in them, the which their friends busyed to leave
the^ great plenty of, and to provide them substancialy of them.


Lazarus. Let it be so, God grant that I may yield both me and mine
willyngly in the hondes of God. My thinks my time does aproche. Oh I long so
sore to be embraced of my brydegrome Christ. Cantic. ii. His left hand is
under my head, and his right hand shall clespe my neck. I desire with Paul
to be lowsed, and to be with Christ. Heal my Lord and I shall be healed.


Tobias. That is well and Chrystenly prayed, God send you his strong spryte,
which shall strength you in all sufferynge, ye and also in death. But now
brother if I perchance shall se you no more in this life: Have ye any quarrel
with any man? or have ye any thing that greueth your mind show on?


Lazarus. What occasioneth you to ask the same? have ye herd ought thereof?


Tobyas. The cause of my questyon is, that if ye have any variaunce, or any
skyll with your brother: before all other things ye ought to dispach the same
and to be reco^cyled again with him. In three things (says Sydrac) have I
pleasure which also be allowed before God and me^: The unite of brethren, the
love of neghbours, and man and wife agreynge well together. And that ye may
forther and set forth such love and unite, ye ought to be ware lest any
variaunce come after your departing by reason of the goods among your
friends, and kynred.


Lazarus. I have dispached and prepared all this long before so near as I
might. I trust there shall rise no strife between my friends or children. I was
minded to have given unto the church or temple, to the iiii. orders of strong
valeaunt beggars, and unto our vicare and parisheprest of such as should have been overplus: But that mind is altered, for God has given me a better mind.
I thank him hyghly thereof.


Tobias.. All testamentes that be made to the fortheraunce of the love of our
neghbure are good. There be of times churches founded, masses, and great doles
to Gods great dishonor: For God is not honored with such things, but only
with yt he has commanded himself. Some think to do an high pleasure unto God
if they disheret their chylderen, friends, and kynred among whom afterward
there aryseth a great strife. They bequiet their goods to found holidays,
trentals, masses of requiem, wherwyth they feed the spiritualty. They think to
please God with such foundations and make an atonement with such goods as they
have skrapen and raked together by wrong, falsede, gyle, usury, and such like
ways spared them. Where as God hates in his offering al such robbery. They
founded also altares, and monumentes and costly graves, to have their names in
estymation among the people and to live long in their mouths and be praised
for these deeds. To this intent be tabels and such memorials hanged up in every
church as a byrders net is spread. O tabel of exchaungers cast out of ye te^pel
by Christ. O yeartyde. O Corbam corbam how dewly art thou practysed yet daily
of our scribes and pharisees, which like painted graves deceive the onwyse and
simple: For they say it is offered unto Gods honor and service that which is
withdrawe^ from the poor children and heirs. Now brother, is it not time for
me to depart? my thinks I have been long enough here. I must also go yet to
the poor house or hospital, for so have I promised.


Lazarus. I thank you heartily good brother for your kind vysitinge of me,
and lovely teaching me. Come again to se how it is with me at your leisure.


Tobias. I will do so. And now I commit you to God, which I pray to be your
guide unto the life everlasting. If ye have need of me, send for me, and I
will be glad to come unto you.


Lazarus. The Lord be blessed and thanked over all forever.


Tobias. Fear well good brother.


Lazarus. Fare well good Toby, God keep us all and be our guide, and counceler
unto life eternal.


Tobyas. Amen.


The end of this treatise.
The sum, and intent of this treatise:
NOw have thou seen good reader the marvelous work of God in his two electes,
namly, Tymothe and Toby: which to their power have planted and watered the sede
of Gods word in their neighbor Lazarus, being at scole, wherein is the will
of god taught, that is adfliction, syknesse, and subieccion of the flesh unto
the sprite. They now being occasyoned by knoledgyng their deuty, to their
neighbor endeavor to make him to dye in the Lord and make him apt unto the
joy everlasting after his troubell. Wherein I pray the to mark the order and
way:

First Tymothe coming the one day and instructynge him to take his
troubelous syknesse patiently, in the which admonition he does treuly, and
pythfully declare the seven petitions of the Pater noster, reprouynge by the
way his impaciency, mysbeleue, and superstitiousnesse wherein he was so
drowned, that it seemed to have been impossible he should ever been come out of.
But the Lord, which kylleth and relyueth again, ledeth to hell, and brings up
again, has also showed his maruaylous power with this sykma^, who^ he has
called to him by repe^tau^ce, as he will also do the most sinner, and mysdoer
of us, if he repent treuly.

Secondarly Tobias coming the second day as his promise was instructs him
how to take his death pacie^tly. And in the mean season expounds certain of
the artikles of our faith, namely, the power of God in creatynge al things,
ye fruit of Christ's sufferynge, death, resurrection, ascensyon, of the holy
ghost, which be the treu church, of communion of saints, of remyssion of
sin, of rysynge again of the flesh, and of the life eternal or
everlasting. And finally he shows what be our enemies death, sin, and
hell, and how we may best withstonde them. This with other superstitions and
abuses does he so featly, and scripturly declare and teaches to eschew as in
mine opynion no rabby, magister noster, or puffet up doctor could do, though
he had spent the best part of his life i^ searchyng Christ at Paris. Take
therefore this treatise often in thine hands, look diligently upon it, and use it
as it is offered unto thy. I will not busy my self greatly in praysynge of it,
for the commune proverb is veryfied in it, that is: good wine needs no
garlande: for if thou read it diligently, and follow it so near as God will
le^de ye grace, tha^ shall thou receive the profit that is sought both in
dytynge and translatynge of it, namly, ye health of your soul and herafter
life everlasting, which grant you god the father, and son, and holy ghost.
Amen.

Prynted in Southwarke, By My James Nicolson, for Ian Gough Cum Priuilegio
Regali.


