A Sermon Preached upon Sunday, being the twelfth of March. Anno. 1581. within
the Tower of London: In the hearing of such obstinate Papists as then were
prisoners there: By William Fulke Doctor in Divinity, and M. of Penbroke Hall
in Cambridge.

Imprinted at London, by Thomas Dawson, for George Bishop. 1581.

A Sermon preached, by M. D. Fulke.
THe place of Scripture, which I have chosen to speak of at this time, and
upon the present occasion, is written in the 17. Chapter of the Gospel after
Saint John, and the 17. verse of the same, being part of the words of our
Savior Christ, unto his heavenly Father, in that most vehement and heavenly
prayer, which he makes for his disciples and his whole Church, a little before
his Passion.

John. 17.Sanctify them in thy truth, thy word is the truth. AFter that our
Savior Christ had accomplished his office of preaching, and sealed the
doctrine of his redemption, by institution of his holy Supper, and finally, as
it were taking his leave of teaching his Apostles, had instructed them of
pacient bearing of his Cross, by setting forth such comforts, whereunto they
should lean, and by promising the coming of his spirit, lifted them up to a
better hope, then the present miseries did portende, discoursing of the glory
and Majesty of his kingdom whereof they should be partakers, as is contained at
the full, in the three Chapiters going immediately before: The Evangelist
declares in the beginning of this seventh Chapter, how he conuerteth
himself to prayer, that this his most heavenly doctrine might be made
effectual: first in the hearts of his Apostles which then were his hearers,
and afterward in all true members of his Church, which by their Ministry
should be gathered in his name. Wherefore among other requests that he
makes for his Disciples in this prayer, this is one especially, that his
father would sa^ctifie them in his truth, which is his holy word, the only
outward witness of his will: which is as much in effect, as that it would
please his Majesty, of his infinite goodness, and for his sake, who
sanctified him self for them, to be a sacrifice propitiatory to dedicate them
unto his father: to consecrate or hallowe them, by his holy spirit, unto him
self, as his chosen and peculiar possession, according to that most holy
truth, which he has revealed in his word and doctrine of salvation,
contained in the Gospel of his son, that being truly united unto him, he
may be glorified in them, and they made by him partakers if eternal felicity.
Sanctify them O Father (says he) in thy truth, thy word is the truth.
There are two special reasons, why our Savior Christ commends his
Disciples, unto the holy and sanctifying protection of God his heavenly
Father: the one contained in the verse going immediately before, the other in
the verse that follows immediately, the one being the great danger they stood
in, the other the great and high office also, that they were called unto.
Concerning the former he said: they are not of the world, even am I am not of
the world. In that they were not of the world, it could not be avoided, but
that they should be hated of the world, as he said also in express words.
They therefore that should be hated of all the world, had need to be
mightily protected.

They that had so many enemies, must needs have a strong defender, and where
should they have any rest, that had all the world against them, but in God,
who is greater then the world? And therefore in consideration of that great
peril they were in, which must remain in the world, although they were not of
the world, although they were hated and persecuted of the world, our Savior
Christ commits them in this prayer to his fathers holy tuition: Forasmuch
as they are not of the world, but inheritours of heaven, Sanctify them in thy
truth. Again, considering how weighty a charge is laid upon them, as he
shows in the next verse. As thou have sent me into the world, so have I
sent them into the world, he desires his Father, to make them able to execute
that charge, saying, Sanctify them in thy truth, thy word is the truth. As
though he should say, Knowing that they are men in whom naturally dwells the
spirit of error, and not of truth, and yet such men, as I have chosen to
testify unto the world, the same truth, which thou O heavenly Father have
sent unto them by me, I confess they are not able of them selves to know the
truth, to speak the truth, to love the truth, for that mueterate
corruption, that bears the sway in all the children of Adam, therefore I
beseech thee holy Father, to sanctify them in thy truth, even in thy holy
word which is the witness and express declaration of thy revealed truth,
that by thy sanctification, they may be renewed in the inner man, to will and
love those things, which thou commaundest, by thy truth they may be delivered
from error, blindness, and ignorance, in which they are holden Captives, and
by thy holy word they may be instructed from time to time, that no
forgetfulness of thy truth do take them, 2. Pet, 1.
but having recourse always unto it, as to a light shining in a dark place,
they may be meet to accomplish the work of so high a calling. And this is
generally the sum and effect of the words of our Savior Christ in this his
prayer. Sanctify, them in thy truth, thy word is the truth.

But that I may speak of them more particularly, I will divide my Treatise
upon this text, into two parts: In the former I will set forth the request of
our Savior Christ, uttered in these words, Sanctify them in thy truth, in
the other, the exposition which he makes of the truth, when he says, Thy
word is the truth. Concerning the request which he makes for their
sanctification, we have to consider, first that it is neither lawful, nor
possible, for any man, to have any access unto God, to stand before his
presence, to look for any benefit at his hands without true holiness. For the
Lord being holy, abhors all that is profane, polluted and defiled,
testifiyng both by Moses and by the Apostle Peter, that if we will approach or
come near unto him, Leuit. 11. 19. and 20.
we must be sanctified, we must be holy, 1. Pet. 1.
be you holy or sanctified says the Lord, for I am holy. According to him
which has called you, which is holy, be you holy, says the Apostle. To
show that sanctification is necessary, the Lord ordained all the sanctifying
rites of the law, by which the Tabernacle, the Altar, the Priests, the
sacrifices, and all the people were, first sanctified, and made holy, before
they could be accepted of him, to be the Lords Tabernacle, his Altar, his
Priests, his sacrifice, his people. Yea, this light of God shined even in the
darkness of natural understanding, so that without revelation from heaven,
the Gentiles acknowledged, that no man could come near unto God, no man
could please God, no man could look for reward of God, without holiness.
And this they testified, even in their manner of worshipping of GOD, which
although it were clean contrary to Gods express commandment, in visible
shapes, and bodily images, yet they declared by their manner of consecrations,
dedications, purifications, and other like ceremonies of their own devising,
that such as will have any thing to do with God, must be hallowed as God is
holy, and all things that apperteyne unto him. The Papists also, even as the
heathen, whose religion and ceremonies in many things they follow, in so many
consecrations and sanctifications, as they use in their Idolatrous service,
mean to signify even so much. And hereof comes all that preparation, pomp,
and furniture, which they use in woorshipping of their Images which they
defend by the same reasons, and worship after the same manner as the Heathen
did their Images, although nothing be more directly contrary to the express
commandment of God. The Papists think their idolatry to be defended, when
they say that they worship not the stocks and stones, the matter and form of
their Images, as Gods, but worship God in them. And did not the wiser sort of
the Gentiles bring the same reason to defend their Idolatry? Yes verily. S. In
Psalm. 96.
Augustine testifies, that one of them said: I worship not that stone, nor
that Image, which is without senses, for your Prophet could not know that it
has eyes and sees not, and I be ignorant that this image neither has life,
nor sees with eyes, nor hears with ears. Therefore I worship not the thing,
but I adore that which I see, and serve that which I see not, who is this? A
certain invisible divine power which has the pre-eminence of that Image.
Behold the Heathen man affirms, that they worshipped not the Idolles, but God
by the Idolles, even as the Israelites in worshipping their golden Calfe,
pretended by it, to worship the God that brought them out of the land of Egypt.
And Aaron proclaimed a holy day to be celebrated unto Iehoua, the only true
God. The multitude of their Gods which they worshipped also, they excused, even
as the Papists do, for they acknowledge but one God, as the principal,
highest, and only governor of all the poetical Gods, even as the Poet
Horatius speaks of Jupiter: Qui res hominum ac deorum, qui mare and terras
varijsque mundum temperat horis, vnde nil maius generatur ipso etc: Which
governs all the affairs of men and Gods, the sea and the land, and the
whole world, with diverse seasons, wherefore nothing is brought forth greater
then he, neither is there any thing like him, or second unto him: yet for all
that Pallas has obtained the next honor unto him. See what the opinion even
of the Poets was, concerning the principal worship due unto the highest God.
But the Philosophers, and such as by the Christians were charged with
worshipping of Images, were yet more subtle and came nearer to the Papists.
For they not only affirmed, that they worshipped God by the Images (as
Chrysostom) witnesses, In Epist. ad Ephesians. hom. 18.
but also being further urged touching the multitude of Gods, they answered
that in Mars they worshipped the power of God, in Pallas, the wisdom of God,
in Venus, the love and pleasure of God, and so of the rest: yea they doubted
not to affirm, that those petty Gods, whom they worshipped (as Augustine
shows) were the powers and Ministeries, of that great God, and even the very
same which the Christians call Angels. To whom Augustine very well replyeth
and says, In Psalm. 9. 6.
I would you would truly worship the Angels, you should easily learn of
them not to worship them: Even so I would the Papists would truly worship
the Angels, they should learn of them not to worship them: worship God
(says the Angel to S. John who fell down at the Angels feet to Apoe. 19.
and 20. 22.
worship him) for I am thy fellow servant, and fellow servant of all the
faithful, the Prophets and them that keep the sayings of this book. And
yet Saint John was not fallen into so gross idolatry, that he would
worship the Angel as God, but even as the papists, he was deceived by
humane affection, to give some part of the honor which is wholly dew to God,
to the angel as to a divine creature and messenger of God. Ye I would the
Papists would ryghtlie worship all the saints of God, for then should
they learn of them, not to worship them, but God the authoure of their
sanctification, to whom all Saints ascribe all honor, all glory, all power,
all might, all riches all wisdom, all hollynesse, Apoc. 7.
all salvation.

There can no greater honor be given unto Saints, then to honor their
Lord, their Savior, their Redeemer, their God, their Father, their
sanctifyer. And it is great contumely and injury to the blessed Saints, to
rob God of his glory, to bestow upon them. Wherefore if the Papists would
truly honor them, then they would follow their faith, their obedience, their
humility, and all their godly virtues. Whereby they should be sure, to honor
and worship none, with spiritual and religious worship, but God only, whom
they alone honored and worshipped, if they were not deceived, as Saint John
was in worshipping the Angel. Well it is plain enough, by that which has
been spoken, that no man can have access unto God, no man can please God, no
man can be joined unto God, without holiness, without the which, as the Apostle
says, that no man shall see God. Hebr. 12.
Seeing therefore that sanctification is so necessary, we must seek from
whence it is to be had. Our Savior Christ in the words of this prayer, does
plainly teach us, from whence all true holiness does flow, and by what means
we may be consecrated, from whence sanctification is to be received, namely
from God only, the only fountain of all holiness, as of all good things. Iam. 1.
Sanctify them (says he) in thy truth. In vain therefore do men seek
sanctification, but in him that is all holiness. Our Savior Christ by this his
prayer, teaches us, not only that holiness is necessary for all the children
of GOD, but also from whence they must obtain the same. For he desires not at
the hands of God, that thing which men may either have of themselves, or of
any other Author then of God only: Whereof it follows, that God only
sanctifies his elect, by this holy spirit of sanctification, through the
meditation of his only son our savior Jesus Christ, who as S. Paul says,
is made unto us by 1. Cor. 1.
God, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. Therefore they
that seek sanctification in themselves, or by any means of their own, labor
all in vain, neither is it possible for them to approach near unto God.
Wherefore the Gentiles although they did know that holiness was necessary,
for them which should have to do with God, or things apperteyning to God, yet
whilst they sought it in themselves, they came not nearer, but departed
further from God. The Pelagians also, which boasted that there was matter
enough in them selves, which being stirred up by their free will, might
consecrate them unto God, bewrayed nothing but their intolerable pride, and
shameful ignorance, as for sanctification it was not possible for them to
attein to any part thereof. For by that Heathenish heresy, they placed
holiness in such things, as were in our power, even as the Gentiles do. For
all the ceremonies which the Gentiles devised to consecrate them selves, or
any thing that they would dedicate unto the service of God, are in the power
of men to perform even as they were of erroneous imagination of men invented
and devised. But the Pelagians although they differed from the Gentiles in that
they confessed, that not by external ceremonies and bodily rites, a man could
be sanctified, but by inward virtues and spiritual purity, not by voluntary
observations and imagined practices of men's deusing, but by obedience and
practice of Gods law and commandments: yet in this point they agreed wholly
and altogether with the Gentiles, in that they held that obedience and practice
of Gods law, was in our power: and might be attained unto by the natural
strength of free will, without the aid of Gods grace, although with the aid
of Gods grace they said a man might more easily keep Gods commandments.
The papists also will seem to depart from the Pelagians, in that they ascribe
not all unto the free will, and the power of natural strength as they did. But
they go not so far from the Pelagians, as they come near unto ye Gentiles,
in such points as the Pelagians did justly differ from the gentiles. For with
the gentiles they attribute some power of sa^ctificatio^, unto outward
Elements, and bodily ceremonies, and that not only such as God has appointed
to testify his grace of sanctification by them, as are the holy sacraments,
but also such, as they themselves have invented, they themselves have
sanctified, they themselves have given power of sanctification unto them
without any prescription, commandment or allowance of God, in his holy
Scriptures, such are these bables, they call their Agnus Dei, Hallowed grains,
hallowed beads, coming from his own holiness, who is the fountain of
Popish holiness, beside an^ hundred of other hallowed creatures, the
consecration of which, is described in their rituall books of Agends and
pontificals, and practiced in their Idolatrous synagogues. yea and to the
Pelagians them selves they approach, while they teach works preparatorie unto
the receiving of grace. which being such as are able to dispose men, and make
them apt to obtain the grace of God, of a certain congruity, they hold to
proceed of the pure naturals, without the grace of God, or assistance of his
holy spirit. 2. Cor. 3.
Forgetting utterly that the Apostle says, We are not able of our selves, as
of our selves to think any thing which is good, but our aptnes or ablenes
(...) is of God. Gene. 8.
Forgetting also what the Lord testifies of all the sons of Adam. That the
imagination of man's heart, Gene. 6.
is evil eue^ from his youth. And all the imaginatio^s of the thoughts of man's
heart, are only evil continually. Forgetting also yt which our Savior Christ
says to his disciples, John. 15.
by which saying the Pelagians of old time were knocked in the head. Without
me (says Christ) you are able to do nothing: yet some of the Popish Doctors,
I mean the school men, are neither ashamed, nor afraid to affirm, that
without grace, that is without Christ, we are able of our pure naturals to do
some thing, that is, to prepare our selves, dispose our selves, unto a certain
aptness to receive sanctification. And the late Council of Trent, accurseth
y^ man. Sess. 6. Can. ^.
Whosoever shall say, that all works which are done before justification
howsoever they are done, are sin, or deserve the hatred of God, or that the
more a man indeuoureth to dispose him self to grace, so much ye more he
sins. Do they not therefore affirm, yt without Christ they may do some
thing which shall please God, or at the least, shall not be sinful, and
deserve the displeasure of God? Is not this as much as to say, that all the
imaginations of the thoughts of man's heart are not only, nor altogether, nor
continually evil: Except they will say, that of evil imaginations and evil
thoughts may proceed good works, or that evil works deserve not the hatred
of God, or that the more a man labors by evil works, as by hypocrisy,
superstition, idolatry, falls worshipping, to dispose himself to the grace of
God, he is the meeter to receive it. For what spark of true goodness
acceptable to God, is in the corrupt nature of man, before he being prevented
by the free mercy and grace of God, be endowed with the gift of faith, through
the spirit of sa^ctification? Seeing yt without faith it is not possible to
please God, Romans 14.
and all that is not of faith, is sin, and that no man can have faith, Heb.
11.
but of the grace and gift of God. Ephe. 2.
Yet dare they pronounce him accursed, Jacob. 1.
that shall say, sin is sin, or that sin deserves the hatred of God, or
that he that by sin endeavors to win the favor of God, does so much
the more sin and offend God. So careful they are to uphold the power of
man, against the grace of God, that they defend that some works done before
justification, may be done in such sort, that they shall not be sin. As
though he that is impious and unrighteous altogether, may after any sort, do
such works, as be not altogether impious and unrighteous in the sight of god,
which is all one as to say, yt without Christ a man is able to do some thing.
For seeing god is said to justify the impious or ungodly man, it is manifest
that whosoever, Romans 4.
is not justified is impious and ungodly, therefore works done before
justification, in what sort soever they be ^one, in respect of the doer be y^
works of an impious and ungodly man, and therefore be impious and ungodly, be
wicked and deserve the hatred of God. And how shall the ungodly man which is
not justified, but is utterly void of grace, dispose himself to grace, that
he shall not more provoke the wrath of God? Is there any better way to dispose
himself, then by prayer, supplications and Sacrifices? But of them the holy
Ghost testifies plainly, that they are abomination to the Lord. The
Sacrifice of the ungodly is abomination unto the Lord (says the wise man)
Prou. 15. and 21.
but the prayers of the righteous are acceptable unto him. He that turns his
ear from hearing the law of God (as every ungodly man does, which is not
prevented with the grace of God) even his prayer is abominable and execrable.
Therefore shall we think, Prou. 18.
that abominable prayers, abominable supplications, abominable, sacrifices,
do or may dispose a man to the grace and favor of God? That execrable and
accursed prayers, and sacrifices do not rather provoke the wrath of God, then
his favor? Are not all the ways of the impious and ungodly man, abomination
unto the Lord. And how should that which God abhors, dispose a man, or
how should a man dispose himself by that which God abhors, to be a meet
vessel to receive the grace and favor of God. Forasmuch then as all men are
ungodly or wicked before they be justified freely by the grace of God, Romans 4.
all their works must needs be ungodly, Romans 3.
wicked and unjust. For they are only good and righteous works, which came
from a righteous man, from a man made righteous or justified through faith, by
the grace of God according to the spirit of sa^ctificatio^ which is given to
the^ only that are justified: although neither all the works of a justified man
are good, nor any perfectly good, because we have received y^ spirit in
measure, and our sanctification is begun, and not perfected in this life, and
therefore our Savior Christ prays, Ioh. 13. and 15
that his father would sanctify his Apostles in his truth, of who^ he
confessed before, yt they were holy and clean, that is, sa^ctificatio^ was
begun in the^, by his word which they had heard, in which word of truth, he
now prays, that they may more and more be sanctified and made holy. Wherefore
all Popish preparations unto sanctification, howsoever they denounce the denier
of the^ to be accursed, are in the sight of God no better, then abominable
and accursed, even by this word. For God only is the author, beginner,
continuer, and perfecter of sanctification, seeing that our savior Christ
prays for the continuance and perfection of sanctification, who was already
begun in his Disciples, who were baptized, who had received the holy Ghost,
who were to be preserved and increased in yt holiness which they had received.
by this we learn, Leu. 11.
yt we must daily pray for ye increase of sanctification, and seek it at the
hands of God alone, who has promised upon our earnest prayers, to grant his
holy spirit by which we shall be daily more and more renewed in the inner man,
to hate sin, and to love righteousness, that the fruits of mortification
and renouation: (which are the two parts of sanctification) may appear daily
in our life and co^uersatio^. For this grace of continuance and increase in
sa^ctificatio^, ye apostle boweth his knees to the father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, by the example of Christ himself, Ephe. 3.
for the Ephesians, that he would give unto them according unto the riches of
his glory, to be strengthened in the inner man, by his spirit. And therefore
as the beginning of sanctification, is only from Gods grace with out all merit
or good disposition of ours, so is also the continuance, increase, and
perfection of the same, the free gift of God, given unto us according to the
riches of his glory, and not procured either in whole, as the Pelagia^s say, or
in part as the Papists teach, by the merits and deserts of men. Whereby they
make not God the whole and only author and perfector of sa^ctificatio^, but
ascribe unto man's merits, a portion of this his glory, while they affirm,
that by well using of the first graces of God, we may and do merit and
deserve the second whereas the Lord God testifies by the Prophet Ezechiel,
Ezech. 37.
that he will have all nations to know, that it is he, which sanctifies
Israel unto who^ also our savior Christ has recourse in his prayer, when he
says, Sanctify them in thy truth. By this he declares yt he desires true
sanctification and not cou^terfet hypocrisy, for fained holiness and dissembled
sanctification, is worthily said to be double iniquity. The corrupt nature
of man without the spirit of God, is prone and ready unto hypocrisy, and
feigned holiness, but all lying and dissimulation is abominable unto God,
wherefore that his Disciples might please God, in true holiness and
righteousness before him all ye days of their lives: He prays unto his
father, to sanctify the^ in his truth. So shall they not seek to mock God,
with holiness pretended, and wickedness intended: but study to serve him
with an upright heart, unfeignedly to seek his honor, and walk in his ways
all the days of their life. Moreover where he says, Sanctify them in thy
truth, he shows evidently, that as there is but one truth, which is the
truth of God, so all other means and ways of sanctification, then in his
truth, are false ways and means, and that no true holiness is attained unto
by them, but false holiness, false sanctification, although it be never so
well intended. For true sanctification is only in Gods truth. Sanctify them
in thy truth. And this is the cause, that the Gentiles, in all their
consecrations and blessings, could never attain unto true sanctification, but
were more and more polluted in them, because they presumed to seek
sanctification, without the truth of God. So that although every thing which
they took in hand, and did, was profane and unholy, yet their Temples, their
Gods, their sacrifices, their ceremonies, their whole religion was most of all
vnpure, unholy, ungodly, yea, most of all filthy, detestable, and abominable,
and of all Christians to be abhorred and forsaken: because it was false
holiness, sanctification, and religion, which they held and practiced. Eue^ so
is it in the false religion, holiness, and sanctification of the Popists,
nothing is more abominable and detestable, then ye which has most of their
false consecration, and is accounted of them most holy, as their holy water,
their holy bread, their holy Candles, Crosses, and such like, and especially
their holy Mass, whereof they make greatest account, and their holy Father,
whom they name and affirm, not only to be most holy, but to be holiness it
self. But they will defend their coniured water, and other their Popeholy
ceremonies, not to be false holiness, or untrue consecrations, for that they
are sanctified in the truth of God, which is his word, for all the creatures
of God are sanctified by the word of God and prayer. Thus does Bristow take
upon him to defend, their exorcising or coniuring water, salt, and such like
creatures, that they may serve to be unto salvation, both of body and soul.
Although I might easily answer, that it is one thing to consecrate, another
thing to conjure, yet who would believe, they should be driven to such
impudent shifts, and malicious wrestings of the scripture, if they them selves
did not profess it. 1. Tim. 4.
For the sense of the Apostles words, in that place where he says, that all the creatures of God are good, and none to be rejected, being received with
thanksgiving, for it is sanctified by the word of God and prayer: the sense I
say is manifest, to be uttered of all ye creatures of God, which are sanctified
unto Christians, by Gods word, and by prayer, in the ordinary lawful use of
them, and especially of meats, forbidden by the teachers of deuilish
doctrines, under color and pretense of holiness, as they are of the
Papists, and not of consecrating or hallowing of creatures to the use of
religion, that they should be means to sanctify men, which men (if the
Papists had any power of sanctifying of all creatures by that text, and that
coniuring were a way of sanctification, had more need to be exercised and
hallowed in their own persons, every day, rather then to receive
sanctification at the second hand, from water, salt, Candles, Ashes,
Frankencense, Garments, and such like: altogether without the word of God.
For we have the word of God to sanctify the ordinary use of meats and
drinks, to nourish us, of water to cleanse us, of Salt to season our victuals,
of Candles to give light, of Garments to cloth us, and so of the rest. But
where have we any word of GOD to sanctify any external creatures, that they
may sanctify us, except in the use of the Sacraments only: Wherefore this is
a beastly abusing of the holy Scripture, to cloak that impiety, which can
not possibly be hid. For the spirit speaks evidently, yt in the later times,
some shall depart from the faith, attending to spirits of errors and doctrine
of Devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their own consciences
cauterized, or burned with a whot iron, forbidding to mary, and commanding to
abstain from meats, which GOD has created to be received with tha^kesgiuing,
of them that are faithful and know the truth, for all the creatures of God
are good, and so forth. O (say the Papists) this is spoken of the Maniches
Tacianistes, Priscillianistes, etc. which affirm that GOD made not the world,
nor instituted marriage, and not of us. And think ye so easily to shift of so
clear a demonstration: when the spirit speaking evidently, gives these
evident marks of erroneous and deuillish doctrine, which are found in you, as
well as in those old heretics. For you also forbid marriage and meats, to
some men at al times, and to all men at some times, therefore at the least
wise, the spirit speaks evidently of Papists, as well as of Maniches,
Eucratites and such like. But if the text be well marked, the spirit
evidently, and principally speaks of you, and not of those old heretics.
For he says, they shall speak falsehood in hypocrisy. But the Maniches and
such like old heretics, as denied God to have made the world, and affirmed
that marriage was of the institution of the Devil, did not speak lies in
hypocrisy, but open and manifest blasphemy. But you Papists, that forbid
marriage and meats, under color of greater holiness, you I say, do speak
falsehood in hypocrisy, and therefore of you the spirit speaks evidently, that
you are Apostates, and have departed from the faith, that you attend unto
spirits of error, and teach the doctrine of Denils: that your conscience is
cauterized with hypocrisy, while you pretend, that there is greater holiness in
one kind of meat then in an other, that fish is more holy then flesh, or that
to eat fish is a more holy abstinence then to eat flesh, or that to eat
fish on certain days is a meritorious fasting, while you pretend abstinence
from marriage to be a necessary sanctification, required of the Ministers of
the Church, which the word of God requires not: as though you could better
see what were convenient and necessary for the Pastors of Gods Church, then y^
holy Ghost, which allows them for perfect good Pastors, which being husbands
of one wife, have al other qualities and conditions by the Apostle described.
This is manifest hyyocrisie, and feigned holiness, and therefore in your
prohibition of meats and marriage, you speak falsehood in hypocrisy, then of
you Papists the holy Ghost most evidently, most directly, and most properly
does prophecy, and nothing so evidently, directly and properly of the Maniches,
Tacianistes, and such other ancient heretics, as did speak falsehood in open
blasphemy, in saying, that the creatures of the world were naught, as made of
the evil God, of whom also they blasphemed, that marriage was ordained.
Wherefore it will not serve your turn, to turn it over unto such open
blasphemers, while you say: we acknowledge marriage to be the honorable
institution of God, and a Sacrament, we confess Gods creatures to be good,
for this is to speak falsehood in hypocrisy, where as in deed, you refuse the
creatures of flesh in your feigned holy fastes, because the land was cursed,
but not the waters, and while you exercise and conjure them as though they were
possessed of the Devil, and by your exorrisins take upon you to add unto them
an other holiness, and power of sanctification, then either god gave unto them
by his creation, or does allow to be given unto them by his word and by
prayer. And whatsoever like hypocrites you speak, in the commendation of
marriage you forbid ye same, to all that receive your most holy orders, as
vnpure, as unclean for them as yt which should pollute and defile those holy
orders and ceremonies, that are ministered by them that are ordained, abusing ye
saying of the Apostle. Romans 8.
They that are in ye flesh cannot please God. Understanding by them that are in
the flesh, married men, whereof it follows, that no married man can please God.
And this does Syricius Bishop of Rome, In Epist. ad Himer.
reason against marriage, in a certain Epistle, if it be not counterfeited in
his name. Wherefore to conclude this matter, the Papists under color of
sanctification, which is only in the truth of Gods word, forbidding meats
and marriage, which is contrary to Gods word, do show them selves to be the
very limbs of Antichrist, unto whom that great Apostasy and defection should
be made, from Christ, whereof the Apostle speaks in the second Chapter, of
the second Epistle to the Thessalonia^s. And thus much concerning the first
part.

Now touching the second part, the words are these. Thy word is the truth:
2 Thessalonians. ^
Which words are needfully added, by our Savior Christ, that seeing he
prays, that his Disciples might be sanctified in ye truth, they might know
precisely, what is the truth. For such is the blindness, ignorance, and error
of man's corrupt nature, that although it be confessed, that GOD requires
truth in the inward parts, as the Prophet says: yet can not man see,
know, or find out, Psalm. 51.
what is that truth of holiness which pleases God. And yet such is his
arrogance, that notwithstanding it be Gods truth, wherein we must be
sanctified: man will presume, to assign it and determine it, without
revelation from God, even out of the visions of his own brain, even out of
his own imagination. So that if he once conceive an opinion, he will have it
to be taken for a certain truth, and undoubted knowledge. Therefore our
Savior Christ, that neither the world should triumph in their blind errors,
nor his Disciples whom he had chosen out of the world, should be ignorant of
the truth: does in very plain terms decyde the matter, and takes away all
ambiguitie and doubt, saying. Thy word is the truth.

By which saying we learn, that there is no truth in matters appertaining to
salvation, to Gods glory, to our sanctification, but that which is revealed by
God. For although in matters pertaining to this world, and this present life
of man, much truth may be found out by study and sharpness of wit, by
experience and by demonstration, as in the sciences of Arithmetike, Geometry,
Philosophy, and other Arts: yet this truth, whereof our Savior Christ
speaks, wherein he prays, that his Disciples might be consecrated, that
they might please God, by no sharpness of wit, by no diligent search, or
study, by no experience, or demonstration of any science can be found out,
without the revelation of God, and the authority of his holy word. And
therefore the Apostle Saint Paul Romans 1.
testified of all the wise men and Philosophers of the world, 1. Cor. 6.
that they became vain in their disputations, and their ignorant heart was
full of darkness, and they became stark fools. Also that the world by
wisdom, knew not the wisdom of God, as it is written, where is the wise?
where is the learned? where is the disputer of this world? Yea GOD has turned
the wisdom of this world into foolishness: So that although it swel never
so greatly in opinion of knowledge, yet it can not attain to the knowledge of
this truth. Wherefore the revelation of Gods word, is necessary for all
them, that shall be made partakers of the truth, of the life to come. The
truth of matter perteining to this life, is opened by GOD in the world, and
in the men of this world: but the truth of the life to come, is not in the
power of man to find out, but comes altogether by the revelation of God. For
it is hidden in God, until it be uttered by him, therefore it is only his
goodness and mercy to disclose, those secret hidden mysteries of his kingdom
unto his elect and chosen children outwardly by his word, and inwardly by his
spirit: of which the one bears mutual testimony unto the other, that we
may know the word of God by his spirit, and his spirit by his word. Now
seeing the Lord God has opened his holy mouth to speak unto us, and declare
unto us by his holy word those things, that we by our wits could never
have sound out: we must give this honor to his holy word, that as he has
uttered thereby nothing but the truth: so he has uttered thereby the whole
and perfect truth. So that whatsoever is necessary for us to be sanctified
unto gods pleasure and our eternal felicity, all that is contained in the
truth of God, and that truth of God is none other but even the same, which is
revealed by his holy word. Wherefore as it is damnable curiosity to enquire of
the truth of God further then God has revealed and showed by his word: so is
it execrable blasphemy, to accuse his word of imperfection, as to say, all
truth is not revealed thereby. For what great commendation should our Savior
Christ in this declaration, give unto the word of God? if when he says. Thy
word is the truth: he should mean no more but that Gods word is true,
whereof no man that acknowledged God did ever doubt. But when he says, unto
his Father, Thy word is the truth: undoubtedly he means as much, as though
he had said: There is no truth in the world concerning sanctification, but
only in thy truth: and in thy holy word, is contained all truth, necessary
for man's sanctification, and consequently for his eternal salvation. The word
of God therefore is a perfect truth, containing all truth, and teaches the
whole truth. And whatsoever is not contained and taught in the word of GOD,
it is no truth, but falsehood and error: which thing the wise man very well
considered, when he said. Add nothing unto his words, left he reprove
thee, Prouer. 30.
and thou be found liar. For seeing every man by nature infected is a liar,
except he speak agreeable to the word of truth, he can speak nothing but
a lie. Wherefore no man can speak the truth, but he which speaks the
word of truth: So that to add unto the truth, which is perfect in it self,
is to invent a lie, and to provoke the wrath of God. The wise man therefore,
did wisely ponder the nature of Gods word to be most absolute and perfect,
whereunto nothing could be added, but that should deserve reproof of God,
and argue the Author of that addition to be a liar. So that it is now clear
and out of controversy, with all them that have any spark of the fear of
God: that the word of God is most perfect in it self, and contains all truth
necessary or convenient for men to know. Yea, the Papists them selves will
not greatly stick with us, in this point, but that all truth is taught by the
word of God.

But what undoubted testimony we have of the word of GOD, there is the chief
point of the controversy between us. The Papists them selves will not now
greatly strive with us, that the word of God is perfect, and that all truth
is taught by the word of God only: but they will not acknowledge, that the
holy Scripture of GOD is the only undoubted external testimony of his word.
And hereof arise contentions and controversies, about so many questions as be
in variance between us. Because we hold that the holy Scriptures inspired
of God, do contain a full and perfect enstruction of all things necessary for
us to know, to the attaining of everlasting life. The Papists hold the
contrary, that all truth necessary to salvation is not taught, by the word
of GOD: but that we have other testimontes of the word of GOD beside the
holy Scriptures.

And herein they are so confident, that under color of some things taught by
other revelation, then that which is contained in the scriptures, they doubt
nothing at all, to thrust upon us such doctrines as are clean contrary to
the scriptures, as the religious use and worshipping of Images, the forbidding
of marriage and meats, the robbing of the lay people of the one half of the
Lords Supper, I mean the Sacrament of his blood, and such like matters as
be most directly contrary, to the word of God, expressed in the holy
scriptures. As though it were possible, that GOD should have one word
written, and an other unwritten, which is contrary to that which is written,
which gappe being once laid open, what certeintie of truth can we have in
the world? In vain was it said by our Savior Christ, unto his Father, for
our instruction. Thy word is the truth, if there be not a certain and
perpetual testimony of that word, which is always like it self, always the
same, and whereunto all things that are good do agree. For unto truth all
things are consonant in it self, but falshoode by and by is contrary unto
truth, and often times unto it self. The word of God written, says
expressly, Thou shalt not make to thy self) in the use of religion, because it
is a commandment of the first Table) Any graven image, or likeness of any
thing, thou shall not fall down to them, and worship them. This
notwithstanding the Papists will bear us in hand, the word of God unwritten
says the contrary, thou shall make to thy self graven images, for religion,
thou shall fall down to them, and worship them. The Scripture tells us, by a
clear renelation of the spirit, that it was the doctrine of Devils to forbid
meat and marriage, for holiness, and religion. The Papists tell us that it
is the Churches authority, which is equal with the scriptures, which
forbids meats and marriage. The truth written says: Drink ye all of
this, and they drank all of it, Let a man examine himself and let him eat of
this bread, and drink of this cup: But the unwritten verity of the Papists,
says in the Constantian council. The lay people shall not drink of that
cup at all, but the Priests only. These contradictions cannot possibly be
both true, wherefore we must needs hold it for an undoubted principle, yt
whatsoever is contrary to the word of god, written is not the word of God,
because it is not true. For although Papists are not so courteous, to the holy
scriptures, to acknowledge that they are perfect, and do contain at the full,
all truth neccssary for us to be knwne for our salvation? yet nature her self
denies unto them this horrible absurdity, that any thing contrary to truth,
should be true. Seeing therefore they dare not for shame say, the scripture
is untrue: let them be ashamed to avouch any thing for truth, which is
contrary to the Scripture. And albeit it were (as they say) that they had
another word of God, beside that which is written in the books of the
Canonical Scripture: yet were it madness to make it contrary to the Scripture,
and blaspemie to make it of greater authorie then then the Scripture. For the
word of God how ever it be expressed, is always of equal authority.
Therefore to boast of such a word of God unwritten, as should be of
authority to abrogate the word of GOD written, or to control the same, or to
dispe^se with any commandment of the same, otherwise then the same written
word allows: is a blasphemous brag of satanicall pride, and can be no suer
testimony of ye truth of Gods word. Such is the presumptuous boasting of the
Papists, concerning the authorie, of their tradition, of their church, of
their Pope, which they advance so highly, as yt they be of power to change
what pleases them in the word of God written, to dispose with what precepts
they list, yea even those, that nature her self will not dispense withal:
which brag, what other thing does it import, but that they have a word of God
in their tradition, Church, or Pope, which is of greater authority then the
word of God written in the holy scriptures, which is plain in that they
challenge authority, not only of interpreting of Scriptures, as they list,
against gra^mer, against the property of the tongue, against reason, against
ye scripture it self, in other places, against the plain circu^sta^ces of the
same places: but also to give credit and alowa^ce, ever to ye holy scriptures
themselves, with should have no credit of themselves, but by means of their
approbation and authority: which is so great, that it is of power, to give
equal credit unto ye Apocrifall writings of men, which the holy Scriptures
inspired of God, upon which ground they have received into the Cannon of the
holy Scriptures, the Apocrifall books of Ecclesiasticus, Tobye, Judith,
Machabees, and such like, to be of equal authorie and credit, with the
books of the Law, the Prophets, and the Psalmmes, and with the Gospels, and
Epistles of the new Testament: although they confess that the Church of God
before the incarnation of Christ, did always take them for the Apocrifall, and
none otherwise were they taken of the Church of Christ, for many hundred
years after his passion. But this is to far out of square, that they are not
content most injuriously to accuse the holy Scriptures of imperfection and
insufficiency, but they will glory of Gods word to be in their possession, of
greater authority, then that which is contained in the holy scriptures. Well,
let that pass, and let us see whether we have not sufficient testimony in
the holy Scriptures, to prove that they are perfect and sufficient and that
the word of truth contained in them, is a full and absolute rule of all
doctrine necessary to eternal salvation. The Lord by Moses charge, Deuteronomy.
12.
that only which he commanded, and Moses did write, to be practiced.
Therefore the word written was a sufficient instruction for any thing that
should be done to the pleasure of GOD and peoples salvation, Deuteronomy. 4. and 12.
Also he forbids them to add any thing to it, or to take any thing from
it, which he had delivered in writing, wherefore there was no want, there was
no superfluity in that written word. The Prophet David in an hundred places
of his Psalms, extolleth the utility, sufficiency, and perfection of the
same law of God written. Every verse almost of the 119. Psalm does set out
the excellency of that doctrine The prophet Esaias shows yt the people of god
for all questions must resort to the law Esaye. 8.
and to the testimony. The Prophet Malachy, which was the last of the Prophets
that god sent to teach by revelation extraordinary, refers the people unto
ye law of Moses, as sufficient to direct them until the coming of Christ.
Abraham in the parable of Luke 16. sends the rich man's five brethren unto the
Law and Prophets, as sufficient to teach them, that they come not into the
place of torments. Our Savior Christ himself, wills the Jews and all them
that will know him, to search the Scriptures. Search the scriptures (says he)
John. 5.
for in them look to have eternal life, and the same are they that bear
witness of me. But perhaps you will say, they were deceived in that they
thought to attain eternal life, by the doctrine of the scriptures, as alone
being sufficient. The^ hear what our savior Christ affirms in this
samepraier, John. 17.
This is eternal life yt they may know thee the only true God and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent. But the knowledge of God and Christ are
sufficiently to be learned out of the holy scriptures: therefore ye doctrine of
the holy scriptures is sufficient, to the attaining of everlasting life. S.
Paul says, yt what things soever are written before, they are written for our
learning, yt through patience and comfort of the scriptures we might have
hope. This is little to the purpose, will some Papist say, that all the
scripture is for our learning, seeing it is not thereby proved, that it is
sufficient for our learning. No sir, but mark the end of this learning, that
we may hear by the scripture this, that we may have hope. And know you not,
that hope makes not ashamed? That by hope we are saved? Seeing then we may
have sufficient learning by the Romans 5. Romans 8.
scripture to have hope, and by hope we may have salvation: is it not
manifest, yt by holy scriptures we may be abundantly instructed unto salvation.
And what need we any far fetched arguments, when the Apostle says in express
words, the scriptures are able to make us wise unto salvation. They are the
very words of the holy Ghost, uttered by S. Paul unto Timothy, 2. Tim. 3.
when he commends, yt from his infancy, he had learned ye holy scriptures,
which are able (says he) to make thee wise unto salvation, through the faith
of Jesus Christ^. Would any man think after so manifest a testimony of ye holy
scriptures brought forth for the sufficie^cie of ye holy scriptures, that the
papists durst for worldly shame, although they be void of the fear of god, to
continue in their impudent paradoxe yt all truth is not taught in the holy
scriptures? That the holy Scriptures, do not contain the whole truth of gods
word in such perfection but that we must receive some part of the word of
God, out of some other testimony, which cannot be proved out of the holy
scriptures. There is none so blind as the obstinate that will not see. But who
so has a care of eternal salvation, will seek it in none other word, then
that which is comprehended in the holy Scriptures, seeing by witness of Gods
spirit, they are able to make us wise unto salvation, which could not be
truly said, if there were any truth necessary to salvation, which were not
to be found and sufficiently proved by the only authority of the holy
Scriptures.

Finally, the same Apostle says in the same place. 2. Timo. 3
All the scripture is inspired of God, and is profitable to teach, to improve,
to correct, and to instruct, in righteousness, that the man of God may be
absolute, being made perfect unto every good work. Could any thing be said
more fully to express the perfection of the holy scriptures, or to prove that
all true doctrine is contained in them. Tush say the Papists: this is nothing
to prove that the word of God, or all true doctrine is perfectly contained in
the Scriptures. He says the Scripture is profitable to teach, he says not,
it is sufficient to teach. Many things are profitable and good helps, which
yet be neither necessary, nor sufficient, and such a thing is the scripture
without the which the Church has continued near two thousand years, and so
might have continued still, but that God has added the aid of the Scriptures
as profitable to teach, to improoue, to correct, and instruct, and yet it
follows not, that the Scriptures alone, are sufficient and able to instruct,
a Christian man in all things that it is needful for him to know. But there
be other testimonies of Gods word, whereby many things are taught, which are
taught in the scriptures, and yet be as necessary to be known and practiced
of Christians, as any taught in the Scriptures. What things are these I pray
you? They will answer the mystery of the blessed Trinity, the sacraments of
the Church, the baptism of infants, the perpetual virginity of Mary and such
like. Concerning the inysterie of the blessed and everlasting Trinity, if it
were not plainly taught, and inuincibly proved by the holy scriptures: the
Church in old time labored in vain to prove it and defend it out of the
Scriptures against so many heresies as Satan raised up against it. But they will
urge us to show, where we find the Trinity once named in the scriptures? A
perilous question, we find three persons of the Godhead plainly and
perfectly distinguished by the holy Scriptures: then what unreasonable beast is
he that will contend of the name, when the thing is certain? Likewise I say of
the name of sacraments, although it be not applied in the Scripture unto
baptism and the Lords Supper: yet that which is the definition of a sacrament,
is clearly in the scripture aduouched of these mystical actions. The name of
Sacrament is borrowed of the Latin speech, in which no part of ye scripture
was first written. As for ye baptism of infa^ts, I shall have occasion to speak
of it hereafter, In ye mean time, I say, the papists are very favorable unto
ye Anabaptists, which affirm ye baptism of infants, cannot be proved out of
the holy scriptures, and so strengthen them in their heresy. Touching the
perpetual virginity of Mary, if it be needful to salvation that it should be
known of every Christian, it is undoubtedly taught in the scriptures if it be
not taught in the scriptures, it is nothing necessary to everlasting salvation.
For to stop the mouth of this impudent and arrogant cauiller, against the
sufficiency of the holy scriptures, the holy Ghost had immediately before
provided: where the Apostle showing what utility he spoke of, namely that
which is both necessary and sufficient, said that the scripture was able to
make a man wise unto salvation. Therefore the Scripture is so profitable, that
it is also necessary to give knowledge of salvation. And it is so profitable yt
it is also sufficient, and able to minister abundance of heavenly wisdom, to
the attainment of eternal salvation. O blind and shameless cauillers, yt
cannot or will not see yt is written in the verse immediately going before, able
to put ye whole matter out of controversy. But let us yet consider more of
their shameless shifts. Admit the papists see not these words going before and
should not be urged with them. Does not this very text in with the apostle
commends ye utility of ye holy scriptures? set forth also the sufficiency
of the same? Does not the Apostle say, the Scripture is so profitable, that the
man of God thereby may be perfect and thoroughly instructed unto every good
work? Who would require greater perspicuitie or plainnes, if he mean to set
his belief, and not to maintain his error? Yet see what Cobwebs the spider
weaueth to cover ye light, of this text from the eyes of the ignorant, and such
as wilfully be obstinate. The man of God says he, in this place is not taken
generally for every godly man, but specially for the Minister of the Church,
the Minister of God. Therefore although the Minister of God may be made
perfect by the doctrine of the Scriptures, it follows not that every man may
be so likewise. Albeit the Minister has his whole duty taught by the holy
Scriptures, yet has not every one of the people his duty thoroughly taught in
the Scriptures, that he may be made perfect and prepared to every good work.
For every good work in that place, does signify the whole work or office of
the minister only, and not of the people also. What can we answer to this?
First I am content to understand the man of God in this text, specially for
the minister of God, as the quarreller says: and what have we lost thereby?
The scripture is sufficient to make the minister of god perfect, which has ye
charge of all the people, to make them perfect, and therefore, yea much rather
it is sufficient, to make every one of the people perfect and thoroughly
instructed to every good work. For what is the office of the minister of God,
is it not to teach, to improoue, to correct, to instruct in righteousness. The
scripture is profitable for all these purposes even unto the perfection of the
man of God, therefore there wants nothing of sufficiency in the holy
Scriptures. For what shall he teach, but true doctrine? and how is the
Scripture profitable to make him perfect unto doctrine, except it be able to
teach him all true doctrine? What shall he reprove but errors, and heresies,
if the Scripture be not able to convince all heresies and false opnions
touching religion, how is it able to make him perfect to that part of his
office, which consists in reproouing and conuincing of errors, and Heretics.
Again, what shall he correct, but vices and sins, that are commmitted
against Gods commandments? But how should he be able to correct them by
the Scriptures, if whatsoever is sin may not be reprehended and condemned by
the authority of the scriptures?

Finally, how shall he instruct in righteousness, to the perfect discharge
of his office, by the proper, ableness of the scriptures, if there be any
works of righteousness acceptable unto God, which are not commanded or commended
in the holy Scriptures. Thus you see, the mist easily driven away, and the
clear light of the truth gloriously shining to the shame and confusion, of all the enemies of the holy scriptures among whom the papists are not the lest,
which in no sauce can abide, that the holy scriptures inspired of god should
be sufficient to testify so much of Gods word unto us, as should be
necessary to salvation of our souls. but being thus shamefully overthrown,
and put to flight, will they give over and yield to the truth? No they are
frozen in the dregs of their error. They will not cease to quarrel, until
they leave to live. For what other starting hole have they now trow you, to
avoid the force of the truth, enforcing the sufficiency of the scriptures by
this testimony of the holy Ghost? For sooth they say that Saint Paul's words
are not to be understood of all the whole Scripture, but of every book, yea
of every text and sentence of the Scripture, which is profitable to teach, to
improoue, to correct, to instruct: but all true doctrine is not taught in every
book or sentence of the Scripture. therefore the sufficiency of the scripture
is not taught by this text. I marvel they say not that Saint Paul speaks of
every word, syllable, or letter yt is written in the Bible, in which is some
profit to teach, to improoue, to correct, and instruct, but not to teach all
things needful to be known. They might as well say, that Saint Paul
speaks of, every singular word, as of every particular book, and several
sentence of the scripture. But how can it be proved that he speaks not of
every book or sentence severed from the rest, but of the whole body of
Scripture? Nay, what is more easy to prove then that? When he speaks of
the Scripture, so as it is able to make the man of God absolute, and perfectly
instructed unto every good work, or unto the whole good work of his
ministry. Every several book, and much less every sentence of the scripture
is not able to make the man of God perfect in all parts of his office, nor
thoroughly prepared unto every good work, therefore it is most evident, that
the Apostle speaks not of every sever all book or sentence, but of the whole
body of the holy Scriptures, in which Timothy was instructed, and which he said
before, was able to make him wise unto salvation. For neither every sentence
nor every book of the holy scripture, does contain sufficient wisdom unto
eternal salvation, but the whole body of scriptures is able to make any man
wise unto salvation, through faith in Jesus Christ. Therefore it is certain,
that this text is to be understood of the whole Scripture, and that word
(...), is so to be translated, the whole scripture or all the scripture, and
not every scripture. But yet blind malice, cannot cease to raise a dust, to
blemishe the glory of Gods truth perfectly expressed, in his holy scriptures.
This text (says the Papist) was written by S. Paul, before the new Testament
was put in writing, and received in the Church. Therefore it must needs be
understood of the scripture of the old Testament only. Wherefore it is not
like, that Saint Paul would affirm, the old Testament sufficiently to co^tain
the word of God. For then the addition of so many books of the new
Testament, were altogether superfluous, which absurdity that we may avoid,
we must needs say, that Saint Paul's meaning was to teach us that every
scripture is profitable, but not that the whole scripture as it was at that
time, was sufficient. So that there is no text, to prove, that the whole
scripture as it is now, containing both the old and new Testament, is
sufficient for a Christian man's perfect instruction, but that he must receive
the word of God from the Churches mouth, although it be not registered in the
old Testament or the new. This argument being of a late invention, pieaseth
the Papists out of measure, insomuch that they clappe their hands at it, and
think them selves clearly discharged of that Terte. But how vain, how
foolish, how ridiculous it is, and unworthy of any man's estimation, I will
plainly open unto you. First it is not denied but Saint Paul in this text,
speaks especially of the scripture of the old Testament, not only because
all books of the new Testament were not then written, although many were, but
also because the apostle speaks of that scripture in knowledge wherein
Timothy had been brought up from his infancy, which should be none other but
the law and the Prophets, the scriptures of the old Testament. But if it may
be proved that the scripture of the old Testament did sufficiently contain
the word of God, as it has been proved already, to make men wise unto
salvation, then much more abundantly the scripture both of the old and new
Testament, contains the whole counsel of God, a perfect truth, even that
word of God, which our Savior Christ in this his prayer affirms to be the
truth. For of all the reasons that ever I heard, this that now pleases them
so much, is most worthy to be laughed at, and hissed out of all Christian
Schools, not only by learned men, but even by women and children. If the
scripture of the old Testament be sufficient (say they) the new Testament is
superfluous. Is there no mean between sufficiency and superfluity? A man that
has wherewith to provide him self of meat and drink, apparel and lodging of
the meanest sort, has sufficient for his living. But if any thing be added to
this sufficiency, will you say it is superfluity. Is there no use of riches, or
abundance above sufficiency, but it is by and by superfluity. The scripture of
the old Testament contains the word of God sufficiently for men's salvation,
but the new Testament added thereunto, contains no new substance or matter
of doctrine, or article of belief, necessary to salvation, but the same
ancient and eternal word of God most richly, most plentifully, most
abundantly.

Wherefore that the Apostle gives the commendation of sufficiency, unto the
scripture of the old Testament, yet so far of, that it should hinder the
credit of the whole scripture, which now the Church enjoys, that it does a
great deal more magnifically set forth the unsearchable treasures of Gods
wisdom and holy word, revealed more at large, more plainly, and openly set
forth in the time of the Gospel, then it was revealed or set forth under the
law. Wherefore we may not reason with the papists if the scripture of the old
testament had been sufficient, the new should have been superfluous, but
contrariwise, if the old Testament were sufficient, the scripture of the new
and old together must needs be abundant. That the scripture of the old
Testament contained sufficient instruction, unto eternal life, has been
proved already sufficiently, and yet for more clearness, I will add other
reasons and authorities, to prove the same richly and abundantly. The whole
doctrine of the Gospel of Christ, is contained in the scriptures of the old
Testament, which is sufficient for a Christian man's instruction, therefore
there is no want, nor imperfection, no insufficiency, of the substance of
doctrine, in the scripture of the old Testament, 2. Tim. 3.
Saint Paul in this very place, exhorts Timothy to continue in those
things which he had learned, and which were committed unto him: knowing of
whom he had learned them, namely of the Apostle, and secondly of the holy
scriptures, in which he had been instructed from an infant, which were able
to make him wise unto salvation. See you not here most plainly, that the same
things which Timothy had learned of Paul, and which were committed unto him,
that he might perfectly fulfill the work of an Evangelist (which cannot be
except he preach the Gospel perfectly) were contained in the scripture of
the old Testament, which he had known from a child, which Scriptures were
not able to make him or any man wise unto salvation, except they contained all
articles of Christian doctrine, which a christian man is bound to know and
believe. And therefore upon this ground, he infers, that the whole scripture
is profitable to furnish the man of God unto all parts of his office, and to
make him perfect unto every good work. Beside this, the holy Ghost in the
Acts of the Apostles, Act. 17.
commends the Berhaeans, that they received the word of God, with all
readiness of mind, daily searching the scriptures, if these things were so as
ye Apostles preached. Mark this text diligently, they received the word of al
redines, as it was preached by the Apostles: but they admitted nothing for the
word of God, but that they found, to have ground and confirmation in ye
scriptures, in ye law, and the prophets: wherefore the apostles preaching ye
Gospel, preached none other word of god, but that which was contained in the
scriptures of the old Testament. For if they had preached any vnwritte^
verities, how should the Berhaeans have found the same in the scriptures? And
what speak I of the Apostles: even their lord and master, ye son of God, the
word of God, the truth of God, offers his whole doctrine to be tried by the
scriptures of the old testament. Joan. 5.
Search ye scriptures (says he) for in the^ you think to have everlasting
life, they are the same, yt bear witness of me: He testifies also, yt all
things that are written of him in ye law, and the prophets, and in the psalms,
must be and were fulfilled. Luke 24.
And when he authorized his Apostles to preach ye Gospel, and performance of
all things that were written in the law and the prophets. He opens their
understanding that they might understand the scriptures, which contained the
word of God perfectly and sufficiently, although the same in the new testament
and doctrine of fulfilling, be set forth more richly, more plentifully, and
more plainly. And lest you should think this sufficiency of the scriptures, to
have been only after all the books of ye old testament were written, which
were many hundredth years from the first to the last. So that from Moses until
Malachy, or from the beginning of the world until Malachies prophecy, was
received, there was no sufficiency of true doctrine contained in the scripture:
I will plainly prove unto you, that from the time that the word of* GOD was
first delivered in writing, there was sufficiency in that scripture for the
perfect instruction of the church of that time. And what soever books of
scripture were afterward added, was but a larger opening, and playner
demonstration of the same, as GOD in wisdom and mercy did see it convenient
and necessary, for every age of the Church, and his people living in those
times. The five books of Moses was the first scripture, that was delivered
unto the Church, which contained a perfect and most sufficient doctrine of all
things to be known and done, of that people, for the attainment of eternal
life: the other books that followed, were but enlargementes and
interpretations of the same doctrine, that was contained in those five books.
For if they had been additions of any new doctrine, they had been contrary
to the prohibition of the same law, and subject to the curse of God. Yea the
principal trial of all Prophets, Deuteronomy. 13.
that succeeded, was by the same law. Insomuch that if a Prophet, or dreamer
of dreams did arise, which taught an other God, or an other worship of God,
not set forth in the law, he was thereby discryed, to be a false prophet,
although he could tell before of things that came to pass* or work miracles.
This argued sufficiently the perfection of the doctrine contained in that law,
against which no signs or miracles, should be credited. Also Joshua in his
exhortation made unto ye people: after that he had divided the land unto
them, charge them to observe and do all that is written in the book of the
law of Moses, that they turn not there from, neither to the right hand, nor
to the left, that is they do neither more nor less, but that is written in
the holy scripture, therefore the book of the law of Moses was perfect and
sufficient, for the instruction of that people. And what says our Savior
Christ unto the Saduces which received no part of the old Testament but only
the five books of Moses: Does he not say, they erred, because they know not
the Scriptures and power of God? And what Scripture? but the scripture of those
five books, out of which he does so pithily and effectually prove the
article of the resurrection of the dead, that he stopped the mouths of those
obstinate and arrogant heretics. And who doubts? but even as that one
article of the resurrection, was by our Savior Christ so substantially
proved, so all other articles of Christian belief, by that divine wisdom of
his, might as necessarily be concluded out of those five books of Moses. This
always is to be remembered, that it was neither necessary nor convenient, for
the Church of those times, unto which these books alone were committed: to
understand or know, these articles of our belief so plainly, so distinctly, so
largely, as they were after revealed by the Prophets, and especially by the
scriptures of the new Testament. But that al necessary points of salvation, and
every thing there to belonging, was sufficiently and perfectly set forth in
those scriptures, which the wisdom of God thought to be convenient for their
instruction: So ye they should not depend upon the uncertain credit of me^,
but always have the touchstone of Gods word contained in his holy writing
inspired by his spirit, to try and examine all doctrines and teachers thereby.
But now ye we have showed, that the holy scripture is a sufficient and most
ple^tifull testimony of the word of God, let us see, what other witness of Gods
word, the Papists would thrust upon us. The word of God (say they,) beside y^
which is contained in the scriptures, is continued also partly by tradition
partly is revealed by the sentence and oracle of the church, and of the chief
shepherd thereof which is the Pope, all which is of equal, authority and
certainty, with that which is contained in the holy scriptures. And first
concerning tradition: the scripture it self, does testify, that it is to be
received, whether it be by writing, or unwritten. For so the Apostle
commands the Thessalonians, saying: 2. These. ^.
Hold fast the traditions, which you have learned, whether it be by word of
mouth, or by our Epistle. So say they, the scripture it self commands
unwritten verities, and traditions, beside the scripture, to be holden fast,
and not to be despised: therefore the scripture alone is not sufficient, to
teach us the word of truth, but we must also lean unto unwritten traditions.
There is no Papist almost, that opens his mouth, or sets his pen to paper,
to defend tradition, but this is the principal bulwark, to maintain unwritten
verities received by tradition. A sore place I promise you. Out of which if you
will gather rightly, you must thus conclude. Saint Paul had taught the
Thessalonians, partly by preaching, and partly by writing, and taught the truth
in both necessary to be retained, therefore the holy scripture does not contain
al doctine needful unto salvation. Or thus, S. Paul in one or two Epistles,
had not comprehended all necessary truth, therefore all necessary truth is not
comprehended in all the books of the scripture.

For he speaks not of traditions, that were no where written, but not
written in his Epistle. Signifying whatsoever he did deliver unto them, either
by word of mouth, or by his Epistle, was the truth of GOD, which they were
bound to believe, and yet he delivered nothing for any doctrine of salvation
unto them, but that which he confirmed by the scriptures of the old
Testament, as it is manifest by ye which S. Luke reports of their neighbors
the Berthaeans which daily searched the scriptures, if those things which
Saint Paul taught, were eue^ so. Wherefore this place does nothing favor
unwritten traditions, yt are altogether beside the holy scripture, but only
such as are not contained in the first and second Epistle to ye Thessalonians,
but were preached by S. Paul, and tried by the scriptures. The strongest
bulwark being thus rased and made even with the ground: what force can there
be in their other feeble fortresses? why do you so exclaim against tradition,
and unwritten verity, and strive so much for your Castle of only scripture say
they? know you not that the Church of God continued more then two thousand
years without any word of the Bible written: and how was the word of God then
continued, but by unwritten tradition: There is not therefore such necessity of
the scriptures, seeing ye church could so long continue the pillar and stay of
truth, without the^, but ye now having the scriptures for witness of some
part of Gods word, she may continue the rest y^ is necessary, for the
instruction of Gods people by tradition only, with out the scriptures. Here is a
godly show for tradition, but indeed nothing else but a vain show, without any
pithe of matter: yea, containing manifest untruth and false matter. For the
word of God was not so long continued only by tradition of men, but by a much
more certain testimony of truth, namely by divine revelation from god, which
was renewed in every age, yt the word of God might not stand upon the bare
credit of men, or be left to the unsure and deceivable delivery of men, from
hand to hand, but be evermore confirmed by heavenly oracle, that ye Church
might be certain, not to be carried away by untrue reports of deceueable men,
but to depend always upon the mouth of god. For in all that time, the lord had
a regard, that his people should not be like children wavering, and carried
about with the wind of every doctrine, by the deceit of men, and by their
craftiness which have a method of error, Ephesians. 4.
as the Apostle says of the church of Christ since his ascension, and therefore
he did in all generations, beside the tradition and delivery of the doctrine
of truth, from the parents to their children, and posterity, s^^rre up
Prophets and Preachers confirmed by extraordinary and wonderful reuelatio^s and
gifts of his holy spirit, which testified of that truth, and word of God that
was continued by tradition, yt it should neither be doubted of, among so many
errors as Satan raised up, nor be corrupted, either by the subtletie of the
devil, or by the infirmity and forgetfulness of men. Wherefore the tradition
being thus continued and confirmed, was not a bare tradition, and delivery of
me^, such as the Papists would draw us unto, from the holy scriptures: but a
most certain and undoubted testimony of Gods word, and his truth, such as he
in wisdom, did see to be most convenient for his church in that season. Beside
this heavenly and divine revelation, which always waighted upon Gods word, in
those times continued by tradition: The very tradition it self, was far
unlike to the pretended tradition, of the Papists. For the Lord God, who in
that time, would have his holy word to be preserved from generation to
generation, by tradition without writing, committed the same to faithful
witnesses, whose lives he enlarged unto so many years, as we read of in the
holic scriptures, not only for propagation of their kind, but also, and
especially, that they might continue the doctrine of his word, which he had
delivered unto them, unto many generations, and to a long posterity after
them. For this cause Adam lived, 930. years. Seth, 912. years Methusalach,
969. Noach, 950. years. So that Adam, which first received the doctrine of
GOD, both of the law and the Gospel, and also the external form of
worshipping god by sacrifice, which he taught his sons, insomuch that Abell
by faith offered an acceptable Hebr. 11.
sacrifice unto God, Romans 10.
which could not be without hearing of the word of God, as the holy Ghost
witnesses: continued a faithful witness and teacher of the same doctrine,
unto many thousands of his posterity, by the space of 930. years, beside his
godly son Seth, and other of his after comers. And whereas by the wicked
generation of Cain, the true invocation of God was profaned in the days of
his Nephew Enoch, which ungodly brood daily increased in wickedness Genesis 4.
corrupting many even of the posterity of Genesis 5.
Seth. The Lord stirred up an extraordinary Prophet Enoch, to confirm the
true doctrine taught by Adam, Seth, Enoch, and other of his godly posterity,
and took him our of the world miraculously, both to confirm the faithful in
the hope of the resurrection, and to confound the reprobate, that despised his
holy correction and discipline. Now let us consider the certainty of this
tradition. Noach, was 600. year old, before the Lord God sent the floode to
destroy those impudent contemners, So that of his father Lamech, and of his
granfather Methushalech which might see and hear, The first of the world
Adam, which Seth, Enoch and all the godly Patriarchs that were before him, did
receive the doctrine of Gods word, as it was delivered by God himself unto
them, without any addition or corruption. Besides that Noach, which received
the tradition, but from the second mouth, of them which received it from the
mouth of God, is again confirmed with divine revelation, with whom, and his
posterity, the covenant of God is again renewed: so that it appears how
for the space of a thousand and six hundred years, the word of God, and
doctrine of salvation, was continued in the church by tradition, without any
danger, or doubt of corruption from Adam to Noach.

Now let us see how this tradition was maintained after the flood, until the
time of Moses, which was the first writer of the Canonical Scripture. First it
is certain by the computation of the age of Sem, the son of Noach. who was
one of them that were preserved in the Ark, and with whom the covenant was
renewed, that he lived unto the time of Abraham, ye until Isaac was 50.
year old and more, for he lived 502. years after the flood. So that all
this time, there continued a faithful and credible witness of the word of
God and history of the world restored, of who^ the people might learn the
certainty of the doctrine, without any peril or doubt of corruption. But when
the Lord called Abraham, and severed him and his posterity for his peculiar
people, and chosen congregation, and that the age of man was now contracted,
and drawn unto a much shorter time of life: that the certeintie of his
heavenly truth should not be committed to uncertain tradition of many
generations, he renewed his covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and
every one of them, and confirmed the same to their children in every age by
divine revelation, until it was his pleasure to record the same, in the most
certain Tables of the holy Scriptures. For from the death of Joseph one of the
twelve Patriarchs, which lived after the coming of Jacob in to Egypt
threescore and ten years, there passed but threescore years until ye birth
of Moses. Leui an other of the xii. Patriarks, lived 23. years after Joseph,
whose daughter Iacobed was mother unto Moses. And Moses long time before he
brought the people out of Egypt received divine revelation as S. Steeuen
testifies, so that he thought his brethren should have acknowledged that God
had appointed him to be there delivered, Acts. 7.
by killing the Egyptian that oppressed them. So that the certainty of this
tradition appears from the beginning of the world, unto the wri^ing of the
holy Scriptures, to have been confirmed, in every age by revelation from god
and by witnesses above all exception, such as received the Oracles and
confirmatiof them, from God him self: whose life was prolonged into such
number of years that the Church might never lack a prophet inspired of God,
of whom they might he instructed in truth of Gods word.

So that the Lord did never permit his word to bare tradition of men, such
as the Papists affirm the tradition of the Apostles to have been, which
should have delivered the doctrine to their successors, without writing, and
they to their successors, and so from age to age, without any assurance of the
fidelity of al their successors, through an hundred hands before it come
unto us. By which uncertainty of the Tradition, a wide gate is opened unto
Satan, to bring in any falsehood and strange error, and to father it upon the
tradition of the Apostles. As it is manifest, he did in ye heresy of the
Vale^tinia^s, Maniches, Montanistes, and such other monstrous heresies, who had
none other refuge to cover ye novelty of there strange opinions, but a secret
tradition, beside the Scriptures, according to which the Valentinians, Lib. 3.
Cap. 2.
iumpe with the Papists, as Irenaeus testifies, they affirmed the Scriptures
were to be interpreted, and not otherwise. But when Irenaeus not content to
confute them by Scriptures, seeks to ouerthrom them also by tradition what
certainty of truth finds he in the tradition of the apostles as it was
received in his time? And a man would think, he being so near the time of
the Apostles, so that he had seen them, which had heard the Apostles, should
have had a much greater certainty and assurance of their traditions, then we
can have in these times, after so many heresies, corruptions, alterations,
persecutions, contentions, which take away alcertaintie from such unwritten
traditions. Yet eue^ this godly father Irenaeus, whiles he strives to bear
down the Heretics not only by scriptures, but also by tradition, in which
they gloried: was deceived by a false and counterfeit tradition contrary to the
Scriptures, by which it was affirmed that our savior Christ lived more then
forty years in the flesh. And yet to justify this tradition, he alleges
for witnesses, all the elders of Asia, which had conversation with S. John the
Disciple of our Lord, who lived with them until the time of Traianus the
Emperor, Lib. 2. Cap. 35
all which affirmed, that Saint John delivered the same thing unto them. Yea
some of them had seen, not only John, but other Apostles also, and heard the
same things of them, and testified of such report. What a godly show of truth
has this tradition? Yea what would a man require almost for greater
certainty of such a tradition, then the uniform consent of al them that had
seen and heard the Apostle, of which some had hard ye other apostles also.
What like assurance can the Papists make us for their pretended traditions of
the Apostles? And yet this tradition which Iraeneus aduoucheth, with such show
of credit to be a true tradition, is a very falsehood and untruth contrary to
the History of the Gospel, Luke. 3.
which expressly affirms that Christ was but 30. years old when he began to
teach in the 15. year of the Emperor Tiberius, after which time he lived
not above 3. years and an half. You see therefore what it is to leave the
holy scriptures and to follow unwritten traditions, whereof what certainty can
there be, when they that lived so near the time of the Apostles were so
grossly deceived with impudent lies and fables, and yet colored with such
show and appearance of credit. And no marvel if Irenaeus which received this
tradition at the second hand was beguiled with a fained untruth when even they
that were the scholars of the Apostles them selves could not agree about
their traditions which were beside their holy writings. Lib. 2. Ca. 26
Eusebius out of Irenaeus testifies that when Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna came
to Rome in the time when Anicetus was bishop there, they could not agree about
the tradition of the Apostles, concerning the celebratio^ of Easter. For
neither could Anicetus persuade Polycarpus, to alter that which he had seen
Saint John and other of the Apostles to practice, neither could Polycarpus
persuade Anicetus to forsake that, which he had received of his predicessors
who pretended to have received the same, of the Apostles Peter and Paul. So
that when the first and immediate successors of the Apostles, cannot agree upon
their traditions: What hope of certainty can we have after so many
generations? These were both ancient fathers, both godly fathers, which
acknowledged yt all things necessary to salvation were contained in the holy
Scriptures, and therefore, although they could not agree in the use of a
Ceremony, yet they did not break Christian unity for that diversity.
Whereas if they had thought unwritten Traditions necessary, as Victor that was
after successor to Anicetus seems to have thought, they would not have so
brotherly communicated the one with the other, as they did, but rather as
Victor, erroniously and presumptuously took upon him, to excommunicate the
churches of Asia that agreed not with him they would have detested the one the
other. This story also does plentifully witness, that the Bishop of Romes
authority in the beginning of the primitive Church, was not reputed to be a
matter of such certainty, yt all me^ must obey his censure, and no man
gainesay, or think otherwise then he does, in any case of religion. For
Polycarpus doubts nothing at all, to dissent from Anicetus Bishop of Rome,
where he thought he had better ground, neither does Anicetus object the
necessity of obedience unto Saint Peter's chair, as the Pope now a days
pretends, but when he could not persuade Polycarpus to consent with him, in
a matof small importance, and which is beside the holy Scripture, he is
content, that he shall dissent from him, both in opinion, and in practice, But
how far from this modesty, is ye Pope of Rome in these days, which though
he can tolerate diversity of Ceremonies, as the Papists say, to color this
matter, yet will he not tolerate that any man shall dissent in opinion and
judgment from him, in any of those things, for which he has no ground out of
the holy scriptures, but only a counterfeit and falsely pretended tradition of
the apostles. Well, you see by the example of Polycarpus and Anicetus, that
there is no certainty in unwritten traditions, when they y^ were the next and
immediate successors of the Apostles, were not resolved upon the^, but
continued in contrary judgments of them. And no marvel, when John him self
testifies, that even among the very Disciples of Christ, there went a wrong
tradition, concerning the death of Saint John: which having no ground upon the
words of our savior Christ, but being clean contrary to the truth of the
holy Scriptures, was yet received from an unwritten verity, until by the
written Gospel of Saint John it was plainly confuted. But it will be
objected, that the ancient fathers. Tertullian, Epiphanius, Basilius, and such
like do maintain that there were some unwritten Traditions of the Apostles in
their times, which were necessary to be observed.

I answer, although the ancient fathers, and even these before named, do
sometime avouch the sufficiency of ye holy scriptures, yet it must be
confessed, that otherwhile they ascribed too much to unwritten traditions,
wherein what certainty it was likely for them to have, you may consider by
that which has been said already, beside that they agree not about their
Traditions, either with the papists, or with us, or among themselves
altogether. Therefore very wisely and like an Apostolic man, ye holy worthy
Ignatius (as Eusebius writes) Lib. 3. Cap 3^
when he was traveling through Asia, toward his martyrdom, which he
suffered at Rome, and in every City where he came, exhorted the people to
continue in the faith of the gospel, and to beware of heresies, which the^
began to spring and multiply, in cleaving fast to the Tradition of the
apostles, he testified, that the same Tradition, that it might be certain
and undoubted, was already committed to writing: for by that time all the
books of the new Testament were written. And that tradition so written, he
thought it necessary to be plainly taught, and set forth unto the people.

This sound and uncorrupted judgment of Ignatius, a most ancient father and
next successor unto Peter in the Church of Antiochia, concerning the Apostles
tradition if they which came after him, had retained, they had neither so
easily been drawn into error themselves, ^usch. lib. Cap. vlt.
as Papias A great admiror of tradition, unwritten was, Irenaeus, Tertullian
and other: nor given occasion to heretics by alleging the insufficiency and
imprefection, of the holy Scriptures, to cloak their new heresies under the
name of ancient traditions.

Thus you have heard, that the word of truth, is not to be sought in the
unwritten traditions, but in the undoubted writings of the prophets and
apostles upon which foundation the Church of Christ is builded, as Saint Paul
testifies, Ephe. 2.
and not upon the uncertain reports of forgetful and deceivable men.

Now must we examine the tow other pretended records of the word of GOD. The
Church and the principal Pastor thereof, which they say, is the Pope,
Concerning the Church, the Apostle seems to give a clear testimony, that
the answer thereof, is an infallible Oracle of Gods word, when he says, It
is ye pillar and stay of truth, whereof it may be inferred, that the Church
alone, which as the holy Scriptures, is sufficient to uphold and stay the
truth, that it should never fail nor decay in the world. Much rather when it
has the assistance of the Scriptures in some part, is the Church able to
maintain an other part of truth, without the Scriptures. After this manner, the
Papists reason out of this text, to prove that all truth is not contained in
the holy Scriptures. But this is a very feeble kind of reasoning.

For granting that the Church is ye pillar and the stay of truth, as it is in
deed, it follows not thereof, that it vpholdeth any truth which is not
comprehended in the holy Scriptures. But contrariwise, seeing it has been
ple^tifully proved, that all true doctrine is taught in the holy Scriptures,
even to the perfection of the man of God, it follows that the Church is the
pillar and stay of that true doctrine which is taught in the Scriptures, and
not of any truth beside the Scriptures: For when all truth is taught in the
scriptures, it follows that whatsoever is not taught in the Scriptures is not
truth. But if this be ye proper note of ye Church to be the pillar of truth
(say they) it is proved thereby, that the Church cannot err, so that if it
set forth any thing beside the Scriptures, the same must needs be true. I
answer, this Sophistry, is already confuted, for it it be granted, that the
Church cannot err, as in matters necessary to salvation the whole Church of
God cannot err, to continue therein, it is because the Church cannot depart
from the doctrine contained in the Scriptures, which are able to make a man
wise unto salvation. But admit it were granted, that the Church cannot err
at all, what should that avail the Papists: verily nothing, but to prove
that they are not the Church.

For if this be a proper and inseparable note of the Church, that it cannot
err, what company soever does err is not the Church. But the Papists whose
doctrine contains so gross contradiction of the word of GOD do shamefully
and abhominably err from the truth, therefore the Popish faction is not the
Church which is the pillar and stay of truth. Thou shall make no images for
religion says the word of God. Thou shall make some images for religion says
the Popish Church. Thou shall not fall down to them, nor worship them, says
Gods commandment. Thou shall fall down and worship them, says the popish
Sinagogue. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve,
says our Savior Christ. When he was tempted to fall down and worship the
Devil, not as GOD, but as Gods Minister to whom the kingdoms of the world
were committed to dispose: The Pope says, thou shall worship and serve other,
beside the Lord thy God, so thou worship them not, and so thou serve them not
as Gods. I might run over a whole hundredth of contradictions, which the
papists do hold and teach contrary to the word of truth written in the
Scriptures by which it is more then manifest, that they hold and teach
damnable errors, therefore they are not the Church of the living God, which
is the pillar and stay of truth, at the least wise in matters necessary to
eternal salvation.

But let us see whether the Apostle by these words, intended to privilege the
Church of God, from all possibility of erring in any matter, albeit the
Church should depart from the certain direction of the holy Scriptures in
any thing. First it must be remembered, that Saint Paul in the Chapter 1.
Timothy 3. describes the persons and offices of Christian Bishops and
Deacons, which done, he adds immediately. These things do I write unto
thee, hoping to come unto thee shortly, but if I tarry long, that thou may
know how it behooves thee to be conversant in the house of God, which is
the Church of the living God, the pillar and stay of truth: In which words
we have to note, first that the Apostle has written briefly that which he
purposed (if they met shortly,) more at large to set forth and confirm:
Secondly that if he were disapointed, so that he could not come shortly, that
Timothy might have a sufficient direction how to behave himself for ordering
of the Church of god in appointing the ministers of the same. By which it is
manifest that this which he speaks of the pillar and stay of the truth, is
meant in respect of the Pastors and Teachers of the Church, by whom the truth
of heavenly doctrine is vpholden and continued in the world, which without
their ministry would utterly fall to the ground and decay. For even as he
writes to the Romans: Romans 10.
seeing faith comes by hearing of Gods word, of them that are sent, of faith
comes invocation, and from thence salvation, if none be sent, there can be no
preaching, no hearing, no faith, no innocation, no salvation: So the Church of
the living God, in respect of the faithful Ministers of the same, which teach
the truth to the salvation of Gods people, 1. Tim. 4.
in which respect they are said to save themselves, and them that hear them:
is rightly called the pillar and stay of truth, which Ministry if it be taken
away, the truth also is taken away, Even as the remoouing of the Candlestick
in the revelation, signifies the overthrow of the Church of Ephesus, Apoc. 2.
unto whom it is threatened if they do not repent. The Candlestick which
signifies the Church, vpholdeth the light of the gospel, by the continual
preaching of the Ministers thereof: so is it a pillar and stay of the truth, so
long as preaching of the Gospel is continued, which if it cease, then
follows darkness, blindness, ignorance, error, and destruction. This is the
true and plain meaning of the Apostle, where he says, The church is the
pillar and stay of truth. Not that it is impossible for the church to err at
any time, or in any matter, or that the determination of ye church, without the
scripture, is a sufficient testimony of Gods word, or of the truth in any
cause, as the Papists maintain. For Paul instructs Timothy by writing, how
he ought to behave him self in the Church of God, which is the pillar and
stay of truth, although he should have no further conference with him in the
matter: These things do I write unto thee (says he) yt thou may know and
so forth, whereas if in calling the church the pillar of truth, he had meant
that the church without the scripture was able to have instructed him, he
would have said. If any thing want in my writing, thou may ask the
determination of the church, which is the pillar and stay of truth. But S Paul
says, that he had written: that Timothy might know, and be able to instruct
the church of God, that it might be the pillar of truth, not that the church,
as the pillar of truth, should instruct him. For, Timothy was to teach the
truth of Gods word unto the church, yt the church might be the pillar of
truth, he was not to learn of ye church, as of a teaching pillar, in which
sense James and Peter and John are called pillars. Gal. 2.
And no doubt but they were pillars of ye church, and of the truth: yet they
were not privileged thereby, but that they might err in some part, as the
error of Peter is declared in the same place. Again it is certain, that the
Apostle in saying the church is the pillar and stay of truth: speaks of the
church of Ephesus, in which he had left Timothy. And the same is true of
every particular church of God, in any place, that it is the house of God, the
pillar and stay of truth, so long as it is the church of the living God. For
he teaches not Timothy by this writing, how to be conversant in the whole
universal church of Christ, but namely in that particular church, unto which
Saint Paul hoped to come vnot him, and by example thereof, in any other
particular church, wheresoever upon like occasion he should be placed by the
Apostle. Now the papists them selves do confess, that every particular church
may err, but it is, the catholic and universal church which they say can not
err.

But seeing that which the Apostle here speaks, is principally spoken of a
particular Church, and is true of every particular Church, that it is the
pillar and stay of truth, as well as of the universal and Catholic Church:
The catholic church is no more privileged from erring, by this text of
scripture, then any particular Church in the world. But this question of the
Church is so intricate, and uncertain among the Papists themselves, that
although they hold this as a principle, that the Church can not err, yet they
can not define what they mean by the Church, in this proposition. For if you
ask them whether you mean by the Church, all and every member of the body,
they will deny it. Where shall we then have the determination of the truth many
doubtful cause? They will answer of the general Council, which is the
Catholic Church represented. But here if they are not resolved, what makes
the general Council. For some hold, that the Council is above the Pope, and
may determine without him and against him. Other hold, that the pope is above
the council, and that the council may determine nothing, either against him,
or without him. But contrariwise, that the Pope without the council, has al
laws, right, and truth in the closet of his breast, so that he may determine
of any doubt, and that all men are bound to believe his determination, as
proceeding from him which can not err. The most of our english Papists at
this time, do hold that the Pope is above the Council, and that the
determination of the Council without the Popes approbation, is nothing to
build upon: So that when they have prated never so long of the authority of
the Church, the end of all the talk comes to this point, that the Church is
not all the faithful, but the general Council, only, the Council is not all
the Prelates, but the Pope only, without whom they can determine no truth, and
who without them may determine all truth, and can determine no error. So that
against this sect of Papists, it shall be sufficient to prove, that the
Popish Church may err, if I can prove that the Pope which is the only pillar
and stay of truth, therein may err. But seeing we know the Pope to be a
mere mortal man, howsoever some of them have made him more the^ a man, yea, a
GOD above all Gods, some neither GOD nor man, but a newter between both, as if
any of them will deny, I can bring their own sayings to their shame: Romans 3.
and seeing the scripture pronounces of every man which is but a man, that
he is a liar, and that God only is true: let us consider, what impudent shifte
they have to justify their Pope from error, that God only should not be true.

Some of the^ say, the Pope may err as a man, but not as a Pope, other say the
Pope may err as Pope also, but not in matters of faith: others seem to say,
if they durst speak out, that the Pope may err also in faith, but not to
induce any man into a false faith by his error. Thus are they at variance among
them selves, and mince the matter so small, yt at length it comes to as good
as nothing at all, that they brag of the spirit of truth given to the Pope in
such measure, that he cannot err.

But how do they assure them selves, that the Pope has such a privilege that
he cannot err in matters of faith? Our Savior Christ (say they) prayed for
Peter, that his faith should not fail: willing him after his conversion to
confirm his brethren.

And what in Gods name, makes this to prove that the Pope cannot err? Yes
forsooth: he prayed for Peter, that is for him and all his successors, because
he was the rock of the church, that none of their faith might fail, that is,
they might not err.

This is a very strange interpretation. For the natural sense of that place,
is manifest by that he said before, Simon, Simon, behold satan has desired to
winow you, as wheat. But I have prayed for thee that thy faith should not fail.

By which words he signifies, that the desire of Satan was utterly to
disperse the Church, that it might never be gathered together, and Peter was
in greatest danger of all the Apostles, through his shameful and cowardly
denial, and forswearing of his master, howbeit, he declares that he has
obtained by his prayer, that Peter's faith should not be altogether qu^nched but
that he should by repentance, take hold of Gods mercy, and be restored,
willing him after his conversion and experience of Gods mercy, to strengthen
his brethren which likewise were weak in faith, though none so near to
falling away, as he. So that the effect of Christ's prayer was, that Peter
through the greatness of his sin, should not despair of forgiveness, but by
faithful repentance, be renewed and converted, not that Peter should never
err in his own person and much less, that none of Peter's successors should
err in any master of faith: which thing by no logike in the world can
possibly be concluded out of this place: For what kind of reasoning is this?
Christ prayed that Peter's faith should not fail, Ergo, Peter had such a
prerogative by Christ's prayer, that he could not err, neither he nor any of
his successors. Christ prayed not only for Peter, but for all his Apostles,
and in this my text, prays for them all, that his father would sanctify them
in ye truth: shall we therefore say, it was not possible for them to err in any
matter? The Papists will not so reason of all the Apostles, for then the like
would follow of all their successors. And yet Christ obtained the effect of
his prayer, that all his Apostles were sanctified in Gods truth. Yea he
prays not this, for his Apostles and other Disciples of that time only, but
for all them that should believe in him through their preaching, for all true
Christians are sanctified in Gods truth, that they should not err finally from
the way of salvation. But hereof it cannot be gathered, that all true
Christians, no not after their calling to the knowledge of truth, cannot err
or be deceived in matters of faith and doctrine, although they cannot continue
in error of any thing that is necessary for the^ rightly to know unto
eternal salvation. Christ promises to send the comforter, eue^ the spirit of
truth, unto all his Apostles, and to his whole church, Joan. 16.
to supply ye want of his bodily presence which should lead the^ into al truth:
and yet it were no good conclusion to gather, yt none of the Church of Christ
might err in any thing, as it is a sure argument, that they cannot finally
err, in any point necessary to salvation. Peter him self, whose faith was
specially prayed for, as there was special cause, for his greatest peril,
after his conuerson, and after he had long time exercised his Apostleship, was
ignorant, and of ignorance erred, concerning the admission of the Gentiles into
the fellowship of the gospel, until he was reformed by the heavenly vision.
Act. 10.
Yea long after this: Peter did err in seperating him self from the Gentiles
by dissimulation, for fear of them of ye circumcision, when I saw that they
did not walk aright (says S. Paul) according to the truth of the Gospel, I
said to Peter before them all. Gal. 2.
I know the Papists will say this was an error of conversation and of fact only,
not an error in faith and doctrine. But this is a vain devise to escape. For
Peter erred not in (...) only, but in a matter of doctrine and faith also
against the truth of the Gospel. For he counterfaited before the Jews, for no
worldly respect, but because he thought it was his duty before God to so
do, rather then to offend the Jews. And where as some of them say, the Pope
cannot induce any other men into error, although he err him self, let the^
consider this example of Peter, who not only erred himself, but also brought,
yea compelled others to Iudaize with him, insomuch that Barnabas also was
carried with them into the same dissimulation: wherefore although Christ prayed
for Peter's faith, that it might not fail, yet Peter both erred, and induced
other into error with him: although being admonished by Paul, he did willingly
reform his error. Wherefore this matter is clear, that the establishing of
Peter's faith from failing, was not to privilege him from erring, but from
dispairing, and therefore can not extend to his successors, in as much as it is
but a personal benefit, obtained for Peter, except you will say by analogy of
the scripture, that the like prayer is made for every one of gods elect, which
in this sense I confess to be true, but yet it follows not, that they are
discharged of the frayletie of man in falling into error, much less any one
order of men, which should be Peter's successors.

And if we should grant that this privilege was given to Peter that he
should not err, and so should be derived unto all his successors, many other
intricate questions, and in extricable doubts would grow, before we could be
resolved who were Peter's successors. For seeing all Bishops be successors of
the Apostles, as Cyprian says, all Bishops are successors also of Peter,
for if you should say, that none were successors of the Apostles, but such as
be ordained in those places where ye Apostles did teach, it could not be
truly said of Cyprian, that all Bishops be successors of the Apostles. But
admit that they be only Peter's successors, that sit in Peter's seat, seeing the
stories affirm that Peter had two seats, at Antioche, and at Rome: why should
not his successors at Antioch, enjoy this prerogative as well as his successors
at Rome? That Peter was at Antioch, we find in the scripture, that he was at
Rome, we find not, but least of all that he bequeathed this privilege to
Rome, and not to Antioch. Well let that also be admitted, that the bishops of
Rome are the only successors of Peter, how is it verified of them, that their
faith never failed: The Papists them selves do confess, and the stories are
to many to deny, that there have been no wickeder men on the earth, then many
Popes have been in all kind of sin and ungodliness. Yea what for all y^ (say
they,) their manners failed from gods law, but their faith never failed from his
truth. I think in deed yt many of their faithes did never fail, for they never
had any, yt it might fail, who brought forth no fruits, but of infidelity
and corruption. For of such wicked persons the 1. Tim. 5.
scripture says, yt they have denied y^ faith, and are worse the^ infidels,
and yt they which commit such things, shall not inherit ye kingdom of Christ
and God. Tush they say, you mistake the matter, Ephesians. 5.
we deny not, but y^ they might and did fail from the faith which works by
love, and by which a man is justified, for many of them are damned spirits in
hell. Gal. 5.
Uerie well, then I perceive, yt you take not faith in this palce, Romans 3.
for a sure trust in the mercyes of God, by which a man is justified and
assured of eternal life, but for a bare knowledge of the truth, such as the
Deuilles have and tremble such as Saint James calls a dead faith, which is
void of good works. Iac. 2.
And did our Savior Christ, pray that a dead, fruitless, barren, and Devils
faith might continue in Peter's successors? was this ye effect of our savior
Christ's prayer? A goodly privilege of the Bishops of Rome, that they should
have knowledge of the truth and yet go unto the Devil. I know you will reply,
that although they through their own defalt, take no benefit by this
privilege, yet it is very necessary for the whole Church, to keep it in
unity of faith. But that our savior Christ prayed not for the continuance of
such a fruitless faith, it is plain by this reason, yt although Peter's
successors should be admitted unto the participation of this benefit, yet
Peter him self might not be excluded. But what a miserable comfort was this
for Peter, if after his master had showed him in what danger he and all his
fellows stood, through the malice of satan, which desired them to winnow or
sift the^, as wheat is scattered abroad in winnowing, insomuch that before the
crowing of the Cock, he should deny him thrice, our Savior Christ should
tell him no more, but that at this prayer and request, he should retain such a
faith as the Devil has, so that he should know ye truth in his conscience,
although he did deny it with his mouth? What comfort could Peter have by this
faith? which rather did increase his sin, in that he was not ignorant of the
truth, then help his weakness whereby he was afraid to confess the truth.
Wherefore seeing Peter's faith, for confirmation whereof our Savior Christ did
pray, was that true and lively faith by which Peter was raised up from weakness
to a trust in Gods mercy, and a sure hope of salvation: it is manifest that he
prayed, not for the says of such successors of Peter* as succeeded only in
place, not in true faith, but continuing in wickedness, and refusing a good
conscience, m^de shipwreck of the faith, and are thrown down into everlasting
condemnation. Well this notwithstanding, let us imagine, y^ Christ prayed for
the continuance of a dead and deuilish faith in Peter and his successors, that
is such a gift of knowledge, that they can not err in any question of faith:
shall that be found in all the Bishops of Rome that glory in the succession
of Peter: No verily. For many times the Pope is a man void of learning, and
knowledge of divinity, as most of y^ Cardinals are, out of which order he is
commonly chosen, and even this Pope that now reigns, Gregory the 13. by
report of them that have seen him and heard him speak, is not greatly
learned. And oftentimes as the story reports of them, they have been but
pelting Canonistes, coming up of Scribes and Notaries, never professing nor
taking upon the^ ye knowledge of divinity. And shall we think, that he which
is this day an unlearned man, not able to decyde a mean question in divinity,
being to morrow chosen Pope, and set in Peter's chair, is suddenly endued with
such knowledge, that he cannot err in any thing, or rather that the spirit
of Prophecy comes upon him, as it did upon Caiphas, which spoke the truth,
without his skill and against his will, because he was high Priest of that
year? Uerely I will not deny, but God may direct the tongue of the Romish
Caiphas, that he may utter at one breath, both a blasphemy, and a prophecy,
as that Jewish Caiphas did, but albeit he were able to prove, that he
sits in Peter's chair, as well as the other could prove, that he sat in
Aarons chair, and that Peter's chair is set up by God, above all other Bishops
chayres, as well as Aarons chair was set up above all the Iewishe Priests
stools: yet should not the Pope have greater Privilege then the High Priest
had. For the best high Priest that ever was of Aarons order, might be
deceived, and many were Heathenish Idolaters, as V^ias, Menelaus, Alcinus,
Jason, and other wicked Saduces, as Annas and Caiphas, which denied the
resurrection and immortality of the souls: Such as Pope John the 2. was, who
was convicted of that heresy in the Council of Constance. For such hell
hounds our savior Christ prayed not, that their faith might not fail, nay
rather he says expressly in the 17. of John, That he prays not for this
world, but for those whom his father had given him out of the world. Seeing
therefore a number of Popes, have been by the Papists own confession, children
of this world, and not children of light, no true members of Christ, it is
certain that he prays not for them, and therefore when he prayed for Peter,
he prayed not for all his successors. Yes say the Papists, yt the Church may
always have one that may confirm or strengthen the weak brethren, or as
though one singular person, were able to confirm all the brethren in all
places of the world, as well as Peter was able to strengthen his fellow
disciples at Jerusalem. Beside that the very words of Christ are plainly
directed unto the person of Peter, with such a circumstance, as cannot agree
to all his successors, admitting ye Bishops of Rome were the only successors
of Peter. And the^ (says he) after thou art converted, strengthen thy
brethren. All the Bishops of Rome have not denied Christ as Peter did, that
they might be converted: Wherefore it is spoken singularly unto Peter in
respect of his fall, that he should be converted and by experience of Gods
mercy be better able to strengthen his weak brethren who were in danger to
fall as deep as he, if Gods goodness had not vpholden them. Hither to
therefore we have not found such assurance of truth in ye succession of Peter,
that we should acknowledge any undoubted witness thereof, beside the holy
Scriptures, which although the Papists would miserably rack out of all
ioynte and order, to establish the dignity of their popedom: yet can they
find nothing which is not by the only testimony and authorite of Scriptures,
proved to stand against them. Let us now see what experience says, of the
failing of Peter's faith in his Successors, and the certainty of truth in the
determination of Councels confirmed by the Pope, for the most of our English
papists, as I said before, acknowledge no council to be lawful and free
from error, except if be confirmed by the Pope: if experience therefore do
prove, that Councels and Popes have shamefully erred, it is manifest, that
they ought to be no rule of truth unto christians, as they are pretended to
deface the only infallible rule of the holy scriptures. To prove the error of
the Popes, I will not begin with Marcellinus, which offered Sacrifice unto
idols, for it will be quickly answered, that his faith failed of infirmity,
and not of ignorance of the truth, being overcome with the terror of
persecution, not being deceived with the error of the Gentiles. Neither will I
stand upon the presumptuous censure of Victor, who for difference in a
Ceremony, took upon him to excommunicate all the Churches of Asia, for which
he was sharply reproved by Irenaeus, Polycrates, and other as Eusebius Lib.
5. Cap. 26
testifies, and by the Bishops of Asia, which countermaunded him in his proud
and uncharitable excommunication. I am able to justify my term of
countermaunding, (...). They did countermaund him (says Eusebius.) Victor
commanded them to al stain from the Communion, and they on the contrary side
commanded him to be quiet. By which is manifest that the bishops of Rome,
usurped authority, was resisted even in the first claim and practice of it.
For as I declared before, Anicetus dissenting from Polycarpus in the same
question, offered him no discourtesie, but brotherly did communicate with him,
yea permitted him his place to celebrate for honors sake. well although the
error of Victor is here reproved by Irenaeus and many other holy Bishops, yet
I will not urge it, because they will say, it was an error in discipline,
rather then in faith, although it was such an error in discipline, as gave the
onset to one of the greatest errors of ye pope, I mean his supremacy: which
then was rejected and countermaunded of all sides.

Therefore I will come to Pope Liberius, who at the first manfully resisted the
Arrians, insomuch that for his constancy, he was by the Emperor Constantius
put out of his Bishopric, and driven into banishment: But afterward being
overcome with tediousnes of banishment, and seduced by one Fortunatianus as S.
Hierome affirms, he subscribed to the Arrian heresy, and was restored to his
See at Rome, from whence he chased Foelix that occupied the place in his
absence.

Thus have you a Pope deniyng the eternal divinity of our savior Christ
convicted of heresy, by ye testimony of Hieronime, one that lived in the same
Church, not long after.

Here the Papists stamp and starcle, denying the testimony of Hieronyme as
sufficient. Yet thus much at least is gained that Hieronyme believed not this
Popish principle, The Pope cannot err, for then he would not have affirmed,
In Catalog. 5. Cap.
that Pope Liberius subscribed unto hereise. But if Hieronyme alone be not
sufficient, what say you to Anthanasius? Is he a credible witness? He lived
in the time of Liberius and knew him, he affirms the same of him.

But if Athanasius be not great enough to carry away the matter, what say you
to Pope Damasus one of his successors, Inpatifi.
could he err or no? Uerily Pope Damasus charge him with reuolting unto
heresy, saying, That he subscribed, but yet he was not rebaptised, and
entered into Rome like a Conqueror, holding council with the heretics.

I know the impudent Papists when they are driven to the wall by this example
of Liberius, for their last refuge, do say that he subscribed indeed to the
condemnation of Athanasius, but not to the Heresy of Arries, which is a
shameless lie, Ad subscriptioonem Haereseos, to the subscription of heresies
says Saint Hierome. The like does both Athanasius and Damasus affirm.

Therefore we have found one Pope fallen into a damnable error. After him we
find, that Pope Innocentius erred, although not in so weighty a matter. For
Innocentius defined against the Pelagians, that it was as necessary for
infantes to eat the flesh of Christ and drink his blood in the Communion,
as to be Baptized. As testifies of him Saint Augustine, Contra. (...) lib. 1.
Cap. 2.
saying: Qui parvulis definiuit etc. Which has defined, that little children
can by no means have life except they eat the flesh of the Son of Man.

Some Papists cavil, that although the Pope may err, yet he cannot err in
his definitive sentence. Behold Augustine says, that Innocentius has here
desined of this matter, and yet it is an error, which the Papists them selves
do not hold at this day. And yet Augustine affirms that this was the error
of all the Western Churches in his time.

But if any man think Saint Augustine no sufficient witness, to depose
against Pope Innocentius, let him take pains to read the Epistle of Pope
Innocent himself, sent unto the Bishop of Africa assembled in council. Where
ye words of Augustine cited out of him, are plainly set down. But here I
know the vain reply of the Papists, will be ready to object, that Pope
Innocent and Augustine, with the rest of the Catholic Bishops in that time,
did practice in deed to minister the communion to infantes, as soon as they
were baptized, but that was no error so long as they did not hold it to be
necessary for infants to receive the Communion.

Thus they grant the practice, and deny the error, either in the opinion or
in the practice of those times.

But if they were not so impudent, yt they had framed their foreheads not to
blushe at any lie, they would never against so clear testimonies both of
Augustine and Innocentius, seek to excuse them of that opinion, which they do
so willingly maintain.

The Pelagians denied that Baptism was necessary for the salvation of infants
whcih they said were without sin: both Augustine and Innocentius prove the
necessity of Baptism, by the necessity of communicating, which may bot be
granted to any that is not Baptized. Therefore, says Innocentius in his
diffinitiue Epistle to the Affricane Bishops. Illud vero quod eos vestra
fraternitas asserit praedicare, paruulos aeternae vitaepraemiis etiam sine
baptismatis gratia posse donari, perfatuum est etc. But that thing which your
brotherhood affirms them to preach, that young children may obtain the
rewards of eternal life, even without the grace of Baptism, it is a very
foolish thing. For except they shall eat the flesh of the Son of man and
drink his blood, they shall have no life in themselves. But they which defend
this unto them: without regeneration, seem to me that they will make fustrate
Baptism it self: Behold says Augustine upon these words, Pope Innocent
Contra. du. Epist. Pelag. lib. 2. Cap. 4.
of blessed memory (every Bishop was called Papa in his time) says, that
little children cannot have life, without the baptism of Christ, and without
the participation of the body and blood of Christ. By which saying you see they
affirm as well the necessity of the one Sacrament as of the other. For what
other thing moved them to give the Communion to infants, but because they
thought it necessary to salvation, while they missevnderstoode those words of
Christ in the sixth of John, as though they had been spoken of Sacramental
eating of Christ's body, as they did the other in the third of John as though
Chirst had spoken of the sacrament of Baptism, which he says of the
necessity of regeneration.

Furthermore where the Papists are enforced to affirm, that it was not
erroneous, but a laweful practice, to minister the Communion to infants, as to
baptize them, although the one be not so necessary as the other, the plain
doctrine of the Scripture does confute them. 1. Cor. 11.
For S. Paul forbids any man or woman, to presume to the Lords Table
without examination and judging of themselves, which things because infantes
cannot perform, it can be none other, but a mere profanation of the Lords
Supper, to minister it unto young infants, even as it was of them which
ministered it unto dead bodies upon the same erroneous persuasio^ of the
necessity thereof unto eternal life. And whereas the blind Cardinal Hosius
affrmeth, that infants may as well examine themselves by other men as in
baptism they believe by other men, and therefore by the Churches authority
without ground of Scripture, are baptized. I answer, if we had not better
ground of Scripture, then either the authority, or reason of the Popish
Church, for the baptism of infants, we would not practice if any more then
we do minister the Communion to infants. But we baptize them not for the
faith of other me^, but for the covenant of God which exte^deth even to the
seed of the faithful, so that there children are holy and not unclean, as
the children of Paganes and Infidels, as we see by manifest Analogy and
proportion, that the Sacrament of baptism, has unto the Sacrament of
Circumcision, which was the Sacrament of regeneration, unto the Jews, as
baptism is unto us, and was commanded to be ministered unto infants,
therefore the Sacrament of baptism is likewise commanded vnot infants.

Also by Analogy which the Lords Supper has unto the Pascall lamb, we do
plainly perceive, that it ought not to be ministered unto infants. For in the
institution of the Sacrament of Passover, the Parents were commanded to
teach their children the right use thereof, beside that many things were to
be done in the celebration of it, as it was first instituted, which could
not be done of infants, as to eat in standing, with staves in their hands,
yea the meat it self which was roasted flesh with sour or bitter herbs, and
unleavened bread, cold not be eaten of young infants, therefore neither the
Lords Supper which is succeeded in the place of the Passover, ought to be
ministered to infants. It was therefore an error in Innocentius and the Church
of yt time, to think it lawefull for infants to communicate, although they had
not thought it necessary: as I have plainly proved that they thought both:
and therefore erred in both points. But this you will say was no damnable
heresy. I will therefore leave Innocentius and come to Pope Honorius, which
was condemned in the sixth general Council, holden at Constantinople for
defending the heresy of the Monochelites, which affirmed that our Savior
Christ had but one will as God, which was all one in effect, as if they had
denied him to consist of two natures, for if he had an humane nature he must
also have an humane will, though always subject to his divine will, as is
proved plainly by many places of the scriptures. This heresy did pope
Honorius hold while he lived, as was proved by his own writings unto Sergius
Bishop of Constantinople, so that both the Popes of both the Romes (for
Co^sta^tinople, was called new Rome) were at once infected with that horrible
heresy, and therefore they were condemned by that council and accursed. The
like censure is thundered against him in the second of Nice. What can you now
say, why the Pope should not be burned for an Heretic? Peradventure you will
say, those Councels were not confirmed, by the Pope, yes verily, the one by Leo
the second, the other by Pope Adrian the first, yet says one, you cannot
prove that any Pope although he erred himself went about to seduce other, or
to change the ancient Catholic faith, which was always held in the Church
of Rome, yes that I can. And that by such a witness, as you may not refuse.
For I will bring forth no less witness, then Pope Leo the second himself,
which in his Synodall Epistle, by which he confirms the decrees of the sixth
Council of Constantinople, as you may read in the 18. actio^ of that
Council, has these words. Pariterque anathematizamus noui erroris
inuentores. Nec non and Honorium qui hanc Apostolicam sedem, non Apostolicae
tradn ionis doctrina lustrauit, sed prophana proditioone immaculatam fidem
subuertere conatus est? Likewise (says he) we do accurse the inuentors of
the new error (and so names a number of heretics) and also Honorius, which
did not lighten this Apostolic Church, with the doctrine of Apostolic
tradition, but went about to subvert the immaculat faith by profane Treason.
Behold the Pope condemns and accurseth the Pope, for an heretic: and yet
men are not ashamed to affirm in these days, that the Pope cannot err. The
Pope condemns the Pope, for laboring to subvert the faith, of the Church,
with heretical treason: and yet the Papists now a days, for a miserable
shift, say, that the Pope although he might himself be deceived, yet cannot
attempt any alteration in the faith of the Church. Well, to be brief I will
omit Pope Vigillius which was privily an Eurichian, as Liberatus charge him,
by an Epistle that he write to the heretics at the instinct of the Empress
which favored them: he was also condemned and accursed by Pope Syluerius. I
will come to the council of Constance, at which time there were no less then
three Popes at once. John the 23. of some called 24. Gregory the 12. and Benner
the 13. All which by authority of the Council being deposed, a Decree or
Canon was made, declaring that the general council was above the Pope, and
that the Pope may err, but yt the general Council cannot err. In this
council Pope John, among other horrible crimes was convicted and condemned for
an heretic, of y^ sect of the Saduces, because he denied the resurrection of
the dead, and immortality of ye soul, as it is to be seen in the 11. Session
of ye Council. This decree and condemnation of the Pope, and Popes was then
counted Catholic. But what says the Popish Catholics of our time? There
wanted the approbation of the Pope. No forsooth, for John the 23. the person
condemned, who of the Council of Constance was taken for the right Pope,
because the other were deposed before in a counsel holden at Pise, by all the
Cardinals, although they would not yield unto it, nor leave their papacy:
Pope John I say, in the next Session, acknowledged that the Council of
Constance was a most holy Council, affirming that it could not err. But
least this approbation might be thought to be extorted by fear, because he
was imprisoned or of hope that he might be restored and confirmed in his
papacy: there wants not a more authentical approbation of Pope Martine the
fifte, who in the end of the Counsel, and before the dissolution thereof,
solemnly approved all things decreed in that Council Conciliariter, that
is, in the form of a Council: and in his Bull charged all persons suspected
of heresy, to be examined upon this interogatory, whether they did acknowledge
that the general Council could not err, and whether they did acknowledge
the Council of Co^stance to be such a Council as could not err, which
Council decreed, that the Pope was inferior to the Council, and condemned
the Pope for error. Thus the Pope him self confesses, that the Pope may
err, and the Council confirmed by the Pope, decrees the same. And not one
Council only. But the general Council of Basil, made even the same Cannon
and decree of the Councels superiority above the Pope. Then belyke it will be
clear, that although the Pope be not always a certain witness of truth,
yet the general Council can not err. No surely, we are never the near of
certainty of truth, in the general Councels determination: For at the same
time, that the Council of Basil, was held in Germany, the Council of
Ferraria and Florentia, was held in Italy, that was of the clean contrary
judgment concerning the Popes superiority to that of Basil and Constance.
But it will be objected, that the Council of Basil lacked the Popes
confirmation. No truly, for although I might allege the confirmation of Pope
Foelix, which was chosen by the same Council after they had deposed Eugenius
for his contumacy, and the Bull of Pope Nicholas the fifth, which succeeded Pope
Eugenius, and confirms all things decreed in the Council of Basil, yet I
will stand upon the very same Eugenius the fourth, which gathered and held the
Council of Ferraria and Florentia against the Council of Basil. For even the
same Eugenius, after he had in three solemn Bulls, in which he complained that
the Council of Basil usurped authority above the Pope, decreed the
dissolution of the same, condemning all the doings thereof: at the length, was
compelled to revoke his own Bulls, and to declare, that the Council was
lawfully continued, notwithstanding his Bulls and decrees to the contrary.
His Bull of reuocation is to be seen in the 16. Session of the Council of
Basil. Beside this, in the next Session, he was sworn by his legates, when
they were incorporated into the Council, to defend that Council, and by
especial words, to defend the decree of the Council of Constance, made in
the fourth Session thereof: by which, the Council is decreed to be above the
Pope, and the Pope bound to obey the Council, and the decrees thereof. Last of
all, by his Presidentes, he accepted such presidency of the Council, as the
council would grant, which was without all jurisdiction of compulsion, being
him self compelled to retain that order of proceeding, with the council
before his presidency was admitted, had observed and would not change: now
that they were content to make him in his legates there president. What
certainty of truth therefore may be looked for in the determinations of Popes
and general councelles, you may easily perceive. You have heard the counsel
against the pope, and the pope against the Council, Council against Council,
one pope against another pope, and the same pope against himself, and all this
is one question, whether the pope or the general Council ought to be taken
as an infallible rule of truth, that cannot err. Out of which contrary
decreees, no other certainty can be concluded, but yt it is certain they may
both err, and therefore it is evident, that there is none other certain and
undoubted record, of the word of truth, but only the new Testament and the
old, the holy Canonical books of the holy Scriptues, as it were easy to
confirm even by the judgment of the most ancient and best approved Fathers,
but that I have already held you so long, as I may not proceed any further.
After the sufficiency of the holy Scriptures to teach us al truth, being thus
maintained, and the objections made by the adversaries confuted: I had thought
to have added an other discourse, concerning the right and certain way of
interpretation and understanding of the holy Scriptures, but because the time
is so far spent, yt I shall not be able to go through it, I will altogether
omit it, desiring God of his infinite mercy, that as he has testified by his
son our savior Christ Jesus, yt we can have no access unto his Majesty,
without sanctification in the word of truth: so it would please him by his holy
spirit, to consecrate and dedicate us wholly unto his pleasure, that following
the infallible rule of truth described in his holy word, we may glorify his
name in this life, and after be partakers of eternal felicity, purchased unto
us by the only merits of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, unto whom with
the father and the holy Ghost, one eternal God, be al honor, glory, power,
and dominion now and ever. Amen.

Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vintree, by Thomas Dawson, for
George Bishop. 1581.


