The Flovver Of Fame.

Containing the bright Renown, and most fortunate reign of King Henry the
viii. Wherein is mentioned of matters, by the rest of our Cronographers
ouerpassed.

Compyled by Ulpian Fulwell.

Hereunto is annexed (by the Aucthor) a short treatice of iii. noble and
virtuous Queens. And a discourse of the worthy service that was done at
Hadington in Scotland, the second year of the reign of king Edward the sixth.

Viuit post funera virtus.

1575. Imprinted at London in Fleet streate, at the Temple gate by William
Hoskins.

To the right honorable and his singular good lord, sir William Cecill Baron
of Burghleygh, Knight of the most noble order of the Garser, Lord high
Treasorer of England, master of the courts of wards and Liueries,
Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, and one of the Queens Majesty's
privy Counsel, Ulpian Fullwell wishes long health with increase of honor.
Being at stryse with my self, (Right honorable) whether I might presume to
exhibit the dedication of this my unpolished labor unto your good Lordship or
not, I was as often abashed as I vewed the homeliness of my style, and eftsons
utterly discomfited. But contrary wise, while I considered with my self (as it
were waying in the other Balaunce) your noble nature in accepting the good will
of the geeuer above the valor of the gift, I am again recomforted, And in the
end of this conflict, the noble courtesy of your honor won in me the
victory: whereupon I was not only enboldened my self, humbly to desire your
L. Patronage, but also (as much as in me lay) encouraged my Aucthour, master
Edmunde Harman, to offer unto you the gross fruits of this our labors. The
matter meriteth the Pen of the best writer, although it has now happened to
the hands of an vneloquent Compyler. But if it may please your honor to
accept the protection hereof, I doubt not but both the matter, and the
worthiness of the Patron, will stir up some of exquisite skill to furnishe
my defect by the renuyng of this my begone attempt. Which I confess to be by
me taken in hand, more willingly then wittilye, respecting more the truth of
the works then the eloquence of words. Thus ceasing to trouble your good
Lordship any longer at this present with my rough and ragged style, In most
humble wise I submit my self and this my sclender travail, unto your honor,
praying almighty God to preserve and prosper you in all your noble affairs
to the great comfort of this Realm.

Your honors most humble, Vlpian Fulwell.

A Table of the contents of this book.
A Commendations of King Henry's noble virtues. Fol. 1 A Resitall of King
Henry's fortunate reign. 2 A brief discourse of the vnyting the two noble
houses of Lancaster and York. From which united house, King Henrye was the
first king that proceaded. 4 Of the Battle fought at Bosworth between King
Henry the seventh and king Richard. 8 Of the birth of King Henry the eight. 10
Of King Henry the eight in the time of his minority. 12 Of his ryding to the
Tower of London before his Coronation. 13 Of his Coronation. 14 Of the winning
of Turwin and Turney. 16 The History of King James of Scotland that was
slain at Branxston field. And of his lamentation. 22 The History of King
Iamies son, who after the death of his father was king of Scotts being but a
child. That took his death after the overthrow of his men at Solomos, and
of his Complaint. 24 How the Kings of England and of France met at Morguison.
An. 1532. 29 Of the winning of Bullaine. 32 Of the death of King Henry the
eight. 36 An Epitaph of his death. 37 A Treatice of iii. noble and virtuous
Queens. 39 The History of the noble service that was at Hadington in
Scotland. 49 A Commendation of the English Soldiers that served at this siege
of Hadington, with the Capitaines names, as near as could be called to
remembrance. 56
To the frindly Reader Vlpian Fullwell wishes health.
THE wise and sage Philosopher Solon, noting the insolency of Cressus, who
esteemed him self the happiest man living, because of his abundant wealth, told
him, that no man is to be reputed happy during his life time, because he
knows not whether it shall end with renown or infamy. Concluding hereby,
that a goodly life, and a godly death makes a perfect happy man.

Now, seeing our late sovereign Lord King Henrye the eyghth, has hit the
mark of true felicity, and won the game of joyful immortality: what
ruthe were it, that so singular an example should not be recorded in the
golden book of perpetual Fame. His noble life, his Godly proceedinges, his
inuicted raygne, his fortunate success, his whole race of life, and end of
the same, deserves to be engraued in letters of pure Gold. If Alexander (the
myghtie Monarche of Macedon) was offended with a Schoolmaster in whose School
he found not the fame of Ulysses (written by Homer) how much more may we
deem he would check and reprove all English Gentlemen, that lay not before
their faces the book of King Henryes life, if he were now amongst us. But
happily it will be said unto me, Sir, if you wear as good an English Poet as
Homer was in Greek: or if the worthiness of your style were comparable to the
matter, we would the better esteem of your work. If that be thy objection
(gentle Reader) I cannot excuse my self. For I confess I have not the gift
of flowing eloquence, neither can I enterlace my phrase with Italian terms,
nor powder my style with french English or Inkhorne Rhethoricke, neither
cowche my matter under a cloak of curious inventions, to feed the dainty
ears of delicate yonkers. And as I cannot: So if I could, I would not. For I
see that many men are so affected with these premises, that many good
matters are obscured, the Aucthors encombred, the works but meanly
commended, and the Reader deceived. For while he coueteth to come to the
purpose, he is lead amasked in the wild Desert of circumstance and digression,
seeking far and finding little, feeding his humor on pleasant words of
slender wayght, guyded (or rather giddyed) with plaucible eloquence.

I do not herein condemn, neither discomende the noble Science of Rhethorike,
nor the eloquent Rhethoritian, but rather wish that excellent skill to be
employed only on such matters as may both commend the speaker, and the thing
spoken, or the writer and the thing written: having always the chief respect
to time and place. For as it would sound very absurd to the ears of the
skillful Musician to hear a gallyard, or any other dance playde on the
solemn Organs: So no less contrary is it, to dance after an Hymn or other
cunning voluntary. Thus (gentle Reader) I desire at thy hands, that thou
accept the matter, and bear with my crabbed meeter. Considering well that often
times is found good graffes upon a Crab tree stock. Take then the fruit,
and accept my good will. And if thou list bestow any fyling upon the
roughnes of my phrase, I shall be beholding unto thee. If not, yet shall my
desire be satisfied with thy good word.

Vlpianus Fulwell.

Vlpian Fulwell to his Book.
WHen lusty Ver begins to deck
each bushe and bow with green:
And Flora fair in flaunting wise
is gorgeous to be seen:
Then Natures Impes tryumphes with joy
till horie Hyemps frown:
Whose frostie face with blastes bedewde
Turns all these vpsy down.
His stormy stoutnesse dryues the birds
their warbling notes to seace:
He keeps as captive, flowers fair,
till spring do them releace.
Yet can his vysage not prevail
The Flower of Fame to vade:
Whose growing green shall not be shutt
in griesely winters shade.
As Hedera with hawtie head
does scorn sir Boreas blast:
Even so this pierlesse Flower of Fame
shall stand as firm and fast.
Out of which stately Blossom breeds
a Bud of Eglentine Note.

Whose worthiness adornes the stock
of natures noble line.
Not every whiffling taunting wind
that flies from scornful tongue:
Sall shake the stalk, ne yet the Flower
to do it any wrong.
For why (my book) thy Patrons name
Such noble sownde does yield:
That thou may think thy self well bleste,
to shrowde under his shield.
Before whose feet, we both will lie
and hope such grace to find:
That we with joy may pass abroad
to please thy Readers mind.
Which thing God grant.

In Vlpiani Fulwelli operis laudem Richardi Coppoci Carmen.
SI tibi cognitio rerum, si nuntia very,
Possideant aliquem pectore pressa locum,
Si studium pacis, seu te laus inclyta belli
Incitet: huc celerem ferto referto pedem,
Hic res non rerum species, hic viuida virtus:
Hic flos conspicuus, conspicienda ferens.
Non hic aiacis flos est Telamone creati
Qui domino dignum nil nisi nomen habet
Nec flos quo Phoebus genutus inscripsit acerbos,
Cum suus Oebalides, morte peremptus erat,
Sed flos hic famae merito regalis habendus,
Henrici octaui regia facta ferens
Fulwello meritas igitur persoluite grates
Florem virtutis praemia iusta manent.
The Flovver of Fame.
A manifest description of king Henryes noble virtues.
PRepare your pens ye Poets fine,
Your wits and curious heddes now show:
In fyled phraes of flowing ryme,
Your stately styles do ye bestow,
On him whose fame right far does fly,
and lodged is in starrie Sky.
To whom while life in corpse did last,
The myghtie Ceasar would give place,
The conquerors of worlds past,
may yield unto King Henryes grace.
whose only name was such a shield
As feared his foreign foes in field.
His kyngly Majesty was such,
As ioyed each faithful subjects heart:
And Rebels proud he foret to couch,
By dint of Sword to feel the smart.
A second Alexander he,
In valianties appeerde to be.
And that which Princes best beseemes,
Gods glory he did much advance:
Repressing Error that had been
of many years continuance. The chiefest thing belonging to a king is to set
forth gods glory.

This was his chief joy and delyght,
Whereby Gods gospel shyneth bright.
His careful head in this respect,
A chair of state in heaven has won:
Where he soiurnes with the elect,
A mate with heavenly fathers son.
whose seat is set in lasting bliss,
and crowned with crown that endless is.
The four Virtues were so well
within his sacred breast yfraught:
Too simple is my pen to tell
the gifts that nature to him taught.
My skillesse quill is far too bace,
To paint the prudence of his grace.
A Solomon for Godly wit.
A Solon for his constant mind: A mirror for all Princes.

A Sampson when he list to hit
the furye of his foes unkind.
Unto his fryndes a gentill Lam,
A Prince that loud a valyant man.
Whom God by diverse means did bless,
As one well worthy of the same:
With victory for to repress
His enemies to his great fame.
And many years to rule and rain,
To Englandes joy, to Scotlandes pain.
Yea, and a blessing more then this,
That does right far surmount the rest:
Which is to English hearts a bliss,
wherewith this happy Realm is blessed. Elizabeth Queen.

His daughter does him so reuyue,
as though the Father were alive.
In whom such virtues rare are seen,
As makes far countries marvel much:
That she a virgin and a Queen.
In godlynes and wit is such.
Though life from father be exylde.
His gifts are left unto his child.
As worthy Prince, by due descent,
The regal Scepter for to guide:
And Christ his foes for to prevent,
By Godly zeal she does provide.
The fathers steps she treades so right,
As does each English heart delyght.
So that though Royal Henry be
Returnde to earth from whence he came:
Elizabeth, yet may we see,
does bewtifie her fathers fame.
Whom God preserve in Regal seat,
Til Nestors years be full complete
A brief resitall of king Henryes Fortunate reign.
AMong the most fortunate kings and Princes that ever reigned: let the
Fortunes of king Henry the eight have a special place, whose happy success
in all his affairs was comparable unto the events of the mighty conquetor
king Phillips son of Macedon. There were in his time reigning more puissant
Princes together, then ever were living in any age before, and yet among them
all, not one of them equal to the King of England iin prowes. In so much that
the Jews were in good hope that one of these noble Champions should be
ordained of God to be their Messiah, whose coming they have long in vain
expected, refusing the true Messiah and savior of the world Jesus Christ,
looking for a Champion to bring them home again unto their destroyed Jerusalem.

These were the names of the most famous governors of the world at that time.
First Henry king of England. The Emperor Maximilian. And Frauncis the
French king, with the valyant Princes that then were in Germany, and Selimus
the Emperor of Turkey, with Barbarossa his great captain, besides a number
more, mentioned by Paulus Iouius and other good Aucthors. And among them all,
the same of king Henry shyned far brighter then the rest, as hereafter
follows. But first I will note of the bliss and happiness that came unto
England by his birth. It is manifest that he was the first branch of the
tree of concord, after the anyting of the two noble howses of Laucaster and
York, that long had been at discention and open hostility for the imperial
Diadem of this realm. For although his brother Prince Arthur were the elder,
yet because he lived not to enjoy his fathers seignories, neither left behind
him any Issue: I reckon him that brought forth the fruit to be the chief and
principal branch. He was also elect and chosen of God to be that Ezechias
that should sinsearly set forth his sacred laws. Yea he was the very Hercules
that was borne to subdue the Romysh Hydra, against which many hedded monster,
neither king nor Keysar could prevail, until this puissant Hercules took the
matter in hand, to the glory of God, and his perpetual fame. He was also
endewed by God with invincible Fortitude, always preuaylyng with glorious
victory. And like as when moises Exodus 17.
held up his Rod the Israelites had the better hand, and while he held
down the same their enemies had hope of victory. So likewise on whose side so
ever king Henry held up his Sword, that part had always prosperous success.
As the wars between the Emperor Charles the fifth, and Frauncis the French
king may sufficiently show. More over the like blessing of God happened unto
him, as seeldome, or (rather I think) never chanced unto any king. For where
as he having three children and no mo, at his departure out of this world:
they have all three succeeded the father. Not as private persons, but
successively in the regal seat: Governing his lands and territories. Also
his noble magnanimity was such, that he being Lord of Ireland, was by the
Earls, Lords and Piers of the same Realm, desired to take upon him the name
of their king. And they of their own accordes, (in the name of the whole Realm
of Ireland) did unto him Homage and Fealty.

Besides all this, when Maximilian the Emperor was dead, the Princes Electors
of the Empire of Rome, with general consent, committed their full authority
of Eleccion, for the space of four days unto king Henry, either to take the
Empire him self, or else to nominate whom he would, who thankfully accepted
their good wills, rendering unto them again their authority, and refusing to
be Emperor him self. Thus we may say (and that trewely) that he wan a
kingdom without battle or bludshed. And he was of power, not only to be an
Emperor, but also to make an Emperor. And thus I may boldly asseuer, that he
was blessed of God above all kings and Princes that ever I have read of. And
happy was that Prince that might stand most in his favor. For the which
diverse made great suite, and specially when they stood in need of aid against
their enemies, because they perceived that Fortune followed his power, as
handmayd to all his proceedings. A rare example (no doubt) it is, and me
seems most strange, that one king should reign 38. years, and that (almost)
in continual wars, and never take foil, but always prevailed as a victor
inuicted, which without the assistaunce of almyghtie God, he could never have
atchyued.

An evident token that God was on his side, and therefore who could stand
against him.

But to write at large of his worthiness and incomparable acts, would fill a
bigg volume, and were too great a charge for my unskillful pen.

Finally, he was a Prince of singular Prudence, of passing stout courage, of
invincible Fortitude, of dexterity wonderful. He was a springing well of
Eloquence, a rare spectacle of Humanity. Of civility or good nurture, an
absolute president.

A special pattern of Clemency and moderation, a worthy example of Regal
Justice. A bottomless spring of larges and benignity. He was in all the
honest Arts and Faculties profoundlye seen. In all liberal disciplines,
equal with the best. In no kind of literature, vnexperte. He was to the
world an ornament. To England a treasure. To his friends, a comfort. To his
foes, a terror.

To his saythfull and loving Subjects, a tender Father. To Innocents, a sure
Protector. To wilful malefactors, a sharp scourge. To his Common weal and
good people, a quiet Haven and Aucor of safegarde. To the disturbers of the
same, a Rock of Extermination. In heinous and intolerable crimes against the
common wealth, a seuear Judge. In the like offenses committed against him self,
a redye port and refuge of mercy, except to such as would persist
incorrigiblye. A man he was in all gifts of nature, of Fortune, and of grace,
pierles. And to conclude, a man above all praises. Such a king did God set to
reign over England, whereof this Realm may well vaunt above other nations,
whose worthiness is more treated of by forreyn writers, then by any of our own
country men. Which may justly redownd to the reproach of all our English Poets
and Historiographers.

A Discourse of the vnyting the two noble howses of Lancaster and York, from
which united house, king Henry was the first king that proceeded.
WHen mighty Jove from heavenly throne,
Beheld the blody broyle,
That Mars had made through civil sword,
within this country soil.
And pitying the ruthful rage
that on this Realm did rain:
Most lovingly did bend his ears,
to hear our moan and plain.
The earth that erst was brewd with blood,
begins now to joy: By the Bore is meant k. Richard.

The Bore is chaced that was wont
this Realm so to annoy.
The Lady Concord came from Heaven,
To stablysh this decree:
That Lancaster and York henceforth,
united shall agree.
Meethought I heard the golden words
That Concord did resite:
And eke me seemde mine eyes beheld,
This noble heavenly wighte.
Who pierst the Skies with warbling wings,
and Scepter in her hand:
Upon her head a Diadem
ycompast with a band.
Whereat my mind was all amazde,
To muse I could not ceace:
Till at the last I might perceive,
It was the band of peace.
Her face as bright as Phoebus beams,
Her hears, like burnisht Gold: Concord a heavenly wight.

Her feature like an Angel shape,
As ioyed me to behold.
With comely grace she did command
that scylence should be synde:
To rule the prease that then was thear,
Till she had said her mind.
When all was whusht, and every man
with listening ears was bent:
To hear her speak, then with these words,
she showed forth her intent.
Oh noble land, since first the time
that Brute in thee did raygne: The words of lady Concord unto England.

Whose line intestine war did end,
As fame does yet remain.
Turmoilde and tossed with civil Sword,
Thou sundry times have been:
Such was thy lot and such mishap,
as yet in thee is seen.
Thy noble pears have yield their souls
When fatal Sword had slain:
Unto the Theater of Jove
on Mars for to complain.
Thy vulgar sort in hugie heaps
do prease their plaintes to show:
With humble suit that perfect peace,
in English land may grow.
And Jove that long have rewde thy case,
has sent me for to ceace
These bluddie broils, and now to turn
thy war to perfect peace.
Where discord reigns and breeds debate,
Subuertion is at hand:
And daily proof does show that
hate confounds many a land.
Let Troyans testifye the same,
Let Pryam witness bear:
What Seignorie cannot bring forth
Examples bought too dear.
Desire of rule does often times dymme Ambition an enemy to all common wealths.

And clips the fame and life:
When Subjects touch the Princes seat,
by sowing seed of strife.
The Roman rowt can well declare,
The smart of Pompeies broyle:
Numidia remembers well,
The brunt of Iugurthes spoil.
With thousands more, whom to resite,
were time but vainly spent:
But right shall sit in Regal seat,
The Tyran to prevent.
And God that all these turmoyles vewes,
at last will work his will,
When false usurper shall take foil,
then right shall flourish still.
To thee (oh famous Realm) I speak,
whose brute does pierce the Skies:
Which for thy wealth, the Heavenly heste,
This order does deuyse.
And I, of Jove the messenger,
this news now bring to thee:
With band of Peace, as faithful pledge,
If thou thereto agree.
What loss and languor thou have had,
Thy self caust witness best:
And Mischief has not sparde to spurn,
To purchase thy unrest.
Wherefore the God that guydes all things,
does charge thee that with speed
Thou join in knott of Marriage,
as thus he has decreede.
There is a land in Western soil,
That Britain has to name:
Which coast does now retain the wight
that must thy quiet frame:
A proper youth, of pregnant wit, A description of k. Henry the vii.

To whom with speed repair:
Of Lancaster that noble house,
He is the ryghtfull heir.
His Princely port does well deserve,
To wear thy Regal Crown:
By due descent to wield the Sword,
with fame and bright renown.
This worthy wight shall turn the war
That long thy wealth has wast:
This Earl Henry shall redress
Thy wayling woe forepast.
Now see the sequel of this hest,
That God appointed has:
Mark well the mean against Sir Mars,
To pacify his wrath.
A noble spouse within thy land,
Of right must now be found:
To link in sacred wedlockes state,
And Queen for to be crownde.
Behold a Uirgin bright of hue
with virtues force bedect:
Of personage surpassing all
that Nature has elect,
Dianaes peer for chastity,
A second Susan she:
Her godly nature well deserves
A Goddess for to be.
The daughter of a Royal king,
That rewlde thy land of late:
The heir of York, that long has been
with Lancaster at bate.
Elizabeth this Lady hight,
The late king Edwardes child: The daughter of king Edw. 4.

She shall bring forth a peerlesse Prince,
thy people for to shylde.
Now since these houses twain has causde
Such ruin for to raygne:
Which bluddie broyle has forced thee
to feel the smarte and pain.
With speed repair to Britain land
This Henry home to call:
And place him in thy regal seat,
Be ye his Subjects all.
As for his Foes take ye no fear,
For God his friend does stand:
He is anointed of the Lord,
to rule thy famous land.
Which being done,
let sacred state The end of lady concords Oration.
of Wedlock join these twain:
Then be thou sure in perfect peace,
hereafter to remain.
When Concord had these words rehearst
and all her message told:
To see the joy that men did make,
was wonder to behold.
With clapping hands and cheerful shoutes
They shewde forth great delyght:
And thought each day to be a year,
till he should come in sight.
And when that Fame had blown her blast
that he had taken land:
Determining to chase the Bore
with force of myghtie hand.
Each man him self do then address,
This royal Prince to place:
With courage stout and loyal hearts,
They serve his noble grace.
Of the Battle fought at Bosworth, between King Henry the vii. and Richard
that then usurped the Crown.
AFter long continuance of blody war (through civil contention) between the
two ^^ble houses, of Lancaster and York for the imperial Diadem of this
Realm, to the great effusion of English blood, as well of the nobility, as
also of the Commons: It pleased Almighty God to put into the minds of the
nobility of this Realm, a mean how to prevent this eminent subversion, by
joining in knot of Marriage the heirs apparent of these two noble houses (as is
aforesaid) to the perfect security of this noble Nation. And here is to be
noted; that when king Edward the fourth dyed (who was lineally descended from
the house of York, whose variable chances of Fortune I over pass.) He left
behind him two sons, and five daughters. The elder of his sons was named
Edward, who was afterward k Edward the fifth.
proclaimed King, being of the age of xi. years. His younger brother had to name
Richard who was Duke of york. Now by reason of the nouage of the young king:
Richard Duke of Gloucester, being uncle unto the young king, intruded him self
to the Protectorship of the king and the Realm, and also wrested into his
tuition the kings brother, taking him from the Queen his Mother, who then
lay in the Sanctuary at Westminster for doubt of the cruel tyranny of the
Protector, whose Ambitious mind she knew to be insatiable of honor and
dignities, and wholly A lamb under the keeping of a Wolf.
bent to cruel tyranny, which shortly after he put in practyse. For when he
had got into his clawze these two young Princes: Like a cruel Tiger, and
rauenyng Wolf, most unnaturally, he caused them to be pitifully murdered
within the Tower of London. And caused one Doctor Sha, (who better deserved to
be called doctor Shame) A doctor for the devil.
to preach at Paul's Cross, persuading the people that king Edward the
fowerth, late deceased, was not ryghtfull king: Affirming that he was a
Bastard. And that the Duke of Cloucester (being lawfully begotten) ought to
have been king when his brother was, and therefore might now iustlye
challenge the Crown. Was not A good son.
this a graceles son, that caused his own natural and virtuous mother, to
be proclaimed at Powles Cross a Harlot? This and his unnatural homicide,
sownded most abhominably in the ears of all honest men. Notwithstanding by
this beastly and detestable policy. (whereunto he also added the death of the
Lord Hastinges and other noble men, whom he supposed would by all means
possible have hindered his ungodly proceedinges) he hitt the mark whereat he
shot, which was the Crown of England, and in fine was crowned king, by the
name of king Richard the third. But ere he had reigned little more then two
years, it pleased God to stir up the nobility of this Realm, to the aid of
Henrye Earl of Richemond, to set him in his ryghtfull inheritance of the
Imperial Diadem of this Realm. The large discourse whereof, is exquisitely
written by Sir Thomas More, as appears in the Cronicle, written by Edward
Hall.

In conclusion this noble Earl of Richemonde after many doubtful casualties
and hard events, arrived at Milforde Haven in Wales, with an army of Britons,
and by the aid of the Welshmen, his power increased. And many of the
nobility of England with great strength came to his aid, until he came to
a place in Leycester shiere called Bosworth, where he met with king Richard
and his army, and between them was fought a sharp battle, in which
conflict, the king himself was slain, and his body carried to Leycester on
horseback, as a Butcher caryeth a A condign reward for such a tyraun
Calfe to the Market. After which victory won by this noble Earl, he was
proclaimed king of England, by the name of king Henry the seventh, and
consequently he married ye lady Elizabeth daughter An. Do. 1485.
unto king Enward the iiii. and they both crowned king and Queen of England,
to the great joy of the whole realm. And thus were the noble houses of
Lancaster and York united in one which was the finishing of long war.

The Birth of the puisant Prince King Henry the eight, which was in the year
of our Lord God. 1490. the xxii. of June.
WHen Lady Concord quenched the broyle,
That cyuill Sword long time had bred:
And calmed eke the warlyke toil,
wherewith this Realm but erst was fed:
Our thraldom then she did remove,
And freedom sent from God above.
The houses wayne that long had been
At deadly food for regal throne:
Of Lancaster and York I mean,
were then by God conioynde in one.
This Marriage made, Sir Mars geeues place,
And each man thankt God for his grace.
But he that does all things foresee,
And knows the sequel of the same:
Knew that a Branch of that same tree,
Should bring forth fruit of endless fame:
And yield such sapp as should delyghte,
The Heavens and eke each English wight.
The natall day by Gods decree,
Approached on with luckie speed:
When as the blossom of this tree
Should show the fruit of happy seed:
Whereat both heaven and earth rejoice
and show the same with cheerful voice.
The four virtues might you view,
Descend from Heaven in Golden Cloud:
And to behold the heavenly crewe,
that ioyed this birthe with voice full loud:
Did sound such tryumphes in the skies,
That through the world round it flies.


Then Justice took the Diadem
That she her self was wont to wear:
Her Ballaunce eke and joined them,
whereby she wonts each cause to hear:
And yeldeth them unto his grace,
In equity to run his race.


When Justice had her self thus yield,
Came Fortitude with cowrage stout,
And deckte this Babe with Sword and shyelde,
To conquer all the raging rowte,
That should attempt or take in hand,
His princely power to withstand.


Then Temperance and Prudence eke,
So decked there his sacred mind,
As never erst was seen the like,
Such grace from God to him was synde.
For Solon there did yield his fame,
And Solomon eke did the same.
The Muses all obeysaunce made,
And echeone gave a Laurel crown:
Sir Mars did there him self disgrade,
And yeldeth up his large renown.
This Prince did Jove himself ordain,
In endless fame on earth to raygne.
And though he were a second son,
yet God foresawe what should ensue:
The Royal race that he should run,
Ere he was borne right well he knew.
And in the womb did him appoint,
with sacred Oil and king annoint.
When tract of time had brought this Prince,
Unto the age of eyghteen years,
His raygne began in this province,
whose noble courage then appears.
That English hearts great joy did make,
And forayne Foes then began to quake.
Of Prince Henry's towardlynes in the time of his Minority.
AS this noble Prince grew in age, so he increased in virtue and princely
demeanure. Using such exercises as was commendable in so noble a personage:
wherein he excelled all other of his time. As in Learning, Rydyng, and martial
feats. In so much, that when he was the only hope of this Realm, he was no
less feared of foreign foes, then entierly loved of his own country men.
And had he not set the fear of God before his eyes, with special regard of
obedience toward his Father: no doubt but he had been seduced by the wicked
suggestions of faccious flatterers, that often times inueagled him to take
upon him the governance of this Realm (his Father being alive) As he him
self has reported after he came to the Crown. But he always abhorred their
ungodly instigations.

At last it pleased God to call his Father from the Earth to dwell with him in
Heaven, when he had raygned 23. years. And then this royal Prince his son
succeeded him in this Realm, as hereafter follows.

King Henry the eight being proclaimed king of England the xxii. day of April
1509. goes to the Tower of London.
Behold the happy day at hand,
For him to wear the Regal crown:
Whereby to rewle this noble land,
And wield the same with high renown.
Which was declarde by Tromp of Fame,
That all Europa heard the same.
Unto this blast of golden sound,
Did foreign Princes bend their ears:
The noise to heaven eke did rebounde,
That Englandes Foes then quake in fears.
And friends unto the English Roye,
with clapping hands began show their joy.
Then as the ancient custom was,
To London Tower is he brought:
With Regal port he so did pass,
That all men ioyde in word and thought.
His countinaunce of Regaltie,
shewde forth a kingly Majesty.
So that if thousands in his way
had right resemblance of his face:
Yet every man might judge and say,
Lo this is he, God save his grace.
He did the rest excel so far,
as does the Sun the dimmest Star.
Within this noble Castle now
This Royal king his seat has take:
Whose special carke and care is how
In order good his Realm to make.
His whole desire and study is
for to reform that was amiss.
Where Prudence rules with good foresyght,
The common wealth does prosper well:
Where wisdom guydes each thing aright,
Thear Commons seeldome do rebel:
But serve their Prince with loyal hearts,
And nothing slack to do their parts.
The stately port that Princes bear,
With Justice ioynde right to mayntaine:
Both holds the Subject in due fear,
And true allegiance does rem ayne.
This king did his affairs so frame,
As made men fear and love his name.
Of the Coronation of king Henry the viii.
IF Fame foresawe what would ensue,
As well as things forepast:
She would not rashly sentence geeue,
In blowing up her blast.
Ne would she judge each triumph
then at first for to excel:
But that another might succeed
to bear away the bell.
What meanst thou Fame in ancient time
to call the learned train:
To paynt the Pageaunts that were shewde,
when Caesar began his raygne.
And cause them then with painful toil,
the same so to commend:
As though it never should take foil,
but last unto the end.
If thou had known as now thou do,
Of this most happy day:
I doubt not but thou wouldste have causde
their painful Pens to stay.
Yet is this thing not so far past,
but that thou may reclayme:
If thou recant thy former blast,
by calling back again.
Revoke therefore thy rash exployt,
whereat I must needs grudge:
And when thou have perpended well,
Thy self shall be the Judge.
And plainly see that Caesar's gestes
Ne his tryumphing fame:
Nor yet his blased pompouse day,
was equal with this same.
Against the time this pierles Prince,
The stately town should pass,
That London hight, whose gorgious streets,
So richely decked was.
That Rome whereof so many write,
In pomp for to excel:
Was never yet adornde so brave,
Nor furnished half so well.
More like a pleasant Paradise,
That noble City seemde:
Then like a place of earthie moulde,
As men might well have deemde.
So sumptuously the stately streates,
were decked with every thing:
As though that Jove from heaven were come
to be their earthly king.
So ioyde men in this Royal Prince,
when he his Crown should take:
That Sorroes all were set to sleep,
and solace did awake.
The worthy Pageaunts that were shewde,
My Pen cannot discharge:
And to descrybe the same aright,
will fill a volume large.
Which passing sightes so seemly were
set forth to view of eye:
That Rome and Greece with all the rest
would let their fame go by.
And Caesar's friends that so advance
his tryumphes and renown:
Would come from graves if that they might,
their Pens thear to throw down.
Thus as he passed through the streates,
unto the crowning place:
Each man erectes his cheerful voice,
And says God save your grace.
His noble train of worthy Pieres,
Each one in his degree:
Attend on this most royal king,
A worthy sight to see.
In fine, no shows of Princely pomp
At this tryumphe did want:
The Conduites all gush out with Wine,
whereof there was no scant.
To Westminster thus began he pass,
To take the Crown his right:
Where both his Queen and he were crownde
To Englandes great delyght.
From the time of this kings Coronation, unto his going into France to the
siege of Turwin and Turneie, I refer thee (gentle Reader) to peruse in
Edward Hall his Cronicle, who has largely displaied the courtly exersises,
wherein he passed the first iiii. years of his raygne. Wherein also thou may
read of sundry Ambassadors that came unto him from foreine countries, with the
success of his noble Captains that he sent into Spain, and into Gelderland
and France, and to scour the Seas. I will treat only of such matter as
appertains to his own person, and of the two famous voyages that he made into
France in proper person.

When king Henry purposed his Journey into France, he first entered in league
of friendship with James king of Scots (who had married Margaret the kings
Sister) for the confirmation of which league, they both received the Sacrament,
with solemn vow to keep the same vnuyolate. But what ensued hereof, you may
hereafter read more at large.

Now let us go forward with setting forth of this Royal voyage.

Of the winning of Turwin and Turnay.
WHo list to read of Martial acts,
And of Bellonaes train, Bellona, the goddess of war.

May in the eyghth king Henryes life,
A Myrror see most plain.
Of war she is the Goddess stout,
on whom does still attend,
The noble crewe and armed rowte
that fatal bow does bend.
This direful Goddess here rehearst
has at a call always
Three handmaydes ever ready pressed,
her pleasure to obey.
Whereby she Princes does correct
and Cities stout subdue:
That live and reign disorderly,
and rule by means untrue.
The first is Blood by dynt of Sword,
The second Fire fierce,
The third is Famyn worst of all,
that cruelly does pierce.
And either of them by her self
is able to throw down
The myghtiest king and Conqueror
that ever yet waer crown.
But if they all conioyne in one, what Prince,
what realm or land:
Or else what world might remain,
their powers to withstand:
So puissant these Damsels are,
That on this Goddess wait:
And being by their Lady calde,
they then address them strayte,
To show dame Natures dyrefull kind,
that she to them has yield:
With terror then they show their force
on Castle, Town or feelde.
This Goddess and her handmaydes three
with all their might and main:
Always attendant might you see
upon king Henry's train.
The Scotts can well report the same,
who felt thereof the smarte:
when all the cheefetaines of their Realm
were slain by deadly darte.
Now let king James his griesly ghost
awake from fatal sleep:
And show his hap and rufull fall
that causde all Scotland weep.
Let all the Scottish noble peers,
bewail the woeful hour:
when they agreede on Bramston hills
to meet king Henryes power.
But since from Earth they may not rise
this doleful tale to tell:
I will for them declare the truth
in order as befell.
His foes of France, whose faithless leagues,
he ever found untrue:
Can witness bear of his great force,
They all his stoutnesse knew.
And Turwin first shall testify
his puissance and might:
Who felt the smart of Fyers rage
with loss of many a knight.
Now see the sole and only cause
that he this siege did lay:
In proper person with his power
unto this towns decay.
When tract of time had tryde the truth,
that Frenchemen wonts to hold,
Whose breach of truce and Princes peace,
No wight could yet witholde.
This Royal king sent forth his Ships,
with hoysed Sails aloft:
whose force did scour the coast from foes,
and quaylde their courage often.
But yet he thought his presence might
accomplysh many things:
That could not so in absence be,
Such is the port of kings.
A comfort to the Subjects all,
A terror to the foes:
A Princes person in the field
does seeledome conquest lose.
His person in the field was such,
As made his Soldiers stout:
His only name would fear his foes
And make them stand in doubt.
His counsel grave so prudent was,
his wytt so wisely stayde:
That all the rest might leave consultes
when he the word had said.
When thus his prudence had perceiude
with judgment and foresyght:
How that his antique foes of France,
deteyned his due right.
He causde his noble Navy then
in readynesse to lie.
And he himself determined,
Sir Neptunes chance to try.
The Shipmen take their tackles then,
and all things ready makes:
With gladsome hearts the Soldiers all
this cheerful voyage takes.
The Ships are rygde with all things meet
For such a royal train.
This noble king is now embarkte,
his right in France to gain.
With noise of Gunnes and sound of Trumpe,
and stroke of rollyng Drum:
They cut the rage of foming waves,
till they to France are come.
With marching forth in warlyke wise,
to Turwin town they bend:
who then perceyues it is hye time,
herself for to defend.
Her wailes and Towers they are decked with tools
of Vulcanes frame:
No thundering noise of Gunne was sparde,
No flashe of Fyers flame.
But when their eyes could witness bear,
this king encamped then:
And saw the siege so stoutly set
with lusty valyant men:
Their hearts began to quake and quayle,
their courage then abate:
They knew his presence in the Camp
was to his train a gate
And strong Portculleys to defend
his lusty Soldiers stout:
Whose faithful hearts unto his grace
for Foes did never doubt.
A Harolde then with blast of Trumpe,
was sent out of the field:
To summon them obediently
unto their Prince to yield.
Or else to stand unto the lot,
that might to them befall:
By dint of Sword or Fires flame,
or Famine worste of all.
Who aunswerd then that they were bent,
the chance of war to try:
And to defend their furnished walls,
and thereon live and dye.
Which messadge being then returnde,
it was a wondrous sight:
To see how soldiers hasted then,
with Turwyn men to fight.
The Trumpets blewe, the Drums stryke up
To show Sir Mars his lore:
A terror sure it was to hear
the thundering Cannons rore.
The king right like a ventrous knight
did nothing balke the brunt:
He comforted the Soldiers all
through every Band and Front.
Saint George Saint George they all began cry,
and fiercely do assail
Their enemies within the town,
with hope for to prevail.
No engine was omitted then
that might their purpose gain:
The battry was so fierce and sharp,
that they in the end were feign
To parle, and to entreat for peace,
their states for to maintain.
In fine they craude for mercy then,
Acknowleging their fault,
Desyring his most noble grace*
to cease his sharp assault.
And they his vassayls would become,
and faithful to his Crown:
In token of their loyalty,
they yield to him their town.
And all the furniture thereof,
to use at his own will:
Desyring that he will vouchsafe,
their bloods not for to spill.
Whose noble answer was again,
Since you for mercy crave:
We mercy grant you for your lives,
from bloody Swoorde to save.
With Trump and Banner then displayde,
he enters this his town:
Saint George his flagg is then aduaunst,
And all the rest thrown down. An. Regni. 5.

Anno Domini. 1513.

KIng Henry being confederate with the Emperor Maximilian, and many of the
nobility of Brabant, Flaunders and Holland, having the said Emperor in wages
under his Banner, invaded France, and first assaulted Turwin with a puissant
Army. Which town (in the end) was enforced to yield it self unto the
mercy of king Henry, who mercyfully granted them pardon of their lives, and
free leave to depart in safegarde, yelding up their town with all their
furniture and munition unto the king: who entered the said town with Banner
displaide as a conqueror. And having taken the ordnaunce, with the rest of the
spoil, within a while after he consumed the town with Fire, which thing
pleased the Emperor very well, for that the said town was oftentimes a scourge
unto him.

The king at this time to solace him self, rode to Lisley (which is a town of
the Emperors) where as he was nobly entertained. And at his entry in to the
town, the keys of the gates were offered unto him to dispose at his pleasure:
who received them thankfully, rendering them again to him of whom he took
them. And when he had recreat him self thear three days, he returned unto his
camp again. Whose return was right joyful unto his Soldiers. For as his
presence increased their joys, so his absence augmented their dolours, so
entire he was unto all his loiall Subjects.

Shortly after, he marched forwards with his whole Army toward the great
City of Turney, which City is said to have as many Towers in it as be days
in a year, which is in number. 365. And in fine, after sharp assault, he
obtained the town, and after possession taken, he built there a strong
Castle. In this mean season, he enuy^ed the Emperor and the Empress his wife
to this his new won town of Turney. Turney.
who right ioyousely came thither, and were there royally feasted, and his
train had both great entertainment and bountiful rewards.

In these wars were many feats of Arms tried, and sundry noble exploites
atchyued, and in conclusion, the chief power of France discomfited. But among
the tragical events that there happened, one pretty accident chanced by
master Henry Norace, who at that time being a young Henry Norace.
Gentleman, and one of the kings Henchemen, having on his head the kings
Helmet: was by the fierceness of his horse carried from the kings Camp into
the midst of the French army that then lay without the town of Turnay in
battle ray. And being thus among his enemies against his will: at last
found the means to turn his horse head again, and so by good hap came
back unto the king: whereof the king was right glad. And being thus escaped,
the king offered to make him knight for this adventure. But he told the king,
that his horse rather deserved that dignity, which carried him among his
enemies against his will. Whereat the king pleasantly laughed, for he loved
this young gentleman very well.

And because my Aucthor was brought up under this said Gentleman, and by him
preferred unto the king, I am occasioned somewhat to digress by remembrance
of his worthiness. This forenamed master Norace grew in such favor and
grace with the king, that he became to be the chief gentleman of his privy
Chamber, and also was master of the black Rodd: Which is an office to the
noble Order of the Garter, which office has a large Prerogative. He was
rightfullye termed the father of the Court (next under the king) for his
singular order of education in courtly civility: As diverse noble men, and
gentlemen, by him brought up, can full well witness. Namely The Lord Henry
Dudley, the Lord Sheafield, The Lord Edmund Shandos, with many more. His
nature was to do good to as many as he might, and harm to none. His pursse
was never shut from the needy. Finally, he was endued with all godly and
virtuous conditions: living in the court in great favor and estimation,
until envy (who always pursues virtue) threw at him her spytefull and
poisoned darts, to his decay. After whose death, the king (to show his good
will toward him) showed him self gracious Lord unto as many as were
servants unto the said master Norace in his life time, and to express the
same more at large: he bestowed his daughter (mistress Marie Norace) in
Marriage on Sir George Carew, which marriage was solempnised in the Court, at the
proper costs and charges of the king, to the same and furtherance of the said
knight and the young lady his wife.

Now to return to my matter again. While the king was in France, king lames
of Scotland An. Do. 1513.
(notwithstanding his league and solemn vow before mentioned) made an
invasion upon the Borderers adjoining unto Scotland. And sent an Ambassador
unto the king into France, accusing the Borderers for breach of the truce
between them taken. When the king understood by the Ambassador, of the king
of Scotts pretense: He rewarded the Ambassador, and so dismissed him.

Now the king of Scotts supposed that all the power of England was in
France with king Henry: knowing also that king Henry could not, nor would not
break up his Camp to come against him, And thought that now he had a plain
gappe opened unto him, to enter into England, and there to work his will.
But by the providence of the Queen, who was left Regent of the Realm by the
king at his setting forth, and by the balyanties of the Earl of Surrey the
kings lieftenaunt, he was prevented of his purpose. For when he thought to
have entered this Realm with all his power, he was met by the Earl of Surrey
at a place called Brampston, This field was it that we call flodden field,
where between them was fought a cruel battle not without great effusion of
blood on both parties: but in the end (by Gods providence) the victory fell
unto the english men. The King of Scotts himself being slain in this field
with xi. of his noble men being all of them Earls, besides a number of his
knights and gentilmen of name, and his whole power made very weak. This
battle being ended to the renoune of the Queen, the Earl the kings
lieuetenant, and the whole Realm: The dead body of the king of Scotts was
found among the other carcases in the field, and from thence brought to
London, and so through London streets on a horseback, in such order as you
have read before of king Richard, and from thence it was carried to Sheene
(near unto Brainford) whereas the Queen then lay. And theare this perjured
carcas lies unto this day unburied. A condign end and a meet Sepulker for
such a forsworn Prince. This shameful end of the Scottish king, kindled the
Fire of malice in the breasts of the Scotts, the flame whereof (in the end)
consumed also their young king that then was left unto them, as followinge you
may read. But first I have taken upon me to introduce king James unto thee,
inform of the Mirror for Magestrates, to utter his complaynt and tell his own
tale as follows.

The Lamentable complaint of king James of Scotland, who was slain at
Scottish field. Anno. 1513.
AMong the rest, whom rewfull fate has rest,
whose shrouding sheets has wrapped their woeful lives
why have not I a place among the^ left,
whose fall each tongue with daily talk reuyues.
Such is the wheel that froward Fortune drives
To day a King of puisance and might,
And in one hour a woeful wretched wight.
A happy life by happy end is tried
A wretched race by woeful end is known:
Though pleasant wind the Ship do rightly guyd
At last by rage of storms it is over thrown.
The greatest Oak with tempest is first blown.
Though fortune seem a loft to hoyse thy sail,
Yet fortune often times smyles to small avail.
I thought my Bower buylt on happy soil,
Which under propped was with tickle stay:
Wherefore on sudden chance I took the foil
In hope for to have had a noble pray.
In search whereof I reapt my fatal day,
With shameful death my fame was forcte to bow
A gwerdon meet for breach of sacred vow.
A Prince his promise ought not to be broke,
Much more his Oath of right obserude should be:
But greedy gain does often the mind provoke,
To break both oath and vow, as seems by me.
Ambicion blearde mine eyes I could not see.
I find, though man with man his faith forgo
Yet man with God may not do so.


I was a king, my power was not small,
I ware the Crown to wield the Scottish land:
I raigude and rewlde, the greater was my fall,
The might of God, no kingdom can withstand,
An Earl wan of me the upper hand.
With blodie Sword my lucklesse life to end,
By shameful death without time to amend.
Such was the force of Atrops cruel spite,
Unlooked for to cut my farall line:
My wretched carcas then was brought in sight,
Through London slrears, whereat ye Scots repine
The endeles shame of this mishap is mine.
Like butchers ware, on horsbacke was I brought
The king of kings for me this end has wrought.
Let Princes all by me example take,
What danger it is to daily in such case:
By perjury their faythes for to forsake,
Least seat of shame shall be their endless place,
Foul infamy shall their renoune deface:
Offalsed faith such is deserved hyre,
And he must fall that will too high aspyre.
^e noble Peers whose lives with mine did end,
Send forth from graves your griesly ghosts each one
To wayle the chance that Fortune us did send.
Let all the Scots power out their plaints and moan
That we to hedles haste were apt and prone.
Which rash beginning void of Godly awe,
Had like success for breach of sacred law.
I thought that England had been far to weak,
For my strong power when Henry was away:
Which made me light regard my vow to break
But yet I found they were left in good stay,
With force and strength to purchase my decay.
Thus my aspiring mind had guerdon due,
Which may a Myrror be for men to vewe.
Whereby to shun the breach of sacred vow,
And not to seek by lawelesse means to rain:
For right will force usurped rule to bow,
And reap repulst in stead of noble gain,
Thus truth in time does turn her foe to pain.
And GOD him self does shield the rightful cause
Then let men learn to live within his laws.
Now that king James has told his tale, and uttered his complainte, let us
see what befell unto his Son, whom he left to succeed in his kingdom. Whose
history I have annexed unto this (although it followed not immediately) that the
just iugdement of God against perjury, may the playnelyer appear. The
notable example whereof may be a terror unto the large and careless conscience
of man. First read his story and then bestow the perusing of his complaynte,

The History of king Iamies son, who after the death of his Father, was king
of Scotts being but a child.
YOu have heard before of the death of king James and the manner thereof, who
left behind him a son named after his father, James.

This young king of Scotts, was both Neuew and Godson unto king Henry, by
means whereof the king was loathe to do any annoyance unto the Realm of
Scotland. But the Scotts being greedy of revenge for the death of their late
king, provoked him to be doing with them, by means whereof, many incursions
were made into Scotland, to the great detriment of the Scotts and destruction
of many of their Castles and villages. An. do. 1523.
But at the last, by the mediation of the Queen of Scotts, an abstinence of
war was taken, and shortly after a peace concluded, which continued until
the year of our Lord 1542. at which time king Henry took his Progres
toward the City of York, where he made great preparation for to have met
with his Nephewe the king of Scotts, who promised unto his uncle king Henry,
that he would very gladly meet him at York, and accordingly prepared so to
do. Wherefore king Henry lay at Pipwell Abbey while great provision was made
at York, for the meeting of these two noble kings, to the great charges of
the king of England, at whose proper costs, a sumptuous lodging was ordained
for the king of Scotts in the Abbay of York, with offices and furniture
accordingly.

While the king lay at Pipwell Abbay aforesaid in a readynesse to come unto
york by the day appointed: the Secretorie unto the king of Scotts came unto
king Henry, who was at his hands noblye entertained, and returned again into
Scotland, enforming the king his master, what great cost the king of England
was at, in preparing for his cumming. The king of Scotts was as desirous to
see his Uncle king Henry, as he was to have seen his Nephew. But when he was
in a readiness to come toward England, the Cardinal of S. Andrews, who
was then newely come from Rome, made haite unto the king of Scotts (as he was
setting forth toward York) and threatened him, that if he proceeded to go into
England, that another should be proclaimed king of Scotland before he
should be iii. Miles out of his Realm. Whereat the king was sore abashed, and
not without good cause: For a kingdom divided in it self, cannot be quieted
without great trouble and bloodshed. And the said Cardinal bare so great a
swaye that the king durst not come into England according to his appointment.
It is thought that ye Cardinal feared lest the king of England would have
persuaded the king of Scotts to abolyshe the Popes authority out of
Scotland, and to alter the state of Religion, and therefore was not willing
that this meeting should be between the two kings. King Henry perceiving him
self to be thus deluded by the king of Scotts, conceived thereof great
discurtesie (as he might full well) Notwithstanding he went forward him self
with all his train to york, and made Proclamation, that if any man had any
matters to exhibit unto his grace, that they should be heard, and have
Justice administered, which accordingly he accomplished to as many as came
before him.

And whereas there had been an insurrection in the same country a little
before this time: The king commanded that all the Rebels which were
apprehended should be placed before him on the left hand of his way as he
passed thorough the country, and having set the country in good order, he
returned to London again.

The Cardinal of saint Androes, who (as is before said) caused the king of
Scotts to break promise with his uncle king Henry (for doubt least that
discourtesie might be reconsiled) to make his matter sure: set the two kings
at open war, and caused the Scotts to make a road into the borders, who
spoiled and did much harm. Whereof when king Henry heard, he sent the Duke of
Norffolke with an Army into Scotland, who burned and spoiled much of the
country. But when the Duke was departed from thence into England: The Scotts
invaded the borders again, and did theare much harm. But at the last Sir
Thomas Wharton (being warden of the marches there) with Sir William Musgraue
and a few of the borderers, met with the Scotts the 14. of November, and
overthrew them: In which conflict the Lord Maxwell, the Earls of Glencarue
and Sassiles, with all the captains of the Scottish Army were taken: and on
S. Thomas eeuen the Apostle, they were brought to the Tower of London, where
they lay that night. The next day following they were brought into the star
Chamber before the Lord Chaunceller of England and the Counsel, being by the
kings charges rychely apparailed, and used more like Princes then prisoners,
which they did full evil requite. For after they were dismissed upon agreement
Unthankful Scotts.
unto certain articles, they not only refused the performance of their
promises, but (notwithstanding the benefits on them bestowed by the king) they
rebelled against him.

But now to return again unto their king: It is thought of some men, that
he him self was in the Battle, and thear received his deaths wound, but
escaped untaken, but it was not so. This conflicte was at a place called
Solomosse.
True it is, that this conflict stroke him to the heart, whereof he dyed
incontinently. Whereby we may be sure that God struck the stroke. And
whether it were, that God (who stryketh to the third and fourth generation of
them that hate him) did it for his fathers offense, or for his own, I may
not, nor will not judge. But no doubt his fathers ungodly perjury was heavily
in his mind: since whose death the Realm of Scotland has been sore plaged,
and have had little good success in any attemptes, and especially against
England.

The tirste that brought news of the king of Stottes death unto king Henry,
was the Earl of Angoes a Scott, who was banished out of Scotland, and lived
here in England by a pencion that the king gave unto him. This Earl came into
the Courie (the king then lying at his house of Saint James) between ten
and xi. of the clock at night, and desired to speak with the king, which being
unto him admitted: he rehearsed unto the king the whole circumstance of the
king of Scotts death. Which when he heard, he was so sorry of that news
(that notwithstanding he warred against him) yet he let fall tears from his
eyes for sorrow of his Nephews death.

The Lamentation of king James, Son unto king James before mentioned.
WHat hard mishap have I among the rest,
Whose froward fate untimely death has wrought
While youthful years did harbor in my breast,
My wretched corpse to lodge in claye is brought.
By haples chance contrary to my thought.
But who is sooner trapte by witched wyle,
Then he whose heart is free frem craltie guyle.
Shall I exclayme on fortunes froward face,
Or on the womb that life to me first gave:
Or on my Fathers fact whose foul deface
Has caused me this luckelesse lot to have:
Would god my mothers womb had been my grave
Or else the Air that yielded me first breath,
With sudden dampe had rendered present death.
Would God my Fathers fact had been undone,
When he made vow a faithful leage to hold:
Or else I would I had not been his Son
But rather borne to pen the Sheep in fold.
My Father in this point was far too bold
Whereby he moude almighty GOD to spill
Him self and me his Son that thought no ill.
What may I deem of this my Fathers deed,
Whereof I ground the chief cause of my playnte
What stony heart for pity will not bleed,
To see how death this pageaunt does depainte,
In flower of age, our lives so to attainte:
The Father and the Son sucessiuelie
The Realm eke plagde for one man's perjury.
I can not scuse his rage and hautie pride,
That forced me my uncle to offend,
Who courteousely my coming did abide,
In friendly wise a time with joy to spend.
I was constraynde my own mind to vnbende
The Prelasie then bare so great a swaye,
That king and keiser must their minds obaye.
I was constraynde contrary to my will,
Reuengement on the English Realm to take
And eke of Mars his lore to learn the skill
Where I like Phaeton my match did make,
My foes me ruled, my friends I did forsake.
Though I was king, another bare the sword,
Whom I durst not offend in deed ne word.
I call for vengeance on thy wretched life,
Thou Prelate proud that have procurde my fall:
Thou were the cause and aucthor of the strife
I was thy Prince and yet I was thy thrall,
Take heed therefore by me ye Princes all.
Where envious subjects bears so great aswaye,
The Princes state is like for to decay.
Such men they are as first do stier up strife,
But they them selves of sauegarde will be sure:
Their deeds are scant, their words are very ryfe,
They raise the broyle, the brunte they not endure,
Yet bloody war they daily do procure.
And prease forth Princes to avenge their ire
While they them selves with gredy minds aspire.
Lo by this means my fatal shrouding sheet,
Is now my weed no other robe have I,
The grave is eke my Court a Pallas meet:
Wherein my wretched corpse for aye must lie.
Woe worth those subjects that aspire so high,
To rule the Prince whom they ought to obey,
Such subjects rule has purchased my decay.
Now that I have passed through these tragical histories of the. ii. kings of
Scotts: I will return to the declaration of the joyful meeting of the kings
of England and France between Callis and Bullaine which was in the year of
our Lord 1532.

And although there was a solemn meetyng between the Kings of these said
Realms, and also between the Emperor and King Henry in the year of our
Lord 1520. Yet because my Anothor was not there to note any thing more then
is already mentioned by Halle in his Cronicle, and was present at this that
follows, I have used his enstruction herein referring thee to the aforesaid
Cronicle to read of the other whereas it is very well described.

How King Henry and the King of France met together between Calice and
boloigne by a place called Morguison 1532.
My glauncing Pen now glyded is
From Mars his bluddie broyle:
And eke my muse desires to rest
a while in frindships soil.
As way ward war bereues the breath
of many worthy wyghtes:
So frindly peace preserues the lives
of noble valyant knights.
And Tully does prefer that peace
which grounded is on ill:
Before the war whose quarrel right,
The blood of man does spill.
In faithful league of frindships force
where Princes knitt the knot:
Unto those realms while it does last
is sure a happy lot.
The Princes sleep is not unsound,
For doubt of foreign foes:
The Soldiers werye wounded limbs
to rest do then repose.
The Merchant sendes his hoysed sails
the surging Seas to sheare:
Which scowreth through the wandering waves
deuoyde of doubtful fear.
The publyke state of common wealth
then lives in quiet rest,
So that recourse from sundry soyles
(...) work all for the best.
(...) ^^^ey helps other then
and what one land does want
Another does supply the same,
no needful things are scant.
And the through concord sclender things
to (...) great increase:
(...) d^corde both consume as fast
men set us pray for peace:
Which causes worldly wealth to rise
(...) ^^^^dly (...) to flow:
As ^horher has contrary force,
and makes wealth ebb as low.
Now (...) that long time had sought
to kni^^^ within her band:
The king of France unto the noble
King of this our land:
Fo^nde o^^ a time convenient,
and eke indifferent place:
Whereas these noble Princes both
together might embrace.
To treat of faithful frindships lore
with one consent they mere:
Where they with joy and tryumphes great
each other then do greet.
The thing that both Realms long desyrde,
at that time might you view:
The order of which joyful sight,
hereafter does ensue.
The declaration of the meeting of these two noble kings at the place above
mentioned.
ALthough there was bluddie war and mortal hatred between the realms of
England and France, in the fifth year of this kings reign: in which year,
the king of England wan from the French men the town of Turwin and the great
city of Turnay as is before declared, yet for the concluding of a perfect
peace between both the Realms, the same year a Marriage was made between the
king of France and the Lady Marye (sister unto the king of England) but
shortly after the said king of France dyed, and the Duke of Suffolk married
the Queen his wife. A peace also was concluded between the young king of
France and the king of England. And within a while the City of Turnay was
rendered unto the French king: For the which he should pay to the king of
England a notable sum of Money. But this amity did not long continue: for
the French king refused to pay his tribute to the king of England, and also
detayned the Queens dowry. And moreover, caused all Englishemens goods to
be arrested at Bordeaux, whereupon the Frenchemens goods were arrested at
London and they cast in Prison. But in fine in the xix. year of the king his
reign, a general peace was proclaimed between the kings of England and
France during both their lives. And defyaunce sent unto the Emperor from
both the kings, and a great power sent into Italy against the Emperor (who
then warred with the Pope and constayned him to take a Castle, wherein he
remained as prisoner, until the Armies that the kings of England and France
had expelled the Emperors power out of that part of Italye. The circumstance
whereof is very largely declared by Sleydon.) This peace taken between the
kings of England and France, continued a good while inviolate. In which
meane-tyme, the Ambassador Ledger of France (that then lay in London) grew
in such favor with king Henry, that he was often times admitted to sit in
presence with the king. This Ambassador made humblesuite unto the kings
grace, that he would vouchesaue to meet with the king of France his Master
in some convenient place, to salute each other, declaring that it would be an
occasion to knitt them together in the insoluble knott of perfect frindship
and amity. Whereunto the king of England willingly condiscended and agreed.
And the rather because the French king appointed to have met with the Pope at
Marsiles by means whereof, king Henry hoped that the French king might
persuade the Pope to some conformity in the controversy of his deuorce from
the Lady Katherin, wherefore he requested the said Ambassador so to inform
the king of France (his Master) which he nothing slacked to do. And in
conclusion, a time was appointed when these two noble kings should meet by
a place called Morguison which is between two great hills, and the midway
betwixt Callice and Boloigne. According to the apointment, the king of England
set forward and came to Callice. The French king likewise lay at Bolloigne,
and on the appointed day, they both met by the said place called Morguison
with a noble train of Dukes, Earls, Lords, Knights and Gentlemen on both
sides. And while these noble Princes embraced each other, a Bishop of France
threw off a cast of great Hawks called Sakers, which Hawks being cast off,
killed a Kyte over the kings heads, to the great pleasure of both the
kings. Then passed they forward with Princely pastymes unto the town of
Boloigne, where was great preparation and noble tryumphes to entertain and
welcome the King of England. When king Henry had passed certain days at
Boloigne with most royal solace and pleasure, he Invited the King of France
to the like at his graces town of Callice, who in like manner came unto Callice
with king Henry, where as his former entertainment unto the king of England
and his train, was noblye acquyted. And while these two royal Kings were
thus at Callice, the king of Heraldes came unto king Henry's grace, declaring
unto him that (according to the ancient custom, and also being parcel of his
oath) he had set up in the market place the Emperors Arms, and the French
kings Arms (for so is the custom, when kings meet together) and desired his
grace to inform him what might please him to be erected in his behalf, to
whom the King answered, that nothing should be set up for him, neither I
care not (quod he) for any such matter. Then said the Heralde, it is my
duitie to erecte somewhat in your graces name. If it be so (quoth the King) I
will that you depaint an armed Arm rising out of a cloud, holding in the
hand a naked Sword with this Poesse under it: Celuy au quel ie m'adiouincts
(Dieu aydant) vaincra. Which is as much to say: Whether part I take (by Gods
help) shall have victory. This was set over the Emperors and the French
kings Arms, as in this Portraiture appears. And full truly did this Poesy
prove: As in Sleydon his Commentaries ye may read at large.

Celuy au quel ie m'adiouincts (Dieu aydant) vaincra.


The History of the winning of Bulleyne by the most victorious King Henrye
the eyghth in his own person.
IF towns subverted could declare,
with tongue or paynting Pen,
Their rufull falls and final fate
their loss of worthy men:
Or if the ruinous Castles old
that flatt on ground now lie,
Or else the walls that erst were decked
with lofty Turrets hye,
Could show their woeful overthrows
by any kind of way:
And eke what Captains them subdude
to take the spoil and pray:
Then Bulleyne that was wont to bragg
in bravery of her might:
Would clips her fame of large renown,
that erst did shine so bright.
This stately Forte, whose furnished walls
felt never yet annoye:
Now plainly shewde the ancient tales
that Poets told of Troy.
Prince Agamemnon with his Greeks
that wan old Ilions town:
In all his toil of ten years siege
gat never such renown.
The mighty Monarke Macedon
that conquered Darius soyles
Won never greater victory,
though many greater spoils.
But as king Henry's courage stout
always his foes subdude:
So mercy matched his manly mind
who bloodshed still eschewde.
He never brewde his sword in blood
on them that mercy crave:
His face with favor still was fraught,
submissiue men to save.
And Bullein men among the rest,
can testify this case:
Who tasted both his force, and eke
his favorable grace.
What mischief might his hand have wrought,
if tyranny had raygnd:
Or rage had harbourd in his breast
which he always refraynd.
Though pleasant prays do often entice
the mind that gapes for gain:
To pass the bounds of princely fame,
great spoil for to obtain:
Yet no such crime of greedy mind
from mercy might him move:
The town of bulleyne can right well
this fame of him approve.
Their town, their lives, their goods and all,
lay in his might and power:
For to have spoylde and overthrown,
and destroyde in one hour.
But piety pricked his Princely heart,
in mercy to excel:
Whose noble nature does deserve
for praise to bear the bell.
THe Realms of France and Scotland perceiving that they never could
prevail against the king of England in any attempt, neither by dissembling
peace, nor yet by open war: ceased not to follow the example of the Scarabe,
who presuming to contend with the Eagle, and being far unable to encounter
with him, devised to annoye him, though it were but with the filthye dung,
wherein he accustometh to welter and tomble. So these two Realms, to obtain
their desired purposes, namely for that they could not bring under yoke the
king of England, they always shot at him a far of, to annoy him as much as
they durst: which king Henry well perceiving, And calling to mind the damages
that some of his predecessors had sustained after the death of the right
valyant king Edward the third by the Realm of France, and further waying
with him self the feythlesse leagues of ye frenchmen: who always when they
entreated for peace, had their Swords ready to fight, and their dissembling
minds wholly bent on treason and mischief: thought with him self, that it was
better to have them his open foes, then his feigned friends, and determined to
invade the Realm of France, and in the end was fully minded to pass into
France very secretly with a mighty and puissant power, which in deed was
wrought so privily, that he imparted his mind in this matter unto no man,
saving only to the Duke of Suffolk, but caused a rumor to be spread that he
was determined to go over unto Paris. The Duke of Norfolk lay (by the kings
apointment) at ye siege of Muttrell, who hearing of the kings pryuie passage
into France, maruailed with him self what should be his pretense: And
thought some vncurtesie yt he might not have been made pryuy thereof, he being
one of the kings pryuy counsel. Whereupon he sent a letter unto Sir Anthony
Brown the master of y^ kings horse, wherein he declared that he mused what the
kings purpose should be, desiring Sir Anthony Brown to resolve him by his
letters of this doubt. This letter was brought when the king lay at Calyce to
pass into France. And because the custom is in the time of war, that all
letters which are sent unto any noble man or other of the camp, shall first
be presented unto the king to break them open and to read them, if he be in
the camp him self: the messenger brought the letter unto the master of the
Posts, who exhibited it unto the Kings grace. The letter that was sent from
the Duke of Norfolk unto Sir Anthony Brown being in the packet of letters,
which the king took and opened. And when he had read it, he said unto
master Edmunde Harman one of his pryuye Chamber who then was in presence with
him and none else: Lo (quoth he) the Duke of Norfolk seems by this letter to
think him self not well dealt withal because he is not made pryuye to our
pretense in this voyage, I assure thee Fdmund (quoth he) no mortal man in this
world does know the cause hereof, but only Sir Charles Brandon: And thou
shall be the second, unto whom I will reveal this matter. My purpose is
(said the King) to lay siege unto Boloygne, and I doubt not but to win it, by
Gods help. May it please your grace then said master Harman, it will be a
noble victory to win: But it will be more noble to hold it when it is won.
Well (said y^ king) I nothing doubt the holding of it, by Gods grace, if I may
win it. Now was the Duke of Suffolk before Bullaine, and had laid siege
unto it on the East side ofit, who thear remained until the king him self
came and encamped on the North side. After whose coming the town was so sore
battered with gunshot, and so sharply assaulted, that after a Months siege,
the captayn, whose name was Mounsier Des^e, shot out an arrowe with a letter
tied to the shafte, wherein he offered the King, to render up the town unto
his graces behoote, so that he would grant pardon of life unto all the people
of the town, and license to depart with bagg and boggage. Which the king
mercifully granted on this condition, that none of them should depart with
any Gonne charged. And the Bulleiners departed the town with as much of their
goods as they could carry with them. After which departure, king Henry with
his nobility entered the town with Banners displayed like a conqueror. And
after he had tarried there by the space of five days, or there about, he
returned again into England, leaving behind him to defend the town, the
Duke of Suffolk that most valiant Captain. But when the kings majesty was
upon departure, news was brought unto him yt the Dolphin of France was
determined to come down and repel him from thence and his power, whereunto
the king answered that he should be very welcome. For (quoth he) the
Dolphin is my God son: and if he come, he shall have my blessing. But he made
no haste to come, as he vaunted? Wherefore the Duke of Suffolk and the Earl of
Essex persuaded the king to return home to England again, for that he had
won as much honor theare, as was to be had at that time. Whereupon the king
committed the defense of the town to the Duke of Suffolk and the Earl of
Essex jointly. But before his departure, he being doubtful whether the Duke of
Norfolk had any need of help at Muttrell, called unto him sir Anthony Brown,
and appointed him to go thither to the aid of the Duke of Norfolk with all
his power. But Sir Anthony Brown answered that he had dismissed many of his
soldiers by reason of sickness, and the rest were either wounded or wearied
with travail, and many of their Horses tired. Then the king demanded of the
Earl of Essex, In what estate his band was: who had This earl is he that was
after Lords marquis of Northapton.
under his charge 1500 horsemen, he answered the king, that of his whole power
he wanted not 60. And that he was ready to fulfill his graces pleasure.
Whereupon the king thought to have sent him to Muttrell, but in the end yt king
having a special regard for the keeping of Bullaine, leatte the Earl with
the Duke to defend the town, and sent Sir Ihon Gage to Muttrell to the aid
of the Duke of Norfolk. And then the king returned into England again with
great triumph. After whose departure out of France, y^ frenchmen began to be
very busy against the englismen. But when they could prevail nothing at
all, they began to entreat for peace, always hoping to have Bullayne again by
some means or other. But king Henry was so affected to that town, that
neither strength of war, nor force of money could win it from him. And he
would often times say, that no true subject of his would persuade him to yield
it up. Which town he held in despite of the Frenchmen during his life.

And thus I end this discourse of the wynning of Bullayne: Omitting to treat
of the large circumstaunce hereof, least I might seem to rob Grafton or Halle
of their labors, concluding this commemoration of king Henry, with his
conquest of Bullaine. After which triumphant victory, no special war
happened unto him, till death the conqueror of all mortal men subdued his
body, whose soul lives with God in his Heavenly kingdom.

KIng Henry, in his life time would often times say, that if it would please
God to endue him with life until he might see three things brought to pass,
he would not desire to live any longer. The first was, to confirm true
religion in this Realm. The second, to establish the Crown. The third, to
see his Son a man. Also he would say: that if he knew any one to be a man
of GOD, and meet to govern a common welthe: he would rather yield his Crown
unto him, then wear it himself, so that he might do it to the pleasure of
God and the weal publyke of his people.

An Epitaph of the death of the most valyant and renowned Prince King Henry
the eyghth.
AWake ye worthies nine,
that long in graves have rest:
Power out your plaints with wayling tears
Let langor be your geast.
Do off your shrowding sheets,
that clads you in the claye,
and deck your selves with black attire,
your mourning to displaye.
Bedewe with saltie tears
your manly faces stowte:
Lay down those weapons that were wont
to quell the raging rowte.
For now that pierlesse Prince
that never yet took foil:
The eyghth king Henry has resynde
his body to the soil.
Record your doleful tunes,
ye noble Peers each one.
Let gryping greefes gnawe on your breasts
to show your pensive moan.
With bryndie blubbered tears,
ye commons all lament:
Send forth your sobbes from boiling breast,
let trynkling tears be spent.
For our Achilles now
has left us in the field:
That wonted was with valiant force
from foes our lives to shylde.
And this has death deuysde
to wrecke his wrathful spyght:
Wherefore (O Mors) we curses yield
on thee both day and night.
Oh noble Brutus land,
how much was death thy foe:
when he with cruel darte constraynde
this Gemme from thee to go.
But though the cursed dame
that cuttes the fatal line:
So much enuyed thy happy state
in making him declyne:
Yet God through mercy great
in spyght of death his darte
Has left a Blossom of his branch
to ease thy pensive smarte.
For whom now let us pray,
that she the race may run
of Nestors years, with like success
as yet her grace has done.
And that his royal Impe
Elizabeth by name:
May wear the Crown and wielde the sword
with joy and endless fame.
Whose, life does render light
unto her fathers fame:
whose noble heart does plainly show
the stock from whence she came.
Though death has done his woorst
with drift of dyrefull darte:
By stryking of that valyant king
and piercing of his heart:
Yet has he not the power
his fame to ouercast:
which shall remain in mouth of man
while Pen and ynke does last.
And eke the shyning Sun
shall cease his running race
before king Henry's worthy fame
shall suffer one deface.
And as his soul is lodgde
with Jove in starrie Sky:
Even so remembrance of his name
on earth shall never dye.
A Preamble to this part of the Book following.
Like as the ancient Greeks
have painted out at large,
Their noble ladies worthy lives
and thereof taken charge:
And as the Roman dames
had writers of their acts,
Even so the trowpe of Englysh train
have some to tell their factes.
Whose bright and shyning fame
deserves to have a place,
Coequall with the best that has
run on in virtues race.
Then let not England blushe
to blase their ladies lives,
Which no whit is inferior
unto the Romayne wives.
Let them vaunt if they list
of Lucrece chastity,
I praise the greeks Penelope
for her fidelity.
A number might be namde
that writers pens have praysde,
Who for their lives and noble acts
an endless fame has raysde.
And yet among the rest
that retche their fame so far:
Let English dames show forth their shine
like Venus twinkling Star.
Whose number sure is great,
although I name but few:
But yet as time will license me
I shall more largely show.
The lives and noble acts
of Ladies in those days:
Whom noble virtue has aduaunsde
to win immortal praise.
For like as valyant men
thereof do gain renown:
So worthy acts of weomen kind
may not be quite thrown down.
Fame may not parciall be
but as deserts require:
Must yield to every worldly wight
their due deserved hyre.
A Commemoration of Queen Anne Bullayne.
YE noble Imphes of Parnas hill,
^e Muses all arowe:
Resownd your pleasant melody,
your warbling notes bestow.
Take wrest in hand to tune
those stringes that render Silver sownd:
And let the voice of Musikes lore
unto the Skies rebownde.
Blo up with joy the cheerful blast
of Englandes blissful state:
In praise of this most noble Qneene
king Henry's lawful mate.
Let Poets deck their sacred heds
with leaf of Laurel bow:
And take their painful Pens in hand
their skill to publishe now.
A gracious Queen and lawful spowse
King Henry (lo) enioyes:
who erst was held from wedlockes law
by show of Romysh toys.
Her virtuous mind and Godly heart
Gods word does so embrace:
As well deserves in Bibels tome
her noble name to place.
Whom love has fed with heavenly food
and knowledge of his truth:
And eke adornde with sacred gifts
in this her tender youth.
Anne Bolloygne (lo) this lady hight,
whose praise for to depainte:
My quaking Quill in trembling fist,
does quayle and gins to fainte.
Lest that the rudeness of my style
might Clips her noble fame:
Whose praise, the best that handels pen
of right should fynely frame.
Let Virgill leave dame Didos acts
and fate of Priams town:
And take of me this charge in hand to purchase him renown.
Or else vouchsafe (O Sulmose Imphe,
to lend thy Pen awhyle
To furuishe forth with eloquence
the baseness of my style.
But well I see it is but vain
for help of them to crave:
In whom no aid is to be had,
that long has lodge in grave.
Wherefore my Muse,
although thy skill
be rude and far too bace:
Yet take thy Pen to write somewhat
of her most noble grace.
Her heart did harbor heavenly gifts
that in her breast was bred:
And Pallas for her wisdom seemde
to soiurne in her head.
Her face and featurde shape was fraught
by Nature passing well:
Her inward gifts and outward grace
all others did excel.
Thus love ioynde with Minerua here,
this noble Queen to frame:
So that it plainly did appear,
from heavenly throne she came.
A Phoenix right, whose course of kind
is singular always:
Whose ashes yeldes another bird,
So one remaynes for aye.
This noble Phoenix in likewise
has of her sinders sent Note

A noble Impe, a worthy Queen
ere she from world went.
Whose Princely praise has pearst the prick
and price of endless fame:
And hit the mark of regal race
from whence her highness came.
^e noble dames that do delyght
for virtue praise to gain:
Desire to know this Princes life
and learn for to retain:
Those virtues that you then may view,
as Mirrours to you all:
Then shall you reap the right renown,
that never shall take fall.
An Epitaph on the death of Queen Anne Bullayne.
IF wayling woes might win thy life,
to lodge in corpse again:
Thy body should O noble Queen,
not thus in grave remain.
For if that death might life redeem,
and life were bought with death:
Ten thousand to restore your life,
would render vytall breath.
But since that may in no wise be,
for death would work his spite:
With yernefull voice and doleful domps
we shall expel delight.
And show our greefes with secret sighs
, and langour of the breast:
The flodds of tears shed for thy sake,
declares our hearts unrest.
And were it not thy royal Impe
did mittigate our pain:
The sorrow for thy fatal day,
we uneath could sustain.
Yet this somewhat recomfortes us
for that we be most sure
Thy blessed soul is lodge with God
Forever to endure.
Also thy noble splendent fame
O noble Prince Queen Anne
Shall live on earth till worlds end
within the mouth of man.
And eke thy life shall be a lore
for Ladies all to learn:
Wherein they may, as in a glass
Dame Virtues path desearne.
A Commemoration of Queen Jane.
AMong the rest, whose worthy lives
has run in virtues race:
O noble Fame peruse thy train,
and give Queen Jane a place.
A nymphe of chaste Dianaes train,
a virtuous virgin eke:
In tender youth, a Matrons heart,
with modest mind most meek.
So that dame Virtue may rejoice
for breeding such a wight:
Whose nature shewde the fair bright beams
of virtues shyning light.
Whereby she was elect and chose
to be the linked mate
of valyant Caesar's equal Peer,
till Atrops shewde her hate.
Whose whirlyng wheel does wander still,
and run with restles race:
And is as friendly to the Page
as t him that bears the Mace.
Thus till the Sisters did agree,
to cut the fatal line:
This noble Lady evermore
to virtue did enclyne.
Whose Godly life and final end,
I wish each lady view:
That Fame may in her Register,
for aye her name renew.
An Epitaph on the death of Queen Jane.
IF dart of death might be repeld,
by fame of verteous life:
And fatal Sisters would with hold,
the blade of bloody knife:
From cruel cut of vital line,
to spare the worthy wight:
This noble Queen should not have felt,
the rancor of their spyght.
But since in exorable they,
for ever will remain:
The body though they cause to couch,
good fame they cannot stayne.
The valiant men, the verteous dames,
that on the earth has raygnde
Have yielded to their cursed knyfe,
yet endless fame has gaynd.
They have subdude stowte Caesar's heart,
they forcde not Helens hew:
Of Cressus wealth they no whit card
they joy all to subdue.
And eke among the rest that has
sustaynde their cancred hate:
This noble Queen has felt the flame
of her untimely fate.
Whose worthy fame shall not be shutt
with body in the claye:
But live and florishe on the earth
while Phoebus guydes the day.
In Praise of the renowned Lady Queen Katherin Par.
DAme Virtue longing to behold
her troop of noble train:
Determined to take the vewe
of them that did remain.
Appointing Fame with sound of trompe,
to sommon and assite:
Each one that in her book was namde
to be a worthy wight.
Of weomen sect (as for the rest)
another time should be:
For famous men to show their selves,
each one in their degree.
This noble troop assembled was
most goodly to behold:
And each one called by their names
as Fame had them enrold.
The Goddesses sat in there seats,
the Graces placed were:
The Muses nine, the noble Nymphs,
in their degrees sat there.
Dame Virtue being cheifest judge
and lady of the place:
Decreed that one among the rest,
should bear the cheifest mace.
Commanding every lady theare,
to answer to their name:
As they in order should be calde,
by voice of noble Fame.
When this decree proclaimed was,
and all things whusht and still:
My greedy eyes to view this sight,
could never gase their fill.
Then Fame calde for Ulysses wife,
whereto one said straight way:
That dyrefull death with cruel lance,
had lodgde her corse in claye.
Then heard I good Cornelia namde,
and many other calde:
Some aunswerde here, and some by fate
in earthy clod were stalde.
At last by lot the Crier said,
where is that noble Dame:
That was the eight king Henry's wife,
and had K. P. to name.
Whereto a noble English Queen,
that then was in the place:
Made answer that her mortal life,
had run the fatal race.
Then virtue sent forth saltie tears,
and bad the Crier pawse:
And said she lost the worthiest wight,
that ever kept her laws.
Dame Patience with wringing hands,
her dollor did declare:
And prudent pallas, for her part,
no paynefull plaints did spare.
The Muses mooude with mestiue mood,
resounded doleful voice:
The Graces all with rented hears
, in langor did rejoice.
In fine the whole assembly there,
in sudden sorrows were:
For each one thought this noble Queen,
dame Virtues Mace should bear.
At last stood up Virginity,
attyred all in white:
Whose countenance like Phoebus beams,
did yield a heavenly light.
Unto the judge dame Virtue she,
her mind began to show:
with Angels voice and Heavenly grace,
each word she did bestow.
O noble Dames leave off (quoth she)
your dumpyshe dolors stay:
And license me, O rightful judge.
somewhat herein to say.
With that it was a joy to see
How sorrows were resynde:
And Virtue bad Virginity
proceed to say her mind.
Each one attentive ear began bend
to hear this noble voice:
Whose prudent words and grave deuyse,
made all the rest rejoice.
This was the tale the Goddess told,
O worthy wightes draw near:
And see the only cause, that we
are now assembled here.
Ye are the troop and noble train
that virtue has embraede,
Whose endless fame for virtues sake,
shall never be defacde.
Here have you heard that ancient dames
by fatal stroke are flayne:
And yet their names in book of Fame
for ever shall remain.
Among the rest Queen Katherin Par,
(so was her Parents name:)
Has yield her soul unto the heavens,
yet left on earth her fame.
Unto whose lot it should have light
dame Virtues Mace to guide:
But cruel Atrops all too soon,
her noble race enuyde.
Yet one among this worthy crewe
must take the charge in hand:
whose due deserts, for virtuous praise,
in chiefest place must stand.
Here is a royal Queen in place,
whose life I know right well:
within whose breast, even from a babe,
unto this day I dwell.
Whom you (O Lady Virtue) first
committed to my charge:
When nature made her perfect moulde,
her skill to show at large.
And while upon this Princely babe
in Cradle I attend:
You Lady Pallas came in haste,
your heavenly gifts to spend.
And Caliop with all her Nymphs,
made haste from Pernas hill:
For to adorn this peereles peace,
with perfect learned skill.
You lady Graces know right well,
and bear it yet in mind:
What haste you made unto this babe,
ye fearde to be behind.
In fine her grace was theare adornde,
with all your gifts so well:
That outward shape and inward gifts,
Panthora did excel.
Her father was a royal king
graund Captain of the train:
Of all the worthy warlike wights
that fame did ever gain.
Her noble Mother bare the bell
for virtue in her days:
Whose worthy fame with tongue and Penn:
has reapte immortal praise.
And she a virgin (lo) does were
the Fathers regal crown:
And prudently does wyeld the sword,
with lardge and bright renown.
She has repressed errors blind,
and causde Gods word to shine:
Whose noble life from virtues lore,
did never yet declyne.
She best deserves to have the Mace,
that virtue means bestow:
Elizabeth of England Queen,
you all her grace do know.
And let Queen Katherin Par enjoy
Fame for her virtuous race:
And unto Queen Elizabeth
dame virtue yield thy Mace.
No sooner had virginity,
this sentence vttred tho:
But all the rest with one consent,
said Lady be it so.
Then Virtue prayide the noble Maid,
that thus this tale declarde:
Commanding scilence to be synde
that judgment might be hard.
Then said the Judge, this is the doom,
and sentence in this case:
Queen Katherin Par in book of Fame
shall have a special place:
And noble Queen Elizabeth
as cheifest of my train:
Shall take this Scepter at my hand,
as meetest for to raygne.
Hereat this noble heavenly crewe
brake up with great delight:
And I yet hold my Pen in hand
Queen Katherins life to write.
It will happily seem somewhat strange unto thee (Gentle Reader) that I have
so sclenderly past over the treatise of these noble ladies before mentioned,
whose lives and noble virtues, I can at large descrybe. And peradventure I may
be deemed parciall, for mentioning of these, and omitting the names of king
Henryes other wives. I confess I have in my hands a Treatise of all their
lives, so far forth as tends to the commendations of their noble and
princely virtues, worthy the immitation of all Ladies and gentleweomen. But it
fares with me, as with the soar Hawk, that keeps her self aloof from
the Faukners fist, until acquaintance has breed a further familiarity. So
if I may perceive this beginning to have thy frindly favor: Thou shall win
me to thy lure, and encourage me to mount as high as I may, not bolting above
my reach, like rash Icarus, whereby to come tumblinge down, and be drencht
in the flood of follye. And thus I end, desyring at thy hands naught else, but
thy good word in lewe of this my labor.

Finis.
THE HISTORY OF the winning of Hadington in Scotland. An. 2. Reg. Edwardi. 6.
WHen I had ended this treatise of the most famous king Henry the eight, and
ready to put the same in prynte: I chanced into the company of certain
Capitaines that had served in king Henry's wars, and in king Edwardes, and
euersince, as often as they have been called thereunto. And after talk
ministered: They seemed greatly to lament, that so noble a piece of service as
was done at Hadington, should so sleyghtlye pass thorough the hands of
Cronographers. Whereupon I (being by them earnestly requested) have taken on
me to discourse thereof, by the instruccions of these said Gentlemen, who were
theare present during all this worthy service, which well deserves the name
of noble and worthy. In so much that the Frenchemen (that then were there to
the aid of the Scotts) say unto this day, that there are few good Soldiers
in England (except those that were at this siege of Hadington) preferring the
service that was then 1548
thear, before any other that ever they knew or heard of. The manner whereof
ensues.

The Lord Graye being at Barwike and the kings liefetenaunt theare: After the
overthrow of the Scotts at Muscleborow field, made a road into Scotland in
the Lent, in the second year of the kings Reign, to take a view of the
town of Hadington, and returned to Barwike again without any assault geeuen.
The Summer following he came with his army and entered the town without any
resistaunce, and then made preparation for the fortifying thereof. In which
mean space, he laid siege unto a Castle that was three miles from the town
named Ester Castle, which Forte was furnished with Scotts and Spanyardes, who
stood at their defense, refusing to submitt them selves, until the Lord Graye
had with the great Cannons made a breach, and was ready to enter the said
Castle. Then they yielded and desired Pardon for their lives only, which the
lord Gray granted unto them all, excepting one: who (during the siege) had
reuyled the King in words, and abused his graces name with most opproprious
terms. Then they all came forth of the castle in their thurtes only,
submitting them selves to the mercy of the Lord Gray. And upon strayt
examination, who should be the tailor that was excepted out of this Pardon: it
was known to be one Newton a Scott. But he, to save him self, put it to one
Hamelton. Thus these two Gentlemen accused one the other. For the decysing
whereof, a Cumbat was appointed between them, and by the Lord Gray ad iudped
so to be.

The time came for this Cumbat to be accomplyshed, A Cumbat.
and the listes made in the Market place of Hadington. And these said
gentlemen entered in their dubblets and hose, weaponed with sword, buckler and
dagger. At the first entry into the listes, this Hammelton kneeled on his
knees, and made his hearty prayer unto Almyghtie God, to geeue the victory
unto the truth: with solemn protestation, that he never uttered any such
words of King Edward of England, as his adversary Newton accused him of. And
on the other side, Newtons conscience being troubled with his false accusation,
argued unto all the beholders his guilt: For there oppeared in him great
timerousues.

The beholders prayde God for Hammelton, for the Soldiers knew right well
that it was newton, for his voice bewrayde him.

Now were the Sticklers in a readiness, and the Combatours drew their
weapons, and between them was fought vi. or vii. blows very lustely. But
Hammelton being meruaylous fierce and eager upon the truth of his quarrel,
constrained Newton to geeue ground, almost to the end of the listes. And if
he had driven him to the The law of Arms.
very end, then (by the law of Arms) he had won the conquest, and his
enemy should have been hanged, if he had not slain him. Newton perceiving him
self to be almost at the point of hanging, stepped forwards again, and gave
Hammelton such a gashe on the leg, that he was not able to stand, but fell
down, and then Newton fell on him, and slew him with his dagger.

Thus the Cumbat was ended, but the English men that knew Newton to be the
rayler, and the false accuser (although by more happ then hardiness, he had
the upper hand) were very desirous to renew Combat again with him. For there
were many Gentlemen theare, that would willingly have ventered their lives on
him, man for man, but he challenged the privilege of the law of Arms, which
was unto him granted. And the Lord Gray gave him his own gown of his A good
reward yli be stowed, but to maintains the law of Arms.
back, and the Chain that he theu ware. Thus was he well rewarded, that
better deserved to have been hanged. But he escaped not so: For afterward, as
he was ryding between the Borders of England and Scotland, he was slain and
cut in pieces. Now I will speak of the seege that the French Army, and the
power of Scotland laid unto the town of Hadington against the English men.

When the foresaid Castle was won, and the Cumbat finished, the Lord Graye
departed toward Barwike, leaving behind him Sir James Wilford as general of
the garryson, and 2000 chosen Soldiers under him to defend the town, which
was not half fortifyed before it was besieged of the Frenchemen and Scotts.
For our men had not been viii. weeks in it before Mounsier Dassey the
French kings lie^etenant, and the Ringraue of France, came to the siege with
twenty thowsande Frenchemen, Almames and Scotts, being all of them lustye
and gallant Soldiers. And at their first coming there was a hot skirmishe
between them and the English men. And because the Gates of the town were not
of any strength for defense, our men were constraynde to ram up the Gates
with earth, and so mayntaine the defense of the town upon the Walls.

There were many assaults geeuen to the loss of both parties. And in the
end, our enemies did so beat the town with shot, that they left not one
whole house for our men to put their heads in: Whereby they were constrained to
lie under the walls, (for other lodging was there none.)

They looked for help to have come out of England, but none came: So that
they were in miserable case for lack of succor. For they were driven to so
narrow pushe, that they rent their shurts A hard shift
for lack of Match, for other shifte had they none. And also their Enemies
had taken away their Flankers, which was their whole defense of the walls,
to expelle them from approaching near whereby to scale. So that by this means,
the Frenchemen came close under the walls of the town, and were their
overthwart neighbors so near: That the Englyshmen on the one side, and the
Frenchemen on the other, lay close together, that there was no more distaunce
of ground between them, then the thickness of the wall. Also one of the
Bulwarks was beaten down so flat, that a man might ride in and out at the
breach, but the Frenchemen durst not venture in thereat.

It grieved the English men not a little, to see their evil neighbors so
near their noses: whereupon, a blunte country man that was one of our
Soldiers, and by his occupation, a maker of Flayles, invented to beat them
from the walls with slayles, and tied a heavy plummet of lead at the end of
a rope, fastening the other end of the rope unto a good truncheon to hold in
his hand, and with such flayles they slew and maimed a great many of them.

This Mounsier Dassey captain general of the French Army, was complained on
to the king his Master, for his too much rashenesse, whereby he lost many
of his best Soldiers: so that he was sent for home in great displeasure, and
in his place was sent Mounsier de Terms, who removed the siege, and came not
near the town by three miles. But he punished our men worse then the siege,
for he laid all the straytes and passages with watch, whereby no victuales
could be brought unto the town. All this while (being about xi. weeks)
came none out of England to the rescue of our besieged men: Saving that sir
Wadam Selinger, and master Windam with a rewe Gentlemen, and three hundredth
Soldiers very ventrousely brake thorough the end of the French Army, and
brought with them Match and powder, which was to our men great comfort.

The scarcity of victuals among them was so great, that they were constraynde
to eat horses, dogs, cattes, and rattes. And yet neither the want of
clothes, nor the extremity of the plague, (which was hot amongst them) nor
the lack of munition, nor the sharp sauce of hunger could beat down the
stowt courage of the English men, to yield up the town. And yet these
extremilies before mentioned, made them look more like owgle Monsters, then
humayne men. But their worthy and valyant captain Sir James Wilford was such
a one, as was able to make of a cowardly beast, a courageous man.

During this time, the Lord Graye being at Barwike, was very careful for them
that were at Hadington, but wanted powder to send to the aid of them.
Notwithstanding he sent xiii. hundred horsemen under the conduction of Sir
Robert Bowse, and Sir Thomas Palmer, not meaning that they should offer any
battle, as some (being deceived) affirm: but to make a show to comfort the
English men withal, that then were comfortless. And thinking that upon the
sight of them, the French and Scottish army would remove farther of.

But they, presumyng further then their commission, gave a charge on their
enemies, and they being all horsemen (as is aforesaid) were by the French and
Scottishe footmen environed, and every man of them (one only excepted)
slain, and taken prisoners, to the great grief of our men at Hadington. And
yet could not all this subdue the hearts of them, but lived in hope.

And at the last came the Earl of Shrewsbery with xvi. thousand fresh
Soldiers to Hadington: At whose coming, the French and Scottishe army left
the siege and went to Edenborovv. But to see the order of this meeting, would
move A mournful meeting
the heart of any man to utter affeccions with tears. The Earl let fall
tears from his eyes, to see that such valyant men should suffer such
distress, whose stowt hearts could not be conquered with any afflictions. On
the other side, our wearied Soldiers sent out the fountaynes of their eyes,
for joy, to see their deliverance at hand. Thus with mournful and joyful
embrasinges they met. And the Earl came into the town, and supplied the want
both of men, munition, and victualles, and shortly after returned to
England again, leaving the town well provided.

Now it fell out, while the Frenchemen were at Edenborovve, there grew such
debate between them and the Scotts, that they fell to bickeringe within them
selves, and the Frenchemen flewe certain Scotts. Whereof, when the
Englishemen heard, they thought that then they might betake them selves to a
little rest, for they had none a great while. Then they sent out their Scoutes
and a Watch, and so went to such lodginges as they had. But Mounseur de
Terms (to reconsile the matter again between his men and the Scotts)
promised the Scotts that he would win unto them the town of Hadington
without any more delay. And when the Englishemen A lustye Canuasado.
thought least of their coming: they came, and killed the watch and the
Scoutes, and were entered in at the bace court of the town before the Larum
was given. The Englishemen perceiuinge this soddeine irruption, made no delays
to encounter with them: But went thorough a privy Posterne gate into the bace
court among them, and with the black Bill slew of them (by estimation) v.
hundred or more, and drove the rest that escaped over the wall, as Sheep
before a Dog, that happy was he that could tumble over first. Thus they
returned with great loss, and no less shame, making no boste of their
bargain. I should have noted before, of a pretty accident that happened at
this siege, which is this.

When Mounsieur Dassey came first to the Note.
aid of the Scotts, he was informed by the Scotts, that there were but a
few Rascalles and white cotes at Hadington, and neither Gentlemen nor good
Soldiers. Whereupon he requested the old Queen of Scotts that then was at
Edenborovgh, to go to a little Nunnerie that was but a mile from Hadington, and
thear she should see the slaughter of all the Englishemen. So she went to
that Nunnerie to behold the performaunce of this promise. And when she came
thither: she might see the very streates of the town (for it stands very
low.) The English men understanding of her being in the Tower of the said
Nunnerie, shot off a great Iron piece they had, (which Gunne they called
Roaring Megge, for the terrible noise that it rendered) and the Pellet hit part
of the Tower that the Queen was in, whereat she made haste down (as it was
high time) and rode posting to Edenborough without seeing any harm done to
the English men. And Mounsieur Dassey found other manner of fellows theare,
then Rascalles and white cotes (as him self reported) geening great
commendations of the Englishemen theare.

Now to return again to the Canuasado before mentioned. When our men had
geeuen the Frenchemen that overthrow in the night, they gave the next Morning
three sharp assaults to the town, and yet took the repulse with great
loss of their men: For they carried away xvi. Carts and Wagons laden of dead
carcases, because they should not be known, besides three hundred that were
found in the base court before mentioned.

You have read what scarsitie of victuales was among them before, and what
pennurie they sustained: Wherefore at the last, there was made sufficient
provision to victual the garrison, but not without great charges, for it was
always brought by conuoye, which was with great strength conducted, and
never without skirmishe. For it was always brought thorough the town of
Dunbar, and in the Castle of Dunbar lay a garrison of our enemies. And on a
time, our Captain Sir James Wilforde went to meet with the conuoy at Dunbar,
which is viii. miles from Hadington, and had with him but xii. men. And when
he had saluted the Lord Wardon (who then came with the conuoy) the garrison of
Dunbar Castle came forth and made a show in the field. Then said the Lord
Warden unto Sir James Wilforde, behold how prowdly your neighbors stand
before us. Yea (quoth Sir James) if I had but a few of my men more with me, I
would offer them some play. If you will geeue a charge on them (said the
Lord Warden) you shall have as many of my men as you will. But because sir
James had no experience of their hardiness, he was loathe to trust unto them.
Notwithstanding in fine he said, that if they would follow him, he would
make a gappe thorough them. They promised not to shrink. So there were about
300 appointed unto him, and he went before them galoping thorough the town in
the face of the Castle, And the shot came so sharply from the Castle upon
them, that all the men that professed to follow him durst not, but shrunk
back: saving only his own xii. men. And when he and his small number was in
the mids of their enemies, he behaved himself very valyantly. But in the
end his horse was slain under him, and he taken prisoner. But his twelve men
being lusty Soldiers, went thorough them again (being to weak for lack of
number to rescue their captain) and so returned without any hurt unto them
done. Thus was this noble Captain taken, and had to the Castle of Dunbar,
thorough the cowardice of them that professed to follow him.

This did so kindel the breasts of our Garrison that lay at Hadington, that
the Captains had much a do to persuade them from leaving the town to fetch
him from them again. For they said that they would dye on them every man,
but they would win the Castle of Dunbar. And the Scotts knew right well
that they could not keep him thear without great danger: Wherefore they sent
him to Edenborough, and theare was he kept prisoner till he was redeemed by
Raunsom. He was so noble a captain, that he won the hearts of all
Soldiers. He was in the town among his Soldiers and frinds, a gentle Lamme.
In the field among his enemies, a Lion. To his men, beneficial. To al men
liberal. After whose misfortune, was sent unto Hadington in his steed, Sir
James Acroft, a valiant Gentleman: whose worthy commendations I omit, because
he being alive, and in deserved estimation, I might be suspecte of flattery.
He was theare by the space of one whole year, during which time, many noble
acts were atchyued. And in fine, when the king perceived how chargeable a
thing it was to keep Hadington, he sent the Earl of Rutlande with vi.
thousand men thither, who caused the town to be rased, and brought away all
the munition to Barwike. And thus was this noble piece of service ended.

The names of the Capitaines that were at Hadington, as near as could be
called to remembrance.
THe Earl of Shrewsberye. The Earl of Rutlande. The Lord Graye. Sir James
Wilforde. Sir James Acroft. Sir Wadam Selinger. Sir Oswalde Wolstrap. Sir
Robert Worsley. Captain Pellam. Captain Dethick, who was my chief
instructor in this matter. Captain Wood. Captain Windam. Captain Tailor.
Captain Collbie. Captain Fitzwilliams. Captain Tiberio an Italian.
Captain Whitton. Captain Boothe. Captain Pikeman. Captain Gam.
Captain Garton. Captain Bagshot. Captain Ashley. Captain Lawson.
A Commendation of the English Soldiers that served at this siege of
Hadington.
THe frowning furious dame,
that hight bellona fierce:
That grieflie Goddess, whose outrage
does Kings and Countries pierce:
Drew forth her bluddie blade,
Sets up her Stander black:
And fenced with her fyerie Flagg,
to work her wrakefull wrack.
Who can escape scotfree then,
that dares abide the broyle:
The noble heart for honor fyghtes,
the Tyran huntes for spoil.
The Cowarde crakes with words,
and hopes for happy day:
Yet is he not the first that strykes,
nor last that runs away.
At point of hard distress,
a hardy man is known:
At rattling shot or hunger sharp
a dastarde is down thrown.
But when Bellona saw
the warlyke English wyghtes:
That at this siege, in Marciall acts
affied their whole delyghtes:
She wondered as she might,
to see that all her rage:
Could by no means, the haughty hearts
of English men assuage.
Tryumphing Garlandes then
with speed she began prepare:
To crown those lusty Captains all
that had of her no care.
The nobles that were theare
She gave each one a Crown:
Adorning them by due desert
with large and bright renown.
And then she calls by name
the rest to take their hyre:
Which was, that they should to the top
of mounting Fame aspyre.
Sir Wilforde come thou first,
Receive thy just reward:
Thy hautie heart, of furious foe
had never yet regard.
Sir Croftes come forth also
to claim thy worthy name:
Control each miss, for so thou maiste,
Thou winnest the forte of Fame.
Sir Sellinger approach
Thou setst thy Foe at naught:
Sir Wolstrap in the Art of war
has worthelye been taught.
Sir Worseley was not worste,
but of the worthy wightes:
And thus Bellona made an end
of talking to her knights.
Now Pellam that has charge
of Pellet and of Shot:
A Garlande had by due desert,
as lyghted to his lot.
And Dethicke dreading naught
the danger of his foe:
By polecie with prowes ioynde,
gave often the overthrow.
Wood would not take the foil
at any equal match:
And Windam well could wind the twist
his wylye Foes to catch.
Fitzwilliams would not slack
to fight for country soil:
And Taylers trusty diligence
sparde not for any toil.
But Collbie knows the cast
the craking Scot to train:
His name in Scotland is well known,
but to their often pain.
Tiberio took no care
for his Italia land:
But manfully among the rest,
did in the quarrel stand.
And Whitten whet his wit,
eke playde his part full stowte:
And Boothe would never balke the brunt
of French or Scottish rowte.
Pykeman past thorough the Pykes
and proud a valyant man:
And Gam by prowes won the game
that Frenchemen would have wan.
So Garton he could guide
and guard his men full well:
And Bagshot was no whitt abasht
what chance soever fell.
As Ashleyes Auncent came
with honor from the field:
So Aslaby wan good report
to Foe he would not yield.
Now Lawson is the last,
yet not of lowest name:
But equal with his captain mates
that has deserude good fame.
Thease Captains and their men
them selves so stoutly showde:
That Garlandes of still lasting Fame
is now on them bestowde.
A Garlande is small gain,
wheare lymmes and living lack:
I wish the Soldier as my self
to feel no kind of wrack.
And such as flow in wealth
and seese a Soldier pore:
I would he were in forefrunt set
when rattlyng Canons rore.
Finis.
The Aucthor.
WHen Fame rang out her Larum bell
of glorious golden sound:
And blewe the blast of Princes acts
which in her book she found:
By her enrolde and Registered
in Scroll of endless brute:
Whose memories should never quayle
until each tung were mute.
This sownde of Bell and blast of Trompe
was heard to Parnas hill:
Where as Queen Caliop and her train
do use their cunning skill.
Theare might you see these noble Nymphs
throw down their Laurel crowns:
With ruffeled hears, outragiously
to fling through Dales and Downs.
And gad, more like to wandering wyghtes,
Then learned Ladies sure:
And every one a Poet sought
her Pen to put in ure.
At last (by chance) I met the Muse
that wonts my quill to guide:
who is the symplest of them all,
and when she me espyde:
All hail (quod she) even thou art he
whom I do now require:
Take Pen in sist without delay
to finishe my desire.
For now it lyghteth to thy lot
King Henryes feign to write:
And though thy Muse be very base,
shrink not for to endyte.
When thou have done thy diligence
The learned of our train:
To polyshe this that thou have done,
will not shun ne disdain.
Alas (quoth I) my loving Muse,
It Is far for me unfit:
To write his due deserved Fame,
requyres a learned wit.
Shall Coridon take Harp in hand,
where Orpheus is in place:
Arions pleasant melody
does Pannes rude pype deface.
But all this might not move the Muse
to alter her request:
She forced me to take my Pen
and so to do my best.
Thus brought she me to Hermon hill,
where heavenly dew does dwell: Note

And thear I wrote as she me taught
God grant it be Full well.
FINIS.
1575.

Imprinted at London in Fleet streate, at the Temple gate by William Hoskins.


