A DEFENSE of the sincere and true Translations of the holy Scriptures into
the English tongue, against the manifold cauils, frivolous quarrels, and impudent
slanders of GREGORY MARTIN, one of the readers of Popish divinity in the
traiterous Seminary of Rhemes.

By WILLIAM FVLKE D. in Divinity, and M. of Pembroke haule in Cambridge.

Whereunto is added a brief confutation of all such quarrels and cauils, as
have been of late uttered by diverse Papists in their English Pamphlets,
against the writings of the said WILLIAM FVLKE.



AT LONDON: Imprinted by Henry Bynneman. Anno. 1583.

Cum gratia and Priuilegio.

To the most high and mighty Princess, Elizabeth by the grace of God Queen
of England, France, and Irelande, defender of the faith, etc.
AMONG THE inestimable benefits, wherewith almighty God, has woonderfully
blessed this your Majesty's most honorable and prosperous government: it is
not to be numbered among the least, that under your most gracious and Christian
protection, the people of your Highness dominions, have enjoyed the most
necessary and comfortable reading of the holy Scriptures in their mother
tongue and native language. Which exercise although it has of long time, by
the adversaries of Him, that wills the Scriptures to be searched (especially
those of our nation) been accounted little better, than an haereticall
practice: And treatises have been written, praetending to show great
inconvenience D. Standish. D. Heskins.
of having the holy Scriptures in the vulgar tongue: Yet now at length
perceiving they can not prevail, to bring in that dar^knesse and ignorance of
Gods most sacred word, and will therein contained, whereby their blind devotion
the daughter of ignorance, as they them selves profess, was wont to make them
rulers of the world: they also at the last are become Translators of the New
Testament into English. In which, that I speak nothing of their insincere
purpose, in leaving the pure fountain of the original verity, to follow the
crooked stream of their barbarous vulgar Latin translation, which (beside al
other manifest corruptions) is found defective in more than an hundred
places, as your Majesty, according to the excellent knowledge in both the tongs
wherewith God has blessed you, is very well able to judge: And to omit even
the same Book of their translation, pestred with so many annotations, both
false and undutiful, by which, under color of the authority of holy
Scriptures, they seek to infecte the minds of the credulous readers, with
haeretical and superstitious opinions, and to alienate their hearts from yelding
due obedience to your Majesty, and your most Christian laws concerning true
Religion established: And that I may pass over the very Text of their
translation, obscured without any necessary or just cause, with such a
multitude of so strange and unusual terms, as to the ignorant are no less
difficult to understand, than the Latin or Greek it self: Yet is it not
meet to be concealed, that they which neither truly, nor praecisely, have
translated their own vulgar Latin, and only Authentical text, have
nevertheless been bold, to set forth a several Treatise, in which most
slanderously and unjustly, they accuse all our English translations of the
Bible, not of small imperfections and ouersightes committed through ignorance
or negligence, but of no less than most foul dealing, in partial and false
translations, wilful and haereticall corruptions.

Against which most leude and untrue accusation, though easy to be judged of,
by such as be learned in the tongues, yet dangerous to disquiet the conscience
of them that be ignorant in the same: I have written a short and necessary
Defense. Which although not labored in words, yet in matter I hope sufficient
to avoid all the adversaries cauilles: I am most humbly to crave pardon, that
I may be bold to dedicate unto your most excellent Majesty, that under whose
high and Christian authority, your people have so many years enjoyed the
reading of the holy books of GOD in their native language, to the everlasting
benefit of many thousand souls: Under the same your most gracious and roial
protection, they may read also the Defense of the sincere and faithful
translation of those Books, to the quieting of their consciences, and the
confusion of the adversaries of Gods truth and holy religion. By which they
may be stirred up more and more, in all duetifull obedience, not only to be
thankeful unto your Majesty as it becomes them, but also to continewe their
most earnest and hearty prayers to almighty God, for this your most godly
and happy regiment over them, for many years forward to be prolonged.

The God of glory, which hitherto has advanced your Majesty's throne, above
all Princes of this age, in true honor and glory, vouchsafe to preserve the
same with his daily blessing, to the perfection of that glorious reparation of
his Church, which you have most happily taken in hand, to the everlasting
praise of his mercy, and the endelesse felicity of your Majesty.

Your Majesty's most humble subject and most bounden daily orator WILLIAM
FVLKE.

THE PREFACE CONTAINING FIVE SUNDRY ABUSES or corruptions of holy Scriptures,
common to all Heretics, and agreeing specially to these of our time* with many
other necessary aduertisements to the reader.
MARTIN.
AS it has been always the fashion of Heretics to pretend Heretics five
ways specially abuse the Scriptures.
Scriptures, for show of their cause: so has it been also their custom and
property to abuse the said Scriptures many ways, in favor of their errors.

FVLKE.
WHETHER these five abuses have been common to all heretics, and whether it
has been the fashion of all heretics to pretend Scriptures for show of
their cause: though I will spare now to enquire of, as a thing wherein learned
men at the first sight may epsy the great skill that Martin pretends to have
in discerning of heretics and heresies; yet will I show (by the grace of God)
that none of these five abuses are committed by us, or our Catholic
translations, and that the popish heretics are in some sort, or other guilty
of them all.

MART. 1. One way is, to deny whole books thereof or ^ Denying certain
books or parts of books.
parts of books, when they are evidently against them. So did (for example)
Ebion all S. Paul's epistles* Manicheus the Acts of the Apostles, Alogiani S.
John's Gospel, Marcion many pieces of S. Lukes Gospel, and so did both these
and other heretics in other books, denying and allowing what they list, as
is evident by S. Irenaeus, S. Epiphanius, S. Augustine, and all antiquity.

FVLK. 1. First we deny no one book of the Canonical scripture that has
been so received of the Catholic church, for the space of 300. years, and
more, as it has been often proved out of Eusebius, S. Jerome, and other
ancient authorities: but the Papists in aduauncing Apocryphal books to be of
equal credit with the Canonical Scriptures, do in effect deny the^ all.
Besides that to add unto the word of God, is as great a fault as to take away
from it, the one being forbidden under as heavy a curse, as the other. Those
blasphemies of Pighius and Eccius, the one calling the holy Scripture a nose of
wax and a dumb judge, the other terming the Gospel written, to be a black
Gospel, and an ynkie Divinity, and that of Hosius acknowleging none other
express word of God, but only this one word Ama, or dilige, love thou: what
other thing do they import, but a shameless denial of all books of the holy
Scripture in deed, how soever in word they will seem to admit them.

MART. 2. An other way is, to call into question at the 2 Doubting of their
authority, and calling the^ into question.
least and make some doubt of the authority of certain books of holy
scriptures, thereby to diminish their credit, so did Manicheus affirm of the
whole new Testament, that it was not written by the Apostles: and peculiarly of
S. Matthewes Gospel, that it was some other ma^s under his name: and therefore
not of such credit, but that it might in some part be refused. So did Marcion
and the Aria^s deny the epistle to the Hebrews to be S. Paul's. Epiph. li. 2.
haer. 69. Eusebius. li. 4. hist. c. 27* and Alogiani the Apocalypse to be S. John's
the Evangelist. Epiph. and August in haer. Alogianorii.

FVLK. 2. We neither doubt of the authority of any certain book of the holy
Scriptures, neither call we any of them into question, but with due reverence do
acknowledge the^ all, and every one to be of equal credit and authority, as
being al inspired of god* given to the church for the building up thereof in
truth, and for the avoiding of fables, and heresies: But the Papists arrogating
to their Pope, authority to allow or refuse, any book of holy Scripture, and
affirming that no Scripture has authority, but as it is approved by their
church, do bring al books of the holy Scripture into doubting, and
uncertainty, with such as will depend upon their Pope, and popish churches
authority: which they affirm to be above the holy Scriptures, saying they
might as well receive the gospel of Nicodemus as of S. Mark, and by the same
authority reject the Gospel of S. Matthew, as they have done the Gospel of S.
Bartholomew. These blasphemous assertions although some of them would color,
or mitigate with gentle interpretations: yet their is no reasonable man but
sees, into what discredit and uncertainty they must needs bring the
authority of the Canonical books of holy Scripture with the simple and
ignorant.

MART. 3. An other way is, to expound the Scriptures 2 Voluntary expositions
according to every ones fancy or heresy.
after their own private conceit and fantasy, not according to the approved
sense of the holy ancient fathers and Catholic Church, so did Theodorus
Mopsuestites (Act. Synod. 5.) affirm of all the books of the Prophets, and of
the Psalms, that they spoke not evidently of Christ, but that the ancient
fathers did voluntarily draw those sayings unto Christ which were spoken of
other matters, so did all heretics, that would seem to ground their heresies
upon Scriptures, and to avouch them by Scriptures expounded according to their
own sense and imagination.

FVLK. 3. We expound not the Scriptures after our own private conceit, and
fantasy: but as near as God gives us grace, according to the plain and
natural sense of the same, agreeable unto the rule or proportion of faith, which
been approved by the ancient fathers, and Catholic church of Christ, in all
matters necessary to eternal salvation. Not bringing a new and strange
sense which is without the Scriptures, to seek confirmation thereof in the
Scriptures (as the manner of heretics is rightly noted by Clemens) but out of
the Scriptures themselves seek we the exposition of such obscure places as we
find in them, being persuaded with S. Augustine, that nothing in a manner is
found out of those obscure and dark places, which may not be found to be most
plain ly spoken in other places. And as for the approved sense of the holy
ancient Fathers, and Catholic Church of the eldest and purest times, if the
Papists durst stand unto it, for the deciding of many of the most weighty
controversies, that are between us, there is no doubt, but* they should soon
and easily be determined, as has been showed in diverse and many treatises,
written against them. In which if any thing be brought, so plainly expounding
the Scripture against their popish heresies, as nothing can be more express
nor clear, then they are driven to seek new and monstrous expositions of
those Fathers interpretations: or else they answer, they are but those Fathers
private expositions, appealing to the Catholic churches interpretation, which
is nothing else but their own private conceipte and fancy, having no record
to prove that Catholic Churches interpretation, but the present heretical
opinions, of this late degenerated Antichristian congregation. And when they
have discoursed never so much of the Catholic churches interpretation, they
reduce and submit all men's judgments to the determination of their Councels,
and the decrees of the Councels to the approbation of their Pope, which as he
is oftentimes a wicked man of life: so is he ignorant and unlearned in the
Scriptures, to whose most private ce^sure, the holy Scriptures themselves, and
al sense and exposition of them is made subject, under color that Christ
praying for Peter, that his faith should not fail in temptation, gave all
Popes such a prerogative, that they could not err in faith* though they were
wicked of life, void of learning, ignorant in the Scriptures, destitute of the
spirit of God, as is proved most inuincibly by example of diverse Popes, that
have been heretics, and mainteyners of such errors, as are not now in
controversy between us (least they should say we beg the principle) but of
the sect of the Arrians, Monothelites, Eutychians, Saduces, and such other.

MART. 4. An other way is, to alter the very original 4. Changing some words
or sentences of the very original text. Tertul. cont. Marae cio. li. ^. in
princ. Tertul. lib. 5.
text of the holy Scripture, by adding, taking away, or changing it here and
there for their purpose. So did the Arians in sundry places, and the Nestorians
in the first epistle of S. John, and especially Marcion, who was therefore
called, Mus Ponticus, the mouse of Pontus, because he had gnawen (as it were)
certain places with his corruptions, whereof some are said to remain in the
Greek text until this day.

FVLK. 4. The original text of the holy Scripture we alter not, either by
adding, taking away, or changing of any letter, or syllable, for any private
purpose, which were not only a thing most wicked and sacrilegious, but also
vain, and impossible. For, seeing not only so many ancient coppies of the
original text are extant in diverse places of the world, which we can not, if
we would, corrupt, and that the same are multiplied by printing into so many
thousand examples, we should be rather mad than foolish, if we did but
once attempt such a matter, for maintenance of any of our opinions. As also it
is incredible, that Marcion the mouse of Pontus, could corrupt all the Greek
coppies in the world, as Lindanus, of whom you borrowed that conceit,
imagines, in those places in which he is charged by Tertullian. For Marcions
heresy was not so generally received by the Greek Church, that all men would
yield unto him, neither was Tertullian so sound of judgment in the Latin
Church, that whatsoever he judged to be a corruption in Marcion* must of
necessity be so taken. But if adding, and detracting from the Scripture, be
proper notes of heretics, who can purge Stephen Gardener, and Gregory
Martine? The one for adding unto a the verse of the Psalm, this pronowne se,
him self, to prove the carnal presens, citing it thus. Escam se dedit
timentibus eum. He gave himself to be meat* to them that fear him, whereas
the words of the Prophet, according to the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin are no
more but* Escam dedit. He has given meat, etc. The other in his fond book of
schism, citing this text out of 1. Cor. 10. as many Papists do against the
certainty of Faith. Qui stat, videat ne cadat. He that stands let him take
heed he fall not. Whereas not only the truth of the Greek: but even the
vulgar Latin translation has. Qui se existimat stare, He that thinks or
supposes that he stands, let him take heed that he fall not. But of such
additions and detractions, used by the Romish rattes, far worse than the
myse of Pontus, we shall have more occasion to speak hereafter.

MART. 5. Another way is, to make false translations of the Scriptures for the
maintenance of error and heresy: so False and heretical translation.
did the Arians (as S. Hierome notes in 26. Esa.) read and translate Proverb.
8. Dominus creauit me in intio viarum suarum, that is, The Lord created mein
the beginning of his ways, so to make Christ the wisdom of God a mere
creature. (...), possedi^. (...)
S. Augustine also lib 5. cont. Julian. c. 2. notes it as the interpretation of
some Pelagian. Genesis 3. Fecerunt sibi vestimenta* for, perizomata, or
campestria, that is, They made them selves garments. Whereas the word of the
Scripture is, b^eeches or aprons proper and peculiar to cover the secretparts.
Again, the self same heretics did read falsely Romans 5. Regnauit mors ab Adam
vsque ad Moysen etiam in eos qui Aug. ep. 89. and lib. 1. de pec. mer. cap. 11.
peccauerunt in similitudinem praeuaricationis Adae* that is. Death reigned
from Adam to Moses, even on them that sinned after the similitude of the
preuaricatio^ of Adam, (...)
to maintain their heresy against original sin, that none were infected
therewith, or subject to death and damnation, but by sinning actually as Adam
did. Thus did the old heretics.

FVLK. 5. As touching false and heretical translations, which is the chief
argument of this book, I doubt not, but by the grace of god to clear our
english translators from any wilful corruptions, for the maintenance of any
error, or heresy: such as were those of the Arrians and Pelagians, which
Gregory Martin, as though he uttered some great piece of skill, does so
diligently express. I shall have occasion also to show, that the Papists them
selves of our times, maintaining their corrupt vulgar translation, against the
truth of the original textes of Greek, and Hebrew, are most guilty of such
corruption, and falsification, whereof although they be not the first authors,
yet by obstinate defending of such errors, they may prove worse than they which
did first commit them. For the authors of that vulgar translation, might be
deceived, either for lack of exact knowledge of the tongues, or by some
corrupt, and untrue copies which they followed, or else perhaps that which they
had rightly translated, by fault of the writers, and negligence of the times
might be perverted: but these men frowardly justifying all errors of that
translation, howsoever they have been brought in, do give plain testimony,
that they are not led with any conscience of Gods truth, but wilfully carried
with purpose of maintaining their own errors: least if they did acknowledge
the error of the Romish church in that one point they should not be able to
defend any one jot of their heresy, whose chief color is the credit and
authority of that particular and false church, rather than any reason or
argument out of the holy Scriptures, or testimony of the most ancient
Christian and Catholic church.

MART. 6. What these of our days? is it credible that being so well warned by
the comdemnation and detestation of the^, they also would be as mad and as
impious as those? Heretics (gentle Reader) be always like Heretics, and
howsoever they differ in opinions or names, yet in this point they agree, to
abuse the Scriptures for their purpose by all means possibly. I will but touch
four points of the five before mentioned, because my purpose is to stay upon
the last only, and to discipher their corrupt translations. But if I would
stand upon the other also, were it not That the Protestants and Caluinists use
the foresaid five means of defacing the Scriptures.
easy to show the manner of their proceeding against the Scriptures to have
been thus: to deny some whole books and parts of books, to call other some
into question, to expound the rest at their pleasure, to pick quarrels to the
very original and Canonical text, ^o fester and infect the whole body of the
Bible with cancred translations?

FVLK. 6. It is very true, that so many Heretics as pretend the authority of
the holy Scriptures, abuse the same to their own destruction: and no Heretics
worse than the Antichristians, or Papists. As partly has been seen already
in every one of your five marks, and more may appear in those four points
which you will handle in the Preface, because the argument of your whole book
is the fifth: so that in the end you shall be proved no wiser with your five
points, than he that came forth with his five eggs, and never a good of them
all. But you ask, if it were not easy for you to show (if you would stand
upon them) that the Protestants use all the said sieve means of defacing the
Scripture? I answer no, and that shall you see when demonstration is made, how
vainly you have labored in the last point: which howsoever you would have it
appear to be a sudden writing, of small trauail, by interlacing a few lines
here and there, against M. Whitaker, against me, and some other: yet it is
evident both by Bristowes threatening, and Campions promise, that it has been a
work of some years unto you: wherein beside that you are beholding much to
Lindanus, for diverse quarrels against Calvin, and to sir Thomas More, for many
cauillations against W. Tyndals translation: there is little worthy of so long
study, and large promises, as have gone before this diligent discovery: so
that if you will make the like trial in the rest, you shall find them as hard
to prove as this last.

MART. 7. Did not Luther deny S. James epistle and so contemn it that he
called it an epistle of straw, and not worthy of an Apostolical spirit? must
I prove this to M. Whitakers, who would never have denied it so vehemently in
the superlatiue Cont. rat. Edm. Camp. page 18. Retent page 32. did. of the
Rock page 307. Luther in no^o Test. Germa. in Prefat. Iacobi.
degree for shame, if he had not thought it more shame to grant it? I need
not go far for the matter: Ask M. Fulke, and he will flatly confess it was
so. Ask Calvin in arg. ep. Iacobi. Ask Flaccus Illyricus, in argum. ep.
Iacobi, and you shall perceive it is very true. I will not send you to the
Catholic Germans and others, both of his own time and after, that wrote
against him in the question of justification: among whom not one omitteth
this, being a thing so famous and infamous to the confusion of that Arch
heretic.

FVLK. 7. I know not whether ever Luther denied S. James epistle as unworthy of
an Apostolical spirit, but I believe you may take a twelve months day more to
prove it, as also that he did so contemn it, that he called it an epistle of
straw. But M. Whitaker which denied it so vehemently* must ask of me, who
most slatly confess (says M. Martin) that it was so. I pray you sir, urge me
not to confess more than I know, or ever knew. But you have confessed it
already in two printed books, Retent. page 32. Disc of the Rock, page 307. In
the place first cited, there are these words But to proceed: LVTHER DENIES THE
EPISTLE OF S. JAMES, BECAUSE IT IS AGAINST HIS HERESY OF JUSTIFICATION BY
FAITH ONLY. We allow not Luther, neither did he allow him self therein, for
he retracteth it afterward. First those words of Luthers denial being printed
in a diverse letter, may testify sufficiently to every reasonable man, that
they are the objection of Bristow, and not the confession of Fulke, who not
simplye admits them as true, but by concession, proves that if they were
true, yet Luthers opinion, against which he him self has written, ought not
to prejudice him, and much less all other men, that never held that opinion.
In the later cited place, are these words. And as touching the epistle of S.
James, it is a shameless slander of him to say that the Protestants reject
it, but we must hear his reason. First Luther calls it a strawen epistle. So
Luther called the Pope supreme head of the Church, and the mass a sacrifice
propitiatory. If Protestants be charged to hold whatsoever Luther sometime
held, and after repented. etc. Who sees not in these words, that I rehearse
the objection of Saunder, which is common to him with many other Papists,
which not discussing whether it be true or no, but supposing it were as Saunder
and the rest of the Papists do affirm. I show that it is no good
consequence, to charge all Protestants with Luthers private opinion, which
perhaps he held sometime, and after retracted, more than to charge us with all
opinions of Papistrie, which de did hold, before God opened his eyes to see the
absurdity of them. And yet if he had held that opinion, and never retracted
the same, he were not in worse case than Eusebius, who in plain words
affirms, that the same epistle is a counterfeit or bastard epistle, lib. 2.
cap. 23. Do you not see now how flatly Master Fulke confesses that it was
so? Such confessions as these, are now and than extorted out of the ancient
fathers writings, which are not living to expound their meanings. But I had
thought Master Martin could have discerned between a suppose or concession,
and an absolute assertion, or a flat confession, especially of one whose
writing is plain enough, and beside is alive to interpret himself, if any
ambiguitie were therein. But be it that Master Martin either would not, or
could not see in my writing any thing else but a flat confession of Luthers
denying of S. James epistle, and calling it an epistle of straw, of what
forehead proceeds it, that he wills Master Whitaker to ask Calvin in
argum. Epist. Iacobi, whether Luther so speak of that epistle? in which
argument Luther is not once named by Calvin, so far is it, that he does
testify any such thing against Luther. Only he says, that some there are in
these days, which think that epistle not worthy of authority, which could
not be understood of Luther, who long before Calvin wrote that argument, had
forsaken that opinion, if ever he held any such, as all those Dutche Bibles
and Testaments of Luthers translation, in which those words so much bayted
at, and so much sought for are omitted, do give sufficient testimony. What
Flaccus Illyricus reports* who perhaps held that opinion him self, and
would father it upon Luther, I have neither opportunity to seek, nor care
to know. But how great a matter it is, that all the Popish Germans, and
other, who have written against Luther, do so spitefully gnawe upon, I have
learned at length by relation of Master Whitaker. whom you send to ask of
me: who after long search and many editions turned over, at the length lighted
upon a Dutch Testament, by likehood one of the first that Luther did set
forth in the German tongue, in which he finds neither denial of S. James
epistle to be Canonical, nor affirmation that it is unworthy of an
Apostolical spirit, no nor that whereof there has been so much babbling of all
the Papists, that he calls it an epistle of straw simply, and in contempt,
but only in comparison of the epistles of Paul and Peter, and other books of
the new Testament, the excellency of which one above an other, after he has
showed in sundry degrees, at last he says, the epistle of James in comparison
of these, is strawye, or like straw. Which he says not in respect of the
credit or authority thereof, but in regard of the argument or matter handled
therein, which all wise and godly men will confess to be not so excellent and
necessary, as the matter of the holy Gospels and Epistles of some other of the
Apostles, namely of Paul, Peter, and John. Our Savior Christ himself, Ioh. 3.
12* calls the doctrine of regeneration, in such plain manner as he uttered
it, to Nicodemus, earthly things in comparison of other greater mysteries,
which he could have expressed in more heavenly and spiritual sort. If I have
spoken to you (says he) of earthly things, and you have not believed, how if I
should speak to you of heavenly things, will you believe? Were not he an
honest and a wise man, that upon these words of Christ spoken in comparison,
would conclude by his authority, that regeneration were a contemptible matter,
a thing not spiritual, not heavenly, but simply and altogether earthly. And
yet with, as good reason, for ought I see or can learn of Luthers words
concerning this matter, he might so infer, as the Papists do enforce, the
like against Luther. Wherefore it is nothing else but a famous and infamous
cauillation, to the confusion of all the Papists which write against Luther,
that no one of them omitteth upon so false and frivolous a ground, to sclaunder
him so haynously, and to charge all Protestants with his assertion so
enuiously: which if it were his, should not be so evil as other Catholic
writers have affirmed of that Epistle, and therefore not sufficient to charge
him, and much less others with heresy: but being not his simple affirmation,
yet because it has been offensiuely taken, he him self has put it out, and
given it over. O what a stir would they keep, if they had any weighty
matter of truth to burden him withal?

MART. 8. To let this pass: Tobie, Ecclesiasticus, and the Machabees are they
not most certainly rejected? And yet Conc. Cart. 3. can. 47.
they were allowed and received for Canonical, by the same authority that S.
James Epistle was. This Epistle the Caluinists are content to admit, because so
it pleased Calvin: those Argu. in epist. Jacob.
books they reject, because so also it pleased him. And why did it so please
Calvin? Under pretense forsooth, that they were once doubted of, and not taken
for Canonical. But is that the true cause in deed? How do they then receive
S. James Whitak. p. 10.
Epistle as Canonical, having before doubted of also, yea (as they say)
rejected? Ibid.


FVLK. 8. You may well let it pass, for it is not worth the time you spend in
writing of it, and if you had been wise, you would utterly have omitted it. But
what say you of Tobie, Ecclesiasticus, and the Machabees most certainly by us
rejected? They were allowed (you say) for Canonical by the same authority
that S. James Epistle was. And think you that S. James Epistle was never
allowed for Canonical before the third Council of Carthage? For, of the other
it is certain they were never received by the Church of the Israelits before
Christ his coming, nor of the Apostolic and primitive Church for more than
300. years after, as both Eusebius out of Origines, and the Council of
Laodicea Can. ^9. confirmed afterward by the sixth general Council of
Constantinople shows for the Greek Church, and S. Jerome in prologo Lib. 6.
cap. 18.
Galeato for the Latin Church. As for the provincial Council of Carthage
holden by 44. Bishops of Africa, if we were bound to receive it for these
books, we must also acknowledge five books of Solomon, which in the same
Council are authorized, whereas the Church never knew but of three. And
although the book of wisdom should be ascribed to Salomo^, there could be but
four. Again, how they understand the word Canonical, it may be gathered both
out of the words of the same Canon, where they give none other reason of the
approbatio^ of all those books of Scripture, but that they have received them
of their fathers to be read in the Church: and also out of S. Augustine, who
was one present at the same De doct. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 8.
Counsel: which after he has declared how a man should discern the
Canonical Scriptures from other writings, by following the authority of the
Catholic Churches, especially those that have deserved to have Apostolic
sees, and to receive their Epistles, he adds further. Tenebit igitur hunc
modum in scripturis canonicis, vt eas quae ab omnibus accipiuntur Ecclesijs
Catholicis, praeponat eis quas quaeda^ non accipiunt. In eis vero quae non
accipiuntur ab omnibus, praeponat eas, quas plures grauioresque accipiunt eis
quas pauciores minorisque authoritatis Ecclesiae tenent. Si autem alias
inuenerit a pluribus, alias a grauioribus haberi, quanquam hoc inuenire non
possit, aequalis tame^ auctoritatis eas habe^das puto. Totus autem canon
scripturarum in quo istam considerationem versandam dicimus, his libris
continetur. He shall hold therefore this mean in the canonical Scriptures, that
he prefer those which are received of all catholic churches, before those
Scriptures which some Churches do not receive. But in those which are not
received of all, let him prefer those Scriptures which the greater number and
grauer churches do receive, before those which churches fewer in number and of
less authority do hold. But if he shall find some Scriptures to be had of fewer
churches and other some of grauer churches, although you can not find this
thing, yet I think they are to be accounted of equal authority. Now the whole
cano^ of scriptures in which we say this consideration must be occupied is
contained in these books. Five books of Moises, that is Genesis, Exodus, etc.
By this saying of Augustine, it is manifest, that he calls canonical
Scriptures, not only those books that ought of necessity to be received of al
churches: but also such as were received of some, and of some were not, in
which number were these books of Tobie, Ecclesiasticus, and the Machabees,
which by his own rule, were not to be received as of absolut and sovereign
authority, because the Apostolic churches of Asia and Europa, and those of
grauest authority, among which was the church of Rome in that time, did not
receive the^, as witnesses not only S. Hierome a Priest of Rome, but also
Ruffinus of Aquileia, in symbolo, who both declare what books were received in
their churches as canonical, and of irrefragable authority to build principles
of faith upon them, and what books were admitted only to be read for
instruction of manners. And therefore according to the rule of Augustine and
testimony of the ancient fathers, and because it co^senteth with the rest of
the scriptures, and not for Caluins pleasure we receive the Epistle of S.
James, though it has not been always, and of all Churches received.
Concerning the name of Caluinists, as of all other nicke names, that it
pleases you of your charity to bestow upon us, it shall suffice to protest
once for all, that we acknowledge none other name of our profession, but
Christians, and Catholics: and that we have neither received that Epistle, nor
rejected the other, because it pleased Calvin so. This may serve for a clear
demonstration, that in the first English Bibles that were printed under the
name of Thomas Anno. 1532. Anno. 1537.
Matthew, before Calvin wrote any word of the reiectio^ of those books, or of
receiving of the other, they are called Apocrypha, and printed with other of
that mark, by themselves, and the Epistle of S. James without any question
acknowledged to be one of the canonical Epistles, whereas Caluines Institution
was first printed An. 1536. and his argument upon S. James Epistle 1551. You
may see what honest dealing the Papists use, to bring the truth into
discredit, and the professors thereof into hatred with the simple and unlearned
people, bearing the^ in hand, that we have no cause to receive or refuse books
of Scripture, but Caluines pleasure. But the God of truth will one day reward
these impudent liars and shameless slaunderers.

Well let us now see under what pretense, it pleased Calvin to reject these
books. Under pretense forsooth (says Martin) that they were once doubted of,
and not taken for Canonical. I pray you sir, where does Calvin pretend that
only cause? In his Instit. li. 3. c. 5 sect. 8. He alleges diverse other
causes touching the books of Machabees, as every man that will may read. Shame
you nothing to forge such manifest untruths, and that in such matters as you
may be convinced in them by ten thousand witnesses? What credit shall be given
to you in matters that consist upon your own bare testimony when you force
not to feign of other men, that wherein every man may reprove you? And as for
the only pretense you speak of, Calvin does so little esteem it, that
notwithstanding the same, he doubts not to receive the Epistle of S. James
because it is agreeable to the whole body of the canonical Scripture as if you
had read his argument upon that Epistle you might easily have perceived.

MART. 9. Mark gentle reader for thy souls sake, and thou Ibid. page 17. M.
Whitaker by these words condemns their own Service book, which
appoints these books of Tobie and Ecclesiasticus, to be read for holy
Scripture, as the other. Do they read in their Churches Apocryphal and
superstitious books for holy Scripture, or is he a Puritan, that thus
disgraceth their order of daily Service.
shall find, that heresy and only heresy is the cause of their denying these
books: so far, that against the orders and Hierarchies and particular
patronages of Angels, one of them writes thus in the name of the rest. We
pass not for that Raphael of Tobie neither do we acknowledge those seven
Angels which he speaks of, all this is far from Canonical Scriptures, that
the same Raphael records, and sauoureth I wot not what superstition. Against
free will thus: I little care for the place of Ecclesiasticus, neither will I
believe free will, though he affirm an hundred times, That before men is life
and death. And against prayer for the dead, and intercession of Saints thus:
As for the book of the Machabees, I do care less for it tha^ for the other.
Judas dream concerning Omas I let pass as a dream. This is their reverence
of the scriptures which have uniuersally bin reverenced for canonical in the
church of God above 1100 years. Con. Cart. 3. and particularly of many fathers
long before. Aug. de doct. Christ. l 2. c. 8.

FVLK. 9. The mouth that lies kills the soul. The reader may think you
have small care of his souls health, when by such impudent lying you declare
that you have so small regard of your own. But what shall he mark? That heresy,
etc. You were best say that Eusebius, Hierom, Ruffine and all the churches in
their times were heretics, and that only heresy was the cause of their denial
of these books. For such reasons as moved the^ move us, and some thing also
their authority. But how prove you that only heresy moves us to reject the^?
Because M. Whit. against the orders, and Hierarchies, and particular patronages
of Angels writes in the name of the rest. That we pass not, etc. Take heed
least upon your bare surmise you belie him where you say he writes in the name
of the rest, as in the next sectio^ following you say, he writes in the name
of both the universities, for which I am sure he had no co^missio^ from either
of the^, although he did write that which may well be aduouched by both the
universities, yet I know his modesty is such, as he will not presume to be
advocate for both the universities, and much less for the whole church, except
he were lawfully called thereto. This is a common practice of you Papists, to
bear the world in hand that whatsoever is written by any of us in defense of
the truth is set forth in the name of all the rest, as though none of us could
say more in any matter, than any one of us has written, or that if any one of
us chance to slip in any small matter, though it be but a wrong quotatio^* you
might open your wide sclaunderous mouths against the whole church for one man's
particular offense. Now touching any thing that M. Whit. has written, you shall
find him sufficient to maintain it against a stronger adversary tha^ you are,
and therefore I will meddle the less in his causes. And for the orders and
patronage or protection of Angels by Gods appointment, we have sufficient
testimony in the Canonical Scriptures, that we need not the uncertain report
of Tobies book to instruct us what to think of the^. But as for the
Hierarchies, and patronage of Angels, that many of you Papists have imagined
and written of, neither the canonical Scriptures, nor yet the Apocryphal books
now in controversy, are sufficient to give you warra^tise. The like I say of
freewil, prayer for the dead, and intercession of Saints. But it grieueth you
that those Apocryphal scriptures, which have bin universally received for
canonical in the church of God above 1100. years should find no more
reverence among us. Still your mouth runs over. For in the time of the Canon
of the counsel of Carthage. 3. which you quote, these books were not
universally reverenced as canonical. And Augustine him self speaking of the
book of Machabees, Cont. 2. G and. Ep. c. 23. confesses that the Jews
account it not as the law, and the Prophets, and the Psalms, to which our
Lord gives testimony as to his witnesses, saying. It behooves that all things
should be fulfilled which are written in the Law, and in the Prophets, and in
the Psalms concerning me: but it is received of the Church, not unprofitably,
if it be soberly read or heard. This writes S. Augustine, when he was pressed
with the authority of that book by the Donatists, which defended that it was
lawful for them to kill themselves, by example of Razis, who is by the author of
that book commended for that fact. He says it is received not unprofitably,
and immediately after. Especially for those Machabees that suffered patiently
horrible persecution for testimony of Gods religion, to encourage Christians by
their example. Finally, he adds a condition of the receiving it, if it be
soberly read or heard. These speches declare, that it was not received without
all controversy, as the authentical word of God: for then should it be
received necessarily, and because it is Gods word especially, and how soever it
be read or heard it is received of the Church, not only necessarily, but also
profitably. Beside this, even the decree of Gelasius, which was near 100.
years after that council of Carthage, allows but one book of the Maccabees.
Wherefore the universal reverence that is bosted of, can not be justified.

But M. Whitaker is charged in the margent, to condemn the service book,
which appoints these books of Toby and Ecclesiasticus to be read for holy
Scripture, as the other. And where find you that in the service book M.
Martin? Can you speak nothing but untruths? If they be appointed to be read,
are they appointed to be read for holy Scripture, and for such Scripture as
the other canonical books are? The service book appoints the Letanie,
diverse exhortations and prayers, yea homelies to be read: are they therefore
to be read for holy and canonical Scriptures? But you ask. Do they read in
their Churches Apocryphal and Superstitious books for holy Scripture? No
verily. But of the name Apocryphal I must distinguish, which sometimes is taken
for all books read of the Church, which are not canonical: sometime for such
books only, as are by no means to be suffered, but are to be hid or
abolished. These books therefore in controversy, with other of the same sort,
are sometimes called Hagiographa, holy writings, as of S. Hierom praefat. in
lib. Tobiae: sometime Ecclesiastica, Ecclesiastical writings, and so are they
called of Ruffinus. Because In expositione Symbol^.
(says he) they were appointed by our Elders to be read in the Churches, but
not to be brought forth to confirm authority of faith: but other Scriptures
they named Apocryphal, which they would not have to be read in the Churches.
So says S. Hierom in praefat. in Proverb. Even as the Church reads in deed
the books of Judith, Tobias, and the Machabees: but yet receaueth them not
among the Canonical Scriptures: so let it read these two books (of
Ecclesiasticus and wisdom) for the edifying of the people, not for the
confirmation of the authority of Ecclesiastical doctrines. These ancient
writers shall answer for our service book, that although it appoint these
writings to be read: yet it does not appoint them to be read for Canonical
Scriptures. Albeit they are but sparingly read, by order of our service book,
which for the Lords day, and other festival days, commonly appoints the
first lesson out of the Canonical Scriptures. And as for superstition,
although M. Whitaker say, that some one thing sauoreth of I know not what
superstition, he does not by and by condemn the whole book for superstitious,
and altogether unworthy to be read, neither can he thereby be proved a
Puritan, or a disgracer of the order of daily service.

MART. 10. As for parts of books, do they not reject certain pieces of
Daniel and of Hester, because they are not in the Hebrew, which reason S.
Augustine rejects: or because they were once doubted of by certain of the
fathers? by which reason some part of S. Mark and S. Lukes Gospel might now
also be called in controversy, specially if it be true which M. Whitakers by a
figurative speech more than insinuates, That page 10.
he can not see by what right that which once was not in credit, should by time
win authority. Forgetting him self by and by, and in the very next lines
admitting S. James epistle (though before doubted of for Canonical Scriptures,
unless M. VVhitakers book.
they receive it but of their courtesy, and so may refuse it when it shall
please them, which must needs be gathered of his words, as also many other
notorious absurdities, contradictions, and dumb blanckes* Which only to note,
were to confute M. Whitakers by him self, being the answerer for both
Universities.

FVLK. 10. As for pieces of Daniel, and of Hester, we reject none, but only we
discern that which was written by Daniel in deed, from that which is added by
Theodotion the false Jew, and that which was written by the spirit of God of
Esther, from that which is vainly added by some Greekish counterfecter. But the
reason why we reject those patches (you say) is because they are not in the
Hebrew, which reason S. Augustine rejects. Here you cite S. Augustine at
large, without quotation, in a matter of controversy. But if we may trust you
that S. Augustine rejects this reason yet we may be bold upon S. Hieroms
authority, to reject whatsoever is not found in the cano^ of the Jews,
written in Hebrew, or Chaldee. For whatsoever was such, S. Hierom did thrust
through with a spit or obeliske, as not worthy to be received. Witness hereof S.
Augustine him self, Epist. ad Hier. 8. and 10. in which he dissuaded him from
translating the Scriptures of the old Testament out of the Hebrew tongue,
after the 70. Interpreters, whose reasons as they were but frivolous, so they
are derided by S. Hierom, who being learned in the Hebrew and Chaldee tongues,
refused to be taught by Augustine, that was ignorant in them, what was to be
done in translations out of them. Also Hieronym him self testifies that
Daniel in the Hebrew, has neither the story of Susanna, nor the hymn of the
3. children, nor the fable of Bell and the Dragon: which we (says he) because
they are dispersed throughout the whole world have added, setting a spit before
them, which thrusts them through, lest we should seem among the ignorant to
have cut of a great part of the book. The like he writes of the vain
additions that were in the vulgar edition unto the book of Esther, both in the
Preface, and after the end of that which he translated out of the Hebrew.
There are other reasons also beside the authority of S. Hierom, that move us
not to receive them. As that in the story of Susanna, Magistrates and judgment
of life and death are attributed to the Jews being in captivity of Babylon,
which has no similitude of truth. Beside out of the first chapter of the true
Daniel, it is manifest, that Daniel being a young man was carried captive into
Babylon, in the days of Nebucadnezer, but in this counterfect story, Daniel
is made a young child in the time of Astyages, which reigned immediately before
Cyrus of Persia. Likewise in the story of Bell and the Dragon, Daniel is said
to have lived with the same king Cyrus, and after when he was cast into the
lions den, the Prophet Habacuck was sent to him out of Jury, who prophesied
before the first coming of the Chaldees, and therefore could not be alive in
the days of Cyrus, which was more than 70 years after. The additions unto the
book of Esther in many places, bewray the spirit of man, as that they are
contrary to the truth of the story, containing vain repetitions, and
amplifications of that which is contained in the true history, and that which
most manifestly conuinceth the sorgerie, that in the epistle of Artaxerxes,
cap. 16. Haman is called a Macedonian, which in the true story is termed an
Agagite that is an Amalekite, whereas the Macedonians had nothing to do with
the Persians many years after the death of Esther and Haman. I omit that in
the ca. 15. ver. 12. the author makes Esther to lie unto the king in saying
that his countenance was full of all grace, or else he lies him self, v. 17.
where he says, the king beheld her in the veheme^cy of his anger, and that he
was exceeding terrible.

As for other reasons, which you suppose us to follow, because these parcels
were once doubted of by certain of the fathers, it is a reason of your own
making, and therefore you may confute it at your pleasure. But if that be true
which Master Whitaker by a figurative speech does more than insinuate, part
of S. Marks and S. Lukes Gospel, may also be called in controversy. Why?
what says M. Whitaker? Marie, that he can not see by what right that which
once was not in credit, should by time win authority. But when I pray you
was any part of S. Mark or S. Luke out of credit? if any part were of some
person doubted of, does it follow that it was not at al in credit? you reason
profoundly, and gather very necessarily. As likewise that he forgets him
self in the very next lines, admitting S. James epistle (though before doubted
of) for Canonical. Will ye say that S. James epistle was once not in credit,
or not worthy of credit, (for that is his plain meaning) because it was
doubted of, yea rejected of some? yea, you say it must needs be gathered of
his words, that we receive it but of courtesy, and so may refuse it when it
pleaseah us. Demonstrate this in a syllogism out of his words if you can, or
all the whole rabble of Rhemes, if you be able. For my part I can but marvel
at your bold assertions, and abhor your impudent enforcements. As for other
contradictions, notorious absurdities, dumb blanks, and I know not what other
monsters you feine unto him, without all proof or particular declaration, all
wise men see how easy a matter it is to rail and slander in generals, and
when you dare come to particulars, I doubt not but the world shall see your
vanity so detected by M. Whitaker him self, that you shall have little joy thus
insolently to deface his godly and learned writings. It had been more than time
that his book had been confuted, which has been abroad a year and a half
almost, if you can with such facility by only noting such matters, show that
he confuteth him self. But somewhat you must say afar of, to save your credit
with your Disciples, to keep them play for the time, while with long study,
and great travail, you are crowding out great trifles.

MART. 11. For the second point, which is not the gross denial of books, but
yet calling of them in question, moving scruples about them, and diminishing
their authority and credit, I will go no further than to S. Paul's epistle
to the Hebrews, In the argument Bib. an. 1579.
which I will not ask why they doubt of, or rather think it not to be S.
Paul's, for they will tell me, because it was once in doubt (not considering
that it was in like manner doubted whether it were Canonical, and yet they will
not now deny but it is Canonical) but I must ask them and request them to
make a reasonable answer, why in their English Bible of the year 1579. and
1580. they presume to leave out S. Paul's name out of the very title of the
said epistle, which name is in the (...)
Greek, and in Bezaes Latin translation, both which they profess to follow.
See the title of the new Test. an. 1580. Does not the title tell them that it
is S. Paul's? why seek they further: or why do they change the title, striking
out S. Paul's name, if they meant to deal simply and sincerely? and what an
heretical peeuishnes is this, because Beza tells them of one obscure Greek
copy that has not Paul's name, and only one: that they will rather follow it,
than all other copies both Greek and Latin? I report me to all indifferent men
of common sense, whether they do it not to diminish the credit of the epistle.

FVLK. 11. Now concerning the second point, which is calling of some books
into controversy or moving scruples about them, to diminish their credit, or
authority, whether you be guilty of that crime rather than we, I have
somewhat noted before. But with what evidence you are able to charge us, it
comes now to be considered: you will go no further than the epistle to the
Hebrews. You may be ashamed to have gone so far. For of al books of the new
Testament, their is none that we might worse spare to confound your
blasphemous heresies, than that epistle, which is the very mall to beat into
powder the abominable Idol of your Mass, and your sacrilegious priesthood
serving to the same. Wherefore it is without all color that you charge us, to
seek to diminish the credit of that epistle. But you will not ask why we
doubt of, or rather think it not to be S. Paul's, because we will tell you,
that it was once in doubt. If you acknowledge that the auctor of this epistle
was once in question, you clear us of moving scruples about it, or calling it
in question, which was your first charge. Let Eusebius, Hierome, and other
ancient Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. ^. Hieronim. ad* ^a^d. Tom. 3.
writers, bear that blame, if it be blame worthy, to tell what other men's
opinions have been in such a matter. Some holding that it was written by S.
Luke, some by S. Barnabas, some by S. Clemens. But you must wit if you will,
that they which at this day doubt of the writer thereof, or else think it not
of S. Paul's penning, have other reasons to lead them, than only because it
was doubted of. For beside those reasons which they had, which of old time
doubted of the writer thereof, as the diversity of the style, and inscription
thereof, and manner of reasoning, they have also observed something out of the
epistle it self, which seems to argue, that it was not written by S. Paul:
as that in the beginning of the 2. chapter he says, The doctrine of salvation
was confirmed to us by the^ that heard it, after it was first spoken by the
Lord him self, which seems to agree with the profession of S. Luke in the
beginning of his gospel. Whereas S. Paul denies that he learned his gospel os
men, but only by revelation of Jesus Christ. Gal. 1. v. 12. But of all the^
that doubt, or think it not to be S. Paul's epistle, there is not one that
doubts of the authority thereof, but that it is equal with the epistle to
the Romans, or the gospel of S. John. Although in the Latin ^^ ^^^^. lib. 3.
cap. 6. in Eua^g Math. ^^. 5. cap. 26.
church as S. Hierom testifies, it has been doubted whether it were
Canonical. The cause seems to be the heresy of the Nouatians, which abused
a text out of the 6. chapt. against remission of sins committed after grace
received, which we show was no sufficient cause to refuse so divine an epistle,
seeing the Apostle speaks not of particular faults, which are common to the
faithful oftentimes every day, but of an utter apostasy, and falling clean
away from the truth of the gospel once known and professed, into an horrible
contempt and persecuting of the same. But we must make you a reasonable
answer, why in the English Bibles printed 1579. and 1580. we presume to leave
out S. Paul's name, out of the very title of the said epistle? which name is in
the Greek and Bezaes Latin translation, which we profess to follow. I answer
without any presumption, that that which is uncertain we spare to affirm.
Example we have not only that ancient Greek copy whereof Beza speaks, which
leaves out the name of Paul, but also diverse printed books in which that
name is left out. Beside it is certain, that title was not of ancient time
universally added. For S. Hier. in Catalogo scriptoru^ ecclesiast. after he
has recited all the epistles of S. Paul, at length he comes to this epistle,
Epistola aute^ quae fertur ad Hebraeos, etc. But the epistle which is called
unto the Hebrews, is not thought to be his, for the difference of the style
and speech, but either written by Barnabas, as Tertullian holds, or by Luke
the Evangelist, as some men think, or by Clemens, that after was B. of the
Roman church, whom they say to have ordered and adorned the sentences of Paul
in his own speech, or else truly, because Paul did write unto the Hebrews, and
because of the envy of his name among the^ he cut of the title in the
beginning of the salutation. These things considered, what need those tragical
exclamations in so trifling a matter? Does not the title tell it is S. Paul's?
why strike they out S. Paul's name? what an heretical peevishness is this?
For lack of good matter, you are driven to loud clamors against us, but I
will even conclude in your own words, I report me to all indifferent men of
common sense, whether we do it to deminish the credit of the epistle, which of
al S. Paul's epistles we might least miss, when we come to dispute against
your Popish sacrifice, and sacrificing priesthood: or whether you do not
craftily move a scruple in the minds of simple persons, to make the^ doubt of
the authority of that epistle (whose double cannon shot you are not able to
bear, when it is thu^dred out against you) under color that it is not of
sound credit among our selves, that use it against you. Which of all the lies
that ever Satan invented, and taught you to utter, is one of the most
abominable.

MART. 12. I know very well that the authority of Canonical Scripture
stands not upon the certainty of the author, but yet to be Paul's or not
Paul's, Apostolical or not Apostolical, makes great difference of credit
and estimation. For what made S. James epistle doubted of sometime, or the
second of S. Peter, and the rest, but that they were not thought to be the
epistles of those Apostles? This Luther saw very well, when he denied S. James
epistle to be James the Apostles writing. If titles of books be of no
importance, then leave out Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, leave out Paul in
his other epistles also, and you shall much pleasure the Manichees and other
old Heretics: and if the titles make no difference, urge no more the title of
the Apocalypse, S. John the Divines, as though it were not S. John's the
Evangelists, and you shall much displeasure some Heretics now a days.
Briefly, most certain it is, and they know it best by their own usual doings,
that it is a principal way to the discredit of any book, to deny it to be
that authors, under whose name it has been received.

FVLK. 12. If you know so well that the authority of the Canonical scripture,
stands not upon the certainty of the auctor: as in deed it does not. For
the books of Judges, of Ruth, of Samuel the later* of the Kings, etc. who can
certainly affirm by whom they were written? with what forehead do you charge
us to doubt of the authority of this epistle, because we report out of the
ancient writers, the uncertainty of the auctor? or leave out that title
which is not certainly true? But yet (you say) to be Paul's or not Paul's,
apostolical or not apostolical, makes great difference of credit and
estimation. If by apostolical you mean of apostolical spirit or authority,
I agree to that you say of apostolical, or not apostolical. If you mean
apostolical that only which was written by some Apostle, you will make great
difference of credit and estimation between the Gospel of Mark, Luke, and
the Acts of the Apostles, from the gospels of Matthew and John. But which of us
I pray you that thinks that this epistle was not written by S. Paul, once
doubts whether it be not of Apostolical spirit and authority? Which is
manifest by this, that both in preaching and writing we cite it thus, the
Apostle to the Hebrews. And if it were written by S. Luke, or by S. Clement,
which both were Apostolic men, seeing it is out of controversy that it was
written by the spirit of God, it is doubtless Apostolical and differs not
in credit and estimation from those writings that are known certainly to have
been written by the Apostles. But I marvel greatly why you write, that to be
Paul's or not Paul's, makes great difference of credit and estimation. Those
epistles that are Peter's and John's are not Paul's, and yet I think their is no
great difference of credit and estimation between them and Paul's. What you
think I know not, but you write very suspitiously. You ask what made S. James
epistle, or the second of Peter and the rest, to be sometimes doubted of, but
that they were not thought to be the epistles of those Apostles? Yes, something
else, or else they doubted vainly of them, and without just cause, as I
think they did. But when their were two Apostles called James, he that
doubts whether the epistle was written by James the brother of John, and is
persuaded it was written rather by James the son of Alphaeus, doubts
nothing of the credit, authority, and estimation of the epistle. No more do
we, which doubt whether the epistle to the Hebrews were written by S. Paul,
seeing we are persuaded it was written either by S. Barnabas, or by S. Luke, or
by S. Clement, as the ancient writers thought, or by some other of the
Apostles or Evangelists, we make no question but that it is Apostolical, and
of equal authority with the rest of the holy scriptures. But Eusebius denied
the epistle of S. James, because he was persuaded that it was written by no
Apostle or Apostolic man, and therefore says plainly that it is a bastard or
counterset: and so belike was Luther deceived* if ever he denied it, as you say
he did. But if titles of books be of no importance (say you) then leave out
Matthew, Mark, John, and Paul in his other Epistles. What need that I pray
you? Is there no difference between leaving out a title whereof there has been
great uncertainty, and diversity in Gods church, and which in some Greek
copies both written and printed is left out: and in leaving out those titles
that never were omitted, nor never any question, or controversy moved of them
by any of the ancient catholic fathers? But you will us to urge no more the
title of the Apocalypse of S. John the Divine, as though it were not S. John
the Evangelists, and we shall please I know not what heretics of our time
except it be the Papists whom it would most concern, that the revelation of
S. John in which their Antichrist of Rome is so plainly described were brought
out of credit. But if you had read Bezaes preface before the Apocalypse, you
should find that even by that title, he gathers a probable argument, that it
was written by John the Evangelist, because it is not like that this excellent
name THE DIVINE could agree to any John in the Apostles time so aptly, as to
Saint John the Evangelist, beside the consent of al antiquity, ascribing that
Revelation to Saint John the Evangelist and Apostle. Last of all (you say) it
is most certain and we know best by our usual doings, that it is a
principal way to discredit any book, to deny it to be the authors under whose
name it has been received. How certain it is with you, whereof no man else
but you can see any light of reason or necessity of conclusion, I know not,
but we are not so void of wit, if we lacked honesty, that we would
discredit Paul's Epistle, by saying it was Peter's, or Augustines sermon, by
saying it was Ambrose, or Chrysostomes work by saying it was Basils. But if
we would bring any book out of credit by denying the auctor whose title it
has borne: we would rather entitle it to some other writer of less credit,
or later time, or by some other arguments prove it unworthy of credit, not
by only denying it to be the auctors, under whose name it has hene received.

MART. 13. But I come to the third point of voluntary expositions of the
Scripture, that is when every man expounds according to his error and
Heresy. This needs no proof, for we see it with our eyes. Look upon the
Caluinistes and Puritanes at home, the Lutherans, Zuinglians, and Caluinists
abroad: read their books written vehemently, one sect against an other: are
not their expositions of one and the same Scripture as diverse and contrary,
as their opinions differ one from an other? Let the example at home be, their
controversy about the distinction of Ecclesiastical degrees, Archbishop,
Bishop, and minister: the example abroad, their diverse imaginations and
fantasies* upon these most sacred words, Hoc est corpus meum.

FVLK. 13. That every one of us expounds the scripture voluntarily according
to his error or heresy, you say it needs no proof, for you see it with
your eyes. You have very clear sight to see a mote in other men's eyes, but can
not see a beam in your own. You make your demonstration by the Caluinists and
Puritans at home, and the Lutherans, Zuinglians, and Caluinists abroad* the one
for the distinction of Ecclesiastical degrees, Archbishop, Bishop, and
Minister: the other for their diverse imaginations and fantasies of these
words* Hoc est corpus meum. But I beseech you sir, touching the domestical
dissentio^, what is the text, or what be the texts of Scripture? upon which
these voluntary expositions* are made* for the distinction or confusion of
Ecclesiastical degrees? If they had been as ready as Hoc est corpus meum, they
should have been set down, as well as that. But I suppose they are yet to
seek for that controversy, as I take it stands rather in collections than
interpretations, and in question whether the political government of the Church
be distinctly expressed in the scripture, or no. As for the contention abroad,
I confess to stand a great part in exposition of that text, wherein although
the one part does err, is that a sufficient cause to condemn the^ both. The
church of Africa, and the Church of Rome, and the two principal lights of them
both Cyprian and Cornelius, dissented about rebaptizing them that were baptized
of Heretics. The Aphricans not in one text only, but in the Cyprianus, and
ali^ in Concilio Aphricano.
exposition of many, differed from the Romans, and from the truth, yet it were
hard to condemn them both for Heretics, and least of all them that held the
truth. S. Augustine and S. Hierom dissented about a text of S. Paul to the
Galathians, of Peter's dissembling, as their contrary epistles do testify. The
truth was of S. Augustines side, yet was not the other an heretic, following a
wrong interpretation. And to come nearer home unto you, the Dominicans and
Franciscans Friars were at daggers drawing (as we say) yea at most sharp and
bitter contention between themselves, and all the Popish Church was divided
about their brawling, concerning the conception of the virgin Marie, whether
she were conceived in sin, or no, where many texts of Scripture must needs
receive voluntary expositions, if not of both parts, yet at the least of one
part: which of those will you say were heretics? If you say neither of both,
then must you have stronger reasons to prove us all heretics, than voluntary
expositions, where parties be in diverse opinions, especially in matter not
overthrowing the foundation of Christian religion. And when you have gathered
the most voluntary expositions you can find, yet shall you find none so
gross, so absurd, so impertinent, as you Papists have coined, for
maintenance of your errors and heresies, of which you your self are ashamed,
though otherwise you have iron foreheads and brazen faces. A few examples among
a great many shall suffice. God made man according to his own image, that is
to say, we must have images in the Church. No man lights a candell and
puts it under a bushel, the meaning is, that images must be set upon the
altar. God made two great lights, the Sun and the Moon, that is, the Pope
to be above the Emperor. Behold here are two swords: that is, the Pope has
power of both the swords. Put on the whole armor of God, that is, the Priest
must put on all his vestiments, before he say Mass. I am become as sownding
brass, or as a tinckling Cymbal, that is, the bells in the steeple signify
preaching of Gods word. I might fill many leaves, yea a whole book of such
popish expositions, as the Papists in our days dare not for shame abide by.

MART. 14. And if you will yet have a further demonstration, this one may
suffice for all. They reject Councels, and Fathers, and the Catholic Churches
interpretation, unless it be agreeable to Gods word, and whether it be
agreeable or no, that Luther shall judge for the Lutherans, Calvin for the
Caluinists, Cartwright for the Puritans, and an other for the Brethren of love:
briefly them selves will be judges both of Councels and Whitak. page 17. and
120.
Fathers, whether they expound the Scriptures well or no, and every youth among
them upon confidence of his spirit and knowledge will saucily control not
only one, but all the fathers consenting together, if it be against that which
they imagine to be the truth.

FVLK. 14. We had need of a better demonstration than the former, by which you
your selves are proved Heretics, rather than we. But let us see how handsomely
you begin. They reject (say you) Councels and Fathers, and the Catholic
Churches interpretation, unless it be agreeable to Gods word. Thus far you
say well. We do reject not only those that you name, but even an Angel from
heaven, except his message be agreeable to Gods word. But all the rest that you
assume to the end of this section, is a stark staring lie, except that you
say of H. N. for the brethren of love, which are more like to you than to us.
For neither Luther, nor Calvin, nor Cartwright is judge among us, whether any
thing be agreeable to the word of God, but whatsoever any of them do say, it
is examined and tried by the Scriptures. And the Scriptures them selves, where
they are so obscure, that neither by common sense, knowledge of the original
tongue, Grammar, Rhetorike, Logike, storye, nor any other humane knowledge, nor
judgment of any writers, old, or new, the certain understanding can be found
out, they are either expounded by conference of other plainer textes of
Scripture, according to the analogy of faith: or else they remain still in
obscurity, until it shall please God to reueile a more clear knowledge of
the^. But none so like the family of love as you Papists are, which reject
councels, fathers interpretation of the most ancient Catholic Church, yea and
manifest Scripture it self, except it be agreeable to the judgment of your P.
M. Pontifex Max. the Pope, as those familiar devils, submit all things to the
sentence, and authority of their H. N. Shame you nothing therefore to quote
Whitaker page 17. and 120. as though he affirmed, that we our selves will be
judges, both of Councels, and Fathers, whether they expound the Scriptures well
or no? because he writes (percase) that we ought to examine al men's writings
by the word of god. Does the Apostle make every man judge of all things, when
he wills every man to examine all things* and to hold that which is good? If
any youth upon confidence of his wit, or knowledge, presume too much in divine
matters, we count it rashness. But that any youth among us, upon confidence of
his spirit, will saucily controwle all the fathers co^senting together against
his fantasy, except it be some Schismatike or Heretic, that is cast out from
amongst us, I do utterly deny, neither are you able to prove it of any that
is allowed among us.

MART. 15. Whereupon it rises that one of them defends this as very well said
of Luther, That he esteemed not Ibid. page 101.
the worth of a rushe a thousand Augustines, Cyprians, Churches, against him
self. And an other very finely and figuratively, (as he thought) against the
holy Doctor and Martyr S. Cyprian, affirming that the Church of Rome can not
err Praef. ad 6. theses Oxon page 25.
in faith, says thus: Pardon me Cyprian, I would gladly believe thee* but that
believing thee, I should not believe the Gospel. This is that which S.
Augustine says of the like men, dulcissime vanos esse, non peritos, sed
perituros, nec Lib. Confess. 1. cap. 14. lib. 7. c. 20.
tam disertos in errore, quam desertos a veritate. And I think verily, that
not only we, but the wiser men among them selves, smile at such eloquence, or
pity it, saying this, or the like most truly, Prodierunt oratores noui, stulti
adolescentuli. Cicer. de Senect.


FVLK. 15. Why should you not at your pleasure upon your false assumption
general, infer one or two slanders particular. M. Whitaker defends that
it was well said of Luther. That he esteemed not the worth of a rush a thousand
Augustines, Cyprians, Churches, against himself. Would God that every Papist
would read his own words in the place by you quoted, that he might see your
impudent forgerie. For I hope there is no Christian, that will imagine, that
either Luther would so speak, or any man of honesty, defend him so speaking.
For Luther was not so senseless, to oppose his own person, but the truth of
his cause, grounded upon the holy Scriptures, not only against one thousand of
men, holding the contrary, but even against ten thousand of Angels, if they
should oppose them selves against the truth of God. But I am too blame to deal
so much in M. Whitakers cause, who ere it be long, will displaye the falshoode
of Gregory Martin, in a Latin writing, to his great ignominy.

The next cauil is upon M. Rainoldes words, in his preface to his six
positions, disputed upon at Oxford, where against Cyprian, affirming that the
Church of Rome can not err in faith, he says: Pardon me Cyprian, I would
gladly believe thee, but that in believing thee, I should not believe the
Gospel. These words you confess that he spoke figuratively, and finely, as he
thought: but that he used the figures of Ironve and concession, you will not
acknowledge, but all other men may easily see. For first he no where grants,
that S. Cyprian affirms, that the Church of Rome can not erie in faith. But
immediately before the words by you translated, after he had proved out of the
eleue^th to the Romans, that the particular Church of Rome may be cut of, as
well as the Church of the Israelites, which were the natural branches, he
asks the question Quid? and Cypriano secus est visum? What? And did it seem
otherwise to Cyprian? Pardon me Cyprian, etc. His meaning is plain, that
Cyprian thought not otherwise than S. Paul has written, or if he did, it was
lawful to dissent from Cyprian. As a little after he says: Quare si Romanam
Ecclesiam errare non posse, etc. Wherefore if Cyprian thought that the Church
of Rome could not err in that point, by the sentence of the Papists, he him
self is to be condemned of error: for diverse Papists whom he names,
confess that every particular Church may err, and Verratus, one of them,
affirms that the Church of Rome is a particular Church, which the rest can
not deny. And in deed that which Cyprian writes, is about certain runneagate
Heretics, that flying out of the Church of Carthage, sought to be received of
the particular Church of Rome. All this while here is no grant that Cyprian
affirms, that the Church of Rome cannot err in faith. And if Cyprian had so
affirmed contrary to the scripture, it might have been justly replied unto him,
which S. Augustine says when he was pressed with his authority. Contra
Crescon. lib. 2. cap. 31. Nos nullam Cypriano facimus iniuriam. We do Cyprian
no wrong, when we distinguish any writings of his from the Canonical authority
of the divine Scriptures. And in truth the words which M. Rainolds before
cited out of S. Cyprian, lib. 1. ep 3. ad Cornel. are spoken of no matter of
faith, but in a matter of discipline. Neither does Cyprian say, that the Church
of Rome can not err in faith, but that those Heretics which brought letters
from schismatikes and profane persons, did not consider, that they are Romans,
whose faith is praised by the commendation, or preaching of the Apostle, to
whom perfidia, falsehood, or false dealing can have none access. Meaning that
the Romans so long as they continue in that faith which was praised by the
Apostle, ca^ not join with Heretics and Schismatikes, that are cast out of
other Catholic Churches. For that he could not mean that the Pope or Church
of Rome cannot err in faith (as the Papists affirm) it is manifest, for that
in a question of religion* he dissented both from the Bishop and Church of
Rome, as all learned men know he did, which he would never have done, if he
had believed they could not err. And that his meaning was not that the Bishop
of Rome could not err in matters of discipline, it is manifest in the next
epistle, where he complains, that Basilides a wicked man, after his crimes
were detected, and his conscience made bare by his own confession, went to
Rome, and deceived our fellow Bishop Stephanus, dwelling far of, and being
ignorant of the case, so that he sought ambitiously to be unjustly restored
into the Bishoprike from whence he was justly deposed. These things prove, that
S. Cyprian thought it no impossible thing, for the Bishops and Church of Rome
to err in faith or government. Wherefore that you cite out of Augustine
agrees best unto your self, and such as you are, who employ al your eloquence
and utterance, to set forth lies and slanders. Last of all, when you have
nothing else to disgrace those grave and learned writers, you would make them
by abusing a piece of Tullie, co^temptible for their youth, among such as know
them not, who if they wanted half a score years a piece, of that ripe and well
seasoned age they have, yet with those gifts of godliness and learning, which
God has in great measure bestowed upon them, they were worthy to be
reverenced. So that Venomous traitor, which writes of the persecution of the
Papists, makes me a very young man, and therefore contemned of the ancient
Fathers at Wisbiche, and yet I can easily prove, that I was of lawful age, if
more than twice one and twenty years will serve, before ever I saw Wisbiche
castle.

MART. 16. The 4. point is, of picking quarrels to the very original text: for
alter and change it I hope they shall not be able in this watchful world of
most vigilant Catholics. But what they would do, if all Bibles were only in
their hands and at their commandment, guess by this: that Beza against the
evidence Beza the mouse of Geneua, gnavveth the text of Scripture.
of all copies both Greek and Latin, (In his Annot. upon the new Testam. set
forth in the year 1556.) thinks (...), is more than should be in the text
Mat. 10: and (...) Luc. 22. (...) Act. 7: the first, against Peter's supremacy:
the second, against the real presence of Christ's blood in the B. Sacrament:
the third, against the making of what soever images, whether they be adored or
no. Thus you see how the mouse of Geneua (as I told you before of Marcion the
mouse of Pontus) knibbleth and gnaweth about it, though he can not bite it of
altogether.

FVLK. 16. In this point you do nothing but pick quarrels, seeing you confess
that neither they have, nor can alter, or change any thing of the original
text. If Beza express his conjecture upon some ground or similitude of
reason, that (...) in Matthew 10. (...) Luc. 22. and (...) Act 7. might perhaps
be added to the text out of the margent or otherwise, and yet does not
precisely affirm it, but leave it to judgment and trial of ancient copies,
if any shall be found to favor his conjecture, what has he like to the mouse
of Po^tus Marcion, which altered and corrupted the text? you say he knibbleth
and gnaweth about it, though he can not bite it of altogether. And for what
advantage? forsooth, because the first word makes for Peter's supremacy, a
poor supremacy that Peter can gain in that he is named the first in the
Cataloge of the Apostles, which is but a primacie of order, not of honor, or
as Ambrose says, a primacie of confession, not of honor, De ineam. dom. cap.
4.
of faith, not of degree. The second word you say is against the real presence
of Christ's blood in the B. Sacrament. You are a perilous catte that can spy a
mouse gnawing at the real presence, which none of the ancient Fathers, or late
writers before these days could find in those words. And as for making of
Images who does forbid, except it be in any use of religion, which God does
forbid in the second commandment of the first table. And where you will
have men to guess what we would do if all Bibles were only in our hands, by
this example of Bezaes conjectures. I wish men rather to consider what the
Romish rattes were like to do in that case, which in their translation of the
ten commandments for the peoples instruction, have clean gnawen out the
second commandment, and because they cannot bite it clean out of the Bible,
they seek all shifts to hide it under the first commandment. Finally
whether Lindanus and you do pick quarrels against all the evidence of all
Greek copies, I refer me to your 4. section, where out of Lindanus you
falsely affirm that certain of Marcions corruptions remain in the Greek text
until this day.

MART. 17. He does the like in sundry places which you may see in his Annotat.
Act. 7. v. 16. Where he is saucie against al copies Greek and Latin to
pronounce corruption, corruption, auouching and endeavoring to prove that it
must be so, and that with these words, To what purpose should the holy Ghost,
or Luke, add this? Act. 8. v. 26. But because those places concern no
controversy, I say no more but that he biteth at the text, and would change it
according to his imagination, if he might: which is too proud an enterprise for
Beza, and small reverence of the holy scriptures, so to call the very text into
controversy, that whatsoever pleases not him, crepte out of the margent into
the text, which is his common and almost his only conjecture.

FVLK. 17. Where Beza notes corruption in places that concern no
controversy, it appears that without parcialitie he desires to restore the
text to sincerity. And yet he is charged of you with pride and sauciness.
Why more I pray you, than Lindanus, of whom you learned to pratle so much of
the mouse of Pontus? Which lib. 2 de optim. genesis interpret. scripturas, has
diverse chapters of the defect of the Greek text, of the redundance, and of
the corruption thereof. If Lindanus might do this with modesty, and desire to
find out the truth (as I think he did) why may not an indifferent reader,
judge the like of Beza, in his doings? As for creeping out of the margent into
the text, which you say is his common and almost only conjecture, why may it
not come to pass in writing out of the books of the Scripture, as it has in
other writings of other auctors. And that either by that means, or by some
other means, corruption has happened to al copies that at this day are extant,
both Greek and Latin, in naming Hieremie for Zachary, Math. 27, Who is so
blind that he will not see? yet the ordinary Gloss confesses, that there were
diverse copies in times past, in which the name of Hieremie was not, but the
word Prophet generally. Likewise in the vulgar Latin text, in the beginning
of S. Marks Gospel, Esaias is cited for that which is written in Malachie* and
some Greek copies have the same, from whence it is like the Latin translation
received that error. But the more part of best Greek copies, leave out the
name of Esaias. How these corruptions should come into the text, except it be
out of the margent, if you can find a better conjecture, we shall be content
with more patience to hear you, than you can abide to hear Beza.

MART. 18. He biteth sore at the word (...) Luc. 1. v. 7^. and will not
translate that, but the Hebrew word of the old (...)
Testament, but at (...) (Act. 2. v. 24.) much more, and at (...) (Act. 7. v.
14.) exceedingly: but yet after he has said all that he could against it, he
concludes, that he No. Test. an. 1556. (...). Beza reconcileth the Greek ^^^^
of the new Testament with the Hebrevve text of the old, by putting out of the
Greek text so much as pleases him.
durst not, and that he had a conscience, upon conjecture to change any thing.
And therefore all this is gnawing only. But in the 3. of Luke he makes no
conscience at all, to leave out these words verse. 36. Qui fuit Cainan, not
only in his own translation, but in the vulgar Latin which is joined
therewith, saying in his Annot. Non dubitauimus expungere, that is, We doubted
not to put it out: and why? by the authority of Moses Genesis 11. Whereby he
signifies, that it is not in the Hebrew Genesis 11. where this posterity of S^m
is ^eckened: and so to maintain the Hebrew verity (as they call it) in the
old Testament he cares not what become of the Greek in the new Testament,
which yet at other times, against the vulgar Latin text, they call the Greek
verity, and the pure fountain, and that text whereby all translations must be
tried.

FVLK. 18. His biting (as you call it) at the word (...), Luke 1. and (...),
Ast. 2. and (...), Act. 9. Seeing they concern no controversy, might have
been contained in the section next before, especially seeing you confess he
says he durst not, and that he had a conscience upon conjecture to change any
thing. But in the 3. of Luke verse. 36. He makes no conscience at all to leave
out the words, Qui fuit Cainan, saying in his annotations, that he doubted not
to put it out by authority of Moses, Genesis 11. A sore charge to diminish any
part of the holy Scripture. But if he have only corrected an error of the
scribe, which by all likelihoode took upon him to add unto S. Luke out of the
Greek text of the 70* that which is not in the Hebrew, verily, I see not what
offense he has committed. For first he can mean no fraud in co^cealing those
words, whereof he does admonish the reader, and of the cause of his leaving them
out. Secondly* he wins no advantage against his adversaries, or to his own
cause, by omitting to say, that Sala was the son of Cainan, whom Moses
affirms to be the son of Arphaxad. And seeing Moses Genesis 11. has no such
Cainan the son of Arphaxad, it is not like that S. Luke, who borrowed that
part of his genealogy out of Moises, would add any thing which Moises had
omitted. But you say that Beza to maintain the Hebrew verity of the old
Testament, eareth not what become of the Greek in the new Testament. You should
have made your antitheton more full (wherein it seems you pleased your self
not a little) if you had said that Beza to maintain the Hebrew verity of the
old Testament, cares not what becomes of the Greek corruption in the new
Testament: and so you should have spoken both more eloquently, and more truly.
But at other times (you say) against the vulgar Latin text, they call the
Greek, text the Greek verity, and the pure fountain, and that whereby all
translations must be tried. We say in deed that by the Greek text of the new
Testament, all translations of the new Testament must be tried, but we mean
not by every corruption that is in any Greek coppie of the new Testament,
and much less that the Hebrew text of the old Testament, should be reformed
after the Greek of the new, where it is uncorrupted: and least of all where
any copy is guilty of a manifest error as in this place now in question.

MART. 19. But if he have no other way to reconcile both Testaments, but by
striking out in the Greek of the new, all that agrees not with the Hebrew of
the old Testament, then let him alter and change so many words of our Savior
him self, of the Evangelists, and of the Apostles, as are cited out of the
old Testament, and are not in Hebrew. Which places they know are very many,
and when need is, they shall be gathered to their hands. Let him strike out
(Mat. 13. v. 14. 15. and Act. 28. v. 26. 27.) the words of our Savior and S.
Paul, cited out of Esaias, because they are far otherwise in the Hebrew. Est.
6. 9. 10. Gal. 3. 13. (...).
Strike out of the Epistle to the Galathians these words, upon a tree: because
in the Hebrew it is only thus. Cursed is he that is hanged. Deuteronomy. 21. in finc.
Yea strike out of David's Psalms that which concerns our redemption upon the
cross (...)
much nearer, They have pierced my hands and my feet, Psalm. 21. because in
the Hebrew there is no such thing. Let the^ control the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. for
saying, dedit, he gave gifts: (...)
because it is both in the Hebrew and Greek, (Psalm. 67.) Accepisti, (...)
thou tookest gifts. and (Hebr. 10.) for, corpus aptasti, let them put, aures
perforasti, because it is so in the Hebrew, Psalm. 40. To be short, if all must
be reformed according to the Hebrew, why does he not in S. Steuens sermon cut
off the number of sieve souls from seventy five, because it is not in the
Hebrew?

FVLK. 19. If you had read Beza his works as diligently to learn the truth
out of them, as you have pried here and there busily how to epsy some fault
or error in them, you should easily have found, that he has other ways to
reconcile both the Testaments, and the difference that seems to be in the
allegatio^s, than by striking out of the Greek in the new, all that agrees
not with the Hebrew of the old Testament. And therefore vainly you bid him
alter so many words as are cited in the new Testament out of the old, which are
not in the Hebrew, and strike out of Matthew. 13. v 14. 15. and Act. 28. v. 26.
27. the words of our Savior* and S. Paul, cited out of Esaias, because they are
otherwise in the Hebrew. Beza knows that Christ and his Apostles always keep
the sense of the Hebrew verity, although they do not always rehearse the very
words. But whereas you bid him out of Gal. 3. 13. strike out these words (
upon a tree) because in the Hebrew it is only thus: Cursed is he that is
hanged. You show either gross ignorance or intolerable frowardness* for
these words ( upon a tree) are in that verse, and in the next before. For thus
the Hebrew text is. 22. When there shall be in any (...)
person a sin to be adjudged to death, and he shall be delivered to death, if
thou shall hang him upon a tree: 23. Let not his carcass tarry all night upon
that tree, but in any case thou shall bury him the same day, for accursed to
God is he that is hanged. The word ( tree) being twice named before, who would
be so mad to say, that S. Paul has added it beside the Hebrew text.
Likewise where you bid us strike out of the Hebrew. Psalm. 21. that which
concerns our redemption on the cross. They have pierced my hands and my
feet, because in the Hebrew there is no such thing: you say most untruly,
for there is nothing else in the Hebrew, no not in the common readings, as
Johannes Isaake a Popish Jew will teach you, who has confuted the cauils of
Lindanus against the Hebrew text, of whom you borrowed this exam le, where if
you had not been blind with malice, you might have seen that Saint
Hierome did read without controversy, Fix^runt, they have pierced, as also
that the most ancient copy of the Hebrew Psalms, supposed to have pertained
to Saint Augustine of Ca^terburie, has Charu they (...)
have pierced, though you had been ignorant what is written concerning this
word in the Masoreth and what Isaac also writes of that word, as it is
commonly read, that it can not signify, as you fantasy sicut leo: like a
lion. And therefore the Chalde, paraphrast turns it, As a lion, they pierced
my hands and my feet. But of this matter more hereafter, as occasion shall be
given. As for the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. saying that Christ gave gifts, whereas of
David it is said, he received gifts, speaks nothing contrary to the Hebrew:
but shows wherefore Christ has received gifts: namely to bestow upon his
church. Except you will say that Christ gave of his own and received none: and
so the Apostle does show the excellency of the truth, above the figure:
Christ above David. Likewise, where the Psalmist says in the Hebrew: Thou
have opened mine ears, the Apostle does rightly collect, that Christ had a
body, which in his obedience was to be offered unto the father. Last of all
you would have five souls cut from 75. in Saint Stephens Sermon, because it
is not in the Hebrew: but you are deceived. For Saint Stephen gathers the
whole number of them that are named in the forty sixth chapter of Genesis.
Namely, the two sons of Judah, that were dead, and Iacobes four wives, to
show how great his family was at the uttermost, before he went down into
Egypt, and how greatly God did multiply him afterward. What is there in any
of these examples like to Qui fuit Cainan, about which you make so much a do?

MART. 20. Must such difficulties and diversities be resolved by chopping and
changing, hacking and hewing the sacred text of holy Scripture? Sec into what
perplexities wilful heresy and arrogancy has driven them. To discredit the
vulgar Latin translation of the Bible, and the fathers expositions according
to the same (for that is the original cause of this) and besides, that they
may have always this evasion, It is not so in the Hebrew, it is otherwise in
the Greek, and so seem jolly fellows and great clerks unto the ignorant
people, what do they? they admit only the Hebrew in the old Test. and the
Greek in the new, to be the true and authentical text of the Scripture.
Whereupon this follows, that they reject, and must needs reject the Greek of
the old Test. (called the Septuaginta) Their perplexity in defending both the
hebrew text of the old Testament, and Greek text of the new.
as false, because it differs from the Hebrew. Which being rejected,
thereupon it follows again, that wheresoever those places so disagreeing from
the Hebrew are cited by Christ or the Evangelists and Apostles, there also they
must be rejected, because they disagree from the Hebrew, and so yet again it
follows, that the Greek text of the new Testament is not true, because it is
not according to the Hebrew verity: and consequently the words of our
Savior, and writings of his Apostles must be reformed (to say the least)
because they speak according to the Septuaginta, and not according to the
Hebrew.

FVLK. 20. Who allows, or who can abide chopping and changing, or hacking and
hewing the sacred text of holy Scriptures? As for the perplexities whereunto
you feign that wilful heresy and arrogancy has driven us, is of your
weauing, for God be praised we can well enough with good conscience and sound
knowledge, that may abide the judgment of all the learned in the world, defend
both the Hebrew text of the old Testament, and the Greek text of the new. Not
of purpose to discredit the vulgar Latin translation, and the expositions of
the fathers: but to fetch the truth, upon which the hope of our salvation is
grounded, out of the first fountains and springs, rather than out of any
streams that are derived from them. And this we do agreeable to the ancient
fathers judgments. For who knows not what fruitful pains S. Hierom took
in translating the Scripture out of the original tongue, neither would he be
dissuaded by S. Augustine, who although he misliked that enterprise, at the
first, yet afterward he highly commended the necessity of the Greek and
Hebrew tongues for Latin men, to find out the certain truth of the text in
the infinite variety of the Latin interpretations: for thus he writetth, De
doct. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 11. Contra ignota signa propria magnum remedium est
linguarum cognitio. E^ latinae etc. Against unknown proper signs, the
knowledge of tongues is a great remedy. And truly men of the Latin tongue,
whom we have now taken in hand to instruct, have need also of two other
tongues unto the knowledge of the divine Scriptures, namely the Hebrew, and the
Greek, that recourse may be had unto the former copies, if the infinite
variety of the Latin interpreters shall bring any doubt, although we find
oftentimes in the books, Hebrew words not interpreted, as Amen, Alleluia,
Racha, Osanna, etc. and a little after Sed no^ propter haec pauca etc. But not
for these few words which to mark and inquire of, it is a very easy thing,
but for the diversities (as it is said) of the interpreters, the knowledge of
those tongues is necessary. For they that have interpreted the scriptures out
of the Hebrew tongue into the Greek tongue, may be nu^bred, but the Latin
interpreters by no means can be numbered. For in the first times of the faith,
as a Greek book came into every man's hand, and he seemed to have some skill
in both the tongues, he was bold to interpret it. Which thing truly has more
helped the understanding, than hindered, if the readers be not negligent: for
the looking upon many books, has often times made manifest sundry obscure or
dark sentences. This is S. Augustines sound judgment, of the knowledge of
tongues, and diversity of interpretations, for the better understanding of the
Scriptures. But let us see what be the absurdities, that you gather of our
defending the original texts of both the tongues. First, we must needs reject
the Greek of the old Testament, called septuaginta, as false, because it
differs from the Hebrew. Where it is not only different in words, but also
contrary in sense, Why should we not? but if it retain the sense and
substance, although it express not the same words, we need not reject it. S.
Hierom, who was required by Paula, and Eustochium, to expound the Prophets,
not only according to the truth of the Hebrew, but also after the translation
of the Septuaginta, whereof he diverse times complayneth: upon the first of
Nahum, says expressly, that it was against his conscience always, to follow
the same. Ignoscite prolixitati, etc. Pardon me that I am so long. For I can
not, following both the story, and the tropologie or doctrine of manners,
comprehend both briefly: most of all, seeing that I am so greatly tormented,
or troubled with the variety of the translation, and against my conscience
sometimes I am compelled to frame a consequence of the vulgar edition: which
was the Septuaginta. This was Saint Hieroms opinion of the Septuagintaes
translation. But upon reiection of that translation (say you) it follows that
wheresoever those places, so disagreeing from the Hebrew are cited by Christ,
or the Evangelists and Apostles, there also they must be rejected, because
they disagree from the Hebrew, and so the Greek text of the new Testament is
not true, and consequentlye the words of our Savior, and writings of his
Apostles speaking according to the Septuaginta, must at least be reformed. It
is an old saying, and a true, that one inconvenience being granted, many do
follow, and so you may heap up an hundred after this manner. But for answer
I say, that neither our Savior, nor his Apostles, citing any place out of the
old Testament, do bring any thing disagreeing in sense, and substance of
matter (the purpose for which they allege it considered) from the truth of the
Hebrew text. Therefore there is no need that the 70. in those places should be
rejected. Although our Savior Christ speaking in the Syrian tongue, is not to
be thought ever to have cited the text of the 70. which is in Greek. And his
Apostles and Evangelists using that text, regard the substance of the sentence,
and not the form of words. For many times they cite not the very words of the
Greek 70. neither: and S. Hierom in Catalogo script: Eccles. which is set as a
Preface to S. Mathewes Gospel, tells you expressly, that in the Hebrew
example of S. Matthew which he had, wheresoever the Evangelist S. Matthew either
in his own person, or in the person of our Lord and Savior, uses the
testimonies of the old Testament, he follows not the authority of the 70.
translators, but the Hebrew: of which these are two places: Out of Egypt have I
called my son. And he shall be called a Nazarite. See you not what a perilous
perplexity we are are in by defending both the Hebrew text of the old
Testament, and the Geeke of the New, when neither are contrary to the other?

MART. 21. All which must needs follow, if this be a good consequence, I find
it not in Moises, nor in the Hebrew, therefore I struck it out, as Beza does
and says concerning the foresaid words. Qui fuit Cainan. This consequence
therefore let us see how they will justify: and withal let them tell us,
whether they will discredit the new Testament, because of the Septuaginta, or
credit the Septuaginta, because of the new Testament, or how they can credit
one, and discredit the other, where both agree and consent together: or,
whether they will discredit both, for credit of the Hebrew: or rather, whether
there be not some other way to reconcile both Hebrew and Greek, better than
Bezaes impudent presumption. Which if they will not maintain, let them flatly
confess that he did wickedly, and not (as they do) defend every word and
deed of their masters, be it never so heinous, or salve it at the least.

FVLK. 21. No whit of that does follow by striking out qui fuit Cainan.
Because it is not found in Moises, and therefore we have nothing to do to
justify your vain consequence grounded upon an absurdity of your own
devising. But we must tell you whether we will discredit the new Testament,
because of the Septuaginta? no not for a thousand millions of Septuagintaes,
nor for all the world will we credit the Septuaginta, against the truth of
the old Testament. But what soever is cited out of the 70. in the new, is not
contrary to the Hebrew in the old, and therefore the way of reconciliation is
easily found, without discrediting both, or either of both in those places. And
in this place, which is a mere corruption, borrowed out of the corruption of
the Septuagintaes, or a Iudaical addition Genesis 11. I think there is no better
way of reconciling than to strike it clean out, as Beza has done, which
generation neither is in the Hebrew verity, nor in your own vulgar Latin
translation, either Genesis 11. or 1. Par. 1. Beside that it makes a foul error
in the computation of time, adding no less than 230. years between Arphaxad
and Sala, more than the Hebrew verity, or the vulgar Latin agreeing therewith,
does number. And therefore he was more presumptuous, that out of the corrupt
and false text of the Septuaginta, added the same unto the Genealogy in S.
Luke, than Beza, which by the authority of Moses removed the same. If you will
still persist to defend the authority of the Septuaginta, against the Hebrew
verity, which like an Atheist you deride, at leastwise defend your own
vulgar Latin translation of the old Testament, and deliver your self out of
that perplexity, in which you would place us, between the Hebrew of the old,
and the Greek of the new Testament. Seeing no less doubts intangleth you
between the Latin of the new, and the Latin of the old, differing
altogether a like, as the Greek and the Hebrew do.

MART. 22. Alas how far are these men from the modesty How the fathers
reconcile the said Hebrew and Greek. Li. 18. de Ciui^. c. 43. 2. Lib. de Doct.
Chr. c. 1^.
of the ancient fathers, and from the humble spirit of obedient Catholics,
who seek all other means to resolve difficulties, rather than to do violence
to the sacred Scripture, and when they find no way, they leave it to God. S.
Augustine concerning the difference of the Hebrew and the Greek, says often
to this effect, that it pleased the holy Ghost to utter by the one, that which
he would not utter by the other. And S. Ambrose thus, We have found many
things not idly added of Hexam. li. 3. ca. 6.
the 70. Greek interpreters. S. Hierom, though an earnest patron of the
Hebrew (not without cause, being at that time In Prooem. li. Paralip.
perhaps the Hebrew verity in deed) yet gives many reasons for the
differences of the Septuaginta, and concerning the foresaid places of S. Luke,
he does give a reason thereof, both for Comment. in 28. Esa. and in quaestion.
Hebrai.
the 70, and for the Evangelist that followed them, neither doubting of the
truth thereof, nor controlling them by the authority of Moses (as Beza
speaks) that is, by the Hebrew. Others say concerning Cainan, that Moses
might leave him out in the Genealogy of Sem, by the instinct of the same
Spirit, that S. Matthew left out three kings in the genealogy of Mat. c. ^.
our Savior. Where if a man would control the Evangelist by the Hebrew of the
old Testament that is read in the books of the kings, he should be as wise and
as honest a man as Beza. Lastly, Venerable Bede thinks it sufficient in this
very difficulty Praef. in Act. Apost.
of Cainan, to marvel at it reverently, vather than to search it dangerously.
And thus far of picking quarrels to the original text, and their good will to
alter and change it as they list, if they might be suffered.

FVLK. 22. Here of pity you will show unto us a piece of learning, how the
Fathers reconcile the said Hebrew and Greek, without violence to the text, as
they do always, or else leave the matter to God.

First S. Augustine De ciuitate, lib. 18. cap. 43. de doctr. chr. lib. 2. cap.
15. of their agreement, notwithstanding they 8^.
were separated into several celles, gathers, that those Septuaginta were
inspired with the same prophetical spirit of interpreting, that the Prophets
were in foreshewing. But this does S. Hierome utterly deny, and derideth
Pr^fat. in Pent^^ teuch.
the ground of this imagination, those 72. celles at Alexandria, as a fable and
a lie. That S. Ambrose says, we have found that many things are not idely
added of the 70. Greek interpreters: We confess as much, where Hexam. lib. 3.
c. 6.
their addition serves for explication of that which is contavned in the
Hebrew, and so means Ambrose: not that they had authority to add any thing,
which Moses had omitted. And we acknowledge with S. Hierome, that their may be
many reasons given for the difference of the one, from the other: But
concerning this place of S. Luke now in question, you say he gives a reason
thereof, both for the 70. and for the Evangelist that followed the^, neither
doubting of the truth thereof, nor controlling them by the authority of Moses.
And for this you quote Comment. in 28. Esa. and in question. Hebrai. in neither
of which places is any mention of this place, much less any reason given to
reconcile it, or the Septuaginta with the Hebrew. It seems you read not the
books your self, but trusted to much some man's collectio^, which you
understood not. In the Preface to the Hebrew questions, Hieronime excuses him
self against envious persons, that barked against him as though he did nothing
but reprove the errors of the 70. saying. That he thinks not his labor to be
a reprehension of the^, seeing they would not express unto Ptolomaeus king of
Alexandria, certain mystical things in the Scriptures, and especially those
things which promised the coming of Christ, least the Jews might have been
thought to worship an other God, whom that follower of Plato therefore did
greatly esteem, because they were said to worship but one god. But the
Evangelists also, and our Lord and Savior, and S. Paul the Apostle, bring
forth many things, as it were out of the old Testament, which are not had in
in our books, of which in their due places we will more fully discuss.
Whereof it is clear, that those are the more true examples, which agree with
the authority of the new Testament. Thus much Hierom in that place: but
neither in his questions upon Genesis, nor 1. Paralip. the proper places for
this text, is their any mention of this place of Luke, Qui fuit Cainan. In the
place cited by you upon the 28. of Esaias, he says, Legimus in Apostolo, etc.
We read in the Apostle. In other tongues and lips will I speak to this
people, and neither so shall they hear me, says the Lord. Which seems to
me to be taken out of this present chapter, according to the Hebrew. And this
we have observed in the old Testament, except a few testimonies which only Luke
uses otherwise, which had knowledge of the Greek tongue rather, wheresoever
any thing is said out of the old Testament, that they set it not according to
the 70. but according to the Hebrew, following the translation of no man, but
turning the sense of the Hebrew into their own speech. You see that Hierome
says nothing particularly, and that which he says generally, concerns this
place nothing at all. And very like it is, that this corruption was not crept
into S. Lukes text in his time, especially seeing neither S. Ambrose in his
commentary upon S. Luke, once touches this controversy, as he does all
other questions about that Genealogy. Where you say S. Hierome was a great
patron of the Hebrew, not without cause, being at that time perhaps the Hebrew
verity in deed. It is without perhaps, or peradventure, that not one jot, or
prick of the law of God can perish, by the testimony of our Savior
Christ, Math. 5. And if you will believe Arias Montanus, an excellent learned
Papiste, he will tell you as much, out of the same text doubtless, in his
Preface unto the great Bible by him set out, with diligent observation of all
the Accents and Hebrew points, which Christ (says he) will never suffer to
perish. And if the Hebrew verity were in Hieronyms time (as doubtless it was)
whether he had a perfect copy thereof, or no, the same Arias Montanus
testifies, if you dare credit him, being one of your sect, for opinion,
though in sincerity of mind, and love of the truth, which I pray to God to
reveal unto him, I think him far better than a number of you: he (I say)
affirms in the same Preface, against the objection that is made of the Jews
corruption of the Hebrew books: Etenim apud nonnull. for we read in some
auctors that through the fraud and impulsion of the spirit of error, some of
the nation of the Jews in times past were brought to that point of insolency,
or madness, that in the beginning of the Christian church, they changed some
words, which might altogether break of that their contention of oppugning the
Christian verity: But those places so defiled by them, were very few, and in
the books of our writers, and also in the copies, both printed and written of
the Jews them selves, are all for the most partnoted, and showed out. For
although either by the fraud of those men, or by the ignorance of the book
writers, or by injury of the times, some change has been made in the Hebrew
books, which we use, yet is there not one word, nor one letter, nor point that
is mentioned to have been of old time, which is not found to have been safely
kept, in that most rich treasury, which they call the Mazzoreth. For in
that, as in an holy and faithful custody, appointed with uttermost diligence,
and great study, the remnants, monuments, tokens, steps, and examples of the
ancient reading, are all contained, and the way how to compare the old and
new reading is showed: of which truly, being compared together, a very
certain way is extant, to the prescript rule whereof, the holy mysteries may
be showed forth, examples whereof sometime in this work, in due place, and
else where also, with Gods help, we will set forth. Thus far Arias Montanus,
whose judgment if you say you are not bound to follow, yet I suppose you can
yield no sufficient reason, why you should not credit his testimony,
concerning the certainty of the Hebrew verity, remaining to this day, and
which shall remain to the worlds end, although all the smatterers among you,
would brast for spite against it. Concerning the opinion of them, which think
that Moses might leave out Cainan, in the genealogy of Sem, by the same spirit
that Matthew left out three kings in the genealogy of our Savior. I answer, if
it be lawful so to imagine, we may without study answer all controversies,
although the same reason is not of Moses compiling a certain account of the
time, from the flood to the calling of Abraham, and of Matthew, showing by the
legal descent, which every man might take out of the books of Kings and
Chronicles, that Christ was the son of David, and therefore he was not bound
to the number of successors, seeing for memory, it was his purpose to recite
but thrice fourteen generations. That Beda maruaileth at the doubt, which he
could not dissolve, his modesty is to be commended, rather than his knowledge.
Nevertheless, the same Beda, in his preface unto his retractation upon the
Acts of the Apostles, speaking of such difference, as he found in the Greek
text of the Acts, from the Latin, he says: Quae vtrum negligentia
interpretis omissa, etc. Which things, whether they were omitted through
negligence of the Interpreter, or otherwise uttered, or for lack of regard of
the writers depraved, or otherwise left, as yet we could not know. For I dare
not so much as suspect, that the Greek copy was falsified: wherefore I
admonish the Reader, that wheresoever we have done these things, he read the^
for his learning: yet that he interlace them not in his book, as places
corrected except perhaps he shall find the same in some Latin book of a
peculiar edition, to have been of old so interpreted. This place shows that
in Bedes time, there were more Latin translatio^s than one, and that the
vulgar Latin was not of such authority, but that it might be corrected by the
Greek, with the consent of other ancient Latin translations. Likewise upon
the text in question, Lib. 1. in Luc. cap. 3. he confesses that the name and
generation of Cainan, according to the Hebrew verity, is found neither in
Genesis, nor in the Chronicles: saying that S. Luke took this generation from
the edition of the Septuaginta. But whether is the truer, or whether both can
be true, he leaves it to the knowledge of God. Noting that whereas according
to the Hebrew verity, from the flood to the birth of Abraham, there were but
292. years, the 70. make 1077. so that the difference is no less than of 785.
years. But to favor this fact of Beza, in putting out the name of Cainan,
there is an ancient copy of the Gospels and Acts in Greek and Latin, of as
great antiquity by all likelihood, as any copy this day extant in
Christendom, sent unto the University of Cambridge this last year, by Beza
him self, there to be kept in the common library, in which copy, this
generation of Cainan, both in the Greek, and in the Latin, is clean left
out, even as Beza has done in his translation. So that he has not only the
authority of Moses, which of it self is sufficient, but also the testimony
of this most ancient book, both for the Greek and for the Latin, to approve
his fact in putting out Qui fuit Cainan. What your vulgar latin translation
has left out in the later end of the Lords prayer in S. Matthew, and in the
beginning and midst in S. Luke, whereby that heavenly prayer is made
imperfect, not comprehending all things that a Christian man ought to pray for,
beside many other like omissions, whether of purpose, or of negligence, and
injury of time, yet still by you defended, I spare to speak of in this place.

MART. 23. Which also may be proved by all their false The 5. abuse of
Scriptures, Corrupt translation. which is the argument and purpose of this
book.
translations (being the principal point I mean to speak of) most evidently.
For as now they translate falsely to their purpose, because they can not alter
the text: so would they, if it were possible, have the text agreeable to their
translation. For example, he that translateth, ordinances, when it is in the
original Greek text, iustifications, and, traditions, he would rather that it
were, ordinances, also in the Greek: but because he can not bring that about,
he does at the least what he can, to make the ignorant believe it is so, by so
translating it.

FVLK. 23. You shall never be able to prove by any tra^slatio^ of ours (though
perhaps in some we may err,) that we have any purpose, either to falsify the
truth, or to change the text though it were possible for us. In translating we
have dealt with a good conscience, albeit not always peradventure, we have
attained to the full truth, which in translating out of one tongue into
another, is a very hard point thoroughly to observe. Your example of ordinances
translated, for that which in the Greek is iustifications and tradition, when
you show where, and by whom it is so translated, you shall receive an answer.
In the mean time, (I say) a translator that has regard to interpret for the
ignorant peoples instruction, may sometimes depart from the etymology, or
common signification or precise turning of word for word, and that for diverse
causes. You your selves translate not Ecclesia, always the Church, but
sometimes the assembly, nor Seniores, Elders, but Seniors, or ancients.
Neither would you translate Presbyter, always a priest, if you translated the
old Testament. In the story of Susanna, you would not call them Priests,
that laid wait for her honesty and life: yet in your vulgar Latin, they are
called Priests. So are they called (...) in Greek, in the new Testament,
which you turn sometimes Priests, sometimes ancients, and sometimes Seniors.

MART. 24. And this of all other is the most fine and subtle treachery
against the Scriptures, to deceive the ignorant readers withal, (which S.
Paul calls the secret things of 2. Cor. 4.
dishonestie, and adulterating of the word of God, as it were mingling water
with wine like false vinteners) when they give them for Gods word, and under
the name of Gods word, their own words, and not Gods, forged and framed,
altered and changed, according to differences of times, and variety of new
opinions, and diversity of humors and spirits, diversely and differently, The
Heretics dissension about their translations. Dial cont. Melan. Lind. dubit
page 84. ^6. ^8. c See Zuing resp ^. and Confess. Tigurinorum.
one Heretic not only correcting his fellow every day, but one egerly
refuting and refelling an other. Bucer, and the Osiandrians and c
Sacramentaries against Luther for false translations: Luther against Munster,
Beza against Castaleo, Castaleo against Beza, Calvin against Seruetus,
Illyricus both against Calvin and Beza: The Puritanes control the grosser
Caluinists of our country, yea the later translations of the self same
Heretics, control the former exceedingly, not only of ouersights, but of
wilful falsifications, as it is notorious in the Ibid. page 83. 97.
later editions of Luther and Beza, and in our English Bibles set forth in
diverse years, from Tindall their first translatour until this day: yea
(which is more) the English translatours The new Test of the year 1580.
of Bezaes new Testament, control him and his translation which they protest
to follow, Luc. 3. 36.
being afraid sometime and ashamed to express in English his false
translations in the Latin.

FVLK. 24. By false translations wilfully and of purpose to falsify the truth
of Gods word is as gross and as abominable treachery, as to corrupt the
very text, although I think S. Paul speaking of the couertures, or cloakes
of dishonestie, and adultering of the word of God 2. Cor. 4. means a further
cunning, than false translations. That those whom you call heretics find
fault with one an others translations, they do none otherwise, than you Popish
heretics. Do not you Gregory Martin, in the 7. chapter and 33. section of
this book find fault with all the Catholics as you term them, that
translate Sheol, Sepulchrum, a sepulcher, and not always (...)
hell? If Bucer, or Zwinglius do justly observe any error in Luther, or Luther
in Munster, or Beza in Castalio the Anabaptist, or Calvin in Seruetus the
horrible heretic, yea and if froward and schismatic Illyricus can discover
any error committed by Calvin, and Beza: the truth leeseth nothing, when the
errors of men are found out by what means soever. That you speak of the
Puritanes, controuling the grosser Caluinistes of our country, I know not
what you mean, neither do I think you can justify your words, for
translation of the Scriptures. Where you say, the later translations of the
self same heretics control the former exceedingly, not only of ouersightes,
but of wilful falsifications, it is a wilful and impudent sclaunder: yet you
blushe not to say, it is notorious. How I pray you? You answer in the later
editions of Luther and Beza, and in our English Bibles set forth in diverse
years, from Tyndall their first translatour. That Luther, Beza, and the later
translatours of the English Bibles have corrected some small faults that have
escaped in their former editions, it may be granted. But do Luther, and Beza
therefore accuse them selves, or the later English translatours the former, of
wilful falsifications? I think those brute beasts, to whom Ambrose
ascribes the Hexam. lib. 6. cap. 4.
art of making syllogismes (if they could speak) would not conclude thus
brutishly. Certain it is that Balaams ass did reason substantially. But much
more you say the English translatours of Bezaes new Testament, do control
him and his translation, being sometimes afraid and ashamed to express his
false translations. If it be so, they are more modest than you, which seem to
be afraid, or ashamed of nothing so much, as least you might seem to fail
in unshamefastness. But to the purpose. If they think Beza (as all men may
err) has somewhat trodden awrye, is it a fault to avoid his step, or a
proud controuling or accusing him of falsification? Nevertheless wherein
soever Luther, Beza, or the English translatours, De doct. Christ. lib. 2.
c^p. 11.
have reformed any of their former ouersightes, the matter is not so great,
that it can make an heresy. Yea, if you were of Saint Augustines judgment
you would acknowledge that the multitude and diversity of translations, is for
the benefit of them that be ignorant in the tongues, yea and of them also,
that be learned in them oftentimes, that of diverse men's translations, they may
judge which is the aptest.

MART. 25. But in this Catalogue of dissentions falsifiers and disagreeing
translatours, I will not greatly rippe up old Act. 1. 14. and 2: 23. Act. 3.
21. The German, French, and English corruptions of the new Testament.
faults, neither abroad, nor at home. I leave Luthers false translations into
the German tongue, to the credit of Staphylus, Apolog. part. 2. and Emserus,
praef. Annot. in no. Test. Luth. and other German writers of his own time,
that saw them and read them, and reckoned the number of them in the new
Testament only, about See Lind. Dubit. p. 84. 85. etc.
1400. heretical corruptions: I leave Caluines and Bezas french corruptions,
to so many worthy men as Vigor and the rest.
have noted them in their french books against the said heretics: Tindals and
his companions corruptions in their first English Bible, to our learned
countrymen of that age, and namely to the right reverend Father and Confessor
Bishop Tonstal, who in a sermon openly protested, that he had found in the new
Testament only, no less than two thousand. If we know it not, or will not
believe it, Lind. Dub. p. 98.
strangers in their Latin writings testify it to the world.

FVLK. 25. We are much beholding to you, that you will not rippe up old
faults abroad, nor at home: and leave Luthers Dutch translation with a 1400.
heretical corruptions in the new Testament only, with Caluins and Bezaes
French corruptions noted by Vigor, and the rest. Also Tyndals and his
companions corruptions in their first English Bible, in whose translation of
the new Testament Bishop Tonstal professed openly in a sermon that he found no
less than 2000. corruptions. This you know he protested with the same tongue,
with which he forsware the Pope, and swear to the kings supremacy, and with
which he preached a solemn sermon, which is in print before the King, against
the Popes usurped tira^ny, pride, false doctrine, covetousness, cruelty,
treason, perverting of Scriptures, as in the same Sermon more at large it
appears: and therefore we need not Lindanus writing to testify of his
credit. But thanks be to God that when you have scraped all that unto you
seemed to have any show of corruption, you can not find 200. faults in the
translation of the whole Bible, nor in three several translations of the same,
which points you are feign to dilate, with such vain tautologies, and
repetitions, that all learned men are ashamed of your tedious writing and yet
to make your book to be of some tolerable length, you had no better shift,
than to note a sort of Bezaes corruptions in his Latin Testament. Who if you
would write against him in Latin, any thing worth the noting, would thank
you for your pains. and reform his errors, but if you brought nothing but
cauils, would so shake you up, as you should have small joy of your
insolent inuectiue: but you provided well for that, by writing against a
Frenchman, in English. And as for the number of errors, or coruptions that
you would have the ignorant believe to be in our English translations, you
think is so great, as must needs make the simple abhor it. But look
homewarde a little unto your authentical vulgar Latin translation, how many
faults be in that, which your Tridentine Council has authorized. And here I
will not charge it with the adversaries thereof, as you do ours; but with
great friends of it, and your doctrine. Lindanus Bishop of Ruremonde, and
Isidorus Clarius Monk of Casine, and Bishop Fulginatensis, of which the
former writes a whole book, discussing how he would have De opt. Genesis
interpr. lib. 3.
the errors, vices, corruptions, additions, detractions, mutations,
vncertaynties, obscurities, pollutions, barbarismes, and soelecismes of the
vulgar Latin translation corrected and reformed: bringing many examples of
every kind, in several chapters and sections. The other Isidorus Clarius
giving In his Epistle to the reader printed at Venice apud Iuntas. ^557.
a reason of his purpose in castigation of the said vulgar Latin translation,
confesses that it was full of errors, almost innumerable, which if he should
have reformed all according to the Hebrew verity, he could not have set forth
the vulgar edition, as his purpose was. Therefore in many places he retayneth
the accustomed tanslation, but in his annotations admonishes the reader, how
it is in the Hebrew. And notwithstanding this moderation, he acknowledges that
about 8000. places are by him so noted and corrected. This Epistle the Deputies
of the Council of Trent could not abide, and therefore in the later edition of
this Bible, set forth with observation of their censure 1569. it is clean left
out, as also a godly collection of the same Isidorus, of places of Scripture,
exhorting to the study of holy Scripture, and a like sound confession of those
things which the Scriptures teach, etc.

MART. 26. But I omit these as unknown to our country, The authors intent in
this book.
or to this age, and will deal principally with the English translations of
our time, which are in every man's hands within our country, the corruptions
whereof, as they are partly touched here and there in the annotations upon the
late new English Testament Catholikely translated and printed at Rhemes so by
occasion thereof, I will by Gods help, to the better commodity of the Reader,
and evidence of the thing, lay them closer together, and more largely display
them, not counting the number, because it were hard, but esteeming the weight
and importance of so many as I thought good to note, specially in the new
Testament. Where I have to advertise the Reader of certain special things,
which he must observe.

FVLK. 26. You should rather omit them as untrue, for albeit it can not be
denied, but some faults may escape the most faithful and diligent translator,
yet so many heretical corruptions, either in the Dutch, or English are
incredible, and turn rather to the discredit of the accuser in all wise men's
judgment, than to the parties so charged. In like manner as Surius notes no
less than 11000. lies in Sleidan, more to his own reproach, than to the
defacing of Sleidans credit. You profess wisely therefore, not to count the
number, but to esteem the weight and importance of such faults as you
thought good to note: if there were as great faithfulness in your performance,
as there is wisdom in your profession. But now to your nine aduertisements to
the Reader.

MART. 27. First, that in this book he may not look for Certain
aduertisements to the Reader.
the proof or explication and deciding of controversies, Which is done in the
Annotations upon the new Testament, but only therefuting or controlling of
their false translations concerning the said controversies, which is the
peculiar argument of this ^reatise.

FVLK. 27. I think their is no wise reader would look for the deciding of so
many controversies in so small a book, and he that shall seek them in your
Annotations, shall find even as little to the purpose, except he will take your
determination without proof for a sufficient decisio^. As for the doctors you
quote without judgment, fraudulently, falsely, truncately, and otherwise
abusiuely, have all or the most been answered long ago. And if need shall be,
with little labor may be answered again.

MART. 28. Secondly, that we refu^e sometime one of their translations,
sometime an other, and every one as their falsehood gives occasio. Neither is
it a good defense for the falsehood of one, that it is truly translated in an
other: the reader being deceived by any one, because commonly he reads but
one. Yea one of them is a condemnation of the other.

FVLK. 28. That shows your malice, rather than either wisdom or honesty.
For if we our selves in our later translations, have corrected some small and
few errors, that have ouerslipped us in our former tra^slatio^s, we have
showed our sincerity and care of setting out the truth by all means. And where
you say, it is no good defense, the reader being deceived by any one, because
commonly he reads but one. I answer you, first there is not in the worst
translation any fault escaped, that may of it self lead him into a damnable
error. Secondly, he has the word of God expounded, by catechizing, sermons,
and lectures, in which he may learn the substance of Christian religion.
Thirdly, he has at hand every where learned Divines, unto whose counsel he
may resort, if he be offended with any thing that he reads in his Bible,
sou^ding contrary to the publicly received doctrine of the Church. In that
you say the one of our translations condemns the other, it had been
sufficient to have said, reproves: which is only, where there is a manifest
error in the one: for otherwise the diversities of tra^slations (as S. Augustine
teaches you) may much profit the simple readers: and they that be diligent
stude^ts of the Scriptures in the English tongue, will not satisfy them selves
with every translation, but will seek for the best approved.

MART. 29. Thirdly, that we speak indifferently against Protestants,
Caluinists, Bezites, and Puritans, without any curious distinction of them,
being all among themselves brethren and pewfellowes, and sometime the one sort
of them, sometime the other, more or less corrupting the holy Scriptures.

FVLK. 29. A wise advertisement. But this is to be noted, that now you
acknowledge them to be all brethren among them selves, and pewfellowes. But
when you list, they shall be at deadly feude one against an other, and no
community or fellowship between them.

MART. 30. Fourthly, that we give but a taste of their corruptions, not seeing
so far, nor marking all so narrowly and skilfully, as them selves know their
own subtilties and meanings, who will smile at the places which we have not
espied.

FVLK. 30. He that considers your quarrels picked to words of one
signification, as Church and Congregation, justice and righteousness, Elder and
Priest, Image and Idol, works and deeds, and such like, will not think that
you have past over any great matters worth the writing of: but that you would
set a vain brag of the case, as though there were much worse matter, than
you have wit to conceive. Yet you say confidently, that we as guilty of our
own subtilties and meanings, will smile at the places which you have not
espied. You are like to those southsayers mentioned in Tullie, of whom one
said, that he maruailed, if when they met together, one of them did not smile
upon another, because they deluded the city, and got themselves much honor
with such vain superstitions. So you being newly become, subtle and partial
translaters, think other men to be like your selfs. But even as the head of
your Church once iested with his Cardinal, how great wealth and honor that
fable of Christ (so the beast called the Christian religion) had brought them:
even so you his lewd limbs, make sport among your self of the holy word of
God, which you have corrupted, somewhat with your blind translatio^s, but much
more with your heretical Annotations. So said your great friend Campion, in
open audience, that he could make as good sport upon the incarnation of Christ.
According to your own affection therefore you judge of us, and not according
to the truth, as the day will try, when the secrets of all hearts shall be
made manifest.

MART. 31. Fifthly, that the very use and affectation of certain terms, and
avoiding other some, though it be no demonstration against them, but that they
may seem to defend it for true translation, yet was it necessary to be noted,
because it is and has been always a token of heretical meaning.

FVLK. 31. When our translation is true, I doubt not but we shall defend the
use of some terms, and the avoiding of other some, by as good reason, as you
shall defend the like in your translations, especially where you affect new
terms unused, or not understood, and avoid common and usual terms of the
same signification, as Euangelizing for preaching the Gospel, adue^t of Christ,
for the coming of Christ, scandalizing, for offending, scandale, for offense,
etc. Which if it be, as you say, always a token of heretical meaning, first
pluck your self by the nose, and then see if we can not defend our doings.

MART. 32. Sixthly, that in explicating these things, we have endeavored to
avoid (as much as was possible) the tediousness of Greek and Hebrew words,
which are only for the learned in these tongues, and which made some little
doubt whether this matter (which of necessity must be examined by them) were to
be written in English or no. But being persuaded by those (who them selves
have no skill in the said tongues) that every reader might reap commodity
thereby, to the understanding and detesting of such false and Heretical
translations, it was thought good to make it vulgar and common to all our dear
country men, as the new Testament it self is common, whereof this Discovery
is as it were a handmaide, attending thereupon for the larger explication and
proof of corruptions there brie^ly touched, and for supply of other some not
there mentioned.

FVLK. 32. He that sees your margent painted with Greek and Hebrewe words,
in so many places, may guess whether it were possible for you to have avoided
the tediousness of them, when in diverse places the Greek and Hebrew words
are set without all need of them, and sometimes where there is no controversy
about them: as in the 5. section of this Preface, where you show the
corruptions of the Arrians and Pelagians, and in the 19 section, where you
would show the difference of the new Testament from the old, in citing of
testimonies. But the Hebrewe word in the Psalm 21. or 22. which you falsely
say, signifies no such thing, as pearcing, you set not down, lest your
falsehood by them that have skill, might be convinced. And if you had cared as
much to find out the truth as to show your skill in both the tongues, you
would have written in Latin, especially against Beza, which never wrote in
English. And vain it is that you pretend to make the matter common to your
dear countrymen, that be unlearned, for the judgment must rest in them that
have knowledge in the tongues, albeit you had written in Latin. It is all one
therefore to the unlearned, as if you had only said, there are many faults or
corruptions, which in a Latin book shall be discovered to the judgment of
the learned* seeing the ignorant can not understand your demo^stratio^s.

MART. 33. Seventhly, that all the English corruptions here noted, and refuted,
are either in all or some of their English Bibles printed in these years,
1562. 1577. 1579. And if the corruption be in one Bible, not in an other,
commonly the said Bible or Bibles are noted in the margent: if not, yet sure it
is, that it is in one of them, and so the Reader shall find it if he find it
not always in his own Bible. And in this case the Reader must be very wise
and circumspect, that he think not by and by we charge them falsely, because
they can show him some later edition that has it not so as we say. For it is
their common and known fashion, not only in their translations of the Bible,
but in their other books and writings, to alter and change, add and put out,
in their later editions, according as either them selves are ashamed of the
former, or their scholars that print them again, dissent and disagree from
their Masters. So has Luthers, Caluins, and Bezaes writings and translations
been changed both by them selves, and their scholars, in many places, so that
Catholic men when they confute that which they find evident faults in this or
that edition, fear nothing more than that the Reader has some other edition,
where they are corrected for very shame, and so may conceive that there is no
such thing, but that they are accused wrongfully. For example. Call to mind
the late pretended conference in the Tower, where that matter Touching S. James
Epistle.
was denied and faced out for Luthers credit, by some one book or edition of
his, which them selves, and all the world knows, was most truly laid to his
charge.

FVLK. 33. First this is untrue, for some you have noted in the new Testament,
printed 1580. Secondly, it is uncertain, for two of these translations might
be printed in one year, and so I think they were. Therefore I know not well
which you mean, but I guess that the Bible 1562. is that which was of Doctor
Couerdales translation, most used in the Church service in King Edwards time.
The Bible 1577. I take to be that, which being reuised by diverse Bishops, was
first printed in the large volume, and authorized for the Churches, about ten
or twelve years ago. That of 1579. I know not what translation it be, except
it be the same that was first printed at Geneua, in the beginning of the
Queens Majesty's Reign. And this conjecture as the fittest I can make, I must
follow, seeing your note of distinction, is as good, as that fond fellows,
that would know his masters horse by the bridle.

But it is a common and known fashion, you say, used of us, that not only in
translations, but in other books and writings of ours, we alter and change,
add, and put to in our later editions. And who uses not so to do, if by
later cogitations, that often are wiser, he find any thing meet to be
changed? Do not you Papists use the same? Is Bristowes chapter of obedience
in his motives, nothing altered from the high treason contained in the first
edition? Is nothing added, taken away, or changed in your Jesus Psalter, in any
of your editions, or are you your selves ashamed of the former? Or have your
scholars presumed to alter their masters writings? If you may have an evasion
in these cases, I trust we are not so pente in, but we may change our own
writings without shame of the former, or corruption in the later. As for the
example of S. James Epistle, denied (as you say) and faced out for Luthers
credit, will serve you for no proof. For so far off is it, that we, or the
world do know, that is was most truly laid to his charge: that now we
know of a certainty, that it was a very slander, as false, as it was common:
seeing Luthers words of that Epistle, are not absolute, but in comparison, as
is confessed by you, and found by some of us to be none otherwise in deed,
who have not stood upon one only book or edition, but upon as many as they
could come by, both in the Latin, and in the Dutch tongue.

MART. 34. Eighthly, in citing Beza, I mean always (unless I note otherwise)
his Latin translation of the new Testament, with his annotations adjoined
thereunto, printed in the year 1556.

FVLK. 34. You were afraid, lest they that understood not Latin, for whose
sake you wrote in English this treatise, might take hurt by Bezaes
translations, and annotations in Latin. And if he him self have espied, and
corrected any thing of his first edition, that was either In his later editio^
156^. he has Qu^ fuit Caina^^, both in the Greek and in the vulgar Latin.
faulty or offensive, in his two later editions, with great equity, as though
you were the only man that had discovered his errors, you must let all the
unlearned in England know, what shameful corruptions, you have observed in
Bezaes translation, or annotations.

MART. 35. Lastly and principally is to be noted, that We charge them not
with forsaking the old approved Latin text, though it be an ill sign, and
to their evident confusion.
we will not charge them with falsifying that which in deed is the true and
authentical Scripture, I mean the vulgar Latin Bible, which so many years
has been of so great authority in the Church of God, and with all the
ancient fathers of the Latin Church, as is declared in the Preface of the
new Testament: though it is much to be noted, that as Luther, only in favor
of his heresies, did wilfully forsake it, so the rest followed, and do follow
him at this day, for no other cause in the world, but that it is against them.
And therefore they inueigh against it, and against the holy Council of Trent,
for confirming the Kemnitius. Calvin.
authority thereof, both in their special treatises thereof, and in all their
writings, where they can take any occasion.

FVLK. 35. In the margent, You will not charge us with forsaking the old
approved Latin text, though it be an ill sign, and to our evident confusion.
S. Augustine, though a mere Latin man, whom you your self do after
confess to have understood but one tongue well, and that was even his mother
tongue, learned (as he confesses) of his nurses, is not so addicted to the
Latin translation, but that he would have men to seek to the Hebrew, and
Greek fountains, which you like a blasphemous hypocrite deny to be the true,
and authentical Scriptures in deed: allowing only the vulgar Latin
translation, as though neither the Churches of Greece, Syria, Armenia,
Aethiopia, nor any other in the world, which have not the vulgar Latin, had
not the true and authentical Scriptures. And though your vulgar Latin has
for many years been of great authority in the Latin Church, from the time
when the knowledge of the Hebrew and Greek tongues have decayed: yet is it
utterly false, that you say that it has been of great authority with all the
fathers of the Latin Church: whereas there is not one that lived within 400.
years after Christ, that knew it, but almost every one followed a several
translation. And S. Augustine in the place before cited, tells you, that
there were innumerable translations out of the Greek into the Latin. Again
that your vulgar Latin, is full of many errors, and corruptions, I have showed
by the confession of Isidorus Clarius, and Lindanus two of your own
profession: of which the one took pains by the Hebrew and Greek to correct
it, the other showed means how it should be corrected. And where you say that
Luther and his followers forsook it for none other cause in the world, but
that it is against them, it is utterly untrue. For beside that they have made
clear demonstration of many palpable errors therein, (which they that have
any forehead amongst you cannot deny.) they have and do daily convince you of
horrible heresies, even out of your own corrupt vulgar translation. Finally
whosoever shall read what Calvin and Kemnitius hane written against the
Council of Trent, for auctorizing that translation, shall plainly see, that
they had something else to allege against it, which nothing at all concerns
their opinions, that be contrary to the Popish heresy.

MART. 36. And concerning their wilful and heretical avoiding thereof in
their new translations, what greater argument can there be than this, that
Luther, who before always had read with the Cath. Church and with all
antiquity, these words of S. Paul, Have not we power to lead about A 1. Cor.
9. Mulierem sororem. 2. Pet. 1.
WOMAN A SISTER, as also the rest of the Apostles? and in S. Peter, these
words, Labor that BY GOOD WORKS you may make sure your vocation and
election: suddenly, after he had contrary to his profession taken a wife (as he
called her) and preached that all other votaries might do the same, and that
faith only justified, good works were not necessary to salvation: suddenly (I
say) after he fell to these heresies, he began to read and translate the
former Scriptures accordingly, thus: Have not we power to lead about a SISTER A
WIFE, as the rest of the Apostles? and, Labor that you may make sure your
vocation and election: leaving out the other words, by good works. And so do
both the Caluinists abroad, and our English Protestants at home read and
translate at this day, because they hold the self same heresies.

FVLK. 36. If their be no greater argument, as you confess there can be none,
that their avoiding of this vulgar Latin is wilful and heretical, than this,
that Luther defended his marriage being a votarie, by that text of 1. Corinthians.
9. wherein the Apostle challenges power to lead about with him a sister to
wife, which your text has Mulierem sororem a woman a sister. And that to
prove that faith only justifies and good works are not necessary to
salvation, he left out of the text of S. Peter good works, by which the
Apostle exhorts us to make sure unto our selves our vocation, and election:
there is none argument at all of wilful, needless, or heretical a^oyding. For
although the marriage of ecclesiastical ministers generally is proved by that
Scripture: yet the marriage of votaries specially, is nothing confirmed. And for
the marriage of Bishops, Priests and Deacons, your own translation of 1. Tim.
3. and Tit. 1. both Latin and English will warrant them to be the husbands of
one wife, so that every child may see, that he needed not for that purpose, to
corrupt the text, 1. Cor. 9. And as for the other texts, 2. Pet. 1. although
this word, (by good works,) is not expressed in the most Greek copies, yet
the whole circumstance of the place gives it necessarily to be understood,
and yet it makes nothing against justification by faith only. For our election
which is most certain and immutable in Gods determination, is made certainly
known unto us by good works, the fruits of justifying faith, even as the
effects do necessarily prove the cause gone before. And so does Thomas
Mathewes Bible note: likewise the Bishops Bible, and the Geneua Bible, for so I
had rather call them, than by the years in which they were once printed,
which have been often printed, and perhaps all in some one year. Couerdales
Bible also adds these words by good works, which is read in some Greek
copies. So true it is that you say, we leave it out, because we hold the
self same heresy: As likewise that you slander us to hold, that good works
are not necessary to salvation, whereas we believe that good works are as
necessary to salvation, as faith, in all them that are justified by faith
only. But because you are not able to withstand the truth which we believe,
you feign odious Monsters, as Dragons, Centaures, Hydraes to fight withal
before the people, that you might get the praise of glorious conquerours:
like S. George on horseback, that in a pageant vanquisheth an hideous dragon
made of paper or painted clothes.

MART. 37. So do they in infinite places alter the old text, which pleased
them well before they were Heretics, and they do it with brazen faces, and
plain protestation, having no shame nor remorse at all, in fleeing from that
which all antiquity with one consent allowed and embraced until their
unhappy days. Which though it be an evident condemnation of their novelties
in the sight of any reasonable man that has any grace: yet as I began to
admonish thee (gentle Reader) we will not charge them for altering the ancient
approved Latin translation, because they pretend to follow the Hebrew and
Greek, and our purpose is not here, to prove that they should not follow the
Hebrew and Greek that now is, before the ancient approved Latin text, which
is done briefly already in the preface to the new Testament.

FVLK. 37. You were afraid belike to be ouermatched in railing, and therefore
you thought to bear us down at once, with a whole flood of reproachful
slanders, and that you utter even with the same face, with which you affirm,
that al antiquity with one consent allowed and embraced your vulgar Latin
text: for what else you should mean I cannot conjecture, seeing you say
afterward you will not charge us for altering the ancient approved Latin
translation. What say you Martin? does all antiquity with one consent allow
and embrace your vulgar Latin translation? What is the cause then that the
most of all antiquity of the Latin Church used not your vulgar Latin text?
or dare you join issue with me, that all the Latin doctors for 400 years
after Christ, used none other Latin translation but that? or that they all
knew your vulgar Latin translation: you are never able to prove it. The 70.
translation in deed was greatly esteemed, and almost generally received in the
Greek and Latin Churches, and out of it were innumerable Latin versions, as
S. Augustine affirms. But your vulgar Latin follows it not in many places,
as it were easy to show, if time and occasion served, and I suppose you will
not deny. As for the reasons you bring in the Preface to the new Testament,
to prove that we should not follow the Hebrew and Greek that now is, before
that ancient approved text, when they come to be considered it shall appear
how vain and frivolous they are. But as for the Hebrew and Greek that now is,
may easily be proved to be the same that always has been, neither is their
any diversity in sentence, how soever some copies either through negligence of
the writer, or by any other occasion do vary from that which is commonly and
most generally received in some letters, syllables, or words.

MART. 38. Neither will we burden them, for not following We charge them not
with forsaking the Greek copies that agree with the ancient approved Latin
text, though this be a sign of their incredible partiality.
the vulgar Latin text, when the same agrees with most ancient Greek
copies: which notwithstanding is great partiality in them, and must needs be
of an heretical wilful humor, that among the Greek copies themselves, they
reject that which most agrees with the vulgar Latin text, in places of
controversies: Yet will we not I say, neither in this case, lay falsehood and
corruption to their charge, because they pretend to translate the common Greek
text of the new Testament, that is, one certain copy. But here at the least
let them show their fidelity, and that they be true and exact translatours.
For here only shall they be examined and called to account.

FVLK. 38. In translation we follow the common usual and printed coppies, as
you do in your translation, and yet you know there be as many, yea ten times
as many diverse readings in the Latin, as are in the Greek: witness hereof
the Bible printed at Antwerpe, by Christopher Plantine 1567. of Hentenius
castigation: where the margents almost of every leaf be full of diverse
readings obeliskes, asterisks, stigmates, signifying the variety that is in
many copies, by adding, detracting, changing.

The same is confessed by Arias Montanus. In apparat. Bibl. De opt. Genesis
interpret. sc. lib. 3.


Lindanus likewise acknowledges as much.

Of that which you say we reject that which best agrees with the vulgar Latin
in places of controversy, you bring none example. But that among your diverse
readings, you reject that which agrees best with the Hebrew and with the
Greek in places of controversy. I will give you an example. Genesis 3 v. ^5.
where the Hebrew truth teaches, that the seed of the woman shall break the
serpents head, and the Greek translateth the pronoune in the masculine
gender ( he) meaning Christ: and some ancient copies of your vulgar Latin
have (ipse) you nevertheless follow that blasphemous corruption, that in
these later times has been received in your vulgar Latin Bibles, and read
still in your text ipsa, she, which though you would wrest blasphemously to
the virgin Marie, which is proper to Christ, can not by the circumstance of the
place be aptly referred to any but to Eve.

MART. 39. And if they follow sincerely their Greek We charge the^ for
forsaking and false translating their own Hebrew and Greek text.
and Hebrew text, which they profess to follow, and which they esteem the
only authentical text, so far we accuse them not of heretical corruption.
But if it shall be evidently proved, that they shrink from the same also, and
translate an other thing, and that wilfully, and of full intention to
countenance their false religion and wicked opinions, making the Scriptures to
speak as they list: then we trust, the indifferent reader for his own souls
sake, will easily see and conclude, that they have no fear of God, no
reverence of the Scriptures, no conscience to deceive their readers: he will
perceive that the Scriptures make against them, which they so pervert and
corrupt for their purpose: that neither the Hebrew nor Greek text is for them,
which they dare not translate truly and sincerely: that their cause is naught,
which needs such f^ule shifts: that they must needs know all this, and
therefore do wilfully against their conscience, and consequently are obstinate
heretics.

FVLK. 39. We crave no pardon, if it can be proved that we have wilfully
translated an other thing than is contained in the Hebrew and Greek, to
maintain any false religion or wicked opinion. Provided always, that if any
translatour, or all the translatours, have ignorantly erred in misunderstanding
any word or phrase of the Hebrew or Greek text, that if it may be plainly
showed unto them, they acknowledging the fault, they may not be charged with
heretical corruption, from which it is certain, their intention was most free.

MART. 40. And the more to understand their misery and wretchedness, before
we enter to examine their translations, mark and gather of all that which I
have said in this Preface, their manifold flightes and iumpes, from one shift
to an other, and how Catholic writers have pursued and chased them, and
followed them, and driven them even to this extreme refuge and seely covert of
false translation, where also they must of necessity yield, or devise some new
evasion, which we can not yet imagine.

FVLK. 40. Hitherto I hope the indifferent reader will confess, that you have
driven us to no iumpes, nor shifts, but only uttered your own malicious and
unlearned quarrels. And how Popish writers have pursued and chased us to
extreme refuge, and seely covert of false translation, let it appear by the
learned answers of M. Jewel, M. Horn, M. Nowell, M. Bridges, M. Calfhill,
and others, that I speak nothing of mine own simple labors, who being one of
the meanest, having confuted ten or twelve of your Popish treatises, can
receive no replye of any man, but only of poor Bristowe: to whom in this
respect, I confess my self more beholding, than to all the Papists beside,
saving that I have reioyned to him almost two years ago, and yet I hear not
of his answer.

MART. 41. First we are wont to make this offer (as we The diverse shifts and
flights that the Protestants are driven unto by the Catholics, as it were the
iumps and turnings of an hare before the hounds.
think) most reasonable and indifferent: that forasmuch as the Scriptures are
diuersely expounded of us and of them, they neither be tied to our
interpretation, nor we to theirs, but to put it to the arbitrament and
judgment of the ancient fathers, of general Councels, of universal custom
of times and places in the Catholic Church, No, say they, we will be our own
judges and interpreters, or follow Luther, if we be Lutherans: Calvin, if we be
Caluinists: and so forth.

FVLK. 41. For expounding of the Scriptures, we will not refuse the arbitrament
and judgment of the ancient fathers, of general Councels, of universal
custom of times, and places in the Catholic church, for this you say is your
offer, which was never refused of us, though you most falsely affirm, that we
say we will be our own judges, and interpretours, or follow Luther, if we be
Lutherans: Calvin, if we be Caluinistes, etc. Who ever said so, you
shameless sclau^derer? What have you differing from us? Wherein you have the
judgment of the ancient fathers, of general Councels, of universal custom,
of times and places in the Catholic church? Unless perhaps you mean some
wretched sophistry, by disioyning these that you here seem to join together.
And if you so do, we must first ask you, whether you your selves in all
expositions of the Scriptures, will stand to the arbitrament of every ancient
father, or of every general Council, or of any custom in any time or place.
I know and you can not deny it, that you will stand to nothing, that is not
allowed by your Pope, though fathers, councels, custom, time or place, or all
the world be against it, yea the manifest Scripture, which is so plain that it
needs no exposition: as the commandment against images in religion.
Theodoret, Gelasius, Vigilius, Chrysostom, against transubstantiation,
Epiphanius against images, the sixth council of Constantinople for condemning
the Pope of heresy, the councels of Constance and Basil for deposing the
Popes, and decreeing, that the council is above the Pope and many other like
matters beside, in which you go clearly from the consent of all antiquity
for 600. years, as the Bishop of Sarum has made plain demonstration, and
you are not able to reply.

MART. 42. This being of it self a shameless shift, unless it be better
colored, the next is to say, that the Scriptures are easy and plain and
sufficient of them selves to determine every matter, and therefore they will
be tried by the Scriptures only. We are content, because they will needs have
it so, and we allege unto them the books of Tobie, Ecclesiasticus, Machabees.
No, say they: we admit none of these for Scripture. Why so? are they not
approved Canonical by the same authority of the Church, of ancient Councels
and fathers, that the other books are? No matter, say they, Luther admits
them not, Calvin does not allow them.

FVLK. 42. That the Scriptures are plain and easy to be understood of them
that use the ordinary means to come to it, for all doctrine necessary to be
known, and sufficient to determine every matter, the holy Ghost him self
does testify, 2. Tim. 3. and some of the ancient fathers also do bear
witness, as Augustine de doct. Christ. lib. 2. Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 13. de
verb. Esai. Vidi d^minum, etc. hom. 2.

If therefore you had the spirit of the ancient fathers, you would be content
to be tried by the Scriptures, for reverence you ought to Gods most holy and
perfect writings, and not because we will have it so, who are content in many
controversies to be tried by the judgment of the ancient fathers, or general
Councels, or universal custom of times and places: and in all controversies,
wherein all the ancient fathers, all Councels, and universal custom of all
times and places do consent* if any think such things can be brought against
us, as it is falsely and sophistically bragged. But whereas we refuse the books
of Tobie, Ecclesiasticus, Machabees, for Canonical Scripture, it is not (as
you say ridiculously) because Luther and Calvin admits them not, but
because they are contrary to the Canonical Scriptures, and were never received
of the Church of Israel for Canonical, nor of the Catholic Church of Christ,
for more than 400. years after Christ, as I have showed before.

MART. 43. Well, let us go forward in their own dance. You allow at the
least the Jews Canonical books of the old Testament, that is, all that are
extant in the Hebrewe Bible: and all of the new Testament without exception.
Yea, that we do. In these books then, will you be tried by the vulgar
ancient Latin Bible, only used in all the West Church above a
thousandyeares? No. Will you be tried by the Greek Bible of the Septuaginta
interpreters, so renowned and authorized, in our Saviors own speeches, in the
Evangelists and Apostles writings, in the whole Greek Church evermore? No,
How then will you be tried? They answer, Only by the Hebrew Bible that now is,
and as now it is pointed with vowels. Will you so? and do you think that only,
the true authentical Hebrew which the holy Ghost did first put into the pens
of those sacred writers? We do think it (say they) and esteem it the only
authentical and true Scripture of the old Testament.

FVLK. 43. Where so many of your own Popish writers do accuse your vulgar
Latin text of innumerable corruptions, what reason is there, that we should
follow that translation only, especially seeing God has given us knowledge of
the tongues, that we may resort to the fountains them selves, as S. Augustine
exhorts. As for the Greek translation of the Septuaginta, from which your
own vulgar Latin varieth, (although we reverence it for the antiquity, and
use it for interpretation of some obscure places in the Hebrew) why should you
require us to be tried thereby, which will not be tried by it your selves? If I
were as captious as you are with John Keltrige, about the Greek Bible of the
Septuaginta Interpreters, I might make sport with you, as you do with him:
but I acknowledge your Syn^cdoche, that you mean the old Testament only,
whereas the word Bible, is commonly taken for both. But to the purpose, we
acknowledge the text of the old Testament, ^n Hebrew and Chaldee, for in the
Chaldee tongue were some parts of it written, as it is now printed with
vowels, to be the only fountain, out of which we must draw the pure truth of
the Scriptures for the old Testament, adjoining herewith, the testimony of
the Mazzoreth, where any diversity of points, letters, or words, is noted to
have been in sundry ancient copies, to discern that which is proper to the
whole context, from that which by error of the writers, or printers, has been
brought into any copy, old or new.

MATT. 44. We ask them again, what say you then to (...)
that place of the Psalm, where in the Hebrew it is thus, As a lion my hands
and my feet: for that which in truth should be thus, They dug or pierced my
hands and my feet: being an evident prophecy of Christ's nailing to the
cross. There in deed (say they) we follow not the Hebrew, but the Greek
text. Sometime then you follow the Greek and not the Hebrew only. And what if
the same Greek text make for the Catholics, as in these places for example, I
have inclined my heart to keep thy iustifications for reward: and, Redeem thy
sins with alms: might we not obtain here the like favor at your hands for
the Greek text, specially when the Hebrew does not disagree? No, say they,
nor in no other place where the Greek is never so plain, if the Hebrew word
at the least may be any otherwise interpreted, and drawn to an other
signification.

FVLK. 44. We say to you first, that you have falsely pointed the Hebrew word
in the marge^t for all the printed books that ever I have seen, as Bomberge
both in folio, and quarto, Stephanus, Basil, Plantine, Arias Montanus,
Co^plutensis, al place Camets under Caph, where you make Patach. But perhaps
your Hebrew is most out of Mu^sters Dictionarie, where it is pointed as you
make it. But for answer to your question, we say, that their is a double
testimony of the Mazzorites to prove, that in the most ancient and best
corrected copies, the Hebrew was Caru, they have dug or pierced: this is
testified not only by our translators, but also by Ioannes Isaac your own
Rabbin, against Lindanus a prelate of yours. And this the auctors of the
Complutense edition, do acknowledge, for thus they have pointed it Caru, where
(...)
is nothing but the redundans of Aleph (which is understood in every Camets)
differing from the usual reading and declining of the Verb Carah, that
signifies (...)
to pearce or dig. Again, where it is read otherwise, if it be rightly
pointed, as it is in Arias Montanus Caari, it cannot signify Sicut leo, as a
lion, as both the (...)
Mazzorites do teach, and Johannes Isaac a Grammarian out of the^ by the
points, and the note over iod does plainly demonstrate. For what should shure^h
sound in iod? or if you would contend it should be Daghes, to what purpose
should it be in iod, if the word should signify as a lion? Therefore
howsoever this variety of copies came either by negligence of some writers, or
by corruption of the Jews, we have sufficient warrant for the ancient and
true reading, which the Greek translator did follow, which also was in S.
Hieromes copy, otherwise he would not have translated out of the Hebrew
Fixerunt: they have pierced. Therefore Rabbi Joseph, which made the Chalde^
Paraphrase upon the Psalter, labored to express both the copies, as well that
which has plainly (they have pierced,) as that which has it corruptly, as
though it spoke of a Lion, and yet can not rightly be so translated, because
the points are imperfect even for that reading. Therefore he has said
Nikethin (...)
Heich Cheariah, They have indented and pierced like a lion my hands and my
feet* as it is in the Venice print of Daniel Bomberg, although Arias Montanus
in his Bible, have no more but Nachethin, which he traslateth, (...)
biting my hands and my feet. I have played the fool to utter these matters
in the mother tongue to ignorant men, that can make no trial of them, but you
have not only given me example, but also enforced me with your vnsoluble
question (as you thought) by one word somewhat out of frame, to overthrow the
whole Hebrew text. But you are to be pardoned, for that you follow your M.
Lindanus herein, who has nothing else in effect to quarrel against the Hebrew
text, but this: and therefore he repeteth it in many places, to make greater
show of it as you do. In other, places where the Hebrew word has diverse
significations, who shall forbid us to choose that which is most agreeable to
the circumstance of the text, and to the analogy or rule of faith?

MART. 45. We reply again and say unto them, why, Is not the credit of those
Septuaginta interpreters, who them selves were Jews, and best learned in their
own tongue, and (as S. Augustine often, and other ancient fathers say) were
inspired with the holy Ghost, in translating the Hebrew Bible into Greek: Is
not their credit (I say) in determining and defining the signification of the
Hebrew word, far greater than yours? No. Is not the authority of all the
ancient fathers both Greek and Latin, that followed them, equivalent in this
case to your judgment? No, say they, but because we find some ambiguitie in
the Hebrew, we will take the advantage, and we will determine and limit it to
our purpose.

FVLK. 45. S. Hieronym abundantly answers this cavil, denying that
supposed inspiration, and de^iding the fable of their 70. celles, which yet
pleased Augustine greatly, yea calling in question, whether any more were
translated by them, than the five books of Praefat. in pent.
Moses: because Aristaeus, a writer in Ptolomees time, and after him, Josephus,
make mention of no more. The same cause therefore that moved S. Hierome to
translate out of the Hebrewe, moves us: whose translation, if we had it
sound ande perfect, might much further us for the same purpose. Although for
the signification of the Hebrewe words, we require no more credit, than that
which al they that be learned in the Hebrewe tongue, must be forced to yield
unto us. And seeing your vulgar Latin departs from the Septuagintaes
interpretation, even in the books of Moses, which (if any be theirs) may
most rightly be accounted theirs, because it is certain they translated them,
although it be not certain whether they translated the rest: with what equity
do you require us to credit them, which your own vulgar translation,
affirms to have translated amiss? as I have showed before in the example of
Canans generation. An other example you have in the 4 of Genesis, Nonne si been
egeris recipies, etc. If thou shall do well shall thou not receive? but if thou
shall do evil, straighteway thy sins shall be present in the doors. The
greek text, has (...), etc. not if thou haste rightly offered: but thou have
not rightly divided: have thou sinned? be still. Where your translation comes
much nearer to the Hebrew, as might be showed in very many examples. As for
the ancient fathers credit of the greek Church, and the Latin that followed
them, if our judgment alone be not aequiualent unto them, yet let these
ancient fathers, Origene, and Hierome, that thought them not sufficient to be
followed, and therefore gathered or framed other interpretations, let their
judgment, I say, ioining with ours, discharge us of this fond and envious
accusation.

MART. 46. Again, we condescend to their wilfulnes, and say: what if the
Hebrewe be not ambiguous, but so plain and Psalm. 15.
certain to signify one thing, that it can not be plainer? As, (...)
Thou shall not leave my soul in Hell, which proves for us, that Christ in
soul descended into Hell. Is not the one Hebrewe word as proper for soul, as
anima in Latin, the other, as proper and usual for hell, as infernus in Latin.
Here then at the least will you yield? No, say they, not here neither. for Beza
tells us, that the word, which commonly and usually signifies, soul, yet
for a purpose, if a man will strain, it may signify, not only body, but
also, carcass. and so he translateth it. But Beza (say we) being admonished by
his friends, corrected it in his later edition. Yea, say they, he was content
to change his translation, but not his opinion concerning the Hebrewe word, as
himself protests.

FVLK. 46. You have chosen a text for example, wherein is least color (except
it be with the unlearned) of an hundred. For, whereas you ask, whether
Nephesh, be no not as proper for soul, as anima, in Latin, and Sheol for Hell,
as infernus in Latin? I utterly deny both the one and the other. For nephesh
is properly the life, and Sheol, the grave or pit, though it may sometimes be
taken for Hell, which is a consequent of the death of the ungodly, as nephesh is
taken for person, or ones self, or as it is sometimes, for a dead carcass.
Yea, there be that hold, that it is never taken for the reasonable immortal
soul of a man, as anima is, specially of Ecclesiastical writers. That Beza
translated the Greek of the new Testament after the signification of the
Hebrewe words, although it was true in sense, yet in mine opinion, it was not
proper in words: and therefore he himself has corrected it in his latter
editions, as you confess, he has not changed his opinion concerning the
Hebrewe: the reason is, because it is grounded upon manifest textes of
Scripture, which he cites, Leuit. 19. verse. 27. and cap. 21. verse. 1. and
11. Number. 5. verse 2. and 9. verse 10. In the first place your own vulgar
Latin translation, for la nephesh turns mortuo. you shall not cut your flesh
for one that is dead. In the second place, your vulgar Latin has, Ne non
contaminetur sacerdos in mortibus. and, Ad omnem mortuum non ingredietur
omnino. Let not the Priest be defiled with the deaths of his countrymen.
and, The high Priest shall not enter into any dead body at all: where the
Hebrew is lenephesh. and (...). (...)
In the third place your vulgar Latin reads polluiusque est super mortuo.
they shall cast out him that is polluted by touching a dead carcass, where the
Hebrewe is lanephesh In the first place, your vulgar Latin has indede,
anima, but in the same sense, that it had before mortuo for the text is of him
that is unclean, by touching any dead body, which in Hebrew is nephesh. How
say you now, is the Hebrewe word as proper for soul, as anima in Latin?
except you will say, the Latin word anima does properly signify, a dead
body: has not Beza good reason to retain his opinion concerning the Hebrewe
word, when he has the authority of your own vulgar translation? You
that note such iumps, and shifts in us, whether will you leap to save your
honesty? will you say, the Hebrewe text is corrupted since your translation
was drawn out of it. The seauentie interpretours then will cry out against
you: for they with one mouth in all these places, for the Hebrewe word
nephesh, render the usual signification (...), adding in the 21. of Leuit. v.
11. (...), which either you must translate, a dead body, or you shall call
it absurdly, a dead soul. Would any man think to have found in you, either
such gross ignorance, or shameful negligence, or intolerable malice
against the truth, that Beza sending you to the places, either you would not,
or you could not examine them, or, if you did examine them, that you would
notwythstanding thus malitiouslye against your own knowledge and conscience,
rail against him? you make us to say, if a man will strain the word, it
may signify not only body, but also carcass. What say you? did Moses
strain the word to that signification? You said before, that we were at
the iumps and turnings of an hare before the hounds, such mighty hunters
you are, and we such fearful hares before you. I am not skilful in the
terms of hunting, but in plain English I will speak it, that if all the
traitorous wolves and foxes, that be in the kennell at Rhemes, would do
their best, to save your credit in this section, nay in this whole preface,
they shall never be able to maintain their own, with any indifferent reader.

MART. 47. Well then does it like you to read thus, according to Bezaes
translation, Thou shall not leave my carcass in the grave? No, we are content
to alter the word carcas, (which is not a seemly word for our sauiors body)
and yet we are loath to say soul, but if we might, we would say rather, life,
person, as appears in the margent of our Bibles. but as for the Hebrew word
that signifies Hell, though the Greek and Latin Bible throughout, the Greek and
Latin fathers in all their writings, as occasion serves, do so read it and
understand it, yet will we never so translate it: but for Hell, we will say
grave, in all such places of scripture, as might infer Limbus patrum, if we
should translate, Hell. These are their shifies, and turnings, and windings, in
the old Testament.

FVLK. 47. I have showed you before, that in the new Testament, we like better
to translate according to the proper and usual signification of the Greek word.
But the Hebrewe word in the old Testament may be translated according to the
circumstaunce of the place, life, person, self, yea, or dead body, and in
some place perhaps carcass. You follow us very near* to seek advantage of the
English word carcass, which commonly is taken in contempt, and therefore we
would not use it, speaking of the body of our Savior Christ, when it was
dead. But you hunt your self out of breath, when you would bring the same
contempt to the Latin word Cadauer, which Beza used. For Cadauer signifies
generally a dead body of man or beast, and by your vulgar Latin translator,
is used for the dead bodies of sacrifices, of Cadauer.
Saints, and holy men, as indifferently, as for carrion of beasts, or carcases
of evil men. Namely in Job. 39. v 33. (...)
wheresoever the dead body is, thither will the Eagle resort, which similitude
our Savior Christ applies to him self, Math. 24. v. 28. wheresoever the
dead body is, thither will the Eagles be gathered, where he compares him self
to the dead body, and the faithful to the Egles.

Now concerning the other Hebrew word, which you say signifies hell, because
the Greek, and vulgar Latin interpretor do so translate it. When just
occasion shall be given afterward Cap. 7. I will show that it properly
signifies a grave, pit, or place for dead bodies, and that in this place of
the 16. Psalm, it must needs so signify, not only the later part of the
verse, expressing in other words that which was said in the former: but also
the Apostles proving out of it the resurrection of Christ, do sufficiently
declare. If you have no place therefore in the Scriptures, to prove your Limbus
patrum, but where the holy Ghost speaks of the death and burial of the
fathers, no marvel though you must strain the Hebrew word, which properly
signifies grave, and the Greek word, which properly signifies a dark
place, and especially the Latin, which signifies generally a low place:
none of all the three words signifying hell, as we commonly understand the
word hell, properly and only, but by a figure where mention is made of the
death of the ungodly, whose reward is in hell. These be the poor shifts,
turninges and windings that you have to wreath in those fables of Limbus
patrum, and Purgatory, which the Church of God, from the beginning of the
world unto the coming of Christ, never heard of, nor many hundredth years
after Christ, until the Mo^tanists, or such like hethenish heretics brought
in those fantasies.

MART. 48. In the new Testament, we ask them will you be tried by the
ancient Latin translation, which is the text of the fathers and the whole
Church? No, but we appeal to the Greek. What Greek, say we, for there be
sundry copies, and the best of them (as Beza confesses) agree with the said
ancient Latin. For example in Saint Peter's words, Labor that by good works
you may 2. Pet. ca. 1.
make sure your vocation and election. Duth this Greek copy please you? No,
say they: we appeal to tha^ Greek copy, which has not those words, by
good works, for otherwise we should grant the merit and efficacy of good
works toward salvation. And generally to tell you at once, by what Greek we
will be ^ried, we like best the vulgar Greek text of the new Testament, which
is most common and in every man's hands.

FVLK. 48. We need not appeal to the Greek; for any thing you bring out of
the vulgar Latin against us. As for that text, 2. Pet. 1. Labor that by good
works, etc. I have answered before in the 36. Section. We like well the
Latin, or that Greek copy which has those words by good works, for we
must needs understand them, where they are not expressed: and therefore you do
impude^tly beelie us to say they do not please us. Calvin upon that text says,
Nonnulli codices habent bonis operibus, sed hoc de sensu nihil mutat, quia
subaudiendum est etia^ si non exprimatur. Some books have By good works, but
this changes nothing of the sense, for that must be understood although it
be not expressed. The same thing in effect says Beza: that our election, and
vocation must be confirmed by the effects of faith, that is by the fruits of
justice, etc. therefore in some copies we find it added by good works. So
far of is it, that Beza misliketh those words, that he cites them to prove
the perpetual connection of Election, Vocation, Justification, and
Sanctification. This is therefore as wicked a slander of us, as it is an
untrue affirmation of the vulgar Latin, that it is the text of the fathers,
and the whole Church: whereby you show your self to be a Donatiste, to
acknowledge no Church, but where the Latin text is occupied. So that in
Greece, Syria, Armenia, Aethiopia, and other parts of the world, where the
Latin text is not known, or understood, there Christ has no Church by your
unadvised assertion. That we like best the most common Greek text, I am sure
that we do it, by as good reason, if not by better, than you in so great
diversities of the Latin text, who like best of that which is most common,
and in every man's hands.

MART. 49. Well, say we, if you will needs have it so, take your pleasure in
choosing your text. And if you will stand to it, grant us that Peter was
chief among the Apostles, because your own Greek text says, The first,
Peter. No, says Mat. 10.
Beza: we will grant you no such thing, for these words were added to the
Greek text by one that favored Peter's primacie. Is it so? then you will not
stand to this Greek text neither. Not in this place, says Beza.

FVLK. 49. In granting Peter to be the first, we need not grant him to be
the chief, and if we grant him to be the chief, it follows not that he is
chief in authority. But if that were granted, it is not necessary that he
was head of the Church. And albeit that were also granted, the Bishop of Rome
could gain nothing by it. But what says Beza, where the text says, the
first Peter? If we must believe you, he says, No, we will grant you no
such thing, for these words were added to the Greek text by one that
favored Peter's primacie. I pray you Martin where has Beza those words? will
you never leave this shameful forgerie? Beza in the tenth of Matthew does only
ask the question. Quid si hoc vocabulum, etc. what if this word were added,
by some that would establish the Primacie of Peter? for nothing follows that
may agree with it. This asks Beza but as an objection, which immediately after
he answeareth, and concludes that it is no addition, but a natural word of
the text, found in all copies, confessed by Theophylact an enemy of the Popes
primacie, and defends it in the third of Mark, where it is not in the common
Greek copies nor in the vulgar Latin, against Erasmus, who finding it in some
Greek copies, thought it was untruly added out of Matthew. But Beza says: Ego
vero non dubito quin haec sit germana lectio. But I doubt not but this is the
true and right reading of the text: and therefore he translateth Prim^in^
Simonem, the first Simon, out of the few copies Erasmus speaks of.
Therefore it is an abominable slander to charge him with following the common
received text where it seems to make against you when he contendeth for the
truth against the common text, yea and against your own vulgar Latin, to give
you that which you make so great account of, that Peter in the Cataloge of the
Apostles was first. So greatly he fears to acknowledge that Peter was
called first. And so true it is that you charge him to say. No, we will grant
you no such thing, for these words were added to the Greek text by one that
favored Peter's primacie. I hope your favorers seeing your forgerie thus
manifestly discovered, will give you less credit in other your shameless
slanders, at the leastwise this in equity. I trust all Papists will grant,
not to beeleue your report against any man's writing, except they read it
tho^selues. Now ^^at this word, (the first) argues no primacie, or
superiority, beside those places quoted by Beza, Act. 26. 20. Romans 1, 8. and
3, 2. You may read 1. Par. v* 23 and 24. where the posterity of Leui and Aaron
are rehearsed as they were appointed by David in their orders, or courses.
Subuel primus, Rohobia primus, sors prima Ioiarib, etc. where least you should
think of any headship, or principality, because the Hebrew is sometime (...),
and the Greek (...), you may see, that Subuel is called primus of the sons
of Gerson, when there is no more mentioned, and more expressly, Rohobia is
called primus of the sons, of Eleazer, of whom it is said, that he had no
more sons, and that (...) signifies here, the first in order, it appears
by those generations, where the second, third, or fourth, is named, as in the
sons of Hebron, and of Oziel. Also in the sons of Semei, where Iehoth is
counted the first, Ziza the second: Iaus and Beria, becaused they increase not
in sons, were accounted for one family. In all which, there is no other
primacy, than in the first lot of Ioiarib, where the Hebrew word is harishuon,
and so follow the (...)
rest^n order, unto four and twenty courses. Therefore there is no cause why
we should not stand to the Greek text, in that place, neither did Beza ever
deny to stand to it.

MART. 50. Let us see an other place. You must grant us (saywe) by this Greek
text, that Christ's very blood which was shed for us, is really in the chalice,
because S. Luke says so in the Greek text. No, says Beza, those Greek
words came out of the margem into the text, and therefore I translate not
according to them, but according to that which I think the truer Greek text,
although I find it in no copies in the world, and this his doing See chap. 1.
number 37. chap. 17. number. 11.
is maintained and justified by our English Protestants, in their writings of
late.

FVLK. 50. Still Beza speaks, as you inspire into him, while he speaks
through your throat, or quil. The truth is, Beza says, that either there is a
manifest Soloecophanes, that is an appearance of incongruitie, or else those
words (which is shed for you) seem to be added out of S. Matthew, or else it is
an error of the writers, placing that in the nominative case, which should be
in the dative. For in the dative case did Basil read them in his morals, 21.
definition.

Nevertheless, all our old books (says Beza) had it so written, as it is
commonly printed in the nominative case. Here are three several disiunctions,
yet can you find none, but one proposition that you set down, as though it
were purely and absolutely affirmed by Beza. Likewise, where you speak of no
copies in the world, you say more than Beza, who speaks but of such copies as
he had, who, if he were of no better conscience, than you would have him seem
to be, might feign some copy in his own hands, to salve the matter. But the
truth is, that since he wrote this, he found one more ancient copy, both in
Greek, and Latin, which now is at Cambridge, where this whole verse is
wanting. But of this matter, which somewhat concerns my self particularly, I
shall have better occasion to write in the places by you quoted, cap. 1. number.
37. and cap. 17. number. 11. where I will so justify that which I have written
before, touching this place, as I trust all learned and indifferent Readers,
shall see how vainly you insult against me, where you bewray grosser ignorance
in Greek phrases, than ever I would have suspected in you, being accounted
the principal Linguist of the Seminary at Rhemes.

MART. 51. Well yet, sayewe, there are places in the same Greek text, as
plain for us as these now cited, where you can not say, it came out of the
margent, or, it was added falsely to the text. A^, Stand and hold fast the
traditions, etc. by this 2 Thessalonians. 2.
text we require that you grant us traditions delivered by word of mouth, as
well as the written word, that is, the Scriptures. No, say they, we know the
Greek word signifies tradition, as plain as possibly, but here and in the
like places, we rather translate it, ordinances, instructions, and what else
soever. Nay Sirs, say we, you can not so answer the matter, for in other
places, you translate it duly, and truly, tradition: and why more in one
place, than in another? They are ashamed to tell why, but they must tell, and
shame both thom selves, and the devil, if ever they think it good to answer
this treatise, as also why they changed congregation, which was always in
their first translation, into Church, in their later translations, and did not
change likewise ordinances, into traditions, Elder^ into Priests.

FVLK. 51. That the Thessalonians had some part of Christian doctrine,
delivered by word of mouth, that is, by the Apostles preaching, at such time as
he did write unto them, and some part by his Epistles, the text enforces us to
grant, and we never purposed to deny: But that the Church at this day, or
ever since the new Testament was written, had any tradition by word of mouth,
of any matter necessary to salvation, which was not contained in the old or
new Testament, we will never grant, neither shall you ever be able out of
this text, or any text in the Bible to prove. Make your Syllogismes, when you
dare, and you shall be answered. But we know (you say) that the Greek word
signifies, tradition, as plain as possibly, but here, and in like places, we
rather translate it, ordinances, instructions, and what else soever. We know
that it signifies tradition, constitution, instruction, precept, also
mancipation, treatise, treason.

For all these the Greek Dictionaries do teach, that it signifies. Therefore
if in any place we have translated it ordinances, or instructions, or
institutions, we have not gone from the true signification of the word,
neither can you ever prove, that the word signifies such a doctrine only, as
is taught by word of mouth, and is not, or may not be put in writing. But in
other places you can tell us, that we translate it duly and truly, tradition,
and you will know, why more in one place, than in another, affirming that we
are shamed to tell why. For my part, I was never of counsel with any that
translated the Scriptures into English, and therefore it is possible, I can not
sufficiently express what reason moved the translators so to vary in the
exposition of one and the same word. Yet can I yield sufficient reason, that
might lead them so to do, which I think they followed. The Papists do
commonly so abuse the name of tradition, which signifies properly a delivery,
or a thing delivered, for such a matter as is delivered only by word of
mouth, and so received from hand to hand, that it is never put in writing,
but has his credit without the holy Scriptures of God, as the Jew had their
Cabala, and the Scribes and Pharisees had their traditions beside the law of
God, Irenaeus, lib. 3. c. 2.
and the Valentinian Heretics accused the Scriptures, as insufficient of
authority, and ambiguously written, and that the truth could not be found in
them by those that knew not the tradition, which was not delivered by writing,
but by word of mouth, iumpe as the Papists do. This abusing of the word,
tradition, might be a sufficient cause for the translators, to render the
Greek word, where it is taken for such doctrine as is beside the
commandment of God, by the name of tradition, as the word is commonly taken.
But where the Greek word is taken in the good part, for that doctrine which
is agreeable with the holy Scriptures, they might with good reason avoid it,
as you your self do not always translate tradere, to betray, but sometimes
to deliver. So did the translators give these words, ordinances, instructions,
institutions, or doctrine delivered, which do generally signify the same that
tradition, but have not the prejudice of that partial signification, in which
the Papists use it, who wheresoever they find tradition, straight way imagine
they have found a sufficient argument, against the perfection and sufficiency
of the holy Scripture, and to bring in all riffe raffe, and trishe trashe, of
man's doctrine, not only beside, but also contrary to the manifest word of
God, contained in his most holy and perfect Scriptures. To the shame of the
devil therefore, and of all popish maintainers of traditions uncommanded by
God, this reason may be yielded.

Now to answer you why Ecclesia was first translated congregation, and
afterward Church: the reason that moved the first translators (I think) was
this: the word Church of the common people, at that time, was used
ambiguously, both for the assembly of the faithful, and for the place in
which they assembled: for avoiding of which ambiguitie, they translated
Ecclesia the congregation, and yet in their Creed, and in the notes of their
Bibles, in preaching, and writing they used the word Church for the same, the
later translators seeing the people better instructed, and able to discern when
they read in the Scriptures, the people, from the place of their meeting, used
the word Church in their translations, as they did in their preaching. These
are weighty matters that we must give account of them* Why we change not
ordinances into traditions, and Elders into Priests, we will answer when we
come to the proper places of them. In the mean season we think there is as
good cause for us in translating, sometime to avoid the terms of traditions
and priest, as for you to avoid the names of Elders calling them ancients,
and the wise men sages, as though you had rather speak French, than English as
we do. Like as you translate Conside. have a good heart after the french phrase,
rather than you would say as we do, be of good comfort.

MART. 52. The cause is, that the name of Church was at the first odious unto
the^, because of the Catholic Church which stood against them: but afterward
this name* grew into more favor with them, because of their English Church,
so at length called and termed. But their hatred of Priests and traditions
continues still, as it first began, and therefore their translation also
remains as before, suppressing the names both of the one and of the other.
But of all these their dealings, they shall be told in their several chapiters
and places.

FVLK. 52. I pray you, who translated first the creed into the English tongue,
and taught it to the people* and for that cause were accounted heretics of the
Antichristian Romish rabble? If the name of Church were odious unto them, why
did they not suppress that name in the creed, which they taught to young
and old, and in steed of Catholic Church, call it the universal congregation
or assembly? Well Dauus, these things be not aptely divided according to their
times. The first translation of the Bible that was printed in the english
tongue, in very many places of the notes, uses the name Church, and most
notoriously in the song of Solomon, where before every other verse almost it
tells which is the voice of the Church to Christ her spous^* which no
reasonable man would think the translators would have done, if the name of the
Church had been odious unto them, or that they thought the Catholic church
stood against the^. Look Thomas Mathewes Bible, in the Canticles of Solomon,
and upon the 16. of S. Mathewes Gospel, the 18. verse, the words of Christ to
Peter. Therefore your senseles imaginations, show no hatred of the Catholic
Church in our translators, but cancred malice, and impudent folly in your
selves.

MART. 53. To conclude, as I began, concerning their shifts, and iumpes, and
windings, and turnings every way, from one thing to an other, till they are
driven to the extreme refuge of palpable corruptions, and false translations:
consider with me in this one case only of traditions, as may be likewise
considered in all other controversies, that the ancient fathers, councels,
antiquity, universality, and custom of the whole Church allow traditions:
the Canonical Scriptures have them, the Latin text has them, the Greek text
has them: only their translations have them not. Likewise in the old
Testament, the approved Latin text has such and such speeches, that make for
us, the renowned Greek text has it, the Hebrewe text has it: only their
translations have it not.

These are the translations which we call heretical and wilful, and which shall
be examined and discussed in this Book.

FVLK. 53. By what windings and turnings I pray you are we driven to that
miserable refuge of palpable corruptions, and false translations? for hitherto
you have showed none, but such as show your own ignorance, or malice.
Neither (I hope) you shall be able to show any, though you sweat never so sore
at your work. Yes, I ween, this one case only of traditions, for so you seem
to say, if it be considered, will discover no less. It is marvel, if for your
sake, all the Greek Dictionaries in the world must not be corrected, and taught
to say, that (...) ca^ signify nothing but a tradition, that is not written.
But yet you roll in your accustomed rhetorike, saying, that the antie^t
fathers, councils, antiquity, universality, and custom of the whole Church
allow traditions, and so do we, so many as be good and agreeable to the holy
scripturs, but that there be traditions of matter necessary to salvation* not
contained in the holy scripturs, when you bring your fathers, Councels, etc.
you shall receive an answer to them. That the canonical scripture allows any
traditions contrary to the doctrine thereof, or to supply any want or
imperfection thereof, as though al things required to make the man of God
perfect, prepared to all good works, were not contained in the Scriptures,
you shall never be able to prove, although for spite against the perfection of
the Canonical Scripture, you should braste a sunder, as Judas did, which
betrayed the auctor of the Scripture. Finally, what so ever you say out of the
old Testament, without proof or show of proof, it is as easily denied by us,
as it is affirmed by you. When you bring but only a shadow of reason, it shall
sone be chased away, with the light of truth.

The Arguments of every chapter, with the page where every chapter begins.
CHAP. 1. THat the Protestants translate the holy Scripture falsely of purpose,
in favor of their heresies, throughout al controversies. page. 1. 2 Against
Apostolical Traditions. page 73. 3 Against sacred Images. page 88. 4 The
Ecclesiastical use of words turned into their original and profane
significations. page 131. 5 Against the CHVRCH. page 139. 6 Against Priest and
Priesthood. Wheremuch also is said of their profaning of Ecclesiastical
words. page 157. 7. Against Purgatory, Limbus Patrum, and Christ's descending
into Hell. page 196. 8. Concerning Justification, and Gods justice in rewarding
good works. page 252. 9 Against Merits, meritorious works, and the reward
for the same. page 263. 10 Against Free will. page 300. 11 For Imputative
justice against true inherent justice. page 328. 12 For Special faith, vain
security, and only faith. page 342. 13 Against Penance and Satisfaction. page
355. 14 Against the holy Sacraments, namely Baptism, and Confession. page 379.
15 Against the Sacrament of Holy Orders, and for the Marriage of Priests, and
Votaries. page 390. 16 Against the Sacrament of Matrimony. page 423. 17
Against the B. Sacrament, and Sacrifice, and altars. pa. 429. 18 Against the
honor of Saints, namely of our B. LADY. pa. 460. 19 Against the distinction
of Dulia, and Latria. page 474. 20 Adding to the text. page 483. 21 Other
heretical treacheries, and corruptions, worthy of observation. page 493. 22
Other faults Iudaical, profane, mere vanities, foll^es, and novelties. page
507.
A Discovery of the manifold corruptions of the holy Scriptures, by the
Heretics of our days, specially the English Sectaries, and of their foul dea
ling herein, by partial and false Translations to the advantage of their
heresies, in their English Bibles used, and authorized since the time of
Schism.
CHAP. 1.
That the Protestants translate the holy Scriptures falsely of purpose, in
favor of their heresies.

MARTIN.
THOUGH this shall evidently appear thorough out this whole Book in every
place that shall be objected unto them: yet because it is an observation of
greatest importance in this case and which stigeth the^ sore, and touches
their credit exceedingly, in so much that one of them setting a good
Confutation of 10. Ho (...)* le^. fo. 35. p. 2.
face upon the matter, says confidently, that all the Papists in the world are
not able to show one place of Scripture mistranslated wilfully of purpose:
therefore I will give the reader certain brief observations and evident marks to
know wilful corruptions, as it were an abridgement and sum of this Treatise.

FVLKE.
ALTHOUGH this trifling treatise was in hand two or three years ago, as by the
threatening of Bristow, and Howlette it may appear: yet that it might seem
new, and a sudden piece of work compyled with small study, you thought good
by carping at my confutation of Howlet last made, and of M. Whitakers work, set
forth later than it, as it were by setting on new ears upon your old pot,
to make it seem to be a new vessel. And first of all you would seem to have
taken occasion of my confident speech in my confutation of Howlets nine
Reasons, in re^earsing whereof, you use such fidelity, as commonly Papists use
to bear toward God, the Church, your Prince, and your Country. For what
face soever I set upon the matter: with a whorish forehead and a brazen face,
you make report of my saying: which being testified by a thousand copies
printed, as it were by so many witnesses, does cry out upon your falshode, and
injurious dealing. For my words out of the place by you quoted against Howlet,
are these: That some error may be in translation (although by you it can not
be showed) I will not deny: but that any shameless translations, or wilful
corruptions, can be Such does Hovvlet charge us vvithall.
found of purpose to draw the Scriptures to any heretical opinion, all the
Papists in the world shall never be able to make demonsiration. This was my
saying, and I repeat it again with as great confidence as before, yea and with
much greater too, forasmuch as all the Papists in the Seminary, having now
beaten their heads together to find out shameless translations and wilful
corruptions, of purpose to maintain heresies * can find nothing, but old
frivolous quarrels answered long before, or new trifling cauils, not worthy in
deed of any learned man's answer but for satisfying of the simple and
ignorant. How this my saying, differs from your slanderous report, I
trust every reasonable Papist that will take pains to confer them together,
will be enforced to acknowledge. For where I say shameless translations and
wilful corruptions (as Howlet charge us,) you report me to say
mistranslated, although in plain words I did confess, that there might be
some errors even in the best and perfectest of our translations. For to
translate out of one tongue into an other, is a matter of greater difficulty
than it is commonly taken, I mean exactly to yield as much and no more, than
the original contains, when the words and phrases are so different, that
few are found* which in all points signify the same thing, neither more nor
less in diverse tongues. Wherefore notwithstanding any translation that can be
made, the knowledge of the tongues, is necessary in the Church* for the perfect
discussing of the ^ense, and meaning of the holy Scriptures. Now if some of our
translators, or they all, have not attained to the best, and most proper
expressing of the nature of all words and phrases of the Hebrew and Greek
tongues in English, it is not the matter that I will stand to defend, nor the
translators them selves, I am well assured, if they were all living. But that
the Scriptures are not impudently falsified, or wilfully corrupted by them, to
maintain any heretical opinion, as the adversary charge us, that is the
thing, that I will (by Gods grace) stand to defend, against all the Papists
in the world. And this end you have falsely and fraudulently omitted, in
reporting my saying, whereupon depends the chief, yea the whole matter of
my assertion. You plai^ manifestly with us, the lewd part of Procustes the
theeu^sh host, which would make his guestes stature equal with his beds,
either by stretching them out if they were too short, or by cutting off their
legs, if they were too long. So if our sayings be too short for your purpose,
you strain them to be longer, if they be too long, you cut of their shankes,
yea that which is worse, the very head, as you play with me in this place. I my
self, and so did many hundreds beside me, hear that reverend father M. Doctor
Couerdale of holy and learned memory, in a sermon at Paul's cross, upon
occasion of some slanderous reports, that then were raised against his
translation, declare his faithful purpose in doing the same, which after it
was finished, and presented to King Henry the eight, of famous memory, and by
him committed to diverse bishops of that time to pervse, of which (as I
remember) Steven Gardener was one: after they had kept it long in their hands,
and the King was diverse times sued unto for the publication thereof, at the
last being called for by the King him self, they redeliuered the book: and
being demanded by the King what was their judgment of the translation, they
answered that there were many faults therein. Well said the King, but are
there any heresies maintained thereby: They answered there was no heresies
that they could find, maintained thereby. If there be no heresies said the
King, then in Gods name let it go abroad among our people. According to this
judgment of the King and the Bishops, M. Couerdale defended his translation,
confessing that he did now him self epsy some faults, which if he might
reuiew it once over again, as he had done twice before, he doubted not but to
amend: but for any heresy, he was sure there was none maintained by his
translation. After the same manner, I doubt not (by Gods help) so to defend
all our translations, for all your evident marks to know wilful corruptions,
that not one shall be found of purpose to maintain any heretical opinion,
and not many errors committed through negligence, ignorance, or human
frailty.

MARTIN. 2. The first mark and most general is: If they translate elsewhere
not amiss, and in places of controversy Evident marks or signs to
knovvvv^^full corruptions in translating.
between them and us, most falsely: it is an evident argument that they do it
not of negligence, or ignorance, but of partiality to the matter in
controversy. This is to be seen through the whole Bible, where the faults of
their translations are altogether, or specially, in those Scriptures that
concern the causes inquestion between us. For other small faults, or rather
ouersights, we will no further note unto them, than to the end, that they may
the more easily pardon us the like, if they find them.

FVLKE. 2. This mark is too general, to know any thing thereby: when you do
exemplify it in special, you shall easily be answered: in the mean time, it
is sufficient to deny generally, that wherewith you so generally charge us; that
we have in places of controversy translated any thing falsely. If one word be
otherwise translated in any place of controversy, than it is in other places
out of controversy: there may be rendered sufficient reason of that variety,
without that it must needs come of parcialitie to the matter in controversy,
but rather of love of the truth, which in all matters of question between us,
is confirmed by plain text of Scriptures, or necessary collection out of the
same, so that if the translation in those places were the same that yours is,
of the new Testament, it should neither hinder our truth, nor fortify your
error. As for small faults, and ouersightes, reason it is (as you say) they
should be pardoned on both sides.

MART. 3. If, as in their opinions and heresies, they forsake the ancient
fathers: so, also in their translations, they go from that text and ancient
reading of holy Scriptures, which all the fathers used and expounded: is it not
plain that their translation follows the vein and humor of their heresy?
And again, if they that so abhor from the ancient expositions of the
fathers, yet if it seem to serve for them, stick not to make the exposition
of any one Doctor, the very text of holy Scripture: what is this but heretical
wilfulness? See this 1. chap. number. 43. chap. 10. number. 1. 2. chap. 18. number. 10.
11. and chap 19. number. 1.

FVL. 3. We never go from that text, and ancient reading, which all the
fathers used and expounded, but we translate that most usual text, which was
first printed out of the most ancient copies, that could be found. And if any
be since found, or if any of the ancient fathers* did read otherwise, than
the usual copies in any word that is any way material, in annotation,
comme^taries, readings and sermons, we spare not to declare it as occasion
serves: but that we stick not to make the exposition of any one Doctor, the
very text of holy Scripture, it is a very heinous slander, neither can it be
proved in any of the places of your book, which you quote for that purpose.

MART. 4. Again* if they that profess to translate the Hebrew and Greek, and
that because it makes more for them (as they say) and therefore in all
conferences and disputations appeal unto it as to the fountain and
touchstone, if they (I say) in translating places of controversy, flee from
the Hebrew and the Greek, it is a most certain argument of nilfull
corruption. This is done many ways, and is to be observed also throughout the
whole Bible, and in all this book.

FVLK. 4. We never flee from the Hebrewe and Greek in any place, much less
in places of controversy: but we always hold as near as we can, that which
the Greek and Hebrew signifies. But if in places of controversy, we take
witness of the Greek, or vulgar Latin, where the Hebrew or Greek may be
thought ambiguous. I trust no wise man will count this a flight from the Hebrew,
and Greek, which we always translate aright, whether it agree with the 70 or
vulgar Latin, or no.

MART. 5. If the Greek be, Idololatria, and Idololatra: (...).
and they translate not. Idolatry, and, Idolater: but, worshipping (...).
of Images, and, worshipper of Images, and that so absurdly, that they make the
Apostle say, Covetousness is worshipping Ephesians. 5. Col. 3. ^^^ (...) 577.
of images: this none would do but fools or mad me^. unless it were of purpose
against sacred images. See cha. 3. nu. 1. 2.

FVLK. 5. If the Greek words do signify, as we translate, as has been
often proved, who but a wrangling quarreller would find fault therewith, except
it were to maintain Idolatry, or worshipping of images, which before God and
all wise men of the world, is al one. And where you say, none but fools, or
mad men would translate, Ep 5. Col 3 Covetousness is worshipping of Images. I
pray you in whether order will you place Isydorus Clarius of a Monk of Casinas
made bishop Fulginas: which in the 3. to the Collossians upon your vulgar
Latin text, which according to the Greek, calls Idolatria, Simulachroru^
seruitus, the service of images: in his notes upon the place writes this.
Praeter caet^ra peccata auaritia peculiare hoc nomen assecuta est, vt dicatur
esse (horrendu^ nomen) cultus simulachroru^, nam pecunia quid aliud est quam
simulachru^ quodda^ vel argente^, vel aureu^, quod homines auari plus amani and
long maiore cultu atq* honor prosequuntur, quam ipsum Deu^. Above other
sins, covetousness has obtained this peculiar name, that it is called (which
is an horrible name) the worshipping of images* for what other thing is money,
but a certain image, either of silver or gold? which covetous me^ do love
more* and prosecute with far greater worship and honor, than they do God him
self. or if you make no count of Is^dorus Clarius, in what degree will you
account the deputies of the counsel of Trent, whose severe censure, this note
has escaped, of fools or of mad men, or of enemies to sacred images? yea how
will you excuse your own vulgar Latin translation, which turns Idololatria
out of Greek into simulachrorum seruitus, the service or worship of Images? I
am not so unacquainted with your shameless shifts, but I know right well, that
you will say, this Latin word Simulachru^ signifies a false image, or an idol
that is worshipped as God. For nothing else you will knowledge to be an idol. But
who shall better tell us what the Latin word Simulachru^ does signify, than the
father of eloquence in the Latin tongue, even Tully himself, who in his oration
pro Archia poeta, uses simulachru^, for the same that statua, and Imago,
speaking of the cunning image makers of Greece, he says: S^atuae and imagines
non animorum simulachra sunt, sed corporum. Standing images, and other images
are not similitudes or images of the minds, but of the bodies. And in his
accusation of Verres: he names Effigies simulachru^que Mithridatis: The shape
and image of Mithridates. In his second book de inuentione, he shows that
Zeuxis, that famous painter, did paint the image of Helena, vt excellentem
muliebris formae pulchritudinem muta in sese imago co^tineret, Helenae se
pingere velle simulachrum dixit. That a dumb image might contain in it, the
excellent beauty of a woman's form, he said he would paint the similitude or
image of Helena. Also in his familiar epistles, Epist. 68. Illi artifices
corporis simulachra ignotis nota faciebant. Those workmen did make the images
of the bodies known to them that knew them not. And so commonly he uses
simulachrum iustitiae, virtutis, ciuitatis, for the image or similitude of
justice, of virtue, of a city or common wealth etc. And so do other good
Latin writers as well as he, use the word Simulachrum: not only for an image,
that is religiously worshipped, but even generally for any image, and in the
same signification that they use the word Imago. But peradventure
Ecclesiastical writers use the word Simulachrum only for idols forbidden,
and I perhaps shall be chidden of Martin for citing testimonies out of profane
authors, to know the use of Ecclesiastical terms. Let us see then what
Christian writers say to this matter, and how they use this word
Simulachrum. You your selves say, we may not translate that verse of Genesis,
God made man after his idol. But Lactantius De vero Dei cultu. lib. 6. c^p 13.
calls men viuentia Dei simulachra, living images of God which we ought to
garnishe rather, than Simulachra insensibilia Deorum, The senseless images of
the Gods, which the Heathen garnished, yea he has a whole chapter, entitled,
de simulachris De orig. error. lib. 2. cap. 2.
and vero Dei simulachro and cultu. Of Images and of the true Image and
Worship of God. In which also he shows that Simulachrum is called of
similitude. And therefore the heathenish Idols, having no resemblance of God,
can not properly be called Simulachra. S. Ambrose an other writer of the
Church, upon 1. Cor. 10. upon that text: Non quia simulachrum est aliquid etc.
Not that the image is any thing, the Greek is Idolum, simulachrum vere nihil
est quia imago videtur rei mortuae. The image or idol is in deed nothing,
because it seems to be an image of a dead thing. Also upon the 45. Psalm.
God was high in the Patriarchs and Prophets, which did not compare him
Imaginibus terrenis and simulachris scrupeis, to images or similitudes of the
earth and stone. Tertullian also, a Latin writer, in his book De spectaculis,
speaking of cunning workmanship of Imagery, showed in those plays, and the
auctors of them, says: Scimus enim nihil esse nomina mortuorum, sicut nec
ipsa simulachra eorum. We know that the names of those dead me^, are nothing,
as also their images. Afterward to their names Nominibus he joins
Imaginibus, to show that Simulachra and Imagines are all one, which of
Christians at that time were greatly abhorred, in detestation of Idolatry. S.
Augustine calls the same Simulachra which before he called Imagines. Cum ex
desiderio mortuorum constituerentur Imagines, vnde simulachrorum vsus exortus
est. When for desire of the dead, Images were made, whereof the use of Images
came, through flattery, divine honor was given unto them: and so they brought
in idolatry or the worshipping of images. The same Augustine in his book
Octaginta Quaestion. in the 78. quaest. which is entitled De simulachrorum
pulchritudine, of the beauty of Images, ascribes to God, the cunning, by which
they are made bewtifull. And in his questions upon the book of Judges, lib. 7.
cap. 41. enquiring how Gedeons Ephod was a cause of fornication to the people,
when it was no Idol, he plainly distinguishes Simulachrum from Idolum, as
the general from the special. Cum idolum non fuerit, id est cuiuspiam dei
falsi and alieni simulachrum. When it was no Idol, that is to say, an Image of
some false or strange God. Again he says, those things that were commanded
to be made in the tabernacle, were rather referred to the worship of God, than
that any thing of them should be taken for God, or for an image of God, pro Dei
simulachro. So that Simulachrum with S. Augustine, signifies as generally, as
Image, and can not be restrained to signify an Idol, in the evil part,
except you add, that it is an image of a false or strange God. Arnobius an
ecclesiastical writer of the Latin Church uses the word Simulachrum for an
image generally: calling man also simulachrum Dei, as Lactantius does the image
of God, Cont. gent. lib. 8. Putatis autem nos occultare quod colimus si delubra
and aras non habemus. Quod enim simulachrum Deo fingam, cum si recte existimes
sit Dei homo ipse simulachrum. Think you that we do hide that which we
worship, if we have no temples, and aultars. For what image shall I feign to
God, whereas if you judge rightly, man him self is the image of God. You see
therefore that Simulachrum signifies not an Idol worshipped for God, but even
as much as Imago, by your own rule. Last of all, for I will not trouble the
Reader with more, although more might be brought. Isidorus Hispalensis an
ancient Bishop of the Latin Church, Originum lib. 8. speaking of the first
inuentors of Images, which after were abused to Idolatry, says: Fuerunt
etiam and quidam viri fortes aut vrbium conditores: quibus mortuis homines qui
eos dilexerunt, simulachra finxerunt, vt haberent aliquod ex imaginum
contemplatione solatium: sed paulatim hunc errorem etc. There were also
certain Valiant men or buylders of Cities, who when they were dead, men
which loved them, made their images or counterfaites, that they might have some
comfort in beholding the images: but by little and little the deuilles
persuading this error, it is certain that so it crepte into their posterity,
that those whom they honored, for the only remembrance of their name, their
successors esteemed and worshipped as gods. Again he says, Simulachra autem
a similitudine nuncupata, etc. Images are called Simulachra of the similitude,
because by the hand of the artificers, of stone, or other matter they resemble
the countenance of them, in whose honor they are feigned. Or they are called a
Simulando, whereof it follows, they are false things. These testimonies
needed not, for them that be but half learned, which know right well, that
Simulachrum is Synonomon with Imago: but that our adversaries are so impudent,
that to serve their idolatrous affection, they care not what Idolles they
invent, of words, of significations, of distinctions, so they may seem to
say somewhat in the ears of the unlearned, which are not able to judge of
such matters. But perhaps they will say, their vulgar Latin interpreter
uses the word Simulachrum, only for Idols, that are worshipped with divine
honor. Neither is that true, and although it were, seeing it seldom uses
Simulachra, and most commonly Idola, and sometimes Imagines, what reason is
their why we may not call those things Images which your Interpreter calls
Simulachra? And to prove that your interpreter uses Simulachrum for an image
generally, as all other Latin writers do, you may see 1. Sam. cap. 19. where
speaking of the image which Michol laid in the bed, to counterfaite the
sickness of David, first he calls it Statuam, and afterward the same image
he calls Simulachrum. And sure it is, that David had no idolles in his house.
And least you should cavil about the Hebrew word Teraphim, which the
Septuaginta translate (...), Aquila calls (...). S. Hieron. tells you they
signify Figuras or Imagines, figures Quest. Heb. in Genesis
or images, which sometimes were abused to idolatry* as those which Rachel
stole, and those which are mentioned Iud. 17. Aben Ezra and other of the
Rabines say, they were astronomicall images to serve for dials, or other
purposes of Astrology: and such it is most like was that, which was placed in
David's bed, which your interpretor calls Statuam and Simulachrum. Therefore
whereas we have translated Idololatria, Col. 3. worshipping of Images, we have
done rightly: and your Latin interpreter will warrant that translation, which
translateth the same word Simulachrorum seruitus, the service of Images. It is
you therefore, and not we, that are to be blamed for translation of that word.
For where you chardge us to depart from the Greek text, which we profess to
translate, we do not, except your vulgar translation be false. But you
professing to follow the Latin, as the only true, and authentical text, do
manifestly depart from it, in your translation, for the Latin being
Simulachrorum seruitus, you call it the service of idolles, appealing to the
Greek word, which you have set in the margent (...), and dare not translate
according to your own Latin, for then you should have called covetousness
even as we do, the worshipping or service of images. And yet you charge us in
your notes, with a marvelous impudent, and foolish corruption. But I report
me to all indifferent Readers, whether this be not a marvelous impudent, and
foolish reprehension, to reprove us for saying the same in English, that your
own interpreter says in Latin. For Simulachrorum seruitus, is as well the
service of images, as Simulachrorum artifex, is a maker of images, whom none
but a fool or a mad man, would call a maker of Idolles, because not the
crafts man that frames the image, but he that sets it up to be worshipped
as God, makes an idol, according to your own acception of an Idol. But of
this matter enough at this time.

MART. 6. If the Apostle say, A pagan idolater, and a 1. Cor. 5. (...). Bib.
an. 1562.
Christian idolater, by one and the same Greek word, in one and the same
meaning: and they translate, A pagan idolater, and a Christian worshipper of
images, by two distinct words and diverse meanings: it must needs be done
wilfully to the foresaid purpose. See chap. 3. number, 8. 9.

FVLKE. 6. We translate not only pagane Idolaters, but also Jews Idolaters,
nor Christians only worshippers of Images, but Paganes also: wherefore this is
a foolish observation. And if we do any where explicate, who is an Idolater, by
translating him a worshipper of images, both the word bears it, and it is not
contrary to the sense of the Scriptures, in which we find the worshipping of
images always forbidden, but never commanded or allowed.

MART. 7. If they translate one and the same Greek (...).
word, Tradition, whenever the Scripture speaks of evil traditions: and
never translate it so, whenever it speaks of good and Apostolical
traditions: their intention is evident against the authority of Traditions.
See chap. 2 numb. 1. 2 3.

FVLKE. 7. This is answered sufficiently in confutation of the Preface Sect.
51. The English word Tradition sounding in the evil part, and taken by the
Papists for matter unwritten, yet as true, and as necessary as that which is
contained in the holy Scriptures: we have upon just cause avoided in such
places, as the Greek word signifies good and necessary doctrine, delivered
by the Apostles, which is all contained in the Scriptures, and yet have used
such English words as sufficiently express the Greek word used in the
original text. Do not you your selves translate Tradere sometimes to betray,
and sometimes to deliver?

MART. 8. Yea if they translate, Tradition, taken in (...).
ill part, where it is not in the Greek: and translate it not so, where it is
in the Greek, taken in good part: it is more evidence Col. 2. ^. 20.
of the foresaid wicked intention. See chap. 2. numb. 5. 6.

FVLK. 8. Our intention can be no worse, than your vulgar Latin Interpreters
was, who, where the Greek has (...) translateth it Traditions Act. 6. And the
right understanding of the word (...) according to the Apostles meaning, will
yield traditions as well, as (...) in the place before mentioned.

MARTINE. 9. If they make this a good rule, to translate according to the
usual signification, and not the original deriuation of words, as Beza, and
Master Page 209.
Whitakers do: and if they translate contrary to this rule, what is it but
wilful corruption? So they do in translating, Idolum, an Image, Presbyter, an
Elder: and the like. See chap. 4. and chap. 6. numb. 6. 7. 8. etc. numb. 13.
etc.

FVLKE. 9. Neither Beza, nor Master Whitaker make it a perpetual rule, to
translate according to the usual signification, for sometimes a word is not
taken in the usual signification, as Foenerator used by your vulgar Latin
Interpreter. Luke. 7. vsuallye signifies an Vserer: yet do you translate it a
Creditor. Likewise Stabulum used Luke. 10. usually signifies a Stable, yet you
translate it, an Inn. So Nauis which usually signifies a Ship, you call it
a Boat. Mark. 8. and Nauicula which vsuallye signifies a Boat, you call a
Ship* Luke. 5. And yet I think you meant no wilful corruption. No more
surely did they which translated Idolum an Image, and Presbyter an Elder,
which you can not deny. But they follow the original deriuation of the
words, whereas some of yours, both go from the usual signification, and also
from the original deriuation.

MARTINE. 10. If Presbyter, by Ecclesiastical use, be appropriated to
signify a Priest, no less than, Episcopus, to signify a Bishop, or
Diaconus, a Deacon: and if they translate these two later accordingly, and the
first never in all the New Testament: what can it be but wilful corruption in
favor of this heresy, That Whitaker. p. ^99.
there are no Priests of the New Testament? See chap. 6. numb. 12.

FVLKE. 10. The word Priest, by Popish abuse, is commonly taken for a
Sacrificer, the same that Sacerdos in Latin. But the Holy Ghost never calls
the Ministers of the word and Sacraments of the New Testament (...), or
Sacerdotes. Therefore the translatours to make a difference between the
Ministers of the Old Testament, and them of the New, calls the one,
according to the usual acception, Priests, and the other according to the
original deriuation Elders. Which distinction seeing the vulgar Latin text
does always rightly observe, it is in favor of your heretical Sacrificing
Priesthood, that you corruptly translate Sacerdos and Presbyter always, as
though they were all one, a Priest, as though the Holy Ghost had made that
distinction in vain, or that there were no difference between the Priesthood
of the New Testament, and the Old. The name of Priest, according to the
original deriuation from Presbyter, we do not refuse: but according to the
common acception for a Sacrificer, we can not take it, when it is spoken of
the Ministry of the New Testament. And although many of the ancient
Fathers, have abusiuelye confounded the terms of Sacerdos, and Presbyter: yet
that is no warrant for us to translate the Scripture, and to confound that
which we see manifestly the spirit of God has distinguished. For this cause,
we have translated the Greek word (...) an Elder, even as your vulgar Latin
translater does diverse times, as Acts. 15. and 20. 1. Pet. 5. and else where
calls them Seniores, or Maiores natu. Which you commonly call, the Auncientes
or Seniors, because you dare not speak English, and say the Elders. Neither
is Presbyter by Ecclesiastical use so approprietated to signify a Priest,
that you would always translate it so in the Old Testament, where your
vulgar translatour uses it for a name of Office, and Government, and not for
Priests at any time. Neither do we always translate the Greek word Episcopus
and Diaconus for a Bishop and a Deacon, but sometimes for an ouerseer, as
Act. 20. and a minister generally oftentimes.

The word Baptisma by Ecclesiastical use signifies the holy Sacrament of
Baptism, yet are you enforced Mark. 7. to translate Baptismata washings. Even
so do we to observe that distinction, which the Apostles and Evangelists
always do keep, when we call Sacerdotes Priests, for difference we call
Presbyteros Elders. and not least the name of Priests should enforce the
Popish sacrifice of the Mass. For this word Presbyter will never comprehend
a sacrificer, or a sacrificing Priesthood.

MART. 11. If for Gods altar, they translate, Temple: and for Bells
idololatrical table, they translate, altar: judge whether it be not of purpose
against our altars, and in favor of their communion table. See chap. 17. numb.
15. 16.

FVLK. 11. If there be any such mistaking of one word for an other, I think
it was the fault of the Printer rather than of the Translator, for the name of
altar is more than a hundred times in the Bible: and unto the story of Bell,
we attribute so small credit, that we will take no testimony from thence, to
prove or disprove any thing.

MART. 12. If at the beginning of their heresy, when sacred images were broken
in pieces, altars dug down, the Catholic Churches authority defaced, the
king made supreme Bib. in king Edw. time printed again 1562.
head, then their translation was made accordingly, and if afterward when
these errors were well established in the realm, and had taken root in the
peoples hearts, all was altered and changed in their later translations, and
now they could not find that in the Greek, which was in the former
translation: what was it at the first but wilful corruption to serve the time
that then was? See chap. 3. 5. chap. 17. numb. 15. chap. 15. number. 22.

FVLK. 12. For images, altars, the Catholic Churches authority, the kings
supremacy, nothing is altered in the later translations, that was falsely
translated in the former, except perhaps the Printers fault be reformed.
Neither can any thing be proved to maintain the popish images, altars,
churches authority, or Popes supremacy, out of any translation of the
Scriptures, or out of the original itself. Therefore our translations were
not framed according to the time, but if any thing were not uttered so plainly
or so aptly as it might, why should not one translation help an other.

MART. 13. If at the first revolt, when none were noted for Heretics and
Schismatikes, but themselves, they did not once put the names of Schism or
Heresy in the Bible, but in steed thereof, division, and, sect, in so much
that for an Heretic, Bib. 1562. Tit. 3.
they said, an author of Sects, what may we judge of it but as of wilful
corruption? See chap. 4. numb. 3.

FVLK. 13. Yes, reasonable men may judge, that they did it to show unto the
ignorant people, what the names of schismatike, and heretic do signify,
rather than to make them believe, that heresy, and schism was not spoken
against in the Scripture. That they translated heresy, sect, they did it by
example of your vulgar Latin Interpreter, who in the 24. of the Acts,
translateth the Greek word (...), sectae. In which chapter likewise, as he
also has done, they have translated the same word, heresy.

MART. 14. If they translate so absurdly at the first, that them selves are
driven to change it for shame: it must needs be at the first wilful
corruption. For example, when it was in the first, Temple, and in the later,
Altar: in the first always, Congregation, in the later always, Church: in the
first, To the King as chief head, in the later, To the King as having
preeminence. So did Beza first translate, carcass, and afterward, soul. Which
alteration in all these places is so great, that it could not be negligence at
the first or ignorance, but a plain heretical intention. See chap. 17. numb.
15. chap. 5. numb. 4. 5. chap. 15. numb. 22. chap. 7. numb. 2.

FVLK. 14. Nay, it may be an oversight, or escape of negligence, or the
Printers fault, as it is manifest in that quarrel you make of temple, for
altar: for in Thomas Mathews translation, the first that was printed in
English, with authority, there is altar in both places. 1. Cor. 9. and 10. For
the term Congregation changed into Church, it was not for shame of the former,
which was true, but because the other term of Church was now well understood,
to show that the word of Scripture, agrees with the word of our Creed: or
perhaps to avoid your fo^d quarrel, not now first picked to the term
Congregation. Whereas the former was: To the King or chief head, the later
saying, the King as having preeminence, does nothing derogate unto the former,
and the former is contained under the later. For I hope you will grant, that
the King is chief head of his people, or if the word head displease you,
(because you are so good a french man) tell us what chief does signify, but
an head? Now this place of Peter, speaks not particularly of the Kings
authority over the Church, or in Church matters, therefore if it had been
translated Supreme head, we could have gained no greater argument for the
supremacy in question, than we may by the word preemine^ce, or by the word
extolling, which you use. That Beza altered the word Cadauer into Animam: I
have showed he did it to void offense, and because the later is more proper to
the Greek, although the Hebrew word which David does use, may and does
signify a dead body or carcass.

MART. 15. If they will not stand to all their translations, but fly to that,
namely which now is read in their Churches: and if that which is now read in
their Churches, differ in the points before said, from that that was read in
their Churches in King Edwards time: and if from both these, they sly to the
Geneua Bible, and from that again, to the other before said: what shall we
judge of the one or the other, but that all is voluntary, and as they list?
See chap. 3. number. 10. 11. 12. chap. 10. number. 12.

FVLK. 15. If of three translations, we prefer that which is the best, what
sign of corruption is this? If any fault have either of ignorance, or
negligence escaped in one, which is corrected in an other, and we prefer that
which is corrected, before that which is faulty, what corruption ca^ be judged
in either? Not every fault is a wilful corruption, and much less an heretical
corruption. The example that you quote out of your 3. chapter concerning the
translation of Idolum, is no flying from our translation to an other, but a
confuting of Howlets cavil against our Church service: because this word is
therein read translated an image. 1. Joan. 5. whereas in that Bible, which by
authority is to be red in the church service, the word in the text is idols,
and not images* and yet will we justify the other to be good and true, which
reads, Babes, keep your selves from images, as your vulgar Latin text is a
simulachris, wherein you fly from your own authentical text to the Greek,
which except you think it make for your purpose, you are not ashamed to count
falsified and corrupted.

MART. 16. If they gladly use these words in ill part, where they are not in
the original text, Procession, shrines, devotions, excommunicate, images: and
avoid these words, which are in the original, Hymns, grace, mystery,
Sacrament, Church, Altar, Priests, Catholic, traditions, iustifications: is it
not plain that they do it of purpose to disgrace, or suppress the said
things and speeches used in the Catholic Church? See chap. 21. number. 5. and
seq. chap. 12. number. 3.

FVLK. 16. Who would be so mad, but blind malice, to think they would disgrace
or suppres the things, or names of Catholic Church, whereof they acknowledge
themselves members: of grace by which they confess they are saved: of hymns,
which they use to the praise of God: of iustifications, when they profess they
are of the^ selves unjust: of Sacraments and mysteries, by which the benefits
of Christ are sealed up unto them: of altar, when they believe that Jesus Christ
is our altar: of Priests, when they hold that al good Christians are Priests:
of devotions, when they dispute that ignorance is not the mother of true
devotion, but knowledge, of excommunication, which they practice daily. As for
the names and things of procession, shrines, images, traditions, beside the
holy Scriptures in religion, they have just cause to abhor. Neither do they
use the one sort of terms, without probable ground out of the original text:
nor avoid the other, but upon some good special cause: as in the several
places (when we are charged with them) shall appear.

MART. 17. If in a case that makes for them, they strain the very original
signification of the word, and in a case that makes against them, they neglect
it altogether: what is this but wilful and of purpose? See chap. 7. numb. 36.

FVLK. 17. I answer we streine no words, to signify otherwise, than the nature
and use of them will afford us, neither do we spare to express that, which
has a show against us, if the property, or usual signification of the word,
with the circumstance of the place, do so require it.

MART. 18. If in words of ambiguous and diverse signification, they will have
it signify here or there, as it pleases them: and that so vehemently, that
here it must needs so signify, and there it must not: and both this, and
that, to one end and in favor of one and the same opinion: what is this but
wilful translation? So does Beza urge (...) to signify, wife, Beza in ^. Cor.
7. v. 1. and 9. v. 5. Bib. an. 1579.
and not to signify, wife, both against virginity and chastity of Priests:
and the English Bible translateth accordingly. See chap. 15. number. 11. 12.

FVLK. 18. To the general charge, I answer generally, we do not as you
slander us. Nor Beza whom you shamefully belie, to urge the word (...). 1.
Cor. 7. v. 1. not to signify a wife against virginity, and chastity of
Priests. For clean contrariwise, he reproves Erasmus restraining it to a
wife, which the Apostle says generally: it is good for a man not to touch a
woman, which does not only contain a commendation of virginity in them that
be unmarried, but also of continency in them that be married. And as for the
virginity or chastity of Priests, he speaks not one word of it, in that
place, no more than the Apostle does. Now touching the other place, that you
quote. 1. Cor. 9. v. 5. Beza does truly translate (...), a sister to wife,
because the word sister, is first placed, which comprehends a woman, and
therefore the word (...) following, must needs explicate, what woman he
means, namely a wife. For it were absurd to say, a sister a woman. Therefore
the vulgar Latin Interpreter, peruerteth the words, and says: Mulierem
sororem. It is true, that many of the ancient fathers, as too much addict to
the singlenes of the Clergy, though they did not altogether condemn marriage
in them, as the Papists do: did expound the sister whereof S. Paul speaks,
of certain rich matrones, which followed the Apostles, whithersoeuer they went
and ministered to them of their substance, as we read that many did to our
Savior Christ. Math. 27. v. 55. Luc. 8. v. 3. But that exposition can not
stand, nor agree with this text for many causes. First the placing of the
words, which I have before spoken of. Secondly this word (...) were needeles,
except it should signify a wife: for the word sister signifies both a woman,
and a faithful woman, and otherwise it was not to be doubted, least the Apostle
would lead a heathen woman with him. Thirdly the Apostle speaks of one
woman, and not many, whereas there were many that followed our Savior Christ,
whereas one alone to follow the Apostle, might breed occasion of ill
suspicion, and offense, which many could not so easily. Fourthly, those that
are mentioned in the Gospel, our Savior Christ did not lead about, but they
did voluntarily follow him: but the Apostle here says, that he had authority,
as the rest of the Apostles, to lead about a woman, which argues the right,
that an husband has over his wife, or of a master over his maid. Fifthly, it
is not all one, if women could travel out of Galilie to Jerusalem, which was
nothing near an hundred miles; that women could follow the Apostles into all
parts of the world. Sixthly, if the cause why such women are supposed to have
followed the Apostles, was to minister to them of their substance, the leading
them about, was not burdenous to the Church, but helpeful: but the Apostle
testifies, that he forbear to use this liberty, because he would not be
burdenous to the Church of Corinth, or to any of them. Seventhly, seeing it is
certain that Peter had a wife, and the rest of the Apostles are by antiquity
reputed to have been all married: It is not credible that Peter, or any of the
rest, would leave the company of their own wives, and lead strange women
about with them. As for the objection that you make in your note upon the
text, to what end should he talk of burdening the Corinthians with finding
his wife, when he himself clearly says, that he was single? I answer,
Although I think he was single, yet is it not so clear as you make it, for
Clemens Alexandrinus thinks he had a wife, which he left at Philippi, by
mutual consent. But albeit he were single, it was lawful for him to have
married, and Barnabas also, as well as all the rest of the Apostles. Again, to
what end should he talk of burdening the Church with a woman, which was not
his wife, when such women as you say ministered to the Apostles of their goods?
Whereby it should follow that none of the Apostles burdened the Churches where
they preached with their own finding, which is clean contrary to the Apostles
words and meaning. Wherefore the translation of Beza, and of our Church, is
most true, and free from all corruption.

MART. 19. If the Puritans and grosser Caluinists disagree about the
translations, one part preferring the Geneua English Bible, the other the Bible
read in their Church: and if the Lutherans condemn the Zuinglians and
Caluinistes translations, and contrariwise: and if all Sectaries reprove each
an others translation: What does it argue, but that the translations differ
according to their diverse opinions. See their books written one against
another.

FVLK. 19. Here again is nothing but a general charge of disagreeing about
translations, of Puritans, and Caluinists, Lutherans and Zuinglians, and of all
Sectaries reproving one an others translation, with as general a
demonstration. See the books written one against an other, which would ask
longer time, than is needeful to answer such a vain cauil; when it is always
sufficient to deny, that which is affirmed without certain proof. Luc. 3. v.
36. Act. 1. v. 14. c. 2. v. 23. c. 3. v. 21. c. 26. v. 20. 2. These. 2. v. 15.
etc. 9. v. 6.


MART. 20. If the English Geneua Bibles them selves dare not follow their
Master Beza, whom they profess to translate, because in their opinion he
goes wide, and that in places of controversy: how wilful was he in so
translating? See chap. 12. number. 6. 8. chap. 13. number. 1.

FVLK. 20. It is a very impudent slander. The Geneua Bibles do not profess
to translate out of Bezaes Latin translation, but out of the Hebrew and
Greek, and if they agree not always with Beza* what is that to the purpose,
if they agree with the truth of the original text? Beza often times follows
the purer phrase of the Latin tongue, which they neither would, nor might
follow in the English. If in dissenting from Beza, or Beza from them, they or
he dissent from the truth, it is of humane frailty, and not of heretical
wilfulnes. The places being examined, shall discover your vanity.

MART. 21. If for the most part they reprehend the old vulgar translation, and
appeal to the Greek: and yet in places of controversy sometime for their
more advantage (as they think) they leave the Greek, and follow our Latin
translation: what is it else, but voluntary and partial translation? See
chap. 2. number. 8. chap. 6. nu. 10. 21. chap. 7. nu. 39. chap. 10. nu. 6.

FVLK. 21. We never leave the Greek to follow your vulgar translation, as in
the places by you quoted, I will prove manifestly: but I have already proved,
that you leave the Latin, and appeal to the Greek, in translating
Simulachra, Idols, both Col. 3. and 1. John. 5. Beza. Luc. 1. To. 2. Apoc. 19.
8. Beza in c. 1^. Apoc. v. 8.


MART. 22. If otherwise they avoid this world, iustifications, altogether, and
yet translate it when they can not choose, but with a co^me^tarie that it
signifies good works that are testimonies of a lively faith: does not this
heretical commentary show their heretical meaning, when they avoid the word
aliogither? See Chap. 3. Nu. 1. 2. 3.

FVLK. 22. To avoid the word altogether, and yet sometime to translate it, I
see not how they can stand together, for he that does sometimes translate it,
does not altogether avoid it. But you will say, they do altogether avoid it
in all such places, where they do not translate it. That is altogether false;
for the Geneua translation Luc. 1. tells you that the Greek word signifies
iustifications, and yields a reason why it does in that place otherwise
translate it: and if to translate the Greek word (...) otherwise than
justification, must needs show an heretical meaning, then must you needs say*
that your vulgar Latin translater had an heretical meaning, for in the second
place by you quoted, namely Romans 2. v. 26. he tran^lateth it Iustitias,
likewise To. 1. v. 32. Iustitiam, so likewise Romans 5. v. 18. And if it be an
heretical commentary, to say, that good works are a testimony of a lively
faith, you will also condemn the Apostles of heresy, which teach it to be
impossible to please God without faith, Heb. 11. and that what soever is not of
faith, is sin, Romans 14. If there be any good works that are not testimonies
of a lively faith. But it is sufficient for you, to call what you will heresy,
and heretical falsification, and corruption, for your disciples are bound to
believe you, though you say the Gospel be heresy, and the Apostles themselves
heretics. Gregory Martine calls this an heretical commentary, what need
you seek other proof?

MART. 23. When by adding to the text at their pleasure, they make the Apostle
say, that by Adams offense, ^inne To ^. v. ^8. No. T^st. an. 1580. Bib. 1579.
came on all men, but that by Christ's justice, the benefit only abounded
toward all men, not that justice came on all, whereas the Apostle makes the
case a like, without any such diverse additions, to wit, that we are truly made
just by To. 5. v. 19.
Christ, as by Adam we are made sinners: is not this most wilful corruption
for their heresy of imputative and fantastical justice. See Chap 11. Nu. 1.

FVLK. 23. The Verse by you quoted Romans 5. v. 18. is a manifest eclipsis or
defective speech, to make any sense, whereof, there must needs be added a
Nominative case, and a Verb. Now by what other Nominative case, and Verb, may
the sense be supplied, but by that which the Apostle him self gives before?
Verse. 15. Unto which all that follows must be referred for explication.
Where he says, as you your selves translate it: If by the offense of one many
died: much more the grace of God and the gift in the grace of one man Jesus
Christ has abounded upon many. Seeing therefore that defective speech must be
supplied for understanding in this probation, what is so apt as that which the
Apostle him self has expressed before in the proposition? Although you in your
translation are not disposed to supply it, because you had rather the text
should be obscure, and wo^dred at, than that it should be plain and easy, or
able to be understood: albeit in other places you stick not to add such
words as be necessary for explication of the text, as every translater must
do, if he will have any sense to be understood in his translation. For that
defective speech which in some tongue is well understood, in some other is
altogether void of sense, and must be explicated by addition of that, which is
necessarily or probably to be understood. So you translate Math. 8. Quid
nobis. What is between us? Mark. 2. Post dies, after some days, Accumberet,
he satte at meat and many such like. But where you charge our translation to
say, the benefit (only) abou^ded toward all men, not that justice came on all:
you do shamefully add to our translation, for the word only is of your own
slanderous addition, and the rest is your malicious colection. For we mean
not to extenuate the benefit of Christ's redemption, but by all means to set
it forth to the uttermost: as the word (abounded) does show, if you do not
blemish the light of it, by your blockish addition of this word (only). And
that we are truly made just by Christ, and yet by imputation, as we are truly
made sinners by Adam, and yet partly by imputation, as we are actually by
corruption, we do at all times and in all places most willingly confess, for
the justice of Christ which is imputed unto us by faith, is no false or
fantastical justice, as you do no less blasphemously, than phantastically
affirm: but a true and effectual justice, by which we are so truly made just*
that we shall receive for it the crown of justice, which is eternal life, as
the Apostle proves at large, Romans 4. and 5. whom none but an hellhound will
bark against, that he defends imputative and fantastical justice.

MART. 24. But if in this case of justification, when the ^a. 2. v. 14. To 3.
v. 28. ^uth. tom. 2. fol. 405. edit. Witteb. an. ^551. Whitak. page 198.
question is whether only faith justify, and we say no, having the express
words of S. James: they say, yea, having ne express scripture for it: if in
this case they will add, only, to the very text: is it not most horrible and
devilish corruption? So did Luther, whom our English Protestants honor as their
father, and in this heresy of only faith, are his own children. See chapter 12.

FVLK. 24. In the question of justification by faith only, where S. James
says no: we say, no also, neither can it be proved that we add this word
only to the text in any translation of ours. If Luther did in his translation
add the word only to the text, it can not be excused of wrong translation in
word, although the sense might well bear it. But seeing Luther does him self
confess it, he may be excused of frawde, though not of lack of judgment. But
why should our translation be charged with Luthers corruption? Because our
English Protestants honor him as their father. A very lewd slander: for we
call no man father upon earth, though you do call the Pope your father, albeit
in another sense Luther was a reverend father of the Church for his time. But
as touching the doctrine of only faith justifying, it has more patrones of the
fathers of the ancient, primitive Church, than Martine can bear their books,
though he would break his back, who in the same plain words do affirm it
as Luther does, that only faith does justify. And the Apostle which says
that a man is justified by faith without the works of the law, speaks more
plainly for justification by faith only, (as we do teach it), than if he had
said a man is justified by faith only. Which text of Romans 3. and many other,
are as express scripture to prove that we teach and believe, as that S. James
says against justification by faith only, where he speaks of an other
faith, and of an other justification, than S. Paul speaks of, and we
understand, when we hold that a man is justified by faith only, or without
works of the law, which is all one. Their ignorance of the Greek and Hebrew
tongue, or their false and vvilfull trans^ation thereof against their
knowledge.


MART. 25. If these that account themselves the great Grecians and Hebricians
of the world, will so translate for the advantage of their cause, as though
they had no skill in the world, and as though they knew neither the
signification of words, nor propriety of phrases in the said languages: is it
not to be esteemed shameless corruption?

FVLK. 25. Yes, but if it can not be proved that so they translate, then is
this an impudent slander, as all the rest are, and so it will prove when it
comes to be tried.

MART. 26. I will not speak of the German Heretics, ^rentius Melancth. See
^inda. Dubi. Dial. 1. c. 1^* Psalm. 51.
who to maintain this heresy, that all our works, be they never so good, are
sin, translated, for Tibi soli peccaui, to thee only have I sinned* thus,
Tibi solum peccaui* that is, I* have nothing else but sinned: whatsoever I do,
I sin: (...)
whereas neither the Greek nor the Hebrewe will possibly admit (...)
that sense. Let these pass as Lutherans, yet wilful corrupters, and
acknowledged of our English Protestants for their good brethren. But if Beza
translate, (...), when Whitak. page 1^^. To. 5. v. 6.
we were yet of no strength, as the Geneua English Bible also does interpret
it, whereas every young Grecian knows that (...) is weak, feeble, infirm,
and not altogether without strength: is not this of purpose to take away man's
free will altogether? See chap. 10. nu. 13.

FVLK. 26. I know not what German heretics those be which maintain that
heresy, that al our works be they never so good are sin, except they be the
Libertines with whom we have nothing to do. For we never say, that good works
are sin, for that were al one to say that good were evil. But that al our
good works are short of that perfection, which the law of God requires, we do
humbly confess against our selves. Or else, what soever seems to be a good
work, and is done of me^ void of true faith, is sin. For these assertions
we have the scripture to warrant us. And if to prove the later any man has
translated those words of David in the 51. Psalm, Lecha, Lebadecha, Tibi
solum, or tantu^modo tibi peccaui, (...)
etc. To the only or altogether to thee I have sinned, in respect of his
natural corruption which he does express in the next verse, he has not
departed one whitte from the Hebrewe words, nor from the sense which the
words may very well bear, which he that denies, rather shows him self
ignorant in the Hebrew tongue, than he that so translateth. For what does Lebad
signify, (...)
but Solum or Tantum and therefore it may as well be translated Solum tibi, as
Soli ^ibi. And the Apostle Romans 3. proving by the later end of that verse, all
men to be unjust, that God only may be true, and every man a lier, as it is
written that thou may be justified in thy words etc. favors that
interpretation of Bucer, or who soever it is beside. But if Beza translate
(...), when we were yet of no strength, as the Geneua English Bible does also
interpret it, whereas every young Grecian knows that (...), is weak,
feeble, infirm, and not altogether without strength: is not this of purpose
to take away man's free will altogether? Chapter tenth, Number. 13. Nay it
is to show as the Apostles purpose is, that we have no strength to fulfill
the law of God without the grace of Christ, even as Christ him self says,
without me you can do nothing, Joan. 15. v. 5. But every young Grecian (say
you) knows that (...) is weak, feeble, infirm, and not altogether with out
strength. And is there then any old Grecian that will prove, that (...) always
signifies him that is weak, but not void of strength? Does (...) always
signify him that has some strength? Certain it is that the Apostle speaks
here, of those that were void of strength, for the same he calls in the same
verse (...) ungodly, or void of religion, for whom Christ died. How say you
then, had ungodly persons any strength to be saved, except Christ had died for
them? Therefore he that in this place translateth (...), weak, feeble,
infirm* must needs understand men so weak, feeble, and infirm, as they have
no strength. For how might it else be truly said, what have thou, which thou
have not received? 1. Cor. 4. v. 7. Yes, say you, we have some piece of freewil
at least, some strength to clime to heaven, even without the grace of God,
without the death and redemption of Christ. If you say no, why cavil you at
Bezaes translation and ours? The Greek word (...) as great a Grecian as you
would make your self, signifies weak or infirm, sometime that which yet
has some strength, sometime that which has no strength at all, as I will give
you a plain example out of S. Paul. 1. Cor. 15. v. 43. The dead body is
sown (...) in weakness: it rises again in power. Does not weakness here
signify privation of all strength? It is marvel, but you will say a dead
body is not altogether void of strength. Beza tells you out of S. Paul,
Romans 8. v. 6. That the wisdom of the flesh without Christ is death, it is
enmity against God, it is neither subject unto the law of God* neither can it
be, where is the strength of free will that you complain to be taken away by
our translation? Beza does also tell you, that S. Paul calls all the
ceremonies of the law (...); as they are separated from the spirit of Christ,
the weak and beggarly elements, Gala^. 4. Are they not void of strength, and
riches which are void of Christ's grace and spirit? But your purpose was only
to quarrel, and seek a knot in a rush, and therefore you regarded not what
Beza has written, to justify his translation.

MART. 27. If Calvin translate, Non ego, sed gratia ^. Cor. 15. 10*
Dei quae mihi aderat: may not mean Graecians control (...).
him, that he also translateth falsely against free will, because the
preposition (...) does require some other participle to be understood, that
should signify a cooperation with free will, to wit, (...), which labored
with me? See chap. 10. numb. 2.

FVLK. 27. The Greek is (...) the grace of God which is with me. A mean
Grecian will rather understand the verb substantive, than the participle, as
you do, and then must needs again understand the verb (...), has labored.
For thus the sense must be, if your participle be understood, I have labored
more than they all, yet not I but the grace of God which labored with me has
labored. Who would commit such a vain tautologie. The sense is therefore
plain, which the Apostles words do yield in the judgment of better Graecians
than ever G. Martine was, or will be. I have not labored more than the rest of
the Apostles, of mine own strength or will, but the grace of God which is in
me, or with me, has given me greater strength and ability to travel in the
Gospel than to them. But you are afraid least it should be thought, that the
Apostle had done nothing, like unto a block, forced only: a blockish fear, and
a forced collection. For when the Apostle first says, he has labored and
after denies and says, I have not labored: what sensible man will not
gather, that in the former, he labored as a man endued with life, sense, and
reason, and in the later, that he labored not by his own strength or virtue,
but by the grace of God* to which he attributes all that he is in such
respect? By the grace of God I am that I am (says he) which manifestly
excludes natural free will, to that which is good and appertaining to the
glory of God. For which cause he denies that he labored more than the rest,
not I but the grace of God* which was present with me.

MART. 28. If, when the Hebrew bears indifferently, to say, Sin lies at
the door: and unto thee the desire thereof Genesis 4. v. 7. an. 1579.
shall be subject, and thou shall rule over it: the Geneua English Bible
translate the first without scruple, and the later not* because of the Hebrew
Grammar: is not this also most wilful against free will? See chap. 10. numb. 9.

FVLK. 28. I grant this to be done willingly, against free will, but yet no
false nor corrupt translation. For in the participle Robets, which signifies
lying, is a (...)
manifest Enallage or change of the gender to declare that in Chataoth, which
word being of the feminine gender, signifies sin, is to be understood
Auon, or some such word as signifies the punishment of sin, which may agree
with the participle in the masculine gender, that the antithesis may be
perfect. If thou do well, shall there not be reward or remission, if thou
do evil, the punishment of thy sin is at hand. But that the later end of
the verse can not be referred to sin, but unto Cain, not only the Grammar,
but also the plain words, and sense of the place does convince. For that
which is said of the appetite, must have the same sense, which the same words
have before, of the appetite of Eve toward her husband Adam, that in respect
of the law of nature, and her infirmity, she should desire to be under his
government, and that he should have dominion over her. So Abel the younger
brother should be affected toward his elder brother Cain, to whom by the law of
nature he was loving and subject, and therefore no cause, why Cain should envy
him as he did. Otherwise it were a strange meaning, that sin which is an
insensible thing, should have an appetite or desire toward Cain, who rather
had an appetite to sin, than sin to him. But you are so greedy of the
later part, that you consider not the former. I know what the Iewisne
Rabbines favorers of Hethenish free will, absurdly do imagine to salve the
matter, but that which I have said may satisfy godly Christian*.

MART. 29. If Calvin affirm that (...) can Calu. in 5. Hebr.
not signify, propter reuerentiam, because (...) is not so used, and Beza
avouches the same more earnestly, and the English Bible Bib. an. 1579.
translateth accordingly, which may be confuted by infinite examples in the
Scripture it self, and is confuted by Illyricus the Lutheran: is it not a
sign either of passing ignorance, or of most wilful corruption, to maintain
the blasphemy that hereupon they conclude? See chap. 7. numb. 42* 43.

FVLKE. 29. If Beza, Calvin, and the English translations be deceived about
the use of the Preposition (...), it proves not that they are deceived in the
translation of the word (...), which is the matter in question. They have
other reasons to defend it, than the use of the preposition, although you
sclaunder Calvin, in saying he affirms, that (...) is not used for propter.
For he says no more, but that the preposition is (...) not (...) or some such
like, that may design a cause quae causam designet, that is, that certainly
may point out a cause, and can not otherwise be taken. Likewise Beza says,
Atqui non facile mihi persuaserim, proferri posse vllum exemplum in quo (...)
ita vsurpe^ur. But I can not easily persuade my self, that any example may be
brought forth, in which (...) is so used, that is, for propter, or secundum,
for which (...), or (...) were more proper and usual. Now if Illyricus have
helped you with a few examples where (...) is so taken, what say Beza or
Calvin against it, but that it does not usually and certainly signify so.
Their judgment upon the place remains still grounded upon other arguments,
although that reason of the acception of (...) be not so strong, as if (...)
had never been so taken. But as for the blasphemy, you say, they conclude upon
that place, will redound upon your own neck, for their exposition is
honorable and glorious to God the father, and Christ his son, and to the
Holy Ghost, by whom that Epistle was indicted, to the confusion of your Popish
blasphemies, of the sacrifice propitiatory offered in the Mass.

MART. 30. If Beza in the self same place contend, that (...) does not
signify reverence or piety, but such a fear as has horror and
astonishment of mind: and in an other place says of the self same word,
clean contrary: what is it but of purpose to uphold the said blasphemy? See
chap. 7. nu. 39. 40.

FVLK. 30. Beza in the same place, does bring many examples to prove, that the
Greek word (...) does signify a great fear, and so is to be taken Heb. 5.
But it is an impudent lie to say, he does contend, that it never signifies
reverence, or piety: and therefore that he says it signifies piety in an other
place, is nothing contrary to that he spoke in this place, for the word
signifies both, as no man that will profess any knowledge in the Greek
tongue can deny.

MART. 31. If he translate for, Gods foreknowledge (...)
Act. 2. v. 23.
Gods providence, for soul, carcas, for hell, grave: to what (...).
end is this but for certain heretical conclusions? And if upon Ibid. v. 27.
Annota. in no* test, post. edit.
admonition he alter his translation for shame, and yet protests that he
understands it as he did before, did he not translate before wilfully
according to his obstinate opinion? See chap. 7.

FVLK. 31. Beza does in deed translate (...) prouidentia, but he expounds
himself in his annotation. id est, aeterna cognitione, for what heretical
conclusion he should so do, you do not express, neither can I imagine. To your
other quarrels, of soul, and carcass, hell and grave, I have said enough in
answer to your preface, Sect. 46. and 47. Annotat. in Act. 2. v. 24.


MART. 32. If to this purpose he avouch that, Sheol, signifies nothing else in
Hebrew but a grave, whereas all Hebricians (...)
know that it is the most proper and usual word in the Scripture for Hell, as
the other word Keber, is for a grave: who would think he would so endaunger
his estimation in the Hebrew tongue, but that an heretical purpose against
Christ's descending into hell, blinded him? See chap. 7.

FVLK. 32. Nay rather all learned Hebricia^s know that Sheol is more proper for
the grave, than for hell, and that the Hebrews have no word proper for hell,
as we take hell, for the place of punishment of the ungodly, but either they
use figuratively Sheol, or more certainly Topheth, or Gehinnom. For Sheol is in
no place so necessarily to be taken for hell, but that it may also be taken for
the grave. That Keber signifies the grave, it is no proof that Sheol does not
signify the same, and therefore you show your self to be too young an
Hebrician, to carpe at Bezaes estimation in the knowledge of the tongue.

MART. 33. And if all the English Bibles translate accordingly, to wit, for
Hell, Grave, wheresoever the Scripture may mean any lower place that is not
the Hell of the damned: and where it must needs signify that Hell, there they
never avoid so to translate it: is it not an evident argument, that they know
very well the proper signification, but of purpose they will never use it to
their disadvantage in the questions of Limbus, Purgatory, Christ's descending
into Hell? chap. 7.

FVLKE. 33. I have said before, there is no place in the old Testament, where
Sheol must needs signify, that hell, in which are the damned, but the place
may be reasonably and truly translated the grave: although, as in diverse
places, by death is meant eternal death, so by grave is meant hell, or
damnation. Concerning the questions of Limbus, Purgatory, and the descending
of Christ into hell, they are nothing like: for the last is an article of our
faith, which we do constantly believe in the true understanding thereof, but
the other are fables and inventions of men, which have no ground, in the
Scripture, but only a vain surmise, builded upon a wrong interpretation of
the words of the Scripture, as in the peculiar places shall be plainly
declared.

MART. 34. If further yet in this kind of controversy, Annot. in Act. 2. v.
24.
Beza would be bold to affirm (for so he says) if the Grammarians would give
him leave, that Chebel with ^iue points signifies, (...)
funem, no less than Chebel with six points: is he not wonderfully set to
maintain his opinion, that will change That is, he would translate, Solutis
funibus mortis, not* Solutis dolorib^s inferni.
the nature of words, if he might, for his purpose?

FVLK. 34. Wonderfullye I promise you, for he translateth the word for all
this doloribus, and says. Nihil tamen ausus sum mutare ex coniectura. Yet I
durst change nothing upon conjecture. Annotat. in Act. 2. v. 24. You say he
would change the natures of words. Nothing so, but if the word might bear
that signification, he thinks it more agreeable to the Hebrew phrase, which
the Evangelist does often follow. Is not this a great matter to make an
evident mark of corruption?

MART. 35. If passiues must be turned into actiues* and actiues into passiues,
participles disagree in case from their substantives, or rather be plucked and
separated from their true substantives, soloecismes imagined, where the
construction is most agreeable, errors devised to creep out of the margent,
and such like: who would so presume in the text of holy Scriptures, to have all
Grammar, and words, and phrases, and constructions at his commandment, but
Beza and his like, for the advantage of their cause? See chap. 5. numb. 6. and
the numbers next following in this chapter.

FVLK. 35. But if all these be proved to be vain cauils, and frivolous
quarrels, as in the chap. 5. numb. 6. and in the numbers following in this
chapter it shall be playnelye declared, then I hope all men of mean capacity
and indifferent judgment will confess, that ignorance has deceived you,
malice has blinded you, hatred of the truth has overthrown you, the father
of lies and sclaunders has possessed you. Act. ^. 21.


MART. 36. For example S Peter says Heaven must (...).
receive Christ. He translateth, Christ must be contained in heaven, which
Calvin him self misliketh, the Geneua English Bible is afraid to follow,
Illyricus the Lutheran reprehendeth: Page 43.
and yet M. Whitakers takes the advantage of this translation, to prove that
Christ's natural body is so cont^^ned in heaven, that it can not be upon the
alt^r. For he knew that this was his masters purpose and intent in so
translating. This it is, when the blind follow the blind, yea rather, when
they see and will be blind: for certain it is (and I appeal to their
greatest Graecians) that howsoever it be taken for good in their divinity, it
will be esteemed most false in their Greek schools both of Oxford and
Cambridge: and howsoever they may presume to translate the holy Scriptures
after this sort, surely no man, no not them selves, would so translate
Demosthenes, for saving their credit and estimation in the Greek tongue. See
chap. 17. numb. 7. 8. 9.

FVLK. 36. Beza translateth quem oportet caelo capi. Act. 3. v. 21. You say,
Heaven must receive Christ. Beza says, Christ must be received of heaven. Call
you this turning of actiues into passiues, and passiues into actiues? Or will
you deny us the resolution of passiues into actiues, or actiues into passiues?
What difference is there in sense, between these propositions? Your purse
contains money, and money is contained in your purse. The Church must receive
all Christians, or all Christians must be received of the Church. But Calvin,
you say, misliketh this translation, and the Geneua Bible is afraid to follow
it. Yet neither of them both misliketh this sense, nor can, for it is all one
with that which you translate, whom heaven must receive. Calvin only says,
the Greek is ambiguous, whether heaven must receive Christ, or Christ must
receive heaven. But when you grant that heaven must receive Christ, you can
not deny for shame of the world, but Christ must be received of heaven:
wherefore you understand neither Calvin, nor Illyricus, who speak of the
other sense, that Christ must receive heaven. And Master Whitaker, not of
Bezaes translation, but of the text, and even of your own translation, may
prove, that Christ's natural body is contained in heaven. And as for your
appeal to the greatest Graecians, and the Greek schools, both of Oxforde and
Cambridge, is vain and frivolous, for the least Grammarians that be in any
country schools, are able to determine this question, whether these
propositions be not all one in sense, and signification. Ego amo te, and Tu
amaris a me, I love thee, or thou art loved of me. But it is strange
Divinity, that Christ should be contained in heaven. Verily how strange so
ever it seems to Gregory Martine, it was not unknown to Gregory Nazianzen,
as good a Grecian, and as great a Divine as he is. For in his second Sermon
(...), not far from the beginning, he writes thus of our Savior Christ
(...). For he must reign until then, and be received or contained of heaven
until the times of restitution. Here you see Nazianzen citing this very place
of Saint Peter Acts. 3. For the mean verb of active signification, doubts
not freely to use the passive verb in the same sense, that Beza translateth
the place, against which you declaime so tragically. And if you think it to
be such an heinous offense, to render passiuely in the same sense, that which
is uttered actiuely in the text, so that no man for his credit would so
translate Demosthenes, as Beza does Saint Luke: I pray you what regard had
you of your credit and estimation? When Matthew. the 4. you translate out of
Latin, Qui daemonia habebant, such as were possessed: and Luke the second, Vt
profiterentur, to be enrolled. Belike you have a privilege to do what you
list, when other men may not do that which is lawful.

MART. 37. But there is yet worse stuff behind: to wit, the famous place
Luke. 22. where Beza translateth thus, Hoc poculum nouum testamentum per meum
sanguinem, qui pro vobis funditur: whereas in the Greek, in all copies without
exception, he confesses that in true Grammatical construction it must needs
be said, quod pro vobis funditur, and therefore he says it is either a plain
soloecophanes (and according to that presumption he boldly trs^lateth) or a
corruption crept out of the margent into the text. And as for the word
Soloecophanes, we understand him that he means a plain soloecisme and fault
in Grammar, and so does M. Page 34. 35. Against D. Sand. Rock. page 308.
Whitakers* but M. Fulke says, that he means no such thing, but that it is
an elegancie and figurative speech, used of most eloquent authors: and it is a
world to see, and a Grecian must needs smile at his devises striving to make
S. Lukes speech here See Comm. ^^d. Figurata constr^c^io, or (...).
as he construeth the words, an elegancie in the Greek tongue. He sends us
first to Budees commentaries, where there are examples of Soloecophanes: and in
deed Budee takes the word for that which may seem a soloecisme, and yet is
an elegancie, and all his examples are of most fine and figurative phr^ses, but
alas how unlike to that in S. Luke. And here M. Fulke was very fowly deceived,
thinking that Beza and Budee took the word in one sense: and so taking his
mark amiss, as it were a counter for gold, where he found Soloecophanes in
Budee, there he thought all was like to S. Lukes sentence, and that which Beza
meant to be a plain soloecisme, he makes it like to Budees elegancies. Much
like to those good searchers in Oxford (as it is said) masters of art, who
having to seek for Papisticall books in a Lawyers study, and seeing there
books with red letters, cried out, Mass books, Mass books: whereas it was
the Code or some other book of the Civil or Canon law.

FVLK. 37. This must needs be a famous place, for the real presence of
Christ's blood in the sacrament, that never one of the ancient or late writers
observed, until within these few years. But let us see what fault Beza has
committed in translation. The last word in the verse (...), he has so
translated, as it must be referred to the word (...) signifying blood, with
which in case it does not agree. That is true: but that he confesses that all
Greek copies without exception have it, as it is commonly read: it is false:
only he says: Omnes tamen vetusti nostri codices ita scriptum habebant* All
our old Greek copies, had it so written. He speaks only of his own, or
such as he had, and not of all without exception, for since he wrote this note,
there came to his hands one other ancient copy, both of Greek and Latin, in
which this whole verse of the second delivery of the cup, is clean left out.
For immediately after these words, (...), does follow, and so in the Latin,
Veruntamen ecce manus qui tradet me, etc. Moreover Beza tells you, that Basil
in his Ethics (...). citing this whole text of S. Luke, reads, (...) in the
dative case, agreeing with (...) the word next before. By which it is manifest,
that in S. Basils time, the reading was otherwise than now it is in most
copies. Again, where you say, he confesses that in true grammatical
construction it must needs be said, Quod pro vobis funditur, his words are
not so, but that those words, if we look to the construction, can not be
referred to the blood, but to the cup, which in effect is as much as you say:
His judgment in deed is of these words, as they are now read, that either
it is a manifest Soloecophanes, or else an addition out of the margent into the
text. And as for the word Soloecophanes, you understand him that he means a
plain soloecisme, and fault in grammar, and so does M. Whitakers. How you
understand him it is not material, but how he is to be understood, in deed.
M. Whitakers whom you call to witness, does not so understand him, but shows
that if he had called it a plain Soloecisme, he had not charged S. Luke with a
worse fault, than Hieronyme charge S. Paul. But what reason is there that
you or any man should understand Beza, by Soloecophanes, to mean a plain
soloecisme? Think you he is so ignorant, that he knows not the difference of
the one from the other, or so negligent of his terms, that he would confound
those, whom he knows so much to differ? But Master Fulke (say you) says
that he means no such thing, but that it is an elegancie, and figurative
speech, used of most eloquent auctors: and it is a world to see, and a Grecian
must needs smyle at his devises, striving to make Saint Lukes speech here,
as he construeth the words, an elegancye in the Greek tongue. Thus you write,
but if I give not all Grecians, and Latinistes just occasion, before I have
done with you, to laugh at your proud ignorance, and to spit at your malicious
falsehood, let me never have credit, I say not of a Grecian or learned man,
which I desire not, but not so much as of a reasonable creature. Ah sir, and
does M. Fulke say, that this speech of S. Luke is an elegancie in the Greek
tongue? I pray you where says he so? you answer me quickly. Against D.
Saunders Rock. page 308. I tremble to hear what words you have there to
charge me withal. In deed in that page I begin to speak of that matter
against Saunder, who charge Beza as you do, and moreover affirms that Beza
should teach, that S. Luke wrore false Greek, because he says, that here is a
manifest Soloecophanes. But that neither you shall quarrel, that I chose some
piece of my saying for my purpose, nor any man doubt how honestly you charge
me, I will here repeat whatsoever I have written touching that matter, in the
place by you quoted.

But the Protestants do not only make them selves Judges of the whole books,
but also over the very letter (says he) of Christ's Gospel, finding fault
with the construction of the Evangelists, and bring the text it self in doubt.
Example hereof he brings: Beza in his annotatio^s upon Luke 22. of the words:
This cup is the new Testament in my blood which is shed for you. In which text,
because the word blood in the Greek, is the dative case, the other word that
follows is the nominative case, Beza supposes that S. Luke uses a figure
called Soloe^ophanes, which is appearaunce of incongruitie, or else that the
last word which is shed for you, might, by error of writers, being first set in
the margent out of Matthew and Mark, be removed into the text. Hereupon M.
Sander out of all order and measure, ^ayleth upon Beza and upon all
Protestants. But I pray you good sir, shall the only opinion of Beza, and that
but a doub^full opinion, indite all the Protestants in the world of such high
treason against the word of God? For what gains Beza by this interpretation?
For sooth the Greek text is contrary to his Sacramentarie heresy. For thus he
should translate it: This cup is the new Testament in my blood, which cup
is shed for you. Not the cup of gold or silver (says he) but the liquor in
that cup, which is not wine, because wine was not shed for us, but the blood
of Christ. Why then the sense is this. This blood in the cup which is shed
for you, is the new Testament in my blood. What sense in the world can these
words have? By which it is manifest, that the words which is shed for you,
cannot be referred to the cup, but to his blood. For the cup was the new
Testament in his blood, which was shed for us, which sense no man can deny, but
he that will deny the manifest word of God. Neither does the vulgar Latin
translation give any other sense, although M. Sander is not ashamed to say it
does. The vulgar Latin text is this. Hic est calix nouum Testamentum in
sanguine meo, qui pro vobis fundetur. What grammarian in construing, would
refer qui to calix, and not rather to sanguine. Again Erasmus translateth it
eue^ as Beza. Hoc poculum nouum Testamentum per sanguinem meum qui pro vobis
effunditur. Now touching the conjecture of Beza, that those words by error of
the scriuener, might be removed from the margent into the text, is a thing that
sometime has happened, as most learned men agree, in the 27. of Matthew, where
the name of Jeremy is placed in the text, for that which is in Zachary, and
yet neither of the Prophets was named by the Evangelist, as in most ancient
records it is testified. The like has been in the first of Mark, where the
name of Esaias is set in some Greek copies, and followed in your vulgar
translation, for that which is cited out of Malachie, which name was not set
down by the Evangelist, but added by some unskillful writer, and is reproved
by other Greek copies. But this place you say is not otherwise found in any
old copy, as Beza confesses: then remains the second opinion, that S. Luke
in this place, uses Soloecophanes, which is an appearance of incongruitie, and
yet no incongruitie. Wherein I can not marvel more at your malice (M. Sander)
than at your ignorance, which put no difference between Soloecisinus and
Soloecophanes, but even ^s spitefully, as unlearnedly, you affirm that Beza
should teach, that S. Luke wrote false Greek, whereas Soloecophanes is a
figure used of the most eloquent writers that ever took pen in hand, even
Cicero, Demosthenes, Greek and Latin, profane and divine, and even of S.
Luke him self in other places, whereof for examples, I refer you to Budaeus
upon the word Soloecophanes. The appearance of incongruitie is, that it
seems, that (...), which is the nominative case, should agree with (...),
which is the dative case, whereas in deed (...) is used as a relative for
(...), as it is often, and the verb (...) which wants, is understood, as it
is commonly in the Greek tongue, and so the translation must be hoc poculum
nouum Testamentum est in sanguine meo, qui pro vobis effunditur, or effusus
est. So that this is nothing else, but an impudent and unskillful quarrelling,
against Beza, whereas you Papists defend against the manifest institution of
the cup, and the practice of the primitive Church, the communion in one kind
of bread only. Con^. Constable. Sess. 13. 21.

Where find you that I affirm S. Lukes speech here to be an elegancie in the
Greek tongue? Yea or Soloecophanes to be nothing else but an elegancie, and
figurative speech? A figure in deed I say that it is, but are all figures
elegancies, or all figurative speeches, elegancies of speech? Some figures I
trow serve to excuse similitudes of faults in speech. But I say
Soloecophan^s is used of the most eloquent writers. Very well, does it thereof
follow, that it is always an elegancie. Have not the most eloquent authors,
used Hyperbatons, Perissologies, and other figures that are counted faults of
speech, and not elegancies, and fine speeches? But all the examples of Budee
(you say) to whose commentaries I send you, are of most sine and figurative
phrases. If they be such, they do the better prove, that for which I called
him to warrantize, namely, that Soloecophanes is not a Soloecisme, or false
Greek, wherewith Sander accuses Beza to charge S. Luke. But where you utter
your foolish pity, in saying, Alas how unlike they are to that in S. Luke. I
think the case is not so clear as you make it, for I suppose those examples
that he brings of the figure of the whole construction changed after a long
Hyperbaton, or Parenthesis, may well be taken for figurative speeches, but not
for elegancies and fine figurative phrases: as again those popular sayings
which being taken out of the common peoples speech, Budaeus says, the most
eloquent Orators have translated into their finest writings. Peradventure, as
Musicians use sometime a discord to set forth the h^rmonye of concordes, so
they by hardly avoiding of a Soloecisme, would show the grace of congruitie,
and elegancie. But of this whole matter let the judgment be with them that are
learned and eloquent in both the tongues. It is sufficient for me that he which
uses Soloecophanes in Greek commits not a Soloecisme, or speaks false
Greek, as Saunder terms it. But where you say, that Master Fulke was foully
deceived and took his marks amiss, as it were a counter for gold, to think
that Beza and Budee took the word in one sense, you say your pleasure, but
you shall well know, that Master Fulke is not so young a babe, to take a
counter for gold, as you are a bold bayarde, to pronounce of all men's
meaninges what you list. For how are you able to prove, that Beza by
Soloecophanes means a plain Soloecisme? Think you that Beza is so simple a
child also, to term copper by the name of gold? If he had meant a
Soloecisme could he not have said so? But you must play Procustes part,
for neither my saying, nor Beza his meaning, were large enough for you, to
frame your sclaunderous cavil against the truth, and therefore with a loud
lie, you must lengthen my saying, and with proud and false presumption, you
must stretche out his meaning. These be your arts, this is your eloquence,
these are the sinnewes of your accusations. What those good searchers in
Oxford were, which being masters of Art, could not discern between mass
books, and law books, for my part I never heard, but I think it to be a
matter of as good credit as that you report of me and Beza.

MART. 38. This was lack of judgment in M. Fulke at the least, and no great
sign of skill in Greek phrases, and he must no more call D. Sanders unlearned
for not understanding Bezaes meaning, but him self, who in deed understood him
not. For, if Beza meant that it was an elegancie used of the finest authors,
and such as Budee does exemplify of, why does he say. that he sees not why
Luke should use soloecophanes, but thinks rather, it is a corruption crept
into the margent? Tell us M. Fulke we beseech you, whether is the better and
honester defense, to say, that it is an elegancie and fine phrase in S. Luke,
or to say, it is a fault in the text, it came out of the margent, the Gospel
is here corrupted. Think you Beza such a fool, that he would rather stand
upon this later, if he might have used the former, and had so meant by
soloecophanes? yea what needed any defense at all, if it had been an usual and
known elegancie, as you would prove it?

FVLK. 38. I had rather it should be compted want of judgment in me, so it
were by a man of judgment, than to be taken so often with falsification, and
lack of truth. For my skill in Greek phrases, although I never professed any,
yet I see nothing brought by you, to change mine opinion of Saunders unlearned
slander, in railing against Beza, for saying that S. Luke should write false
Greek. And if Soloecophanes do differ as much from Soloecismus, as gold does
from copper (as you seem to say) when you write that I take a counter for
gold, I might think my self very unlearned in deed, if I did understand
Beza speaking of Soloecophanes, as though he spoke of Soloecismus. But you
demand why Beza says, that he sees not why S. Luke should use
Soloecophanes, if he meant that it was an elegancie used of the finest
authors. Still you thrust in your lie, in every corner: who says he meant it
was an elegancie? Beza says he sees no cause why S. Luke should use
Soloecophanes, that is, depart from the usual and ordinary construction: and
therefore passes to an other conjecture. But you speak me fair to tell you,
whether is the better and honester defense, to say that it is an elegancie, and
fine phrase, or to say it is a fault in the text, it came out of the margent,
the Gospel is here corrupted. First I answer you that Beza affirms neither,
but rather translateth as Basil did re^d. Secondly, I say there is no
dishonestie in either of both conjectures, for this Soloecophanes though it be
no elegancie, yet may be defended from Soloecisme, or false Greek. And
certain it is that some words have crept out of the margent into the text,
as the name of Ieremye in all copies that are extant Math. 27. and, of Esaias in
many: Marc. 1. And yet we say not the Gospel is corrupted, which foul phrase
it seems, you have great pleasure in, not withstanding you your self out of
Lindanus, charge all the Greek copies of the epistle to the Corinthians to be
corrupted by Marcion the mischievous mouse of Po^tus. You ask further, whether
I think Beza such a fool to stand rather upon the later* if he might have
used the former, and had so meant by Soloecophanes? Nay rather, think you Beza
such a fool, that he would mean a plain Soloecisme, and call it only an
appearaunce of Soloecisme? what he rather stood upon, his translation does
best show, which is both with S. Basilles reading, and with the appearaunce of
incongruitie, which is none in deed. Yea what needed any defense at all, say
you, if it had been an usual and known elegancie. So well you love a lie when
you have made it, that you can never leave it until you have worn it all to
naught. Now you have it, not only an elegancie, but an usual and known
elegancie. Verily I never said it was an elegancie, as my words are plain to
be read of every man, and much less that it was an usual and known
elegancie. Only I say it is usual and common in the Greek tongue, that the
praepositiue article, is used for the relative, and so much in the next section
you your self do grant me: and as for defense you talk of, I see none
needful, except it be for that this phrase here used of S. Luke, is lawful,
though it be not so common, as the ordinary construction.

MART. 39. For you say further, that (...) is taken for (...), and (...) is
understood, and that this is a common thing in the best Greek authors, but you
must add, that the said relative must always be referred to the antecedent of
the same case, as this speech (...) may be resolved thus, (...), or rather
(...). but that (...), may be resolved, (...), you shall never be able to bring
one example, and you wilfully abuse whatsoever knowledge you have of the Greek
tongue, to deceive the ignorant, or else you have no skill at all, that speak
so barbarously and rustically of Greek elega^cies. For if you have skill, you
know in your conscience, that (...), is as great a soloecisme in Greek, and no
more elegancie, than to say in Latin, In meo sanguine fusus pro vobis, which
in the schole deserves whipping. And yet you ask very vehemently (concerning
these words, Hic calix nouum Testame^tum in meo sanguine qui pro vobis
fundetur:) what mean Grammarian would refer, qui, to calix, and not to
sanguis? I answer that a mere latinist, for ignorance of the Greek tongue,
would refer it rather as you say: but he that knows the Greek; as you
seem to do, though he be a very young Grammarian, will easily see it can not
be so referred: as in the like Act. 14 Sacerdos quoque Iouis qui erat ante
ciuitatem eorum. Here, qui, is ambiguous, but in the Greek we see (...).
that, qui, must be referred to, Iouis, and can not be referred to, Sacerdos.

FVLK. 39. First I take that you grant me, that it is a common thing in the
Greek tongue, that the article praepositiue is taken for the subiunctiue, and
the Verb substa^tiue may be understood, where it is not expressed: which if
you would not have granted, might have been extorted from you by confession of
all Grecians, and Greek writers. Secondly where you teach me a general rule,
to add to the former concession, that the said relative must always be
referred to the antecedent of the same case, as in the example you bring (...),
you shall pardon me to learn of you. I take you for no such* Aristarchus,
that you have power to make new rules in the Greek Grammar, and such as shall
control not only Homer, but all good authors that ever did write in that
language, of Soloecisme and incongruitie. For if the relative must always be
referred to the antecedent of the same case, to agree with it in case, or else
it is false Greek, I will abide by it, there is no Greek auctor whose works
are extant, but he has committed Soloecisme. The examples that hereof might be
brought out of every several writer, if they were heaped together, would make
a book as big as Ilias. But in this so clear a case, to cite any examples,
I see not to what purpose it should be, unless it were to make little
children that learn (...) in the Grammar schools, to be witnesses of your
intolerable arrogancy, and incredible ignorance. One example I will bring you
out of S. Mark, not unlike this of S. Luke, but that the Verb (...) is
expressed, (...) and they bring him to the place Golgotha, which is being
interpreted the place of sculles. This example is more than sufficient, for so
plain a matter. For although it be an elegancie for the relative to agree in
case with the Antecedent sometimes, yet to make a perpetual rule thereof it
proceeds of too much rashness, want of knowledge and consideration. But I
shall never be able to bring one example like to this of S. Luke, where the
relative not agreeing in case with the Antecedent, the Participle may be
resolved by the verb Substantive that is not expressed: and I wilfully abuse
what so ever knowledge I have of the Greek tongue, to deceive the ignorant,
or else I have no skill at all, to speak so barbarously, and rustically of
Greek elegancies, and I know in my conscience, it is as great a Soloecisme in
Greek, and no more elegancie than to say in Latin In meo sanguine fusus pro
vobis, which in the school deserves whipping: and I know not what beside.
But touching the similitude of the Soloecismes, if you had made your example a
like, that is put in the relative in the Latin, as it is in the Greek, In meo
sanguine qui fusus pro vobis, there is no more Soloecisme in the one, than in
the other. But all this while I bring no example, and you urge an example, yea
so extremelye, that you say confidently, I shall never be able to bring one:
but what if I bring two or three? who then abuses his knowledge in the Greek?
who has no skill at all? who deserves whipping? Have you so read all authors,
and bear them, and all their phrases so well in mind, that you dare before
all the world auouche, that I shall never be able to bring one example? But to
let all the world see your vanity, I will begin with Theognis, who in the
863. of his Elegiake sentences writes thus:

(...) See you here the relative (...) being the nominative case not agreeing
with his antecedent, (...) of the accusative case, but coming before the Verb
(...) that is included in the participle (...) that is included in the
participle (...); What can you here say? will you cavil at the subiunctiue
article, then read a few verses after, and see whether this Poet uses not as
indifferently the prepositiue article as the subiunctiue, for the relative.

(...). And within two verses,

(...) speaking of the same Wine.

Also Theocritus in 25. Eidyll.

(...). And in the 24. Edyll.

(...) From Theocritus let us pass to Hesiodus, out of whom it were over
tedious to cite, how often he uses the article prepositiue for the relative,
and not agreeing in case with the antecedent: but an example or two shall
serve, where the verb substantive is understood, and not expressed, nor any
other verb to govern the relative, yet not agreeing in case with the
Antecedent.

(...). Again in (...).

(...). Here me thinks, I hear you grudge against poetry, and poetical
license, as doubtless you would quarrel against profane authorities, if I
should bring you any like examples out of Prosaicall writers.

We must see therefore, whether we are not able to bring examples of the like
phrase, out of the holy Scriptures. First that Soloecophanes is found in S.
Luke I will refer you to the first cap. of his Gospel, v. 74. and cap. 6. v.
4. Likewise Acts 27. v. 3. and act. 13. v. 6. But for the like Soloecophanes
to this in question Luc. 22. I will send you first to S. Paul, Col. 1. v. 26.
(...). In this verse (...), must needs be the accusative case, as (...) is, by
apposition, then is (...), for all the world, as (...), the nominative case,
signifying Quod absconditum fuit, which the later part of the verse (...), does
most plainly declare. For what else should be the nominative case to the verb
(...); and even so your vulgar Latin text has it translated: vt impleam
verbum Dei, mysterium quod absconditum fuit a saeculis and generationibus, nunc
autem manifestatum est sanctis eius. But because this is not so evident, for
that the nominative case and the accusative of the neuter gender be of one
termination, I will bring you yet more plain examples out of the revelation of
S. John, cap. 1. v. 4. (...). Grace to you and peace from him, or from God, (as
some copies have) which is, and which was, and which is to come. Would not your
grammar say it is a plain Soloecisme, because he says not, (...), and (...),
what have you here to quarrel? Is not (...), and (...) the same phrase that is
in Luke, (...); Well, let us go a little further, to the next verse of the same
chapter, where we read thus. (...). And from Jesus Christ which is a faithful
witness, the first borne from the dead, and Prince over the kings of the
earth. The more usual construction would require, that he should have said,
(...). But that hevseth the same Soloecophanes, which S. Luke does. ca. 22. (If
the reading be not altered) where the article prepositiue is put in the place
of the subiunctiue, and agrees not in case with the antecedent, as often it
does, but being the nominative case, comes before the verb (...), which is
not expressed, but must needs be understood: as even your vulgar translator
does acknowledge, rendering it in both verses thus: ab eo qui est, and qui erat,
and qui ven^urus est, and a Jesus Christo qui est testis fidelis, etc. These
examples I doubt not, but they are sufficient to satisfy any reasonable man,
to show, that I have not invented a new construction that never was heard of,
to save Bezaes credit, and whereof I am able to give not so much as one
example. But that I may overthrow M. Martines vain insultation, with a whole
cloud of examples, I will yet add one or two more. In the same revelation, ca.
8. v. 9. Thus we read (...), and there dyed the third of all creatures which
are in the sea, which had lives. Your vulgar Latin text turns it thus. Et
mortua est ^ertia pars creaturae, eorum quae habebant animas in mari. And there
dyed the third part of the creatures, of those things which had life in the
sea. In which translation, although the order of the words which Saint John
uses, is somewhat inuerted: yet the sense remains the same, and (...) is
translated, quae habebant, which agrees not with (...) in case, as every
child that can declyne a Greek noune, does know: where otherwise the most
common construction were to have said, (...). Therefore the phrase and
construction is the same, which is Luke 22. (...). What can fine M. Gregory,
which carpeth at my skill, that speak so barbarously, and rustically of Greek
elegancies, what can Master Gregory Martin I say, the great linguist of the
Seminary of Rhemes, allege, why these phrases are not alike? or rather
changinge the words, in figure the very same? And if he have any thing to
cavil against this example, as I see not what he can have, yet have I an other
out of the same book, cap. 3. v. 12. (...). And I will write upon him the
name of my God, and the name of the cittye of my God, the new Jerusalem, which
descends out of heaven from my God. The vulgar Latin translation differs
not from this, which says: Et scribam super eum nomen dei mei, and nomen
ciuitatis dei mei, nouae Jerusalem, quae descendit de coelo a deo meo. Here the
antecedent is of the genitive case, the relative of the nominative, which
comes before the verb (...), understood in the participle (...), as in Luc.
22. it is in the participle, (...). By these examples, in seeking whereof, I
promise you, I spent no great time, you may learn to be wiser hereafter, and
not to condemn all men, beside your self, out of your readers chair at
Rhemes, of ignorance, unskillfulness, barbarusnes, rusticity, yea wilfulnes and
madness, where you your self deserve a much sharper censure, through your
immoderat insultation, the matter thereof being both more false and forged,
than we might justly have borne, if we had been overtaken with a little
grammatical ignorance. By these examples I trust you see, or if you will needs
be blind, all the young Grecians in England, may see, that as in the Latin
translation, you confess the relative stands more likely to be referred to
the word Sanguine, than to the word Calix, so in the Greek, there is no help
to remove it from the next manifest and necessary antecedent, to a word
further of, with which the signification of the participle can not agree. For
who would say that a cup is shed for us? And though you make a metonymye of the
cup, for that which is in the cup, what is that I pray you? Not wine you will
say, I am sure, but the blood of Christ. If you so resolve it, then follows
that vain nugation which I have noted against Saunder This blood in the cup,
which blood is shed for you, is the new Testament in my blood. Is that blood in
the cup diverse from that blood in which the new Testament is confirmed? If
it be the same, how often was ^t shed? If it were shed in the cup, how
holds your unbloody sacrifice? Or how can you say that it was shed in the
cup, where, by your rule of concomitans, it is not separated from the body, as
it was in his passion? If it were not separated, as certainly his blood was not
separated from his body, in the supper, how can that which was in the cup, be
his blood that was shed for us? for the word of shedding signifies separation.
Wherefore it can not be referred to that in the cup, but to his blood which was
shed on the cross for us, so that there is a manifest enallage, or change of
the temps. The present being put for the future, as it is manifest by the other
Evangelists, where the word of shedding, can be referred to nothing else, but to
his blood shed upon the cross. wherefore the Greek text can here resolve you
of no ambiguity, as in the place you cite, act. 14. Neither was there ever any
ancient writer that stumbled upon this ambiguitie, but al with one consent
refer the word of shedding to his blood, and not to the cup, or the content
thereof, so many as speak of it.

MART. 40. And this is one commodity among others, that we reap of the Greek
text, to resolve the ambiguitie that is sometime in the Latin: whereas you
neither admit the one nor the other, but as you list, neither does the Greek
satisfy you, be it never so plain and infallible, but you will devise that it
is corrupted, that there is a soloecisine, that the same soloecisme is an
elegancie, and there upon you translate your own devise, and not the word of
God. Which whence can it proceed, but of most wilful corruption? See chap.
17. nu. 10 11. 12.

FVLK. 40. This is nothing but general railing, and impudent slaundering, as
in the particular sections before is proved. For we neither devise that the
text is corrupted, to alter any thing of the text, no not where it is
undoubtedly corrupted, as in the name of Jeremy. Math. 27. Neither devise we
a Soloecisme, when we admonish that there is a Soloecophanes, which of no
Papist that ever I heard of was before observed. Neither make we a Soloecisme
to be an elegancie when we say against them that confound a Soloecisme with
Soloecophanes, that Soloecophanes is a figure used sometimes of most eloquent
writers, neither is it straight way a virtue or elegancie of speech what so
ever eloquent writers sometimes have used: wherefore we translate nothing of
our own devise, but we translate the word of God without any wilful
corruption.

MART. 41. If in ambiguous Hebrew words of doubtful signification, where the
Greek gives one certain sense, you refuse the Greek, and take your
advantage of the other sense: what is this but wilful partiality? so you do
in, Redime eleemosynis Ps. 118. Octo^. Nun. Ps. 138.
peccata tua. Dan. 4. and Inclinaui cor meum ad faciendas iustificationes tuas
propter retributionem. and, Nimis honorati sunt amici tui Deus etc. and yet at
an other time you follow the determination of the Greek for an other advantage:
as Psalm. 98. Adore his footestoole, because he is holy. Whereas in the Hebrew
it may be as in our Latin, because (...)
it is holy. See chapt. 13. number. 18. chapt. 9. number. 23 24. chapt. 18. number. 1.
2. So you flee from the Hebrew to the Gre^ke, and from this to that again,
from both to the vulgar Latin, as is showed in other places* and as S.
Augustine ^i. 11. con^. Faust. cap. 20
says to Faustus the Manichee, You are the r^le of truth: whatsoever is for
you, is true: whatsoever is against you, is not true.

FVLK. 41. If Hebrew words be ambiguous, we take that sense which agrees
with other places that are plain, and with out all ambiguitie, and this is no
partiality, but wisdom and love of the truth: not to ground any new
doctrine upon such places only, where the Hebrew word is ambiguous, and may
have diverse significations. As you do the redemption of sins by alms,
upon that place of Daniel. 4. Where you confess that the Hebrew word is
ambiguous, and are not able to bring any one plain text for it, where the
words are not ambiguous. But we ground our refusal upon a hundred plain
textes, that acribe the whole glory of our ransom and redemption from
sins, to the only mercy of God. But as well this text, as the other two,
that you cite in the chapters by you quoted, shall be thoroughly diseussed, to
see if you can have any aduau^tage at our translators of the same. But on the
contrary side (you say) that at an other time we follow the determination of
the Greek for an other advantage, as in that text, Psalm. 89. Adore his foot
stool. because he is holy, whereas in the Hebrew it may be as in your Latin,
because it is holy I answer, that we follow not the determination of the
Greek, as moved by the only authority thereof, for any advantage, but
because we learn our interpretation out of the very Psalm it self. For
whereas the Prophet in the 5. verse has said. Exalt ^e the Lord our God, and
worship at the foot stool of his feet, for he is holy: in the last verse
of the same, he repeateth again the like exhortation. Exalt ye the Lord our
God, and worship him in his holy hill, for the Lord our God is holy. In this
verse for his foot stool he places the holy hill, which expresses where his
foot stool was, namely (...)
the holy A^ke, and for Cadhosh hu, holy is he, now he says Cadosh I^houa,
holy is the Lord our God, which puts the other verse out of ambiguitie.
Wherefore if we take testimony of the Greek, we fly not to the Greek from
the Hebrew, but show that the Hebrew may so be understood, having other more
certain arguments, than the testimony of the Greek. Again it is utterly
false that you say, we fly from both Hebrew and Greek to the Latin, for we
never fly from the Hebrew, but acknowledge it as the fountain and spring,
from whence we must receive, the infallible truth of Gods word, of the old
Testament, following the Latin or Greek so far, as they follow the truth
of the Hebrew text, and no farther. As for the saying of S. Augustine to
Faust^s the Manichee. (You are the rule of truth,) does most aptly agree to
you Papists and to your Pope: for you will not aforde unto the Scriptures them
selves, any authority or certainty of truth, but upon your approbation and
interpretation. Wherefore not only that which he says to Faustus the Manichee,
agrees aptly to you: what so ever is for you is true, what so ever is against
you, is not true: but that also which he reports, Tyconius the Donatist
said of his sect ( Quod volumus sanctum est, what so ever we will is holy)
you your selves take upon you. For no doctrine is good nor holy, though it be
proved never so plainly out of the holy Scripture, except it be allowed by you
for catholic and holy.

MART. 42. What shall I speak of the Hebrew particle vau? which (Genesis 14.
verse. 18.) must in no case be (...)
translated, because, least it should prove that Melchisedec offered sacrifice
of bread and wine, as all the ^athers, expound i^: but (Luc. 1. verse. 42.)
where they translate the equivalent Greek particle (...), there Beza proves
the said particle to signify, because, and translateth accordingly, Quia
benedictus, for, and benedictus fructus ven^ris tui.
and the English Bezites likewise. I will not urge the^ why, we like the sense
well, and Theophylacte so expounds it. But if the Greek copulative may be so
translated, why not the Hebrew copulative much more, which often in the
Scripture is used in that sense? See chap. 17. nu. 13. 14.

FVLK. 42. That the Hebrew particle Vau, is sometimes to be taken for a casual
conjunction, and signifies, because: no man denies: but that it must be taken
so. Genesis 14. because (...) is taken so. Luc. 1. 42. what reason is this? But
all the fathers (say you) expound Melchisedechs bringing forth of bread and
wine, to be a sacrifice. I grant that many do, but not al: yet do not they
ground upon the conjunction causal, for Cyprian Lib. 2. Epist. 3. ad Caecilium
reads thus, Fuit autem sacerdos, and he was a Priest. So does Hierom Epist.
ad Euagrium, expounding the very Hebrew text, say, Et Melchisedech rex Salem
protulit panem and vinum, erat autem sacerdos dei excelsi. The word protulit
also has Ambrose, de mysterijs initiand. Augustine upon the title of the 33.
Psalm. Cyprian in the epistle before named, and the vulgar Latin has
proferens. Hierome Ep. ad Euagrium, shows that the best learned of the
Hebrews judgment was, that Melchisedech Victori Abraham ^buiam processerit,
and in refectionem, tam ipsius, quam pugnatorum ipsius, panes vinumque
protulerit. Melchisedech came forth to meet Abraham the conqueror, and for
refection, as well of him, as of his warriors, brought forth bread and wine.
And after many interpretations of the Greek writers which he rehearses, in
the end he will determine nothing of his own judgment. The author of
Scholastica historia, Cap. 64. agrees with the interpretation of the Hebrews.
At vero Melchisedech rex Salem obtulit ei panem and vinum: quod (quasi
exponens) Josephus ait: ministrauit exercitui xenia, and multam abundantiam
rerum opportunarum simul exhibuit, and super epulas benedixit Deum, qui Abrahae
subdiderat inimicos. Erat enim sacerdos Dei altissimi. But Melchisedech king of
Salem, offered unto him bread and wine, which Josephus (as it were expounding
of it) says: he ministered to his army the duties of hospitality, and gave
him great plenty of things necessary, and beside the feast, or at the feast,
he blessed God, which had subdued unto Abraham his enemies: for he was a Priest
of the highest God. Therefore not all the fathers so judged of Melchisedeches
bread and wine. But against all them that referred the same to his
Priesthood, we oppose the Apostle to the Hebrews ca. 7. who searching of
purpose whatsoever was in Melchisedech, wherein he resembled Christ, so that
he omitteth not the interpretation of his name, nor of his city, makes no
mention of his sacrifice of bread and wine, whereas nothing seems to have
greater resemblance, than that, which deceived many of the ancient fathers,
but yet was not observed of the holy Ghost.

MART. 43. But I would ask rather* why (...) Luc. 1. v. 28.
may not in any case be translated, full of grace: whereas (...) is translated,
full of sores. Both words being of like Luc. 16. v. 20*
form and force. See chap. 18. numb. 4. 5.

FVLK. 43. The former word being a participle, is best translated by a
participle freely beloved: for the other, if we had a participle in English
to say, sored or botched, we would use it, but for lack of a participle, we
are constrained to use the noune, full of sores. I may likewise ask you,
whether you would translate (...) full of gold, or gilded? And so of all other
verbes of that form, where there is in English a participle: why ought not
likewise (...) be translated by the participle?

MART. 44. Again, why say they (Hebr. 13.) Let your (...).
conversation be without covetousness, and say not, Let marriage be honorable in
all, and the bed undefiled. Both (...).
being expressed a like by the Apostle, and by way of exhortation, as the rest
that goes before and follows? See chap. 15. numbr. 15.

FVLK. 44. Although the sense were not greatly different, yet the participle
(...) following in the later part of the verse, (...), etc. but fornicators
and adulterers God will judge, shows that the former part of the verse, is
an affirmation, rather than an exhortation. Again the purpose of the Apostle
is plain, to dissuade them from whoredom and adultery, and not only to exhort
married men to use marriage temperately, but for avoiding of whoredom and
adultery, which God will punish, to show the remedy that God has provided
for man's infirmity, to be honorable and void of filthiness.

MART. 45. Are we too suspicicious think you? how Hebr. 5. v. 7.
can fear, be translated, that which he feared: Beza. Act. 26. v. 20. ^. Thessalonians. 2. and ^.
repentance, them that repent or amend their life: tradition, the doctrine
delivered: temples, shrines: idols, devotions: every humane creature, all
ordinances of man: foreknowledge, providence: soul, carcas: hell, grave:
altar, temple: table, altar: and such like?

FVLK. 45. We think you not more suspicious, than malicious. From his fear,
may well (for explications sake) be translated, from that which he feared, Heb.
5. v. 7. even as hope is sometime taken, for that which we hope for, as Col. 1.
v. 5. Tit. 2. v. 13. So may repentance in Beza Act. 26. v. 20. signify them
that repent, as circumcision often signifies them that are circumcised,
neither is there any change of the sense, to say the fruits worthy of
repentance, or the fruits worthy of them that repent, or amend their life. And
I pray you what does tradition, 2 Thessalonians. 2. and 3. signify, but the doctrine
delivered? Does not the Apostle declare, what his tradition was, when he
delivers this doctrine, that if any man will not work, let him not eat. 2 Thessalonians. 3. v. 10. The word (...) as it is used, Act. 19. v. 24. signifies
neither temples nor shrines, but certain idolatrous coins, on which was
stamped the figure of Dianaes temple, more like to your Popish shrines, than to
the temple of God. Where idols are translated devotions, I know not, except
you mean, Act. 17. v. 23. where the word is (...), which your vulgar Latin
translatour, 2 Thessalonians. 2. calls quod colitur, that which is devoutly
worshipped, and so the word signifies whatsoever is religiously worshipped or
adored, and not idols as you say, nor simulachra, images, as your translatour
calls them, Act. 17. For it is derived of (...), or (...), which signifies
to adore, to worship, to honor devoutly, or religiously. Every humane
creature, signifies in that place, 1. Pet. 2. every magistrate, of what
creation or ordination soever he be, and so is meant by that translation (all
ordinances of men) not all laws of men, which yet were not impious, if you
add the restraint, for the Lord, for whom nothing can be, that is against
his law. The rest of your quarrels be all answered before.

MART. 46. What caused these strange speeches in Psalm. 86. ^3. Bib. 1579.
their English Bibles. Thou shall not leave my soul in the grave. Thou have
delivered my soul from the lowest grave. A covetous man is a worshipper of
images. By laying on of the hands of the Eldership. Hail freely beloved. SIN
lies at the door, and thou shall rule over HIM. Break of thy sins with
righteousness, for Redeem with alms. Jealousy is cruel as the grave, for as
hell. Cant. Cant. 8. Bib. an. 1579. The griefs of the grave caught me. Psalm.
116. And, God will redeem my soul from the power of the grave. O grave I will
be thy destruction. Psalm. 4^.
Os. 13. and such like? what made Calvin so translate into Latin, that if you
turn it into English, the sense is, that God powered water upon us abundantly,
meaning the holy Tit. 3.
Ghost: what else but because he would take away the necessity of material
water in Baptism, as in his commentary and Bezaes, it is evident?

FVLK. 46. These speeches are not strange in Gods Church, how soever they
sound in your ears. So many of them as translate for Sheol, the grave, have
their answers sect. 32. and chap. 7. which is appointed for that question. The
covetous man a worshipper of images sect. 5. of this chapter, and chap. 3.
numb. 12. The laying ^^ of hands of the Eldership, is warranted by the
signification of the Greek word (...), which signifies a company of Elders,
as it is translated by your own vulgar Latin interpreter. Luk 22. verse. 66.
Seniore^ plebis. The Elders of the people, and Act. 22. v. 5. he calls (...).
Omnes maiores natu. And for a consistory of Elders, is the word Presbyterium
used in Latin by Cyprian lib. 3. epist. 11. and lib. 2. epist. 8. 10. Of hail
freely beloved we spoke lately, sect. 43. Of the text Genesis 4. v. 7. sin lies
at the door, etc. sect. 28. and chap. 10. sect. 9. of Dan. 4. break, for
redeem thy sins. sect. 41.

If Calvin Tit. 3. did wrongly interpret, that which is spoken of water, to
be meant of the holy Ghost, what is that to our translation? But certain it
is, that Calvin never meant to take away, the necessity of material water
from the sacrament of baptism, although he taught that the want of the
external sacrament, where it cannot be had, does not deprive gods elect from
eternal salvation: neither has Beza any other meaning in his annotation.

MART. 47. I had meant to have but briefly skimmed over these things, but
multitude of matter makes me too long, as it chances to a man that wadeth
thoroughe myrie and foul places, and yet the greatest demonstration that they
are wilful corrupters, is behind, which only I will add, and for the
rest, refer the reader to the whole book.

FVLK. 47. It is a small sign, that multitude of matter is cause of your
length, when you repeat one matter in so many sections, your similitude of a man wading in foul and myrie places, does well agree unto you, for you have
been all this while wading in the puddle of your slanders, misprisions, and
false and false accusations, in which you have so berayed your self, as you
shall not easily purge your self from the mire of them. But because you say
the greatest demonstration, that we are wilful corrupters, is behind, though
it be tedious for us to rake in such a gogmyre of your forgeries, and false
accusations, yet we will take courage, and consider what main demonstration
you can make, to prove us in our English translations to be wilful corrupters.

MART. 48. Doubt you whether they translate of purpose and partiality, in
favor of their opinions? you shall hear them selves say so, and protest it.
If I dealt with Lutherans, this Tom. 2. fol. 405. edit. Witteb. anno 1551.
one testimony of Luther were sufficient, who being asked why he added only,
into the text, Romans 3. answered that he did it to explicate the Apostles sense
more plainly, that is, to make the Apostle say more plainly, that faith only
justified. And his Disciple Illyricus disputes the matter, that the Apostle
saying* by The express testimonies of Beza, (whom the English Heretical
translations follovv herein) that he does vvilfully and of purpose translate
against such and such catholic assertions.
faith without works, says in deed, only faith. But because I deal rather
with our English Caluinists, and Beza is their chief translator, and a
Captain among them, whom they profess to follow in the title of the new
Testament, anno 1580. and by the very name of their Geneua Bibles, let us see
what he says.

FVLKE. 48. I think there is no man doubts, but they translated the
Scripture, with purpose to maintain their opinions, but whether they have
wittingly, and wilfully translated falsely, to maintain any errors, or
heretical opinions, that is the matter in question, and which has need of
your greatest demonstration, to make it apparent. That Luther might rightly
interpret the place Romans 3. of only faith justifying, by the excluding of
works, I have before acknowledged, and Illyricus does rightly defend it. But
that he did put in the word (only) in his translation, which is not in the
original, I will not take upon me to excuse, seeing the truth of that doctrine
is manifest, without that addition: and Luther him self in his later editions,
has reformed it. Again, what fault soever other men have committed in their
translation, we are unjustly charged therewith, except we follow the same in
ours. That we profess to follow Beza by the very name of our Geneua Bibles, it
is a very ridiculous argument. For our Bibles are so commonly called, because
they were translated, and first printed at Geneua, not by Beza, who at that
time, had scarce finished his translation of the new Testament, and never
dealt with translating of the old, so far as we know, but by certain
godly, and learned English men, which lived there in Queen Mary's time, to
enjoy the liberty of a good conscience, which they could not have in their
own Country.

MART. 49. First, concerning (...), which the vulgar Latin and Erasmus
translate: Agite poenitentiam, Repent. or, Do penance. This interpretation
(says he) I refuse for many causes, but for this especially, that many
ignorant persons have taken hereby an occasion of the false opinions of
SATISFACTION, wherewith the Church is troubled at this day. Lo, of purpose
against satisfaction he will not translate the Greek word, as it ought to be,
and as it is proved to signify, both in this book, and in the annotations
upon the new Testament. A little after speaking of the same word, he says:
why I Mat. ^. v. 8.
have changed the name, poenitentia, I have told a little before, protesting
that he will never use those words, Loco supra citato.
but resipiscere, and resipiscentia, that is, amendment of life: because of
their heresy, that repentance is nothing else but a mere amendment of former
life, without recompense or satisfaction or penance for the sins before
committed. See chap. 13.

FVLK. 49. Of purpose against the heresy of satisfaction, Beza will not
translate the Greek word, as the vulgar Latin translator does, but yet as
the Greek word ought to be translated. Erasmus finding the vulgar Latin
insufficient, has added Vitae prioris, that is, repent ye of your former
life. Neither does Beza find fault with the English word repent, but with
the Latin Agite paenitentiam, when you translate it, do penance, meaning
thereby, pain or satisfaction for sins passed, to be a necessary part of
true repentance, which is not contained in the Greek word (...), which
signifies changing of the mind, that is, not only a sorrow for the sin
past, but also a purpose of amendment, which is best expressed by the Latin
word Resipiscere, which is always taken in the good part as (...) is in the
Scripture, where as the Latin words paenitere and Paenitentia, are used in
Latin, of sorrow or repentance that is too late. As paenitere and paenitentia
may be said of Judas grief of mind, which caused him to hang him self, but
not (...), or (...) or resipiscere and resipisscentia: and therefore the Holy
Ghost speakinge of his sorrow, uses an other word (...), and (...). And
this is the cause, why Beza refused the word Paenitentia, having a Latin
word that more properlye does express the Greek word, as we might
lawefullye do in English, if we had an other English word proper to that
repentance, which is always joined with faith, and purpose of amendmente,
for want whereof, we are constrained to use the words repent and
repentance, which may be taken in good part, or in evil. For we say,
repentance too late, and Judas repented too late, but there is no (...) that
can be called too late. But where you say that resipiscere, and
resipiscentia, is nothing but amendment of life, and that repentance in our
heresy, is nothing else but a mere amendment of former life: you speak
untruly: for those words do signify not only amendment of life, but also
sorrow for the sins past, although without recompense or satisfaction, which
you call penance, for the sins before committed: for we know no recompense or
satisfaction made to God for our sins, but the death of Christ, who is the
propitiation for our sins. 1. John. 1. Neither has your blasphemous
satisfaction any ground in the Greek word (...): but only a foolish color
by the Latin translation Agite poenitentiam, which, it is like your Latin
interpreter did never dream of, and therefore he uses the word Resipiscere.
2. Tim. 2. Of them to whom God should give (...) repentance to the
acknowledging of the truth, Et resipiscant, and so they may repent, or as you
translate it, recover themselves from the snare of the Devil. Seeing therefore,
repentance is the gift of God, it is no recompense or satisfaction made by us
to God, to answer his justice: but an earnest and true grief of mind for our
transgression of Gods law, and offending against his majesty, with a certain
purpose and determination of amendment, so near as God shall give us grace.
Hitherto therefore we have no demonstration of any wilful corruption, but a
declaration of the cause that moved Beza, to use a more exact translation, and
such as comes nearer to the original word, than that which the vulgar
translation has used, upon which, occasion of a great blasphemy has been
taken, and is yet mainteyned.

MART. 50. Again concerning the word, Iustifications, (...).
which in the Scripture very often signify the commandments, he says thus,
The Greek interpreters of the Bible Luc. 1. v. 6.
(meaning the Septuaginta) applies this word to signify the whole Law of
God, and therefore commonly it is wont to be translated word for word,
Iustificationes: which interpretation therefore only I rejected, that I might
take away this occasion also of cauilling against justification by faith, and
so for, iustificationes, he puts constituta, Tullies word forsooth, as he
says. Can you have a more plain testimony of his heretic all purpose?

FVLK. 50. Concerning the Greek word (...), which Beza translateth
Constitutionibus, constitutions, and you confess that in Scripture it does
very often signify the commandments. He says first, that as the whole Law
of God is divided into three parts, Moral, Ceremonial, and Judicial, so the
Hebrews have three several words, to express the several precepts of those
laws. For the Hebrew word which signifies the Ceremonial precepts, the
Greeks use to translate (...). So the sense is, that Zachary, and Elisabeth
were just, walking in all the Moral commandments, and observing the holy
rites, and ceremonies, as much as concerned them: but the third word, which
signifies Judgments, S. Luke does not add, because the exercise of Judicial
cases, did not belong unto them, being private persons. After this he says,
that the Greek Interpreters of the Bible, transferred this word, unto the
whole law of God, and especially to the holy ceremonies: so verily,
exceedingly commending the law, that it is a certain rule of all justice. And
therefore men are wont, commonly in respect of the word, to turn it,
Iustifications. And this word in this place, Beza in deed confesses, that he
refused to use, for avoiding of cauillations against justification by faith,
seeing he has none other word, neither would he for offense, seek any new
word, to express justification by faith, whereas the word (...) in this
text, Luc. 1. verse 6. signifies not that, by which they were made just, but
the commandments or precepts of God, by walking in which, they were declared
to be just. For by the works of the law (such as Saint Luke here speaks of)
no flesh shall be justified before God. Therefore (...) in this place, must
have an other sense, than iustifications, namely, commandments, as you say
it is often taken, or constitutions, as Beza calls them, which before God and
the world, are not of such difference, that you should charge him with
wilful corruption, for translating that word constitutions, which you
confess, signifies very often, commandments. Wherefore here appears no
heretical purpose, except you will say, that justification by faith, which S.
Paul so often, so diligently, and so purposedly does teach, is an heresy.

MART. 51. Again, when he had rejected this translation (Act. 2. verse 27.)
Non derelinques animam meam in inferno, Thou shall not leave my soul in Hell:
because (as he says) hereupon grew the errors of Christ's descending into
Hell, of Limbus, and of Purgatory: atlength he concludes thus: Whereas the
doubtful interpretation of one or two words has brought forth so many
mo^sters, I chose rather I o^ how sin ^^^ Anima, carcass. Infero nus, grave.
simply, for soul, to say, carcass, for hell, grave: than to foster these
foul errors.

FVLK. 51. Beza shows, that because the doubtful interpretation of the
Hebrew word Sheol into (...), which does not properly signify hell, but a
dark place, such as the pit is, wherein the dead are put, and of the Poets is
taken for hell, had bredde such monsters, as Limbus patrum, Purgatory, and
Christ's descending into them: therefore he did plainly translate that verse,
as it is meant. of the raising up of Christ's body out of the grave, which if
he had translated out of Hebrew, as he did out of Greek, had not been
offensive, nor untrue, as I have showed in answer to your Preface, sect. 46.
and of this chapter, sect. 32. But seeing Beza him self, has altered that
translation, and it was never followed of our English translators, what
demonstration is this, that we are wilful corrupters of the holy Scriptures?

MART. 52. Again, when he had translated for, (...).
Whom heaven must receive, thus, who must be contained in heaven: he says,
whereas we have used the Act. 3. v. 21.
passive kind of speech, rather than the active (which is in the Greek:) we
did it to avoid all ambiguitie. For it is very expedient, that there should be
in the Church of God, this perspicuous testimony against them, that for
ascending by faith into heaven, so to be joined to our head, obstinately
maintain that Christ must be called again out of heaven unto us. Meaning his
presence in the ^. Sacrament, and inueying no less against the Lutherans, than
the Catholics, as the Lutherans do here against him, Flac. Illyr.
for this wilful interpretation, and that by Caluines own judgment, who
thinks it a forced translation.

FVLK. 52. True it is, that he meant concerning the manner of Christ's presence
in the blessed sacrament, and that so he translated, to exclude the carnal
manner of presence, which the Papists have invented: but all this while the
translation is true, and warranted by Gregory Nazianzene, as I have showed
before, sect. 36. of this chapter. For he that says, Heaven must receive
Christ, (as you do) can not deny, except he be mad, but that Christ must be
received of heaven. So that Beza does none otherwise translate, than you do,
Qui daemonia habebant, which is actiuely thus to be translated, those who had
devils, and you say, which were possessed of devils, that is, were had of
devils. That the Lutherans find fault with Bezaes translation, it proves it
not to be false, he has justified it sufficiently in his answer to
Selneccerus, and the Divines of Iena. Neither does Calvin (as you say
untruly) think it a forced translation, but not weying the sentence
sufficiently, supposes that the words are placed ambiguously, for that it
seems to be doubtful, whether we should save, that heaven must receive
Christ, or that Christ must receive heaven. But if it be once granted (as it
is of you) that heaven must receive Christ, there is neither Calvin, nor
Illyricus, nor any man that bears the face, but of a young Grammarian, yea of
a reasonable man, which can deny, that conversion by the passive: Christ must
be received of heaven. Therefore if you had any respect of your credit, with
men of understanding, you would not for shame, rehearse this quarrel so often,
which has not so much as any color or show of reason to maintain it, but
that you abuse the names of Illyricus and Calvin, as mislykinge it, whose
arguments by no means will serve your turn, because that which is denied by
them, or doubtful to them, is plain and confessed by you.

MART. 53. But Beza goes forward still in this kind. Romans 5. verse. 18.
whereas Erasmus had put propagatum est, indifferently, both of Adams sin
which made us truly sinners, and of Christ's justice, which makes us truly
just: he rejecting it, among other causes why it displeased him, says: That
old error of the Sophists (meaning Catholics) which for imputative justice
put an inherent quality in the place, is so great, and so execrable to all
good men, that I think nothing is so much to be avoided as it.

FVLK. 53. A manifest ecclipsis, or want of words, being in that verse, for
which Erasmus has put propagatum est, which word is ambiguous, and may give
occasion of error, for men to think, that the righteousness of Christ comes
by propagation, as the guiltines of Adam does: Beza thought good to supply the
lack, rather by such words as are warranted by the text, verse 12. 15. and
16. and can give no occasion of error. And therefore, thus he renders that
verse, Nempe igitur, sicut per vnam offensam reatus venit in omnes homines ad
condemnationem: ita per vnam iustificationem, beneficium redimdauit in omnes
homines ad iustificationem vitae. Now therefore, as by one offense guiltiness
came upon all men unto condemnation: so by one justification, the benefit
abounded toward all men unto justification of life. In this verse these words,
guiltiness came, and, the benefit abounded, are added for explication sake,
and are taken out of the verses going before, in which the Apostle speaks of
the same matter. Therefore Beza to avoid occasion of the heresy of the
Papists, of justice inherent, among other causes which he rehearses, refuses
that word, by which Erasmus supplied the text, and uses such words for that
purpose, as the Apostle him self in the verses precedent does offer, for this
necessary supplye: which seeing it must be made, that there may be a sense and
understanding: who can mislike that it should be made, by the Apostles own
words? or who ca^ suppose that the Apostle would leave any other words to be
understood, than such as he him self had before expressed? And as for the
heresy of inherent justice, can have no hold in this verse, except some such
word be added for supply, as the Apostle never used in this case. That
Christ's justice does make us as truly just, as Adams sin made us truly
sinners, there is no question, but by what means we are made just, we say as
the Scripture teaches us to speak, that justice is imputed to us through
faith, Romans 4. The Papists say it is a quality inherent within us, for which
words and matter, they have no warrant in the holy Scripture.

MART. 54. These few examples prove unto us that the Scriptures translated
verbatim, exactly, and according to the proper use and signification of the
words, do by the Heretics confession make for the Catholics, and therefore
Beza says he alters the words into other: and (I think) it may suffice any
indifferent reader to judge of his purpose and meaning in other places of his
translation, and consequently of theirs that either allow him, or follow him,
which are our English Caluinists, and Bezites. Many other ways there are to
make mosta certain proof of their Wilfulness, as when the translation is
Call. Heb. 5. 7. and Tit. 3. 6. Beza 2. Thess^l. 2. 15. and 3. 6.
framed according to their false and heretical commentary: and, When they
will avouch their translations out of profane writers, Homer, Plutarch,
Pliny, Tullie, Virgil, and Terence, and reject the Ecclesiastical use of
words in the Scriptures and Fathers: which Beza does for the most part
always. But it were infinite to note all the marks, and by these, the wise
reader may conceive the rest.

FVLK. 54 These examples prove nothing less. For to run over them all
briefly, the first two, we translate verbatim, A man is justified by faith,
without the works of the law, and, repent, and, repentance, we say for (...)
and (...). What make these for Popery? If Luc 1. v. 6. we should call (...),
iustifications, what should Popery gain, but a vain cavil? when you your
selves confess, that those iustifications are often used for commandments?
Act. 2. v. 27. all our English translations are as you would have them. Thou
shall not leave my soul in hell, nor suffer thy holy one to see corruption, by
which verse no descent into Limbus, but the resurrection from death can be
proved. If we translate as you do Act. 3. v. 21. whom heaven must receive,
we will easily convince that Christ must be received of heaven. In the last
example the question is not, how the word is to be translated, but by what
word the want of the text is to be supplied, which we supply not with
words of our own, but with the Apostles own words.

Have you not gained greatly by translating verbatim, exactly, and according to
the proper use and signification of the words? I like well that every
indifferent Reader may judge by these examples, of Bezaes purpose in other
places of his translation. But you have two other ways, to make certain
proof of their wilfulness: The first is, when the translation is framed
according to their heretical commentary. A reasonable man would think
rather, that the commentary were framed according to the text, than the text
to the commentary. But to justify the truth of those translations, for the
first text you quote, it is handled sect: 26. of this chapter, and so
consequently Cap. 7. The second is answered sect: 46. the other two concerning
tradition sect. 23. of the preface, and in the chapter following. The second
way of proof is, when they will avouch their translations out of profane
writers. I think there is no better way, to know the proper, or diverse
signification of words, than out of ancient writers, though they be never so
profane who used the words most indifferently, in respect of our
controversies, of which they were altogether ignorant. As for the
ecclesiastical use of words in the Scripture, and the Fathers, which Beza
(you say) does for the most part reject, it is untrue: except there be good and
sufficient cause, why he should so do, warranted by the Scripture it self, or
necessary circumstances of the places, which he does translate. For if the
Scripture have used a word in one signification sometimes, it is not
necessary that it should always use it in the same signification, when it is
proved by ancient writers that the word has other significations, more
proper to the place, and agreeable to the rule of faith, which perhaps the
usual signification is not. As for example, the Scripture uses very often
this word (...) for a boy, or servant: but when the same word is applied to
our Savior Christ, in the prayer of the Apostles, Act. 4. 27. Who would not
rather translate it child, or son, as the word does sometime, but more
seldom signify? How the Fathers of the Church have used words, it is no
rule for translators of the Scripture to follow, who oftentimes used words,
as the people did then take them, and not as they signified in the Apostles
time. As (...) for a public testification of repentance, which we call
penance: (...) for imposition of hands, and such like, in which sense these
words were never used before the Apostles times, and therefore it is not like,
that they would begin a new use of them, without some manifest explication
of their meaning, without the which no man could have understood them: as
they have done in the use of these words (...), and such like. It is not a
fault therefore, prudently to seek even out of profane writers, what is the
proper signification of words, and how many significations a word may have,
and reverently to judge, which is most apt for the place to be translated,
and most agreeable with the holy ghostes meaning in that text: and not
always to be tied to the usual signification of words, as they are
sometimes taken in Scripture, and much less as they are used of the ancient
Fathers.

MART. 55. But would you think that these men could notwithstanding speak
very gravely and honestly against voluntary and wilful translations of
Scripture, that so notoriously offend therein them selves? Harken what Beza
says against Annot. act. 10. v. 46.
Castaleo and the like: The matter (says he) is now come to this point that
the translatours of Scripture out of the Greek into Latin, or into any other
tongue, think that they may lawfully do any thing in translating. Whom if a
man reprehend, he shall be answered by and by that they do the office of a
translatour, not that translateth word for word, but that expresses the
sense. So it comes to pass, that whiles every man will rather freely follow
his own judgment, than be a religious interpreter of the Holy Ghost, he does
rather pervert many things than translate them. Is not this well said, if he
had done accordingly? but doing the clean contrary, as has ben^ proved, he
is a dissembling hypocrite in so saying, and a wilful Heretic in so doing,
and condemned by his own judgment.

FVLK. 55. No wise man doubts, but they could both speak very gravely and
avoid most religiously al voluntary, and wilful translations of scripture,
that might tend to maintain any error. And the rather they will be
persuaded, that Beza has avoided that lewd kind of translation, for which he
reproves Castaleo, when they shall see, that you so malicious an enemy unto
him, having spent all your invention to seek holes in his translation, can
find nothing but such childish cauils, as when they be discovered, men will
marvel that you were not ashamed to move them.

MART. 56. But after this general vewe of their wilful purpose and heretical
intention, let us examine their false translations more particularly, and argue
the case with them more at large, and press them to answer, whether in their
conscience it be so or no, as hitherto is said: and that by several chapters
of such CONTROVERSIES as their corruptions concern: and first of all (without
further curiosity whence to begin, in cases so indifferent) of TRADITIONS.

FVLK. 56. The more particularly you examine our translations, the freer, I
hope, they shall be found from falsehoode, and wilful corruption. And the more
at large you argue the case, and press us to answer, the more you shall make
the case to appear worse on your side, and the truth clearer on our part. And
as God is witness of our conscience and sincerity in setting forth his word,
without adulteration, or corruption, so I appeal to the consciences of al
indifferent readers, whether hitherto you have gotten any advantage against us
in this whole chapter, which yet you profess to be the abridgement, and sum
of your whole treatise.

CHAP. II.
Heretical translation of holy Scripture against Apostolical TRADITIONS.

Martin.
THis is a matter of such importance, that if they 1.
should grant any traditions of the Apostles, and not pretend the written
word only: they know that by See the annotations of the new Testament 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15.
such traditions mentioned in all antiquity, their religion were wholly defaced
and overthrown. For remedy whereof, and for the defacing of all such
traditions, they bend their translations against them in this wonderful manner.
Wheresoever the holy Scripture speaks against certain traditions of the
Jews, partly frivolous, partly repugnant to the law of God, there all the
English translations follow the Greek exactly, never omitting this word,
tradition. (...)
Contrariwise, wheresoever the holy Scripture speaks in the commendation of
Traditions, to wit, such traditions a^ the Apostles delivered to the Church,
there all their said translations agree, not to follow the Greek, which is
still the self same word, but for, traditions, they translate, ordinances, or
instructions. Why so and to what purpose? we appeal to the worm of their
conscience, which continually accuses them of an heretical meaning, whether,
by urging the word, traditions, wheresoever they are discommended, and by
suppressing the word, wheresoever they are commended, their purpose and intent
be not, to signify to the Reader, that all traditions* are naught, and none
good, all reproueable, none allowable.

Fulke.
TRaditions in deed is a matter of such importance, as if you may be allowed
whatsoever you will thrust upon us under the name of unwritten traditions, the
written word of God shall serve to no purpose at all. For first as you plainly
profess, the holy Scripture shall not be accounted sufficient to teach all
truth necessary to salvation, that the man of God may be perfect, prepared to
all good works. Secondly with the Valentinian heretics, you accuse the
Scriptures of uncertain understanding without your traditions, under pretense
of which, you will bring in what you list, though it be never so contrary to the
holy Scriptures plain words, by color of interpretation, as you do the
worshipping of images, and many other like heresies. As for the mention that is
made of Apostolical traditions in diverse of the ancient fathers, some of
the^ are such, as you your selves observe not, and not for the tenth part of
those that you observe, can you bring any testimony out of the ancient fathers,
as is proved sufficiently by so many propositio^s as were set down by the
Bishop of Sarisburie M. Jewel, whereof you can bring no proof for any one to
have been taught within 600. years after Christ. Now concerning the traditions
of the Apostles, what they were, who can be a better witness unto us than
Ignatius the disciple of the Apostles, of whom Eusebius writes, that when he
was led toward Rome where he suffered martyrdom, he earnestly exhorted the
Churches, by which he passed, to continue in the faith, and against all
heresies which even then began to bud up, he charged the^ to retain fast the
tradition of the Apostles, which by that time he protested to be committed to
writing: for by that time were all the books of the new Testament written. The
words of Eusebius concerning this matter are, li. 3. c. 35. (...). And he
exhorted the^ straightly to keep the tradition of the Apostles, which testifying
that it was now for assurance committed to writing, he thought necessary to be
plainly taught. Against this tradition of the Apostles, which for certainty
and assurance is contained in their holy and undoubted writings, we say
nothing, but strive altogether for it. But because the word traditions, is by
you Papists taken to signify a doctrine secretly delivered by word of
mouth, without authority of the holy Scriptures, we do willingly avoid the
word in our translations, where the simple might be deceived, to think that the
holy ghost did ever co^me^d any such to the church, which he would not have to
be committed to writing in the holy Scriptures: and in steed of that word so
commonly taken, although it does not necessarily signify any such matters, we
do use such words, as do truly express the Apostles meaning, and the Greek
word does also signify. Therefore we use the words of ordinances or
instructions or institutio^s or the doctrine delivered, all which being of one
sense, the Greek word (...) does signify, and the same does tradition
signify, if it be rightly understood: but seeing it has been commonly taken,
and is urged of the Papists to signify only a doctrine delivered beside the
word of God written in such places where the holy Ghost uses the Greek word
(...) in that sense, we translate by that word (tradition) where he uses it
for such doctrine as is grounded upon the holy Scriptures, our translatours
have avoided it, not of any heretical meaning, that all (...) traditions are
naught, but that all such as have not the holy Scripture to testify of them,
and to warrant them, are evil, and to be avoided of all true Christians, which
can not without blasphemy, acknowledge any imperfection in the holy Scriptures
of God, which are able to make a man wise unto salvation, if they should
think any doctrine necessary to salvation not to be contained therein.

MART. 2. For example Matt. 15. Thus they translate, Why do thy disciples
transgress the TRADITION of (...).
the Elders? And again, Why do you also transgress the commandment of God
by your TRADITION? And again. Thus have you made the commandment of God of
no effect by your TRADITION: Here (I warrant you) all the bells sound tradition,
and the word is never omitted, and it is very well and honesty translated, for
so the Greek word does properly signify. But now on the other side,
concerning good traditions, let us see their dealing. The Apostle 2 Thessalonians. 2.
v. 15. (...), tr^ditiones.
by the self same word both in Greek and Latin, says thus: Therefore,
brethren, stand and hold fast the TRADITIONS which you have learned either by
word, or 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6.
by our Epistle. And again, Withdraw your selves from every brother walking
inordinately, and not according to the TRADITION which they have received of
us. And again (according to the Greek which they profess to follow:) I praise
you brethren, that in all things you are ^. Cor. 15. 2.
(...).
mindful of me, and as I have delivered unto you, you keep my TRADITIONS.

FVLK. 2. No marvel, though you can not abide the bells sounding against man's
traditions, which sound must needs pearce your conscience more than it
offends your ears, seeing you know that many of those things which you
defend under the name of traditions, against the holy scriptures, have not God
for their auctor, which forbids to be worshipped in such sort, but man, or
rather Satan, which has inspired such things unto me^, thereby to dishonor
God, and to discredit his holy and most certain written word. Yet you say it
is well and honestly translated. God knows how feign you would there were no
such text exta^t in the Gospel against your superstition and will worshipping.
But now let us see our crafty dealing (as you compte it) against good
traditions. In the first text 2. Thessal. 2. v. 15. You may see your
understanding of traditions, quite overthrown. For the Apostle speaks of
such traditions as were delivered to them partly by preaching and partly by his
Epistle. Therefore tradition does not signify a doctrine delivered by word of
mouth only. But yet you will say it signifies here a doctrine delivered by
word of mouth also, which is not written. How prove you that? because all that
the Apostle preached was not contained in his Epistles to the Thessalonians,
therefore was it no where written in the Scriptures? what the tradition was in
the second text* 2 Thessalonians. 3. v. 6. is expressed by and by after: that he which
will not labor must not eat. Was this doctrine never written before? when God
commands every man to labor in his vocation. As for the third place. 1.
Cor. 11. 2. your own vulgar Latin translater both teaches us how to
translate it, and also discharges our translation of heresy and corruption,
for he calls (...) in that place, praecepta precepts or instructions, or
commau^dements, or ordinances, I see no great difference in these words. By
which his translation he shows, that in the other places, 2. These. 2. and 3.
He means the same thing by traditiones, traditions, that we do by ordinances
or instructions, and might as well have used the word praecepta* in those two
places, as he did in this one, if it had pleased him.

MART. 3. Here we see plain mention of S. Paul's traditions, and consequently
of Apostolical traditions, yea and traditions by word of mouth, delivered to
the said Churches without writing or Scripture. In all which places look,
gentle reader, and seek all their English translations, and thou shall Yet M.
Fulke says, it is found there. page 153. against D. Sand. Rock. If he give
not us an instance, let him give him self the lie.
not once find the word, tradition, but in steed thereof, ordinances,
instructions, preachings, institutions, and any word else rather than,
tradition. In so much that Beza their master translateth it traditam
doctrinam, the doctrine delivered, putting the singular number for the plural,
and adding, doctrine of his own. So framing the text of holy Scripture
according to his false commentary, or rather putting his commentary in the
text, and making it the text of Scripture. Who would 2 Thessalonians. 2. and 3. (...).
think their malice and partiality against traditions were so great, that
they should all agree with one consent so duly and exactly in these and these
places to conceal the word, which in other places do so gladly use it, the
Greek word being all one in all the said places?

FVLK. 3. There is no question but the Apostles by word of mouth, that is by
preaching and teaching, delivered the doctrine of the Gospel to the Churches,
but that they preached taught or delivered any doctrine, as necesarie to
salvation, which they proved not out of the holy Scriptures, and which is not
contained in the new Testament or the old, this is not yet proved, neither ever
can it be proved. Such matters of ceremonies, order, and discipline, which are
mutable, no man denies, but they might and did deliver, but yet in them nothing
but agreeable to the general rules set down in the Scripture. But in all
these places the word tradition can not once be found. Yet M. Fulke says it
is found. Yea does? where says he so? You answer page 153 against D. Saunders
Rock. Therefore if he give not an instaunce, let him give him self the lie.
But he that charge Fulke to say it is found, lies the more. For so he says
not: read the place who will. He speaks against Saunder, who affirmed that the
very name of tradition used in the better part, can not be suffered to be in
the English Bible: as though there were some decree of the Synod, or Act of
Parliament against it, and says: it may be and is suffered in that sense,
which the holy Ghost uses it, but not to bring prayer for the dead, or any
thing contrary to the Scripture under the name of traditions Apostolic. By
which words I mean, that there is no prohibition or edict to the contrary,
but if any man will use the word tradition in translation of the Bible, he is
permitted so to do, I do not affirm it is so found. But as if I should
say. The Papists in England are suffered to live as becomes good subjects,
I affirm not that they are, or shall be found so to live. But to omit this
foolish quarrel, Beza our Master is said to have translated (...), the
doctrine delivered, putting the singular number for the plural, and adding
doctrine of his own. What an heinous matter here is, the word doctrine is a
collectiue, comprehending many precepts or traditions, and in the next
chapter, the Apostle uses the same word in the singular number. Again, the
1. These. 4. v. 2. he calls the same (...), precepts or documents, which word
signifies the same that (...), witness your vulgar latin tra^slator, which
gives one word for both, praecepta, 1. Cor. 11. and 1. These. 4. And that the
word doctrine is added to the text, it is a fond cauil: for the word doctrine
is contained in (...), which signifies a delivery* but whereof? ^f not of
doctrine. Our Savior Christ also, Math. 15. v. 9. by the testimony of Esaias,
reproves the tradition of the Pharisees, teaching the doctrines precepts of
me^, which testimonye of Esaias, could take no hold of the^, if traditions were
not doctrines and precepts. So that in this tra^slatio^ of Beza, (cry out as
loud as you can) there is neither fraud nor corruption, malice nor
partialitye, but a prudent declining of that term, which might give occasion
of error, and the Apostles meaning truly and faithfully delivered. To show
that one word may be diversely translated, especially when it signifies diverse
things, to wise me^ is needeles. I have said before you your selves translate,
or else you should be taken for mad men, the Latin word tradere (of which
tradition is derived) sometimes to deliver, sometimes to betray, and yet the
Greek and Latin word being all one in all the said places.

MART. 4. Yea they do else where so gladly use this word, tradition, when it
may tend to the discredit thereof: that they put the said word in all their
English Bibles, with the like full consent as before, when it is not in the
Greek at all. As when they translate thus, If ye be dead with Christ from the
rudime^ts Col. 2. 20.
(...).
of the world: why as though living in the world, ARE YE LEDD^ WITH TRADITIONS?
and as an other Of the year 1579.
English translation of theirs reads more heretically, Why are ye burdened
with traditions? Tell us sincerely you that profess to have skill in the
Greek, and to translate according to the Greek: tell us we beseech you,
whether this Greek word (...) do signify tradition, and (...), to be lead
or burdened with traditions. You can not be ignorant Col. 2. 1^. Ephesians. 2. 15.
that it does not so signify, but as a little before in the same chapter, and
in other places, your selves translate (...), ordinances* (...).
decrees: so (...), must be (as in the vulgar Latin it is) Quid decernitis?
Why do you ordain or decree, or, why are you led with decrees?

FVLK. 4. It grieueth you that tradition should be mentioned so often in the
ill part as it is. And it seems you would defend the Colossians against S.
Paul, who reproves them because they were led with ordinances according to
the precepts and doctrines of men. But you seem to make light of such
traditions, and therefore you count that the more heretical translation, which
says, why are you burdened with traditions? Wherefore I pray you is that more
heretical? Do you not think that such traditions, as are the commandments
and doctrines of men, are burthenous to men's consciences? But they that have
skill in the Greek tongue must tell you sincerely whether this word (...) do
signify tradition, and (...) to be led or burdened with traditions. I answer
you if (...) as you confess, signify ordinances and decrees or doctrines, and
the word tradition signifies the same, why should not (...) signify to be
led or burdened with traditions, as well as with ordinances, customs, or
decrees. These words differ much in sound, but not greatly in signification.
Dogmata Pythagoraea that might never be put in writing, what were they but the
traditions of Pythagoras. Such were the Philosophical decrees called (...)
whereof Tullie speaks in his book de finibus, which were dictata taught by
word of mouth, which to set forth, among them was compted an heinous offense,
might not those rightly be called traditions?

MART. 5. Justify your translation if you can, either out of Scriptures,
fathers, or Lexicon. And make us a good reason (...) they translate, ordinance:
and (...), tradition: clean contrary.
why you put the word, traditions, here, where it is not in the Greek: and
would not put it in the places before, where you know it is most evidently in
the Greek. Yea you must tell us, why you translate for tradition, ordinance,
and contrary for ordinance, tradition: so turning ca^te in pan (as they say)
at your pleasure, and wresting both the one and the other to one end, that you
may make the very name of traditions odious among the people, be they never so
authentical, even from the Apostles: which your conscience knows, and you
shall answer for it at the dreadful day.

FVLK. 5. First out of Scripture I justify it thus: Those dogmata against
which the Apostle writes, were according to the precepts, and doctrines of
men: but such the Scripture calls traditions* Math. 15. Therefore these were
traditions. Secondly out of the fathers, Chrysostom upon this place says,
Traditiones graecorum taxat, he reproves the traditions of the Greeks, saying
all is but a humane doctrine. Secondly S. Ambrose upon this text. Love not the
world says he, nor those errors Quos humana adinuenit traditio, which the
tradition of men has inverted. And afterward, Sagina enim carnalis sensus
humana traditio est. For the tradition of man is the pampering of carnal sense,
by which he says men are so burdened, that they cannot be joined to the head
which is above. Yet burthening with traditions, is called of you the more
heretical translation. Say as much to Ambrose, that he makes an heretical
co^mentarie. The interpretor of Theodoret printed at Collen 1573. has
translated in the very text, for (...), traditiones hominum traditions of me^.
You see now this matter is not so void of testimony of the fathers, as you
supposed. The reason you require us to make, is made often before. We thought
it not meet, to express the Greek word in both places, by the same english
word, because the english word as it is used by you, is not so indifferent, to
signify the doctrine of God delivered out of the Scriptures: as to signify
doctrines of men devised beside the Scriptures. If we must answer why we call
tradition ordinance, and ordinance tradition: let your vulgar Latin
interpreter answer us, or you for him, why he calls tradition precept, and
usage or precept, tradition? The one he does 1. Cor. 11. v. 2. the other Act.
6. v. 14. where the Greek is (...) signifying there precepts, or observations
commanded, he translateth traditiones, as in the other place the Greek being
(...) he translateth praecepta. If this be lawful for him why should it be
counted corruption or false translation in us? seeing we are moved with as good
reason, as can be yielded for him. As for authentical and apostolical
traditions that are grounded upon the doctrine of the Apostles expressed in
their writings, we shall be ready to receive them, when so ever they shall be
brought soorth. If they cannot be proved by the Scriptures, which are written
that we might believe, and believing have eternal life, and which are able to
make us wise unto salvation, we have nothing to do with them: we may well spare
them: nay we dare not admit them, least we should answer for blasphemy against
the holy Scriptures, in that dreadful day, if by admitting of such traditions,
we should profess, that the doctrine contained in the holy Scriptures, is
imperfect or insufficient to salvation.

MART. 6. Somewhat more excusable it is, but yet proceeding of the same
heretical humor, and on your part (that should exactly follow the Greek)
falsely translated, when you translate in S. Peter's Epistle thus: You were not
redeemed 1. Pet. 1. 18.
with corruptible things from your vain conversation received by the tradition
of the fathers. Where the Greek is (...).
thus rather to be translated, from your vain conversation delivered by the
fathers. But your fingers itched to f^^st in the word, tradition, and for,
delivered, to say, received, because it is the phrase of the Catholic Church,
that it has received many things by tradition, which you would here control
by likeness of words in this false translation.

FVLK. 6. I marvel why you should compte it an heretical humor, to use the
word traditions in the evil part, which the holy ghost so uses, and your
own vulgar translator also: but that you are more partial in allowing the
traditions of me^, than we in avoiding the term sometimes, only for doubt lest
traditions of me^, should creep into the place of Gods co^mandeme^ts. But how
is it falsely translated on our part, that profess to follow the Greek, which is
truly translated in your vulgar Latin text, which professes to translate the
Greek, as well as we? belike because we say, received by the tradition of the
fathers, which according to the Greek should be, delivered by the fathers, but
that our fingers itched to foyst in the word tradition. What I pray you? has
your vulgar tra^slator foisted in that word? did his fingers itch against such
catholic phrases, that he would co^trol the^ by a false translation? do you
not perceive that while you rail upon us* you revile your own vulgar Latin
translation, which has the same word tradition, for which you storm against
us? But for, delivered, we have said, received. See whether frowardnes drives
you, the Apostle says, they were delivered from the vain conversation of
their fathers tradition. Do you then understand, that it was delivered by the
fathers, but not received by their sons? Certainly they were delivered from
that vain conversation which they had received. For receiving does necessarily
importe delivering. And because you called for a Lexicon in the next section
before, Scapula will teach you, that (...) does signify, as indifferently A
patre traditus as a patre acceptus, delivered by the father, and received by
the father. What wrangling then is this, about the moon shine in the water, to
cry out false translation, foysting, itching fingers, and I know not what?

MART. 7. But concerning the word tradition, you will say perhaps the sense
thereof is included in the Greek word, delivered. We grant. But would you be
content, if we should always expressly add, tradition, where it is so
included? then should we say 1. Cor. 11. 2. I praise you that as I have
delivered Tradidi (...)*
you (by tradition,) you keep my precepts or traditions. And again v. 23. For
I received of our Lord, which also I delivered unto you (by tradition) etc. And
Luc. 1. v. 2. As they (by tradition) delivered unto us, which from the
beginning saw etc. and such like, by your example, we should translate in
this sort. But we use not this licentious manner in translating holy
Scriptures, neither is it a translators part, but an interpreters, and his
that makes a commentary: neither does a good cause need other translation
than the express text of the Scripture gives.

FVLK. 7. We will say it is contained in the Greek word (...) which
signifies received by tradition or delivery from the Fathers, and not in the
verb (...) which signifies otherwise many times, tha^ simply to deliver, and
when it signifies to deliver, it does not always signify to deliver by word of
mouth, without writing, as you understand tradition: but as well by writing, as
by preaching. As when S. Paul says, I received of the Lord, that which I
delivered unto vou, speaking of the institution of the supper, he means that
which the Evangelists had written, and he him self does write. So 2 Thessalonians. 2.
when he wills the^ to hold the traditions, which they had learned of him, he
speaks not only of such as they learned by his preaching: but such also as
they learned by his Epistle. Wherefore if you should expressly add the word
tradition in your partial signification, wheresoever you find the word
delivered, you should not only translate ridiculously, but also heretically
and falsely. Words in deriuation and composition, do not always signify
according to their primitive.

MART. 8. And if you will yet say, that our vulgar Latin translation has here
the word, tradition: we grant it has so, and therefore we also translate
accordingly. But you profess to translate the Greek, and not the vulgar
Latin, which you in England condemn as Papisticall, and say it is Discover.
of the Rock. page 147. Fraefat in nou^^ Test. 1556.
the worst of all, though Beza your master pronounce it to be the very best:
and will you notwithstanding follow the said vulgar Latin, rather than the
Greek, to make traditions odious? Yea such is your partiality one way, and
inconstancy an other way, that for your heretical purpose you are content to
follow the old Latin translation, though it differ from the Greek, and
again another time you will not follow it, though it be all one with the
Greek most exactly. as in the place before alleged, where the vulgar Latin
translation has nothing of traditions, but, Quid decernitis, as it is in the
Greek: you Col. 2. 20.
translate, Why are ye burdened with traditions?

FVLK. 8. You may be sure we will say, that we know to be true, and sufficient
to discharge our translation from your foolish and malicious quarrelling. But
we profess (you say) to translate the Greek, and not the vulgar Latin. And
I pray you, what does your vulgar Latin Interpreter profess to translate, but
the Greek? if he then translating out of Greek, could find tradition in the
Greek word, why should not we find the same, especially being admonished by
him: who if he translated truly, why are we blamed for doing as he did: if his
translation be false, why is it allowed as the only authentical text. We
follow not therefore the Latin translation, but join with it wheresoever it
follows the Greek, as we do in ten thousand places more than this, and
willingly depart not from it, but where it departs from the Greek, or else
uses such words as would be offensive, if they were translated into English,
or occasion of error, as you do likewise, when you depart from the proper and
usual signification of words, which your Latin translator uses: as when you
call foenerator, a creditor, which signifies an usurer, Luc. 7. Stabulum, an
Inn, and stabularius, an host, Luc. 10. Vna Sabathi, the first of the Sabbath,
John. 2. Ecclesia, the assembly, Act. 7. Baptismata, washings, Marc. 7. and
such like. But we in England (you say) condemn the Latin translation, as
papisticall. We accuse it as not true, in many places, and we say it is the
worst of all, though Beza, our master, pronounce it to be the very best. This
touches me somewhat, for in the margent is noted Discovery of the Rock, page
147. where in deed speaking of the Hebrew text, of the old Testament, and the
Greek of the new, the Greek translation of the Septuaginta, and the common
Latin translation, I say the Tridentine Council allows none for
authentical, but the common Latin translation, that is, the worst of all. Now
what says Beza contrary to this? speaking of the diverse Latin translations
of the new Testament only, he says of the vulgar Latin, that he follows it
for the most part, and prefers it before all the rest, maxima ex part
amplector and caeteris omnibus antepono. So that I speak of the whole Bible,
Beza of the new Testament only. I speak of the vulgar Latin text, in
comparison of the original Hebrew and Greek, and the Septuagintaes
translation: Beza of the Latin translation of the new Testament, in comparison
of all other Latin translations, that were before him, as Erasmus, Castallion,
and such like. According to your old manner therefore, you rehearse out of my
writings, either falsifying the words, or perverting the meaning. These things
considered, you have no cause to accuse us of partiality and inconstancy, for
following, or leaving your Latin text, which we never did but upon good
ground, and reason sufficient.

MART. 9. So that a blind man may see, you frame your translations to bolster
your errors and heresies, without all respect of following sincerely either
the Greek or the Latin. But for the Latin no marvel, the Greek at the
least, why do you (...).
not follow? Is it the Greek that induces you to say ordinances (...).
for traditions, traditions for decrees, ordinances for iustifications, (...).
Elder for Priest, grave for hell, image for idol? tell us before (...).
God, and in your conscience, whether it be, because you will (...).
exactly follow the Greek: nay, tell us truly, and shame the devil, (...).
whether the Greek words do not sound, and signify most properly that, which
you of purpose will not translate, for disaduantaging your heresies? And first
let us see concerning the question of Images.

FVLK. 9. A blind man may see, that you cavil, and slander, quarrel and
rail, without respect either of conscience toward God, or honesty toward the
world: in so much, that most commonly, you forget the credit of your own
vulgar Latin translation, so you may have a color to find fault with ours.
And yet again you ask, whether it be the Greek, which induces us to say,
for (...), ordinances, and for (...), traditions, etc. I tell you, the Greek
allows us so to say, which is sufficient, when other godly causes move us
beside, so to translate. Is it the Latin that induces you to say, for an
usurer, a Faenerator.
Stabulum.
creditor: for a stable, an Inn: for, what was done, what Quod factum.
was chanced: for, fastening to, crucifying: for, be you saved, Act. 5.
save your selves: for, creature, creation: for, confessed, Affigentes, act. 2.
promised: for a boat, a ship: for a ship, a boat: Saluamini, act. 7.
Confessus, act. 7.
for singing, piping: for hay, grass: for refection, refectorie: Nauiculas,
luc. 5.
for foolishnes, madness: for an image, an idol, etc. I Nauis, marc. 4.
blame not all these as false translations, yet every man Cecinimus, mat. 11.
Fanum, mat. 14.
may see, they are neither usual, nor proper: yet as for Refectio, mar. 14.
some of these (though not for all) I know you may give Insipientia, luc. 6.
good reason, so may we, for any show of alteration, or Simulachrum.
departing from the usual signification of the Greek word, that you are able
to allege against us.

CHAP. III.
Heretical translation against sacred IMAGES.

Martin.
I Beseech you, what is the next and readiest, 1.
and most proper English of Idolum, idololatra, idololatria? is it not Idol,
Idolater, (...).
idolatry? are not these plain English (...).
words, and well known in our languag^? (...).
Why sought you further for other terms and words, if you had meant
faithfully? What needed that circumstance of three words for one, worshipper of
images and, worshipping of images? whether Bib. 1577. Ephesians. 5. Col. 3.
(I pray you) is the more natural and convenient speech, either in our
English tongue, or for the truth of the thing, to say as the holy Scripture
does, Covetousness is idolatry, and consequently, The covetous man is an
idolater: or as you translate, Covetousness is worshipping of Images, and, The
covetous man is a worshipper of images?

Fulke.
IF you ask for the readiest and most 1.
proper English of these words, I must needs answer you, an image, a
worshipper of images, and worshipping of images, as we have sometimes
translated. The other, that you would have, Idol, Idolater, and Idolatry, be
rather Greekish than English words: which though they be used of many English
men yet are they not understood of all, as the other be. And therefore I say,
the more natural, and convenient speech for our English tongue, and as
convenient for the truth of the thing it is to say, covetousness is the
worshipping of images, and the covetous man is a worshipper of images: as to
say covetousness is idolatry, and the covetous man is an idolater, as I have
proved before. Seeing Idolum by your own interpreter is called simulachrum,
and simulachrum signifies as much as imago an image, Cap. 1. numb. 5.

MART. 2. We say commonly in English, Such a rich The absurdity of this
translation, A covetous man is a worshipper of images.
man makes his money his God: and the Apostle says in like manner of some,
Whose belly is their God, Phil. 3. and generally every creature is our idol,
when we esteem it so exceedingly that we make it our God. But who ever heard
in English, that our money, or belly, were our images, and that by esteeming
of them too much, we become worshippers of images? Among your selves are there
not some even of your Superintendentes, of whom the Apostle speaks, that make
an idol of their money and belly, by covetousness and belly cheer? Yet can
we not call you therefore in any true sense, worshippers of images, nether
would you abide it. You see then that there is a great difference betwixt idol
and image, idolatry and worshipping of images: and even so great difference is
there betwixt S. Paul's words and your translation.

FVLK. 2. Before you can show that absurdity of this translation, a covetous
man is a worshipper of images, you must defend your own vulgar Latin
translation, which calls (...) simulachrorum seruitus, which I have proved to
signify the serving or worshipping of images, cap. 1. nu. 5. Now to our
English phrase, a rich man makes his money his God, a glutton his belly, and
so of other creatures honored above measure. I say the worshipping of images
may be after two sorts, either when they are worshipped as gods, (as among the
grosser sort of the Gentiles and Papists) and then it is against the first
commandment. Thou shall have none other gods but me: or else when men
pretend to worship God by them, as the Israelites did in the calfe Ex. 32.
and in Ieroboams calves, and in the brazen serpent, and the wiser sort of the
Gentiles and Papists pretend to do in worshipping their images: and then it is a
sin against the second commandment. Thou shall make to thy self no graven
images. Thou shall not fall down to them nor worship the^. By similitude
therefore of the^ that trusted in images as their gods, and so honored the^,
which were not able to help them, the Apostle calls the covetous man a
worshipper of images, and covetousness worshipping of images: and not properly:
but because their money is to the^ the same occasion of departing from God,
that the images was to the worshipper of the^. So if we will speak improperly,
as the Apostle says, their belly is their God, we may say, it is their idol,
or their image, which they worship as God: not that the belly, or any such
thing is God, or an idol, or an image properly, but that it is so termed, for
that to such vile creatures, is given that divine honor, which is due to God:
but by worshippers of idols, and images, is given to idols or images. I
confess the use of the English tongue in these speeches, is rather to call
the^ idols, than images, and to extend the name idol (which is always taken in
the evil part) to that which the word image can not so aptly signify: yet in
truth of the thing there is no difference between idol and image, worshipping
of idols, and worshipping of images, whether you speak of such as be idols and
images so properly called, or of such as be only by similitude, figuratively
so named. If any of our Superintende^ts be such as you speak of, I wish them
amended or else removed. For my part I know none to be such, although I wish
to the best, increase of Gods grace, to despise the world, and to be more
earnest in setting forth Gods glory. As for the great difference you speak
of, betwixt S. Paul's words, and our translation, I see none as yet.

MART. 3. Will you see more yet to this purpose? In the English Bible printed
the year 1562. you read thus: How 2. Cor. 6.
agrees the Temple of God with images? Can we be ignorant of Satan's
cogitations herein, that it was translated of purpose to delude the simple
people and to make them believe that the Apostle speaks against sacred images
in the Churches, which were then in plucking down in England, when this your
translation was first published in print? Whereas in very truth you know, that
the Apostle here partly interprets him self to Salomo^s Temple did well
agree with images, but not with idols.
speak of men, as of Gods temples wherein he dwells, partly alludeth to
Salomons Temple, which did very well agree with images (for it had the
Cherubins, which were the representations of Angels, and the figures of oxen to
bear up the lauatory) but with idols it could not agree: and therefore the
Apostles words are these, How agrees the Temple of God with idols?

FVLK. 3. We had need to see more, before we be convicted of corruption: for
hitherto we have seen nothing, but a folish cavil, grounded upon the common
use of the word idol in English, in which speech it is taken only for unlawful
images, although in the Greek it signifies as generally, as Imago in Latin,
and by Tully him self is used for the same. But in the English Bible printed
1562. we read thus 2. Cor. 6. How agrees the temple of God with images? Here
you can not be ignorant of Satan's cogitatio^s, that it was translated of
purpose, to make the simple people believe, that the Apostle speaks against
sacred images in churches, which were then in plucking down in England when
this translation was first published in print. You are so cunning in Satan's
cogitations, that he has inspired into you a manifest untruth: for this text
was so translated, and printed nere 30. years before 1562. in King Henry the
eightes time, when images were not in plucking down. And when it was printed
again 1562. which was the fifth year of her Majesty's reign (God be thanked)
there was no need to pluck down images out of churches, which were plucked
down in the first and second years of her reign. Wherefore that purpose is
vainly imagined of you, for the tra^slaters purpose was the same that the
Apostles: to show that the religion of God, has nothing to do with images,
made by man's devise* to honor them as gods, or to honor God by them. And where
you say that the Apostle alludeth to Salomons temple, which did well agree with
images, but not with idols: I answer you, Salomons temple did not agree with
images made by the devise of man, to honor God by them, or in the^. For the
Cherubins were not of man's devise: but of Gods commandment: the oxen to hold
up the lauatory, the pomegranats, and other ornaments, were not for any use of
religion to worship God in them, or by them, but for use and garnishing of the
house appointed by God in his law, and by direction of his spirit in Solomon.
For the commandment, Thou shall not make to thy self, is no restraint unto
God, but unto men of their own brain, or private intent, to make images to
serve in religion. Therefore the Apostle speaking of such images as were
forbidden by Gods law, is not otherwise to be understood, and no more is our
translation.

MART. 4. When Moises by Gods appointment erected (...).
a brazen serpent, and commanded the people that were stung The brazen
serpent, first an image, and lavvfull: afterward an idol, and unlawful.
with serpents, to behold it, and thereby they were healed: this was an image
only, and as an image was it erected and kept and used by Gods commandment.
But when it grew to be an idol (says S. Augustine) that is, when the people
began to adore it as God, Numb. 21.
then king Ezechias brake it in pieces to the great commendation Lib. 10. de
Ciuit. c. 8.
of his piety and godly zeal. So when the children of Israel in the absence of
Moises made a caife, and said, These are thy Gods 4. Reg. 18.
o Israel that brought thee out of Aegipt, was it but an image Exodus 32.
which they made? was that so heinous a matter, that God The molte^ calf, an
idol.
would so have punished them as he did? No they made it an idol also, saying,
These are thy gods o Israel. And therefore the Apostle 1. Cor. 10.
says to the Corinthians, Be not idolaters, as some of (...).
them. Which also you translate most falsely, Be not worshippers of images, as
some of them.

FVLK. 4. The brazen serpent first and last was an image, holy, when it was
commanded by God to be made as a sacrament of our redemption by Christ,
lawful, when it was reserved only for memory of that excellent miracle:
unlawful, cursed, and abominable, when it was worshipped, and therefore
justly broken in pieces, by the godly king Ezechias. You cite Augustine as it
pleases you, to follow your own context. Quem sane serpentem propter facti
memoriam reseruatum, cum postea populus errans, tanquam idolum colere cepisset
Ezechias, etc. Which serpent truly being reserved for the memory of the fact,
when afterward the people going astray, began to worship as an idol, Ezechias
the king, serving God with religious power, with great praise of his piety,
brake in pieces. Here it is certain, that Augustine as most Ecclesiastical
writers, uses the word Idolum, for an image abused. But that the people began
to adore it as God, he says not, for they only worshipped God by it, falsely
in deed, and superstitiously: but yet not believing that image to be God him
self, but a holy representation of his power, which was showed by it in the
days of Moses. That Ezechias by religious or Ecclesiastical power and
authority, did put down idolatry you pass it by, as though you saw it not
in S. Augustine. But you bring an other example to prove, that images except
they be worshipped as gods, be no idols. In truth, seeing all religious worship
is due only to God, although the idolaters intend not to worship their images
as gods, yet by worshipping of them, they make unto them selves gods of them,
and so offend both against the first, and second commandments. Yet how
prove you, that the Israelites made a god of their calfe. Because they said
these are thy gods, o Israel, that brought thee out of the land of Aegipt. But
even by that same speech it is manifest, that they worshipped not the calfe, as
believing it to be God: but contrariwise protested thereby, that they meaned not
to change their God, but to worship the same God, which brought the^ out of
the land of Aegipt by that image, which they could not be ignorant that it was
made but yesterday, of their earings, and therefore could not think it was the
same god that brought them out of the land of Aegipt, but that they would
worship God by that visible shape, which they saw before them. And Aaron by
his proclamation confirms the same. To morrow, (says he) shall be holy day to
Iehoua, that is, to the only true God, whom they dishonored, pretending to
worship him by that Image: so heinous a thing it is, to make Images to
represent God, and to worship them for his honor, although the worshipper do
not believe them to be Gods. Therefore where we have in some translations, 1.
Cor. 10. called those Idolaters worshippers of Images, we have not erred: for
an Image it was they worshipped, thinking to worship God thereby. But if
either Image, or Idol; worshippers of Images or Idolaters, would please you,
we have both in our translations, the one expressing what we mean by the
other, that these cauillations were needelesse, but that malice against the
truth incenseth you to pick quarrels, and that translation which uses the
terms of Idols and Idolaters, was then in printing at Geneua, when Images were
in pulling down in England, namely the first and second years of the
Queens reign, being finished the 10. of April 1560. which notably confuteth
the fond purpose, that you slander our translators to have had.

MART. 5. We see then that the Jews had images without sin, but not idols.
Again for having idols they were accounted like unto the Gentiles, as the
Psalm says, They learned Psalm. 165.
their works, and served their graven idols. But they were not accounted like
unto the Gentiles for having images, which they had in Salomons Temple, and in
the brazen serpent. S. Hierom writes of the Ammonites and Moabites (who were
In c. 25. Ezech. The Protestants are like to the Ammonits and Moabits.
Gentiles and Idolaters) that coming into the Temple of Jerusalem, and seeing
the Angelical images of the Cherubins covering the Propitiatory, they said,
Lo, eue^ as the Gentiles, so Judah also has idols of their religion. These men
did put no difference between their own idols, and the Jews lawful images.
And are not you ashamed to be like to these? They accused Salomons Temple of
idols, because they saw there lawefull images: you accuse the Churches of God
of idolatry, because you see there the sacred images of Christ and his Saints.

FVLK. 5. We know that the Jews had images without sin, and so have we: but
to have images in any use of religion without Gods express commandment,
neither is it lawful for the^ nor us, because we have a general commandment
to the contrary. They were accounted like the Gentiles therefore, for having
images contrary to Gods commandment, of their own appointment, and
worshipping them: not for having images appointed by God, which yet it was not
lawful for the^ to worship. But the Protestants (you say) are like to the
Ammonits, and Moabits, of whom S. Hierom writes, that In Ezech. cap. 25
coming into the temple, and seeing the Cherubins covering the propitiatory,
they said, lo, even as the Gentiles, so Judah also has idols of their
religion, as we accuse the church of God of idolatry, because we see there the
sacred images of Christ, and his Saints.

This that you say S Hierom writes, he only reports it, as a ridiculous
fable of the Jews. Ridiculam vero in hoc loco, Haebrei narrant fabulam. The
Hebrews in this place, tell a ridiculous fable. But fables are good enough, to
bolster false accusations. Secondly, he reports them to say: Sicut cunctae
gentes colunt simulachra, ita and Judah habes suae religionis Idola. As all
nations worship images, so has Judah also idols of their religion. By which
words you see, that he calls images, and idols, the same things. For
simulachrum, to be taken as largely as Imago, I have proved before, in so much
that man is called Simulachrum Dei, the image, not the idol of God, as idol
is taken in the evil part. But neither are you like to Judah, nor we to Ammon,
and Moab, in this case. For Judah had Gods commandment, to warrant their
images, so have not you, but his commandment against your images. Again,
Moab and Ammon (if the tale were true) had idolatrous images of their own, so
have not we.

MART. 6. But tell us yet I pray you, do the holy Scriptures of either
Testament speak of all manner of images, or rather of the idols of the
Gentiles? your conscience knows that The holy Scripture speaks against the
idols of the Gentiles, not against all manner of images.
they speak directly against the idols and the idolatry that was among the
Pagans and Infidels: from the which as the Jews in the old Testament, so the
first Christians in the new Testament were to be prohibited. But will you have
a demonstration that your own conscience condemns you herein, and that you
apply all translation to your heresy? What caused you being otherwise in all
places so ready to translate, images: yet Esai. 31. and Zachar. 13. to
translate, idols, in all your Bibles with full consent? Why in these places
specially and so advisedly? No doubt because God says there, speaking of this
time of the new Testament: In that day every man shall cast out his idols of
silver and idols of God. And, I will destroy the names of the idols out of the
earth, so that they shall no more be had in remembrance. In which places if you
had translated, images, you had made the prophecy false, because images have
not been destroyed out of the world, but are, and have been in Christian
countries with honor and reverence, even since Christ's time. Mary in the
idols of the Gentiles we see it verified, which are destroyed in all the world
so far as Gentilitie is converted to Christ.

FVLK. 6. Verily the commandment of God, being a commandment of the first
table, unto which what soever is said in the Scriptures of images, or the
worship of them forbidden, must be referred, speaks generally of all manner of
images made by the devise of man, for any use of religion, whether they be of
Jews, Pagans, or false Christians. But we are offered a demonstration, that our
own conscience condemns us herein, and that we apply all translation to our
heresy. And that is this. In Esai 31. and Zacha. 13. with one consent all
translate Idols, because God speaks of the time of the new Testament, where
if they had translated Images, they had made the prophecy false, because
Images in Christian countries are with honor, but Idols of the Gentiles are
destroyed out of the world so far as gentilitie is converted to Christ. A
goodly demonstration I promise you. That the translators had no such respect,
it is plain, for that they do not understand the 31. of Esaias of the time of
Christ: but of the reformation made by Ezechias. But in Esaias 44. which is a
manifest prophecy of the Church of Christ, they all use the word Image, also
Micheas the 5. and in diverse other places, where the destruction of Idolatry
is prophesied, by the religion of Christ, which is verified only in true
Christians: for otherwise both the Idolatry of Pagans, and of false
Christians, has remained in many places, and yet remains to this day.

MART. 7. And what were the Pagans idols or their Romans 1.
idolatry? S. Paul tells us, saying: They changed the glory What were
the idols of the Pagans.
of the incorruptible God into the similitude of the image of a corruptible
man, and of birds and beasts, and creeping things, and they served (or
worshipped) the creature more than the creator. Does he charge them for making
the image of man or beast? Your selves have hangings and clothes full of such
paintings and embroderings of imagirie. Wherewith then are they charged? with
giving the glory of God to such creatures, which was to make them idols, and
them selves idolaters.

FVLK. 7. That the Paganes changed the glory of God into the similitude of the
Image of man, etc. it was the extremity of their madness, but that they made
Images of man or beast, If you will not confess* that Jupiter, Mars, etc.
were men, and Isis a cow or beast, yet remember that they made Images of their
Emperors, and committed Idolatry to them: otherwise to make Images out of
religion, was not the offense of Idolatry in them, nor us, that have them in
hangings, and paintings, and other lawful Images.

MART. 8. The case being thus, why do you make it two 1. Cor. 5. Bib. 1562.
distinct things in S. Paul, calling the Pagans, idolaters: and the Christians
doing the same, worshippers of images: and that in one sentence, whereas the
Apostle uses but one and the self same Greek word in speaking both of
Pagans and Christians? It is a marvelous and wilful corruption, and well to be
marked, and therefore I will put down the whole sentence, as it is in your
English translation. I wrote to you that you should not company with
fornicators: and I meant not at all of the fornificators of this world, either
of the covetous, or extortioners, either (...).
the idolaters etc. but that ye company not together, if any that is called a
brother, be a fornicator, or covetous, or (...).
A WORSHIPPER OF IMAGES, or an extortioner. In the first, speaking of Pagans,
your translator names idolater according to the text, but in the later part
speaking of Christians, you translate the very self same Greek word,
worshipper of images. Why so? forsooth to make the reader think that S. Paul
speaks here, not only of Pagan idolaters, but also of Catholic Christians
that reverently* kneel in prayer before the Cross, the holy Roode, the images
of our Savior Christ and his Saints: as though the Apostle had commanded
such to be avoided.

FVLK. 8. The reason is, because we count Idolaters and worshippers of Images
to be all one. But it is a marvelous wilful corruption, that in one sentence
1. Cor 5. we call the Paganes Idolaters, and the Christians worshippers of
Images, and yet the same Greek word in both. If this were a fault, it were
but of one translation of the three, for the Geneua Bible, has Idolater in
both, the other worshipper of Idols, in the later place. And we think the
later to be understood of Idolatrous Papists, which worship Idols made with
hands of men, as Crosses, Roodes, and other Images, to as great dishonor of
God, and danger of their souls, as Pagans did. So that if it had been
worshippers of Images in both, the translation had not been amiss.

MART. 9. Where if you have yet the face to deny this your malicious and
heretical intent, tell us, why all these other words are translated and
repeated alike in both places, covetous, fornicators, extortioners, both Pagans
and Christians: and only this word (idolaters) not so, but Pagans, idolaters:
and Christians, worshippers of images. At the least you can not deny but it
was of purpose done, to make both seem all one, yea and to signify that the
Christians doing the foresaid reverence before sacred images (which you call
worshipping of images) are more to be avoided than the Pagan idolaters. Whereas
the Apostle speaking of Pagans and Christians that committed one and the self
same heinous sin what soever, commands the Christian in that case to be
avoided for his amendment, leaving the Pagan to him self and to God, as
having not to do to judge of him.

FVLK. 9. I think the cause was, that Christians might understand, who was an
Idolater, and what the word Idolater signifies, which was used in the former
part of the sentence. And if the translators purpose was by this explication,
to dissuade the readers from worshipping of popish Images, I see not what cause
he has to be ashamed thereof, seeing the Greek word signifies as much as he
says: not as though Idols were proper only to the Gentiles, and Images to
Christians, for in other places he uses the name of Images, speaking both of
the Pagans, and the Christians, 1. Cor. 8. Although for my part, I could wish
he had used one word in both places, and either called them both Idolaters, or
both worshippers of Images.

MART. 10. But to this the answer belike will be made, VV. Fulke, Co^futat. of
John Hovvlet fol. 35.
as one of them has already answered in the like case, that in the English
Bible appointed to be read in their Churches, it is otherwise, and even as we
would have it corrected: and therefore (says he) it had been good before we
entered into such heinous accusations, to have examined our grounds that they
had been true. As though we accuse them not truly of false translation,
unless it be false in that one Bible which for the present is read in their
Churches: or as though it pertained not to them how their other English Bibles
be translated: or as though the people read not all indifferently without
prohibition, and may be abused by every one of them: or as though the Bible
which now is read (as we think) in their Churches, have not the like absurd
translations. yea more absurd, Bib. 1577. Col. 3. v. 5.
even in this matter of images, as is before declared: or as though we must
first learn what English translation, is read in their Church (which were
hard to know, it changes so often) before we may be bold to accuse them of false
translation: or as though it were not the same Bible that was for many years
read in their Churches, and is yet in every man's hands, which has this
absurd translation whereof we have last spoken.

FVLK. 10. Mine answer was framed to Howlets reason, who would prove that our
service was naught, because the Scriptures were therein read in false and
shameless translations: example of which he brings. 1. John. 5. Children
keep your selves from Images. To whom mine answer was apt, when I said in
the Bible appointed to be read in the service, it is otherwise, and as he him
self says, it ought to be, which answer as though it were made to the
general accusation of our translations, you with many supposings, as though
this, as though that, would make it seem to be insufficient, whereas to
Howlets cavil, it was not only sufficient, but also proper. And therefore this
is a vain supposell, as though we accuse them not truly of false translation,
unless it be false in that one Bible, which for the present is read in their
Church. For we grant you not the other to be false, because this is true, and
so are all the rest. As though it pertayned not to them how their other
English Bibles be translated. It pertains so far that if their were a
fault in the former, we have amended it in the later. But in that text, for
which I answered, I acknowledge yet no fault, neither is that mine only
answer, for I prove that Image and Idol with the Apostle, signifies the same
thing. Or as though the people read not all without prohibition, and may be
abused by every one of them: There is no such false translation in any of
them, that the people can be abused there by, to run into heresy. Yet
again: Or, as though the Bible which now is read (as we think) have not the
like absurd translation, yea more absurd eue^ in this matter of Images, as is
declared before. As though you have proved, whatsoever you prate of: once
again: Or, as though we must first learn, what English translation is read
in their Church (which were hard to know, it changes so often) before we may
be bold to accuse them of false translation. If you will accuse that
translation, which is read in our Church, as Howlet does, reason would you
should first learn which it is, and that is no hard matter, seeing there was
never more appointed than two, as often as you say we change. Or, (at last) as
though it were not the same Bible, that was for many years read in their
Churches, and is yet in every man's hands, which has this absurd translation,
whereof we last spoke. As though I could prophecy, when I answered Howlet, for
the Bible appointed to be read in the Church, in 1. John. 5. that you would
find fault with an other text, in that translation, that sometime was read in
the church, and yet is in many men's hands? Which although it be well altered in
that point, which you quarrel at, in the two later translations, yet I see no
absurdity in the first, which for one Greek word, gives two English words,
both of one signification, yea, and the later being plainer, explicating the
former, which to English ears is more obscure, and less understood.

MART. 11. Surely the Bible that we most accuse, not Bib. 1562.
only in this point, but for sundry other most gross faults and heretical
translations, spoken of in other places, is that Bible which was auctorised by
Cranmer their Archbishop of Canterbury, and read all King Edwards time, in
their Churches, and (as it seems by the late printing thereof again, anno
1562) a great part of this Queens reign. And certain it is, that it was so
long read, in all their Churches, with this venomous and corrupt translation
of images, always in steed of idols, that it made the deceived people of
their sect, to despise, contemn, and abandon the very sign and image of
their salvation, the cross of Christ, the holy roode, or crucifixe,
representing the manner of his bitter passion and death, the sacred images of
the blessed virgin Mary, the mother of God, and of S. John Evangelist,
representing their standing by the cross, at the very time of his Ioh. 19. v.
26.
passion. In so much that now by experience, we see the foul inconvenience
thereof, to wit, that all other images and pictures of infamous harlots and
heretics, of heathen tyrants and persecutors, are lawful in England at this
day, and their houses, parlours, and chambers, are garnished with them* only
sacredimages, and representations of the holy mystery of our redemption, are
esteemed idolatrous, and have been openly defaced in most spiteful manner, and
burned, to the great dishonor of our Savior Christ, and his Saints.

FVLK. 11. That Bible perhaps you mislike more, than the other translations,
because Archbishop Cranmer allowed it by his authority. But howsoever it be,
(as I think, there be more imperfections in it, than in the other) it is not
your accusation without due and substantial proof, that can make it less
esteemed, with any indifferent, or wise man. If it have caused the people to
contemn, and abandon all Popish Idols, there is cause, that we should give
God thanks for it. Albeit not the translation only, but preaching of the
Gospel, and Christ crucified especially, by which Christ has been truly, and
lively painted forth unto them, and even crucified among them, has made them
contemn, yea and abhor all carnal and humane devises of the image of our
salvation, or representation of his passion, by vain and dead images, to be
any helps of faith, religion, or the worship of God. Where you say it is
seen by experience, that all other images of infamous harlots, and heretics,
of Heathen tyrants, and persecutors, are lawefull in England, to garnish
houses, when sacred images are esteemed idolatrous, defaced, and burned: I
know not well your meaning. For if you have any true images of the
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, or other holy persons, I think they be as
lawefull, to garnishe private houses, as the other you speak of. Yea the
stories of the whole Bible painted, both of the old Testament, and the new,
are not forbidden, but in many places used. Provided always, that in the
places appointed for the public service of God, such things are not
lawefull, for danger of idolatry, nor in private places to be abused, as they
are of Papists, but rather, though they were as ancient, and as goodly
monuments as the brazen serpent was, which no images at this day, can be, it
is to the great honor of God, that they should be despised, defaced, burned,
and stamped to powder, as that was, which sometime was erected by the
commandment of God, by which not only great miracles were wrought, but the
wonderful mystery of our salvation through faith in Christ, was prefigured.

MART. 12. And as concerning the Bible, that at this day is read in their
Churches, if it be that of the year 1577. it is worse sometime in this matter
of images, than the other. For where the other reads, Covetousness, which is
worshipping Col. 3. v. ^.
of idols: there this later (where unto they appeal) reads thus,
Covetousness, which is worshipping of images. and Ephesians. 5. it reads as
absurdly as the other, A VV. Fulke Confut. fol. 35.
covetous man which is a worshipper of images. Lo, this is the English Bible,
which they refer us unto, as better translated, and as correcting the fault
of the former. But because it is evident by these places, that this also is
partly worse, and partly as ill as the other, therefore this great confuter
Fol. 36. Bib. 1579.
of Master John Houlet, flees once more, to the Geneua English Bible, saying,
Thus we read, and, so we translate: to wit, A covetous person, which is an
Idolater. Where shall we have these good fellows, and how shall we be sure
that they will stand to any of their translations? from the first read in
their Churches, they flee to that that is now read, and from this again, to
the later Geneua English Bibles, neither read in their Churches (as we
suppose) nor of greatest authority among them: and we doubt not but they will
as fast flee from this, to the former again, when this shall be proved in some
places more false and absurd, than the other.

FVLK. 12. It pleases you worse perhaps, that less favors your pelting
distinction of images, and idols, but it is never the worse to be liked of
them, that be wise, and learned, which know that (...), and (...), in Greek,
do signify the same thing, which you can not deny. And where you say, in your
scornful mood, lo, this is the Bible, which they refer us unto, as better
translated, and as correcting the fault of the former, you follow your
accustomed vain of lying. For I acknowledge no fault of the former, in this
point of images, but confute the frowardnes of that foolish reason, which
accuses our service, of reading the Bible, in shameless translations, in that
text, 1. John. 5. whereas in the Bible appointed for the service, it is not as
he says, but even as he would have us to say. I fly not therefore (as it
pleases your wisdom to say) from that translation also, to the Geneua Bible,
neither do I allege the Geneua translation for that cause you pretend, but to
show, that albeit we translate in such words, as you can not mislike, yet your
venomous slaundering pens, and tongues, can never give over your peevish
quarrelling. In the place by you quoted, I defend both as true, and answerable
to the Greek, and of one sense and meaning, where the sound of words only, is
diverse, the signification of matter, one, and the same. And yet you must have
your foolish flourish in roperipe terms. Where shall we have these good
fellows, etc? You shall have us, by the grace of God, ready to justify all
our translation, from shameless falsification, and heretical corruptions,
which is your impudent charge against us. And if in matter of lesser moment,
you can descry the least error, in any, or in all of our translations, we
shall be willing to confess the same, and ready to reform it. For truth is
deerer to us, than credit: although we think it better credit, to reform a
fault, than being admonished, wilfully to continue it, or defend it.

MART. 13. But what matter is it how they read in their churches, or how they
correct their former translations by the later: when the old corruption
remains still* being set of purpose in the top of every door within their
churches, in these words: Babes keep your selves from images? Why remains
1. John. 5.
that written so often and so conspicuously in the walls of their churches,
which in their Bibles they correst as a fault? their later Bibles say, Keep
your selves from idols: their church walls say, Keep your selves from images.
S. John speaking to the lately converted Gentiles, bids them beware of the
idols from whence they were converted: they speaking to the old instructed
Christians, bid them beware of the sacred image of Christ our Savior, of the
holy Crucifixe, of the Cross, of every such representation and monument of
Christ's passion, and our redemption. And therefore in the very same place
where these holy monumentes were wont to stand in Catholic times, to wit,
in the roode loft, and partition of the Church and chauncell: there now
stands these words as confronting and condemning the foresaid holy
monumentes, Babes keep your selves from images. Which words whosoever
esteems as the words of Scripture, and the words of Saint John, spoken
against Christ's image, is made a very babe in deed, and sottishly abused by
their scribled doors, and false translations, to count that idolatry, which
is in deed to no other purpose, than to the great honor of him whose image
and picture it is.

FVLK. 13. Still you harp on the old untuneable string, that the former is a
corruption, which says, Babes keep your selves from images, which sentence
sore grieueth you, to be written in the top of church doors, or in place
where the Roode loft stood. And you ask why it remains on the walls, which
we correct as a fault in the Bibles? But who told you that they correct it as
a fault in the Bibles? Is every alteration with you a correction? The one
explicateth the other, that idols of which S. John speaks, be images abused
in religion. Not that all images be idols (as the word idol in the English
speech is taken) nor that al idols be images, but as images that are
worshipped. But S. John (you say) speaking to the converted Gentiles, bids
them beware of the idols from whence they were converted. That is true, but not
only from them, but from all other idols. Except perhaps you think, that
Christians by that text should not abhor the images of Simon Magus, and
Selene, and the images of the Valentinians, and Gnostikes, and other heretics,
which worshipped the image of Christ, and of Saint Paul, as Irenaeus and
Epiphanius Irenaus libr. 1. e^. 20 23. 24. Epiphanius. lib. 1. Tom. 2 H. 27.
do testify. And it seems you so think in deed. For you say soon after,
whosoever esteems those words, as the words of Scripture (if images be put
for idols spoken against Christ's image) is made a very babe. Suchs babes
were Irenaeus and Epiphanius, that they condemned this worshipping of images
for heresy. Such a babe was Epiphanius, that finding the image of Christ
painted in veil hanging in a Church at Anablatha, he judged it to be contrary
to the Scriptures, and rent it in pieces. Such a babe was Tertullian, that
speaking of that very text of Saint John, little children keep your selves
from idols, he writes, Non iam ab idololatria quasi ab officio, sed ab
idolis, id est ab ipsa effigy eorum. Indignum enim vt imago Dei viui, Imago
Idoli and mortui fiat, He bids them take heed, not now from idolatry, as
from the service, but from the idols them selves, that is to say, from the
very images, or shapes of them. For it is unworthy that the image of the
living God, should be made the image of an idol, and that being dead.
Finally, such a babe was your vulgar translatour, that he says. Filioli
cust^dite vos a simulachris, Which is all one, as if he should have said ab
imaginibus (as I have plentifully proved) children keep your selves from
images. As for the purpose you pretend to have in honoring Christ by images
contrary to his commandment, is in deed nothing but dishonouring of him and
destruction of your selves.

MART. 14. But the gay confuter with whom I began, V V. Fulke. Fol. 35.
says for further answer: Admit that in some of our translations it be,
Children keep your selves from images (for so he would have said if is were
truly printed) What great crime of corruption is here committed? And when it
is said again, this is the crime and fault thereof, that they mean by so
translating to make the simple believe that idols and images are all one, which
is absurd: he replyeth that it is no more absurdity, than in steed of a
Greek word, to use a Latin of the same signification. And upon this position
he grants that according to the property of the Greek word a man may say,
God Gen 1.
made man according to his idol, and that generally, idolu^ (...).
may as truly be translated an image, as Tyrannus a King (which is very true,
both being absurd) and here he cited many authors and dictionaries idly, to
prove that idolum may (...).
signify the same that image. (...).


FVLK. 14. But this scornful replier with whom I have to do, is so
accustomed, to false and dishonest dealing, that he can never report any thing
that I have written truly, and as I have written, but with one forgerie or an
other, he will clean corrupt and pervert my saying. As here, he shameth
nothing to affirm, that I grant, that according to the property of the
Greek word, a man may say. God made man according to his idol I will report
mine own words, by which every man may perceive how honestly he deals
with me.

But admit that in some translation it be as you say: Children keep your
selves from images: what great crime of corruption is here committed? You say
that it is to make simple men believe that idols and images are all one, which
is absurd. This is no more absurdity, than in stead of a Greek word to use a
Latin of the same signification. But you reply, that then where Moises says
that God made man according to his own image, we should consequently say,
that God made man according to his idol. I answer, howsoever the name of
idols in the English tongue for the great dishonor that is done to God in
worshipping of images, is become so odious that no Christian man would say,
that God made man according to his idol, no more than a good subject would
call his lawefull Prince a tyrant, yet according to the Greek word, (...) may
be as truly translated an image, as (...), a King.

Here if I were disposed to give the rain to affection, as you do often being
unprovoked by me, were sufficient occasion offered, to insult against your
falsehoode. But I will forbear, and in plain words tell you, that if you be
so simple, that you can not understand the difference of these two
propositions, (...) wheresoever it is read in Greek, may be truly translated
an image: and this: wheresoever the word image is used in English, you may
use the word idol, you are unmeet to read a Divinity Lecture in England,
how soever you be advanced in Rhemes. If not of ignorance, but of malice, you
have perverted both my words and meaning, let God and all godly men be judge
between you and me. My words are not obscure nor ambiguous, but that every
child may understand my meaning to be no more but this. That this English
word idol is by use restrained, only to wicked images. The Greek word
(...) signifies generally all images, as (...) did all Kings, until Kings
that were so called, became hateful for cruelty, which caused even the name
tyrannus to be odious.

MART. 15. But I beseech you Sir, if the dictionaries tell you that (...) may
by the original property of the word signify an image, (which no man
denies) do they tell you also that you may commonly and ordinarily translate
it so, as the common usual signification thereof? or do they tell you that
image and idol are so all one, that wheresoever you find this word image, you
may truly call it, idol? for these are the points that you should defend in
your answer. For an example, do they teach you to translate in these places
thus, God has Romans 8. Imagini. 1. Cor. 15. Imaginem.
predestined us to be made conformable to the idol of his son. And again,
As we have borne the idol of the earthly (Adam:) so let us bear the idol of
the heavenly (CHRIST.) And again, We are transformed into the 2. Cor. 3. Hebr.
10.
same idol, even as our Lords spirit. And again, The Law having a shadow of
the good things to come, not the Col. 1. 2. Cor. 4.
very idol of the things. And again, Christ who is the idol of the invisible
God? Is this (I pray you) a true translation? yea, say you, according to the
property of the word: but because the name of idols, in the English tongue,
for the great dishonor done to God in worshipping of images, is become odious,
no Christian man would say so.

FVLK. 15. No man denies (you say) that (...) may by the original propriety
of the word signify an image. It is well, that being convicted by all
Dictionaries, old and new, you will at length yield to the truth. But you
demand whether the Dictionaries do tell me that I may commonly and ordinarily
translate it so, as the common usual signification thereof. Sir I meddle only
with the translations of the Scripture, and the Dicctionaries tell me that so
it usually signifies, and therefore so I may translate in the Scripture, or
any other ancient Greek writer, that uses the word according to the
original propriety thereof. Peradventure some later Greek writers
restraining it only to wicked images, may so use the term, as the general
signification thereof will not agree to the meaning in some odd place or
other. But that is no matter to plead against our translation of the
Scripture, when in that time it was written, the word was indifferent, to
signify any image. Further than this, you ask of me, if the dictionaries do
tell me, that image and idol are all one, and wheresoever I find the word
Imago, I may truly call it idol? No forsooth sir, they teach me no such thing:
neither do I say that the word image and idol may be confounded But the
clean contrary, if your Mastership had not mistaken me, because it was not
your pleasure to take me either according to my words, or according to my
meaning. Why sir, These are the points you should defend in your answer,
for an example, do they teach you to translate in these places thus: God has
predestined us to be made conformable to the idol of his son. And again,
we have borne the idol of the earthly, etc. I pray you sir, pardon me to
defend that I never said, ne thought, you your self confess in the end,
that I say, that no Christian man would say so: wherefore when you say that I
affirm, this is a true translation according to the property of the word: can
I say less? Then you lie like a Popish hypocrite.

MART. 16. First note how foolishly and unadvisedly he speaks here, because
he would confound images and idols, and make them falsely to signify one
thing: when he says, the name of idol, is become odious in the English
tongue because of worshipping of Images, He should have said, The dishonor
done to God in worshipping Idols, made the name of Idols odious. As in his own
example of Tyrant, and king: he meant to tell us that Tyrant sometime was an
usual name for every king, and because certain such Tyrants abused their
power, therefore the name of Tyrant became odious. For he will not say (I trow)
that for the fault of kings, the name of Tyrant became odious. Likewise the
Romans took away the name of Ma^lius for the crime of one Manlius, not for
the crime of John at Nokes, or of any other name. The name of Judas is so
odious that men now commonly are not so called. Why so? because he that
betrayed Christ, was called Judas: not because he was also Iscariote. The very
name of Ministers is odious and contemptible. Why? because Ministers are so
lewd, wicked, and unlearned, not because some Priests be naught. Even so the
name of idol grew to be odious, because of the idols of the Gentiles, not
because of holy images. For if the reverence done by Christians to holy images
were evil, as it is not, it should in this case have made the name of images
odious: and not the name of Idols. But God be thanked, the name of Images is no
odious name among Catholic Christians, but only among heretics and
Imagebreakers, such as the second general Council of Nice has condemned
therefore with the sentence of Anathema. No more than the Cross is odious,
which to all good Christians is honorable, because our Savior Christ died on
a Cross.

FVLK. 16. Nay first note how falsely, and then how foolishly, and yet how
impudently he continues a slander against me, of his own devising, that I
would confound those English words, images, and idols. For first he will teach
me to speak English, that where I said the name of idol is become odious in
the English tongue, because of worshipping of images, I should have said. The
dishonor done to God in worshipping of idols, made the name of idols odious.
And what I pray you were those idols, the worshipping of which made the name
odious, but images? May I not be so bold, under your correction, to use the
general name images, which you say are not idols, until they be abused. When
the image of Jupiter, King of Creete, was first made, and nothing else done
unto it, would you call it an image, or an idol. Sure I am, you called the
brazen serpent, first an image, and then an idol. Even so I trust I may
without offense of English men, say, that the abuse of images, called first
without note of infamy (...), idols, made the name idols to be odious, and
therefore not applied, but to such abused images: and the example I brought of
Tyrannus, which first did signify a king, is very play and like, but that you
are disposed to play the peevish quarreller. And trow you, I will not say, that
for the fault of kings, the name of tyrant became odious. Yes verily, I will
not spare to say, and so I said before, that for the fault of such cruel
Kings, as were called Tyranni, though the name it self first signified not so,
that name of tyrant became odious. As for your fomblitudes of Manlius, and
Judas, two proper names, compared with image, and idol, King, and Tyrant,
which be common names, I will not vouchsafe to answer them. But the name of
ministers (you say) is odious, for the faults of ministers, and not for the
faults of priests. Popish priests are odious enough, for their own faults,
so that they need not be charged unjustly, with the faults of our evil
ministers. Which, I would wish, were fewer, than they be, but I trust there are
not so many evil of them, as your popish priests have been, and are daily
found to be. And whosoever of our ministers has been found worst, I think
there may be found, not a priest, but a Pope of your side, as evil, or worse
than he. But if reverence done by Papists, (which you call Christians) to
images, had been evil, (say you,) it should have made the name of images,
odious also. No sir, that follows not, so long as that reverence was
accounted good, and lawful, and now that it is found to be abominable, the
people having the other odious word of idols, in use, need not abandon the
name of images, except they had an other, to signify lawful, and good images.
The curse of the idolatrous Council of Nice the second, no Christian man
regards, which knows that by Gods own mouth in the Scriptures, all makers
and worshippers of idolatrous images are accursed.

MART. 17. But to omit this man's extraordinary and vaduised speeches which be
too many and too redious (as when he says in the same sentence, Howsoever the
name Idol is growe^ odious in the English tongue, as though it were not also
odious in the Latin and Greek tongues, but that in Latin and Greek a man
might say according to his fond opinion, Fecit hominem ad idolum suum, and so
in the other places where is imago) to omit these rash assertions I say, and
to return to his other words, where he says, that though the original
property of the words has that signification, yet no Christian man would
say, that God made man according to his idol, no more than a good subject
would call his lawful Prince, a Tyrant. Does he not here tell us that, which
we would have, to wit, that we may not speak or translate, according to the
original property of the word, but according to the common usual, and
accustomed signification thereof? As we may not translate, Phalaris tyrannus,
Phalaris the King, as sometime Tyrannus did signify, and in ancient authors
does signify: but, Phalaris the tyrant, as now this word tyrannus is commonly
taken, and understood. Even so we may Ab idolis.
not now translate, My children, keep you selves from images, (...).
as the word may, and does sometime signify, according 1. Ioh. 5.
to the original property thereof, but we must translate, keep your selves
from idols, according to the common use and signification of the word, in
vulgar speech, and in the holy Scriptures. Where the Greek word is so
notoriously and usually peculiar to idols, and not unto images: that the holy
fathers of the second Nicene Council, (which knew right well the signification
of the Greek word, them selves being Grecians) do pronounce Anathema, to all
such as interpret those places of the holy scripture, that concern idols, of
images, or against sacred images, as now these Caluinists do, not only in
their commentaries upon the holy Scriptures, but even in their translatio^s of
the text.

FVLK. 17. We can not yet be rid of this man's extraordinary, and unadvised
surmises, which are too many, and tedious, as where I say, the name Idol is
odious in the English tongue, he gathers, that I mean, it to be odious only
in the English tongue, and not in the Latin and Greek. I have showed before,
that in Tullies time, it was not odious in Latin, and it is not long, since
Master Martin confessed the Greek word, according to the original
propriety, to signify as generally, as (...), an image, which is not odious.
Although in later times, among Christians, both of the Greek, and the Latin
Church, the name of Idolum, became odious, as well as the word Idol in
English. Therefore it is not my fond opinion, but. M. Martines foolish
collection, that a man may say in Latin, fecit hominem ad idolum suum: and yet
I am charged with rash assertions, when nothing is reproved that I affirm, but
that which he him self does imagine.

But now you will return to those words of mine, where I say, that though
the original propriety of the words, has that signification: yet, no
Christian man would say, that God made man according to his idol, no more than
a good subject would call his lawefull Prince, a tyrant. These words (you
say) do tell us, that we may not speak, or translate, according to the
original propriety of the word, but according to the common, usual, and
accustomed signification thereof. For speaking I grant, as the words are used
in our time: but for translating, I say you must regard how the words were
used in time of the writer, whose works you translate. As if you would
translate out of Euripides, (...), would you say, who is tyrant of this land?
or rather, who is King? or in Aristophanes, (...), would you translate,
Jupiter, tyrant of the gods, or King of the gods? I think not. But in S. John,
seeing at that time that he wrote, (...), signified an image generally, it may
be translated, an image, generally, and seeing he speaks of the unlawful
use of images, it may also be translated an idol, as the word is now taken
to signify. How the late petty Prelates of the second Nicene Council were
disposed to use the word, to color their blasphemous idolatry, it is not
material. The ancient dictionaries of Suidas, Phauorinus, Hesychius, with the
examples of Homer, Plato, and other ancient Greek Authors, are of more
credit for the true and ancient signification of that word.

MART. 18. This then being so, that words must be Loco citato. fol. 35
translated as their common use and signification requires, if you ask your
old question, what great crime of corruption is committed in translating,
keep your selves from images, the Greek being (...); you have answered your
self, that in so translating, idol, and image, are made to signify one
thing, which may not be done, no more than Tyrant and King, can be made to
signify all one. And how can you say then, that this is no more absurdity,
than in steed of a Greek word, to use a Latin of the same signification.
Are you not here contrary* your self? Are idol, and image. Tyrant, and King,
of one signification? said you not that in the English tongue, idol is grown
to an other signification, than image, as tyrant is grown to an other
signification than King? Your false translations therefore, that in so many
places make idols, and images, all one, not only forcing the word in the holy
Scriptures, but disgracing the sentence thereby, (as Ephesians. 5. and Col. 3.) are
they Ephesians. 5. A covetous man is a worshipper of images, and Col. 3. Covetousness
is worshipping of images.
not in your own judgment very corrupt: and as your own consciences must
confess, of a malicious intent corrupted, to disgrace thereby the Churches
holy images, by pretense of the holy Scriptures that speak only of the Pagans
idols.

FVLK. 18. Again, I repeat, that words must, or may be translated, according
to that signification they had in time of the writer, whom you translate. And
to my question, what absurdity is it in that text of Saint John, for (...), to
translate image: you answer by that means, idol and image, are made to
signify one thing. But that is not so, for image signifies more generally,
than idol in English, and image answers properly to the Greek word,
(...), idol, to the meaning of Saint John, that is of wicked images, so that
the translation is good. Even as (...), may be translated a King, generally,
according to the word, and if the Author mean of a cruel King, it may be
translated a Tyrant. For King is a general word, applied to good Kings, and to
evil, as image is to lawefull and unlawful images. Therefore our
translations, that for (...), say an image, are not false, much less any
malicious corruptions. And if the translators in so doing, intended to disgrace
popish images, I think they did well, and according to the meaning of the holy
Ghost, who forbidding generally, all images, that may be had in religious
reverence, did not restrain the signification of the word (...), to the wicked
idols of the Gentiles, but left it at large, to comprehend all such images, and
all kinds of worshipping them, as are contrary to the law and commandment
of God.

MART. 19. But of the usual, and original signification of words (whereof
you take occasion of manifold corruptions) we will speak more anon, if first
we touch some other your falsifications against holy images: as, where you
affectate to thrust the word Image into the text, when there is no such thing
in the Hebrew or Greek, as in that notorious example; 2. Par. 36. (Bib. 1562.)
Carved images that were laid to his charge. (...). subaud. (...). Number. c. 22.
(...).
Again, Romans 11. To the image of Baal. and Act. 19 The image that came down
from Jupiter. Where you are not content to understand image, rather than idol,
but also to thrust it into the text, being not in the Greek, as you know very
well.

FVLK. 19. Three places you note, where the word Image is thrust into the text,
being neither in the Hebrew, nor Greek. The first, 2. Par. 36. bib. 1562.
which I confess is a fault, but I marvel how it crept in. For Thomas Mathewes
bible, which was printed before it, has not that word, Carved images. It is
reformed also in both the translations that followed.

The second, Romans 11. is no corruption, for seeing you acknowledge, that a
substantive must be understood, to bear up the feminine article, what reason
is there, why we should not understand (...), rather than (...), seeing it is
certain, Baal had an image, that was worshipped in his temple? 2. Reg. 10. The
third place is, Acts the 19. where the word Image is necessarily to be
understood, which fell down from Jupiter, as it was feigned. Hereunto Pliny
bears witness, lib. 16. cap. 40. and shows by whom it was made, and of
what matter, of the like speaks Herodianus. And the similitude of this Image,
is yet to be seen, in those ancient Coygnes, that yet remain, which were
called (...) temples. Wherefore your vulgar translation which turns (...).
Iouis prolis, is not right, and therefore is corrected by Isidorus Clarius, a
Jove delapsi simulachri, with the consent of the deputies of the Council of
Trent.

MART. 20. Of this kind of falsification is that which is crept as a leprosy
through out all your Bibles, translating, Sculptile and conflatile, graven
image, molten image, namely in the first commandment, where you know in the
Greek it is (...)
idol, and in the Hebrew, such a word as signifies only a graven (...)
thing, not including this word image: and you know that God commanded to
make the images of Cherubins, and of oxen in the Temple, and of the brazen
serpent in the desert, and therefore your wisdoms might have considered, that
he forbadde not all graven images, but such as the Gentiles made and worshipped
The meaning of the 1. Commandment concerning false Gods and graven idols.
as Gods: and therefore Non facies tibi sculptile, concurreth with those
words that go before, Thou shalt have none other gods but me. For so to have
an image as to make it a God, is to mke it more than an image: and therefore,
when it is an Idol, as were the Idols of the Gentiles, then it is forbid by
this commandment. Otherwise, when the Cross stood many years upon the Table
in the Queens Chapel, was it against The Cross in the Q. Chapel.
this commandment? or was it idolatry in the Queens Majesty and her
Counselors, that appointed it there, being the supreme head of your Church?
Or do the Lutherans your puefellowes, at this day commit idolatry against this
commandment, that have in their Churches the crucifixe, and the holy Images
in the Lutheran Churches.
Images of the mother of God, and of S. John the Evangelist? Or if the whole
story of the Gospel concerning our savior Christ, were drawn in pictures
and Images in your Churches, as it is in many of ours, were it (trow you)
against this commandment? fie for shame, that you should thus with
intolerable impudency and deceit abuse and bewitch the ignorant people,
against your own knowledge and conscience. For, wot you not, that God many
times expressly forbade the Jews both marriages and other conversation with the
Gentiles, least they might fall to worship their idols, as Solomon did, and as
the Psalm reports of them? ^. Reg. 11. Psalm. 105. v. 35.
This then is the meaning of the commandment, neither to make the idols of
the Gentiles, nor any other like unto them, and to that end, as did Jeroboam in
Dan and Bethel.

FVLK. 20. This is a sore complaint, that we have falsified the Scripture, as
it were with a Leprosy, in translating sculptile, and conflatile, a graven and
a molten Image, and namely in the first commandment, where there is no word
of Image, or Imagrie: but in deed in the second commandment, we translate*
the Hebrew word Pesel a graven Image. You say it signifies a graven (...)
thing, not including the word Image. I answer you are not able to bring a
place in the Bible, where it signifies any other graven thing, but only an
Image: and yet it is derived of a verb, that signifies to grave or hew, as
the word Pisilim, Iud. 3. taken for quarries of (...)
stone does declare. Beside this, the word next following, signifying a
similitude or Image, sufficiently shows, that it is not taken generally for
any graven work, but for such, wherein the likeness or similitude of God, or
any creature is meante to be resembled: and the same does also the Greek word
(...) testify; as for the Cherubins, Oxen, Brazen serpent, or any thing which
God commands, is not forbidden by this precept: but that which man makes
of his own head, to honor as God, or to worship God by it. Wherefore very
absurdely, to cloak such abominable Idolatry* you say that this
commandment, Non facies sculptile, does concur with those words, Thou shall
have none other Gods but me. By which not only two several commandments are
confounded, but also a vain tautologie committed: or else that added for
interpretation* which is more obscure, than the text interpreted. Touching the
cross that stood sometimes in the Queens chapel, whereof you speak your
pleasure, as also of her Majesty's Councillors, it is not by and by Idolatry,
what soever is against that commandment, neither is the having of any Images
in the Church (which are had in no use of religion) contrary to this
commandment. And although we will not accuse the Lutherans of Idolatry,
neither can we, because they worship no Images: yet will we not excuse them,
for suffering of Images to be in their Churches, whereof may ensue danger of
Idolatry, but that in some part they go against this commandment, deceived
in their judgment, and of us not to be defended in their error. After you
have railed a fit, with fie for shame, and such like Rhetorike, you seem to
make the prohibition of Images, none other, but such as the prohibition of
marriage, and other conversation with the Gentiles, which was only for fear of
Idolatry. But when you can show the like absolute commandment, to forbid
marriage, and conversation with Hebr.
the Heathen, as this is for Images in religion, and worshipping Teraphim.
of them, we may have some regard of your similitude: Matsebah.
otherwise the meaning of this commandment, Temunah.
is generally to forbid all Images of God, and of M^schith.
Pesel.
his creatures, to honor God by them: for to honor Tselamim.
them as Gods, is a breach of the first commandment, Tabnith.
as properly as of the second. Hamanim.


MART. 21. This being a thing so plain as nothing more Samel.
Massecah.
in all the holy Scriptures, yet your itching humor of deceit and Nesachim.
falfehood, for the most part does translate still, images, images, Gillulim.
when the Latin, and Greek, and Hebrew have diverse other Miphletseth.
Gr.
words, and very seldom that which answers to image. For (...).
when it is image in the Latin, or Greek, or Hebrew, textes, your translation
is not reprehended: for we also translate sometimes, (...).
images, when the text of the holy Scripture requires it. And we (...)
are not ignorant that there were images, which the Pagans adored for their
gods: and we know that some idols are images, but not al images, idols. But
when the holy Scriptures call the^ by so many names, rather than images,
because they were not only images, but made idols: why do your translations,
like cuckoes birds, sound continually, images, images, more than idols, or
other Al image and iages, in their tra^slations.
words equivalent to idols, which are there meant?

FVLK. 21. In deed there is nothing more plain in all the holy Scriptures,
tha^ that the worshipping of Images, of al sorts, is forbidden* but that our
itching humor of deceit, and falsehood, (as it pleases you to speak) has
corrupted the text, to establish any false opinion of the use of Images, it is
not yet proved. But now you set upon us with 13. Hebrew words, and 9. Greek
words at ones, which we for the most part do translate still Images, Images:
and you say we sound with Cuckowes birds continually Images, Images, more
than Idols or other words equivalent to Idols. How many times the word Image
is sounded, I never had care to seek, and now I have no leisure to number, but
I am sure Idols and Idolatry, in that translation in which least, are named
above forty or fifty times. But to a conscience guilty of worshipping of
Images, contrary to the express commandment of God, the very name of Images
must needs sound unpleasantly. That we have no greater change of words to
answer so many of the Hebrew tongue, it is of the riches of that tongue, and
the poverty of our mother language, which has but two words, Image, and
Idol, and them both borrowed of the Latin and Greek: As for other words
equivalent, we know not any, and we are loath to make any new words of that
signification, except the multitude of Hebrew words of the same sense coming
together, do sometimes perhaps seem to require it. Therefore as the Greek has
fewer words to express this thing than the Hebrew, so has the Latin fewer
than the Greek, and the English fewest of all, as will appear if you would
undertake to give us English words for the 13. Hebrew words. Except you would
coin such ridiculous inkhorne terms, as you do in the new Testement, Azymes,
Prepuce, Neophyte, Scandale, Parasceue, and such like.

MART. 22. Two places only we will at this time ask you the reason of: first
why you translate the Hebrew and Greek Matsebah.
that answeareth to Statua, image, so often as you do? (...)
Whereas this word in the said tongues, is taken also in the better part, as
when Jacob set up a stone and erected it for a title, Genesis 28. v. 22. Esa. 19.
v. 19.
pouring oil upon it: and the Prophet says, Our Lords altar shall be in
Aegipt, and his title beside it. So that the word does signify generally a
sign erected of good or evil, and therefore might very well (if it pleased
you) have some other English than, image. Unless you will say that Jacob also
set up an image: and, Our Lords image shall be in AEgipt: which you will not
say, though you might with more reason than in other places.

FVLK. 22. Seeing you ask, why we translate the Hebrew word Matsebah so often
an image? It had been reason you should have told us how often we do so, or
at least noted some place, where it can not signify an image. We know the
word being derived of the verb Iatsab that signifies to stand, may be taken
for some thing erected, that is no image, but a pillour, or as your Latin text
calls it a title, in both the places by you noted Genesis 28. Esai. 19. and else
where Genesis 25. 2. Sam. 18. But when soever we translate it an image, the
circumstaunce of the place so requires, as 2. Reg. 10. where it is said, that
Baals images were taken out of his temple, broken and burnt. For they were
images of Baal, that were worshipped in his temple, and not titles or pillours.
Likewise 2. Reg. 17. where it is said, that the Ismaelites made unto them
selves, Statuas, images, and groves under every high hill and under every
thick tree: as appears by Ezechiel. 6. where they be called Gillulim idols,
which had the similitude of men, as Baalim and such other.

MART. 23. Secondly we demand, why your very last Of the year 1570.
English Bible has (Esa. 30. 22.) For two Hebrew words, which are in Latin
Sculptilia and Conflatilia, twice, images, Pesilim.
Massechoth.
images: neither word being Hebrew for an image: no (...).
more than if a man would ask, what is Latin for an image, and you would tell
him Sculptile. Whereupon he seeing a fair painted image in a table, might
happily say, Ecce egregium sculptile. Which every boy in the Grammar school
would laugh at. Which therefore we tell you, because we perceive your
translations endeavor and as it were affectate, to make Sculptile (...)
and image all one. Which is most evidently false and to your great confusion
appears Abac. 2. v. 13. Where for these words, Quid prodest sculptile quia
sculpsit illud fictor (...).
suus, conflatile and imaginem falsam: Which is according to the Hebrew and
Greek: your later English translation has, What profits the image? for the
maker thereof has Of the year 1579.
made it an image, and a teacher of lies.

FVLK. 23. If it had said, the graven images of silver, and the molten or cast
images of gold, I know not what advantage it had been to you, or loss to us.
But neither word (you say) is Hebrew for an image. Alack this is poor
sophistry, when all the world of Hebricians know, they are Hebrew for nothing
else, but for graven or cast images, and by the figure Synecdoche, are taken
generally for images of what making or matter soever they be. And the question
is not, by what art images are made: but to what use, and how they be used,
that they may be condemned for unlawful. This I take to be the cause, why the
interpretour neglected the difference of the Hebrew words, which sometimes is
not observed, and in English impossible always, and unprofitable to be kept.
As for your own conceit, whereat you think boys might laugh, I leave it to
your self. For if we were asked, what is Latin for an image, we could
answer somewhat else than Sculptile. But if a boy should ask Pesilim or
Massecath in this place of Esaias does signify, we would not answer a graven
thing, or a molten thing, least he might show us the mantilltree of a chimney,
and a brass pot hanging over the fire, and demand further whether Esaias in
this text spoke of them, and all such things as they are. But it is most
evidently false (you say) that Sculptile and Image are all one, and this
appears to our great confusion, Abacuc the second etc. But I say to your
shame, it will appear by this very text, that Pesel and Massecah signify
one and the same thing and that most evidently. For thus the textis, What
profits the Image ( Pesel) for his maker iots^ro, has made it, or (as you
will have it) has graven it Pesalo: what follows now, but Massecah an
Image? you had rather say Conflatile a molten Image. But then you must
remember, that the maker of it by grauing, made it a molten Image, which is a
strange piece of work, except you will say, that first he did cast it, and
then he did grave it, but say which way you will, the same Image is called
Pesel and Massecah without difference. The last words are vmoreh shaker, and a
teacher of lies. For which words your translation has Imaginem falsam, a
false Image, whereas Moreh never signifies an Image. But of that afterward.

MART. 24. I would every common Reader were able to discern your falsehood in
this place. First, you make Sculpere sculptile, no more than, to make an
image: Which being absurd you know (because the painter or embroderer making
an image, can not be said Sculpere sculptile) might teach you that the Hebrew
has in it no signification of image, no more than Sculpere can signify, to
make an Sculptile.
image: and therefore the Greek and the Latin precisely (for (...).
the most part) express neither more nor less, than a thing graven: but yet
mean always by these words, a graven idol, to which signification they are
appropriated by use of holy Scripture, as Simulacrum, idolum, conflatile, and
sometime imago. In which sense of signifying Idols, if you also did repeat
images so often, although the translation were not precise, yet it were in some
part tolerable, because the sense were so: but when you do it to bring all
holy images into contempt, even the image of our Savior Christ crucified, you
may justly be controlled for false and heretical translatours.

FVLK. 24. I would every common reader were able to discern your foolish
malice in this place. For first while you cavil at the Etymology of the
words, which the Prophet regards not, you make him say, that the ^^^h^o^er
thereof, has graven a graven thing, a ^^cl^ea thing. Secondly, where you say,
that the Hebrew word Pes^^ has no signification of an image in it, leaning to
the bare de^^^^tion from the verb Pasal, you control the only use of it,
which is to signify an image, or idol, whether it be graven, or molten, or by
what workmanship soever it be made, which you confess to be the sense of it.
But when we do it (you say) to bring all holy images into contempt, we may
justly be controuled, for false and heretical translatours. First we know no
holy images, made with hands at this time so accounted, but they are all
profane and abominable idols. Secondly, if the translatours purpose were
evil, yet so long as the words and sense of the original tongue will bear
him, he can not justly be called a false and heretical translatour, albeit he
have a false and heretical meaning. As you Papists have in your late
translation of the new Testament: yet where you translate, either according to
the words, or according to the sense, no equity can condemn you for false
translatours.

MART. 25. As in this very place (which is an other Abic. ^.
falshoode like to the other) conflatile you translate image, as you did
sculptile, and so here again in Abacucke (as before in Esaias is noted) for two
distinct words, each signifying an other diverse thing from image, you
translate, images, images. Thirdly, for imaginem falsam, a false image, you
translate an other thing, without any necessary pretense either of Hebrew or
Greek, avoiding here the name of image, because this place tells you that
the holy Scripture speaks against false images, or as the Greek has, false
fantasies, or as you translate the (...).
Hebrew, such images as teach lies, representing false gods which are not, as
the Apostle says, Idolum nihil est, And, Non 1. Cor. 8. Act. 19.
sunt Dij qui manibus fiunt. Which distinction of false and true images you
will not have, because you condemn all images, even holy and sacred also, and
therefore you make the holy Scriptures to speak herein accordingly to your
own faasie.

FVLK. 25. Seeing the Prophet regards not the Etymology of the words, but
uses both for one and the same Image, no nor regards the matter whereof it
is made, as appears in the next verse, where he calls this Idol wodde,
and stone, which cannot be molten, every reasonable man may see, that the word
Massecah does in this place signify generally an Image, which is made to be a
teacher of lies. And whereas you repeat, that the two words doc signify each
an other diverse thing from Image, because the one signifies a graven thing*
the other a molten thing, you speak with out all shame, and sense of honesty:
for Pesel signifies not every graven, carved, or hewn thing, but only an
Image. For who would say, that a mortar, or a gutter of hewn stone were in
Hebrew to be signified by the word Pesel, or a pewter pot, or a dishe, by the
word Massecah; Seeing the use of the Hebrew tongue therefore has appropried
these names only to Images, it is great frowardness, and no learning to
quarrel about the etimologie or deriuation of them. As this name building in
English, is taken only for houses: as when we say here are goodly buildings,
which if a man would extend according to the deriuation, and showing nothing
else but walls of brick or other matter, praise them for goodly buildings, he
should be thought to speak straungly in our tongue, and yet according to the
deriuation, building may signify any thing that is builded. But for Imaginem
falsam, a false image, you charge us to translate an other thing, without any
necessary pretense, either of Hebrew, or Greek. Such affirmations will make us
think meanly of your knowledge, in the Hebrew tongue. For what I pray you else,
ca^ Moreh in this place signify, but a teacher? or where (...)
is it ever taken for an image, as your Latin text has, or a fantasy, as the
Greek reads. Turn over your dictionarie, and Hebrew concordance, and see if
you can find it used for an image* or an idol. At least wise, give credit to
Isidorus Clarius, who thus writes in his notes upon the text. Quod ait
imaginem falsam, in Heb. est docen^, vel annuncians mendacium. That he says a
false Image, in the Hebrew it is teaching or showing forth a lie The
distinction you make of true and false Images, is vain for this purpose: for
all Images that are used in religion, are false, and teachers of falsehood,
which you with Gregory say are Lay men's books; but what shall they teach
Abac. 2. Ierem. 10.
says Abacuc and Jeremy, but lies and vanity? where note that Jeremy
calls the Image woodde, by Synecdoche, signifying all Images made with hands,
of any matter. Again he says, every artificer is confounded in his Image,
because it is false which he has made, and there is no breath in it. In which
verse it is to be observed, that he uses first the word Pesel, saying
Mippasel and afterward Nifco, for the same Image made (...)
by the artificer, without distinction of grauing or melting, at leastwise for
the sense, though the words be diverse. Even so your vulgar Latin translator
uses Sculptile, conflatile, imaginem and simulachrum, for one and the same
thing. The Scripture therefore telling us that all Images are false, because
they being void of life, are set up to represent the living, it is not our
fantasy, but the authority of Gods word, that causes us to reject your
fantastical distinction, of true and false Images.

MART. 26. Wherein you proceed so far, that when Daniel said to the King, I
worship not idols Dan. 14. v. 4.
made with hands ((...)) you make him say thus, I worship not things that
be made with hands, Bib. 1562. 1577.
leaving out the word idols altogether, as though he had said, nothing made
with hand, were to be adored, not the Arc, the propitiatory, no nor the holy
cross it self, that our Savior shed his blood upon. As before you added to
the text, so here you diminish and take from it at your pleasure.

FVLK. 26. That (thing) is put for idol, I confess it to be a fault in some
translations, but in the Geneua Bible it is reformed. Contempt of the
authority of that Apocryphal chapter (as it seemed) did breed that
negligence. Where you write, that he should by saying, I worship not things
made with hands, have denied the Arc, and the propitiatory to be worshipped,
it is very true, for neither of both was to be worshipped, as they were made
with hands, but God was to be worshipped where they were, and those things to
be reverently esteemed, as the sacraments, of Gods presence. As for the cross
whereon Christ dyed, I see no cause why it should be worshipped, if it were to
be had, but rather, if it were worshipped, it should be served as the brazen
serpent was. None of the Apostles made any accounte of it: Nicodemus and
Joseph of Arimathia, if there had been any matter of religion in it, might
have preserved it, and not have suffered it to be buried in the earth, with the
two other crosses* as the story of the invention, says, if it be true. At
the finding whereof, Helena as Saint Ambrose writes, Regem adorauit non
lignum vtique, quia hic gentilis est error and vanitas impiorum. She worshipped
the King, not the tree verily, for this is an Hethenishe error and vanity of
ungodly men. De obit. Theodosij.

MART. 27. But concerring the word image, which you make to be the English of
all the Latin, Hebrew, and Greek words, be they never so many and so
distinct, I beseech you, what reason had you to translate (...), images, Sap.
15. verse 13. does the Greek word so signify? does not the sentence
following, tell you that it should have been translated, graven idols? for
thus it says. They judged all the idols of the nations to be Gods. Lo, your
images, or rather, lo, the true names of the Pagans gods, which it pleases
you to call, images, images.

FVLK. 27. I think you are not able to prove, that we make, image the English
to all the Hebrewe words, though you boldly affirm it. But in the place by
you mentioned, I suppose they translated the Greek word graven or carved
images, rather than idol, because the writer in that place, Sap. 15. 13.
speaks of the first framing and fashioning of those images, which though the
purpose of the workman be never so wicked, yet can not properly be called
idols, before they be abused by them that worship them.

MART. 28. But (to conclude this point) you might, and it would have well
becommed you, in translating or expounding the foresaid words, to have
followed S. Hierom, the great famous Comment. in Abac. 2.
translator, and interpreter of the holy Scriptures: who tells you two senses
of the foresaid words: the one literal, of the Idols of the Gentiles: the
other mystical, of Heresies and errors. Sculptile, says he, and conflatile:
I take to be perverse opinions, which are adored of the authors that made the^.
See Arius, that graued to him self this idol, that Christ was only a
creature, and adored that which he had graven. Behold Eunomius, how he molted
and cast a false image, and bowed to that which he had molten. Suppose he had
exemplified of the two condemned heretics, Iouinian, and Vigilantius also: had
he not touched your idols, that is, the old condemned heresies, which you at
this day adore?

FVLK. 28. It becomes us best in translation, to follow the original text,
and as near as we can, the true meaning of the holy Ghost. As for the two
senses, which Hieronym tells, stand whole and untouched, for our translation.
There is a difference between a translation, and a commentary. In commenting
upon the text, they that see it convenient, may apply the idols of the
Gentiles, and the worship of them, to the heresies of our times, of the
Papists, Anabaptists, Libertines, and such like, as the Apostle does by
similitude to covetousness. As for old condemned heresies, which you charge us
to worship, as idols, you are able to prove none, whatsoever you babble of
Vigilantius, and Iouinian, neither of both do we follow in any error, much
less in any heresy.

MART. 29. These only (I mean heresies and heretics) are the idols and
idolaters (by the ancient Doctors judgment) which have been among Christians,
since the idolatry of Zach 13. Loco citato.
the Gentiles ceased, according to the Prophets. Therefore S. Hierom says
again: If thou see a man that will not yield to the truth, but when the
falshoode of his opinions is once showed, perseuereth still in that he began:
thou Osee. 11.
may aptly say, Sperat in figmento suo, and he makes dumme or deaf idols.
And again, All Heretics have their gods: and whatsoever they have forged,
they adore the same as Sculptile, and Constantile: that is as a graven and
molten idol. And again, He says well, I have Osee. 12.
found unto my self an idol: For, all the forgeries of heretics are as the
idols of the Gentiles: neither do they much differ in impiety, though in name
they seem to differ. And again, Whatsoever according to the letter In 5. Amos.
is spoken against the idolatry of the Jews, do thou refer all this unto
them, which under the name of Christ worship idols, and forging to them selves
perverse opinions, carye the tabernacle of their king the devil, and the image
of their idols. For they worship not an idol, but for variety of their
doctrine, they adore diverse Gods. And he put in very well, which you made to
your selves: for they received them not of God, but forged them of their own
mind. And of the idol of Samaria, he says, we always understand Samaria,
(and the In 8. Amos.
idol of Samaria) in the person of Heretics, the same Prophet saying, WOE BE
TO THEM THAT DESPISE c. 6.
SION, AND TRUST IN THE MOUNT OF SAMARIA. For Heretics despise the Church of
God, and trust in the falsehood of their opinions, erecting them selves against
the knowledge of God: and saying, when they have divided the people (by
schism,) we have no part in David, nor inheritance in the son of Isay.

FVLK. 29. Not these only, but the idols of the Simonists, Valentinians,
Gnostici, Carpocratits, Collyridians, and such like, made with hands, of
Christ, and his mother, of Paul, and Simon, and Selene, and Pythagoras, etc.
and such other, were idols of false Christians, since the idolatry of the
Gentiles gave place, by the judgment of Irenaeus, Epiphanius, and other
ancient doctors. And whatsoever you cite, or can cite out of Saint Hierom,
against the idols of heresies, agrees most aptly to your selves, the
Papists, who worship not only idols made with hands, but also the idols of
your brains, which are abominable heresies.

MART. 30. Thus the Reader may see, that the holy Scriptures which the
adversaries falsely translate, against the holy images of our Savior Christ,
and his Saints, to make us Idolaters, do in deed concern their idols, and
condemn them as idolaters, which forge new opinions to them selves, such as
the ancient fathers knew not, and adore them, and their own sense and
interpretation of Scriptures, so far and so vehemently, that they prefer it
before the approved judgment of all the general councels and holy doctors,
and for maintenance of the same, corrupt the holy scriptures at their pleasure,
and make them speak according to their fancies, as we have partly showed, and
now are to declare further.

FVLK. 30. Thus the Reader may see, that when you have cauilled, quarrelled,
falsified, and slaundered, as much as you can, to charge us with false
translation of the Scripture, concerning images, you can find nothing worth
the nothing: but if some small oversight, through negligence, or perhaps the
Printers fault, has escaped, you make a great matter of it, although it be
corrected by our selves in other translations, and when all other matter
fails, you return to your accustomed vein of railing, and reuiling, which
in no wise man's judgment, deserves any answer, because it is so general.

CHAP. IIII.
The ECCLESIASTICAL use of words turned into their ORIGINAL and PROFANE
signification.

Martin.
WE spoke a little before of the double signification 1.
of words, the one according to the original property, the other according
to the usual taking thereof in all vulgar speech and writing. These words (as
by the way, we showed before, upon occasion of Chap. 3. number. 17. 18. See also
M. V Vhitaker page 200. and the 6. chap. of this book (number. 6. 7. 8. and number.
13. etc.) much more of this matter.
the Adversaries grant) are to be translated in their vulgar and usual
signification, not as they signify by their original property. As for
example: Mayor in the original signification* is greater. But when we say, The
Mayor of London, now it is taken and sounds in every man's ear, for such an
Officer: and no man will say, The greater of London, according to the original
property of it. Likewise Episcopus, a Greek word, in the original sense, is
every ouerseer, as Tullie uses it, and other profane writers: but among
Christians, in Ecclesiastical speech, it is a Bishop. And no man will say, My
Lord ouerseer of London, for my Lord Bishop. Likewise we say, Seven Deacons, S.
Steven a Deacon. No man will say, Seven Ministers, S. Steven a Minister.
Although that be the original signification of the word Deacon. But by
Ecclesiastical use and appropriation being taken for a certain degree of the
Clergy, so it foundeth in every man's ear, and so it must be translated. As we
say, Nero made many Martyrs: not, Nero made many witnesses: and yet Martyr by
the first original property of the word, is nothing else but a witness. We
say Baptism is a sacrament: not, washing is a sacrament. Yet Baptism and
washing, by the first original property of the word is all one.

Fulke.
WE have also answered before, that 1.
words must not be always translated, according to their original and
general signification, but according to such signification, as by use they are
appropried to be taken. We agree also that words taken by custom of speech
into an Ecclesiastical meaning, are not to be altered into a strange or
profane signification. For such vanities and novelties of words, the Apostle
prohibiteth, whereof the popish translation of the new Testament is fraught
full. Notwithstanding our meaning is not, that if any Greek terms, or words
of any other language, have of long time been usurped in our English language,
the true understanding of which is unknown at this day, to the common people:
but that the same terms may be either in translation, or exposition, set out
plainly, to inform the simplicity of the ignorant, by such words, as of them
are better understood. Also when those terms are abused by custom of speech,
to signify some other thing, than they were first appointed for, or else be
taken ambiguously for diverse things: we ought not to be superstitious in these
cases, but to avoid misunderstanding, we may use words according to their
original signification, as they were taken in such time, as they were written
by the instruments of the holy Ghost. As for example, if a Bishop be mistaken
by the people, either for such an idol as the Papists used to make of their
S. Nicolas bishops, or else for a great Lord only, that rides about in a
white rochet, they may be told, that the name of a Bishop describes his
office, that is, to be an ouerseer of the flock of Christ, committed to his
charge. Likewise if the word Deacon, be taken for such an one, as at a popish
mass stands in a disguised tunicle, holding a patten, or some other
Idolatrous babble used of them: the people must be taught, that this name
signifies a minister, which was ordained not to serve the Popish altar, but
the poor men's tables, that is, to provide for the poor, and to see the
Churches alms bestowed upon them. Also if the name of Martyrs be not
understood, but taken only for them that are tormented and rent in body, as
the common speech is to say, of men and beasts, that they are martyred, when
their bodies are wounded and mangled: here it is needful to show, that the
Saints that suffered for Christ, had their name of their witness or
testimony, not of their pains and torments. The name of Baptism is so common
to Christians, that it need not to be changed into washing: but yet it may and
ought to be explicated unto the unlearned, what this word does signify, which
is no profane signification, but a true and general understanding of the word,
which is used of the Evangelist for other washings than the Sacrament of
Baptism, and so, you are enforced to translate it, Marc. 7.

MART. 2. Now then to come to our purpose, such are the absurd translations of
the English Bibles, and altogether like unto these. Namely, when they translate
congregation for Church, Elder for Priest, Image for Idol, dissension for
schism, General for Catholic, secret for Sacrament, ouer-seer for Bishop,
See chap. 15. nu. 18. and 3. 4. and chap. 21. nu.
messenger for Angel, ambassador for Apostle, minister for Deacon, and such
like: to what other end be these deceitful translations, but to conceal and
obscure the name of the Church and dignities thereof mentioned in the holy
Scriptures: to dissemble the word schism (as they do also Heresy and
Heretic) Gal. 5. Tit. 3. 1. Cor. 11. Bib. 1562.
for fear of disgracing their schisms and Heresies, to say of Matrimony,
neither Sacrament which is the Latin, nor mystery which is the Greek, but to
go as far as they can possibly from the common usual and Ecclesiastical
words, saying, This Ephesians. 5. v. 32.
is a great secret: in favor of their heresy, that Matrimony is no
Sacrament.

FVLK. 2. Absurd tra^slations of the English Bibles, you say are congregation
for Church, Elder for Priest, Image for Idol and such like. The word Church
being ambiguously taken of the people for the place of assembly, and the
assembly it self, it was as lawful for us to call congregation, as for you to
call it assembly, Acts 7. This word Priest, commonly taken for a sacrificer
and the same that Sacerdos, and so by you translated: there was good occasion
to use the word Elder, for which you use Senior, or ancient in your
translation, which is a name of authority, as ouerseer is of diligence,
minister of service* pastor of feeding all which names set forth a true
Bishop, Pastor, and Elder, and if you will needs have it, of a true Priest Of
Image for Idol is said enough in the next Chapter before, Schism I know
not how English men should understand, except it were englished by dissension,
division, rending, or some such like Of general for Catholic, we shall speak
anon. Secret for Sacrament, we use, because we would retain the
ecclesiastical use of this word Sacrament which is to signify the seals of
Gods promises, and not confound it, with every holy or unholy secret thing.
The Greek word mystery, which you would enjoin us to use, was in the time
of the first translation more unknown, than that we could well have used it,
except we would have followed your vein, in vanity and novelty of terms,
Praepu^e, neophyte, gratis, depositum, etc. or else made general and common
the proper use of this Ecclesiastical term Sacrament, to every mystery, and
called the Sacrament of preaching, of publishing the Gospel to the Gentiles, of
the seven stars, as you do, and yet in the Sacrament of the whore of Babylon
you leave it and call it mystery, Apoc. 17. v. 7. as you should be enforced
to do, if you would translate the old Testament out of Latin, Dan. 2. diverse
times, except you would call Nabuchadonosors dream, a Sacrament, and Dan 4.
where the king says, that to Daniell no secret is impossible; meaning
unknown, or not understood, you would say, no Sacrament, and Tob. 12. you
would translate Sacramentum regis abscondere bonum est. It is a good thing to
hide the kings Sacrament, where you should say secret, and where the English
phrase would hardly bear you to say the kings mystery. Of the other terms,
in the places by you quoted, it shall be sufficient to speak. But I have
rendered reasonable causes of these terms hitherto: so that no man, but mad
with malice, would think we conceal the name of Church, and dignities thereof,
in hatred of them, or do dissemble the names of schism and heresy, in favor
of those abominations, which are as well set forth to their detestatio^, in the
terms of dissension and sects: as for the name Sacrament, we find not in the
Greek but mysterium we translate a secret or a mystery, as the word
signifies, which nothing favors the pretended Sacrament of Matrimony.

MART. 3. S. Paul says as plain as he can speak, I 1. Cor. ^. v. 10.
beseech you brethren, that you all say one thing, and that there be no
schisms among you. They translate for schisms, dissentions: which may be in
profane and worldly things, as well as in matters of religion. But schisms are
those that divide the unity of the Church, whereof they know them selves
guilty. S. Paul says as plainly as is possible, A man that is an Heretic
Tit. 3.
avoid after the first and second admonition. They (...)
translated in their Bible of the year 1562, A man that is an author of
Sects. And where the Greek is, Heresy, reckened among damnable sins, they
say, Sects: favoring that Gal. 5.
name for their own sakes, and dissembling it, as though the holy Scriptures
spoke not against Heresy or Heretics, Schism or Schismatikes.

FVLK. 3. S. Paul in deed speaks plainly in Greek, but if you speak
English and say schisms, forty thousand of the people in England will swear
they understand you not. But schisms (you say) are those that divide the
unity of the Church: dissentions may be in profane and worldly things.
Verily all schisms divide not the Church, for they were not all the Church, of
whom it is said in S. John 9. There was a schism among them: for I think the
best of the Pharisees, were scarce good members of the Church. Again where S.
Paul does say, least there should be a schism in the body. 1. Cor. 12. He
speaks of the natural body, whereunto he compares the Church. S. Paul also
says, as plainly as he can speak in Greek. 1. Cor. 11. v. 18. I hear
that there be schisms among you: yet your vulgar Latin translatour is bold
to say Scissuras, cuttings or rendings, where you are bold to go from your
Latin text and call them schisms. And for explicating the Greek name of
heresy, by sects, why should we be more blamed* than the vulgar Latin
translator, who commonly translateth it Sectas, and namely Gal. 5. 2. Pet. 2.
Acts. 24. diverse times, 26. and 28 in all which places you your selves
translate sects. Is it because he, or you favor heresies and heretics? will
you never leave this foolish wrangling, which always turns you to the
greater discredit?

MART. 4. As also they suppress the very name Catholic, when it is expressly
in the Greek, for malice toward Catholics and Catholic religion, because
they know, them selves never shall be called or known by that name. And
therefore their two English Bibles accustomed to be read in their An. 1562
1577.
Church (therefore by like most authentical) leave it clean out in the
title of all those Epistles, which have been known by Eusebius. li. 2. Eccl.
bis^. c. 22. in fine. 1579.
the name of Catholicae Epistolae ever since the Apostles time: and their later
English Bible (dealing somewhat more honestly) has turned the word Catholic
into General: saying, The General Epistle of James, of Peter, etc. As if a man
should say in his Creed, I believe the general Church, because he would not
say, the Catholic Church: as the Lutheran Catechismes say for that purpose, I
believe the Christian Church. So that by this rule, when S. Augustine Lind. in
Dubitantio.
tells that the manner was in cities where there was liberty of religion, to
ask, Qua itur ad Catholicam? We must translate it, Which is the way to the
General? And when Saint Hierome says, If we agree in faith with the B. of
Rome, ergo Catholici sumus: we must translate it, Then we are Generals. Is not
this good stuff? Are they not ashamed thus to inuert and pervert all words
against common sense, and use and reason? Catholic and General or universal
(we know) is by the original property of the word all one: but according to
the use of both, as it is ridiculous to say, A Catholic Council, for a
General Council: so is it ridiculous and impious to say, General for
Catholic, inderogation thereof, and for to hide it under a bushel.

FVLK. 4. I do not know where the name of Catholic is once expressed in the
text of the Bible, that it might be suppressed by us, which are not like to
bear malice to the Catholic Church, or religion, seeing we teach, even our
young children to believe the holy Catholic Church. But not finding the word
Catholic in the text, you run to the title of the seven Epistles, called as
commonly Canonical as Catholic or General. But Eusebius belike testifies
that they have been so called ever since the Apostles time, lib. 2. cap. 22. I
marvel you are not ashamed to avouch such an untruth. Eusebius speaking of
his own time, says, they are so called, but that they have been so called
ever since the Apostles time, he says not. And so far off he is from saying
so, that he pronounces the Epistle of S. James in the same place, to be a
bastard, and speaks doubtfully of the Epistle of S. Jude. But whereas in one
translation we use the word General for Catholic, you make a great may game
of it, showing your wit and your honesty both at once. For these 5. of
James, 2. of Peter, one of Jude, and the first of John, which are properly and
rightly so entitled, have that title, because they are not sent to any
particular Church, or persons, but to all in general, as the Greek scholiast
truly notes. And OEcumenius before the Epistle of S. James says expressly
Catholicae id est vniversals dicuntur hae, etc. These Epistles are called
Catholic, that is to say Universal or General because not distinctly to one
nation or city (as S. Paul to the Romans, or Corinthians) this company of
our Lords disciples does dedicate these Epistles, but generally to the
faithful, or to the Jews that were dispersed, as also Peter: or else to all
Christians living under the same faith. For otherwise, if they should be called
Catholic, in respect of the sou^dnes of the doctrine contained in the^, what
reason were there more to call them so, than to call all the Epistles of S.
Paul? Wherefore in this title which yet is no part of the holy Scripture, it
is rightly translated general. The other translatours seeing seven to be called
general, where only five are so in deed, and seeing them also called
canonical, which should seem to be a controulling of S. Paul's Epistles, left
out that title altogether, as being no part of the text* and word of God: but
an addition of the stationers or writers.

MART. 5. Is it because they would follow the Greek, Catholica.
that they turn (...), general? even as just, as when they turn (...) image,
(...) instruction, (...) ordinance, (...) dissension, (...) sect, (...)
secret, and such like, where they go as far from the Greek as they can,
and will be glad to pretend for answer of their word, sect, that they
follow our Latin translation. Alas poor shift for them that otherwise
pretend nothing but the Greek, to be tried by that Latin which them selves
condemn. But we honor the said text, and translate it Sects also, as we there
find it, and as we do in other places follow the Latin text, and take not
our advantage of the Greek text, because we know the Latin translation is
good also and sincere, and approved in the Church by long antiquity, and it is
in sense all one to us with the Greek: but not so to them, who in these days
of controversy about the Greek and Latin text, by not following the Greek,
which they profess sincerely to follow, bewray them selves that they do it
for a malicious purpose.

FVLK. 5. It is because we would have the Greek understood, as it is taken in
those places, when we turn Catholic general, Idolum, image, (...),
instruction, (...), ordinance, (...), dissension, (...), sect, (...), secret,
and such like. And where you say, we would be glad for our word sect, to
pretend to follow your Latin translation, it is a fable. For in translating
sect* we follow the Greek as truly, as your Latin translation does, which
if it be true and sincere, as you confess, what deuilish madness possesses
your malicious mind to burden us with such purposes, as no reasonable man
would once imagine or think of, that we should use that term in favor of
heresy, and heretics, whom we think worthy to suffer death, if they will
not repent, and cease to blaspheme, or seduce the simple.

CHAP. V.
Heretical translation against the CHVRCH.

Martin.
AS they suppress the name, Catholic, 1
even so did they in their first English Bible the name of Church, it self:
because at their first revolt and apostasy from that that was universally
known to be the only true Catholic Church: it was a great objection against
their schismatic proceedings, and it stuck much in the peoples consciences,
that they forsook the Church, and that the Church condemned them. Whereupon
very wi^ily they suppressed the name Church in their English translation, so,
that in all that Bible so long red in their Bib. 1562.
congregations, we can not once find the name thereof. Judge by these places
which seem of most importance for the dignity, pre-eminence, and authority
of the Church.

Fulke.
How can we suppress the name Catholic, 1.
which the holy Scripture never uses, as for the name of Church, I have
already showed diverse times, that for to avoid the ambiguous taking of that
term, it was at the first less used, but never refused, for doubt of any
objection of the Catholic Church against us: the profession of which, being
contained in our English creed, how could we relinquish, or not acknowledge
to be contained in the Scripture, in which we taught, that all articles of
faith necessary to salvation are comprehended? But we are content to be judged
by those places which seem of most importance for the dignity, pre-eminence,
and authority of the Church.

MART. 2. Our Savior says, Upon this Rock I will Mat. 16.
build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. They
make him to say, Upon this rock I will build Mat. 18.
my congregation. Again, If he hear not them, tell the Church: and if he
hear not the Church, let him be to thee as an Heathen and as a publicane, they
say, Congregation. Again, who would think they would have altered the word
Church in the Epistle to the Ephesians? their English translation Ephesians. 5.
for many years red thus, Ye husbands love your wives as Christ loved the
congregation, and cleansed it to make it unto him self a glorious congregation
without spot or wrinkle. And, This is a great secret, but I speak of Christ
and of the congregation. And to Timothee, The house 1. Tim. 3.
of God, which is the congregation of the living God, the pillar and ground of
truth. Here is no word of Church, which in Latin and Greek is, Ecclesia Dei
viui, columna and firmame^tum veritatis. Likewise to the Ephesians again, He
has made him head of the congregation, which is his Ep. 1. Heb. 12. v. 23.
body. And to the Hebrews they are all bold to translate: The congregation of
the first borne, where the Apostle names heavenly Jerusalem, the city of the
living God, etc.

FVLK. 2. In the first English Bible printed, where it was thus translated,
Math. 16. upon this rock I will build my congregation: the note in the
margent is thus, upon this rock, that is, as says S. Augustine, upon the
confession which thou have made, knowledging me to be Christ, the son of the
living God, I will build my congregation or Church. Was not this translator
think you sore afraid of the name of the Church? What other thing should he
understand, by the word congregation, in all places by you noted, or in any
like, but the church, as he does here expound him self. And this translation
almost word for word, does the Bible you call 1562. follow.

MART. 3. So that by this translation, there is no more Church militant and
triumphant, but congregation, and he is not head of the Church, but of the
congregation: and this congregation at the time of the making of this
translation, was in a few new brethren of England, for whose sake the name
Church was left out of the English Bible, to commend the name of congregation,
above the name of Church. Whereas S. Augustine In ps. 81. in initio.
tells them, that the Jews Synagogue, was a congregation: the (...).
Church, a convocation: and that a congregation, is of beasts also: a
convocation, of reasonable creatures only: and that the Jews congregation is
sometime called the Church, but the Apostles never called the Church,
Congregation. Do you see then what a goodly change they have made, for
Church, to say congregation: so making themselves a very Synagogue, and that by
the property of the Greek word, which (yet as S. Augustine tells them most
truly) signifies rather a convocation?

FVLK. 3. A strange matter that the Church militant and triumphant should be
excluded, by using the word congregation: when by it nothing is signified but
the congregation or Church militant and triumphant: and that Christ should no
more be head of the Church when he is head of the congregation, where the
difference is only in sound of words, not in sense or meaning. Your vain and
ridiculous surmise, why the name of Church should be left out of the Bible, I
have before confuted: showing that in every Bible it is either in the text, or
in the notes. But S. Augustine tells us (say you) that the Jews synagoge was
a congregation, the church a co^uocation: and that a congregation is of beasts
also, a convocation of reasonable creatures only. But S. Luke in the person of
S. Stephen tells us, and Augustine tells us as much, that the synagoge of
the Jews is called also Ecclesia: which signifies the church and
congregation. That Congregatio the Latin word, may be of beasts also, it
skilleth not, for the church of Christ is called also a flock, and sheep of
his pasture. But he that should say in English a congregation of beasts, might
be taken for as wise a man, as he that said an audience of sheep. And whereas
S. Augustine, tells you, that the Jews congregation is sometime called the
church: what is the cause that you do translate it, the assembly, Act. 7. even
as you do the congregation of the Idolatrous Ephesians, Act. 19? But further
(you say) Augustine tells us, that the Apostles never called the church
congregation. It is a world to see what foolish fetches you have, to deceive
the ignorant. Augustine says the Apostles never called our assembly
Synagoga, but always Ecclesia: and yet he is a little deceived: for S. Paul
calls our gathering together unto Christ (...), but Congregatio, a
congregation, he says not. And although he make a nice distinction between the
words Congregation and Convocation, yet all men which know the use of these
words, will confess no necessity of a Jewish synagoge, to be implied in the
word congregation more than in the word (...), which of the holy Ghost is used
for an assembly or gathering together, either of Jews, Christians, or Gentiles.
And therefore it seems the translatour used the word congregation, which is
indifferent for all, even as the word Ecclesia is used both in the Greek, and
vulgar Latin.

MART. 4. If they appeal here to their later translatio^s, we must obtain of
them to condemn the former, and to confess this was a gross fault committed
therein. And that the Catholic Church of our country did not il to forbid and
burn such books which were so translated by Tyndal and the like, as being not
in deed Gods book, word, or Scripture, but the Devils word. Yea they must
confess, that the leaving out of this word Church altogether, was of an
heretical spirit against the Catholic Roman Church, because then they had
no Caluinisticall Church in any like form of religion and government to
theirs now. Neither will it serve them to say after their manner, And if a man
should translate Ecclesiam, congregation: this is no more Consut. of M. Hovvlet
sol. 35.
absurdity, than in steed of a Greek word, to use a Latin of the same
signification. This (we trow) will not suffice them in the judgment of the
simplest indifferent Reader.

FVLK. 4. We need not to appeal to the later translations, for any
corruption or falsification of the former, no nor for any mistranslation. For
seeing the spirit of God (as I have said before) uses the word Ecclesia
generally for a company of Christians, Jews, and Gentiles, the translator has
not gone from the truth, and use of the Scriptures, to use the word
congregation, which signifies indifferently all three. Wherefore there needs
no condemnation, nor confession of any gross fault herein committed, except
you will count it a gross fault in S. Luke, to use the word (...) without any
scrupulositie for all three, as the translator does the word congregation, and
you in two significations the word assemblye. Neither can your heathenish and
barbarous burning of the holy Scriptures so translated, nor your blasphemy in
calling it the devils word, be excused, for any fault in translation, which
you have discovered as yet, or ever shall be able to descrye. That stinking
cavil of leaving out of the Bible this word Church altogether, being both
foolish and false, I have answered more than once already. It is not left out
altogether, that in contents of books and chapiters, and in notes of
explication of this word congregation is set down. Neither could there be any
purpose against the Catholic Church of Christ in them that translated and
taught the Creed in English, professing to believe the holy Catholic Church.
As for our hatred of the malignant Antichristian Church of Rome, we never
dissembled the matter, so that we were afraid openly to profess it, what
need had we then after such a fantastical manner (as is fondly imagined) to
insinuate it.

MART. 5. But, my Masters, if you would confess the former faults and
corruptions never so plainly, is that enough to justify your corrupt dealing
in the holy Scriptures? Is it not an horrible fault so wilfully to falsify and
corrupt the word of God written by the inspiration of the holy Ghost? May you
abuse the people for certain years with false translations, and afterward
say, Lo we have amended it in our later translations? See his nevve Test. in
Latin of the year 1556, printed by Robert Steven in fol. Act. 2. v. 27.
Then might the Heretic Beza be excused for translating in steed of Christ's
soul in hell, his carcas in the grave. And because some friend told him of
that corruption, and he corrected it in the later editions, he should
nevertheless in your judgment, be counted a right honest man. No (be ye sure)
the discrete Reader can not be so abused, but he will easily see, that there is
a great difference in mending some ouersights which may escape the best men:
and in your gross false translations, who at the first falsify of a prepensed
malice, and afterward alter it for very shame. Howbeit, to say the truth, in
the chiefest and principal place that concerns the Churches perpetuity and
stability, you have not yet altered the former translation, but it remains as
before and is at this day red in your Churches thus, Upon this Rock Mat. 16.
v. 18. Bib. 1577.
I will build my congregation. Can it be without some heretical subtlety,
that in this place specially and (I think) only you change not the word
congregation into Church? Give us a reason and discharge your credit.

FVLK 5. You are very hardly, and in very deed maliciously bent against us,
that you will accept no confession of faults escaped, never so plainly made. As
for corrupt dealing in the holy Scriptures, and falsifying of the word of god*
you are not able no not if you would burst your self for malice, to convict
us. And therefore look for no confession of any such wickedness, whereof our
conscience is clear before God, and does not accuse us. As for Bezaes
correction of his formen translation, Act. 2. v. 27. if your dogged stomach
will not accept, he shall notwithstanding with all godly learned men, be
accounted, as he deserves, for one who has more profited the Church of God,
with his sincere translation, and learned annotations, than all the popish
Seminaries, and Seminarists, shall be able to hinder it, iangle of gross and
false translations, as long as you will. But the chiefest and principal place
that concerns the Churches perpetuity, is not yet reformed to your mind.
For in the Bible 1577. we read still Math. 16. upon this rock I will build my
congregation. If Christ have a perpetual congregation, builded upon the
foundation of the Prophets, and Apostles, him self being the corner stone, his
Church is in no danger ever to decay. Yet you ask, whether it can be without
some heretical subtlety, that in this place specially, and (as you think)
only, the word congregation, is not changed into Church. It is an homely, but
a true proverb: the good wife would never have sought her daughter in the
oven, had she not been there first her self. You are so full of heretical
subtilties, and traitorous devises, that you dream of them in other men's
doings, whatsoever comes into your hands: yea, where you your self can
have no probable imagination what to suspect. And therefore we must give you a
reason, in discharge of our credit For my part, I know not with what special
reason the translator was moved, but I can give you my probable conjecture,
that he thought it all one, (as in deed it is.) to say my congregation, or my
Church. For what is Christ's congregation, but his Church? or what is Christ's
Church, but his congregation? And yet to put you out of all fear, the Geneua
translation has the word Church, that you make so great account of, as though
it were not an indifferent word to the true Church, of true Christians, and the
false Church of malignant Heretics: being usurped first to signify the
congregation of Christians, by a Metonymie of the place containing, for the
people contained. For the etymology thereof is from the Greek word (...),
which was used of Christians for the place of their holy meetings, signifying
the Lords house, therefore in the northren, which is the more ancient English
speech, is called by contraction Kyrke, more near to the sound of the Greek
word.

MART. 6. What shall I say of Beza, whom the English Bibles also follow,
translating actiuely that Greek word, (which in common use, and by S.
Chrysostoms, and the Greek doctors exposition, is a plain passive:) to
signify, as in his annotations is clear, that Christ may be without his
Church, that is, a head without a body. The words be these in the heretical
translation, He gave him to be the head over all things to the Ephesians. 1. v. 2^.
23.
Church, which (Church) is his body, the fulness of him (...).
that fills all in all. S. Chrysostom. says Beza, (he might have said, all
the Greek and Latin ancient fathers) takes it passiuely, in this sense,
that Christ is filled all in all, because all faithful men as members, and the
whole Church as the body, co^curre to the fulness and accomplishment of Christ
the head. But this (says he) seems unto me a forced interpretation. Why so
Beza?

FVLK. 6. That Beza translateth the participle, (...), actiuely, it is plain,
both in the text of his translation, and in his annotations. But that he does
it to signify, that Christ may be without his Church, that is a head without a
body, it is a shameless slander. His words, upon which you weaue this cobweb,
are these. Omnino autem hoc addidit Apostolus, vt sciamus Christum per se non
indigere hoc supplemento: vt qui efficia^ omnia in omnibus reuera: nedum vt
suppleatur a quoquam, nisi quatenus pro immensasua bonitate Ecclesiam dignatur
sibi quasi corporis instar adiungere. This the Apostle has added altogether
for this end, that we may know that Christ of him self has no need of this
supplye: as he which works in truth all things in all so far it is, that he
should be supplied by any body, but that of his infinite goodness, he
vouchsafes to adioine his Church unto him self, as his body. Who but the
devil, would find fault with this godly and Catholic saying? wherein it is
affirmed, that Christ, which according to the perfection of his divine nature,
needs no supply, yet of his infinite mercy, vouchsafes to become head of
his Church, as of his body: so that he will not be counted perfect without it.
Is this to say, Christ may be a head without a body? or is it for his
benefit, or the benefit of his Church, that he is the head thereof? But the
more to lay open this malicious slander, and impudent falsifying of Bezaes
words, and meaning, I will set down his saying, going immediately before, upon
the word (...), which he calls complementum sieve supplementum, a fulfilling
or supplying. Is enim est Christi in Ecclesiam amor, etc. For such is the love
of Christ toward his Church, that whereas he performs all things, to all
men, unto the full: yet he esteems him self as an imperfect head, and maimed
of the members, unless he have his Church adjoined to him, as his body.
Hereof it comes, that Christ is taken sometime collectiuely for the whole
Church, adjoined to her head, as 1. Cor. 12. v. 12. and 13. and Gal. 3. 16.
Hereof comes also that phrase, (in Christ) so often repeated, which
signifies something more expressly, than with Christ, or by Christ. Hereof that
voice of Christ, Saul, Saul, why do thou persecute me? whether also
pertains that which is written, Col. 1. v. 24. Finally, hereof proceeds all
our hope and consolation. How think you, is not this man willing to separate
the Church from Christ, the head from the body? O monstrous malices of godless
Papists. His exposition of the place being such, as you see, let us now
examine what can be said against his translation. For a man must not translate
falsely, to make a true sense. It is alleged against him, that Chrysostom, and
all the Greek and Latin fathers take the participle passiuely. Beza
confesses it of Chrysostom, whom the later Greek writers commonly do
follow. But the participle, being derived of the mean verb, may have either
passive or active signification. But why does Beza say, that the exposition of
Chrysostom is forced, which takes it passiuely? he says not in respect of
Chrysostomes sense, which he him self follows, and it is contained in the
word (...), but in respect of the grammar, that (...) should be put absolutely
without any word to govern it, seeing the participle of the mean verb, may
be taken actiuely, and govern (...), being the accusative case.

MART. 7. Mark his Doctors whom he opposes to the fathers, both Greek and
Latin. Because Xenophon (says he) in such a place, and Plato in such a place,
use the said Greek word actiuely. I omit this miserable match, and unworthy
names of Xenophon and Plato, in trial of S. Paul's words, against all the
glorious Doctors: this is his common custom. I ask him rather of these his
own Doctors, how they use the Greek word in other places of their works? how
use they it most commonly? yea how do all other Greek writers either profane,
or sacred, use it? What say the Greek readers of all Universities? Surely, not
only they, but their scholars for the most part, can not be ignorant, that the
use of this word, and the like, is passive, though (...).
sometime it may also signify actiuely: but that is so rare in comparison of
the other, that no man lightly will use it, and I am well assured, it would be
counted a fault, and some lack of skill, if one now in his writings that would
express this in Greek, God fills all things with his blessing, should
say, (...): and, The wine fills the cup, (...). Ask them that have skill,
and control me* Contrariwise, if one would say passiuely, All things are
filled with Gods blessing, The cup is filled with wine, Such a prophecy is
fulfilled. What mean Grecian would not say, as S. Chrysostom here expounds
this word, (...), using it possiuely?

FVLK. 7. Mark how malice carries this man almost into madness. For who but
a mad man would think, that Beza opposes profane writers to
Ecclesiastical doctors, for understanding of the Scripture? The mean verb
(...), which the meanest Grammarian in the world knows to be taken both
actiuely and passiuely by the Grammar rule De verbo medio, Beza proves out of
Xenophon, and Plato, that it is and may be used actiuely. Why not therefore in
this place of S. Paul, where both the sense requires it, that one thing be
not repeated twice without necessary cause, and the construction of the word
(...) calls for it, which otherwise is left at randon, without any
government? Seeing therefore we have the common rule of Grammar, and the
example of eloquent writers for use, I marvel what M. Martine means to
waste so many words about so clear a matter. No man that knows any thing,
doubts but that (...) may be, and is often taken passiuely: But seeing it is
also found to be a verb mean, who need to be afraid to use it actiuely
(having Xenophon and Plato for his warrant) yea even in those examples you put
of Gods blessing filling all things, or the wine filling the cup, if any man
would speak so. But if because the word is more usually taken passiuely, men
would refrain so to speak, yet why should we think that S. Paul did not use
it actiuely? when the active signification is more agreeable, both with his
words, and with his meaning. But least you should think Beza is alone, which
takes it actiuely, what say you to Philippus Montanus one of your own
profession, which in his animaduersions upon Theophlyactes translation, by him
corrected, says upon this place (...) qui adimplet, vel adimpletur, verbum
enim est medium, passive autem videtur accipere Theophylactus. Which fills,
or which is filled: for it is a verb of indifferent signification, active or
passive, but Theophylact seems to take it passiuely. What say you to Isidorus
Clarius, who although in his text he reads passiuely, yet in his note,
confesses it may be taken either passiuely or actiuely. For this is his note.
Plenitudo eius\] per omnia enim membra adimpletur corpus Christi, quia omnia in
omnibus implet, dum ipse agit in omnibus, vel per omnes homines haec implet
membra. Sieve pleni^udinem and complementum omne suum habet ipsa ecclesia ab
illo, qui omnia in omnibus adimplet. That is the fullness of him\] for by all
the members the body of Christ is filled, because he fills all in all, while
he works in all, or throughout all men fills these members. Or else the
Church her self has all her fullness and acco^plishment of him, which fills
al in all. These me^ both Papists, were as good Grecians (I warrant you) as M.
Gregory Martin is, or ever will be, by whom if he will not be controlled, it
were folly to press him with the judgment of our Greek readers, which he
requires.

MART. 8. Yet (says Beza) this is a forced interpretation, because Xenophon
forsooth and Plato (once perhaps in all their whole works) use it otherwise. O
heretical blindness or rather stubburnnesse, that calls that forced, which
is most common and usual: and sees not that his own translation is forced,
because it is against the common use of the word. But no marvel. For he that
in other places thinks it no forced interpretation, to translate (...), to be
contained, Which neither Recipere.
Xenophon, nor Plato, nor any Greek author will allow him to do, and (...)
carcas, and (...). providence, and (...), Animam.
them that amend their lives, may much more in this place dissemble
^raescientiam.
his forced interpretation of (...). But why he should Poenitentiam.
call S. Chrysostoms interpretation forced, which is the common and usual
interpretation, that has no more reason, than if a very thief should say to
an honest man, Thou art a thief, and not I.

FVLK. 8. I have showed how it is enforced, because in taking the participle
passiuely, you must either be enforced to admit a plain soloecisme, where
none needs: or else you must hardly understand the preposition (...) to
govern, the accusative (...), as Montanus tells you in Theophylact, and as
Oecumenius does, and the sense will be no more than is contained in the word
Complemenium. Whereas by taking it actiuely, the wonderful goodness of Christ
shines toward his Church, who although he needs nothing to make him perfect,
as Chysostome says, but supplieth al things in all things, yet it is his
gracious pleasure, to accoumpt him self imperfect without his Church, which he
has united to him as his body, in which he is not perfect without all his
members.

As for your vain and tedious repetition, like the Cuckowes song, of Bezaes
misprisions, I will not stand so often to answer, as you are disposed to
rehearse the^: Only I must admonish the reader, of a piece of your cunning,
that in repeating the participle, you change the temps, and for (...), you say
(...), as though it were the preterperfect temps, which can not be taken, but
only passiuely. I know the Printer shall bear the blame of this oversight, but
in the mean time it makes a little show, to a young Grecian, that considers
it not.

MART. 9. Is it forced Beza, that Christ is filled all in all by the Church?
does not S. Paul in the very next words before, call the Church the fullness
of Christ, saying, Which Ephesians. 1.
is the fullness of him that is filled all in all? If the Church be the,
fullness of him, then is he filled or has his fullness of the Church, so that
he is not a maimed head without a body. This would S. Paul say, if you would
give him leave, and this he does say, whether you will or no. But what is the
cause that they will not suffer the Apostle to say so? because (says Beza)
Christ needs no such complement. And if he needs it not, then may he be
without a Church, and consequently it is no absurdity, if the Church has been
for many years not only invisible, but also not at all. Would a man easily at
the first imagine or conceive that there were such secret poison in their
translation?

FVLK. 9. You should urge Beza with a Latin Epistle, seeing you are so earnest
in the matter. I have told you that the sense of Chrysostom is true, but not
flowing easily from the words of S. Paul. That Christ has his fullness of
the Church, it is granted by Beza upon the word Plenitudo or Complemenium,
as you can not be ignorant, if you have read Bezaes Annotations, as you
pretend. But you charge Beza to say, that Christ needs no such complement.
Bezaes words are as I have set hem down before, Vt sciamus Christum per se,
non indigere hoc supplemento, that we may know that Christ of him self,
needs not this supply. Is this al one, with that you report him to say? No
his saying was too long for your theeuish bed, and therefore you cut of Perse
of him self, or by him self. What say you? Dare you affirm that Christ of
him self in respect of his divine nature, has need of any complement? That
Christ has had always a Church since the beginning of the world, and shall
have to the end, Beza does plainly in an hundredth places confess: neither
can it be otherwise proved by this translation, nor vet (by Bezaes words that
Christ of him self is perfect and needs no supply) but that it pleases him
to become the head of the Church, as of his body, which his divine and
merciful pleasure, seeing it is immutable, Christ can not be without his
Church, nor the Church without him. Yea as Beza in plain words affirms,
this is our whole hope and consolation, that Christ esteems him self an
imperfect head, and maimed of his members, except he have his Church adjoined
to him as his body.

MART. 10. Again, it comes from the same puddle of Geneua, that in their
Bibles so called, the English Bezites Bib 1579.
translate against the unity of the Catholic Church. For whereas them selves
are full of sects and dissensions, and the true Church is known by unity,
and has this mark given her by Christ him self, in whose person Solomon
speaking says, Vna est columba mea, that is, One is my dove, or, My Cant. 6.
v. 8.
dove is one. Therefore in steed hereof, the foresayed Bible (...).
says, My dove is alone: Neither Hebrew nor Greek (...)
word having that signification, but being as proper to signify one, as Vnus
in Latin.

FVLK. 10. He that has any nose may smell, that this censure comes from the
stinking puddle of Popish malice. For he that says my dove is alone. Cant. 6.
8. does a great deal more strongly aduouche the unity of the Church, than he
that says my dove is one. For whereas Solomon says in the verse going
immediately before. There are three score Queens, and four score concubines,
and of the damsels without number, if you add thereto my dove is one: it may
be thought she is one of those last mentioned. But if you say as the Geneua
Bible does, but my dove is alone, and my undefiled is the only daughter of her
mother: Now the church is excepted from all the rest of the Queens,
concubines, and damsels. And where you say, the Hebrew has not that
signification, I pray you go no further, but even to the same verse, and tell
me whether the sense be, that, she is one of her mothers daughters, or the only
daughter of her mother? Here therefore (as almost every where) you do nothing,
but seek a knot in a rush.

MART. 11. But we beseech every indifferent Reader, even for his souls
health to consider that one point specially before mentioned of their
abandoning the name of Church for so many years out of their English Bibles:
thereby to defeat the strongest argument that might and may possibly be
brought against them and all other Heretics: to wit, the authority of the
Church which is so many ways and so greatly recommended unto all Christians in
ho'y Scriptures. Consider (I pray you) what a malicious intention they had
herein. First, that the name Church should never sound in the common peoples
ears out of the Scriptures: secondly, that as in other things, so in this also
it might seem to the ignorant a good argument against the authority of the
Church, to say, We find not this word (Church) in all the holy Scriptures.
For as in other articles they say so, because they find not the express word
in the holy Scripture, so did they well provide, that the word (Church) in the
holy Scriptures should not stay or hinder their schismatic and heretical
proceedings, as long as that was the only English translation, that was read
and liked among the people: that is, so long till they had by preaching taken
away the Catholic Churches credit and authorite altogether, among the ignorant
by opposing the Scriptures thereunto, which them selves had thus falsely
translated.

FVLK. 11. We trust every indifferent Reader will consider, that they which
translated the Greek word Ecclesia, the congregation, and admonished in the
notes that they did by that word mean the church, and they which in the
creed might have translated Ecclesiam Catholicam, the universal congregation,
taught all children to say, I believe the Catholic church, could have no such
deuilish meaning as this malicious sclaunderer, of his own head does
imagine. For who ever heard any man reason thus. This word church is not
found in the Scripture, therefore the church must be despised, etc. Rather it
is like (beside other reasons before alleged) that those first translatours,
having in the old Testament out of the Hebrew translated the words Cahal
Hadath, and such other for the congregation (where the Papists will not
translate the church, although their Latin text be Ecclesia, as appears,
Act. 7. where they call it assembly) thought good to retain the word
congregation, throughout the new Testament also, least it might be thought of
the ignorant, that God had no church in the time of the old Testament.
Howsoever it was, they departed neither from the word, nor meaning of the holy
Ghost: nor from the usage of that word Ecclesia, which in the Scripture
signifies as generally, any assembly, as the word Congregation does in
English.

CHAP. VI.
Heretical translation against PRIEST and PRIESTHOOD.

Martin.
But because it may be, they will stand here upon 1.
their later translations, which have the name Church, (because by that time
they saw the absurdity of changing the name, and now their number was
increased, and them selves began to challenge to be the true Church, though
not the Catholic: and for former times when they were not, they devised an
invisible Church) If then they will stand upon their later translations, and
refuse to justify the former: let us demand of them concerning all their
English translation, why and to what end they suppress the name Priest,
tra^slating it Elder, in all places where the holy Scripture would signify by
Presbyter and Presbyterium, the Priests and Priesthood of the new Testament?

Fulke.
IF any error have escaped the former 1.
translations, that has been reformed in the later, all reasonable men ought
to be satisfied with our own corrections. But because we are not charged with
ouersights and small faults committed either of ignorance, or of negligence,
but with shameless tra^slations, wilful and heretical corruptions, we may not
acknowledge any such crimes, whereof our conscience is clear. That we devised
an invisible church, because we were few in number, when our translations were
first printed, it is a lewd sclaunder. For being multiplied (as we are God be
thanked) we hold still that the Catholic church, which is the mother of us
all, is invisible, and that the church on earth may at sometimes be driven into
such streights, as of the wicked it shall not be known. And this we held
always, and not otherwise. Now touching the word Presbyter, and Presbyterium
why we translate them not Priest, and Priesthood of the new Testament, we have
given sufficient reason before: but because we are here urged a fresh, we must
answer as occasion shall be offered.

MART. 2. Understand gentle Reader, their wily policy therein is this. To
take away the holy sacrifice of the Mass, they take away both altar and
Priest, because they know right well that these three (Priest, sacrifice, and
altar) are dependentes and consequentes one of an other, so that they can not
be separated. If there be an external sacrifice, there must be an external
Priesthood to offer it, an altar to offer the same upon. So had the Gentiles
their sacrifices, Priests, and altars: so had the Jews: so Christ him self
being a Priest according to the order of Melchisedec, had a sacrifice, his
body: and an altar, his Cross, upon the which he offered it. And because he
instituted this sacrifice to continue in his Church for ever, in commemoration
and representation of his death, therefore did he withal ordain his Apostles
Priests at his last supper, there and then instituted the holy order of
Priesthood and Priests (saying, hoc faecite, Do this:) to offer the self
same sacrifice Luc. c. 22. v. 19.
in a mystical and vnblouddie manner, until the worlds end.

FVLK. 2. In denying the blasphemous sacrifice of the popish mass, with the
altar, and priesthood, that thereto belongs, we use no wily policy, but with
open mouth at all times, and in all places, we cry out upon it. The sacrifices,
priests, and altars of the Gentiles, were abominable. The sacrifices of the
Jews, their priests, and altars, are all accomplished and finished in the
only sacrifice of Christ our high Priest, offered once for all, upon the altar
of the cross: which Christ our Savior, seeing he is a Priest, according to
the order of Melchisedech, has an eternal priesthood, and such as passes not
by succession, Heb. 7. Therefore did not Christ at his last supper, institute
any external propitiatory sacrifice of his body and blood, but a sacrament,
joined with the spiritual sacrifice of praise, and thanks giving. Which
sacrament being administered by the ministers thereto appointed, the sacrifice
is common to the whole Church of the faithful, who are all spiritual
priests, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, as much as the minister of the
word and sacraments.

MART. 3. To defeat all this, and to take away all external priesthood and
sacrifice, they by corrupt translation of the holy Scriptures, make them clean
dumme, as though they had not a word of any such Priests, or Priesthood as we
speak of. Their Bibles (we grant) have the name of Priests very often, but
that is when mention is made either of the Priests of the Jews, or of the
Priests of the Gentiles (specially when they are reprehended and blamed in the
holy Scriptures) and in such places our Adversaries have the name Priests in
there translations, to make the very name of Priest odious among the common
ignorant people. Again they have also the name Priests, when they are taken
for all manner of men, women, or children, that offer internal and spiritual
sacrifices, whereby our Adversaries would falsely signify that there are no
other Priests, VVhitakers page 199.
as one of them of late freshly avouches, directly against S. Augustine, who
in one brief sentence distinguishes Priests properly so called in the Church,
and Priests as it is a common name to all Christians. Lib. 20. de Ciuit. Dei,
cap. 10. This name then of Priest and Priesthood properly so called (as S.
Augustine says) which is an order distinct from the Laity and vulgar people,
ordained to offer Christ in an unbloody manner in sacrifice to his heavenly
father for us, to preach and minister the Sacraments, and to be the Pastors of
the people) they wholly suppress in their translations, and in all places where
the holy scripture calls them, Presbyteros, there they never translate
Priests, but Elders. And that they do observe so duly and so warily, and
with so full and general consent in all their English See the Puritans reply,
page 159. and VVhitgifts defense against the Puritans, page 722.
Bibles, as the Puritans do plainly confess, and M. Whit. gift denies it
not, that a man would wonder to see how careful they are, that the people may
not once hear the name of any such Priest, in all the holy scriptures,

FVLK. 3. Now you have gotten a fine net to dance naked in, that no
ignorant blind bussarde can see you. The maskes of your net be the ambiguous
and abusiue significations of this word Priest, which in deed according to
the original deriuation from Presbyter, should signify nothing else, but an
Elder, as we translate it, that is, one appointed to govern the Church of God,
according to his word: but not to offer sacrifice for the quick and the dead.
But by usurpation it is commonly taken, to signify a sacrificer, such as (...)
is in Greek, and sacerdos in Latin, by which names, the ministers of the
Gospel are never called by the holy Ghost. After this common acception, and
use of this word Priest, we call the sacrificers of the old Testament, and of
the Gentiles also: because the Scripture calls them by one name Cohanin, or
(...), but because the Scripture calls the ministers of the new Testament by
diverse other names, and never by the name of (...), we thought it necessary to
observe that distinction, which we see the holy Ghost so precisely has
observed. Therefore where the Scripture calls them (...), we call them
according to the etymology, Elders, and not Priests: which word is taken up
by common usurpation, to signify sacrificers of Jews, Gentiles, or Papists,
or else all Christians, in respect of spiritual sacrifices. And although
Augustine, and other of the ancient fathers, call the ministers of the new
Testament, by the name of sacerdotes, and (...), which signify the ministers
of the old Testament: yet the authority of the holy Ghost, making a perfect
distinction between these two appellations, and functio^s, ought to be of more
estimation with us. The Fathers were content to speak in Latin and Greek, as
the terms were taken up by the common people newly converted from gentilitie,
but yet they retained the difference of the sacrificing priesthood, of the one,
and the ministerial office of the other. This may suffice therefore to render
a reason, why we use not the word Priest for Ministers of the new Testament:
not that we refuse it in respect of the etymology, but in respect of the use
and common signification thereof.

MART. 4. As for example in their translations. When there fell a question
about circumcision, They determined (...).
that Paul and Barnabas should go up to Jerusalem Presbyteros.
unto the Apostles and ELDERS, about this question. Act. 15. And again, They
were received of the The later Bibles read Church.
congregation and of the Apostles and ELDERS. Again, The Apostles and Elders
came together to reason of this matter. Again, Then pleased it the Apostles
and Elders with the whole congregation to send etc. Again, The Apostles and
Elders and brethren send greeting etc. Again, They delivered them the decrees
for to keep, Act 16.
that were ordained of the Apostles and ELDERS. If in all these places they had
translated Priests (as in deed they should have done according to the Greek
word) it had then disaduantaged them this much, that men would have thought,
both the dignity of Priests to be great, and also their authority in
Councels, as being here joined with the Apostles, to be greatly reverenced and
obeyed. To keep the people from all such holy and reverent cogitations of
Priests, they put Elders, a name wherewith our holy Christian forefathers
ears were never acquainted, in that sense.

FVLK. 4. In all those places by you rehearsed, Act. 15. and 16. your own
vulgar Latin text has seniores, which you had rather call ancients (as the
French Protestants call the Governors of their Churches,) than Elders, as we
do. That Popish Priests should have any dignity or authority in Councels,
we do flatly deny: but that the Seniors, Ancients, Elders, or Priests (if
you will) of the new Testament, should have as much dignity and authority, as
Gods word does afford them, we desire with all our hearts. That our Christian
Forefathers ears were not acquainted with the name of Elders, it was because
the name of Priest in their time, sou^ded according to the etymology, and not
according to the corruption of the Papists: otherwise I think their ears
were as much acquainted with the name of Elders, which we use, as with the name
of Auncientes, and Seniors, that you have newly taken up, not for that they
differ in signification from Elders, but because you would differ from us.

MART. 5. But let us go forward. We have heard often and of old time, of
making of Priests: and of late years also, of making Ministers: but did ye
ever here in all England of making Elders? Yet by these men's translations it
has been in England a phrase of Scripture this thirty year: but it must
needs be very strange, that this making of Elders has not all this while
been practiced and known, no not among them selves in any of their Churches
within the realm of England. To Titus they make the Apostle say thus, For
this cause left Tit. 1.
I thee in Creta, that thou should ordain ELDERS in every city, etc.
Again of Paul and Barnabas: When (...).
they had ordained Elders by Election, in every congregration. Presbyteros.
Bib. an 1562.
Act. 14. If they had said plainly as it is in the Greek, and as our
forefathers were wont to speak, and the truth is: Titus was le^t in Creta to
ordain Priests in every city: and, Paul and Barnabas made Priests in
every Church: then the people would have understood them they know such
speeches of old, and it had been their joy and comfort to hear it specified in
holy Scriptures. Now they are told an other thing, in such newness of
speeches and words, of Elders to be made in every city and congregation, and
yet not one city nor congregation to have any Elders in all England, that we
know not what is profane novelty of words, which the Apostle ^. Tim. 6.
wills to be avoided, if this be not an exceeding profane novelty.

FVLK. 5. When you have gotten a babble, you make more of it than of the tower
of London, for you have never done playing with it. It must needs be a
clarkely argument, that is drawn from the vulgar speeches of making Priests,
and making Ministers. Those Priests or Ministers, that are made among us, are
the same Elders that the Scripture in Greek calls (...), and the Bishops
letters of orders, testifying of their ordination, call them by none other
name, but by the name of Presbyteri, which the Scripture uses: which term
though in English you sound it Priests, Elders, Ancients, Seniors, or
Ministers, which is the common peoples word, it is the same office which is
described by the holy ghost, Tit. 1. and in other places of Scripture. As for
the profane novelty wherewith this word Elder is changed, we will consider
of it in the next section.

MART. 6. That it is novelty to all English Christian ears, it is evident.
And it is also profane, because they do so English the Greek word of
ordaining (for of the word Presbyter (...).
Act. 14.
we will speak more anon) as if they should translate Demosthenes, or the
laws of Athens concerning their choosing of Magistrates, which was by giving
voices with lifting up their hands. So do they force this word here, to
induce the peoples election, and yet in their Churches in England the people
elect not ministers, but their Bishop. Whereas the holy Scripture (...).
says, they ordained to the people: and what soever force the word has, it is
here spoken of the Apostles, and pertains not (...).
to the people, and therefore in the place to Titus it is another Tit. 1.
word which cannot be forced further, than to ordain and appoint. And they
might know (if malice and Heresic would suffer them to see and confess it)
that the holy Scriptures, and fathers, and Ecclesiastical custom, has drawn
this and the like words from their profane and common signification, to a more
peculiar and Ecclesiastical speech: as Episcopus, an ouerseer in Tulite, is a
Bishop in the new Testament.

FVLK. 6. The name Elders used in our translation, is neither more novel to
English ears, nor more profane to godly ears, than the name Ancients, which
your translation uses. And yet I think the Apostle 1. Tim. 6. spoke not of
novelty to English ears, but of that which was new to the ears of the
Church of God. But the word Elders (I ween) must be profane, because we
English the Greek word of ordeining, as if we should translate Demosthenes,
or the Laws of Athens concerning the choosing of Magistrates. Does not this
cavil redounde more against the holy Ghost, to accuse his style of
profaneness, which uses the same words for the ordeining of Priests, that
Demosthenes or the laws of Athe^s might use for choosing of their Magistrates?
But this word we enforce (you say) to enduce the peoples election, and yet the
Bishop, not the people, elect our ministers. We mean not to enforce any other
election than the word does signify. Neither does our Bishops (if they do
well) ordeine any Ministers or Priests without the Testimony of the people,
or at leastwise of such as be of most credit where they are known. Where you
urge the pronowne, (...), to them, as though the people gave no consent nor
testimony, it is more than ridiculous: and beside that, contrary to the
practice of the primitive Church* for many hundredth years after the Apostles,
as also that you would enforce upon the word (...), used by S. Paul, Tit. 1.
as though that word of constitution, did exclude election. That the word
(...) by the Fathers of the Church since the Apostles, has been drawn to
other signification than it had before, it is no reason to teach us how it was
used by the Apostles. Election is an indifferent thing, the election of
Bishops, Elders, or Priests is an holy thing, the holiness whereof is not
included in the word (...) but in the holy institution of Christ, and
authority by appointment delivered, by imposition of the hands of the
Eldership.

MART. 7. And concerning (...) which we now speak of, S. Hierom tells them
(in c. 58. Esai.) that it signifies Clericorum Greg. Nazian. in titul. Ser. 1.
4. 5.
ordinationem, that is, giving of holy orders, which is done not only by
prayer of the voice, but by (...) and (...).
imposition of the hand: according to S. Paul unto Timothee, Manus cito nemini
imposueris. Impose or put hands quickly on no man. That is, be not hasty or
easy to give holy orders. Where these great etymologistes, that so Ignat. ep.
10. says of Bishops, (...).
strain the original nature of this word to profane stretching forth the
hand in elections, may learn an other Ecclesiastical erymologie thereof, as
proper and as well deduced of the word as the other, to wit, putting forth the
hand to give orders: and so they shall find it is all one with that which the
Apostle calls imposition of hands, 1. Tim. 4 2. Tim 1: and consequently, for,
ordaining Elders by election, they should have said, ordaining or making
Priests by imposition of hands: as else where S. Paul, 1. Tim. 5. and the
Acts of the Apostles (Act. 6. and 13.) do speak in the ordaining of the seven
Deacons and of S. Paul and Barnabas.

FVLK. 7. The testimony of S. Hierome whom you In Esa. cap. 58.
cite, you understand not, for speaking there of the extension of the finger,
which the septuaginta translate (...), and God requires to be taken away: he
says, Many of our interpreters do understand it of the ordination of Clerks,
which is performed not only at the imprecation of voice, but also at the
imposition of hands, least as we have laughed at in some men, the secret
imprecation of the voice should ordain Clerks, being ignorant thereof. And so
proceeds to inueigh against the abuse of them, that would ordain Clerks, of
their basest officers, and seruitours, yea at the request of foolish women. By
which it is manifest, that his purpose is not to tell what (...). properly does
signify, but that imposition of hands, is required in lawful ordination,
which many did understand by the word (...). although in that place it
signified no such matter. And therefore you must seek further authority to
prove your Ecclesiastical etymology, that (...) signifies putting forth of
the hands to give orders. The places you quote in the margent, out of the
titles of Nazianzens sermons, are to no purpose, although they were in the
text of his Homilies. For it appears not, although by Synecdoche the whole
order of making Clerks were called (...) that election was excluded where
there was ordination by imposition of hands. As for that you cite out of
Ignatius, proves against you, that (...) differs from imposition of hands:
because it is made a distinct office from (...), that signifies to lay on
hands? and so (...) and (...) by your own author do differ.

MART. 8. But they are so profane and secular, that they translate the Greek
word (...) in all the new Testament, as if it had the old profane
signification still, and were indifferent to signify the ancients of the
Jews, the Senators of Rome, the elders of Lacedemonia, and the Christian
Clergy. In so much that they say, Paul sent to Ephesus, and called the Elders
(...).
of the Church: Act. 20. and yet they were such as had their flocks, and cure
of souls, as follows in the same place. They make S. Paul speak thus to
Timothee, Neglect not the (...).
gift (so they had rather say than grace, lest holy orders should Bib. 1579.
1577.
be a Sacrament) given thee with the laying on of the hands of the Eldership.
or, by the authority of the (...).
Eldership. 1. Tim. 4. What is this company of Eldership? Presbyterij.
Somewhat they would say like to the Apostles word, but they will not speak
plainly, least the world might hear out of the Scriptures, that Timothee was
made Priest or Bishop even as the use is in the Catholic Church at this day.
Let the Ca. 3. in the year 436. Where S. Augustine was present and
subscribed.
fourth Council of Carthage speak for both parts indifferently, and tell us
the Apostles meaning, A Priest when he takes his orders, the Bishop
blessing him and holding his hand upon his head, let all the Priests also
that are present, hold their hands by the Bishops hand upon his head. So do
our priests as this day, when a Bishop makes priests: and this is the laying
on of the hands of the company of Priests, which S. Paul speaks of, and
which they translate, the company of the Eldership. Only their former
translation of 1562. in this place (by what chance or consideration we know
not) let fall out of the pen, by the authority of Priesthood.

FVLK. 8. We desire not to be more holy in the english terms, than the holy
Ghost was in the Greek terms. Whom, if it pleased to use such a word, as is
indifferent to signify the ancients of the Jews, the Senators of Rome, the
Elders of Lacedemonia, and the Christian Clergy, why should we not truly
translate it into English?

But I pray you in good sadness, are we so profane, and secular, Act. 20. in
calling those whom Saint Paul sent for out of Ephesus, Elders? What shall we
say then of the vulgar Latin text, which calls them Maiores natu? as though
they obtained that degree by years, rather than by any thing else? and why do
you so profanely, and secularly call them the Ancients of the Church? Is there
more profaneness and secularitie in the English word Elders, than in the
Latin word Maiores natu, or in your Frenchenglishe term, Ancients. Surely
you do nothing but play with the noses of such as be ignorant in the tongues,
and can perceive no similitude or difference of these words, but by the sound
of their ears. But now for the word (...), used by Saint Paul, 1. Tim. 4.
which we call the Eldershippe, or the company of Elders, I have showed before,
how it is used by Saint Luke, in his Gospel, cap. 22. and Act. 22. You say,
we will not speak plainly, lest the world should hear, that Timothy was
made Priest, or Bishop, even as the use is in the Catholic Church at this day.
And then you tell us out of the Council of Carthage, 4. cap. 3. that all the
Priests present should lay their hands on the head of him that is
ordained, together with the Bishop. We know it well, and it is used in the
Church of England, at this day. Only the term of Eldership displeases you,
when we mean thereby the company of Elders. But whereas the translators of
the Bible, 1562. call it Priesthood, either by Priesthood they meant the same
that we do by Eldershippe: or if they meant by Priesthood, the office of
Priests, or Elders, they were deceived. For (...) signifies, a company of
Elders, as it is twice used by S. Luke, and oftentimes by the ancient writers
of the Church, both Greeks and Latins.

MART. 9. Otherwise in all their English Bibles, all the bells ringe one note,
as, The Elders that rule well, are worthy of double honor. And, Against an
Elder receive no accusation, but under two or three witnesses, 1. Tim. 5. And,
If any be diseased among you, let him (...).
call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him, and annoint him
with oil, etc. Jacob. 5. Whereas Lib. 3. de Sacerdotio.
Saint Chrysostom out of this place, proves the high dignity of Priests in
remitting sins, in his book entitled, Of Priesthood, unless they will
translate that title also, Of Eldershippe. (...).
Again, they make S. Peter say thus: The Elders which are among you, I
exhort, which am also an Elder, feedeye Christ's flock, as much as lies in
you, etc. 1. Pet 5.

FVLK. 9. In these three textes you triumph not a little, because your vulgar
Latin text has the Greek word Presbyter. The high dignity of Priests, or
Elders, in remitting sins, we acknowledge with Chrysostom, in his book
entitled of Priesthood: which seeing it is (...), we will never translate
Eldershippe. But we may lawfully wish, that both Chrysostom, and other
ancient writers, had kept that distinction of terms, which the Apostles and
Evangelists did so precisely observe. In the last text, 1. Pet. 5. your vulgar
Latin says, Seniores and Consenior, your selves in English, seniors, and
fellow senior. What trespass then have we committed, in saying Elders, and
fellow Elder, or an Elder also?

MART. 10. Where if they will tell us (as also in certain S. Hierom reads,
Presbyteros ego compresbyter Ep. 85. ad Euag. and in 1. ad Gal. proving the
dignity of Priests. and yet in 4. Gal. he reads according to the vulgar
Latin text, Seniores in vobis rogo consenior and ipse. Whereby it is evident,
that Senior here, and in the Acts, is a Priest, and not contrary, Presbyter,
an Elder.
other places) that our Latin translation has Seniores, and maiores natu: we
tell them, as heretofore we have told them, that this is nothing to them, who
profess to translate the Greek. Again we say, that if they meant no worse
than the old Latin translator did, they would be as indifferent as he, to
have said sometime Priests, and Priesthood, when he has the words Presbyteros
and Presbyterium: as we are indifferent in our translation, saying Seniors and
Ancients, when we find it so in our Latin: being well assured that by sundry
words he meant but one thing, as in Greek it is but one, and as both Erasmus,
and also Beza him self always translate it, keeping the name Presbyter and
Presbyteri: of whom by reason they should have learned, rather than of our
Latin translator, whom otherwise they condemn. And if they say, they do
follow them, and not him, because they translate not Senior, and mayor natu,
but the word Presbyter, or (...), an Elder, in all places: we tell them, and
herein we convent their conscience, that they do it to take away the external
Priesthood of the new Testament, and to suppress the name Priest, against the
Ecclesiastical, and (as now since Christ) very proper and usual signification
thereof, in the new Testament, councels, and fathers, in all common writing
and speaking: specially the Latin Presbyter, which grew to this signification
out of the Greek, in the foresaid places of holy scripture.

FVLK. 10. I have told you already, and you could not but know, that it should
be told you, that seeing we translate none otherwise, tha^ your vulgar Latin
tra^slator, we are no more to be blamed of falsehood, corruption, profaneness,
nouelty, tha^ he is, who professed to traslate the Greek as much as we do. But
if we had meant no worse (say you) than he, we would have been as indifferent
to have said sometimes priest and priesthood, where he has the word
Presbyteros, and Presbyteriu^. I answer, Presbyteriu^ he has but once, and
for that you have Priesthood once, as you confessed before. And if the name
Priest were of the same understanding in common English, that the word
Presbyter is, from whence it is derived, we would never have sought more
words for it, than we do for the words Bishop, Deacon, and such like.

The words Presbyter, and Presbyterium, you confess, that Beza does always
use, and so do we, when we write or speak Latin, but we can not use them in
English, except we should be as fond as you in your gratis, deposi^um, and
such fantasies. And to tell you plainly, as our conscience bears us
witness, we will never dissemble, that we avoid that word Priest, as it is
used to signify a sacrificer, because we would show a perfect distinction,
between the priesthood of the law, and the ministerye of the Gospel: between
Sacerdos, and Presbyter, a sacrificer, and a governor of the Church. And I
appeal to your own conscience, whether if the English word Priest, were as
indifferent as Presbyter, and sounded no more toward a sacrifice, than either
Presbyter, or your own English words, Ancient, and Senior, whether (I say)
you would make so much a do about it, for to have it in all places of the
New Testament, where (...) is in the Greek. But seeing your popish
sacrificing power, and blasphemous sactifice of your Mass, has no manner
ground at all in the holy Scriptures, either in the original Greek, or in
your own Latin translation, you are driven to seek a seelye shadow for it,
in the abusiue acception and sounding of the English word, Priest, and
priesthood. And therefore you do in the second section of this chapter, in
great earnest affirm, that Priest, sacrifice, and altar, are dependents, and
consequents, one of another, so that they can not be separated. If you should
say in Latin Sacerdos, sacrificium, altar* or in Greek (...) be such
consequents, we will all subscribe unto you: but if you will change the first
word, and say Presbyter, sacrificium, altar, or (...), every learned man's
ears will gloe, to hear you say, they are dependents and consequentes
inseparable. Therefore we must needs distinguish of the word Priest, in your
Corollarie, for you mean thereby Sacerdotem, we grant the consequence of
sacrifice and altar, but if you mean Presbyterium, we deny that ever God
joined those three in an inseperable band, or that Presbyter in that he is
Presbyter, has any thing to do with sacrifice, or altar, more than Senior, or
Maicr natu, or Ancient, or Elder.

MART. 11. Insomuch that immediately in the first Canons See can. Apost. Conc.
1. Nic. Epist. Ignat. Co^c. Carth. 4. Beza in 1. Pet. 5.
and Councels of the Apostles and their successors, nothing is more common than
this distinction of Ecclesiastical degrees and names, Si Episcopus, vel
Presbyter, vel Diaconus, etc. If any Bishop, or Priest, or Deacon do this or
that. Which if the Protestants or Caluinistes will translate after their manner
thus, If a Bishop, or Elder, or Deacon, etc. they do against them selves,
which make Presbyter or Elder a common name to all Ecclesiastical persons: and
not a peculiar degree, next unto a Bishop. So that either they must condemn
all antiquity for placing Presbyter in the 2. degree after a Bishop, or they
must translate it Priest as we do, or they must make Elder to be their second
degree, and so put Minister out of place.

FVLK. 11. The distinction of Episcopus* and Presbyter to signify several
offices, we grant to be of great antiquity, albeit we may not admit the
counterfaite Canons of the Apostles, nor the Epistles of Ignatius, for such
men's writings as they bear the name to be. We make Presbyter, or Elder, a
common name to all Ecclesiastical persons, none otherwise, than you do this
word Priest. For Deacons with us, are not called Presbyteri, or Elders. As for
the distinction of Bishops and Elders names, which the Scripture takes for
the same, does no more condemn all antiquity in us, than in you. Who
acknowledge that the Scripture uses those names without distinction, in your
note upon Act. 20. v. 28. where they are called Bishops, which before ver.
17. are called (...), which you translate Ancients, and expound Priests: and
thus you write. Bishops or Priests (for those names were sometime used
indifferently, Governors of the Church of God, and placed in that room and
high function by the holy Ghost. But it seems you have small regard to
defend your own notes, so you might find occasion to quarrel at our words.

MART. 12. And here we must ask them, how this name (...)
Minister came to be a degree distinct from a Deacon, whereas Diaconus.
by their own rule of translation, Deacon is nothing else but a Minister: and
why keep they the old and usual Ecclesiastical S. Tim. 3. Bib. 1577. 1579.
name of Deacon in translating Diaconus, and not the name of Priest, in
translating Presbyter? Does not Priest come of Presbyter as certainly and as
agreeably as Deacon of Diaconus? Prebstre. Prete.
Does not also the French and Italian word for Priest come directly from the
same? Will you always follow fancy and not reason, do what you list,
translate as you list, and not as the truth is, and that in the holy
Scriptures, which you boast and vaunt so much of? Because your selves have the^
whom you call Bishops, the name Bishops is in your English Bibles, which
otherwise by your own rule of translation, should be called an Ouerseer or
Superintendent: likewise Deacon you are content to use as an Ecclesiastical
word so used in antiquity, because you also have those whom you call Deacons:
Only Priests must be turned contemptuously out of the text of the holy
Scriptures, and Elders put in their place, because you have no Priests, nor
will none of them, and because that is in controversy between us. And as for
Elders, you have none permitted in England, for fear of overthrowing your
Bishops office and the Queens supreme government in all spiritual things and
causes. Is not this to follow the humor of your heresy, by Machiauels
politic rules without any fear of God?

FVLK. 12. Here I must answer you, that we have no degree of Ministers
distinct from Deacons, but by vulgar and popular use of speaking, which we are
not curious to control. Otherwise, in truth, we account Bishops, Elders, and
Deacons, all Ministers of the Church. It is no more therefore, but the common
speech of men, which uses that word, which is common to all Ecclesiastical
persons, as peculiar to the Elders, or Priests. Why we keep the name of
Deacons in translating Diaconus, rather than of Priests, in translating
Presbyter, I have told you often before. The name Priest being by long abuse
of speech applied to signify Sacrificers of the old Testament, called (...),
we could not give the same name to the Ministers of the new Testament, except
we had some other name whereby to call the Ministers of the old Testament,
wherein we follow reason, and not fancy, for it is great reason, we should
retain that difference in names of the Ministers of both the Testamentes,
which the holy Ghost does always observe. But you follow fancy altogether,
imagining that Priests only are put out of the text, because we have no
Priests. Whereas we have Priests as well as we have Bishops, and Deacons, and
so are they called in our book of common prayer indifferently Priests, or
Ministers. And where you say, we have no Elders permitted in England, it is
false, for those that are commonly called Bishops, Ministers, or Priests
among us, be such Elders as the Scripture commends unto us. And although we
have not such a consistory of Elders, of gouernemente, as in the Primitive
Church they had, and many Churches at this day have: yet have we also Elders
of government to exercise discipline, as Archbishoppes, and Bishops, with
their Chauncellours, Archedeacons, Commissaries, Officialles, in whom if any
defecte be, we wish it may be reformed according to the word of God.

MART. 13. Apostles you say for the most part in your translations (not
always) as we do, and Prophets, and Evangelists, and Angels, and such like,
and wheresoever there is no matter of controversy between you and us, there
you can plead very gravely for keeping the ancient Ecclesiastical Beza in
cap. 5. Mat. nu. 25. etc. 10. nu. 2.
words, as your master Beza for example, beside many other places where he
bitterly rebukes his fellow Castal^ons translation, in one place writes thus:
I can not in this place dissemble In 3. cap. Mat. nu. 1^.
the boldness of certain men, which would God it rested within the compass
of words only. These men Baptizo.
therefore concerning the word Baptizing, though used of sacred writers in the
mystery or Sacrament of the new Testament, and for so many years after, by the
secret consent of all Churches, consecrated to this one Sacrament, so that it
is now grown into the vulgar speeches Baptism.
almost of all nations, yet they dare presume rashly to change it, and in
place thereof to use the word washing. Delicate men forsooth, which neither are
moved with the perpetual authority of so many ages, nor by the daily custom of
the vulgar speech, can be brought to think that lawful for Divines, which all
men grant to other Masters and professors of arts: that is, to retain and
hold that as their own, which by long use and in good faith they have truly
possessed. Neither may they pretend the authority of some ancient writers, as
that Cyprian says, TINGENTES, for BA^PTIZANTES, and Tertullian in a certain
place calls SEQVESTREM, for MEDIATOREM. For that which was to those
auncientes as it were new, to us is old: and even then, that Baptizo.
Mediator.
the self same words which we now use, were familiar to the Church, it is
evident, because it is very seldom that they speak otherwise. But these men
by this novelty seek after vain glory, etc.

FVLK. 13. If in any place we use not the name of the Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, Angels, and such like, we are able to give as sufficient a reason
why we translate those words according to their General signification, as you
for translating sometime Baptismata, washings, and not baptismes, Ecclesia the
assembly and not the Church, with such like. Therefore as Castaleo and such
other Heretics, are justly reprehended by Beza, for leaving (without cause)
the usual Ecclesiastical terms, so when good cause or necessity requires
not to use them, it were superstition, yea and almost madness sometimes in
translating to use them, as to call the Pharisees washings Baptismes, or the
assembly of the Ephesia^ Idolaters the Church, yet both in Greek and Latin
the words are Baptismata, ecclesia.

MART. 14. He speaks against Castaleon, who in his new Latin translation of
the Bible, changed all Ecclesiastical words into profane and Heathenish, as
Angelos into genios, Prophetas into Fatidicos, Templum into fanum, and so
forth. But that which he did for foolish affectation of finenesse and style,
do not our English Caluinistes the very same when they list, for furthering
their Heresies? When the holy Scripture says idols according as Christians
have always understood it for false gods, they come and tell us out of Homer
and (...)
the Lexicons, that it may signify an image, and therefore so they Confut. of
the Reas. fol. 35.
translate it. Do they not the like in the Greek word that by Ecclesiastical
use signifies, penance, and doing penance, (...).
when they argue out of Plutarch, and by the profane sense thereof, that it is
nothing else but changing of the mind or amendment of life? Whereas in the
Greek Church, Poenitentes, that is, they that were in the course of penance,
and excluded from the Church, as Catechumeni, and Energumeni, till they had
accomplished their penance, the very same are called in the Greek (...).
Dionys. Ec. Hier. c. 3.


FVLK. 14. That Castaleo did for foolish affectatio^ of finenesse, you slander
us to do for furthering of heresy. And here again with lothsomnes, you
repeat your rotten quarrel of idols, translated images, which was to discover
your abominable idolatry, cloked under a blind and false distinction of
images and idols. The word (...), we translate repentance, as you do
sometimes, when you can not for shame use your Popish term penance, by which
you understand satisfaction for sin, which in diverse places you are
enforced to give over in the plain field, and to use the term repentance: as
in the fifth of the Acts. This Prince and Savior, God has exalted with his
right hand to give repentance to Israel and remission of sins, likewise Act.
11. where the Scripture speaks of God giving repentance to the Gentiles. And
when you speak of Judas, you say also repenting him, so that the repentance of
Judas, and that which God gave to Israel, and to the Gentiles is uttered in one
term, whereas else you have almost every where penance, and doing of penance.
Where you say we make repentance nothing but changing of the mind, or
amendment of life, you speak untruly, for not every changing of the mind
is godly repentance, neither is only amendment of life all repentance: but
there must be contrition, and sorrow for the life past. That in the Greek
Church they that were Catechumeni, and Energumeni, were called (...), such as
are in repentance it makes nothing against the true use of the Greek word, as
it is used in the Scriptures. We know the discipline of the Church appointed
an outward exercise of praying, fasting, and other humbling, for a trial, and
testimony of true and hearty repentance, which was some times called by the
name of repentance by a Metonymia signi, which he that will enforce by that
name to be parts of true and inward repentance, is as wise as he that will
contend the Iuy bushe to be a part of wine, because some men seeing it hang
over the house, will say, lo here is wine.

MART. 15. They therefore leaving this Ecclesiastical signification, and
translating it according to Plutarch, do they not much like to Castaleo? Do
they not the same, Latria. Dulia. Beza in 4. Mat. nu. 10.
against the famous and ancient distinction of Latria, and Dulia, when they
tell us out of Eustathius upon Homer, and Aristophanes the Grammarian, that
these two are all one? Whereas we prove out of S. Augustine in many places,
the (...) and (...) in the Scriptures, almost alvvaies used for the service and
honor proper to God. August* de Ciuit. Dei. li. 10. c. 1. Bib. an. 1562.
second Council of Nice, Venerable Bede, and the long custom of the Church,
that according to the Ecclesiastical sense and use deduced out of the
Scriptures, they differ very much. Do they not the like in Mysterium and
Sacramentum, which they translate a Secret in the profane sense, whereas they
know how these words are otherwise taken both in Greek and Latin, in the
Church of God? did they not the like in the word Ecclesia, when they
translated it nothing else but congregation? Do they not the like in (...),
which they translate, ordaining by election, as it was in the profane court of
Athens: whereas S. Hierons tells them, that Ecclesiastical writers take it
for giving holy orders by imposition of hands? Do they not the like in many
other words, wheresoever it serves their heretical purpose? And as for
profane translation, is there any more profane than Beza him self, that so
often in his annotations, reprehendeth the old translation, by the authority
of Tullie, and Terence, Homer, and Aristophanes, and the like profane authors?
yea so fondly and childishly, that for Olfactum, which Erasmus uses, as
Plinies word, he will needs say, odoratum, because it is Tullies word.

FVLK. 15. In translating the Scripture, we use the word repentance, in the
same signification, that the scripture uses (...). In other Ecclesiastical
writers, we can nevertheless understand it, as they mean it. Concerning that
unlearned distinction of Latria and Dulia, we do rightly, to show out of
profane writers, that it is vain, and that the terms signify all one, and
you your self confess in your marginall note, that sometimes in the Scripture
(...), and (...), do not signify the service and honor that is proper to
God, as for (...), is in more than an hundred places, used for the service and
honor proper to God. S. Augustine you confess afterward, knew well but one
tongue, and therefore he is no meet judge of distinction of Greek words. Bid
follows Augustines error. The idolaters of the 2. Nicene council, were glad
of a cloak for the rain, contrary to the property of their tongue. As is
proved by Eustathius, Aristophanes, Xenophon, Suidas, and by later writers, no
Protestants, Laurentius Valla, and Ludouicus Viues. Mysterium we translate a
secret, or a mystery, indifferently, the word signifying no more an holy
secret, than a profane and abominable secret, as the mystery of iniquity,
the mystery of Babylon. For the words Ecclesia, and (...), we have said
sufficiently, and very lately. To use Tullies words, when they answer the
Greek, as properly as any barbarous words, or less commendable words, I
know not why it should be counted blame worthy in Beza, or in any man, except
it be of such a Sycophant, as likes nothing, but that which sauoureth of his
own spittle.

MART. 16. But to return to our English translatours: do not they the like to
profane Castaleo, and do they not the very same that Beza their Master so
largely reprehendeth, when they translate Presbyterum, an Elder? Is it not all
one fault to translate so, and to translate, as Castaleo does Baptismum,
washing? Has not Presbyter been a peculiar and usual word for a Priest, as
long as Baptismus for the Sacrament of regeneration, which Castaleo altering
into a common and profane word, is worthily reprehended? We will prove it
has, not for their sake, who know it well enough, but for the Readers sake,
whom they abuse, as if they knew it not.

FVLK. 16. If it be as great a fault in us to translate Presbyterum, an Elder,
as for Castaleo to translate Baptismum, washing: your vulgar translatour must
be in the same fault with us, which so often translateth Presbyteros,
seniores, or maiores natu, which signify Elders, and not Priests: it is a
vain thing therefore that you promise to prove, that Presbyter has been a
peculiar, and usual word for a Priest, as long as Baptismus for the Sacrament
of regeneration. For peculiar you can never prove it, seeing it is used in the
Scripture so often, for such Elders and Ancients, as you your self would not
call Priests. So that if you did translate the whole Bible out of your own
vulgar Latin* you must translate Presbyter thrice, an Elder or Ancient, for
once a Priest.

MART. 17. In the first and second Canon of the Apostles That Presbyter has
signified a Priest, from the Apostles time, not an Elder.
we read thus, Episcopus a duobus aut tribus Episcopis ordinetur. Presbyter ab
vno Episcopo ordinetur, and Diaconus, and alij Clerici. that is, Let a bishop
be consecrated or ordained by two or three Bishops. Let a Priest be made by one
Bishop. See in the 4. Council of Carthage the diverse manner of Can. 23. 4.
co^secrating Bishops, Priests, Deacons, etc. Where S. Augustine was present
and subscribed. Again, Si quis Presbyter conte^nens Can. Apost. 32.
Episcopum suum etc. If any Priest contemning his Bishop, make a several
congregation, and erect another altar, (that is, make a Sehisme or Heresy) let
him be deposed. So did Arius being a Priest against his Bishop Alexander.
Again, Priests and Deacons, let them attempt to do nothing Can. 40.
without the Bishop. The first Council of Nice says, Can. 3.
The holy Synod by all means forbids, that neither Bishop, nor Priest, nor
Deacon etc. have with them any foreign woman, but the mother, or sister, etc. in
whom there is no suspicion. Again, It is told the holy Council, Can. 14.
that in certain places and cities, Deacons give the Sacraments to Priests.
This neither rule nor custom has delivered, that they which have not
authority to offer the sacrifice, should give to them that offer, the body of
Christ. The 3. Council of Carthage wherein S. Augustine was, and to the which
he subscribed, decrees, That in the Sacraments Can. 24.
of the body and blood of Christ, there be no more offered than our Lord him
self delivered* that is, bread and wine mingled with water. Which the sixth
general Council of Constantinople repeating and confirming, ad does If (...).
therefore any Bishop or Priest do not according to the order given by the
Apostles mingling water with wine, but offer an unmingled sacrifice, let him be
deposed etc. But of these speeches all Councelles be full: where we would
gladly know of these new Translatours, how Presbyter must be translated: either
an Elder, or a Priest.

FVLK. 17. I think you have clean forgotten your promise so lately made, that
this word Presbyter has always bin peculiar for a Priest, you bring many
testimonies, some counterfaite, some autenticall, in which the name of (...)
and Presbyter is found, but that in all them it is peculiar for a Priest, you
show not at all. Some color it has of that you say, in the 14. Can. of the
Nicene Council, and Carth. 3. c. 24. repeated Constable. 6. where mention is made
of sacrifice and offering, for so they did improperly call the administration
of the Lords supper, in respect of the sacrifice of thanks giving that was
offered therein. After which phrase also, they called the Ministers (...) and
Sacerdotes, sacrificers. So they called that which in deed was a table of wood
an altar, and the inferior ministers Levites, by which it appears they did
rather allude to the names used in the old Testament, than acknowledged a
sacrificing Priesthood, that might as properly be so called, as the Priesthood
after the order of Aaron was. Sometime they used the name of sacrifice and
Sacerdos generally, for religious service, and the minister of religion as the
Gentiles did. And hereof it is that we read often* of the sacrifices of bread
and wine, and in the Canon of Carthage by you cited. Nec amplius in sacrificijs
offeratur quam de vuis and frumentis. And let no more be offered in the
sacrifices, tha^ that which is made of grapes and corn. This was bread and
wine, not the natural body and blood of Christ. Wherefore these vnpropre
speeches prove not a sacrificing priesthood, whereby the natural body and
blood of Christ should be offered in the Mass, which is the mark you shoot
at.

MART. 18. Do not all the fathers speak after the same manner, making always
this distinction of Bishop and Priest, Ep. 2. ad Trallianos.
as of the first and second degree? S. Ignatius the Apostles scholar does he
not place Presbyterium as he calls it, and Presbyteros (...).
(Priests, or the College of Priests) next after Bishops, and Deacons in the
third place, repeating it no less than thrice in one Epistle, and commending
the dignity of all three unto the Comment. in c. 7. Michea.
people* does not S. Hierom the very same, saying* Let us honor a Bishop; do
reverence to a Priest, rise up to a Deacon? Ep. 85. ad Euagrium.
And when he says, that as Aaron and his sons and the Levites were in the
Temple, so are Bishops, Priests, and Deacons in the Church, for place and
degree. And in an other place, speaking of (...) ages done by the Vandals and
such like, Bishops were Epitaph. Nepotiani. c. 9.
(...) Priests slain, and diverse of other Ecclesiastical o^^ers: Churches
overthrown, the altars of Christ made stables for horses, the relikes of
Martyrs dug up, etc. When he says of Nepotian, fit Clericus, and per
solitos gradus Presbyter ordinatur: he becomes a man of the Clergy, and by
the accustomed degrees in m(...)at? a Priest, or an Elder? when he says, Mihi
ante Presby^^^u^ sedere non licet etc. does he mean he could not sit above an
Elder, or above a Priest, him self as then being not Priest? When he* and
Vincentius (as S. Epiphanius writes) of reverence to the Ep. 60. apud Hie^ ^^.
ca. 1.
degree, were hardly induced to be made Presbyteri: did they refuse the
Eldership? What was the matter that John the B. of Jerusalem, seemed to be so
much offended with Epiphanius and S. Hierom? was it not because Epiphanius made
Pauliamus, S. Ep. 1. ad Heliod.
Hieroms brother, Priest within the said John's Diocese?

FVLK. 18. Before the blasphemous heresy of the Popish sacrifice of the Mass
was established in the world, the fathers did with more liberty use the terms
of sacrifice, and sacrificing Priests: which improper speeches, since they
have given occasion in the time of ignorance, to maintain that blasphemous
heresy, there is good reason that we should beware how we use any such terms,
especially in translation of the Scriptures. All the rest of the authorities you
cite in this section, and 500. more such as they are, speak of Presbyter or
(...) which words we embrace: but of the English word Priest, as it is
commonly taken for a sacrificer, or against this word Elder, they speak
nothing, for in all those places, we may truly translate for Presbyter an Elder.

MART. 19. When all antiquity says, Hieronymus Presbyter, Cecilius Presbyter,
Ruffinus Presbyter, Philippus, I^^encus, Hesychius, Beda, Presbyteri: and when
S. Hierom so often in his Cataloge says, Such a man Presbyter: is it not for
distinction of a certain order, to signify that they were Priests, and not
Bishops? namely when he says of S. Chrysostom, Ioannes Presbyter Antiochenus,
does he not mean, he was as then but a Priest of Antioche? Would he have said
so, (...) had written of him, after he was Bishop of Constantinopl(...)

FVLK. 19. All this while here is nothing for the English word Priest, in that
respect we avoid it in tra^slatio^, nor against the word Elder, which we use,
by which we mean (...) other thing, than the Scripture does give us to
un(...)d by the word (...). As for the distinction of Episcopus, and Presbyter
which came in afterward, you your self confessed as we heard of late, that it
is not observed in the Scriptures, but the same men are called Episcopi, which
before were called Presbyteri. And according to that distinction, you can allow
but one Bishop of one city at once: yet the Scripture in diverse places
speaks of many Bishops of one city, as Act. 20. the Bishops of Ephesus
called before Presbyteri, Elders, also he saluteth the Bishops and Deacons of
Philippi, Phil. 1. where your note says, that, In the Apostles time, there
were not observed always distinct names of either function of B. and Priest.
Would you have us to translate the Scripture with distinction of names which
the holy ghost makes not, nor your vulgar Latin observes, nor you your self
for shame can observe? And if we should have translated for Elders, Priests,
that distinction taken up after the Apostles times, or the writing of the
Scripture, had been never the more confirmed.

MART. 20. But of al other places, we would desire these gay translatours to
translate this one place of S. Augustine, speaking of him self a Bishop, and S.
Hierom a Priest. Quanquam Inter Epistolas Hiero. Ep. 97. in ^ine.
enim secundu^ honoru^ vocabula, quae iam Ecclesiae vsus obtinuit, Episcopatus
Presbyterio mayor fit: tamen in multis rebus, Augustinus Hieronymo minor est.
Is not this the English thereof? For although according to the titles or names
of honor, which now by use of the church have prevailed, the degree of
Bishop be greater than Priesthood, yet in many things, Augustine is less
than Hierom. Or, does it like them to translate it thus, The degree of Bishop
is greater than Eldership, etc? Again, against Julian the heretic, when he
has brought many testimonies of the holy doctors, that were all Bishops, as of
S. Cyprian, Ambrose, Basil, Nazianzene, Chrysostom: at length he comes to S.
Hierom, who was no Bishop, and says: Nec sanctum Hieronymum, Lib. 1. ca. 2. in
fine.
quia Presbyter fuit, contemnendum arbitreris, that is, Neither must thou
think, that S. Hierom, because he was but a priest, therefore is to be
contemned: whose divine eloquence, has shined to us, from the East, even to
the West, like a lamp, and so forth to his great commendation. Here is a
plain distinction of an inferior degree to a Bishop, for the which the
Heretic Julian did easily contemn him. Is ^ot S. Cyprian full of the like
places? is not all antiquity so full, that whiles I prove this, me thinks I
prove nothing else, but that snow is white?

FVLK. 20. Of all other importune and unreasonable judges, you are one of the
worst, that would enforce us to translate the Scriptures, which you confess
observes not the distinction of Bishops, and Priests, according to the
fathers, which do almost always observe it. If we should translate those
sentences of S. Augustine, we might use the word Priest, for Presbyter, and
priesthood, for presbyterium, and if we use the words Elder, and Eldership,
what offense I pray you, were it, when by these names we understand nothing,
but the same function and minister which Augustine does? That Episcopus, a
Bishop, was of very old time used, to signify a degree Ecclesiastical,
higher than Presbyter, an Elder or Priest, we did never deny, we know it right
well. We know what S. Hierom writes upon the epistle to Titus, cap. 1. idem
est ^rgo Presbyter, qui Episcopus. The same man is Presbyter, or an Elder, or
Priest, which is Episcopus, a Bishop. And before that by the instinct of the
devil, factions were made in religion, and it was said among the people, I am
of Paul, I of Apollo, and I of Cephas, the Churches were governed by common
council Presbyterorum, of the Elders. But afterward, when every one thought
those whom he had baptized to be his own, and not Christ's, it was decreed in
the whole world, that one de Presbyteris, of the Elders, being elected, should
be set over the rest, to whom all the care of the Church should pertain,
and the seeds of schisms should be taken away. This and much more to this
effect, writes Saint Hieronyme of this distinction, in that place, and in
diverse other places, which nothing proves, that we are bound to translate
Presbyter in the Scripture, a Priest, and least of all, that we are bound in
terms, to keep that distinction, which the Scripture makes not, and the
Papists them selves can not observe in their most partial translation.

MART. 21. In all which places, if they will translate Elder, and yet make the
same a common name to all Ecclesiastical degrees, as Beza defines it, let the
indifferent Reader consider Annot. in 1. Pet. 5.
the absurd confusion, or rather the impossibility thereof: if not, but they
will grant in all these places, it signifies Priest, and so is meant: then we
must beat them with Bezaes rod of reprehension Bezaes words in the place a*
boue alleged.
against Castaleon: that we can not dissemble the boldness of these men, which
would God it rested within the custom of words only, and were not important
matter, concerning their heresy. These men therefore touching the word Priest,
though used of sacred writers in the mystery of the new Testament, and for so
many years after, by the secret consent of all Churches, consecrated to this
one Sacrament, so that it is now grown to be the proper vulgar speech almost
of all nations: yet Prete. Prebstre. Priest.
they dare presume rashly to change it, and in place thereof, to use the word
Elder delicate men forsooth (yea worse a great deal, because these do it for
heresy, and not for delicacy) which neither are moved with the perpetual
authority of so many ages, nor by the daily custom of the vulgar speech, can
be brought to think that lawful for divines, which all men grant to other
masters and professors of arts, that is, to reteyne and hold that as their
own, which by long use, and in good faith, they have truly possessed. Neither
may they pretend the authority of any ancient writer (as that the old Latin
translator says, Senior, and Seniores) Presbyter, for a Priest. Baptismus for
the Sacrament of Baptism.
for that which was to them as it were new, to us is old: and even then, that
the self same words which we now use, were more familiar to the Church, it is
evident, because it is very seldom that they speak otherwise.

FVLK. 21. I see no impossibility, but that in all places where we read
Presbyter, we may lawfully translate Elder, as well as Priest, and make it still
in Scripture, a common name to all Ecclesiastical degrees, at least, to as
many as the Scripture makes it common, without any absurdity or confusion.
And albeit in the fathers, we should translate it Priest, because they
understood by the name Presbyter, a distinct degree from Episcopus: yet the
saying of Beza against Castaleo, could not by any wise man be applied to us.
For Castaleo changed the name of the Sacrament Baptismus, by which both the
Scriptures, and the fathers uniformly, did use to signify one, and the same
Sacrament: whereas the name of Presbyter, in the Scripture, signifies one
thing, and in the fathers an other. For in the Scripture it is taken
indifferently for Episcopus, and Episcopus for Presbyter: but in the fathers
these are two distinct degrees. Therefore he is worthy to be beaten in a Grammar
schole, that can not see manifest difference between the use of the word
Baptismus, which being spoken of the Sacrament* in the Scriptures, and fathers,
is always one and of Presbyter, which in the Scriptures is every
Ecclesiastical governor, in the fathers one degree only, that is subject to
the Bishop.

MART. 22. Thus we have repeated Bezaes words again, only changing the word
Baptism into Priest, because the case is all one: and so unwittingly Beza the
successor of Calvin in Geneua, has given plain sentence against our English
Translatours in all such cases, as they go from the common received and usual
sense, to another profane sense, and out of use: as namely in this point of
Priest and Priesthood. Where we must needs add a word or two, though we be
too long, because See M. VVhitgifts defense against the Puritans reply. page
721. where he affi^meth that this word Priest, comes of the word
Presbyter, and not of the word Sacerdos.
their folly and malice is too too great herein. For whereas the very name
Priest, never came into our English tongue, but of the Latin Presbyte^, (for
thereupon Sacerdos also was so called, only by a consequence) they translate
Sacerdos, Priest, and Presbyter, not Priest, but Elder, as wisely, and as
reasonably, as if a man should translate, Praetor Londini, Maire of London: and
Mayor Londini, not Maire of London: but Greater of London: or Academia
Oxoniensis, the University of Oxford: and Vniuersitas Oxoniensis, not the
University, but the Generality of Oxford: and such like.

FVLK 22. Bezaes words agree to us, as well as Germans lips, that were nine
mile asunder. For if this english word Priest, by custom of speech, did
signify no more than the Greek word (...), we would no less use it in our
translations, than Bishops and Deacons: which offices though they be shamefully
abused by the Papists, yet the abuse of the words, makes no confusion
between the ministers of the law, and of the Gospel, as this word Priest
does, by which the Jewish sacrificers are rather understood, than preachers of
the Gospel, and ministers of the Sacraments. But whereas the etymology of
this English word Priest, comes from Presbyter, you charge us with great
folly and malice, that for Sacerdos, we translate Priest, and for Presbyter,
Elder. To this I answer, we are not Lords of the common speech of men, for
if we were, we would teach them to use their terms more properly, but seeing
we can not change the use of speech, we follow Aristotels council, which is
to speak, and use words* as the common people uses, but to understand and
conceive of things, according to the nature and true property of them.
Although for my part, I like well of the French translation, which for (...)
or Sacerdotes always translateth sacrificateurs, sacrificers, and for
Presbyteri, where they signify the Ministers of the word and Sacraments,
Prestres, Priests. But this diversity being only of words and not of matter,
or meaning reasonable men will take an answer, fools and quarrellers will
never acknowledge any satisfaction.

MART. 23. Again, what exceeding folly is it, to think that by false and
profane translation of Presbyter into Elder, they might take away the external
Priesthood of the new Testament, whereas their own word Sacerdos, which they
do and must needs translate Priest, is as common and as usual in all
antiouitie, as Presbyter: and so much the more, for that it is used
indifferently to signify both Bishops and Priests, which Presbyter lightly
does not but in the new Testament. As when Constantine the Great said to the
Bishops assembled in the Council of Nice, Deus vos constituit sacerdotes,
etc. God Ruffin. lib. 1. ca. 2.
has ordained you Priests, and has given you power to judge of us also. And
Saint Ambrose, When did thou Epist. 32. ad Vale^tinianum Imp.
ever hear, most clement Prince, that lay men have judged Bishops. Shall we
bend by flattery so far, that forgetting the right of our Priesthood, we
should yield Iuris Sacerdotalis.
up to others, that which God has commended to us? And therefore does Saint
Chrysostom entitle his six books De Sacerdotio, Of Priesthood, concerning
the dignity and calling not only of mere Priests, but also of Bishops: and
S. In Apolog. pro sua f^g. orat. 1. (...). Epist. 1. ad Hieronem. Sacerdotes.
(...)* (...).
Gregory Nazianzene handling the same argument says, that they execute
Priesthood together with CHRIST. And S. Ignatius says, Do nothing without the
Bishops, for they are Priests, but thou the Deacon of the Priests. And in the
Greek Liturgies or Masses, so often, (...), Then the Priest says this, and
that* signifying also the Bishop when he says Mass. and Ec. Hiera. c. 3.
S. Denis says sometime Archisacerdotem cum sacerdotibus. The high Priest or
Bishop with the Priests: whereof come the words (...), in the ancient
Greek fathers, for the sacred function of Priesthood, and executing of the
same.

MART. 24. If then the Heretics could possibly have extinguished Priesthood
in the word Presbyter, yet you see, it would have remained still in the words
Sacerdos and Sacerdotium* which themselves translate Priest and Priesthood:
and therefore we must desire them to translate us a place or two after their
own manner: first Saint Augustine speaking thus, Q^is vnquam audiuit
sacerdotem ad altar stantem etia^ Lib. 8 cap. 27. De Ciu. Dei.
super reliquias Martyrum* dicere: offero tibi Petre, and Paul vel Cypriane?
Who ever heard that a PRIEST standing at the altar* even over the relikes of
the Martyrs, said, I offer to thee Peter, and Paul, or Cyprian? So (we trow)
they must translate it. Again, Nos vni Deo and Lib. 22. Ciuit. c. 10.
Martyrum and nostro, sacrificium immolamus, ad quod sacrificium sicut homines
Dei, suo loco and ordine nominantur, non tamen a sacerdote inuocantur. Deo
quippe, non ipsis sacrificat, quamuis in memoria sacrificet eoru^, quia Dei
sacerdos est, non illoru^. Ipsum vero sacrificium corpus est Christi. We think
they will and must translate it thus. We offer sacrifice to the only God both
of Martyrs and ours, at the which Sacrifice, as men of God they (Martyrs) are
named in their place and order: yet are they not inuocated of the Priest that
sacrifices. For he sacrifices So as he said before, I offer to ^^ee Peter,
etc.
to God, and not to them (though he sacrifice in the memory of them) because
he is Gods Priest, and not theirs. And the sacrifice it self is the body of
Christ.

FVLK. 23. 24. Nay, what exceeding folly is it to think that an external
sacrificing office, can be established in the new Testament (which never
calls the Ministers thereof, Sacerdotes, or (...)) because men of later time
have improperly transferred those terms unto the Elders or Priests of the new
Testament. Certainly among so many names as the Scripture gives them, if
sacrificing for the quick and the dead, had been the principal part of
their function, as by you Papists has been accounted: is it credible, that
the holy Ghost would never have called them (...), as well, yea, and rather
than the Sacrificers of the old Testament? Seeing therefore the holy Ghost had
made such a broad difference, between their names, and offices, those ancient
fathers that confounded those names, which the spirit of God would have to be
distinct can not be excused: although they never dreamed of the mischief that
followed, that the altar of the cross being overthrown, and the only and
sufficient sacrifice, which Christ our high Sacrificer offered once for all,
being judged imperfect, a new altar, a new sacrifice, and a new sacrificing
Priesthood should be set up in the steed of it. Wherefore the improper
speeches of the ancient writers, are no warrant for us, either to translate
the Scripture according to their improper speaking, or to set up a new
sacrifice and function of sacrificing, contrary to their meaning. They named
sacrifice and offering, but they meant not propitiatory sacrifiee, but only of
prayers, or praises and giving of thanks. They named (...), and Sacerdotes,
but they meant according to the general etymology of those words, such as
were occupied in distributing holy things, not such as should verily
sacrifice the body of Christ again to his father, but offer the sacrifice of
thanks giving in the Sacrament of the Lords supper, which after a certain
manner (as Saint Augustine says) is called the body of Christ, Epist. 23.
^onifac. De co^sec. dissinct. 2. cap. hoc est, and Glossa ibidem calestis.
when in deed it is the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. And it is
called the sacrificing of the body of Christ, not in truth of the thing, but
a signifying mystery* as Gracian cites out of Hierome.

MART. 25. Likewise when Saint Ambrose says* The Lib. de Sacram. c. 4.
consecration ( of the body of Christ) with what words is it, and by whose
speech? Of our Lord Jesus. For in the rest that is said there is praise given
to God, prayer made for the people, for Kings, and others: but when it comes
that the venerable Sacrament must be consecrated, Sacerdos.
now the Priest uses not his own words, but he uses the words of Christ.
And S. Chrysostom in very many places Hom* 2. in 2. Timoth.
says, The sacred oblation it self, whether Peter, or Paul, or any meaner
Priest whatsoever offer it, is the very Sacerdos. Sacerdote.
same that Christ gave unto his disciples, and which now the Priests do make
or consecrate Why so I pray thee? because not men do sanctify this, but
Christ him self. which before consecrated the same. And again, It is not man
that makes the body and blood of Christ, but he that was crucified for us,
Christ: the words are uttered Sacerdotis.
by the Priests mouth, and by Gods power and grace are the things proposed,
consecrated. For this, says he, is my body. With this word are the things
proposed, consecrated.

FVLK. 25. These testimonies are heaped up without any need, for the improper
usage of these words (...), or Sacerdos in the ancient writers, we do
acknowledge: but in the holy Scripture you are not able to bring one place,
where Presbyteri of the new Testament are called Sacerdotes, or (...).
Wherefore of the improper applying of these names, to the Ministers of the new
Testament, can follow no consequence of external sacrifice, or altar which
you urge, except sacrifice and altar be likewise used improperly, as where the
table is called an altar, the bread and wine a sacrifice, as in Irenaeus lib.
4. cap. 32. where also he says, that the sacrifices do not sanctify the man,
but the conscience of the man being pur^, sanctifies the sacrifice, and
causes God to accept it as of a friend cap* 34. Which can not in any wise be
true of the natural body of Christ.

MART. 26. And so be these places, where them selves translate Sacerdos a
Priest, they may learn also how to translate Presbyteros in S. Hierome saying
the very same thing, Presbyteri.
that at their prayers, the body and blood of our Lord is made. And in an
other place, that with their sacred mouth, they make our Lords body. Likewise
when they read S. Ambrose against the Nouatians, that God has granted lice^c^
to his Priests to release and forgive as well great sins as Sacerdotibus.
little without exception: and in the Ecclesiastical history, how the Nouatian
Heretics taught that such as were fallen into great sins, should not ask
for remission of the Priest, but of God a Sacerdote.
only: they may learn how to translate Presbyteros, in S. Hierom, and in the
Ecclesiastical history, where the one says thus: Episcopus and Presbyter,
cum peccatorum audierit varietates, scit qui ligandus sit, qui soluendus: and
the other Sozom. lib. 7. c. 16* Socrat. lib. 5. c. 19.
speaks de Presbytero Poenitentiario, of an extraordinary Priest, that heard
confessions, and enjoined penance, who afterward was taken away, and the people
went to diverse ghostly fathers, as before. And especially Saint Chrysostom
^ill make them understand what these Presbyteri were, and how they are to be
called in English, who tells them in their own word, that Sacerdotes, the
Priests of the new law Lib. 3. de Sacerd.
have power, not only to know, but to purge the filth of the soul, therefore
whosoever despises them, is more worthy to be punished, than the ^ebell
Dathan, and his accomplices.

FVLK. 26. Where S. Hierom uses the word Presbyteri, we will make no great
courtesy to translate Priests: knowing that when he says, at their prayers,
the body and blood of Christ is made, he means the Sacrament of the body
and blood: of Christ, as he him self says in an other place. Dupliciter
sanguis Christi, and ^ar^ intelligitur. The blood and flesh of Christ is
understood two manner of ways either that spiritual and divine, whereof he
him self said: my flesh is meat in deed, and my blood is drink in deed:
and except ye shall eat my flesh and drink my blood, you shall not have
eternal life: or else the flesh and blood which was crucified, and which was
shed by the spear of the soldier. This and such other places teach us to
understand S. Hierome, if he speak any where obscurely or improperly of the
mystery of our Lords supper. We grant with Ambrose, that God has given
authority to all the ministers of the word, to remit all sins that be
remissible. But this do not you grant, for you reserve some to the Bishops,
and some to the Pope alone to remitte, wherein you go clean against Ambrose,
who favors you not so much by the term Sacerdos, which you say he uses, as
he condemns your partial and Popish reservation of cases, when he allows
every Priest to forgive, as well great sins as little* without exception. S.
Hierom you cite at large, as it seems, to insinuate auricular confession. But
the whole saying you liked not, because it* shows how they forgive sins. It
is written in Math. lib. 3. cap. 16. upon those words spoken to Peter. Unto
thee will I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven etc. Istu^ locu^ episcopi
and presbyteri no^intelligentes etc. This place Bishops and Priests not
understanding, take upon them somewhat of the pride of the Pharizees: so that
they think they may either condemn the innocents, or lose the guilty
persons: whereas with God not the sentence of the Priests, but the life of the
persons accused is inquired of. We read in Leuiticus of the Lepers, where they
are commanded to show them selves to the Priests, and if they have the
Leprosy, then by the Priest they are made unclean. Not that Priests make
Lepers and unclean persons, but that they may have knowledge of him that is a
Leper* and him that is no Leper: and may discern who is clean or who is
unclean. Therefore even as the Priest does there make the Leper clean or
unclean: So here also the Bishop and Priest does bind or lose, not them that
be innocent or guilty, but according to his office, when he shall hear the
variety of sinners, he knows who is to be bound, and who is to be loosed.
But where you say, the people went to diverse ghostly fathers, as before, when
that extraordinary penitentiarie Priest was taken away, for the adultery of a
Deaco^ at Constantinople, you speak beside the book, to make the ignorant
believe that the people went to auricular shrift. For in Constantinople, where
this privy confession was taken away, the people were left to their own
consciences. At Rome the same time, great offenders did open penance, neither
were there any such diverse ghostly fathers, as you speak of. That Chrysostom
says, lib. 3. de sacerdotio, we receive it, being so understood, as i^ be not
contrary to that I cited even now our of Hie(...) But what makes all this
against translating Presbyter, an Elder?

MART. 27 Now then (to conclude this point) seeing Heb 12:
we have such a cloud of witnesses (as the Apostle speaks) even from Christ's
time, that testify not only for the name* but for the very principal
functions of external Priesthood, in offering the sucrifice of Christ's body
and blood* in remitting sins, and so forth: what a pe^^ish, malicious, and
impudent corruption is this, for the defacing of the testimonies of the holy
scriptures tending thereunto, to seek to scratch advantage of the lord
Presbyter, and to make it signify an Elder, not a Priest: Presbytenum
Eldership rather than Priesthood: as if other new fangled companions that
would forge an Heresy that there were no Apostles, should for that purpose
translate it always legates: or that there were no Angels* and should
translate it always Messengers: and that Baptism were but a Iudaical
ceremony, and should translate it washing: which Castalio did much more
tolerably in his tra^siatio^ than any of these should, if he did it only of
curiosity and folly. And if to take away al distinction of clergy and lai^y
the Protestants should always translate clerum* Clerus.
* In ^. Pet. 5. See S* Hierome ad Nepot. de vit. Clericorum ep. 2. c. 5.
lotte or lotterie, as they do translate is for the same purpose parish and
heritage: might not Beza him self control them, saying, that the ancient
fathers transferred the name clerus to the College of Ecclesiastical Ministers?

FVLK. 27. A cloud of testimonies in deed you have heaped together, not as
the Apostle did to uphold the certainty of faith: but to obscure the light of
truth. For our translation of (...) an Elder is true, clear and plain,
without ambiguity. Insomuch as the vulgar Latin interpreter* who as it seems
was a Grecia^, and therefore uses gladly many Greek terms, does yet
translate this wo^d almost twice as often senior or mayor natu, as he does
Presbyter, when he speaks of the ministers of the gospel. How the ancient
writers applied unto the^ improperly the name of sacrificer, as unto the
sacrament the name of oblation or sacrifice, I have spoken already
sufficiently. Our translation therefore is nothing like your vai(...) supposall
of of new fangled companions, which to (...)* Apostles, Angels, and Baptism,
would turn the words into Legates, Messengers, and washing. Whereas we have
no purpose to deny any office or function of the Church appointed by Christ,
but to distinguish in name, as his spirit in the Scriptures does always, the
sacrificers of the old Testament, from the Ministers of the new Testament. The
word Clerus, 1. Pet. 5* which we translate parish or heritage, your selves in
your notes of that place confess, to comprehend in signification all
Christians, which you are not able to prove, that in S* Peter's time it was
transferred unto the college of ecclesiastical ministers, as Beza says it was
afterward: wherefore it is one of your accustomed slau^ders, to say we
translate it so of purpose, to take away all distinction of Clergy and
Laity, when al men know, that wheresoever our Churches are established, we
retain the distinction, and so think it necessary always.

MART. 28. But al^s, the effect of this corruption and heresy concerning
Priests, has it not wrought within these few years such contempt of al
Priests, that nothing is more odious in our country than that name: which
before was so honorable and venerable, and now is, among all men? If ministry
or Eldership were grown to estimation in steed thereof, somewhat they had to
say but that is yet more contemptible, and especially Elders and Eldership, for
the Queens Majesty and her Counsailours will permit none in government of
any Church in England, and so they have brought all, to nothing else, but
profane lai^ie. And no marvel of these horrible inconveniences, for as the
Sacrifice and Priesthood go together, and therefore were both honorable
together: so when they had according to Daniels prophecy, abolished the daily
sacrifice out of the church, what remained, but the contempt of Priests and
Clergy and their offices, so far forth, that for the holy Sacrifice sake,
Priests are called in great despite, Massing Priests* of them that little
consider, or less care, what notable holy learned fathers of all ages since
Christ's time, this their reproach touches and concerns, as by the
testimonies before alleged is manifest, and whereof the Reader may see a
peculiar Chapter in the late Apology Chap. 6.
of the English Seminaries.

FVLK. 28. A meruaylous corruption, for us to call them Elders, whom you in your
translation call Ancients, and the vulgar Latin before us both called
Seniores. But what is come to pass I pray you by this wonderful corruption?
The name of Popish Priests is so contemptible, that nothing is more odious in
England. And good cause why: both for their blasphemy against God, and
traitorous practices against the honorable state of the realm* and our most
gracious Queen. But Elders and Eldership (you ween) is more contemptible
because the Queens Majesty and her Counsailors will permit none in government
of any Churches in England, and so they have brought all to nothing else, but
profane Laity. This traiterous slander of yours, is as true, as all the
rest. For although the Queens Majesty and the Counsel do not permit such
consistories of Elders for only discipline and government, as be in some other
Churches, yet do they not only permit, but also mainteyne and reverence, such
Elders, being signified by the Greek word (...) as are necessary for the
government of the Church in doctrine, Sacraments, and discipline to the
salvation of Gods people. The daily sacrifice mentioned in Daniell, was the
Morning and Evening sacrifice of the old Law, whereunto your blasphemous
sacrifice of the Mass has no resemblaunce. You may not therefore look to
recover the credit of Massing Priests, by that sacrifice, which being once
instituted by God, was at length taken away by the only sacrifice of Christ's
death: Against which all the Apologies in the world shall never be able to
defend your Massing Priesthood. As for the chapter of Allens Apology,
whereunto you refer us, conteyneth certain quotations, and a few sentences of
the ancient writers which have been answered an hundredth times, to justify
massing Priests, but all in vain, for never shall he prove, that any one from
the Eldest which he names unto Beda, which is the youngest, was such a Massing
Priest in all points, as those traitors are, which by the Queens laws and
edict are proscribed and prohibited. I mean not for their manners, but for
their Mass and all opinions incident thereunto.

CHAP. VII.
Heretical translation against PVRGATORIE, LIMBVS PATRVM, CHRIST'S DESCENDING
INTO HELL.

Martin.
HAVING now discovered their corrupt translations 1
for defacing of the Churches name, and abolishing of Priest and Priesthood:
let us come to another point of very great importance also, and which by the
wonted consequence or sequel of error, includes in it many erroneous
branches. Their principal malice then being bent against Purgatory, that is,
against a place were Christian souls be purged by suffering of temporal
pains after this life, for surer maintenance of their erroncous denial
hereof, they take away and deny all third places, saying that there was never
from the beginning of the world any other place for souls after this life,
but only two: to wit, heaven for the blessed: and hell for the damned. And
so it follows by their heretical doctrine, that the Patriarchs, Prophets,
and other good holy men of the old Testament, went not after their deaths, to
the place called Abraham's bosom, or Limbus patrum. But immediately to heaven:
and so again by their erroneous doctrine it follows, that the fathers of the
old Testament were in heaven, before our savior Christ had suffered death for
their redemption: and also by their erroneous doctrine it follows, that our
savior Christ was not the first man that ascended and entered into heaven: and
moreover by their heretical doctrine it follows, that our savior Christ
des^ended not into any such third place, to deliver the fathers of the old
Testament out of their prison, and to bring them triumphantly with him into
heaven, because by their erroneous doctrine they were never there ^ and so that
article of the Apostles Creed concerning our savior Christ his descending
into hell, must either be put out by the Caluinists, as Beza did in his
Confession of his faith printed An. 1564. or it has some other meaning, to
wit, either the lying of his body in the grave, or (as Calvin and the purer
Caluinists Caluins Institutions li. 2. c. 16. Sect. 10. and in his Catechism.
his scholars will have it) the suffering of hell pains and distresses upon
the Cross. Lo the consequence and coherence of these errors and heresies.

Fulke.
WE may be bold to say with S. Augustine, 1
We believe according to the authority of God* that the kingdom of heaven is
the first place appointed for Gods elect, and that hell is the second place,
where all the reprobrate and such is be not of the faith of Christ, shall
suffer eternal punishment. Tertium penitus ignoramus, imo nec esse in
scripturis sanctis inuenimus. The third place we are utterly ignorant of, yea
and that it is not, we find in the holy Scriptures. But hereof it follows,
say you, that the godly of the old Testament, went not after their deaths to
Abraham's bosom, or Limbus patrum, but immediately to heaven. Of Limbus patrum.
which is a border of the Popes hell, I grant it follows* but of Abraham's
bosom it follows none otherwise, than if I should say, Gregory Martin went
into Chepeside, Ergo, he went not to London. That the fathers of the old
Testament were in Heaven, before our Savior Christ had suffered death for
their redemption, it is no inconvenience: for his death was as effectual to
redeem them that lived before he suffered actually, as them that live since,
because in Gods sight, he is the Lamb that was slain from the beginning of
the world. And the fathers that were justified by faith in his blood, received
the same crown and reward of righteousness, that we do being justified by
the same means. And yet our Savior Christ was the first man, that in his
whole manhood ascended and entered into heaven, into the fullness and perfection
of glory which is prepared for all Gods elect, to be enjoyed after the general
resurrection. That our Savior Christ descended into no prison after his
death, we verily believe, and yet we do also constantly believe the article of
our Creed, that he descended into hell, by suffering in soul the pains due to
Gods justice, for the sins of all whom he redeemed, and by vanquishing the
Devil, and all the power of hell, in working the redemption of all the children
of God. If Beza in his confession had clean left out that article, which is
untrue, he had been no more to be blamed than the auctors of the Nicene
Creed, and many other Creedes in which it is not expressed, because it is
partly contained under the article of his sufferings, partly it is in part of
the effect and virtue of his death and redemption.

MART. 2. These now being the heretical doctrines which they mean to avouch
and defend what soever come of it: first, they are at a point not to care a
rushe for all the ancient holy Doctors, that write with full consent to the
contrary Beza in 1. Pet. 3. 19 Caluins Institur. li. 2. c. 16. Sect. 9.
(as themselves confess, calling it their common error) secondly, they
translate the holy Scriptures in favor thereof most corruptly and wilfully, as
in Bezaes false translation (who is Caluines successor in Geneua) it is
notorious, for he in his new Testament of the year 1556. printed by Robertus
Stephanus in folio, with Annotations, makes our Savior Christ say thus to his
father, Non derelinques cadauer meu^ in sepulchro, Thou shall not leave my
carcass in the grave, Act. 2. For that which the Hebrew, and the Greek, and
the Latin, Hiero. in Ps. verso ex Hebraeo.
and S. Hierome according to the Hebrew, say: Non derelinques animam meam in
inferno, as plainly as we say in English, Thou shall not leave my soul in
hell. Thus the Prophet (...).
David spoke it in the Hebrew* Psalm. 15. Thus the Septuaginta uttered it in
Greek, thus the Apostle S. Peter alleges it, thus the holy Evangelist S.
Luke in the Acts of the Apostles, cap. 2. records it, and for this, S.
Augustine calls him an infidel that denies it: yet all this would not
suffice to make Beza translate it so, because of certain errors ( See his
Annot. in 2. Act.
as he heretically terms them) which he would full gladly avoid hereby,
namely the Catholic true doctrine of limbus patrum, and Purgatory. What need
we say more? he translateth animam, a Carcass: (so calling our Savior Christ's
body, irreuerently, and wickedly) he translateth infernum, grave.

FVLK. 2. That many of the Christian fathers held this error, that the godly
of the old Testament were not in heaven before Christ's death, it is no cause
why we should be afraid to confess the truth, revealed to us out of the holy
Scriptures, to the glory of God. And if the wrong or ambiguous translation of
one Hebrew word Sheol, deceived them, that were for the most part ignorant
(...)
of the Hebrew tongue, what reason were it that we should not in translation
reform that error? But as for Bezaes first translation of the Greek word
(...) dead body, and (...) grave, I have answered at large, Cap. 1. sect.
31. where also it is showed how vainly you take hold of the English word
carcass, to charge Beza with vnreuerent calling of our Savior Christ's body,
when it was dead, because he calls it in Latin Cadauer.

MART. 3. Need we take any great labor to prove this to be a foul
corruption, or that it is done purposely, when he confesses that he thus
translateth because else it would serve the Papists? Which is as much to say,
as, the word of God if it be truly and sincerely translated, makes in deed
for them. For the first part, we will not stand upon it, partly because it is
of it self most absurd, and they are ashamed of it: partly because it shall
susfise to confute Beza, that two other as famous heretics as he, Castalio and
Flaccus Illyricus write against him in this point, and confute him: partly
also, because we speak not here universally of all heretical translations,
but of the English corruptions specially, and therefore we may only note here,
how gladly they also would say somewhat else for, soul, even in the text, if
they durst for shame: for in the margent of that English translation, Bib. an.
1579.
they say, or life, or person: thereby aduertising the Reader, that he may
read thus, if it please him, Thou shall not leave my life in the grave, or,
Thou shall not leave my person. As though either man's soul or life were in the
grave, or, anima, might be translated person, which the self same English
Bible does not, no not in those places where it is evident Act. 7. v. 14.
that it signifies the whole person. For though this word soul, by a figure,
is sometime taken for the whole man, yet even there they do not, nor must not
translate it otherwise than soul: beause our tongue bears that figure as
well as Latin, Greek, or Hebrew: but here, where it can not signify the
whole person, it is wicked to translate it so.

FVLK. 3. If you take more labor than you are well able to bear, yet shall you
prove it no heretical corruption. As Castaleo, and Illyricus, the one an
heretic, the other a schismatike, have inueyed against Beza, so has he
sufficiently confuted them. But to our English translation, where in the
margent, they say, life, or person, when in the text they say soul: what does
this offend you? They render the usual English word for the Greek word, but
they admonish the reader, that the word soul in this place signifies not the
soul separated from the body* but either the life, or the whole person.
Because that although the body only be laid in the grave* yet according to
vulgar speech and sense, the whole man is said to be buried, and his life
seems to be enclosed in the grave, according to which popular and humane
conceyt, the Prophet in that Psalm speaks, as appears in the later part
of that verse, which is all one in sense with the former. Neither will thou
give thy holy one to see corruption: where corruption which is proper only to
the body is there spoken generally of the whole man. If this exposition please
you not, yet you have no cause to find fault with the translation, which in
that place is according to the common and ordinary signification of the Greek
word (...), soul. Which as it is sometime taken Act. 2.
for the whole person, as you note, Act. 7. 14. So is it here, as the later
part of the verse does most plainly declare.

MART. 4. But as for the word grave, that they put boldly in the text, to
signify that howsoever you interpret, soul, or whatsoever you put for it, it
is not meant according to S. Augustine and the faith of the whole Catholic
Church, that his soul descended into Hell, whiles his body was in the grave:
but that his soul also, was in the grave, howsoever that is to be understood.
So making it a certain and resolute conclusion, that the holy Scripture in
this place speaks not of Christ's being in Hell, but in the grave: and that
according to his soul, or life, or person, or (as Beza will have it) His
carcass or body: and so his soul in Hell, as the holy Scripture speaks,
shall be, his body in the grave, as Beza plainly speaks, and the Bezites
covertly insinuate: and white shall be black, See Vigors sermons page 110.
115. and dei^ceps.
and chaulke shall be cheese, and every thing shall be any thing that they will
have it. And all this their evident false translation, must be to our miserable
deceived poor souls, the holy Scripture and Gods word.

FVLK. 4. The Greek word (...) well bears to be translated in some places a
grave, and here the later part of the verse, speaks of corruption, which can
not be understood to be but in the grave, and so does S. Peter understand it,
saying* that David the Patriarch died and was buried, and his sepulcher
remains with us unto this day: and S. Paul upon the same verse of the Psalm
says, he saw corruption. Both the Apostles therefore interpreting this verse of
the resurrection of Christ, we think it in deed a resolute conclusion, that
the Scripture in this place, speaks not of Christ's being in hell, which we
acknowledge in the article of our Creed, but of his burial and resurrection.
Your trifling of white and black, chaulke and cheese, may seem pleasant
Rhetorike to gross ears, whom you seek to fill with such vanities. But the
wiser sort, that are acquainted with figurative speeches, will think it nothing
strange, if words be not always taken in their usual and proper
signification. That the Hebrew word Nephesh, which the Prophet in that (...)
verse of the Psalm uses, is taken diverse times in the Scripture for a dead
body, I have before proved more plainly, than ever you shall be able to deny:
where you may, if you be disposed to sport your self, use your figurative
comparison of white and black, chaulke and cheese, but you shall sooner of
white make black, of chaulke cheese, than you can possibly avoid the clear
light of those textes, which was seen even of your own vulgar Latin
interpretours.

MART. 5. Where we can not but marvel, why they are affraide to translate the
words plainly in this place, of his soul being in Hell: Whereas in the Creed
they admit the words, and interpret them, that by suffering Hell pains upon
the Cross, so he descended into Hell, and no otherwise. Why did they not here
also keep the words for the credit of their translation, and afterward (if
they would needs) give them that gloss for maintenance of their heresy?
This mystery we know not, and would gladly learn it of the Puritan
Caluinistes, whose English translation perhaps this is. For, the grosser
Caluinistes (being not so pure and precise in following Calvin as the Puritans
be, that have well deserved that name above their fellows) they in their other
English Bibles have in this place Bib. an. 1562. and 1577.
discharged them selves of false translation, saying plainly. Thou shall not
leave my soul in Hell. But See Lind. dubit. page 19.
in what sense they say so, it is very hard to guess: and perhaps them selves
can Whitaker. page 165. M. Hues B. of S. Asaph in Wales.
not tell yet what to make of it, as appears by M. Whitakers answer to F.
Campion. And he is now called a Bishop among them, and proceeded Doctor in
Oxford, that could not obtain his grace to proceed Doctor in Cambridge,
because he preached Christ's descending into hell, and the Puritans in their
second admonition to the Parliament, page 43. cry out against the politic
Caluinists, for that in the Creed of the Apostles (made in English meeter, and
song openly in their Churches, in these words: His spirit did after this
descend, into the lower parts, to them that long in darkness were, the true
light of their hearts,) they favor his descending into Hell very much, and so
consequently may thereby build Limbus Patrum, and Purgatory. And the Puritans
in their second reply against M. Whitgifts defense, page 7. reprehend one of
their chiefest Caluinisticall martyrs, for affirming (as they term it) a
gross descending of our Savior Christ into Hell. Thus the Puritans confess
plainly their heretical doctrine, against Christ's descending into Hell.

FVLK. 5. By confessing in our Creed, that Christ descended into hell, you
might know, but that you had rather be ignorant, that you might marvel still,
that we purposed not in translating this place, to deny that article, as you
falsely slander us: but because this place might seem unto the ignorant, to
confirm the error of Christ's descending into Limbus patrum, as it does not,
if it be rightly understood, it was thought good of some translatours, (that
seeing this verse must have the same sense in the Greek Sermon of Peter, that
it has in the Hebrewe Psalm of David, and the Greek word (...), used by the
Evangelist, in steed of the Hebrewe word Sheol, may bear to signify a (...)
grave, as the Hebrew word does most usually,) by translating it the grave,
to show that this verse in Greek, makes no more for that error of
descending into Limbus, than the same does in Hebrewe. As for your distinction
of gross Caluinistes and Puritans, it may be packed up among the rest of
your quarrels, and slanders. What Master Whitaker has written in his
answer, to Friar Campion, he is able to explane unto you him self, if you do
not understand him. That the Bishop of Saint Asaph did once favor your
error in some part, and for that was misliked of the University of
Cambridge, it is as true, as that afterward reforming his judgment at Oxford,
where he proceeded, he was also incorpored Doctor at Cambridge. The English
meeter upon the Creed, except it be drawn to an allegory, in my judgment,
can not be defended, which judgment I declared openly at Paul's cross
fourteen or fiueteene years ago. Master Latimers error of Christ
suffering torments in hell, after his death, is justly reprehended, by whom
soever it be. By all which, I know not what may be rightly gathered, but that
we flatter not one another in errors, but if any among us be deceived, of what
account or credit soever he be, we spare not to reprove his error, preferring
Gods truth before all worldly and private respects of friendship, countenance,
credit, and whatsoever.

MART. 6. The truth is, howsoever the politic Caluinists speak, or write in
this point, more plausibly and covertly to the people, and more agreeably to
the article of our faith, than either Calvin, or their earnest brethren, the
Puritans, do, which write and speak as fantastically and madly, as they
think: yet neither do they believe this Article of the Apostles Creed, or
interpret it, as the Catholic Church, and ancient holy fathers always have
done, neither can it stand with their new profession so to do, or with their
English translations in other places. It can not stand with their profession:
for then it would follow that the Patriarchs, and other just men of the old
Testament, were in some third place of rest, called Abraham's bosom, or Limbus
Patrum, till our Savior Christ descended thither, and delivered them from
thence, which they deny in their doctrine, though they sing it in their
meeters. Neither can it stand with their English translations: because in other
places where the holy Scriptures evidently speak of such a place, calling it
Hell, (because that was a common name for every place and state of souls
departed, in the old Testament, till our Savior Christ, by his Resurrection
and Ascension, had opened heaven) there, for Hell, they translate Grave.

FVLK. 6. The truth is, howsoever you slander us with odious names of schism,
and diverse interpretations, we al agree in the faith of that article, and in
the true sense and meaning thereof. As also we consent against your errors of
Limbus patrum, or any descending of Christ into that fantastical place. As for
Abraham's bosom, we account it no place of descent, or going down, but of
ascending, even the same that our Savior Christ upon the cross, called
Paradise, Luc. 23. saying to the penitent thief, this day thou shall be with
me in Paradise, which of Saint Paul is called the third heaven, 2. Cor. 12.
saying, that he was taken up into the third heaven, whether in the body, or
out of the body, he knew not, (but he was taken up into Paradise, and there
heard words that could not be uttered, which it is not lawefull for a man to
speak. And that Abraham's Bosom is a place far distant from hell, that only
text where it is named, Luc. 16. does evidently declare. First the Angels
carry the soul of Lazarus into Abraham's bosom, he might as well have said
Hell, if he had meant Hell. But Angels use not to go down into Hell.
Secondly, it is a place of comfort, for Lazarus was there comforted. Thirdly,
there is a great Chaos, which signifies an infinite distance between Abraham
and the rich glutton, which utterly overthrows that dream of Limbus, which
signifying a border or edge, supposes that place to be hard adjoining to the
place of torments. Last of all, if the Article of our faith had been of Limbus
Patrum, or of Abraham's bosom, we should have been taught to say, he
descended into Limbo patrum, or he descended into Abraham's bosom, which all
Christian ears abhor to hear. The word Sheol used in the old Testament
(...)
for a common receptacle of all the dead, signifies properly a place to
receive their bodies, and not their souls: and therefore most commonly in our
translations, is called the grave.

MART. 7. As when Jacob says, Descendam ad filium Genesis 37.
meum lugens in infernum: I will go down to my son into Hell, mourning:
they translate, I will go down into the grave unto my son, mourning: as
though Jacob thought, that his son Joseph had been buried in a grave, whereas
Jacob thought, and said immediately before, as appears in the holy Scripture,
that a wild beast had deucured him, and so could not be presumed to be in any
grave: or as though, if Joseph had been in a grave, Jacob would have gone down
to him into the same grave. For so the words must needs import, if they take
grave properly: but if they take grave unproperly, for the state of dead men,
after this life, why do they call it grave, and not Hell, as the word is in
Hebrew, Greek, and Latin? (...)
No doubt they do it, to make the ignorant Reader believe, that the Patriarch
Jacob spoke of his body only, to descend into (...)
the grave, to Iosephes body: for as concerning Jacobs soul, Infernus.
that was by their opinion, to ascend immediately after his death to heaven, and
not to descend into the grave. But if Jacob were to ascend forthwith in soul,
how could he say, as they translate, I will go down into the grave, unto my
son? As if according to their opinion, he should say, My sons body is
devoured of a beast, and his soul is gone up into heaven: well, I will go
down to him into the grave.

FVLK. 7. A proper quidditie you have found out of Jacob, supposing his son
to be devoured of wild beasts: yet says, I will go down unto him mourning,
which you think can not be into the grave, because he did not think he was
buried. But you must remember, it is the common manner of speech, when men say
in mourning, they will go to their friends departed, they mean, they will
dye, although their friends perhaps were drowned in the sea, or their bodies
burned, or perhaps lie in desolate places unburied: So Jacobs descending to the
grave, signifies no more, but death, by which he knew he should be joined to
his son in soul, though he were not in body. The name of grave is used,
because it is usual, that dead men are buried, though it be not universal.
And that the grave is taken commonly for death, it appears by that phrase, so
often used in the Scriptures. He slept with his fathers. and was buried, which
being spoken indifferently of good men, and evil, can not be understood of one
place of their souls, but of death, which is common to all, and is proper to
the body, not unto the soul, for the souls of the departed sleep not. The
like is to be said of the phrase used in Genesis of Ismael, as well as of the
godly Patriarchs, he was laid up to his people. And lest you should please your
self too much in your childish conceit of Iosephes being devoured, whereof yet
his father was not certain. You shall hear how Isydorus Clarius translateth
the same place, in his Bible censured by the Deputies of Trent Council,
Descendam ad filium meum, lugens in sepulchrum. I will go down to my son,
mourning, into the grave. This is one of the places which he thought mere to
be corrected, according to the Hebrew, and in other places, where he is content
to use the old word Infernus, he signifies in his notes, that he means
thereby Sepulchrum, the grave. And in deed this word Infernus signifies
generally any place beneath, as the Greek word (...), which the Greek
translators used for Sheol, the Hebrew word, signifies a place that is dark,
and obscure, where nothing can be seen, such as the grave or pit is in which
the dead are laid, which therefore of Job is called the land of darkness,
and the Job 10*
shadow of death.

MART. 8. Gentle Reader, that thou may the better conceive these absurdities,
and the more detest their guilefull corruptions, understand (as we began to
tell thee before) that in the old Testament, because there was yet no ascending
into heaven, the way of the holies (as the Apostle in his epistle to Hebr. 9.
v. 8.
the Hebrews speaks) being not yet made open, because our savior Christ was
to dedicate and begin the enteraunce in his Hebr. ^0. v. 20.
own person, and by his passion to open heaven: therefore (we say) in the old
Testament the common phrase of the holy Scripture is, even of the best men, as
well as of others, that dying they went down ad inferos, or ad infernu^: to
signify that such was the state of the old Testament before our savior
Christ's Resurrection and Ascension, that every man went down, and not up:
descended, and not ascended: by descending I mean not to the grave, which
received their bodies only: but ad inferos, that is, to hell, a common
receptacle or place for their souls also departed, as well of those souls that
were to be in rest, as those that were to be in pains and torments. All the
souls both good and bad that then died, went downward, and therefore the
place of both sorts was called in all the tongues, by a word answereable to
this word, hell, to signify a lower place beneath, not only of torments, but
also of rest.

FVLK. 8. Where you reason that there was no asce^ding into heaven, because the
way of the holies was not yet made open, when the first tabernacle was
standing, you abuse the Reader, and the Scripture. For the Apostles meaning is,
in that verse, to show that to the great benefit of Christians, that first
tabernacle is fallen, because that now we have more familiar access unto God,
by Jesus Christ. For whereas the High Priest only, but once in the year, and
then not without blood, entered into the second most holy Tabernacle, because
the way of the Holyes, that is unto the Holiest, or sancta sanctorum, was not
then opened, now our Savior Christ having once entered into the holiest place,
by his own blood, and found eternal redemption, we have Heb. 4. v. 16.
by him without any ceremonies, sacrifices, or mediation of any mortal Priest,
free access unto the throne Heb. 10. v. 19.
of grace, even into the holy place, by the new and living way, which he
has prepared for us. But all this is to be understood of the clear
revelation of the mercy of God in Christ, which was obscurely set forth unto
the fathers of the old Testament, and not of the effect and fruit of his
passion, which was the same for their salvation, that it is for ours. Neither
have the souls of the faithful, since the coming of Christ, any other place
of rest, than the fathers had before his incarnation, God Heb. 11. v. 40.
providing most wisely, that they without all the rest of their brethren, that
shall be unto the worlds end, shall not be made perfect. And whereas you
say, that all the souls of good and badde, then went downward, you are
controlled by the wise man, Eccles. 3. Where he speaks in the person of the
carnal man, doubting of that which is not comprehended by reason, but beleened
by faith: who knows whether the spirit of man ascend upward. And more
plainly in the last chapter of that book, where he exhorts to repentance,
showing in the end that though dust return to the earth from whence it was,
yet the spirit returns to God that gave it. It returns to God therefore,
it goes not down. For who would abide to hear this speech, the souls of
the faithful went downewarde to God, yea went into hell to God. Nay returned
downward into hell to God that gave them. That common receptacle therefore of
the dead was the receptacle of their bodies, which all first or last, returned
to the earth from whence they were taken. And where you say that place was
called in all tongues, by such a word, as signifies a lower place beneath, it
is true of the common receptacle of their bodies, but not of their souls. For
the soul of Lazarus was not carried by the Angels into hell, but into
Abraham's bosom, which was not only a place of rest, but also of joy, and
comfort, contrary to torments: between which and hell, was an infinite
distaunce. Who would call that a common receptacle, when there was an infinite
distance, impassable from one to the other.

MART. 9. So we say in our Creed, that our savior Christ him self descended
into hell, according to his soul: So Epitaph. Nepot. ca. 3.
S. Hierom speaking of the state of the old Testament, says: Si Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob in inferno, quis in caelorum regno, that is, If Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob were in hell, who was in the kingdom of heaven? And again, Ante
Christum, Abraham apud inferos: post Christum, latro in Paradiso, that is,
before the coming of Christ, Abraham was in hell: after his coming, the
thief was in Paradise. And least a man might object, that Lazarus being Luc.
16.
in Abraham's bosom, saw the rich glott^n a far of in hell, and therefore
both Abraham and Lazarus seem to have been in heaven: the said holy doctor
resolves it, that Abraham and See S. August. in Psalm. 85. v. 13.
Lazarus also were in hell, but in a place of great rest and refreshing, and
therefore very far off from the miserable wretched glutton that lay in
torments.

FVLK. 9. We say in our Creed, that Christ descended into hell, which being an
article of our faith, must have relation to such benefit, as we receive by
his descending, namely, that thereby we are delivered from the pains of hell.
But that he should descend into Limbus patrum, to fetch out the fathers, which
before you said were in prison, now you say in rest, we neither say it in our
Creed, neither does it pertain unto us. But Hierome is cited as a favorer of
your opinion, who, I confess in some part held as you do, but not
altogether. For thus he writes in Epitaph. Nepos. After he has given thanks
to Christ for our redemption by his death. Quid ante miserius homine, qui
aeternae mortis terrore prostratus viuendi sensum ad hoc tantum acceperat vt
periret, etc. What was more miserable than man before, which being cast down
with terror of eternal death, received sense of living for this end only,
that he might perish. For death reigned from Adam unto Moises, yea upon those
which have not sinned after the similitude of the transgression of Adam. If
Abraham, Isaak, and Jacob in hell, who in the kingdom of heaven? If thy
friends were under the punishment. If Adam and they which sinned not, were
held guilty by other men's sins, what is to be thought of them which said in
their heart there is no God etc. And if Lazarus be seen in the bosom of
Abraham and in a place of rest, what like has hell and the kingdom of Heaven?
Before Christ Abraham in hell, after Christ the these in Paradise. In these
words Hierome after his Rhetorical manner, amplifying the benefit of our
redemption by Christ, does rather touch this error, than plainly express it.
For first he makes all men miserable before Christ, and cast down with
terror of eternal death, which is true, if ye consider them without Christ,
in which state are all men since Christ, but of all men that lived before the
time of Christ's death, and yet embraced their redemption by him, it is not
true. As also that there are some which have not sinned. But that all this is to
be understood, specially of the death of their bodies, and allegorically of
their souls, he adds immediately, Et id^^rco in resurrectione eius multa
dor^^ntium corpora, etc. And therefore at his resurrection, many bodies of them
that slept arose, and were seen in the heavenly Jerusalem. See you not how he
turns all into an Allegory, to set forth the virtue of Christ's redemption?
who brought all his elect by his death, from hell, and the power of darkness,
into the kingdom of heaven. Furthermore you bid us see Augustine in Ps 85. v
13. Where in the beginning he professes his ignorance in discussing the
question of the nethermost hell. First supposing this world in which we live,
to be Infernum superius, and the place whether the dead go Infernum inferius,
from which God has delivered us, sending thither his son, who to this
Infernum or Nascendo.
lower place came by his birth, to that by his death: he Moriendo.
adds an other opinion. Fortassis enim apud ipsos inferos est aliqua pars
inferior etc. Peradventure even in hell it self there is some part lower, in
which the ungodly, which have much sinned are delivered. For whether Abraham
had been now in certain places in hell we can not sufficiently define. And
afterward when he has spoken of the diverse places of Lazarus, and the rich
glutton, he concludes as uncertainly as he began. Ergo inter ista fortasse duo
inferna, quorum in vno, etc. Therefore peradventure between these two hels, in
one of which the souls of the righteous rested, the souls of the wicked are
tormented, one attending prays in the person of Christ, etc. Here you may
see, what an article of belief this was with S. Augustine, when he has
nothing to define, but only brings his coniecturall opinions and
peraduentures. Also how he takes Infernum for any lower place, in so much that
he calls this world, Infernum. Wherefore much more may Infernum signify the
grave, and be so sometimes translated.

MART. 10. His words be these in effect: If a man will say unto me, that
Lazarus was seen in Abraham's bosom, and a place of refreshing even before
Christ's coming: true it is, but what is that in comparison? Quid simile
infernus and regna caelorum? What has hell and heaven like? As if he should
say, Abraham in deed and Lazarus (and consequently many other) were in place
of rest, but yet in hell, till Christ came, and in such rest, as has no
comparison with the ioies of heaven. And S. Augustine disputing this matter
sometime, and doubting Epist. 99. ad Euod. and de Genesis ad lit. li. 12. c. 33.
whether Abraham's bosom be called hell in the Scripture, and whether the name
of hell be taken at any time in the good part (for of Christ's descending into
hell, and of a third place where the Patriarchs remained until Christ's coming,
not heaven, but called Abraham's bosom: he doubted not, but was most assured)
the same holy doctor in an other place, as being better resolved, doubted not
upon these words of the Psalm. Thou have delivered In Psalm. 85 v. 13.
my soul from the lower hell, to make this one good sense of this place, that
the lower hell is it, wherein the damned are tormented* the higher hell is that,
wherein the souls of the just rested, calling both places by the name of hell.

FVLK. 10. I have set down his very words in deed, which being well weighed,
make nothing so clearly for your pha^tasied Limbus, as you would have me^ ween.
You say Augustine doubts whether Abraham's bosom, in the Scripture be called
hell, Ep. 99. and de genesis ad lit. lib. 12. ca. 33. But there he does utterly
deny it, and in Ps. 85. as by his words cited before appears, he doubts.
So that where he flatly denies, with you he doubts, and where he doubts,
with you he is better resolved. Wherefore this matter of Abraham, and the
faithful being in hell, is no article of faith, except you will say that S.
Augustine was not resolved in the articles of our faith, who touching the
third place, whatsoever at diverse times he speaks doubtingly in his
Hypognosticon, he affirms resolutely, that he finds in the scriptures, that
there is none.

MART. 11. And surely of his marvelous humility and wisdom, he would have
been much more resolute herein, if he had heard the opinion of S. Hierom, whom
he often consulted in such questions, and of other fathers, who in this point
speak most plainly, that Abraham's bosom or the place where the Loco citato.
Patriarchs rested, was some part of hell. Tertullian, (Li. 4. aduers.
Marcion.) Says, I know that the bosom of Abraham was no heavenly place, but
only the higher hell, or, the higher part of hell. Of which speech of the
fathers, rose afterward that other name, Limbus patrum, that is the very
brimme or uppermost and outmost part of hell, where the fathers of the old
Testament rested. Thus we see that the Patriarchs themselves were as then in
hell, though they were there in a place of rest: in so much that S. Hierom
says again, Ante Resurrectionem Christi notus in Iudaea Deus, and ipsi qui
nouerant eum, tamen ad inferos trahebantur. that is, Before the Resurrection of
Christ, God was known in Jury, and they themselves that knew him, yet were
drawn unto hell. S. Chrysostom upon that place of Esaias, Hom. quod Christus
sit Deus to. 5.
I will break the brazen gates, and bruise the iron bars in pieces, and will
open the treasures darkened, etc. So he calls hell, says he, for although it
were hell, yet it (...).
held the holy souls, and precious vessels, Abraham, Infernus.
Isaac, and Jacob. Mark that he says, though it were hell, yet there were the
just men at that time, till our savior Christ came to deliver them from thence.

FVLK. 11. As wise and humble as he was, he was not ready to yield to every
opinion of Hierom, as his Epistles written to Hierom do declare. Neither was
Hierome sore solute in this matter, whereof he speaks under a cloud* and in
an Allegory, as it is plain, where he says the bodies that were raised at
the resurrection of Christ, were seen in the heavenly Jerusalem, whereas it is
certain they were seen only in the earthly Jerusalem actually. But he
means, the effect of Christ's redemption, was acknowledged either in the
Catholic Church, which is Jerusalem above in one sense, or else that they
shall be seen in the new Jerusalem and blessed felicity of the godly at the
worlds end: whereof a testimony was given in that sight of their appearing
and particular resurrection known at Jerusalem on earth. But you cite an other
place out of Tertullian lib. 4. aduersus Marcione^, and in the margent you say,
Loco citato, but I wot not where. And these be Tertullians words, if you be
an honest man. I know that the bosom of Abraham was no heavenly place, but
only the higher hell, or the higher part of hell. I see you will be as bold
with the ancient doctors works, as you are with my poor writings, whom
you make to say even what you list. In the last Section before you said S.
Augustine Epistol. 99. and de genesis ad lit. Lib. 12. Cap. 33. Doubted whether
Abraham's bosom were called hell. Quod si nusquam etc. If it be never read in
the holy Scriptures ( scilicet that hell is taken in the good part) verily
that bosom of Abraham that is the habitation of a certain secret rest, is
not to be believed, to be any part of hell. And again by reason of the
infinite Chaos, Satis vt opinor appareat, It may appear as I think
sufficiently, that the bosom of that so great felicity, is not a certain
part, and as it were a member of hell. In the other place he speaks to the
same effect, and upon the same ground, that he never finds in the Scriptures
hell, taken in good part, and cap. 34. where he proves that paradise is
heaven, he says: Quanto magis ergo. How much more then, may that bosom of
Abraham, after this life be called paradise? This says Augustine, and much
more to this purpose, wherein I thought to have forborne you, but that you come
upon us still with new forgeries. Tertullian in the book by you quoted, page
274 of Frob. printed 1550 thus writes. Sed Marcion aliorsum cogit, etc. But
Marcion drives it another way, so forsooth, that he determines both the
rewards of the Creator, either of torment, or of refreshing, to be laid up for
them in hell, which have obeyed the law and the Prophets. But of Christ, and his
God, he defines an heavenly bosom, and heaven. We will answer and even by
this self same Scripture, conuincing his blindness, which against hell
discerns this Abraham's bosom, to the poor man. For one thing is hell, (as I
think) and Abraham's bosom, an other thing. For a great depth he says, is
between those regions, and that does let the passage to and fro. But neither
should the rich man have lifted up his eyes, and that truly from a far of,
but into higher places, and that of an exceeding height, by that infinite
distance of height and depth. Whereof it appears to every wise man, that has
ever heard of the Elysian fields, that there is some local determination,
which is called Abraham's bosom, to receive the souls of his sons, even of
the Gentiles, he being the father of many nations, to be accounted of Abraham's
family, and of the same faith, by which Abraham believed God, under no yoke of
the law, nor in the sign of circumcision. That region therefore I call the
bosom of Abraham, and if not heavenly, yet higher than hell, which shall give
rest in the mean season, to the souls of the just, until the consummation of
things do finish the resurrection of all, with the fullness of reward. This
is as much as I can find in Tertullian, touching Abraham's bosom, which is
clean contrary to that you affirm him to speak. For by this saying it is
manifest, that your opinion is Marcions heresy. Secondly, that Abraham's bosom
is not hell, but higher by an infinite distance, although not in full
perfection of heavenly glory. Thirdly, that it is not Limbus patrum, but the
receptacle of all the just souls, to the end of the world. Tertullians
authority therefore does you small pleasure, and less honesty, unless you
did cite him more truly. But I am unwise to look for plain dealing, and
sincerity, at your hands. Well, your Limbus patrum, the very brimme, or
uppermost, or outmost part of hell, wherein all the Patriarchs should rest, we
have now found from whence it came, even from your old acquaintance, the Mouse
of Pontus, Marcion the abominable Heretic. The other saying of Hierome, but
that the opinion of the fathers in hell, had by that time taken some strength,
might be understood of the mortality, whereunto they were subject, and never
should have been raised, but by the resurrection of Christ, as it seems by
that which he opposes of all nations, since the passion and resurrection of
Christ, acknowledged to speak like Philosophers, of the immortality of the
soul, and rejoicing in the resurrection of the dead, as the fathers mourned at
their death. Chrysostoms place is more apparent for your error, although he
also may be understood to speak allegorically of the effect of Christ's death
and resurrection, by which all the Patriarchs were delivered from death, and
hell was spoiled: not that they were in prison there, but that the justice of
God had condemned them thither, if Christ's death had not redeemed them: but I
will not stand to clear Chrysostom of this error, which it is sufficient
for me to have found that Marcion the old Heretic, was the first author
thereof, by Tertullians confession, howsoever it came to pass, that many good
men afterward deceived by the words (...) and Infernus, did hold it.

MART. 12. Therefore did Jacob say, I will go down Genesis 4^.
to my son unto Hell. And again he says: If any misfortune happen to
(Benjamin) by the way, you shall bring my gray head with sorrow unto Hell, which
is repeated again twice in the Chapter 44. by which phrase the holy Scripture
will signify, not only death, but also the descending at that time of all
sorts of souls into hell, both good and badde. And therefore it is spoken of
all sorts in the holy scripture, both of 3. Reg. 2.
good and of bad. For all went then into hell, but some into a place there, of
rest, others into other places there, of torments. And therefore S. Hierom
says, speaking of hell, according to the old Testament, Hell is a place
wherein souls are included: In cap. 13. Osee. Aug. in Psalm. 85. v. 13.
either in rest, or in pains, according to the quality of their deserts.

FVLK. 12. Jacob said he would be joined to his son by death, as in the
other text you bring, it is more manifest, than the Sun at noone days. For
Jacob speaking of his graye head, must needs mean of his body, and therefore
of the grave, and not of Hell. So in the 3. Reg. 2. which you quote, David
charge Solomon, that he suffer not the gray head of Ioab, to go down to the
grave in peace, and that he shall cause the hoare head of Shemei to go down
to the grave with blood, which by no means can be understood of his soul
going to hell, which goes not with blood, although it is plain enough by the
word hoare head, that he means his body in age, or his old body. And this
text Pagnine, in his Dictionarie, thought necessary to be understood of the
grave, although he make the word Sheol indifferent to signify Hell, and the
Grave. That all went to Hell, some to rest, and some to torments, it was
first devised by Marcion, the Heretic. But Saint Hierome is once again cited
in Oseam cap. 13. where he says, that Hell is a place wherein souls are
included, etc. by which you see that he speaks not of Limbus, wherein souls
were included before Christ, but of such a place wherein they are now
included, taking the word Infernus, generally for any place* that receives
the souls of the departed, as he says most plainly him self, in the same
place: Quicquid igitur separat sratres, infernus est appellandus. Whatsoever
does separate brethren* is to be called hell. Augustine is quoted, to multiply
a lie, and for nothing else, as I have showed before.

MART. 13. And in this sense it is also often said in the holy Scriptures, that
such and such were gathered, or laid ^o The Scriptures speak of an other
Hell, besides that of the damned.
their fathers though they were buried in diverse places, and died no: in the
same state of salvation, or damnation: In that sense Samuel being raised up, to
speak with Saul, said, To morrow thou and thy sons shall be with me. That is,
dead, and in hell, though not in the same place or state there: in this sense
all such places of the holy Scripture as have the word Inferi, or Infernus,
correspondent both to the Greek and Hebrew, ought to be, and may be most
conveniently translated by the word, Hell. As when it is said, Thou have
delivered my soul from the Ab inferno infer^ori.
lower hell, Psalm. 85. v. 13. that is, as S. Augustine expounds it, Thou have
preserved me from mortal sins, that would have brought me into the lower
hell, which is for the damned. Which place of holy Scripture, and the like, when
they translate grave, s^e how miserably i^ sounds: Thou have delivered my
soul Bib. 1579.
from the lowest grave. Which they would never say for very shame, but that
they are afraid to say in any place (be the holy Scriptures never so plain)
that any soul was delivered or returned from hell, lest thereof it might
follow by and by, that the Patriarchs, and our Savior Christ, were in such a
Hell.

FVLK. 13. That which is spoken indifferently of the elect, and reprobate, must
needs be understood of that which is common to both, that is, corporal
death. How can it be verified of their souls, that they were laid to the
fathers, when between the godly, and the wicked, there is an infinite distance:
but the earth, the grave, or pit* is a common receptacle of all dead bodies.
That Samuel, which being raised up, spoke to Saul* might truly say of his
soul, though not of all his sons, that he should be with him in hell, for it
was the spirit of Satan, and not of Samuel, although counterfaiting Samuel, he
might speak of the death of Saul, and*his sons. As for that verse of the
eighty and five Psalm, whereupon you do falsely so often allege S. Augustines
resolution, what absurdity has it, to translate it, from the lowest grave, or
from the bottom of the grave: whereby David means extreme danger of death,
that he was in, by the malice of his persecuting enemies Saul and his
accomplices. But we are afraid to say in any place, that any soul was delivered
and returned from hell. We say that the souls of all* the faithful, are
delivered from hell: but of any which after death is condemned to hell, we
acknowledge no return. And these words are spoken by David while he lived,
and praised God, for his deliverance, which might be not only from the grave,
but also from hell, saving that here he speaks of his preservation from death.

MART. 14. And that this is their fear, it is evident, because that in all
other places where it is plain that the holy scriptures speak of the hell of
the damned, from whence is no return, they translate there the very same
word Hell* and not grave. As for example, The way of life is on high to the
prudent, Proverb. 15. 24.
to avoid from Hell beneath. Lo, here that is translated Hell beneath, which
before was translated the lowest grave. And again, Hell, and destruction are
before the Lord, how much more the hearts of the sons of men? But when in
the holy Scriptures there is mention of delivery of a soul Bib. 15^9. De manu
inferi.
from Hell, then thus they translate: God shall deliver my soul from the power
of the grave: for he will receive me. Can you tell what they would say? does
God deliver them from the grave, or from te^porall death, whom he receives to
his mercy? or has the grave any power over the soul? Again when they say,
Psalm. 89. 48.
What man lives and shall not see death? shall he deli^er his soul from the
hand of the grave?

FVLK. 14. I have showed before diverse times, that although the Hebrew word
Sheol do properly signify a receptacle of the bodies after death, yet when
mention is of the wicked, by consequence it may signify hell, as the day
signifies light, the night darkness, fire heat, peace signifies
prosperity, and an hundredth such like speeches. But where you say that
Proverb. 15. v. 24. that is translated hell beneath, which before was
translated the lowest grave, Psalm. 85. v. 13. You say untruly, for although in
both places there is the word Sheol, yet in that Psalm there is Tachtyah, in
the Proverbs Mattah, (...)
for which if it were translated the grave, that declineth, or is downewarde,
it were no inconvenience. In the other textes, you trifle upon the word soul,
whereas the Hebrewe word signifies not the reasonable soul, which is
separable from the body, but the life, or the whole person of man, which may
rightly be said, to be delivered from the hand or power of the grave, as the
verse. 48. does plainly declare, when in the later part is repeated, the
sense of the former, as it is in many places of the Psalms.

MART. 15. If they take grave properly, where man's body is buried: it is not
true either that every soul, yea or every body is buried in a grave. But if
in all such places, they will say they mean nothing else but to signify
death, and that to go down into the grave, and to die, is all one: we ask
them why they follow no^ the words of the holy Scripture to signify the same
thing, which call it, going down to Hell, not going down to the grave? Here
they must needs open the mystery of Antichrist working in their translations,
and say, that so they should make Hell a common place to all that departed in
the old Testament, which they will not* no no^ in the most important places of
our belief concerning our Savior Christ's descending into Hell, and
triumphing over the same. Yea, therefore of purpose they will not, only for to
defeat that part of our Christian Creed.

FVLK. 15. We can not always take the word grave properly, when the Scripture
uses it figuratively. But if we say, to go down to the grave, and to die is
all one, you ask us why we follow not the words of the holy Scripture. I
answer, we do, for the Scripture calls it grave. and not hell. Where is
then your vain clattering of the mystery of Antichrist, that we must open?
Because we will not acknowledge that heretical common place, invented by
Marcion the heretic, we purpose to defeat the article of Christ's descending
into hell. A monstrous sclaunder, when we do openly confess it, and his
triumphing over hell in more triumphant manner than you determine it. For if he
descended into that hell only, in which were the souls of the faithful,
which was a place of rest, of comfort, of joy, and felicity, what triumph was
it to overcome such an hell, which if you take away the hateful name of hell
by your own description, will prove rather an heaven than an hell. But we
believe that he triumphed over the hell of the damned, and over all the power
of darkness, which he subdued by the virtue of his obedience and sacrifice.
so that it should never be able to claim or hold any of his elect, whom he
had redeemed.

MART. 16. As when the Prophet first, Osee. 13. and afterward the Apostle, 1.
Cor. 15. in the Greek, s^y thus* Ero (...)
mors tua o mors, morsus tuus ero inferne. Vbi est, mors stimulus tuus? vbi
est, inferne, victoria tua? O death, (...).
I will be thy death: I will be thy sting* o Hell. Where is, o death, thy
sting? where is, o hell, thy victory? They translate Bib. 1579.
in both places, O grave, in steed of, o Hell. What else can be their meaning
hereby, but to draw the Reader from the common sense of our Savior Christ's
descending into hell, and conquering the same, and bringing out the fathers and
just men triumphantly from thence into heaven? which sense has always been
the common sense of the Catholic church and holy Doctors, See S. Hier. Co^*
me^t. in 13. Osee.
specially upon this place of the Prophet. And what a kind of speech is this,
and out of all tune, to make our Savior Christ say, O grave I will be thy
destruction? as though he had triumphed over the grave, and not over hell: or
over the grave, that is, over death: and so the Prophet should say death twice,
and Hell not at all.

FVLK. 16. S. Hierom whom you quote in the margent, to prove that all the
Catholic Doctors understood this text of Osee, of Christ's descending into
hell, and thereby reprove our translation, which for hell says grave, after
he has repeated the words of the Apostle 1. Cor. 15. upon this text, thus he
concludes. Itaque quod ille in resurrectionem interpretatus est Domini, no^
aliter interpretari nec possumus nec audemus. Therefore that which the Apostle
has interpreted of our Lords resurrection, we neither can, nor dare
interpret otherwise. You see therefore by Hieromes judgment, that in this
text, which is proper of Christ's resurrection, it is more proper to use the
word of grave, than of hell. How vainly the same Hierome interprets the last
words of this chapter, of spoiling the treasure of every vessel that is
desirable* of Christ's delivering out of hell the most precious vessels of the
Saints, etc. I am not ignorant, but we speak of translation of the 14.
verse, which being understood of Christ's resurrection, it argues, that the
grave is spoken of, rather than hell. As for the repetition of one thing twice
for vehemency, and certainties sake, is no inconvenient thing, but commonly
used in the Scriptures.

MART. 17. Why, my Masters, you that are so wonderful precise translatoures,
admit that our savior Christ descended not into Hell beneath, as you say, yet I
think you will grant that he triumphed over Hell, and was conqueror of the
same. Why then did it not please you to suffer the Prophet to say so at the
least, rather than that he had conquest only of death and the grave? You abuse
your ignorant reader very impudently, and your own selves very damnably, not
only in this, but in that you make grave, and death, all one, and so where the
holy Scripture often joins together death and Hell* as things different and
distinct: you make them speak but one thing twice, idly and superfluously.

FVLK. 17. For our faith of Christ's triumphing over hell, I have spoken
already sufficiently, but of the Prophets meaning beside the words them
selves, the Apostle is best expounder, who refers it to the resurrection,
and his victory over death, which he has gained not for him self alone, but
for all his elect. Where you say we make grave and death all one, it is false.
We know they differ, but that one may ^e signified by the other, without any
idle or superfluous repetition in one verse. I refer me to a whole hundred of
examples, that may be brought out of the Psalms, the Prophets, and the
Proverbs, where words of the same, like, or near signification, are twice
together repeated, to note the same matter, which none but a blasphemous dog,
will say to be done idly, or superfluously.

MART. 18. But will you know that you should not confound them, but that Mors,
and Infernus, which are the words of the holy Scripture in all tongues, are
distinct: hear what S. Hierome says, or if you will not hear, because you
are of them which have stopped their ears, let the indifferent Christian
Reader harken to this holy Doctor, and great interpreter of the holy Scriptures
according to his singular knowledge in all the learned tongues. Upon the
foresaid place of the Prophet, after he had spoken of our Savior Christ's
descending into hell, and ouercomming of death, he adds: Between death and
Hierom in Os^^ cap. 13*
hell, this is the difference, that death is that whereby the soul is
separated from the body: Hell is the place where souls are included, either in
rest, or else in pains, according to the quality of their deserts. And that
death is one thing, and Hell is another: the Psalmist also declares, Psalm. 6.
saying: THERE IS not in death, that is mindful of thee, but in Hell who shall
confess to thee? And in another place. Let death come upon them, and let them
go down into Hell alive. Thus far S. Hierom.

FVLK. 18. He that by the grave understands a place to receive the bodies of
the dead, and figuratively death, does no more confound the words of death,
and the grave, then he that by a cup, understands a vessel to receive drink
properly, and figuratively, that drink which is contained in such a vessel.
Therefore that you cite out of Hierome, makes nothing against us, for he him
self, although deceived by the Septuagintes, or rather by the ambiguitie of
the word (...), which they use, in the signification of the Hebrew word
(...), yet by Infernus understands them that be In inferno, and the dead, as
we do by the word grave oftentimes. As for his opinion of the godly souls
in happy hell before Christ's death, or his interpretation of any other part
of Scripture, we profess not to follow in our translations, but as near as
we can the true signification of the words of holy Scripture, with such sense
(if any thing be doubtful) as the proper circumstances of every place will
lead us unto, that we may attain to the meaning of the holy Ghost.

MART. 19. By which differences of death and Hell, (whereof we must often
advertise the Reader) are meant two things: death, and the going down of the
soul into some receptacle of Hell, in that state of the old Testament, at
what time the holy Scriptures used this phrase so often. Now, these impudent
translators in all these places, translate it grave, of purpose Bib. 1579.
to confound it and death together, and to make it but one thing, which S.
Hierom shows to be different, in the very same sense that we have declared.

FVLK. 19. The difference of Mors and Infernus which Hierome makes, can not
always stand, as I have showed of the hoare heads of Jacob, Ioab, and Shemei,
which none but mad men will say, to have descended into a receptacle of
souls, beside other places of Scripture, where Sheol must of necessity
signify a place for the body. And even those places of the Psalms, that S.
Hierom calls to witness, do make against his error. For where David says,
Psalm. 6. In hell who shall confess unto thee? How can it be true of the souls
of the faithful being in that holy hell Abraham's bosom? Did not Abraham
confess unto God, and acknowledge his mercy? Did not Lazarus the same, did
not all the holy souls departed confess God in Abraham's bosom? Were all
those blessed souls so unthankful, that being carried into that place of
rest, and comfort, none of them would confess Gods benefits? It is plain
therefore, to the confusion of your error, that Sheol in that place of David
must needs signify the grave, in which no man does confess, praise, or give
thanks unto God, of whom in death there is no remembrance. Therefore he
desires life and restoring of health, that he may praise God in his Church or
congregation. Likewise in the Psalm. 54. where he prophesies unto the wicked a
sudden death, such as befell to Chore, Dathan, and Abiram, which went down
quick into the grave. Not into hell, whether come no bodies of men living, but
the souls of men that are dead.

MART. 20. But alas, is it the very nature of the Hebrew, (...)
Greek, or Latin, that forces the^ so much to English it grave, rather than
hell? we appeal to all Hebricians, Grecians, and Latinists in the world: first,
if a man would ask, what is Hebrew, Infernus.
or Greek, or Latin for Hell: whether they would not answer, these three
words, as the very proper words to signify it, even as panis signifies bread:
secondly, if a man would ask, what is (...)
Hebrew, or Greek, or Latin, for a grave: whether they would answer these
words, and not three other which they know, are as proper words for grave, as
lac, is for milk. Sepulchrum.


FVLK. 20. The very nature of the Hebrew word (...), is most properly to
signify a grave, or receptacle of dead bodies, as all that be learned in that
tongue, do know. About the Greek and Latin terms, is not our question, and
therefore you deal deceitfully, to handle them all three together. Although
neither (...), nor Infernus are so proper for hell, but that they may be taken
also sometimes for the grave, and so perhaps were meant by the Greek and
Latin translators in diverse places. You speak therefore as one void of all
shame, to say they are as proper for hell, as panis, for bread. Where you ask
what is Hebrew, Greek, or Latin, for hell: you must understand, that if you
speak of a proper word, for those invisible places, wherein the souls
departed, are either in joy or torments, I answer, there is no proper word for
those places* either in Hebrew, Greek, or Latin. For that which of all these
tongues is translated heaven, is the proper word for the sensible sky, in
which are the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and by a figure is transferred to
signify the place of Gods glory, in which he reigns with the blessed
spirits of Angels, and men, above this sensible world. Paradise and Abraham's
bosom, who is so childish, not to acknowledge them to be borrowed words, and
not proper. So for* (...) of the reprobate souls in the Hebrew tongue T^phe^^
or Gehinnom which properly are the names of an abominable place of Idolatry,
are used, and Sheol sometimes figuratively may signify the same. In Greek and
Latin G^henna is used for the same, which is borrowed of the Hebrew. Sometimes
also the word (...) in Greek is taken for the place of the damned, and the
kingdom of darkness. The Latin word Infernus is any low place. Wherefore I
can not marvel sufficiently at your impudency, which affirm these three
words (...), and Infernus, to be as proper for our English word hell, as Panis
is for bread. That there be other words beside these in all the three tongues
to signify a grave, I marvel to what purpose you tell us, except you would
have ignorant folk suppose, that there cannot be two Hebrew, Greek, or Latin
words for one thing.

MART. 21. Yea, note and consider diligently what we will say. Let them show
me out of all the Bible one place, where it is certain and agreed among all,
that it must needs signify grave* let them show me in any one such place,
that the holy Scripture uses any of those former three words for grave. As
when Abraham bought a place of burial, whether he bought Infernum: or when it
is said the kings of Israel were buried in Genesis c. 49.
the monuments or sepulchers of their fathers, whether it say, in infernis
patrum suorum. So that not only Divines by this observation, but Grammarians
also and children may easily see, that the proper and natural signification of
the said words, is in English Hell, and not grave.

FVLK. 21. We note well your foolish subtlety, that will have us to show you
one place, where it is oertaine and agreed among al, that, sheol must needs
signify grave I am persuaded that you and such as you are, that have sold your
selves to Antichrist, to maintain his heresies with all impudency, will agree
to nothing that shall be brought, though it be never so plain and certain,
that it must needs so signify. I have already showed you three places, where
the hoare head is said to go down into sheol, that is into the grave For
whether should the hoare head go but into the grave? Nothing can be more plain
to him that will agree to truth, that sheol in all such places is taken for the
grave. But to omit those places, because I have spoken of them all ready: what
say you to that place, Numb. 16? where the earth opened her mouth, and
swallowed up the rebels with their tents, and all there substance of
cattaile, and what soever they had: where the text says. They went down, and
all that they had alive sheolah into the pit or grave. God made a great grave
or hole in the earth, to receive them all. Where no man will say that evther
the bodies of these men or their substance of Tents, cattaile, and stuff
went into hell, as it is sure their souls went into torment. And if
authority do way more with you than good reason, hear what S. Augustine
writes upon the same text* and how he takes your inferos or infernum, which
in the Hebrew is sheol, Quest. super Number. lib. 4. c. 29. Et descenderunt ipsi
and omnia quaecunque sunt eis viuentes ad inferos. Notandum secundum locum
terreni^m dictos esse inferos, hoc est, etc. And they themselves descended, and
all that they had alive unto Inferas, the lower parts. It is to be noted, that
Inferi are spoken of an earthly place, that is in the low parts of the earth.
For diversely and under manifold understanding even as the sense of things which
are in hand requires, the name of Inferi is put in the Scriptures, and
especially it is wont to be taken for the dead. But for as much as it is said
that those descended alive ad inferos, and by the very narration it appears
sufficiently what was done: it is manifest, as I said, that the lower parts of
the earth are termed by this word inferi, in comparison of this upper part of
the earth in which we live. Like as in comparison of the higher heaven, where
the dwelling of the holy Angels is, the Scripture says, that the sinful
Angels being thrust down into the darkness of this air, are reserved as it
were in prisons of a lower part or hell, to be punished. S. Augustine here does
not only understand this place of the grave or receptacle of bodies: but also
shows that the Latin word inferi or infernus, does not always signify hell,
as you made it of late, as proper for hell, as Panis for bread. But because you
shall not complain of the singularity of this example, although you require
but one, I will add out of the Psalm 141. where the Prophet says, our bones
are scattered at the very brinke or mouth of sheol the grave. How can you
understand him to speak of hell? For the grave and not hell is a place for dead
men's bones: as he speaks of the faithful, by the wicked compted as good as
dead and rotten, consumed to the bones. By these and many other examples, it is
manifest, that the proper signification of sheol in English, is a grave and not
hell.

MART. 22. And therefore Beza does strangely abuse Annot. in Act. 2. 25. 27.
and in 1. Cor. 15. 55.
his Reader, more than in one place, saying that the Hebrew word does properly
signify grave, being deduced of a verb that signifies, to crave or ask,
because it craves always new coarses. As though the grave craved more than
Hell does, or swallowed Bib. 1579. Prouer. 1. 12. 30. 15. 16.
more, or were more hardly satisfied and filled than Hell. for in all such
places they translate grave. And in one such place they say, The grave and
destruction can never be full. Prou 27. 20.
Whereas them selves a little before, translate the very same words, Hell and
destruction: and therefore it might have pleased Cap. 15. 11.
them to have said also, Hell and destruction can never be full, as their
powfellowes do in their translation, and again, We shall Bib. 1562. 1577.
Proverb. 1. 1. Pet. 5.
swalow them up, like Hell. The Devil (we read) goes about continually like a
roaring lion, seeking whom he may de^ou^. Who is called in the Apocalypse,
Abaddon, that Apoc. 9. 11.
is, destruction. And so very aptly Hell and destruction are joined together,
and are truly said never to be filled. What madness and impudency is it then
for Beza to write thus: Who Beza before alleged.
is ignorant that by the Hebrew word, rather is signified a grave, for that it
seems after a sort to crave always new c^rcasses?

FVLK. 22. Beza does not abuse his reader, to tell him that sheol is derived of
a verb that signifies craving, or asking: but you do unhonestly abuse Beza,
as you do every man, when you take in hand, to affirm that he stands only
upon the etymology of sheol, to prove that it signifies the grave.

MART. 23. And again, concerning our Savior Christ's descending into hell* and
delivering the fathers from thence, it Annot. in 2. Act. v. 24.
is marvel, f^i^lr Be^a, that the most part of the ancient fathers were in
this error, whereas with the Hebrews the word SHEOL, signifies nothing else
but GRAVE. Before, he pleaded upon the etymology or nature of the word, now
also he pleads upon the authority of the Hebrews themselves. If he were not
known to be very impudent and obstinate, we would easily mistrust his skill
in the Hebrew, saying that among the Hebrews, the word signifies nothing else
but Nihil aliud.
grave.

FVLK. 23. Beza says that the word Sheol properly signifies nothing but the
grave, nevertheless he says, it is taken figuratively, for tribulation,
which is near to extreme destruction, yea and sometime for the bottomless
pit of hell.

MART. 24. I would gladly know, what are those Hebrews: does not the Hebrew
text of the holy Scripture best tell us the use of this word? Do not themselves
translate it Hell very often? do not the Septuaginta always? If any Hebrew in
the world, were asked, how he would turn these words into Hebrew, Similes
estis sepulchris dealbatis: you are like to whited graves: And, Sepulchrum eius
apud vos est: His grave is among you: would any Hebrew I say translate it by
this Hebrew word which Beza says among the Hebrews signifies Sheoli^^. Sheol.
nothing else but grave* Ask your Hebrew Readers in this case, and see what
they will answer.

FVLK. 24. The best of the Hebrews, that either interpreted Scriptures, or made
Dictionaries, Jews, or Christians, do acknowledge that sheol does properly
signify the grave. That the Septuaginta do always translate it (...), it
proves not that it always signifies hell, for (...) signifies not always
hell, as in the place of Nu^b. 16. As for the turning of Latin into Hebrew, is
not our controversy, but of translating Hebrew into English, sheol may
signify the grave, the hole, the pit, as F^^ea, though it be not all one with
the Latin word Sepulchrum. And yet Rabbi Solomon whom you boldly cite in the
27. Section, says plainly that the true and proper interpretation In Genesis 37.
of Sheol is Keber, which you say, is as proper for grave, as Lac is for milk.

MART. 25. What are those Hebrews then, that Beza The Protesta^t^ in
interpretation of Scriptures, follow the late Jews, rather than the ancient
fathers, and Apostolical church.
speaks of? forsooth certain Jews or later Rabbines, which, as they do
falsely interpret all the holy Scriptures against our Savior Christ in other
points of our belief, as against his Incarnation, Death, and Resurrection: so
do they also falsely interpret the holy scriptures against his descending into
Hell, which those Jewish Rabbines deny, because they look for another Messiah
that shall not die at al, and consequently shall not after his death go down
into Hell and deliver the fathers expecting his coming as our savior Christ
did. And therefore those Jewish Rabbines hold as the heretics do, that the
fathers of the old Testament were in heaven before our savior Christ's
Incarnation: and these Rabbines are they which also pervert the Hebrew word to
the signification of grave, in such places of the holy scriptures as speak
either of our Savior Christ's descending into hell, or of the fathers going
down into Hell, even in like manner as they pervert other Hebrew words, of the
holy scripture, as Esa. 7.
namely, alma, to signify a young woman, not a virgin, against our Saviors
birth of the B. Virgin Marie.

FVLK. 25. Beza speaks of the holy men of God, which did write the
Scriptures, and so use that word Sheol, as it can not be taken to signify any
thing properly, but the grave or pit. And as for the Jewish Rabbi^s, what
reason is there, why we should not credit them in the interpretatiou of
words, of their own tongue, rather than any ancient Christians ignorant of
the Hebrewe tongue? And although they do sometimes frowardly contend about the
signification of a word or two, against the truth of the Gospel, that is no
sufficient cause why they should be discredited in all words. But beside them.
Beza has also the best Hebritians that have been in this last age, among the
Christians, not only Protestants, but Papists also, namely Pagninus, and
Masius, in their Dictionaries.

MART. 26. And if these later Rabbines be the Hebrews that Beza means, and
which these gay English translators follow, we lament that they join
themselves with such companions, being the sworn enemies of our Savior
Christ. Surely the Christian Hebrews in Rome, and elsewhere, which of great
Rabbines are become zealous Doctors of Christianiti^, and therefore honor
every mystery and article of our Christian faith, concerning our Savior
Christ, they dispute as vehemently against those other Rabbines, as we do
against the Heretics, and among other things, they tell them, thus Saul said,
1. Reg. 28.
Raise me up Samuel, and that the woman said, I see Gods ascending out of the
earth, and, An old man is ascended or come up, and that Samuel said, Why have
thou disquieted me, that I should be raised up? and, To morrow thou and thy
sons shall be with me. And the book of Ecclesiasticus Eccl. 46. 23.
says, that Samuel died, and afterward lifted up his voice out of the earth,
etc. All which the holy Scripture would never have thus expressed, (whether it
were Samuel in deed o^ not) if Saul and the Jews then had believed, that
their Prophets and Patriarchs had been in heaven about. And as for the Hebrew
word, they make it (as every boy among the Jews does well know) as proper a
word for Hell* as panis is for bread, and as improper for a grave (though so it
may be used by a figure of speech) as Cymba Charontis is Latin for death.

FVLK. 26. If we followed the Jews in exposition of the Scriptures against
Christ, we were not so much to be pitied, as to be abhorred: but if we be
content to learn the propriety of Hebrew words of the learned Rabbinsi, as
Hierom was glad to do of his Rabbin, who as it appears by his scholar in
some places, was not excellently learned, there is no cause why any man should
pity us, but them rather, that to cloak their ignorance in the Hebrewe tongue,
pretend as if it were more unlawful to learn Hebrew of the Hebrew Rabbis,
than Latin of Quintilian or Priscian, and Greek of Gaza, Suidas, and such
like. That you tell v^ of the Romish Rabbis converted from Iudai^me, to
Papistrie, is not worth a straw. For their argument of Saules and a witches
opinion, that the dead might be raised, proves nothing in the world, that
they were in Hell. And the son of Syrach shows him self not to be directed
by the spirit of God, which affirms, Samuel did lift up his voice after his
death* out of the earth, contrary to the judgment of Catholic Doctors of the
Church. For that the Scripture speaks of Samuel raised by the witch, is
meant of a wicked spirit counterfetting the shape and similitude of Samuel.
For the souls of the faithful, and holy Prophets, be not at the
commandments of witches, but at rest with God, where they can not be
disquieted. As for the authority of those unknown authors, that teach boys
to say, Sheol is as proper for hell, as panis for bread, we may esteem it to
be of as good credit, as Charons boat, Plutoes palace, and Cerberus three
heads, etc.

MART. 27. But what speak I of these? do no: the greatest and most ancient
Rabbines (so to call them) the Septuaginta Geneb. lib. 3. de Trin.
always translate the Hebrew word, by the Greek (...), which is properly
hell? do not the Talmudistes, and Chaldee paraphrases, and Rabbi Solomon
Iarhi, handling these places of the Psalms, He will deliver my soul from the
hand of Sheol, interpret it by Gehinum, that is, Gehenna, hell? and yet the
Caluinists bring this place for an example that it signifies grave. Likewise
upon this place, Let all sinners be turned into SHEOL: the foresaid Rabbines
interpret it by Gehinum, Hell. Insomuch that in the Proverbs, and in Job, it
Proverb. 15. Job. 26.
is joined with Abaddon. Where Rabbi Leui according to the opinion of the
Hebrews, expounds Sheol, to be the lowest region of the world, a deep place
opposite to heaven, whereof it is written, If I descended into Hell, thou art
present: and so does Rabbi Abraham expound the same word in chap. 2. Ion^.

FVLK. 27. Although the Septuaginta do always translate Sheol by the word
(...), yet do they not thereby always understand hell: as it is manifest in
all those places, where the Scripture speaks of a receptacle of dead bodies.
But now you will bear us down with Rabbis, Talmudists and Chaldee
paraphrases. And first you say that all these, handling that verse of the 49.
Psalm. He will deliver my soul from the hand of Sheol, interpret it by
Gehinnom, that is, hell. I grant that Rabbi Joseph using the liberty of a
Paraphrast, rather than a translator, interprets the word by Gehinnom, that
signifies hell fire, and so the sense is true. For God delivered David from
eternal damnation. But Rabbi David Chimchi, expounding the same place
according to the proper signification of Sheol, says. (...). etc. The Prophet
said when he saw the destruction of the souls of the wicked in their death:
In the day in which my body shall go down to ( Sheol) the grave, God shall
deliver my soul from the hand of ( Sheol) the grave, that my soul shall not
perish with my body. You see therefore that all the Rabbines be not of your
side, no nor Rabbi Solomon Iarchi, whom you cite. For upon 37. of Genesis,
verse 35. where Jacob says, he will go down to the grave, mourning, thus he
writes, (...). Mourning to Sheol, according to the plain and literal sense
the interpretation thereof is the grane, in my mourning I will be buried, and I
will not be comforted, all my days: but after the Midrash, or exposition, not
according to the letter, it is hell. This sign was delivered by hands, or by
tradition, from the mouth of his power, (that is from a divine oracle) if not
one of my sons shall dye in my life time, I had confidence, that I should not
see hell. By this saying, it is manifest, that this Rabbine acknowledged the
true and proper translation of this word Sheol, was to the grave, although
after figurative, and sometimes fond expositions, it was interpreted for hell.
Likewise you say, but untruly, of this verse, Psalm. 9. v. 18. Let all sinners
be turned to Sheol, for there the Chaldee Paraphrast retains the word Sheol,
and does not give any other word for it. David Chimchi interprets it
according to the literal sense, (...). Let the wicked be turned into the
grave, which is so straung with you to be aunswerable to Sheol, although as R.
Solomon he says, it may be understood of their burial in hell. That Sheol in
the Proverbs, and Job is joined with abaddo^, Prou. 1^. Job. 26.
it hinders it not to signify the grave, where is the destru ction and
consumption of the body. And Prou. 15. v. 11. the Chaldee Paraphrast retains
Sheol, which Kabuenaki expounds thus, (...), etc. It is said of Sheol, and
Abaddon, that Sheol is the grave, (...), and Abaddon is hell, which is deeper
than the grave, etc. And although in Job Rabbi Leui, and others expound Sheol
for a secret place about the center of the earth, which should seem to be (...)
hell: yet they say not that this is the proper signification of the word
Sheol. For in the 21. of Job. v. 13. the Chaldee Paraphrast for Sheol,
interprets Kebureta, the grave, and in the 14. verse. 13. beith kebureta, the
house of the grave, and 17. v. 12. and 15. the grave. In both which places
Rabbi Abraham Peritsol joins Sheol, and Keber together, both signifying the
grave, and in the later verse, he makes Job to say to his friends (...), The
bars of (...)
lies with which you comfort me into the midst of the pit of the grave shall
go down with me when I dye. By all which testimonies it is manifest, that
Sheol is not the proper for hell, the receptacle of souls, but for grave, the
common dwelling house of men's bodies.

But you will press us yet further, with the authority of Rabbi Abraham upon
Jonas. 2. In deed in Abraham Aben Ezra, I read as you say, but this is only
his opinion of the figurative sense of that place. for upon Hosee cap. 13. v.
14. he expounds (...) thus, I have been a redeemer of thy fathers, now I
will be a destruction of death which is to thee. And so do R. Shelomo Iarchi,
and Rabbi David Chimchi: yea, so does Saint Paul, more worth than all the
Rabbis that ever were, expound it.

MART. 28. This being the opinion and interpretation of the Hebrews, See the
skill or the honesty of Beza, saying that Sheol, with the Hebrews signifies
nothing but grave. Whereas in deed (to speak skilfully, uprightly, and not
contentiously) it may signify grave sometime secondarily, but Hell,
principally and properly, as is manifest, for that there is no other word so
often used and so familiar in the Scriptures to signify Hell, as this, and for
that the Septuaginta do always interpret it by the Greek word (...).

FVLK. 28. The opinion of the Hebrews being as I have rehearsed out of their
own words, see the skill or honesty of Martin, which dare open his mouth
against Beza in this matter, and tell us that Sheol may secundarily signify a
grave, whereas it does first and principally so signify, how soever the
Septuaginta do interpret it by (...), which signifies an obscure dark place
under the earth, and not hell properly.

MART. 29. The which Greek word is so notorius and peculiar for Hell, that
the Paganes use it also for Pluto, whom they feigned to be God of hell, and
not God of graves: and and if they would stand with us in this point, we
might beat them with their own kind of reasoning, out of Poets and profane
writers, and out of all Lexicons. Unless they will tell us (contrary to their
custom) that we Christians must attend the Ecclesiastical use of this word
in the Bible, and in Christian writers, and that in them it signifies grave.
For so Beza seems Annot. in Act. 2^ 27.
to say, that the Greek Interpreters of the Bible translated the Hebrewe word
aforesayed by this Greek word, as signifiyng a dark place: whereas the
Greek Poets used it for that which the Latins called Inferos, that is, Hell.
Which ambiguitie (says he) of the word, made many err, affirming Christ's
descending into Hell. So was LIMBVS builded, whereunto afterward Purgatory was
laid.

FVLK. 29. That Pluto of the Poets is feigned to be the God of Hell, it was
here of that they imagined Hell to be a place under the earth, which was his
palace, as earth was his kingdom: or else what becomes of the triple
division of all the world, if Jupiter having heaven, Neptune the Sea, Pluto
should not have the earth? who had his name of the riches enclosed in the
earth, and was also called (...), or (...) as in Homer Il. 15. (...). Jupiter
and I, and Pluto the third that rules over the dead. Whereof it is put in the
Genetiue case; after such prepositions as govern an Accusative or Dative,
where (...) the house of Pluto is to be understood. I might here cite diverse
places out of Nonius the Christian Greek Poet, who seems to use (...) and
(...) for the grave, speaking of the resurrection of Christ, Joan. 2. and of
Lazarus cap. 11. But of the translation of the Greek word is not our question,
but of the Hebrewe word Sheol, which the septuaginta turning into (...) mean
a place generally to receive the dead, which sometimes is the grave of the
bodies, sometimes hell of the souls.

MART. 30. I see Beza his wiliness very well in this point. For here the
man has uttered all his heart, and the whole mystery of his crafty meaning
of this corrupt translation: that to avoid these three things, Christ's
descending into Hell, Limbus patrum, and Purgatory, he and his companions
wrest the foresaid words of the holy Scriptures to the signification of grave,
But let the indifferent Christian reader only consider Beza his own words in
this place, point by point.

FVLK. 30. Beza uses no wiliness or craft at all, for he does always openly
detest the dreams of Limbus and Purgatory, and whatsoever may depend upon
them. But let us see what you can gather out of his words.

MART. 31. First he says, that the Greek Poets were wont to use the Greek
word for Hell: secondly, that they which interpreted the Bible out of Hebrewe
into Greek, used the very same word for that Hebrewe word whereof we have
now disputed: thirdlye, that the aunciente fathers (for of them he speaks,
as a little before he expresses) understood the said Greek word for Hell,
and Ibid. v. 24.
thereby grew to those errors (as he impudently affirms) of Christ's
descending into Hell, and of the place in Hell where the fathers rested
expecting the coming of our Savior, etc. Whereby the Reader does easily see,
that both the profane and also the Ecclesiastical use of the word is for Hell,
and not for grave.

FVLK. 31. I looked for some great matter, when you began to consider so
diligently from point to point: but I see we shall have nothing, but this cold
collection, that both the profane and Ecclesiastical use of this word (...),
is for hell, and not for the grave. That it is used for hell, no man denies:
but that it is used only for hell. Beza says not, and I have proved that it
is not. As also it may be proved by diverse other places out of the Apocriphall
writings, namely Sap. 16. v. 13. where it is translated for death by your own
Latin translatour, being the same verse, that is in the song of Anna 1. Sam.
2. where Sheol is used, and is repeared in that signification Tob. 13. v. 12.
Likewise Sap. 2. v. 1. where the ungodly that profess the mortality of the
soul say, that none was known to return from (...), the word can signify
nothing but grave. For hell it can not signify in their speech, that believe no
hell, and say plainly that their souls shall vanishe like smoke, or light
air. Likewise in Baruch. 2. it is taken for the grave, where he says the
dead which are in the (...), shall not give honor to God, where it is
certain, that by that word is meant the grave, seeing the souls of the
righteous that were in Abraham's bosom, did praise God, and moreover, he makes
it plain that he speaks of the dead bodies, when he says their spirit is
taken out of their bowels.

MART. 32. And for the Latin word, it is the like Infernus, inferi.
case for all the world: and if a man will ask but his child that comes
from the Grammar, what is Infernus, he will say Hell, and not grave: what is
Latin for grave? He will answer Sepulchrum, or monumentum. But never
Infernus, unless one of these Caluinisticall translatours taught him so, to
deceive his father.

FVLK. 32. I hope they that be wise will believe S. Augustine, rather than you,
that the word Inferi, which is the same that Infernus, has diverse and
manifold understandings in the Scripture, as I have declared before sect. 21.
But with the Latin word Infornus, we have little to do, which translate not
out of Latin, but out of Hebrew or Greek.

MART. 33. Now then, to draw to a conclusion of this their corruption also in
their English translation: whereas the Hebrew, and Greek, and Latin words
do most properly and usually signify Hell: and both Greek, and Latin
interpreters precisely in every place use for the Hebrew word, that one
Greek word, and that one Latin word, which by all custom of speaking and
writing* signify Hell: If they object unto us some Catholics, that translate
it Sepulchru^, as they do: it is a fault in them also, but so far less tha^
in the Protestants, as chance medley is in respect of vvilfull murder.
it had been the part of sincere and true meaning translatours, to have
translated it also in English always by the word Hell: and afterward to have
disputed of the meaning thereof, whether and when it is to be taken for Hell,
or grave, or lake, or death, or any such thing. As i^ one place they have done
it very exactly and indifferently, namely when Jonas says (c. 2. v. 2.) out of
the Whales belly. Out of the belly of hell, cried I, and thou heardest my
voice. So all translate it, and well, whatsoever it signify in this place.
They think that Hell, here signifies nothing else but the Whales belly, and
the affliction of Jonas, and so the word may signify by a Metaphorical
speech, as when we say in English, It See their marginall annot. Ionae 22. Bib.
1577.
is a hell to live thus: and therefore no doubt they did here translate it so,
to insinuate that in other places it might as well signify grave, as here the
Whales belly.

FVLK. 33. Your conclusion is as good as your premises, because the Greek and
Latin Interpretors had before us translated amiss, which gave occasion to
diverse errors, therefore we also knowing the true signification of the word,
must have followed them in wrong and doubtful translation, and afterward
debated the meaning of the several places. But in the margent, you tell us,
that such Catholics as have translated the word Sheol* for a grave, have also
done amiss. Pardon us M. Martin, we take you for no such learned Hebritian,
that you should control Pagninus, Isidorus Clarius, and all other Hebritians
of this time upon such slender sleeuelesse reasons, as you have brought
hitherto. And you show an intolerable proud stomach, that being a man so
little seen in the Hebrew tongue (as you show your self to be) you should
condemn such grave and learned persons of your own side, of rashness, or
ignorance. For you make them in the case of chance medley, that have
translated sheol a grave. Think you the deputies of the Council of Trent had
no more discretion in perusing Isidorus Clarius correction of the Bible, than
to suffer him to change life and safety into chance medly and manslaughter?
you may in time to come if you apply your study, prove learned in that
language wherein as yet you are but a smatterer not worthy to be heard against
so many, so learned, so famous professors of the Hebrew tongue, Jews, and
Christians, Protestants, and Papists, authors of Grammars, Dictionaries, and
translations. But in the second of Jonas, it pleases you well, that our Geneua
Bible translateth this word Hell, out of the belly of hell, etc. but you like
not that they should interpret it a metaphorical Hell, or the extremity of
affliction, whereinto the Prophet was brought: where you make it no doubt what
they would insinuate, you show your self more bold to affirm, than ready or
able to prove.

MART. 34. But then they should have translated it also hell in other places,
as they did in this, and afterward have interpreted it grave in their
commentaries, and not presumptuously to straiten and limite the word of the
holy Ghost, to their private sense and interpretation, and to prejudice the
ancient and learned holy fathers, which look farremore deeply and
spiritually ^at. 12.
into this prophecy, than to Jonas, or the Whale, our Savior himself also
applying it to his own person, and to his being in the heart of the earth three
days and three nights. And therefore S. Hierome says, This belly of Hell,
according to Comment. in 2. ^o^^.
the story, is the Whales bellye, but it may much better be referred to the
person of Christ, which under the name of David sings in the Psalm* Thou
shall not leave my Psalm. 15. In inferno. Psalm. 87.
soul in Hell: Who was in Hell alive, and free among the dead. And that which
our Savior says. The Son of man shall be in the heart of the earth, he does
interpret of his soul in hell. For as the heart is in the mids of the body,
so is Hell said to be in the mids of the earth.

FVLK. 34. They have in other places translated it according to the propriety
of the word. and if in this place they had done so likewise, I see not what
fault they had committed. Certain it is that the whales belly, did rather
resemble a grave, wherein Jonas seemed to be buried, than hell the receptacle
of separated souls. It is the office of a translator not so much to regard
what other have written upon the place he translateth, be they ancient, be
they godly, be they learned, as what sense the interpretation of the words
will best bear. Without prejudice therefore of any man's credit, the truth in
this case must be sought out.

That you report out of Hierom upon this place, shows that both the Hebrew
word sheol, and the Latin infernus, are not proper and peculiar for hell, as in
other places you tell us. That S. Hierom interprets the saying of Christ,
Math. 12. v. 40. of his being in the heart of the earth, to be meant of his
being in hell, which is said to be in the midst of the earth, it is confuted
by the words of our Savior Christ, who says, that he shall be there three
days, and three nights, that is, all the time of his death, which is true of
his body in the grave, but not of his soul in hell: for both he said he
would be that day in Paradise, and you your selves hold, that he made no
tariaunce in hell. Beside that it is a fantastical opinion to limit hell into
the midst of the earth, which is rather a place without the sensible world,
than any dungeon within the earth.

MART. 35. Thus then presupposing (as we must) that Jonas speaks in the
person, of our Savior Christ, the principal sense is not of the whales belly,
but of that hell whether our Savior Christ descended, and from whence he
delivered the fathers of the old Testament, him self ascending into heaven, as
their King and general captain before them, and opening the way of heaven
unto them, as is signified in an other Prophet: Mich. 2. 13.
and was the first that entered heaven.

FVLK. 35. That which Jonas spoke, was first true of his own person, and then
of Christ, as Jonas was in this a resemblaunce of him. But by this similitude
of Christ remaining so many days and nights in the heart of the earth, as
Jonas did in the whales belly, it is manifest that he speaks of his body
remaining in the grave, not of his soul tarying in hell. Wherefore the
descending of Christ into Limbus patrum, has no manner of hold, either of the
saying of Christ in the Gospel* Math. 12. or of Jonas in his prayer, Ion. 2.

MART. 36. Against all which truths and every point thereof, these
translatours are so watchefull and wary, that where the Apostle says, Christ
began, and dedicated unto us Heb. 10. 20.
the way into heaven, they say, in their English translations with (...).
full consent nothing else bus, He prepared. Why are they fals^^ Initiauit.
here than their Masters, Calvin, Beza, Illyricus, who read, Dedicauit? Is
there nothing in the Greek word, but bare preparation? where be these
etymologistes now, that can strain (...).
and wring other words to the uttermost advantage of their heresy, and here
are content for the like advantage, to dissemble the force of this word, which
by all use and property signifies, to make new, to begin a thing, to be the
first author, to dedicate: as S. Augustine might have taught them, and their
Lexicons, Aug. tract. 48. in Joan.
and the Scriptures in many places. This translation (no doubt) is not done
sincerely and indifferently of them, but for their own deceitful purpose, as
is all the rest. When Saint Paul speaks of preparation only, they know
right well that he uses the usual word to prepare: as, He has prepared them
Heb. 11. 16.
a city: and wheresoever is signified preparation only, let them (...).
bring us one example where it is expressed by the other Greek word, which now
we speak of.

FVLK. 36. I grant the translations had been more proper, and agreeable to the
Greek word, to have said, which he has dedicated, or by dedication prepared.
But here is no fraud, against any truth or error of yours. For the Apostle
speaks not of the way by which we ascend immediately to heaven, but of the way
by which we have free access to God through faith, without the vailes and
ceremonies of the law, as it is manifest by his exhortation. And whereas you
said before, that Christ ascending into heaven, to those whom he had brought
out of hell, you must tell us then, where they remained all those forty days
that were between his resurrection and ascension, except you will make two
ascensions of Christ into heaven, one in soul alone, the other in body and
soul: which has not been heard of in the church before. For that his soul
was first received into heaven or Paradise immediately after his death, it
proves not an ascension: seeing the same was common to him, with other
saints. Again, seeing the mystery of our rede^ptio^ is divided into the
death, and resurrection of Christ, and that by his death we are delivered from
sins, by his resurrection we are justified: if you will not allow his death
to have purchased equal redemption to the fathers of the old Testament and us,
but measure the virtue thereof by the instance of time, in which it was actually
performed: you must stay your prisoners from entering into the kingdom of
heaven, at least until his resurrection. For none can enter into the kingdom
of heaven, but justified persons. Seeing therefore that justification depends
upon his resurrection, you must either grant, that it was communicated to the
fathers in their time before his incarnation, or else you must stay them from
entering into heaven before they were justified by his resurrection. The place
of Micha 2 that you quote* is nothing to the purpose of Christ's ascending For
there the Prophet threateneth the Israelites with the violence of their
enemies the Chaldees, whom God him self would prosper against them, to have
the victory, and to drive them into captivity.

MART. 37. But it is of more importance, which follows, and appart^yning
altogether to this controversy Hebr. 5. v 7. your trauslation is thus, in the
very English Bible that Of the year 1577.
now is read in your Churches: Which in days of his flesh Against Christ's
descending into H^^.
offered up prayers with strong crying, unto him that was able to save him from
death, and was heard in that which he feared. Is the Greek here, In that
which he (...).
feared? You know that no Grammar nor Lexicon does allow you this translation.
But either thus for reverence, or as one of your own English Bibles has it,
because of his reverence.

FVLK. 37. Your first quarrel against the truest translation of that word (...)
Heb. 5. is that it says in that which he feared, whereas the Greek is from
fear or out of fear: which afterward you confess though distant in word,
yet to be agreeable in sense. The second, that in the margent, our translation
is against Christ's descending into hell. How so I pray you? do you according
to your translation expound that word of Christ's descending into hell? no
verily. But we do expound it of his descending into hell, therefore our
translation is to prove Christ's descending into hell: and if our exposition
were not true, yet even your opinion of Christ's descent were nothing hindered
thereby: you will say, that by our exposition, we exclude his descent after his
death: we do in deed in such sort as your error teaches, altogether without
the Scripture. For if there had been an history of Christ's going into hell,
and delivering the Patriarchs and others the faithful from thence, all the
Eua^gelists would not have omitted so notable a matter, and that also an
article of our belief.

MART. 38. How is it then, that in your later English ^^x meru.
Bibles you changed your former translation from better to worse? or who
taught you so to translate it? for sooth the Heretic Beza, whose translation
you follow for the most part in your later Bibles, though here, in sense rather
than in word. And who taught Beza? he says, Calvin was the first that ever
found out this interpretation. And why? surely for defense of no less
blasphemy Calu. Catech. and Institut. li. 2. c. 16.
than this, that our Savior JESUS Christ upon the Cross was horribly afraid
of damnation, that he was in the very sorrows and torments of the damned, and
that this was his descending into Hell, and that otherwise he descended not.
Let the Reader note these new teachers upon this place, and judge to what
wicked end this translation tends.

FVLK. 38. If we have in the later reformed an error escaped in the former,
what skilleth it, by whom we were admonished, so to correct it? But Beza you
say affirms, that Calvin was the first that ever found out this
interpretation. It appears you were never well beaten for lying, it is such a
common fault with you. Beza speaking of the interpreters of this age, says
that Calvin (as he thinks) was the first that showed the true and natural
interpretation of this place. He says not, the first that ever found it. Yea
clean contrary wise he says, Denique vt non dubium sit, etc. Finally that it
should not be doubtful, but that some of the ancient fathers also have
interpreted this place even so, Nazianzenus Conc. de fill. 2. does plainly
number (...) this fear among the infirmities of Christ's manhood. As for that
which you call a blasphemy, is a holy and comfortable true doctrine, that
Christ for the redemption of our souls, suffered the wrath of God in his
soul, as those tears, and that strong cry declares, in which he complained
according to the sense of his humanity, that he was forsaken of God.

MART. 39. A wonderful thing: when all antiquity with a general, and full
consent has in that place of the holy Scripture read thus, that Christ was
heard (of his father) for Io. 11. 42.
his reverence (according as our Savior him self also says in the raising of
Lazarus, and signifies in his long prayer Io. 17:) how a blasphemous and
presumptuous Heretic should be so malapert thus to alter it, that he was heard
in that which he feared, that is, that he was delivered from damnation and the
eternal pains of hell, which he was sore afraid of. To the maintenance of which
blasphemy, Beza will seem to force the Greek thus. First (says he) (...)
does not here signify reverence or (...).
piety, but fear, and such a fear which he calls pauorem and
consternationem animi, that is, dreadfulnesse and astonishment of mind, and
other like words, to insinuate an exceeding horror and fear in our Savior
Christ. For confutatio^ whereof, we might easily bring the common use of this
Greek word in the holy Scriptures to signify not every fear, but that
religious fear which is in the best men, joined with godliness, holiness,
and devotion, as when in the Acts they that buried S. Steven, Act. 8.
are called Viri timorati, devout men, such as feared God. (...).


FVLK. 39. How know you, that al antiquity has so read? if we had the
commentaries of many of the ancient fathers upon this text, we might perhaps
prove unto you, that they read otherwise. Nazianzenus as I showed before among
Christ's infirmities, reckeneth this fear. Primasius although he expounds it
of reverence, yet alleges out of Cassiodorus that the word is taken sometime
for love, sometimes for fear. Theodoretus also interprets this place of
Christ's fear, according to his humane nature, showing that he feared death,
which S. Paul feared not, both to show him self a man, and to have
experience of all our infirmities without sin. But where you say, that
Calvin makes him to fear damnation, and the eternal pains of hell, it is
false. Calvin says plainly, his fear came not of distrust, but of the sense
of his humane nature, forbearing the judgment of God, which without vehement
endeavor, could not be overcome. Therefore was the astonishment, the tears,
the strong cry, the drops of blood, the Angel needful to comfort him, the
last extreme conflict, in which he cried, my God my God why have thou
forsaken me. As for the signification of the Greek word (...) although it be
so often taken for piety and religion, yet it is also taken for fear. As
Acts 23. Where S Luke says the Tribune was greatly afraid, least Paul
should have been rent in pieces, between the Pharizees and Saducees, he
uses this word (...) for being afraid, which was of no piety or religious
fear in him, that was a Pagane, but a natural and civil fear, least a
prisoner being a Roman, of whom he had charge, should be violently murdered
amongst them.

MART. 40. But we need not go far, for Beza will help us him self, who
tells us in an other place the very same. His words be these: (...)
significat non quemuis Anno. in Luc. 2. v. 25.
timorem, sed cum reuerentia potius quam cum animi trepidatione coniunctum
latini religione^ vocant. That is, (...) does not signify every fear, but
that which is joined with reverence, rather than with astonishment of mind,
the Latins do call it religion, or religious fear. If this be the true
signification of (...), as Beza him self confesses, why does he not so
translate it in the foresaid place to the Hebrews? Why forsakes he the old
approved Latin translation, and general consent of all ancient Interpreters,
and translateth it, that fear or astonishment of mind, which he says the word
does not signify?

FVLK. 40. You have great leisure thus to trifle, or rather intolerable malice
thus to cavil. Beza in the place by you cited, speaks of the word (...),
when it is taken for religion, for then it is rather joined with reverence,
than with astonishment.

MART. 41. And mark that in his foresaid annotation upon Saint Luke, he
tells not a peculiar signification of the Greek word in that place, as
though in some other places it might have an other signification, but he
tells generally what the very nature of the Greek word is, that is, that it
signifies not every fear, but a fear joined with reverence. And he said
truly: and they shall hardly give an instance, where it signifies that fear
of astonishment, which both he and they translate in the foresaid place of S.
Paul. Such a force has heresy to lead a man even contrary to his own
knowledge, to falsify gods holy word.

FVLK. 41. Any reasonable man reading the note upon the word (...), religious,
used by S. Luke of Symeon, will understand Beza to speak of the signification
of that word, as it is taken in that place, for he speaks against the
barbarous word Timoratus, used by the vulgar Interpreter, which signifies, if
it have any signification, one made afraid, rather than fearing God, with love
and reverence. But where you say, we shall hardly give an instance, where the
word signifies that fear of astonishment, which they translate, if you would
have taken pains to read Bezaes annotations your self, upon this text in
question, you should have found, that he brings many instances out of
Aristotle, Sophocles, Plutarch, Nazianzen, and S. Luke, Act. 23. If you had
remembered what S Mark writes of our Savior Christ, Mar. 14. v. 33. it should
not have been so strange a matter unto you, to hear that our Savior Christ
with great astonishment, and terror of mind, was afraid of death, where he
uses the words (...), and (...): which was not for bodilye pain or bodily
death. (which not only thousands of holy Martyrs have joyfully embraced, but
infinite wicked persons have contemned) but for the feeling of Gods wrath,
which was infinitely more heavy upon his soul, than any torments were upon his
body.

MART. 42. Yea Beza says further to this purpose (much more against his skill
in the Greek tongue, if he had any at all) that (...) the preposition can not
bear this sense, For which, or in respect whereof, and therefore he
translateth the Greek into Latin, thus. Exauditus est ex metu, he was heard
from fear: not, for fear, or, for his reverence. And because from fear, is a
hard speech, and dark, that seems to be the cause why our English
translators say, In that which he feared, far from Beza in word, but
agreeably in sense.

FVLK. 42. When Beza has showed his skill in the Greek tongue, not only in
his translation, and annotations, but also in diverse Greek Epigrams, which he
has set forth, who but one stark mad with malice, and blind with conceit of
his own slender skill, would doubt whether Beza had any skill at all in the
Greek tongue. As for that he says of the signification of the preposition
(...)* he speaks in respect of the property of the Greek tongue, for yet
you bring no examples, but Hebraisms out of the Scripture, for that
signification of the preposition.

MART. 43. But for this matter we send them to Flaccus Flac. Illyric.
Illyricus, a Captain Lutherane, who disputes this very point against the
Caluinistes: and teaches them that no thing is more common, than that
signification of (...). For proof whereof, (...).
we also refer them to these places of the holy scripture. Mat. 13. Luc. 22.
and 24. Act. 12. Psalm. 87. And Machab. 5. (...).
21. where (...) with a genitive, and (...) with an accusative, signify all
one, which Beza denies. Gentle Reader, bear with these tedious
grammatications, fitter to be handled in Latin, but necessary in this case
also, good for them that understand, and for the rest an occasion to ask of
them that have skill in the Greek tongue, whether we accuse our adversaries
justly or no, of false translating the holy Scriptures.

FVLK. 43. And we by the same authority, send you to Bezaes answer, in his
last edition of his annotations. And yet the Reader must know that Beza did not
simply deny, that the preposition might have such sense. But he said, Non
facile mihi persuaserim, I can not easily persuade my self, that any example
can be brought, wherein (...) is so used. And in all these examples that you
have brought, it signifies rather prae, which is (...), than propter, (...),
as your vulgar translator observes the difference, 2. Mac. 5. verse 27.
translating prae superbia, and propter elationem mentis. But Beza requires an
example of (...), taken for (...) or (...), that may answer to the vulgar
Latin, pro reuerentia. For who would translate in Saint Matthew, 13. (...), pro
gaudio, propter gaudium, or secundum gaudium, or (...), pro dolor, and so of
the rest, but of these, let Beza him self give account. As for these tedious
grammatications, which you confess to have been fitter to be handled in
Latin, it seems you uttered in English, for that of many ignorant, you might
be thought to bring some great learning out of the Hebrewe and Greek tongues
against us, whereas the learned, if you had written in Latin, of other
nations, as well as ours, might have been witnesses of your fond trifling, and
quarrelling against our translations. As for the necessary cause you pretend,
that the unlearned may ask them that have skyll in Greek, is very ridiculous.
For neither can they have at hand always such as be able to resolve them,
neither if they be of your faction* will they ask any indifferent man's
judgment, but only such as will avouch before the ignorant, that all which you
write, is good and perfect.

MART. 44. And we beseech them to give us a good reason, why they professing to
follow precisely the Greek, do not observe truly the Greek points, in such
place as concerns this present controversy. For the place in the Apocalypse,
which they allege of our Savior Christ's suffering from the beginning
(thereby to infer that the just men of the old Testament might enter heaven
then, as well as after his real and actual death) according to the Greek
points, says thus, All that dwell upon the earth, shall worship him* (the
beast) whose names have not been written in the book of life of the Lamb
slain, from the beginning of the world. Where it is evident, that the Greek
text says not, the Lamb slain from the beginning, but that the names of
those Antichristian Idolaters were not written in Gods eternal book of
predestination, from the beginning, as it is also most plain without all
ambiguitie, in the 17. chapter, v. 8. If in a place of no controversy they had
not been curious in points of the Greek, they might have great reason
sometime to alter the same.

FVLK. 44. How feign would you obscure the light of that excellent testimony,
even contrary to your own vulgar Latin translation? that you might not have
such a faithful witness against your Limbus patrum? You require a reason,
why we keep not the Greek points, Apoc. 13. I answer, we keep those
points, which the most ancient written copies have, which the Complutensis
Edi^i^ has, and which the best Greek printes now have. If you would know a
reason why we follow not them that point otherwise* I answer you, the
composition of the words, is against that pointing. For except Saint John had
meant that the Lamb was slain from the beginning of the world, he would not
have placed those words, from the beginning of the world, next to those
words, the Lamb which is slain, but next the word written. And therefore
Aretus that could not understand how the lamb was slain from the beginning
of the world is forced to imagine Hyperbaton in this text, where none needs,
the sense being good and plain without it, as the words do lie. Whose names
are not written in the book of life of the lamb, that has been slain since
the beginning of the world. And although it be true, that the names of the
Antichristian Idolaters, were not written in Gods eternal book of
predestination, from the beginning, as it is said Apoc. 17. v. 8. Yet is that
no reason, why this also should not be true, that the lamb was slain since
the beginning of the world, seeing without violence you can not distract
(...), from the lamb slain whom it does immediately follow.

MART. 45. But if in points of controversy between us, they will say, diverse
pointing is of no importance, they know the contrary by the example of
ancient heretics, which used this mean also to serve their false heretical
purpose. If they say, our vulgar Latin sense points it so, let them profess
before God and their conscience, that they do it of reverence to the said
ancient latin text, or because it is indifferent, and not for any other
cause, and for this one place we will admit their answer.

FVLK. 45 We say that wrong pointing may greatly alter the sense, but good
composition and placing of words in a sentence is a good rule to direct
pointing, where it is either lacking, or falsely signed. We refuse ^ot the
testimony of the vulgar Latin, where it agrees with the truth of the Greek
or Hebrewe, yea before God and our consciences, we reverence it, as a monument
of some antiquity, from which we neither do, nor are willing to dissent,
except the same dissent from the original text. Otherwise the truth of this
assertion, that Christ was slain from the beginning of the world, has not
only testimony of the ancient fathers, but also may be confirmed out of the
Scripture. For by the obedience of Christ Saint Paul Romans 5. teaches that
many are justified, meaning all the elect of God, who except Christ's death had
been effectual to them, before he suffered actually on the cross, must have
gone, not into Limb^ patrum, but into hell Diabolorum, which is the place
appointed for all them that are not justified freely by the grace of God,
through the redemption of Christ Jesus, whom God before has set forth, to be
a propitiatory in his blood, Romans 3. v. 24. etc. The title of this chapter
threatens a discovery of heretical translations against Purgatory
especially: but in the whole discourse thereof, which is shameful long one,
containing 45. sections, there is not one place noted against Purgatory,
Amphora coepit institui, curren^e rota cur vrceus exit?

CHAP. VIII.
Heretical translation concerning JUSTIFICATION.

Martin.
ABout the article of justification, as it has 1.
many branches, and their errors therein be manifold, so are their English
translations accordingly many ways false and heretical. First, against
justification by good works and by keeping the commandments, they suppress
the very name of justification in all such places where the word signifies
the commandments or the Law of God, which is both in the old and new
Testament most common and usual, namely in the books of Moses, in the Psalm
118. that begins thus, Beati immaculati: in the Psalm 147. ver. 19. 1.
Match. 1. ver. 51. and cap. 2. v. 21. Luke. 1. v. 6. Romans 2. v. 26. In all which
places and the like, where the Greek signifies justices and iustifications
most exactly, according as our vulgar latin (...).
tra^slateth, iustitias and iustificationes: there the English translations say
jointly and with one consent, ordinances, or, statuts. For example, Romans 2. If
the uncircumcision keep the ORDINANCES (...).
of the law, shall it not be counted for circumcision? And Luc. 1, 6. They
were both righteous before (...).
God, walking in all the commandments and ORDINANCES of the Lord,
blameless. Why translate (...).
you it ordinances, and avoid the term, iustifications? is it because you
would follow the Greek? I beseech you is not (...), just, (...), to be
justified, (...), iustifications or justices? In the old Testament you might
perhaps pretend, that you follow the Hebrew word, and therefore there you
translate, (...)
statutes, or ordinances. But even there also, are not the seventy Greek
interpreters sufficient to teach you the signification of the Hebrew word: who
always interpret it (...), in English, iustifications?

Fulke.
THese matters were driven so thin in 1.
the first chapter, that you shall sooner press out blood, than any more
probable matter. For the old Testament, which we translate out of the Hebrew,
you your self do set forth our answer, that we give the English of
Chukim, when we say, ordinances, or statutes, and not (...)
of the Greek word (...), which of the Septuaginta is used in the same sense
for precepts, and commandments, as you your self confess cap. 1. sect.
50. that very often in the Scripture it signifies commandments. But the
Septuaginta, you say, are sufficient to teach us the interpretation of the
Hebrewe word, who always interpret it (...). If they had always interpreted
it so, it is not sufficient to teach us: then there needed none other
translation, but according to theirs, then must you depart from your vulgar
translation, which in many things departs from them. But where, you say they
always interpret the Hebrew word Chukim, by (...), it is false. For Exodus 18.
v. 20. (...)
they translate it (...), Praecepta, which your vulgar translation calls
Ceremonias, ceremonies, as it does also Genesis 26. v. 5. where the Septuaginta
translate (...): by which you see, that justification, is not always the
English for the Greek word, which the Septuaginta do use. Also Number. 9. v.
3. for Chukoth they translate (...) the law, which the vulgar Latin calls
(...)
Ceremonias, ceremonies, and for the Hebrewe word Misphatim, they give (...),
comparation, the vulgar (...)
Latin justification, by which you may see, how your tra^slatour uses even the
Latin word, that you make so much a do about. Likewise in the foureteenth verse
of the same Chapter, the Septuaginta translate Chukath, twice together (...)
(...), and that which the vulgar Latin calls justification of the
passover, the Greek calls (...), the order of the pascall, Deuteronomy. 4. your
vulgar Latin turns Chukim, thrice Ceremonias, ceremonies. And (...)
Deuteronomy. 5. twice, and Deuteronomy. 6. twice, Deuteronomy. 7. once, and so commonly almost in
every chapter. But in the chap. 11. v. 32. the Greek for Chukim has (...),
where (...)
as in the beginning of the chapter, he had (...), the Latin in both
Ceremonias, ceremonies. By which it is evident what the Greeks and Latins
meant by those words. chap. 20. for this Hebrew word, and in an other the
Greek has nothing but (...) commandments. So has he 1. Reg. 2. v. 3. for
(...) commandments. Also 1. Reg. 8. v. 58. for Chukim, he has (...), and (...)
for Misphatim, he has (...), as he has it twice in the next verse, where
Solomon prays that God will defend his cause, and the cause of his people
Israel, as the cause shall require. More examples might I bring, but for
tediousness, to convince the bold rashness of this quarreller, but these may
suffice all indifferent Readers: and answer sufficiently for us, within the
new Testament, we translate (...), ordinances, or statuts, seeing it is
proved, both by the Septuaginta which calls the same Hebrewe word, not only
iustifications, but often commandments, statuts, precepts, judgments, and by
the vulgar Latin Interpretor, which commonly calls it ceremonies or precepts.

MART. 2. But be it, that you may control them in the Hebrew, which none but
fools will grant unto you: in the new Testament, what pretense have you? do
you there also translate the Hebrew word, or rather the Greek? the Greek
undoubtedly you should translate. What reason then can you have, why you do
not? none other surely, than that which Beza gives for him self* saying, that
he rejected the word, iustifications, (notwithstanding it expressed the Greek,
word for word, notwithstanding the seventy Greek Interpreters, used it to
signify the whole law, and in Latin it be commonly translated,
iustificationes,) notwithstanding all this, for Annot. in 1. Lu^.
this only cause (says he) did I reject it, to avoid the cauillations that
might be made by this word, against justification by faith. As if he should
say, This word truly translated, according to the Greek, might minister great
occasion to prove by so many places of scripture, that man's justification is
not by faith only, but also by keeping the law, and observing the
commandments, which therefore are called according to the Greek and Latin,
iustifications, because they concur to justification, and make a man just, as
by S. Lukes words also is well signified, which have this allusion, that they
were both just, because they walked in all the iustifications of our Lord.
Which they of purpose suppress by other words.

FVLK. 2. None but fools considering what I have brought of the usage of that
word (...) will judge that it signifies only iustifications: and all wise men
may see that we have good warrant to translate it otherwise in the Greek
Testament, where it must needs have an other signification. The concurrence of
works with faith to justification before God, which the Apostle does exclude.
Romans 3. we may not admit. But justification by works, as Saint James teaches,
we do acknoweledge. I hope you will not say, that your Latin translator
against justification by works, translated the word so often ceremonies, or
that ceremonies of the law do concur to justification by faith. The
commandments in deed are called iustifications, because the works of the
law, if a man keep it wholly, are able to justify. Not that every ceremony
or observation of any piece of the law, is a justification, ^or makes a man
just: which you may better say, upon the etymology of the word, than that
every particular observation of the law, or good work, does concur with
faith unto justification.

MART. 3. And hereof also it rises, that when he can not possibly avoid the
word in his translation (as Apoc. 19. 8. (...).
Bissinum enim iustificationes sunt sanctorum, The silk is the iustifications
of Saints:) there he helps the matter with this co^mentarie, That
iustifications, are those good Beza Annot. in Apoc. 19.
works which be the testimonies of a lively faith. But our English
translatours have an other way to avoid the word even in their translation.
For they say here, the righteousness of Saints: because they could not say,
ordinances of Saints: and they would not say, iustifications of Saints:
knowing very well (by Bezaes own commentary) that this word includes the
good works of saints: which works if they should in translating call their
iustifications, it would go sore against justification by only faith.
Therefore do they translate in steed thereof, ordinances, and, statutes,
where they can, which are terms furthest of from justification: and where they
can not, there they say, righteousness, making it also the plural number,
whereas the more proper Greek word for righteousness is (...) (Dan. 6, 22.)
which there some of them translate vngiltinesse: because they will not translate
exactly, if you would hire them.

FVLK. 3. When (...) Apoc. 19. are translated iustificationes, they signify
just works, as I have already proved the signification of the word to bear,
beside that it is so used by Aristotle in his Ethics, who of justification
before God (whereof we speak) understood never a whit. Therefore, if in
steed of righteousness, which is the singular number, it were translated
rightuous or just works, it were not amiss in mine opinion. Although by
righteousness in that place, is nothing meant, but good or rightuous works,
as Bezaes note does tell you. Bib. of the year 1577. most approved.


MART. 4. And therefore as for, justice, and, iustifications, they say
righteousness: so for, just, they translate, righteous. and by this means,
Joseph was a righteous man, Mat. 1. 19.
rather than a just man: and Zachary and Elisabeth were Luc. 1. 6.
both righteous before God, rather than just: because when a man is called
just, it sounds that he is so in deed, and not by imputation only: as a
wise man, is understood to be wise in deed, and not only so imputed.
Therefore do they more gladly and more often say, righteous men, rather than,
just men, and when they do say, just men, as sometime they do least they
might s^eme wilful inexcusably: there they understand, just by imputation,
and not in deed, as is to be seen in Bezaes Annotations upon the Epistle to
the Romans. Note also that they put the word, just, when faith is joined
withal, as Romans 1. The just shall live by faith, to signify that justification
is by faith. But if works be joined withal, and keeping the commandments,
as in the place alleged Luc. 1. there they say, righteous, to suppress
justification by works.

FVLK. 4. This is a marvelous difference, never heard of (I think) in the
English tongue before, between just and righteous, justice and righteousness. I
am sure there is none of our translatours, no nor any professer of
justification by faith only, that esteems it the worth of one hair, whether
you say in any place of Scripture just or righteous, justice or righteousness:
and therefore freely they have used sometimes the one word, sometimes the
other. Therefore, it is a monstrous falshoode, that you fain them to observe
this distinction, that they join just with faith, and righteous with works.
Do they not translate Romans 2. ver. 13. the hearers of the law are not
righteous before God, but the doers of the law shall be justified. Have you
not again, the righteousness of God is made manifest without the law etc. by
the faith of Jesus Christ. And where you read the just shall live by faith,
have you not immediately, the righteousness of God is revealed from faith to
faith, as it is written, the just shall live by faith? Who then but the Devil,
which has his name of sclaundering, would here invent a distinction of just
and righteous?

MART. 5 And certain it is, if there were no sinister meaning, they would in
no place avoid to say, just, justice, justification, (...), etc. (...) iustum
est. (...). Non enim iniustus est Deus.
where both the Greek and Latin are so, word for word, as for example. 2.
Tim. 48. In all their Bibles* Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
RIGHTEOUSNESS, which the Lord the RIGHTEOUS judge shall GIVE me at that day.
And again 2 Thessalonians. 1. Rejoice in tribulation which is a token of the
RIGHTEOUS IVDGEMENT of God, that you may be counted worthy of the kingdom of
God for which ye suffer. For it is a RIGHTEOUS THING with God, to recompense
tribulation to them that trouble you: and to you that are troubled, rest with
us, in the revelation of our Lord JESUS from heaven. And again Heb 6. 10. God
is not VNRIGHTEOVS to forget your good work and labor, etc. These are very
pregnant places to discover their false purpose in concealing the word,
justice, in all their Bibles. For if they will say, that justice is not an
usual English word in this sense, and therefore they say, righteousness: yes
I trow, just, and unjust, are usual and well known. Why the^ would they not
say at the least, in the places alleged, God the JUST judge, A token of the
JUST IVDGEMENT of God, It is a JUST thing with God, God is not VNIVST to forget
etc? Why is it not at the least in one of their English Bibles, ^eeing so both
in Greek and Latin?

FVLK. 5. Certain it is, that no Englishman knows the difference between
just and righteous, unjust and unrighteous, saving that righteousness and
righteous are the more familiar English words. And that we mean no fraud
between justice and righteousness, to apply the one to faith, the other to
works, read Romans 10. v. 34. 5. and 6. of the Geneua translation, where you
shall see, the righteousness of the law, and the righteousness of faith.
Read also against this impudent lie, in the same translation Luc. 1. Zachary
and Elizabeth were both just. Cap. 2. Simeon was just. Matthew the first,
Joseph a just man; and else where often times, and without any difference in
the world, from the word righteous. Who ever heard a difference made,
between a just judge and a righteous judge, this trifling is too too shameful
abusing of men's patience, that shall vouchsafe to read these blotted papers.

MART. 6. Understand gentle Reader, and mark well, The Scriptures most evident
for justification, by works, against only faith.
that if S. Paul's words were truly translated thus, A crown of JUSTICE is
laid up for me* which our Lord the JUST judge will RENDER unto me at that day,
and so in the other places: it would infer, that men are justly crowned in
heaven for their good works upon earth, and that i^ is Gods justice so to do,
and that he will do so because he is a just judge, and because he will show his
JUST IVDGEMENT, and he will not forget so to do, because he is not unjust: as
the ancient fathers (namely the Greek doctors S. Chrysostom, Theodorete,
Psalm. 57. Si vtique est fructus iusto, vtique est Deus iudicans eos in terra.
and Oecumenius upon these places) do interpret and expound. In so much that
Oecumenius says thus upon the foresaid place to the Thessalonians, (...) etc.
See here, that to suffer for Christ procures the kingdom of heaven according
to JUST IVDGEMENT, and not according to grace. (...).
Which least the Adversary might take in the worse part, as though it were
only Gods justice or just judgment, and not his favor or grace also. S.
Augustine excellently declares how it is both the one and the other: to wit,
his grace and favor and mercy, in waking us by his grace to live and believe
well, and so to be worthy of heaven: his justice and just judgment, to render
and repaye for those works which him self wrought in us, life everlasting.
Which he expresses thus: How should he render or repay as a just judge,
unless he Aug. de gra. and lib. arb. ca. 6.
had given it as a merciful father? Where S. Augustine urges the words of
repaying as due, and of being A JUST IVDGE therefore. Both which the said
translatours corrupt, not only* saying, righteous judge, for, just judge: but,
that he will give a crown, which is of a thing not due, for that (...).
which is in the Greek, He will render or repay: which is of a thing due and
deserved, and has relation to works going before, for the which the crown is
repaied. He said not (says Theophylacte upon this place) he will give, but,
he will render or repay, as a certain de^te. For he being just, will define
and limite the reward according to the labors. The crown therefore is due
debte, because of the judges justice. So says he.

FVLK. 6. What so ever you may cavil upon the words just and justice, you
may do the same, with as great advantage, upon the words righteous and
righteousness. That God as a just judge rewarde^^ good works, of them that
are justified freely by his grace, by faith without works, with a crown of
justice, it proves not either justification by works, or the merit or
worthiness* of men's works, but all depends upon the grace of God, who
promises this reward of his mere mercy, and of the worthiness and merits
of Christ, which is our justice, whereby we being justified before God, our
works also, which he has given us, are rewarded of his justice, yet in
respect of Christ's merits, and not in respect of the worthiness of the
works. Again, God is not unmindful of his promise, to reward our works,
for then he should be unjust: he is just therefore to perform what so ever
he has promised, though we nothing deserve it. Neither has Chrysostom, or
Theodorete, any other meaning. That you cite out of Oecumenius a late writer in
comparison, is blasphemous against the grace of God, neither is S. Augustine,
that lived 500. years before him, a sufficient interpreter of his saying, to
excuse him. With Augustine we say, God In psalm 70. and in Psalm. 101.
crowns his gifts, not our merits. And as he acknowledges Gods mercy, and
also his justice, in rewarding our works, so do we. Where (...) is translated
he will give, I confess it had been more proper, and agreeable to the Greek,
to have said, he will render, or repaie, which yet is wholly of mercy in
respect of us, or our deserving, but of justice in respect of his promises,
and of Christ's merits, unto which is rendered, and repayed, that which he
deserved for us. The crown therefore is due debte, because it is promised to
us for Christ's sake, not because any works of ours are able to purchase it.

MART. 7. Which speeches being most true as being the express words of holy
Scripture, yet we know how odiously the Adversaries may and do misconster
them to the ignorant, as though we challenged heaven by our own works, and
as though we made God bound to us. Which we do not, God forbid. But
because he has prepared good works for us (as the Apostle says) to walk in
Ephe. 2. v. 10.
them, and does by his grace cause us to do them, and has promised life
everlasting for them, and tells us in all his holy Scriptures, that to do
them is the way to heaven* therefore not presuming upon our own works as our
own or as of our selves, but upon the good works wrought through Gods grace
by us his seely instruments, we have great confidence (as the Apostle
speaks) and are assured that these Heb. 10.
works proceeding of his grace, be so acceptable to him; that they are
esteemed and be worthy and meritorious of the kingdom of heaven. Against
which truth, let us see further, their heretical corruptions.

FVLK. 7. If you would abide by your first protestation* we should not need to
contend much about this question. But after you have in the beginning
magnified the grace and mercy of God, and abased your own merits, you come
back again with a subtle compass, to establish your own free will, the
worthiness of your works, and your merit of the kingdom of heaven. First,
you say God tells us in all his holy Scriptures, that to do good works, is
the way to heaven. In deed to fulfill the law, is to deserve heaven. But who
so ever is guilty of sin, must seek an other way, than by good works to
come to heaven, namely to Jesus Christ, who is the only way to heaven, the
truth, and the life, by whose blood, when he is purged from his sin, and
reconciled unto God, and the kingdom of heaven purchased for him, then he has
the way of good works appointed him to walk in, toward the same. Secondly,
you say you presume not upon your own works, as your own, or as of your
selves, but upon the good works wrought by Gods grace, by you his seely
instruments, you have great confidence. Thus while you would seem to fly
from Pelagia^isme, you fall into flat Pharisaisme. For you trust that you are
righteous in your selves, though not as of your selves. Such was the Pharisee
of whom Christ tells the parable, which Luc. 18.
ascribing all his works to the grace of God, had confidence in them, that he
was just before God by them. God I thank thee (says the Pharisee). He
acknowledges the grace of God, as author of all his works: yet against such
as he was, Christ tells that parable. And whereas you call the Apostle, Heb.
10. to witness of your error, you do him great wrong, for he speaks not of
any confidence to be had upon good works, wrought by the grace of God by us:
but in the new covenant of remission of sins, by the sacrifice of Christ's
death, by whom we have access to God, that we may be acceptable to him, not
for any meritorious works wrought by us, but by the only oblation of his body
once for all, by which he has made perfect for ever, those that are sanctified.

CHAP. IX.
Heretical translation against MERITS, or MERITORIOVS WORKS, and the
REWARD for the same.

Martin.
WHen they translate (Romans 8. 18.) thus, I Bib. 1577.
am certainly persuaded, that the afflictions of this time, ARE NOT VVORTHIE OF
THE GLORY which shall be showed upon us: do they not mean to signify to the
Reader, and must it not needs so sound in his ears, that the tribulations of
this life, be they never so great, though suffered for Christ, yet do not
merit nor deserve the heavenly glory? but in the Greek it is far
otherwise. I will not stand (...).
upon their first words, I am certainly persuaded, which is I suppose.
a far greater asseueration, than the Apostle uses, and I marvel how they
could so translate that Greek word, but that they were disposed, not only to
translate the Apostles words falsely against meritorious works, but also to
avouch and affirm the same lustily, with much more vehemency of words, than
the Apostle speaks. Well, let us pardon them this fault, and examine the
words following. Where the Greek (...). Non sunt condignae ad futuram,
gloriam. S. Chrysostom upon this place.
says not, as they translate with full consent in all their English Bibles,
The afflictions are not worthy of the glory, etc. but thus, The afflictions of
this time, are not equal, correspondent, or comparable to the glory to come.
because the afflictions are short, the glory is eternal: the afflictions
small and few, in comparison, the glory great and abundant above measure.

Fulke.
ALthough an invincible argument against 1.
merits, and desert of good works, may be drawn out of this text, yet the
meaning of the translators is to show, no more, than the Apostle says, that
the heavenly glory is incomparably greater, than all the tribulations of this
life. And this the Apostle speaks, not doubti^gly, as our english word (I
suppose) does signify, when a man may be deceived in his supposel, but he
avouches it constantly, as a thing, which being well considered, with the
reasons thereof, he concludes of it with certainty. And so does (...)
signify in this place, and in diverse other, by the judgment of better
Grecians, than Gregory Martin will be these seven years, as Romans 3. 28. where
the Apostle having discussed the controversy of justification by faith, or
works, concludes, as of a certainty, (...). we determine therefore, that a
man is justified by faith, without the works of the law. Likewise, Romans 6. v.
11. after he has proved, that sanctification is necessary to all them that
shall* or have put on the justice of Christ, he says with great asseueration
unto the Romans, (...) Make you full account therefore, that you are dead to
sin, and not uncertainly think or suppose it so to be. Therefore for the
translation of (...), in this place, we will accept no pardon of you, it is
better translated than your wit or learning serves you to understand. Now let
us come to the other words, (...), are not worthy of the glory. Where you
say, it should be not equal, correspondent, or comparable, to the glory.
Verily those words we use, have none other sense in this place, than the words
which you supply us withal, but our words do express the most usual
signification of the Greek word (...), even as your vulgar Latin does,
calling it in the same sense condignae, which you in your own translation dare
not render, equal, correspondent, or comparable, but condign: lest following
the sense, you might be accused to forsake the word, even so we think it best,
where the usual signification of the word will bear the sense in our English,
to retain the same, and not to change it.

MART. 2. This is the Greek phrase and the Apostles meaning, which we need
not greatly to prove, because their own Doctors Calvin, and Beza, do so
interpret it, and therefore wonder it were, that the Geneua English Bibles
also should forsake their masters, and follow the error of the other English
Bibles, but that they thought the more voices the better. In the mean time,
the people s^eth no other translation, and thinks it is the Apostles very
words. But Beza himself ^elleth them the contrary, translating thus: Statuo
minime esse paria quae praesenti tempore perpetimur, futurae gloriae nobis
reuelandae, that is, I am of this opinion, that the things which we suffer in
this present time, are not equal to the glory that shall be revealed to us.
And in his commentary, thus, S. Paul's discourse and matter handled in this
place, declare, that he speaks not of the valor or price of the afflictions
which we suffer for Christ, but rather by comparing their quality, and
quantity, with life everlasting, he gathers that we shall be infinitely more
happy with Christ, than we are miserable here. Therefore did he use the *
Greek word rightly, and properly, which (...).
the Grammarians say is spoken of such things, as being poysed or weighed,
are found of one weight. Thus far Beza.

FVLK. 2. We contend not, as it seems at this time, about the meaning of the
place, but about the true translation of the words. If you can prove therefore,
that the Greek word (...), does not signify worthy, or that this English
word worthy, can not express the meaning of the Apostle in this text, your
accusation is just, but if you can prove neither of both, you multiply words,
as your manner is, without matter, to no purpose, but to weary the Reader. And
wisely you translate* Bezaes Latin word Statuo, I am of opinion, which
signifies more truly, I determine, or as our translation has, I am certainly
persuaded, and not, I am of an opinion, whereof there is no certain knowledge,
for an opinion may be false, and is of uncertainties.

MART. 3. If then a comparison only be signified, why do they not so
translate it in English, that it may be taken for a comparison in our English
phrase? For they know very well that if a man should say in English,
according as they translate, Good works are not worthy of heaven, this man is
not worthy of my favor, he is not worthy of such a living, of so great
praises: every English man understands it thus, that they deserve not heaven,
and that such a man deserves not this or that. Even so must the Reader needs
take it in this place, and they must needs have intended that he should so
take it. For Prou. 3.
though the Greek phrase may signify a comparison, being so (...).
uttered, yet not the English. And if it might, yet obscurely, and ambiguously:
and if it might, yet here they do falsely translate so, because here the Greek
phrase is otherwise, and therefore should otherwise be englished* For it is
not, (...), which is, as they translate, worthy of the glory: but, (...),
which can not be so translated. For if it might, then these Greek phrases were
alone, and might be used indifferently. And then I must desire them to turn me
this into Greek, He is not worthy of thanks. And if they turn it by the
Apostles phrase in this place, (...), to all Grecians they shall be ridiculous.
And yet this is as well turned out of English into Greek, as they have turned
the other out of Greek into English.

FVLK. 3. Verily I can not see, nor any wise man else, I think, what this
English word, worthiness, does signify, but a comparison of equality in
price, valor, goodness, excellency, or such like. And even in those English
phrases, that you bring for example: Good works are not worthy of heaven, the
meaning is. There is not an equality of excellency in good works and heaven:
or good works compared to heaven, are not equal in valor. And even so: this
man is not worthy of my favor. The goodness of this man, is not so great, as
the goodness of my favor. And so of the rest. And where you say, every
English man understands it thus: that they deserve not heaven, and such a
man deserves not this, etc. I grant they may of worthiness gather desert, in
such as may deserve, and so may they of the comparison of equality, conclude
desert in the like case. For to deserve, is by doing, to make him self equal
in good or evil to that reward, or punishment which is valued with such
doing. Therefore whether you say worthy, or equal, it is all one. And in this
text* by either of both, merit or desert is necessarily excluded. For if the
heavenly glory be inco^parably greater, than the afflictions of this life, it
follows of necessity, that the afflictions of this life deserve not, that
is, make not an equality of excellency with heavenly glory. But the Greek
phrase (you say) is otherwise, for (...) is not joined with a Genitive case,
but with an Accusative, and a Preposition: In deed this later construction of
(...) is not so usual, and does more fully set forth the comparison, but the
same also is set forth by the Genitive case, as you your self can not deny.
Now our English phrase would not bear, that we should say, worthy to the
glory, and therefore we said worthy of the glory. But if that were good, you
say, the Greek phrases were all one, and might be used indifferently. I see no
great difference between the Greek phrases, and yet it follows not, that
they may be used indifferently. For unusual phrases are not to be used as
indifferently, as common phrases. And therefore your example of turning English
into Greek, is not all one, with turning Greek into English. If I translate
our of Greek into English, I must observe the English phrase, as near as I
can, and so if I translate into Greek, must I have respect to the usual
Greek phrase. And to speak of your ridiculous translation, out of English
into Greek. I think he that should say, (...), for worthy of thanks,
should deserve no great commendation. But he that should say, (...), for
worthy of the kings favor, though it be no usual phrase* I see not why he
should be ridiculous. And if you should translate these words into English,
(...). Would you not, or might you not translate it thus? Nero was not worthy
of the kingdom. Therefore we have not done amiss, to translate, worthy of
the glory.

MART. 4. Marie, if they would express a comparison of equality or
inequality between thing and thing, then this is the proper Greek phrase
thereof, and much more proper for this purpose, than by (...), and a Genitive
case. Which notwithstanding The Greek (...), signifies a comparison. (...).
is often so used in Scriptures by way of comparison, as Proverb. 3. concerning
the praise of wisdom. Where S. Augustine to express the comparison, reads
thus, Omne pretiosum non est illi dignum: and S. Hierome according to the
Hebrew thus, Omnia quae desiderantur non valent (...)
huic comparari. or, adaequari. and Eccles. 26. we have the very like speech
proceeding of the said Greek word (...). Omnis ponderatio non est digna
continentis animae. Which the English Bibles thus, There is no weight to be
compared unto a mind that can rule it self. or, with a continent mind.

FVLK. 4. You can not use the word (...), but it will include a comparison,
whether it be with a Genitive case, as in the examples you bring, or with an
Accusative, as in this text of S. Paul. And even so the English word
(worthy) does comprehend an equality in good or evil. Wherefore the sense
is all one, whether you say in this text equal or worthy: but that the usual
signification of (...) is worthy, as no man will deny, that is not past all
shame.

MART. 5. And if (...) with a genitive case signify a comparison, and them
selves so translate it in all their Bibles, (...).
should not (...) in the Apostles phrase much more be so translated? I appeal
to their own consciences. Again, if here in Ecclesiasticus they say not
according to the Greek words, There is no weight worthy of a continent mind,
because (...).
they would by an English phrase express the comparison: is it not more than
evident, that when they translate the Apostle by the very same words, Worthy
of the glory, etc. they know it can not, and they mean it should not signify
a comparison? I can not sufficiently express, but only to the learned and
skilful reader, their partial and heretical dealing. Briefly, I say, they
translate, (...), Not to be compared with a continent mind, being in Greek
word for word. Not worthy of a continent mind: and contrariwise they
translate in S. Paul, (...), Not worthy of the glory to come, being in the
Greek, Not to be compared to the glory to come. according to the very like
Latin phrase by dignus, Eccl. 6. Amico fideli nulla est comparatio, and non
est DIGNA ponderatio auri and argenti CONTRA BONITATEM FIDEI, that is,
according to their own translation, A faithful friend has no peer, weight
of gold and silver is not to be compared to the goodness of his faith.

FVLK. 5. If the English word (worthy) did not signify a comparison* as well
as the Greek word (...), it were somewhat that you say, but seeing one
signifies as much as the other, there is no more savor in your disputation,
than in an egg without salt. When we say, there is no weight of gold to be
compared to a continent mind, it is all one, as if we said, worthy of a
continent mind, for we meant, to be compared in goodness, price, excellency,
etc. And therefore you speak out of measure falsely, and impudentlye, when you
say, we mean not that the word (worthy) in this text of S. Paul, should
signify a comparison, for it is not possible that it should signify
otherwise. Does not the Geneua note in the margent say, or of like valor. If
you be so blind, that you can not see a comparison in the word worthy, at
the least shore up your eyes, and behold it in those words of like or equal
value. For all comparison is either in quantity or quality. And where you
say, that you can not express your conceit, but only to the learned, there
is none so meanly learned, but they may well laugh at your foolish and
unlearned trifling.

MART. 6. Now if they will say, though their translation of Saint Paul's
words be not so exact and commodious, How good works merit life
everlasting, though one incomparably exceed the other.
yet the sense and meaning is all one (for if these present afflictions be not
equal or comparable to the glory to come, then neither are they worthy of
it, nor can deserve or merit it) let the Christian Reader mark the
difference. First their Beza and Calvin tells them that the Apostle speaks
of the one, and not of the other. Secondly, the passions and afflictions that
Christ our Savior suffered all his life, were not comparable to the eternal
glory which he obtained thereby: yet did he thereby deserve and merit
eternal glory, not only for him self, but for all the world: yea by the
least affliction he suffered, did he deserve all this. Unless you will deny
also that he merited and deserved his glory, which your opinion a man might
very well gather by some of your false translations, but that you would Heb.
2. ^. in the new Testament of the year 1580. and Bib. 1579.
think us too suspicious, which perhaps we will examine hereafter. Thirdly,
the present pleasure of aduoutrie during a man's life, is not comparable to the
eternal torments of hell fire: and yet it does merit and deserve the same.
Fourthly, the Apostle by making an incomparable difference of the glory to
come with the afflictions of this time, does (as Saint Chrysostom says) (...).
exhort them the more vehemently and move them to sustain all things the more
willingly: but if he said as they translate, The afflictions are not worthy of
heaven, you are never the nearer heaven for them, only believe: this had not
been to exhort ^. Cor. 4. v. 17.
them, but to discourage them. Fifthly, the Apostle when he will else where
encourage them to suffer, says plainly, Our tribulation which presently is
for a moment and light, WORKS above measure exceedingly, an eternal (...).
weight of glory in us.

FVLK. 6. We say our translation, both in word, and sense, is the same in
English, that S. Paul did write in Greek. As for the argument, against
merit, or desert which does follow thereof, we affirm that it is as
necessarily gathered of the words equal, or comparable, or correspondent, as
of the word, worthy. But to overthrow this argument, you have five reasons.
The first is of the authority of Beza, and Calvin, which you say tells us,
that the Apostle speaks of the one, and not of the other. To this I answer,
that they both affirm the consequence against merits out of this text,
although it be not the Apostles direct purpose, to abase the merit of works,
by comparison of the excellency of the glory. To your second argument, I
answer, that though the afflictions that Christ our Savior suffered, were
not comparable in respect of the length of time, with the eternal glory that
he obtained thereby: yet in respect of the excellency of his person, and the
perfection of his obedience, they were comparable, and of equal value to
deserve eternal glory according to the justice of God, by which one man's
disobedience was sufficient, to eternal condemnation, Romans 5. What the least
of his afflictions, separated from all the rest, was in valor, I have not
learned out of the Scripture, only I think, he suffered nothing
superfluously, *nor less than was needful to answer the justice of God.
Your other fond surmises, I omit, until you express them. To your third
argument, I say, that one act of adultery is worthy of damnation, and
deserves eternal torment, not by comparison of the short pleasure, with
infinite pain: but because it is a sin committed against the majesty of the
eternal God: and therefore is worthy of eternal punishment. For the sin is
to be measured after the excellency of the person, against whom it is
committed. Therefore that word* which being spoken against a poor man, is a
light fault, as to say he is a knave, the same being spoken against a Lord, is
an heinous offense, and deserves the pillorie, hut being spoken against a
King, is high treason, and is worthy of death. Seeing therefore the eternal
majesty of God is contemned in every sin, that sin does justly deserve
eternal torments. Fourthly, it is true, that the Apostle does exhort us
cheerfully to abide the small and momentarie afflictions of this life, in
respect that they shall be rewarded with incomparable glory. But hereof it
follows not, that the glory is deserved, by short and small sufferings, but
is given of the bountiful liberality of God, to them that for his sake
patiently suffer such small afflictions. Therefore, if it be an encouragement
for a man to labor, to hear that he shall be paid his hyre, as much as his
work deserves: it is a much greater encouragement for him to hear, that he
shall receive a thousand times more, than his labor deserves. The words you
add, (you are never the nearer heaven, only believe) are yours, and none of
ours: for we say with the Apostle, we must suffer with Christ, if we will
reign with him, and the patient suffering of the faithful, is nothing
repugnant to the justification before God, by faith only. To the last argument
of the Apostles authority, I answer, our patient suffering works infinite
weight of glory, not by the worthiness, merit, or desert of our suffering,
but by the bountiful liberality of God, who has promised so incomparable
reward, to small tribulation, suffered for his sake. Wherefore all your five
reasons notwithstanding, our translation is sound and true.

MART. 7. See you not a comparison between short and eternal, light
tribulation, and exceeding weighty glory: and yet that one also works the
other, that is, causes, purchases, and deserves the other? For, like as the
little seed being not comparable to the great tree, yet causes it and brings
it forth: so our tribulations and good works otherwise incomparable to
eternal glory, by the virtue of Gods grace working in us, works,
purchases, and causes the said glory. For so they know very well the
Greek word imports: though here See this Greek word, 2. Cor. 7. thrice.
Where the^ selves translate it, causes* works, v. 10. 11.
also they translate it most falsely, prepares. Bib. an. 1577.

FVLK. 7. We see the comparison well, but we see not, that works or causes,
is all one with purchases and deserves. Your comparison of seed, and
tribulation, is not like. For in the seed is the formal cause of the great
tree, so is not the formal cause of eternal glory in our tribulation. But as
if an Emperor for one days valiant service in war, do give unto his son
one of his kingdoms, we may truly say, that days service wrought him this
great reward, or caused him to be advanced to this kingdom: but we can not
say truly, it purchased or deserved a kingdom: for then every one that served
as well as he deserved the like reward: so is the reward of eternal life,
which is the gift of God, incomparably greater than our tribulation, not by
the desert of the sufferer, but by liberality of the giver. That translation,
that uses the word of preparing, is not so proper, according to the word,
but it differs not much in sense, showing how those afflictions do work,
or cause, namely by preparing, and making us conformable to the sufferings of
Christ.

MART. 8. Lastly, for most manifest evidence, that these present tribulations
and other good works are meritorious and worthy of the joys to come, though
not comparable to the same: you shall hear the holy Doctors say both in one
passage or sentence. S. Cyprian thus: O what manner of day shall come, Ep. 56.
nu. 3. Singulorum met rita.
my brethren, when our Lord shall recou^t the MERITS of every one, and pay us
the reward or stipend of faith and devotion? Ep. 56. here are merits and the
reward for the same. It follows in the said Doctor, What glory shall it be,
and how great joy, to be admitted to see God, so to be honored that thou
receive the joy of eternal life with Christ thy Lord God, to receive there
that which neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor has ascended into
the heart of man, for, that we shall receive greater things, than here either
we do, or suffer, the Apostle pronounces, saying, The passions of this time
are not condign or comparable to the glory to come. Here we see, that the
stipend or reward of the merits aforesaid, are incomparably greater than the
said merits.

FVLK. 8. For lack of Scriptures, you fly to the Doctors, to find merits, in
whom nevertheless being Catholic, and sound Doctors, you shall sooner find
the word Meritum, than your meaning of it. The place of Cyprian, I marvel why
you geld, except it be to join the reward that he speaks of, with the word
merits, which he uses, either generally for works, as it is often used in
the ancient writers: or if he mean thereby deserts, he speaks but of
examination only of all men's deserts, that he may give to the wicked that they
have deserved, and to the godly that which he has promised, therefore he
calls it the reward of their faith and devotion. His words are these: O
diesille qualis and quantus aduenies, fratres dilectissimi, cum caeperit
populum suum dominus recensere, and diuinae cognitionis examine singulorum
meritum recognoscere, mittere in gehennam nocentes and persecutores nostros,
flammae paenalis perpetuo ardore damnare, nobis vero mercedem fidei and
deuotionis exoluere. O that day what manner a one and how great shall it come,
my dearest beloved brethren, when the Lord shall begin to recount his
people, and by examination of his divine knowledge consider the merits of
every one, to send into hell fire the guilty, and to condemn our persecutors
with perpetual burning of penal flame? but unto us to pay the reward of faith
and devotion. The reward of faith is not that which belief deserves: but
which it looks for, according to Gods promise, whereunto it leans. For in
respect of deserte of Gods favor, he says, and brings diverse textes for
proof: Fidem tantum prodesse and tantum nos posse quantum credimus. That Ad
Quirin. lib. 1. ca. 42.
faith only does profit, and that so much we can do, how much we believe.
Wherefore, we see not in Cyprian the incomparable glory to be a reward of
deserts.

MART. 9. Likewise S. Augustine: The exceeding Ser 37. de Sanctis.
goodness of God has provided this, that the labors should soon be ended,
but the rewards of the MERITS Praemia meritorum.
should endure without end: the Apostle testi fying, THE PASSIONS OF THIS TIME
ARE NOT COMPARABLE etc. For we shall receive greater bliss, than are the
afflictions of all passions what soever. Thus we see plainly, that short
tribulations are true merits of endless glory, though not comparable to the
same: which truth you impugn by your false and heretical translation. But let
us see further your dealing in the self same controversy, to make it plainer
that you bend your translations against it, more than the text of the
Scripture does permit you.

FVLK. 9. A man may see you are driven to extreme shifts, when you will seek
Praemia meritorum, in S. Augustine, and can find it no where, but among the
Sermones de sanctis, which bear no credit of Augustines works: but of some
later gatherer. The true Augustine in Ps. 70. Con. 1. thus writes. Nihil es
per te, deum inuoca, tua peccaia sunt, merita dei sunt, supplicium tibi
debetur* and cum praemium venerit, sua dona coronabit non merita tua* Thou art
nothing by thy self, call upon God, thine are the sins, the merits are
Gods, to thee punishment is due, and when the reward shall come, he will crown
his gifts not thy merits. Finally Augustine in nothing is more earnest than
in denying the reward which is of grace, to be due in respect of merit or
worthiness of works.

MART. 10. In the book of wisdom, where there is honorable mention of the
merits of Saints and their rewards in heaven, you translate the holy
Scripture thus: God has (...). Dignos se. (...).
proved them, and finds them MEET FOR HIM SELF. To omit here that you use
the present tense, whereas in the Greek they are preter tenses (God knows
why, only this we know, that it is no true nor sincere translation) but to
wincke at smaller faults, why say you here in all your Bibles, that God
finds his Saints and holy servants meet for him self, and not, worthy of
him self? See your partiality, and be ashamed.

FVLK. 10. The book of wisdom written by Philo the Jew, as S. Hierome
thinks, is no holy Canonical Scripture, to confirm the credit of any
article of belief. Therefore whether he thought that men's merits were worthy
of the favor and grace of God, and the reward of eternal life, or no, it is
not material. But somewhat it is that you say, that our translators for (...)
have not translated worthy, but meet. For my part, I wish they had retained
the usual signification of that word, and said worthy of him self, only to
take away your cavil. For otherwise in the sense, there is no difference, if
that he says be true, none is meet for God, but they that are worthy of him,
which are not meet or worthy of the^ selves, but made such by grace, not for
merit of their works, but by the righteousness of Christ, imputed to them
by faith. This if the wiseman means not, but that their virtues were such as
deserved Gods favor and eternal life, we may boldly reject him, as going
against the wisdom of God revealed in the Canonical Scriptures.

MART. 11. In the Apostles places before examined, you said negatiuely, that
the afflictions of this time were NOT WORTHIS OF the glory to come, the Greek
not bearing that translation: but here, when you should say affirmatively, and
that word for word after the Greek, that God found them WORTHY OF HIM SELF,
there you say, MEET (...).
FOR HIM SELF, avoiding the term, worthy, because merit is included
therein. So that when you will in your translation deny merits, then
condignae ad, signifies worthy of: Condignae ad gloriam.
when you should in your translation affirm merits, then Dignus with an
ablative case does not signify, worthy of. No Dignosse.
marvel if such wilfulness wilnot see the word merit, or that which is
equivalent thereto, in all the Scripture. For when you do see it, and should
translate it, you suppress it by another word. But this is a case worthy of
examination, whether the Scripture Merit of good works plainly proved by
the Scriptures.
have the word, merit, or the equivalent thereof* For we will force them even
by their own translations, to confess that it is found there, and that they
should translate it accordingly often when they do not, yea, that if we did
not see it in the vulgar Latin translation yet they must needs see it and
find it in the Greek.

FVLK. 11. In the Canonical Scripture it seems the translators had a
religious care, to keep both the property of the words, and the true
meaning of the holy Ghost. In the Apocryphal books, they had a wise
consideration, to translate them according to the best meaning, that their
words would bear. Now whether you say, worthy of God, or meet for God: you
must understand this meetenesse, or worthiness, to be of grace, and not of
merit: or else the saying is blasphemous against the grace of God. For merit
is not necessarily included in worthiness. The Kings son is worthy to
succeed his father* by right of inheritance, not by merit of virtue always.
A stranger may be worthy of the kings service* which never deserved the
kings entertainment but for such good qualities, as are in him. But after this
tedious trifling, it would somewhat awake our spirits* if you could (as you
threaten in the margent) prove the merit of good works plainly by the
Scriptures: either by the word merit, which you can never do, or by any
thing that is equivalent unto it: and to force us by our own translations to
confess, that it is found there, if not in the vulgar Latin yet in the
Greek.

MART. 12. First when they translate the foresaid place thus, The afflictions
of this time are not worthy of the (...).
glory to come: they mean this, deserve not the glory to come, for to that
purpose they do so translate it, as has been declared. Again, when it is
said, The workema^ is worthy of (...).
his hire or wages: What is meant, but that he deserves his Dignus mercede
s^^a.
wages? And more plainly Tob. 9. they translate thus: Brother Non ero
co^dignu^ prouidentiae.
Azarias, if I should give my self to be thy servant, I shall not DESERVE thy
providence. And such like. If then in these places, both the Greek and the
Latin signify, to be worthy of, or, not to be worthy of* to deserve, or,
not to deserve: then they must allow us the same signification and virtue of
the same words in other like places. Namely Apoc. 5. of our Saviors merits,
thus: The lamb that was (...)
killed, IS WORTHY to receive power, and riches, etc. What is that to say, but,
DESERVES to receive? For so I trust they will allow us to say of our Savior,
that he in deed deserved. Again, of the damned, thus: Thou have given them
blood to drink, for they ARE WORTHY, Apoc. 16.
or, THEY HAVE DESERVED. is it not all one? (...).
lastly of the elect, thus: They shall walk with me in white, because they are
worthy, Apocal. 3. that is, because they deserve it. And so in the place
before by them corrupted, (...), Digni sunt. (...), Dignos se.
God found them worthy of him: that is, such as deserved to be with him in
eternal glory. Thus by their own translation of (...) and dignus, are
plainly deduced, worthiness, desert, and merit of saints, out of the
Scriptures.

FVLK. 12. Your first foundation is false, therefore all your building falls
to the ground. For when we translate that text thus: The afflictions of this
time, are not worthy of the glory to come, we mean not thus: deserve not the
glory to come, but even as you do, they are not equal or comparable: but
thereof it follows, that they deserve not, for to deserve, is to do a thing
equal unto the reward: the afflictions be not equal, therefore they deserve
not. But when it is said the workman is worthy of his hyre, we acknowledge
that he deserves his wages, yet we should not do well to translate it, that
he deserves his hyre: because worthiness may be where there is no desert.
Gold is worthy to be esteemed before silver, and yet there is no merit, or
deserte of gold, if we speak properly. That of Tob. 9. is not in the Greek,
but in some Bibles translated out of Latin according to the usual phrase of
English, rather than to the property of the word, where it is said Apoc. 5.
The Lamb, that was killed, is worthy to receive power, and riches, though we
will not contend of the deserts of Christ, yet we may be bold to say, that in
respect of the godhead, he was worthy of all honor and glory from
everlasting, before he had created any thing: and therefore worthiness does not
always import desert, as no worthiness does no desert. Likewise, when it is said
of the wicked, Apoc. 16. they are worthy to drink blood, it is true, that they
deserved that plague, because their cruel works were justly recompensed with
that punishment: but yet some may be worthy of their punishment, that have not
deserved it. The son of a traitor, is worthy to bear the punishment of his
fathers attainder; yet he has not always deserved it by his own deeds.
Therefore it is not all one: they are worthy, and they have deserved. The
infants of the reprobate, as soon as they have life* are worthy of eternal
damnation, and yet they have not deserved the same, by their own deeds.
Therefore where it is said of the elect, They shall walk with me in white,
because they are worthy, it is not meant, that they have deserved by their own
works, to walk with Christ: but because they are made worthy by Christ, who
has given them grace, not to defile their garments, who also shall give them
the reward of white garments, that is, of innocence, which no man can
deserve, because no man is clear from sin, but only by forgiveness of
sins, in the blood of Christ. Therefore you have performed nothing less,
than your promise, which was to prove the equivalent of merit, out of the
Scripture, and to force us, by our translation, to confess the same. Fos
worthiness does not always argue or enforce desert* as desert does worthiness,
worthiness being a more general word, than merit or desert.

MART. 13. But to proceed one step further, we prove (...) signify desert.
it also to be in the Scriptures, thus. Them selves translate thus, Heb. 10.
29. Of how much sorer punishment shall he be worthy, which treads under
foot the son of God? though one of their Bibles of the year 1562. very
falsely and corruptly, leaves out the words, worthy of, saying thus. How much
sorer shall he be punished* etc: Fearing no doubt by translating the Greek
word sincerely, this consequence that now (...).
I shall infer, to wit, If the Greek word here, by their own translation,
signify to be worthy of, or, to deserve, being spoken of pains and punishment
deserved: then must they grant us the same word so to signify elsewhere in
the new Testament, when it is spoken of deserving heaven, and the kingdom of
God. as in these places, Luc. 21. Watch therefore* all (...).
times praying, that you MAY BE WORTHY to stand before the son of man. and,
c. 20. THEY THAT ARE WORTHY to attain to that world, and to the resurrection
from the dead, neither marye, nor are married. and, 2 Thessalonians. 1. That you may
BE WORTHY (...).
of the kingdom of God, for which also ye suffer.

FVLK. 13. You think to have great advantage at our translation of the word
(...), Heb. 10. shall be worthy: which is true according to the sense, but not
so proper for the word, which signifies rather to be judged, or accounted
worthy, whether he be worthy in deed, or not. And so it should have been
translated, if the nature of the word had been exactly weighed. But the
translators looked rather to the purpose of the Apostle, which is by all means
to terrify such contemners and backeslyders, of whom he speaks. The Greek
word therefore does not signify to deserve, but to be judged worthy,
although it is true, that those of whom the Apostle there speaks, deserved
extreme pains of damnation. And even so it signifies in all other places, as
Luc 20. (...), they that shall be counted worthy to attain to that world.
and, Luc. 21. (...), that you may be counted worthy and, 2 Thessalonians. 1. (...),
that you may be counted worthy. And so the word does signify in other places,
without controversy, as Luc. 7. the Centurion said, (...), I accounted not my
self worthy. and, 1. Tim. 5. The Elders that govern well, (...), let them be
counted worthy of double honor. For it is the imperative mode, therefore it is
a fault in our translations, to make it the indicative. For we can not say,
let them be worthy, or let them be made worthy: but let them be judged,
reputed, or accounted worthy.

MART. 14. Thus you should translate in all these places, according to your
translation of the former place to the Hebrews: or at the leastwise you should
have this sense and meaning, as the old vulgar Latin has, translating in all
these places, counted worthy, but meaning worthy in deed: as when Quidigni
habebuntur. Vt digni habeamini.
it is said, Abraham was reputed just, it is meant, he was just in deed. If
you also have this meaning in your translations, which here follow the vulgar
Latin: then we appeal to your selves, whether, to be counted worthy, and to
be worthy, and to deserve, and to merit, be not all one: and so here also
Merit is deduced. But if you mean according to your heresy, to signify by
translating. counted worthy, that they are not in deed worthy: then your
purpose is heretical, and translation false, and repugnant to your translating
the same word in other places, as is declared, and now further we will declare.

FVLK. 14. I have showed you how we should translate that word in any place*
wheresoever it is read, even as the vulgar Latin has in the places by you
noted* and in those three textes, Luc. 20. 21. 2 Thessalonians. 1. We mean not
falsely counted worthy, but worthy in deed, as when it is said, that
Abraham was reputed just, we acknowledge that he was truly so reputed, and
that he was just in deed. But where you appeal to our consciences, whether
to be counted worthy, and to be worthy, and to deserve, and to merit, be not
all one. I answer you plainly* and according to my conscience, they be not. But
even as Abraham was reputed just, and was just in deed, not by deserte, but
by faith, so in those three texts, the faithful are counted worthy, and are
worthy in deed, not by their merit, and desert, but for Jesus Christ's sake.
For herein your heresy is greatly deceived, to imagine, that he which is just
by Christ, by faith, or by imputation, is not truly just, or not just in deed.
For Christ, faith, and imputation, are not contrary, or opposed to truth, but
to merit or desert of the party, that is just by Christ, by faith, or by
imputation, and so we say of them that are accounted worthy for Christ's sake,
and not for their own merits.

MART. 15. They whom God does make worthy, they (...) to make worthy, (...)
to be made, or to be worthy. (...).
are truly and in deed worthy: are they not? but by your own translation of
the same word in the active voice, God does make them worthy. Therefore in the
passive voice it must also signify to be made, or to be in deed worthy. For
example, 2 Thessalonians. 1, 11. You translate thus, we also pray for you, THAT OUR
GOD MAY MAKE YOU WORTHY of this calling. According to which translation, why
did you not also in the self same chapter, a little before, translate thus:
That you MAY BE MADE WORTHY (and so be worthy) of (...).
the kingdom of God, for which also you suffer? You know the case is like in
both places, and in the Greek Doctors you specially* should know (by your
ostentation of reading them in Greek) that they according to this use of holy
Scripture, very often use also this word, both actiuely and passiuely, to make
(...).
worthy, and, to be made, or, to be worthy. See the Greek Liturgies.

FVLK. 15. They must needs be worthy, whom God makes worthy: but then are
they not worthy by their merits or deserts, but by his grace in Jesus Christ,
and so our translators mean, when they say, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 11. that our God may
make you worthy of this calling, although the clearer translation had been,
that God may account you worthy, as the vulgar Latin has, vt dignetur. For
dignor is not to make worthy, but to vouchsafe, or to account worthy.
Wherefore, you do vainly here snatch at a word, contrary to the meaning, both
of the translator, and of the text. For those whom God makes worthy, are not
worthy by their desert, but by his grace accepting them. How the Greek
Doctors use the word, it is not now the question, but how it signifies in the
Scripture: although I see not how you prove that the doctors use it, to make
worthy, or to be made worthy by desert.

MART. 16. Which Saint Chrysostom, to put all out (...).
of doubt, explicateth thus in other words, That he make us worthy of the
kingdom of heaven. Ser. 1. de orando Deo. And upon the Epistle to Titus cap.
3. in the same sense passiuely, God grant we may all BE MADE WORTHY (...).
(or be worthy) of the good things promised to the^ that love him. And in an
other place of the said Doctor it must needs signify, to be worthy* as when
he says, In Colos. 1. No man lives such a trade of life, that he is worthy
(...).
of the kingdom, but all is his gift. For to say thus, No man so lives that
he can be counted worthy of the kingdom of heaven: is false, is against the
Protestants own opinion, which say they are counted worthy, that are not.
Again, to say, No man so lives that he can be made worthy: is false, because
God can make the worst man worthy. It remains then to say, No man so lives
that he is worthy. Which a little before he declares thus, No man by his own
proper (...).
merits obtains the kingdom of heaven, that is, as his own, and of him
self without the grace of God. And yet we must show further out of the
Scriptures, that God makes us worthy, and so we are in deed worthy, and
here also we must convince you of false and partial interpretation.

FVLK. 16. Saint Chrysostom puts not the matter any whit out of doubt, for
your side. For he does not expound this text of 2 Thessalonians. 1. But only in the
later end of his Sermon prays, that God having mercy upon us all, will make
us worthy of his kingdom. Where you might have seen, if you had not been
blind with frowardness, that God makes us worthy, by his mercy, not by our
merits. That (...) in his prayer upon the 3. to Titus is taken to be made
worthy, rather than to be accounted worthy, you have no proof, but your own
authority: although for God to make worthy by his mercy, and to account
worthy, is all one in effect. The third place* in Epist. ad Col. cap. 1. is
altogether against you. Where he says, no man lives such a trade of life,
that he may be judged or accounted worthy of that kingdom, but all is the
gift of God. Is not his meaning plain, that no man can be accounted worthy by
works or merits, but altogether by the grace and gift of God?

With this distinction therefore which is plain, even by those words which
you cite, that Chrysostom makes, (...), without any inconvenience* may
signify in this place, to be accounted worthy. No man by his own proper
merits obtains the kingdom of heaven (says he) but even as a lot is rather
by hap and chance, so it is here: meaning that God gives his kingdom no
more according to man's deserts, than lottes do fall to men by chance, which
yet God disposes, as it pleases him. Finally, the whole discourse of the
Doctor being against man's merits, using the word in the same place so often
of Gods dignation, vouchsafing or accounting worthy, you had great scarsitie
of examples out of the Doctors, that bring this place to prove that (...)
signifies to be made worthy by merit, and not by mere mercy.

MART. 17. The Greek word (...) (I pray you) what does it signify ^ you must
answer that it signifies not only, meet, but also, worthy. For so Beza
reaches you, and so you (...).
translate Mat. 3. 11. and cap. 8. and 1. Cor. 15. 9. I am not worthy, in all
three places. And why (I pray you) did you not likewise follow the old Latin
interpreter one step further, saying, Giving thanks to God the father THAT
HAS MADE US VVORTHIE, but translating rather thus, (...). Col. 1. v. 12.
Which has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in
light. Here was the place where you should have showed your sincerity, and
have said that God makes us worthy of heavenly bliss. Because you know if
(...) be worthy, then (...) is to make worthy. But you are like to Beza your
Master, who (as though all interpretation of words were at his commandment)
says, here and here and so forth I have followed the old Latin interpreter,
translating Annot. in 3. Mat. no. Test. 1556.
it, worthy: but in such and such a place (meaning this for one) I choose
rather to say, MEET. But that both he and Idoneum dicere malui.
you should here also have translated, worthy, the Greek fathers shall teach
you, if we be not worthy* or able to control so mighty Grecians, as you
pretend to be when you crow upon your own dunghill, otherwise in your
translations showing small skill, or great malice.

FVLK. 17. If you be not able to draw merit out of word (...), which properly
signifies worthy: you shall have somewhat a do to wring it out of the word
(...), which properly signifies, apt, or meet, and sometime sufficient,
according to which later signification, Beza in three places translateth
dignus, because sufficiens is no Latin word in that sense to be used. But
now you ask, why we went not a step further* to translate (...), Collos. 1.
v. 12. which has made us worthy. I answer you, first there is no reason that
a word which has diverse significatio^s, should always be translated after
one. Secondly, when a word has one most usual signification, and two or three
other significations not so usual: by translating it once or twice according
to the sense of the place, after one of the best usual significations, we are
not bound to give over the most common and usual signification, when the
sense of the place requires it. Thirdly, when a verb is derived of a nowne
that has diverse significations, it signifies most commonly after the most
usual signification, as (...), sometime signifies cheap, we must not thereof
conclude, that (...) signifies to make cheap. So (...), signifies sometime
great, or much, you may as well say, that (...), signifies to magnify, to
make great, or to multiply: which none but a mad man would say: and yet
you think you have made a great argument, when you say, if (...) be worthy,
then (...) is to make worthy. It remains therefore, that seeing the most
usual signification of (...), is apt or meet, the true and best signification
of (...), is to make apt or meet, which we have followed in our translation.
But if you will still contend that (...), is all one with (...), then you must
tell us, as you require us often, whether (...), be as good Greek, as (...),
if you would say, worthy of death. Beza therefore follows not his pleasure,
where he chooses to say, for (...), Idoneum, but the nature of the word, and
the usual signification thereof* compared with the sense of the place. And if
we should follow your vulgar Latin translation, and say, that God has made
us worthy to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light, you
are never the narre for your merits. For God makes us worthy by his grace,
and by the righteousness and holiness of Christ, which is imputed to us being
incorporated to him, and made lively members of his mystical body. How
vainly you charge the translatours, with bragging, unskillfulness, and malice,
they that are learned can judge, and God will one day revenge it.

MART. 18. The Greek fathers (I say) interpret the Oecum. in Caten.
Apostles word here, (...). that is, has made us worthy, and given us the
grace to be worthy. And S. Basil in orat. Liturg. making both Greek words
all one, says, THOU HAVE MADE US (...).
VVORTHIE to be ministers of thy holy altar. And anon after, MAKE US WORTHY
for this ministry. And Saint Chrysostom upon the Apostles place. God does
not only give us society with the Saints, but makes us also worthy to
receive so great dignity. And here is a goodly consideration of the goodness
of God toward us, that does in deed by his grace make^ us worthy of so great
things, who otherwise are most unworthy, vile, and abject. Which making of us
worthy, is expressed by the said Greek words, more than by the Latin,
mereri, because it declares whence our merit and worthiness proceeds* to
wi^, of God. Both which S. Chrysostom expresses excellently, thus: Ho. de
Cruce and latrone.
When he brought in Publicans to the kingdom of heaven, he defamed not the
kingdom of heaven, but magnified it also with great honors, showing that there
is such a Lord of the kingdom of heaven, which has made Vt etiam illius
d^gnitatis gloriam merer^ntur.
even unworthy persons to be so much better, that they should deserve even the
glory of that dignity. And Oecumenius says, that it is Gods glory, (...).
TO MAKE HIS SERVANTS WORTHY of such good things: and that it is their glory,
(...).
TO HAVE BEEN MADE WORTHY of such things, in 2 Thessalonians. 1.

FVLK. 18. If the Greek fathers did so interpret the Apostles words, yet
your merit is to seek, as I have said. For I will not contend, whether God
make us worthy, but whether he make us worthy by desert of our good works, or
by his mercy, and grace, in the redemption of his son. But let us see what
the fathers say to the matter. First Oecumenius words are flat against you, if
they be truly translated, (...), he has counted us worthy, and has freely
granted unto us to be meet. See you not, that all our worthiness and meetenes
depends of his grace, and free acceptance? The Liturgy entitled of Basil,
although it have a much younger author, makes never a whit more for you. The
minister prays that God would accoumpt him worthy, or make him meet for the
ministry. And if you should in both places translate, that God makes worthy,
you ca^ not prove merit thereby: but contrariwise it sounds against merit,
for God makes us not worthy by our deserts, but by the worthiness of Christ.
Chrysostom also, as I have showed before upon this place, does utterly
condemn your opinion of merits, for he says, Such are the things that are
given, that he has not only given them, but also made us able to receive
them. Again, he has not only given us the honor, but also strength to
embrace it. What is our strength? what is our ability, to receive the gifts
of God, but faith in the merits of Christ? The place of Chrysostom, Hom. de
cruce and latrone, is not be be understood of deserving by works, but by the
grace of God, and remission of their sins, which makes men meet and worthy
of his glory: as the example of the Publican, justified only by remission
Luc. 18. Luc. 7.
of his sins, and of the harlot saved by faith, which he uses, does plainly
declare. And yet sanctification, and the fruits of good life, are not excluded
from the persons justified, and saved, but only merit or desert of works,
according to which, as the same Chrysostom says, in ep. Col. 1. we must say,
we are unprofitable servant, when we have done all that is commanded us. But
this is no place, to handle controversies of religion, but translations of the
Scripture. The word (...), except you bring us better evidence, than yet we
see any, in all places where we read it, we may translate it dignari, which is
to vouchsafe, or account worthy.

MART. 19. Thus we see how the holy Scripture uses equivalent words to
signify, merit, which you suppress as much as you can. So likewise we might
tell you of other words and phrases that do plainly import and signify
merit. As when it is said Ecclesiastici 16. Every man shall find according
to his works. Budee both your Master (...).
and ours in the Greek tongue, tells us that the Greek word (...) (to
find) is proprely to receive for that which a man has given or labored. And
to require you with some profane authority, (because you delight much in that
kind,) the whole oration of Demosthenes (...), will tell you the same. Now, to
receive for that which a man has labored or wrought, what does it else
presuppose, but merit and desert? Eccles. 16. Psalm. 61. Apoc. 22.
It is a common phrase of the Scripture, that God will judge and reward or
repay according to every man's works. Does not this include merit and demerite
of works? but I wot not how, nor wherefore, in this case you translate
sometime, deeds, for works, saying* Who will reward every man according
(...).
to his deeds. And again, You see then how that of deeds a man is
justified, and not of faith only.

FVLK. 19. We do not yet see, that the holy Scriptures used any word
aequiualent to merit, whereby it might be gathered, that we are justified or
saved by merit of good works. But you have other words and phrases, that do
plainly importe and signify merit, as in Ecclesiasticus 16. every man shall
find according to his works. Where you put us in mind, what our Master
Budee writes of the proper signification of (...), that is, to deserve,
bringing example therefore, out of Demosthenes oration (...). But I pray you,
does our said Master affirm this to be the only signification of that
verb? Where he brings you the example out of Gregory, of Saul, which
seeking his fathers Asses (...) found a kingdom, does he mean that by
seeking his fathers Asses, he deserved a kingdom? Again, the example he
brings out of Saint Luke, (...), thou have found favor or grace with God:
does he understand, that the virgin Marie deserved the grace of God? But you
object, that it is a common phrase of the Scripture, that God will judge or
reward, or repay to every man according to his works. It is true, but not to
every one according to his merits, for then all should be damned, for all
have deserved death: and no man should be saved, for no man meriteth
salvation. But God rendereth to the faithful according to their works, when
he freely gives for Christ's sake eternal life to them, that by perseueraunce
of good works (as the Apostle says) seek glory, honor, and incorruptio^.
Their works therefore, are the fruits of his grace. not the merits or
deserts of his grace by which we are saved: Ephesians. 2. But here again you
quarrel, that for works, we say sometimes deeds, as though they were not all
one. Or if they be not, why do you, 1. Cor. 5. translate Qui hoc opus fecit,
that has done this deed.

MART. 20. I know you will tell us that you use to say deeds or works
indifferently, as also you may say, that you put no difference between just
and righteous, meet and worthy, but use both indifferently. To the ignorant
this is a fair answer, and shall soon persuade them: but they that see
further, must needs suspect you, till you give a good reason of your doing.
For, the controversy being of faith and works, of justice and justification
by works, of the worthiness or valor of works: why do you not precisely
keep these terms pertaining to the controversy, the Greek words being
always pregnant in that signification? Why should you once translate the
Greek (...), deeds, rather than, works. You know it is properly, works, as,
(...), deeds. It were very good in matters of controversy to be precise. Beza
makes it a great fault Prefat. in no. Test. 1556.
in the old vulgar Latin translatour, that he expresses one Greek word in
Latin diverse ways. You choppe and change significations here and there as
you list, and you think you satisfy the reader marvelous well, if sometime
you say idol, and not always, images: sometime just, and not always
righteous: and if in other places you say works, or if one Bible has works,
where an other has deeds, you think this is very well, and will answer all
the matter sufficiently. God and your conscience be judge herein, and let the
wise reader consider it depely. The least thing that we demand the reason of,
rather than charge you with all, is, why your Church Bible says in the places
before alleged. The righteous judgment of God, which (...).
will reward every man according to his deeds. and, man is justified by
deeds, and not by faith only. Whereas you know the Greek is more pregnant for
us than so, and the matter of controversy would better appear on our side,
if you said thus: The JUST judgment of God* which will reward every man
according to his WORKS, and, Man is justified by works, and not by faith only.

FVLK. 20. If you could tell us what advantage our doctrine might have, by
translating deeds rather than works, it might be suspected why some
translations use the one, rather than the other: but seeing you can not
imagine, nor any man else, what it should a^^ile us, to use the one rather
than the other, it may be reasonably thought, that the translators meante no
subtlety, especially when in places of like appara^ce for our assertion, they
use the word deeds also. As Gal. 2. v. 16. A man is not justified by the
deeds of the law, but by faith of Jesus Christ, where the Greek word is
(...) as well as in S. James. But where you say that (...) is proper for
deeds* you were best call the second book of S. Luke, The deeds of the
Apostles. The fault that Beza finds with the vulgar Latin translation is,
that in diverse places, he translateth one word diverse ways, and them
differing. For otherwise to translate for (...) sometimes Gladius, and
sometimes En^i^, it were no fault, no more than it is in us to use the words
justice and righteousness* works and deeds, faith and belief, trust and
confidence, etc. And you your selves in such words do often use the same
liberty.

MART. 21. But will you not yet see merit and meritorious works in the
Scripture? I marvel your skill in the Greek teaches you nothing in this
point. S. John says: Look 2. Epist. v. 8.
to your selves, that you lose not the things which you have wrought, but that
you may receive a full reward. Me thinks, in these words the equivalent of
merit is easily seen of any man that is not wilfully blind. But you should
see (...).
further tha^ the common sort. For you know that the Greek here signifies*
not only that which we work, but that which we work for. At in the Greek
phrase of working for a man's living, and as you translats Io. 6. v. 27. LABOUR
NOT FOR THE MEAT that perishes, but for that meat which endures unto life
everlasting. Such (...)
laborers God hired to Mat. 20.
work in his vineyard, and (...).
the workman is worthy of his hire. So that the Apostle in the former words
exhorts to perseverance, Luc. 10.
that we lose not the reward or pay, for which we work and which by working we
merit and deserve.

FVLK. 21. You fare with us, as a merry fellow did with his friends, of whom
Erasmus tells, who affirming that he saw in the sky a fiery dragon, with
often asking them if they did not see it, he induced them at length, every one
to confess they saw it, least they should have been thought to be purblind.
But in good earnest, and in my conscience, I see no more merit in the
Scriptures, than I did before. Yea I have this argument more, to persuade me
that it is not found in the Scriptures, because the chiefest patrones thereof,
having taken such pains to find it, are now as far from it, as ever they
were. But to the matter, I say there is no merit included in the saying of S.
John, although you rehearse it in the second person, after the vulgar Latin
translation, and not after the Greek, which is in the first person, and may
be referred to the reward of the Apostles, which shall be full, if they whom
they have converted to the faith, do persevere unto the end. But make it as
strong for your part as you can, the full reward is given according to the
most bountiful promise of God, to our good works, of his mere mercy and
grace, and not by deserte of our works. And the parable of the laborers, whom
God hired into his Math. 20.
vineyarde, declares most evidently, that the reward is of grace, not of
merit. For if it were of merit, they that came first early in the morning,
should have received more, as their labor was greater, than they which came
at the last hour. Where our Savior Christ says* the workman is worthy
of his hire, he Luc. 10.
teaches his Disciples, that they may lawfully take meat and drink of them
to whom they preach, according to that common saying, or Proverb. But thereof
it follows not, that every one which works in Gods vineyarde, is worthy
for his works sake, and by deserte of his labor, of eternal glory, for he
promises greater reward to his workmen, a thousand fold and more, than
their labor does deserve* So that yet we see not, that we merit and deserve
by working, although we receive reward for our work* or according to our
works. Vnde mihi tantum meriti Ambros. ad virg. in exhor.
(says a godly father) cui indulgentia est pro coron^? whence should I have so
great merit when pardon or mercy is my crown.

MART. 22. Again Beza tells us, that (...) signifies Annot. in To. c. ^. v.
27.
mercedem quae meritis respondet, that is, a reward (...).
answereable to the merits. And we find many words in the Scripture like
unto this, (...) Hebr. 10. and 11.
(...), Which are on Gods part, who is the rewarder* and recompenser. And on
our part we have (as the Apostle (...), etc. Phor. apud Oecum. in Hebr. 10.
Ps. 18. and 118. (...).
says, Hebr. 10. and 4.) great confidence, confidence (says Photius a
notable Greek father) of our works, confidence of our faith, of our
tentations, of our patience, etc. Yea we have (...) and (...) in the
Scripture, which must needs signify as much as Bezaes (...) By the one, is
said, In keeping thy commandments is great reward. Again* You shall
receive THE RETRIBVTION of inherimunce. Col. 3. v. 24. And 2. Thessal. 1. v. 6.
Gods repaying just and reiribution of (...)
Hell or Heaven for good and evil deser^es* is expressed by the same word.
And by the other, is said, I have inclined my heart to keep thy iustifications
(or commandments) always FOR REWARD. (...).


FVLK. 22. If you can find (...) in the Scripture, you convince us of merit
by Bezaes judgment. Therefore, tell us I pray you, in what book and chapter
we shall find it. First you tell us, that you find many words like unto it.
Yea, but neither the same, nor any that is aequiualent. For rendering of
reward* which all your words do signify, may be according to promise by
grace: and not by desert. The confidence of our works, that Photius speaks
of, must be understood as they are testimonies of Gods sanctifying spirit, or
else it is contrary to the Scripture. The parable told Luc. 18. and 17.
against them that trusted in themselves, that they are righteous, whereas we
must confess, that we are unprofitable servants in all our obedience, and
best works that we do. Yea but you have (...) and (...) in the Scripture,
which must needs signify as much as Bezaes (...). Who will yield to this
necessity? If a man promise a laborer 20. shillings for every days work, the
rendering of this wages may be called (...), or (...), and yet no man will say,
that a days labor deserves twenty shillings. That there is great reward
promised for them that keep Gods commandments, we confess: but this
reward is either of merit, if they perfectly keep all Gods commandments,
which no man does: or of mercy, if being justified by faith through remission
of their sins, they endeavor according to the measure of Gods grace, given
unto them, to keep Gods commandments in some part, as God gives strength.
In the testimony of S. Paul, the word of inheritance following immediately
Coll. 3.
after the word of reward, or retribution, excludes merits: for the
inheritance depends of Gods free adoption, by which he makes us his sons,
that he may give us that inheritance, which we can never deserve. In the other
place the Apostle promises reward of glory, to them that suffer for Christ's
name: which God having promised of his mere mercy to give us, and the same
being purchased for us by the merits of our Savior Christ: it is as just
before God to render unto us, as to repay the wicked with eternal
condemnation, according to their merits. So that the merits of Christ, and
his satisfaction, plead for us in all rewards, and not the merits of our
good works, which yet are not ours, but Gods gifts in us. That you allege out
of the Psalm, follows afterward to be considered.

MART. 23. But all this will not suffice you. For wheresoever you can possibly,
you will have an evasion. And therefore in this later place you run to the
ambiguitie of the Hebrewe word, and translate thus: I have applied my heart to
fulfill (...)
thy statuts always, EVEN UNTO THE END. Alas my masters, are not the
Seventy Greek Interpreters sufficient to determine the ambiguitie of this
word? is not S. Hierom, in his translation according to the Hebrew? are not all
the ancient fathers both Greek and Latin? It is ambiguous (say you) and
therefore you take your liberty. You do so in deed, and that like Princes.
For in an other place, where the Greek has determined, you follow it with all
your heart, saying, fall down before his footestoole, because he is holy:
whereas the ambiguitie (...)
of the Hebrew, would have borne you to say, as in the vulgar Latin, because
it is holy, and so it makes for holiness of places, which you can not abide.

FVLK. 23. You need not be half so earnest, for the word of reward, in that
verse of the Psalm, which we translate unto the end: for if it were granted
unto you, that for which you make so much of it, the merit of good works will
never be established by it. For reward, as I have often said, and plainly
proved, does not of necessity import the merit or desert of him that is
rewarded: but often times the liberality and bountifulness of the rewarder,
which for small labor gives wonderful great reward. Now concerning the
translation of this word yekebh, the Seventy Interpreters, nor (...)
yet S. Hierom, are sufficient to determine the ambiguitie in this place, more
than in an hundred other places, where our translations depart from their
judgment. But it is still free for men of every age, to use the gift of
knowledge, and interpretation of tongues, unto the exact finding out of the
true meaning of the holy Ghost in the Scriptures. Neither do we join with
them, only for advantage, as you fondly charge us, but as I have showed you
reason in the example you bring, so is there reason also to be showed,
wheresoever we either join with them, or depart from them. Where you say, we
can not abide holiness of places, it is false, for we do acknowledge the
holiness of all places, which you can prove, that God has sanctified, as he
did the Arc, the temple, the tabernacle, etc.

MART. 24. But you use (you say) the ambiguity of the Hebrew. Take heed that
your liberty in taking all advantages, against the common and approved
interpretation of the whole Church, be not very suspicious. For if it do
signify also reward, as (you know) it does very commonly, and your self so
translate it, (Psalm. 18. v. 11.) when you can not choose: and if the
Septuaginta do here so translate it in Greek, and Propter aeternam
retributionem sez. vitae aeternae, vt eam merear percipere. in comment.
S. Hierome in his Latin translation, according to the Hebrew, and the
ancient fathers in their commentaries: what vpstart new masters are you that
set all these to school again, and teach the world a new translation? If you
will say, you follow our own great Hebrician, Sanctes Pagninus. Why did you
follow him in his translation, rather than in his Lexicon called The saurus,
where he interprets it as the whole Church did before him? Why did you follow
him (or Benedictus Arias either) in this place, and do not follow them in the
self same case, a little before translating that very Hebrew word, which is in
this place, propter retributionem, Psalm. 118. v. 112.
for reward? So that you follow nothing, neither (...)
judgment, nor learning, in Hebrew or Greek, but only your own error and
heresy, which is, that we may not do well in respect of reward, or, for
reward, and therefore because the holy Prophet David said of him self the
contrary, that he did bend his whole heart to keep Gods commandments for
reward, you make him say an other thing.

FVLK. 24. If Sanctes Pagninus, Benedictus Arias, and Isidorus Clarius, be
vpstart new Masters in your judgment, because they depart here from the
Septuaginta, and Saint Hierome, we poor men must look for small favor at
your hands. But because you say we follow nothing, neither judgment nor
learning, in Hebrew or Greek, but only our own error and heresy: I will
set down the judgment of Isidorus Clarius, upon this place, who translateth
it, as all the Hebritians of this age do, and yeldeth his reasons in these
words. Inclinaui cor meum.\] Accommodaui animum meum, vt opere praestem
praecepta tua, etc. I have inclined my heart.\] I have applied my mind, that in
work or deed, I might perform thy commandments, even unto the end of my
life. For that word, propter retributionem, for reward, the Hebrew words have
not: and truly it is to be taken away, for it is too servile a thing, and not
worthy of so great a Prophet, to give diligence to Gods commandments for
reward, and hope of retribution. For that is the part of an hyreling, and of
him which is unworthy the name of a son: neither can he be worthily called a
Christian man, that serves Christ with this mind. For what? if God should say
so, that he would not reward us with any other retribution, seeing for this
one thing, that we are created by him, we can never satisfy this debt, shall we
refuse to serve him. Therefore we are bound to serve him with our whole mind,
although he had decreed to thrust us into hell fire, both for that which we owe
him, and for that we live only that time which we bestow in well doing, for
they which give over them selves to all wicked works, by no means can be said
to live. Yet there may be an interpretation of the Hebrew words, without such
offense, so that it may be said, for ever is the reward, as else where we
read, in keeping of them is great reward. For by this means it is signified,
that the fruit in deed of keeping Gods law is very great, but yet that
retribution is not the end and scope, but the love of God. Let all indifferent
Readers judge by this, what just cause you have thus to rail, not only upon
our translators, but also upon al learned Papists, that have translated even
so. And let the ignorant judge, what knowledge you have in the Hebrewe tongue,
which urge the false translation of the Seventy, against the opinion and
translation of all the learned Hebritians of this age, both Papists and
Protestants: although it were no hard thing to prove, that the Greek text of
the Psalms, which now we have, is none of the Seuenties translation, as even
Lindanus might teach you, de opt. genesis l 3. ^. 6.

MART. 25. And to this purpose perhaps it is, (for other cause I can not guess)
that you make such a marvelous transposition of words in your translation,
(Mat. 19.) saying thus: When the son of man shall sit in the throne of his
majesty, ye that have followed me in the regeneration, shall sit also upon
twelve scates. Whereas the order of these words both in Greek and Latin, is
this: You that have followed me, in the regeneration, when the Son of man
shall sit in his majesty, you also shall sit upon twelve seats. To follow
Christ in the regeneration, is not easily understood what it should mean: but
to sit with Christ in the regeneration, that is, in the resurrection, upon
twelve seats, that is familiar and every man's interpretation, and concerns
she great reward that they shall then have, which here follow Christ, as the
Apostles did.

FVLK. 25. You look for faults very narrowly, that can espy but a comma
wanting, although it be no impious sense to follow Christ in the regeneration;
for the world by Christ was after a sort renewed, when the cause of the
restoration thereof was performed, as for the reward, of which you have such a
servile care, is expressed in sitting upon twelve seats, to judge the tribes
of Israel. Wherefore there was no need, that you should fear the loss of
your reward, by this transposition.

MART. 26. The like transposition of words is in some No. Test. 1580.
of your Bibles (Heb. 2. v. 9.) thus. We see JESUS crowned with glory and
honor, which was a little inferior to the Angels, through the suffering of
death. Whereas both in Greek and Latin, the order of the words is thus: Him
that was made a little inferior to Angels, we see JESUS. through the passion of
death, crowned with honor and glory. In this later, the Apostle says, that
Christ was crowned for his suffering death, and so by his death merited his
glory. But by your translation, he says that Christ was made inferior to
Angels by his suffering death, that is (says Beza) For to Vt mori posset.
suffer death: and taking it so, that he was made inferior to Angels, that he
might die, then the other sense is clean excluded, that for suffering death he
was crowned with glory: and this is one place among other, whereby it may very
well be gathered that some of you think that Christ him self did not See
Calvin in epist. ad Philip.
merit his own glory and exaltation. So obstinatly are you set against
merits and meritorious works. To the which purpose also you take away man's
free will, as having no ability to work toward his own salvation.

FVLK. 26. Whether we say, Christ was crowned for his suffering, or Christ was
made inferior to the Angels through his suffering, the sense of either of both
is good and godly, and may stand with the place, neither does the one of them
exclude the other: although but one only can be the sense of the place. And if
this be the place, by which you may gather, that some of us think, that Christ
merited not his own glory, it is not worth a straw. We hold that Christ for
him self needed not to merit, because he was the Lord of glory, but that he
merited for us, to be exalted in our nature, for our salvation, it is so far
off that we deny, that our whole comfort rests in his merits, and in his
glory, which he has deserved for us, we hope to be glorified for ever. When
you make your transition to the next chapter, you say, we take away man's free
will, as having none ability to work, by which it seems, that you do not
only allow to man the freedom of his will, but also power to work
whatsoever he will: so that he shall not only have a free will, but also a
strength by the same to work toward his own salvation.

CHAP. X.
Heretical translation against FREE WILL.

Martin.
AGAINST free will your corruptions be 1.
these Ioh. 1. 12. where it is said, As many as (...).
received him, he gave them power to be made the sons of God: some of No.
Test. 1580.
your translations say, he gave them prerogative to be the sons of God. Beza,
dignity. Who protests that whereas in other places often he translated this
Greek word, power and authority, here he refused both, in deed against free
will, which he says the Sophistes would prove out of this place, reprehending
Vt liceret filios Dei fieri.
Erasmus for following them in his translation. But whereas the Greek word is
indifferent to signify dignity, or liberty, he that will translate either of
these, restrains the sense of the holy Ghost and determines it it to his
own fancy. If you may translate, dignity: may not we as well translate it,
liberty? Yes surely. For you know it signifies the one as well as the other
both in profane and Divine writers. And you can well call to mind (...), and
(...), whence they are derived, and that the Apostle calls a man's liberty of
his own will, (...). Now then if potestas in Latin, ^. Cor. 7. 17.
and power in English, be words also indifferent to signify both dignity
and liberty, translate so in the name of God, and leave the text of the
Scripture indifferent as we do: and for the sense whether of the two it does
here rather signify, or whether it does not signify both (as no doubt it
does, and the fathers so expound it) let that be examined otherwise. It is a
common fauls with you and intolerable, by your translation to abridge the sense
of the holy Ghost to one particular understanding, and to defeat the
exposition of so many fathers, that expound it in another sense and
signification. As is plain in this example also following.

Fulke.
SEeing you confess that the Greek 1.
word signifies not only power, but also dignity, and that in this place it
signifies both, it can be no corruption, but the best and truest
interpretation, to translate (...), dignity, for that includes power, whereas
power may be severed from dignity. Where you would have us use a word, that
is ambiguous, when the sense is clear by your own confession, you bewray your
own corrupt affection, which desire to have the Scriptures so ambiguously or
doubtfully translated, that the ignorant might receive no benefit of certain
understanding by them. When a word has diverse significations, a wise
translater must weigh, which of them agrees with the text in hand, and that to
use: but not to seek ambiguous words, that may bring the matter in doubt, when
the meaning to him is certain. As here you say, there is no doubt but it
signifies both, and yet you quarrel at our translation, which comprehends
both, and urge the word of power, from which dignity may be severed, whereas
from dignity, power or ability or license can not be divided.

MART. 2. The Apostle (1. Cor. 15. 10.) says thus: I labored (...).
more abou^dantly than all they: yet not I, but the grace of god with me. Which
may have this sense, not I, but the grace of God which is with me, as S.
Hierome sometime expounds it: or this, not I, but the grace of God which
labored with me. And by this later is most evidently signified, that the grace
of God and the Apostle, both labored together, and not only grace, as though
the Apostle had done nothing, like unto a block, forced only: but that the
grace of God did so co^curre as the principal agent with all his labors, that
his free will wrought withal. Against which truth and most approved
interpretation of this place, you translate according to the former sense
only, making it the very text, and so excluding all other senses and
commentaries, as your Masters Calvin and Beza taught you, who should not have
taught you if you were wise, to do that which neither they nor you can
justify. They reprehend first the vulgar Latin interpreter for neglecting the
Greek article, and secondly them that by occasion thereof, would by this place
prove free will. By which their commentary they do plainly declare their intent
and purpose in their translation, to be directly against free will.

FVLK. 2. S. Hierome favoring this translation of ours, as he does in diverse
places, lib. 2. aduers. Ioui. Gratia dei quae in me est, and lib. 2. aduers.
Pelag. and ad Principe^. Gratia dei quae mecu^ est. The grace of god which is
in me, or which is with me. I marvel why you count it among heretical
corruptions, except you take S. Hierome for an heretic. By the later, you say
it is signified, that ye grace of God, and the Apostle both labored together,
although it be no proper speech to say, the grace of God laboreth, yet that you
would have, is expressed before, where S. Paul says, I have labored more than
they al, which none but a block would understand, that he was forced like a
block. The grace of God uses no violence, but frames the will of man to
obedience and service of God. But that S. Paul had of him self no free will
to perform this labor, but that it was altogether of the grace of God, which
gave him this will, he confesses more plainly, than that it can be denied,
where he says, Not I. Whereby he means, not that he was only helped by the
grace of God, and did it not alone: but that he did nothing by his own
strength, but altogether by the grace of God, which made him willing, which of
nature was unwilling to set forth the Gospel, yea by froward zeal became a
blasphemer and a persecuter thereof. Which grace gave him not only a will to
promote the Gospel, but inspired him also with divine knowledge, by
revelation, without study or hearing of other men: which gave him also
strength to overcome so many difficulties, that no labor, nor travail, nor
persecution, nor continuance of time, did make him weary, or faint in his
labor. All this (I say) he does ascribe wholly unto the grace of God. And this
sense does not make Paul a block, nor enforced by violence, but a willing,
prompt, and painful labourer. But if you mean, that S. Paul had a free
will, and strength of him self, which only was helped by the grace of God,
then is your sense abominable Pelagianisme, heresy, worthy to be trodden under
feet, by all Christians, and of Calvin, and Beza most justly reprehended, who
are utter enemies to free will, that derogateth any thing from the grace of
Christ, without whom we can do nothing: which text always John. 15. v. 5.
choked the Pelagians, and so does it their half faced brethren, the Papists.

MART. 3. But concerning the Greek article omitted in (...).
translation, if they were but Grammarians in both tongues, they might know
that the Greek article many times can not be expressed in Latin, and that
this is one felicity and prerogative of the Greek phrase, above the Latin,
to speak more briefly, commodiously, and significantly, by the article. What
need we go to Terence, and Homer, as they are w^nt? Is not the Scripture full
of such speeches? Iacobus Zebedaei, Iacobus Alphaei, Judas Iacobi, Maria
Cleophae, and the like. Are not all these sincerely translated into Latin,
though the Greek article be not expressed? Can you express the article, but
you must add more than the article, and so add to the text, as you do very
boldly in such speeches through out the new Testament, yea you do it when
there is no article in the Greek: as Io. 5. 36. (witness) (sins.)
and 1. ep. Io. 2, 2. Yea sometime of an heretical purpose: as Ephesians. 3. By whom
we have boldness and entrance with Bib. 1562.
the confidence which is by the faith of him, or, in him, as it is in other
your Bibles. You say, confidence which is No. Test. 1580.
by faith, as though there were no confidence by works: you know the Greek
bears not that translation, unless there (...).
were an article after, confidence, which is not, but you add it to the text
heretically. as also Beza does the like (Romans 8. 2.) and your Geneua English
Testaments after him, for the here sit of imputative justice: as in his
annotations he plainly deduceth, saying confidently, I doubt not but a Greek
article (...) ((...)) (...) ((...).)
must be understood, and therefore (for sooth) put into the text also. He
does the same in S. James, 2. v. 20. still debating the case in his annotations
why he does so, and when he has concluded in his fancy, that this or that is
the sense, he puts it so in the text, and translateth accordingly. No
marvel now, if they reprehend the vulgar Latin Interpreter, for not
translating the Greek article in the place which we began to treat of, when
they find articles lacking in the Greek text it self, and boldly add them
for their purpose in their translation. Whereas the vulgar Latin
interpretation is in all these places so sincere, that it neither adds nor
diminishes, nor goes one io^e from the Greek.

FVLK. 3. Concerning the omission of the Greek article, which Calvin and Beza
reprove in the old translator, you make many words to no purpose: for they
reprove him not for omitting it, where either it can not, or it need not be
expressed, but in this place, where both it may, and meet it is, that it
should be expressed. But we (you say) to express the article, do add more
than is in the text: yet in truth we add nothing, but that which is
necessarily to be understood, as when we say James the son of Zebedee,
where you had rather say James of Zebedee, as though you were so precise, that
for necessary understanding, you would not add a word to the text, and yet
you do very often, yea sometimes where no need is. As Act. 8. where the
Latin is Curauerunt Stephanum, you translate it, they took order for Stephans
funeral. Does Curare signify to take order for a funeral? So likewise Luc.
10. Paeniterent, they had done penance. But to answer for our own doings. Io
5. v. 36. where Christ says, I have a greater witness, than John's witness,
why may not the article (...) be referred rather to (...), that is of
necessity to be understood, than to (...). In the other place 1. John. 2. v.
2. the word sins, must needs be understood in the pronoune adjective
ours. In the third text, where you accuse the translators of heretical
purpose, the sense is all one, whether you add the article or no. For when the
Apostle says, by Christ we have boldness and entrance with confidence, by
faith, how can you understand confidence by works, and whether there be
confidence by works or no, there can none be proved by this place. Where Beza
understands an article, Romans 8. whom our English translation does follow, it
is only to make that plain, which otherwise is necessarily to be understood.
For there is no difference between these sayings. The law of the spirit of life
in Christ Jesus, and this, The law of the spirit of life which is in Christ
Jesus, has delivered me from the law of sin and death. The article or
relative therefore declares no more, but that the law of the spirit of life,
is in Christ Jesus, which delivers us. For both the text says, in Christ
Jesus, and it can not be in any other to deliver us. For he says not, The
law of the spirit of life in us, but in Christ Jesus, and the next verse
following does manifestly confirm the same, as every man may see that will
consider it. Likewise James the second, will thou know O thou vain man, that
faith without works is dead? If you say, the faith which is without good
works is dead, is not that the meaning of the Apostle? Where he adds
immediately, that Abraham was justified by such a faith, as was fruitful of
good works. And when he brings example of Devils faith, is it not manifest
he speaks of such a faith, as is utterly void of all good works? Where you
say that Beza puts the article into the text, and translateth it
accordingly, you do most shamefully belie him. For to the original text, he
adds none of his own collection, but in his translation only, where he
judges that according to the sense of the place, it must of necessity be
understood: which if it be a fault in articles, it must be so in other words
also, for like cause added. Then answer to your own translations, where
beside those that I have noted before, which seem to proceed of some Popish
purpose, you have added to your Latin authentical text. As in these
examples, Mat. 8. Quid nobi^ and tibi? what is between us? Cap. 9. Confid^,
have a good heart. Cap. 22. Mal^ p^rdet. he will bring to naught. Marc. 2. Post
dios, after some days. Accumberet, he satte at meat. Luc. 17. Ab illo, more
than he. Io. 12. Discumbentibus, them that satte at the table. Non quia de
egenis pertinebat ad eum, not because he cared for the poor. Act. 9. Ecce ego
Domine. Lo here I am Lord. cap. 10. gustare, to take somewhat, cap. 17.
colentibus, that served God. Nobiliores eorum qui sunt Thessalonicae, more
noble than they, that are at Thessalonica, Romans 1. Vocatis sanctis, called to
be Saints, etc.

MART. 4. But you will say in the place to the Corinthians, Non ego, sed gratia
Dei mecum.
there is a Greek article, and therefore there you do well to express it. I
answer first, the article may then be expressed in translation, when there
can be but one sense of the same: secondly, that not only it may, but it must
be expressed, when we can not otherwise give the sense of the place. as Mat. 1,
6. Ex ea (...).
quae fuit Vriae. Where you see the vulgar interpreter omitteth it not, but
knows the force and signification thereof very well. Mary in the place of S.
Paul which we now speak of, where the sense is doubtful, and the Latin
expresses the Greek sufficiently otherwise, he leaves it also doubtful and
indifferent, not abridging it as you do, saying, the grace of God which is
(...).
with me: nor as Calvin, gratia quae mihi aderat: nor as Illyricus, gratia quae
mihi adest. Which two later are more absurd tha^ yours, because they omit and
neglect altogether the force of the preposition, cum, which you express
saying, with me But (...).
because you say, which is with me: you mean heretically as they do, to take
away the Apostles cooperation and laboring together with the grace of God, by
his free will: which is by the article and the preposition most evidently
signified.

FVLK. 4. You take upon you to prescribe rules of tra^slatio^, as though you
were Prince of the Critici or Aerop^gitae. But al reasonable men will confess
that the article is so often to be expressed, as it may, and makes any thing
to the sense, and understanding of the place. But as for your rule, that it is
not to be expressed in tra^slatio^, when there may be more senses than one of
the same, is so good a rule, that by the same reason, and by equity thereof,
when so ever any word comes in the text, that may have more senses than one,
we must skippe it over, and not translate it at all, and so we shall leave out
five hundred words in the new Testament. A better rule I take it to be, in all
such cases, to examine what is most agreeable to the common phrase of the
tongue, and the scope of the text in hand: according to which I say, the verb
substantive is both more usual, and also more probable to be understood in
this text 1. Cor. 15. than the participle (...).

MART. 5. And here I appeal to all that have skill in Greek speeches and
Phrases, whether the Apostles words in Greek sound not thus: I labored more
abundantly (...) ((...) etc.) (...).
than all they: yet not I, but the grace of God (that labored) with me.
Understanding not the participle of Sum, but of the verb going before, as in
the like case when our Savior says, It is not you that speak, but the holy
Ghost that speaks in you. If he had spoken short thus, but the holy Ghost in
you, you perhaps would translate as you do here, the holy Ghost WHICH IS IN
YOU. But you see the verb going before is rather repeated, Not you speak, but
the holy Ghost THAT SPEAKS IN YOU. Even so, Not I labored, but the grace of
God laboring with me, or, WHICH LABOVRED WITH ME. So prays the wise man Sap.
9, 10. Send wisdom out of thy holy heavens, that she may be with me, and
labor with Et mecum laboret.
me as your selves translate. Bib. 1577.

FVLK. 5. And I likewise appeal not only to all that have skill in Greek
speeches and phrases: but to al them whose ears are accustomed to reasonable
speachs, whether it be like that the Apostle would understand that participle,
whereof (perhaps) there is no verb, for where shall we read (...)? Secondly
whether he would understand the participle of an other verb adjective, than
went before, for before he said (...). Thirdly, whether he were so desirous to
set forth his own cooperation with the grace of God, that he would express
it with two prepositions, one in apposition, the other in composition.
Fourthly, whether he meant to attribute any thing to him self, when, as it
were correcting that which he said of laboring, he says, yet not I, but the
grace of God. Fifthly, whether he purposed to challenge any merit of the
labor to him self, or make his labor any thing separate or separable from
the grace of God, when he said before, by the grace of God I am that I am.
Last of all whether his words being resolved, if this participle be added,
they conteyne not a ridiculous tautologie, or vain repetition. I have labored
more than they all, vet not I, but the grace of God which labored together
with me has labored. To conclude in your example which you feign. Because
you can find none to answer your fancy: if the words were as you suppose
(...), we would and must if we did well, translate it thus. It is not you
that speak but the holy Ghost. which is in you, and so understand, speaks.
The saying of Philo, or what so ever eloquent Jew that was, which gathered
that book of wisdom, is not of such importance, that we need to seek any
interpretation thereof, although it is certain, that by wisdom, he means
not the Son of God, the wisdom of the Father, but divine knowledge and
understanding, which is a gift of his spirit, whereof he speaks by a
rhetorical Prosopopoea, or fiction of person.

MART. 6. And so the Apostle calls him self and his fellow preachers, Gods
coadiutors, collabourers, or such as (...), S. Augustine, Cooperarij. and 2.
Cor. 6. 1. (...).
labor and work with God, which also you falsely translate, Gods laborers,
to take away all cooperation, and in some of your Bibles most foolishly and
peeuishly, as though you had sworn not to translate the Greek, We together
are Gods laborers. as well might you translate (To. 8, 17.) that we together
(...).
be Christ's heirs: for that, which the Apostle says coheires, or joint heirs
with him: the phrase and speech (as you know) in Greek being al one. So does
Beza most falsely Ephesians. 2. v. 5.
translate, Vna viuificauit nos per Christum, for that which is plain in the
Greek, He has quickened us together with Christ, Where the English Bezites
leave also the Greek, and The English translators are ashamed of their Master.
follow our vulgar Latin translation rather than Beza, who goes so wide from
the Greek, that for shame they dare not follow him. Fie upon such hypocrisy
and pretensed honor of God, that you will not speak in the same terms that
the holy Scripture speaks, but rather will teach the holy Ghost how to
speak, in not translating as he speaks. As though these phrases of
scripture, men are Gods coadiutors, coworkers with his grace, raised with
Christ, coheirs with him, compartakers of glory with him, were all spoken to
the dishonor of God and Christ, and as though these being the speeches of the
holy Ghost him self, needed your reformation in your English translatio^s.
Otherwise if you mean well, and would say as we say, that what so ever good we
do, we do it by Gods grace, and yet work the same by our free will together
with Gods grace as the mouer and helper and directer of our will: why do you
not translate in the foresaid place of S. Paul accordingly?

FVLK. 6. S. Paul says 1. Cor. 3, 9. that he and Apollo are (...), joined
together in the work and business of God, he says not that they are helpers
of God, for God needs no help. A helper is of him that lacks strength,
which is blasphemous to say of God. Therefore even Faber Stapulensis (as Beza
tells you) reproves that term adiutores, which your vulgar translator
uses, and you your self in favor of your heresy of freewill, do not
translate, but fly to the Greek word (...), and say Coadiutors, which if you
would express in English, signifies fellow helpers of God. The word
Cooperarij, which S. Augustine uses (as Beza also tells you) may be
referred to the joint labor of the ministers, in several offices of planting
and watering. And although it be referred to God, that he as the Lord and
Master, and they as the servants, altogether by his grace and strength, do
work together, the sense is not evil, yet not proper for this place. Because
the Apostle does not here set out the dignity of the ministers, but abaseth
their labor and submits all to God. For he had to do with them, that did
attribute too much unto the ministers work, with whom it was unseasonable, to
extol their labors, and make them coadiutors or fellow helpers of God. But
contrariwise he ascribes the fruit of all their labors to God, and to take
away the Schisms that were among them, by depending of one minister more than
an other, declares that they altogether are Gods laborers, Gods husbandmen,
etc. In the other place 2. Cor. 6. v. 1. (...), it is more proper to say; that
the Apostles joined their labors unto Christ offering his grace, that it
should not be received in vain. Where nevertheless the strength of man's
free will, is not avouched, but the grace of God, who works by his ministers,
giving them strength to labor, and fruit to their labors. Next follows an
open outcrie against Beza, for false translation, and our translators, for
being ashamed to follow him. If we mislike Bezaes translation, are we by and
by ashamed to follow him? And if his translation be false, as you affirm, and
we ashamed to follow him in falsehood: do we deserve to be defied as hypocrites,
because we prefer the truth before the credit of our master, as you call him.
O how glad you are, when you have never so small an occasion to set abroad the
sails of your railing, and reuiling oration. But let us see, whether Beza
deserve so much blame, as you charge him withal. Beza having translated (as he
thought) most near to the Apostles meaning, Ephesians. 2. v. 5. in his annotation
upon the place, thus writes: Conuiuificauit, etc. The vulgar, and Erasmus
translate, he has quickened us together with Christ, which sense I do in no
wise reprehend. But yet nothing shall be detracted from the self same matter,
and perhaps it may be said more aptly, that the preposition (...), in this
place, is used rather to declare the uniting together of the Gentiles and Jews
in one Christ: after which manner, the word (...), which signifies to be
builded together, is afterward used, verse 22. This is Bezaes judgment, not
contrary to the common translation, and ours, but agreeing in the sense
thereof, and comprehending a further matter, whereof the Apostle in that
chapter speaks. But our translators thought best to follow the plain and
common understanding, not for shame of Beza, or his translation, but for desire
of sincerity and plainness. Contrariwise, where your vulgar translator is
sometimes so barbarous, that his phrase has no sense according to the text, it
may well be thought you were ashamed to follow him, lest you should have been
ridiculous to all men. As you translate Timoratus, religious oftentimes. Non
quia de Ioh. 12.
egenis pertinebat ad eum, which in English is, not because of the poor it
pertained to him, but you have, translated, not because he cared for the poor.
Vna sabbathi, the first Ioh 21. Act. 1. Act. 14.
of the Sabbath. Sabbati habens iter, having the journey of a Sabbath, you
translate, distant a Sabbats journey. Yea you are bold to correct your text,
and for Italia, to Act. 25. Ibid.
say Attalia. Ad abluenda crimina, which is, to wash away the crimes you say,
to clear him self of the crime. Cum multa ambitione, which is, with much
ambition, you say, with great pomp. Exhortentur, which is a deponent, you 1.
Cor 14. 1. Cor. 15.
translate, may be exhorted: ad reuerentiam vobis, which is, for reverence to
you, you say, to your shame: and such like. I do not blame you that you are
ashamed to follow your vulgar Latin text in these phrases, but that you are
not ashamed to allow that translation, as the only authentical text, which no
man for shame will follow in many places. To conclude, our meaning for free
will, is, that we confess it at all times, to be free from co^streint, but
never free to embrace that which is good in deed, but only when it is reformed
by the grace of God: who also in all good things that we take in hand, does
not only make us willing, but also gives all the strength we have to perform
them. If this be your meaning (as I am afraid it is not) by your terms of
working and helping, and directing, (as though it could go alone with a little
help and direction) we join with you: but if you think you can do any thing
that good is, without the grace of God, like to Pelagius Celestius, and other
like Heretics of the devils black guard, we leave you.

MART. 7. You say moreover in some of your Bibles, Eib. 1561. (...).
thus: So lies it not then in a man's will or running, but in the mercy of
God. Whatsoever you mean, you know this translation is very dissolute, and
wide from the Apostles words, and not true in sense. for salvation is in
willing and running: according to that famous saying of Saint Augustine, Aug.
Sermon. 15. de verb. Apostoli.
He that made thee without thee, will not justify thee without thee: that is,
against thy will, or, unless thou be willing. and the Apostle says, No man is
crowned, unless 2. Timoth. 2. 1. Cor. 9.
he fight lawefully. and again, So run THAT YOU MAY obtain. and again. The
doers of the Law shall Romans 2. Mat. 19.
be justified. And our Savior, If thou will enter into life, keep the
commandments. We see then, that it is in willing, and running, and doing: but
to will, or run, or do, are not of man, but of Gods mercy. and so the
Apostle speaks, It is not of the willer, nor runner, but of God that has
mercy. And it is much to be marueled, why you said not, It lies not in the
willer, nor in the runner: which is near to the Apostles words, but so far
of, in a man's will and running.

FVLK. 7. The translation you reprehend, I grant is not proper for the words,
and therefore is reformed in the later translations, yet in sense it is all
one: for salvation lies not in the will, or running of man, but in the mercy
of God: even as S. John says, the children of God are not made of the will of
the flesh, nor of the will of man, but they are borne of God. But thus you
reason against it. We are not saved, except we will, and run, ergo, salvation
lies in willing and running. I deny your argument, which is as good as this;
we are not saved from sin, except we have committed sin, ergo, salvation
from sin, lies in committing sin. The famous place of Augustine, is a
famous corruption of Papists, to establish the strength of free will, clean
contrary to S. Augustines mind, where a point interrogatiue is changed into a
periode: for in ancient written copies, it is red with interrogation. Qui
ergo fecit te sine te, non te iustifica^ sine te? He therefore that made thee
without thee, does he not justify thee without thee? And the whole discourse
of that father, both before and after, requires that reading. For thus he
writes. Si hominem te fecit Deus, and iustum tu te facis, melius aliquid
facis, quam fecit Deus, sed sine te fecit Deus. Non enim adhibuisti aliquem
consensum, vt te faceret Deus. Quo modo consentiebas qui non eras. Qui ergo
fecit te sine te, non te iustificat sine te? Ergo fecit nescientem, iustificat
volentem. tamen ipse iustificat, ne su iustitia tua. If God have made thee a
man, and thou make thy self a just man, thou make some better thing than
God has made: but God made thee without thee. for thou gave no consent, that
God should make thee? how did thou consent which wast not. He therefore
that made thee without thee, does he not justify thee without thee? Therefore
he has made thee not knowing, but he justifies thee being willing, yet it is
he, that does justify thee, that it should not be thy justice.

The meaning of Saint Augustine is, that we have no more free will to be
justified, before we be prevented by the grace of God, than we had will to be
created. For it is Gods grace, that makes us willing to be justified, and
saved, not the strength of man's free will, as he proves at large throughout
the whole Homily. Now to the textes of Scripture, which you cite, I answer,
there is not one, that proves any strength or swaye of man's free will, toward
the true goodness, before, of an ungodly man, and enemy of God, he be
reconciled by the grace and mercy of God, and made an obedient child in some
part, willing to do the will of his father. First, those textes of fighting,
and running, prove, that fighting and running is necessary for them, that are
exhorted thereto, but not that fighting or running are in the free will of man,
or that salvation lies in them. Eating and drinking are necessary for the
life of man, yet the life of man lies not in eating and drinking. Where the
Apostle says, the doers of the law shall be justified, he means them that
fulfill the law, and does our Savior Christ, aunswering to the question of
him that asked, what she should do to obtain life, declare, that there is no
way to enter into life by doing, but only by doing of Gods commandments. For
the man that does them shall live by them. But if he were asked which is the
way to eternal life, as he was by Thomas, he will answer, I Ioh. 14.
am the way, the truth, and the life. Those textes therefore declare not, how a
man, that is a transgressor of the law, may be saved, but that to obtain
salvation by works, it is necessary for a man to keep the whole law and
commandments of God, or else he is accursed.

MART. 8. Again, touching continency and the chaste single life you translate
thus: All men can not receive this (...). Marvelous strange translation. De
gra^. and li^. arb. c. 4.
saying. Mat. 19. v. 11. Now you wot well, that our Savior says not, All men
can not, but, all men do not receive it: and that therefore, (as S. Augustine
says) because all will not. But when our Savior afterward says, He that CAN
receive (...).
it, let him receive it: he adds an other Greek word to express that sense.
Whereas by your fond translation he might have said, (...). And again by your
translation, you should translate these his later words thus: He that can or
is able to receive it, let him be able to receive it. For so you translate
(...) before, as though it were all one with (...). Do you not see your
folly, and fashoode, and boldness, to make the reader believe that our
Savior should say, Every man can not live chaste, it is impossible for them,
and therefore no man should vow chastity, because he knows not whether he
can live so or no?

FVLK. 8. The Greek word (...) does signify to be able to hold, or contain,
and so it is used Mar. 2. (...). Which you translate, so that there was no
place, no not at the door. Do you not mean, that the place about the door,
was not able to hold that multitude? Your vulgar Latin is. Ita vt non caperet
neque ad ianuam, in barbarous words, but in sense as I have said before. So
John. 2. the six pottes, when they were empty are said (...), able to
receive every one of them two or three measures. Likewise, John. 22. where the
word is (...), you your selves translate not able to contain. Seeing the
word therefore signifies not only to receive, but also to be able to
receive, it is rightly translated, Matthew. 19. and according to the meaning of
our Savior Christ, all men can not receive this saying, but they to whom it is
given, which he does after evidently confirm, when he adds the participle
(...), he that is able to receive it, let him receive it. Which were vainly
said, if all men were able that would, and if it were given to all that would:
for then he should say, all men do not receive this saying, but they that
will, let them receive it. Where you call Augustine to witness of your
foolish gloss, you do him shameful injury, for he says not all men do
not, because all will not: but these are his words in the place by you quoted:
Non omnes capiunt verbum hoc, sed quibus datum est: quibus enim non est datum,
aut nolunt, aut non implent quod volunt, quibus autem datum est, sic volunt vt
impleant quod volunt. All men receive not this word, but they to whom it is
given, for they to whom it is not given, either they will not, or else they
fulfill not that which they will: but they to whom it is given, do so will,
that they fulfill that which they will. Augustine is plain to the contrary,
that it is not in every man that will, to be continent, but it is the special
gift of God that any both will, and be able to perform it, for which he cites
also the saying of the wise man Sap. 8. which with you is Canonical Scripture.
When I knew that otherwise I could not be continent, except God should give
it, and this same was wisdom to know whose gift it is, I went unto the Lord
and prayed to him. These things considered, our translation is justified, both
according to the word, which signifies so^etime to be able to receive: and
according to the sense, which here must needs require, that it should be so
translated. Wherefore it is impossible for any man to live chaste* except he
have the gift of God, whereof unless a man be certain, he does foolishly,
and presumptuously to vow that, which he knows not, whether he shall be able
to perform.

MART. 9. Again in some of your Bibles (Genesis 4. ^i^. 1^79.
v. 7.) where God says plainly, that Caine should receive according as he did
well or evil, because sin was subject unto him, and he had the rule and
dominion thereof, evidently declaring his free will: you translate it thus, If
thou do well, shalt thou not be accepted? and if thou do not well, sin
lies at the door: and also unto thee HIS desire shall be subject, and thou
shall rule over HIM. By which relatiues falsely put in the masculine gender, you
exclude the true antecedent sin, and refer them to Abel Caines brother. as
though God had said, not that sin should be in his dominion or subject unto
him, but his brother Abel. But that this is most false and absurd, we prove
many ways. First S. Augustine says directly the contrary: Tu dominaberis
illius: nunquid Li. 15. c. 7. de ciuit. Dei.
Fratris? absit. cuius igitur nisi peccati? Thou shalt rule (says he) over
what? over thy brother? Not so. over what Quest. Heb. in Genes.
then but sin? S. Hierome also explicateth this place thus: Because thou
haste free will, I warn thee that sin have not dominion over thee, but thou
over sin. Moreover, the text it self, if nothing else, is sufficient to
convince this absurdity. For where this word, sin, goes immediately before
in the same sentence, and not one word of Abel his brother in that speech of
God to Cain, how is it possible, or what coherence can there be in saying as
you translate, Sin lies at the door, and thou shall have dominion over him,
that is, thy brother? But if we say thus, Sin lies at the door, and thou
shalt have dominion thereof: it has this direct and plain sense, If thou
do ill, sin lies at the door ready to condemn thee, because it is in
thee to over rule it.

FVLK. 9. The relatiues be the masculine gender in the Hebrew tongue, and
therefore referred to Abel, and not to sin, which is of the foeminine gender.
Again, sin has no appetite to Cain, but rather Cain to it, therefore even
as it was said to Eve, thy appetite shall be to thy husband, so it is said
of Abel, his appetite shall be to thee. Saint Augustine follows the corrupt
translation of the Septuaginta, which for appetite read conversion, and
therefore there is the less account to be made of his authority, being also
ignorant in the Hebrew tongue, and not regarding the Greek relative to be
also of the masculine gender. Hierome also in that place, interprets not
appetite, but society, and fantasy, ththat chataoth is the masculine gender,
and not (...)
the foeminine. Whereas it is never read but in the foeminine gender, out of
this place of controversy. But the text it self (you say) is sufficient* to
convince this absurdity, because in this speech of God to Cain, there is no
word of Abel. It is somewhat that you say, if this that Moises reports were
all that God said to Cain, but seeing it is certain, that God at large
discoursed with him, of the cause of his envy against his brother, we may
easily understand in this speech, two arguments to reprove Caines envy, the
one of the person of God, the other of the person of Abel. For God does
reprove his envy by his own justice, and by Abels innocence. Which latter
argument your false translation does utterly suppress. But that a Relative is
referred to an Antecedent, which in the same verse is not expressed, it is no
strange thing, to them that read the scripture. Examples I will give you, Job
26. v. 6. 11. and 12. and cap. 27. v. 9. and 10. yea it is very usual, when
the antecedent may be easily understood, as here, both by the gender, and
also by manner of speech, which being the same that was spoken of Eues
infirmity and subjection to her husband, must needs here have the same sense
of Abel toward Caine his elder brother.

MART. 10. Now if against the coherence of the text, and exposition of the
holy Doctors, and of the whole Church of God* you pretend the Hebrewe grammar
forsooth, as not bearing such construction: not to trouble the common reader
that cannot judge of these things, and yet fully to satisfy every man even of
common understanding, we request here the Adversaries themselves to tell us*
truly according to their knowledge and skill, whether the Hebrewe construction
or point of grammar be (...)
not al one in these words, Sin LIES at the door? and in these, the desire
THEREOF shall be subject to thee, and thou shall rule over IT. If they say (as
they must needs) that the Hebrewe construction or Syntaxis is al one, then will
it follow that the Hebrewe bears the one as well as the other: and therefore
when the self same translation of theirs makes no scruple of Grammar in the
former, but translate as we do, Sin lies at the door: a blind man may see
that in the latter words also, the Hebrew is but a foolish pretense, and that
the true cause of translating them otherwise, proceeds of an heretical
humor, to obscure and deface this so plain and evident Scripture for man's
free will.

FVLK. 10. I have showed before, the cause of the Cap. 1. sect. 28. (...)
change of the gender in the word robets to be, for that by sin is meant
here the punishment of sin. Sanctes Pagninus takes the word sin, for an
oblation for sin. And for the punishment of sin, it is taken, Zach. 14, 19.
The Septuaginta also do plainly refer these relatiues unto Abel, and
therefore they are in the masculine gender, (...), the conversion of him
pertains to thee, and thou shall rule over him.

MART. 11. And as for the Hebrewe grammar in this point, were it not for
troubling the Reader, we could tell the^ that the word, sin, in Hebrew is not
here of the foeminine gender, (as they suppose) but of the masculine. so says
S. Hieror. expressly q. Hebr. in Genes.
upon this place, who had as much knowledge in the Hebrew tongue, as all these
new Doctors. Aben Ezra also the great Rabbine, in his Hebrew commentaries upon
this text, says, it is a mere forgerie and fiction, to refer the masculine
relative otherwise than to the word, sin: which, though elsewhere it be the
feminine gender, yet here it is a masculine, according to that Quinquarboreu^*
rule of the Grammarians, that the doubtful gender must be discerned by the
verb, adjective, pronoune, or participle, joined with the same: as the said
Hebrew Doctor does in the word, paradise, Genesis 2. which there by the pronounes
he pronounces to be a feminine, though elsewhere a masculine. Lastly, if the
word sin, were here, and always only a feminine, and never a masculine: yet
they have little skill in the Hebrew tongue, that think it strange to match
masculines and feminines together in very good and grammatical construction.
Whereof they may see a whole chapter in Sanctes Pagninus with this title,
Foeminea masculeis iuncta. that is, Feminines joined with masculines.

FVLK. 11. Not only the Hebrew Grammar, but the same phrase used before, makes
plainly for our translation. That S. Hierome says, the Hebrew is of the
masculine gender, as great an Hebritian as he was, he may not carry the matter
away with his authority, except he bring an instance, where it is of the
masculine gender. The Jewish Rabbis, patrones of free will, as ignorant of the
grace of God, err in this place, as they do in a thousand more, and are
forced to invent strange applications of the word, appetite, to make their
sense probable. How the gender of Hebrew words may be found out, we are not
now to learn, which because you have but lately learned, you think all men
ignorant thereof, but your self. By the chapter of Pagninus, where he shows
that feminines are joined to masculines, you might learn that chataoth is the
feminine gender, although it be joined with a participle of the masculine
ge^der. Who (...)
also might have taught you, the difference of nounes ending in he, praecedente
camets, to be this, that feminines have the accent in the last syllable,
masculines in the last ^ilr^ and milel. (...)
save one, and therefore chataoth in this place, having the accent in the last
syllable, notwithstanding the participle, which is masculine, must needs be of
the feminine gender.

MART. 12. Now for the last refuge, if they will say all this needed not,
because in other their Bibles, it is as we would have it: we tell them, they
must justify and make good all their translations, because the people reads
all, and is abused by all, and al come forth with privilege, printed by the
Queens Printer, etc. If they will not, let them confess the faults, and call
them in, and tell us which translation or translations they will stand unto. In
the mean time they must be content to hear of all indifferently, as there
shall be cause and occasion to touch them.

FVLK. 12. We tell you that we may not justify any fault committed in our
translations, but we have reformed them (if any were espied) in the later.
Nevertheless those faults are not so great, that we need call in all the
Bibles in which is any fault, it is sufficient that we admonish the reader in
our later editions of such faults as are escaped in the former: especially when
the faults, are such about which me^ are not agreed, as in this place you
should rather commend our equity, that suffer such tra^slations to be in the
peoples hands, in which is some color of maintaining your errors against us.
But if you be so rigorous, that a book of Scripture may not be red, in which
there is any fault, I charge you call in your translation of the new Testament,
for therein are shameful faults, and such as you can not defend or excuse,
except it be by the fault of the Printer, whereof yet you have not admonished
the reader. I will give you a taste of some, and let all men judge whether they
be not intolerable faults. For they are no less than detracting and taking
away from the word of God. As 1. Cor. 14. v. 38. where both the Greek and the
Latin is, If they will learn. Your translation is: If they learn any thing.
Likewise Acts 5. v. 4. where both the Greek and Latin is: Festus answered
that Paul is kept at Caesarea: you translate. Festus answered that Paul is
in Caesarea: leaving out the word (kept) as before you left out the word
(will) or (desire) which alters the sense very much. But in a place of
greater moment, and in a matter of some controversy, of Gods particular
preordination, and fore appointment, you leave out a whole clause Act. 10. v.
41. For where it is both in the Greek and in the Latin, that God made the
resurrection of his son manifest: not to all the people, but to the witnesses
chosen before of God, to us which did eat and drink with him, etc. Your
English translation has no more but thus: Not to all the people, but to us,
who did eat and drink with him, etc. Leaving clean out that which is in your
Latin text, Testibus praeordinatis a Deo. Also in the Epistle to the Hebrews
cap. 7. v. 28. where both the Greek and your vulgar Latin has. The law
appoints Priests, men that have infirmity, your translation is, the law
appoints Priests them that have infirmity, leaving out Homines, a word very
material in this place* to observe the oppositio^ between the Priesthood of
me^ and the Priesthood of the son of God. These faults in the new Testament
being some of them which I by no diligent reading have observed, now you be
admonished of them, we shall see whether you will call in your translation, or
command your disciples to burn their books: If you will not, I pray you be
good master to us, and let our Bibles go abroad still, for any faults we have
our selves amended, and admonished all diligent Readers thereof by our later
translations. And because you crack so much of the exposition of the Doctors
and of the whole Church of God against us: I must let the Reader understand
that the whole Greek Church which for the most part knew none other text
but the Septuaginta, must needs expound the place of Abel as we do, because
the Greek text is manifestly in the Masculine gender. And so does Chrysostom
in Genesis Hom. 18. expound the place in these words.

Ne putes inquit licet tuum auersatus sim sacrificium ob prauam me^tem,
fratrisque oblationem acceptam habuerim ob sanam intentionem, quod ideo primatu
te destituam, and primogeniturae dignitatem a te auferam. Nam licet honor ego
illum prosecutus fuerim, acceptaque fuerint illius dona, etc. Think not
(says he) that although I have refused thy sacrifice, for thy naughty mind,
and have received thy brothers oblation, for his good and sound meaning, that
therefore I will deprive thee of the primacie, and take away from thee, the
dignity of the birthright. For although I have vouchsafed him of honor, and
that his gifts have been received, yet unto thee belongs his conversion, and
thou shall rule over him. And this I permit after thy sin, that thou may
enjoy the privileges of thy birthright, and I command him to be under thy
power and dominion. You were best now to rail upon Chrysostom and charge him
with heresy, and schismatic exposition, contrary to the holy Doctors, and
the whole Church of God, against freewill of man. Which because it is your
quarrel, you have S. Ambrose also your enemy, De Caine and Abel, lib. 2. cap.
7. Who although as he read it in Latin, did think it must be referred to
him, and not to his brother, yet he expounds it not of the strength of free
will, but charge Came to be author of his own error, Culpae ipsius ad ^e
conuersio est. The conversion of the fault it self is unto thee. For his
brother is not added to him, but error is ascribed, whereof he him self is
author to him self. The crime (says he) will return upon thee, which began
of thee. Thou have not whereby to accuse necessity more than thine own mind.
The wickedness is retorted back upon thee, thou art Prince of it. He says
well, thou art Prince of it, for impiety is the mother of sins, etc You see
therefore, that if you could obtain that these relatiues were referred to him,
yet your free will were not by and by to be builded upon the place, and that
all be not heretics, which draw that text to an other exposition, than
stands with your good liking.

MART. 13. Again they translate in some of their Bibles No. Test 1580.
against free will, thus, Christ, when we were yet OF NO STRENGTH, died for the
ungodly, Romans 5. v. 6. The (...)
Apostles word does not signify that we had nostrength, but that we were
weak, seeble, infirm. Man was wounded in free will, by the sin of Adam (as
he that in the Gospel went down from Luc. 10.
Jerusalem to Jericho, which is a parable of this thing) he was not slain
altogether. But I stand not here, or in any place to dispute the controversy,
that is done else where. This only I say, because* they falsely hold, that
free will was altogether lost VVhitakers, page 18.
by Adams sin, therefore they translate accordingly, When we had no strength.
But the Greek word is well known, both in profane authors, and
Ecclesiastical, and specially in the new Testament it self, throughout, to
signify nothing else, but, weak, feeble, sick, infirm. Look me through the
new Testament, Multi inter vos infirmi sunt, etc. 1. Cor. 11 v. 30. Cum
infirmor, tu^ petens sum. 2. Cor 12. v. 10. and alibi.
wheresoever infirmity, feebleness, languishing, and the like are spoken of,
there is found this Greek word to express it. What Grecian knows not (be
he but simply acquainted with phrases, and nature of words.) what (...), do
signify. When the Apostle says, Quis infirmatur, and ego non vror? Who is
weak and infirm, 2. Cor. 11. 29.
and I am not much grieved? shall we translate, who is of no strength, etc. or
let them give us an instance, where it is certain that this word must needs
signify, of no strength. (...) and a priuatiuum. (...). ^exicon magnum
Basileae. (...).
Will they pretend the etymology of the word? a ridiculous and absurd evasion.
we ask them of (...), a word of the very same signification, which being
compounded in like manner as the other, what does it signify? any thing else but
infirmity and feeblenes? Yea it is so far from signifying, no strength, that
the greatest Grecians say, it is not spoken properly of him that for weakness
keeps his bed, which is (...), but of him that is il disposed, and
distempered in body. Yet the etymology is all one with that word which these
men will have to signify him that has no strength. And if they will needs
urge the etymology, we tell them, that (...) and (...), signify, robur, that
is, great strength, such as is in the strongest and stoutest champions. and so
the etymology may take place, to signify a man of no great strength, not, of
no strength. But M. Whitaker puts us in good Page 209.
hope, they will not stand upon etymologies.

FVLK. 13. This cavil is fully answered, cap. 1. sect. 26. therefore I wili
not spend many words here about it. The word (...), we know signifies
weak, that is of small strength, and sometimes so weak, that there is no
strength. As Gal. 4. where Saint Paul, calls the ceremonies of Moses law,
now exspired, the weak and beggarly elements, that is void of all strength
and riches. Likewise the Apostle to the Hebrews, cap. 7. says, the
commundement of the Aaronicall priesthood is abolished, (...), because it was
weak and unprofitable without Christ, as unprofitable is void of profit, so is
weak void of strength. S. Paul, 1. Cor. 15. says, our dead body is sowed in
weakness: Is there any strength of a dead body? Moreover Romans 8. that which was
impossible by the law, (...), by means it was weak, is not that void of
strength to save us, which has no possibility to do any thing? These
instances may serve to prove, that (...) may signify that which is so weak,
that it has no strength. Upon the etymology alone we stand not, But where you
say, that man was wounded in free will, by the sin of Adam, not slain
altogether, (grounding your assertion upon a fond and false allegory of him
that fell among thieves, which is no parable of a man in this case, but of man
in necessity to be helped by right of neighborhood) I pray you, how came
man to be dead altogether in sins? Ephesians. 2. Col. 2. and in many other places
of the Scripture. Beside, is there any freedom of will to godliness, remaining in
them that are altogether dead in sin? But we are not now to handle
controversies, but translations, as you do well admonish us.

MART. 14. When they have bereaved and spoiled a man of his free will, and left
him without all strength, they go so Beza in annot: Romans 2. 27.
far in this point, that* they say, the regenerate them selves have not free
will and ability, no not by and with the grace of God, to keep the
commandments. To this purpose they translate, (1. Io. 5. 3.) thus: His
commau^dements are not grievous, Mandata eius grauia non sunt. (...).
rather than thus, His commau^dements are not heavy, for in saying, they are
not heavy, it would follow, they might be kept and observed: but in saying,
they are not grievous, that may be true, were they never so heavy or
impossible, through patience. As when a man can not do as he would, yet it
grieueth him not, being pacient and wise, because he is content to do as he
can, and is able. Therefore do they choose to translate, that the
commandments are not grievous, where the Apostle says rather, they are not
heavy. much more agreeably to our (...).
Saviors words, My burden is light! and to the words of God by Moses, Deuteronomy.
30. This commandment which I command thee this day, is not above thee (that
is, beyond thy reach) but the word is very near thee, in thy mouth, and in
thy heart, that thou may do it: and to the common signification of the
Greekeword, which is, heavy. Beza would say somewhat in his commentary, how
the commandments are heavy or light, but his conclusion is against free will,
and that there can be no perfection in this life, in^cying against them that
would prove it out of this place: which is as much to say (but he is ashamed
to speak plainly) that we can not keep the commandments: which the holy
Doctors have long since condemned and abhorred, as most absurd, that God should
command that, under pain of damnation, which is impossible to be done.

FVLK. 14. Seeing our English word grievous, comes of the Latin word grave,
which is not only weighty, but also troublesome, It better answers both the
Greek and the Latin, than heavy, which is properly that which is of great
weight, and the same word being both in Greek and Latin, 2. Cor. 10. you
your selves (...).
translate sore: his epistles are sore and vehement: but in effect there is no
great difference. We acknowledge that his commaundeme^ts are not heavy to him
that is borne of God, which ouercometh the world by faith, otherwise the yoke
of the law, as the Apostle confesses, is such a burden, as neither we, nor
our fathers were able to bear, but believe to be saved by the grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who having taken away the curse of the law, and satisfied
for our transgressions of the law, has also given us grace to love the law,
and commandments of God, and in some weak measure to observe them. So that
the curse being taken away, our transgressions answered in Christ, and our
hearts framed by his grace, to love his commandments, and some strength given
us to keep them, they are not heavy, they are not burdenous, or grievous. That
which God speaks, Deuteronomy. 30. is of the knowledge of the law, which was
plainly revealed, and not of the strength that men have to keep it, and
therefore is by the Apostle referred unto faith, for the observation thereof,
Romans 10. for by faith in Christ, which has fulfilled the law for us, we are
accounted to have fulfilled it in him. Beza speaks plainly enough, if you
had grace to understand him, and therefore is nothing ashamed to say, that we
can not keep the commandments of God, not only without the grace of God,
but neither having the grace of God in such measure, as God gives it to no man
but that he sins. Otherwise, what grace God is able to give, we doubt not,
but what he does, and will give to any man in this life we speak. That God
should command under pain of damnation, that which is impossible to be done,
is no absurdity: seeing for them whom God will have to be saved, he provided an
other way of their salvation, than by keeping the law, namely the redemption
of Christ. As for the reprobate void of Gods grace, say you (if you dare) that
they are able to keep the law without grace, or without grace have so much as
any will to desire to have grace.

MART. 15. Thus having taken away free will to do good, and possibility to
keep the commandments, and all merit or valor and efficacy of good
works, their next conclusion is, that we have no true justice or
righteousness in us, but an imputative justice, that is, Christ's justice
imputed to us, be we never so foul and filthy in our souls, so that we
believe only, and by faith apprehend Christ's justice. For this purpose they
corrupt the Scriptures in their English Bibles, thus.

FVLK. 15. The justice whereby we are accounted just in the sight of God, is
not inherent in us, but in Christ, which is the Lord our righteousness.
Ierem. 23. Not withstanding it is the only true justice, and we are truly
just by it. And yet we are not void of the spirit of sanctification, which
is a fruit, and consequent of justification, by which we have grace to
withstand sin, and to work righteousness, not whereby we should be made
righteous before God, but whereby we are declared to be righteous in part,
until the body of sin being abolished, we shall be wholly renewed according
to the image of God.

CHAP. XI.
Heretical translation for IMPVTATIVE JUSTICE, against true inherent justice.

Martin.
ONE place might suffice, in steed of many, 1
where Beza does protest, that his adding or alteration of the text, is,
specially against the execrable error of inherent Annot, in Romans 5. 18.
justice, which (he says) is to be avoided as nothing more. His false
translation, thu^ our English Bezites and Caluinists follow in their Bibles.
Likewise then as by the offense of one* Romans 5.
the fault came on all men to condemnation: so by the justifying of one, the
benefit abounded, toward all men to the justification of life. Where there
are added to the text of the Apostle, six words: and the same so wilfully and
voluntarily, that by the three first, they make the Apostle say, sin came on
all men by Adam, and they were made sinners in deed: by the three later, they
make him say, not that justice or righteousness came likewise on all men by
Christ, to make them just in deed, but that the benefit of Christ's justice
abounded toward them, as being imputed forsooth unto them. Whereas, if they
would needs add to the text (which yet is intolerable, so much, and in
so doubtful a case) they should at the least have made the case equal, as
the Apostle him self teaches them to do, in the very next sentence, saying
thus, For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the
obedience of one shall many also be made righteous. So they translate, rather
than, be made just. For they are the lothest men in the world to say that we
are made just, for fear of justice inherent in us, though the Scripture be
never so plain. As here we see the Apostle makes the case like, that we are
made just by Christ, as we were made sinners by Adam.

Fulke.
THis one place is delivered from your 1
vain cauillation, Cap. 1. Sect. 23. when the sentence is ecclipticall or
defective, they that will translate to have it understood, must needs supply
the words that are wanting. And where shall they find what words are
lacking, but in the same place, and in the treaty of the same matter? It
appears you had rather the text had no sense, than that it might seem to
make against your blasphemy of justice inherent. As for that fond quarrel of
yours, that they be not just in deed, to whom the justice of Christ (which
you like an helhound do scorn at) is imputed, deserves no answer. For who
is such a block, to say or think, that those whom God does justify, are not
made just in deed? Was not Abraham just in deed, when God imputed his faith
unto justice? Is not he made rich in deed, which is made rich by an other
man's gift? Christ is given unto us of God to be justice, wisdom,
sanctification, and in him we are just, wise, and holy, not in our own
righteousness, wisdom, or holiness. As for adding to the text, God knows
how we abhor it, but adding of words which do explicate the sense of the
holyghost, is no addition forbidden, for then all preaching were accursed,
which is, or ought to be nothing else, but an explaining and setti^g forth of
the word of God, in more words, the matter whereof (though in fewerwords) is
contained in the scripture. And if we speak of adding of words in
translation, have I not showed before, that you have added many? some in deed
upon necessary cause, and some without necessity. What needed you to say for
Poeniterent, they had done penance, Luc. 10. for In omnibus bonis, in all his
goods, Genesis 6. for separamini, separate your selves, 2 Cor. 6. etc. To say we
are justified, and to say we are made just, is all one: and therefore I
marvel why you think us loath to say the one, rather than the other. Is any
man so senseless to think we can say, a man is made righteous, and dare not
say he is made just. I tell you plainly, we defy the heresy of
righteousness inherent, as much as of justice inherent. We are just, we are
righteous in the sight of God, not by the justice or righteousness of our
works: but by the justice or righteousness of Christ imputed to us through
faith. And we are made just by Christ, as we were made sinners by Adam* in
some respect, but not in every respect, for the Apostle makes a broad
difference between the transgression and the benefit Romans 5. v. 15. and other
differences there be, which none, but a Pelagian, will deny. Nay Pelagius will
not say, that we are just by Christ according to propagation: but according to
faith.

MART. 2. And it is a world to see, how Beza shifteth from one signification
of the word justified, or, made just, to an other. Sometime to be justified, is
to be pronounced qui^^e from (...). absolui. (...). absoluitur.
all sin, or declared just before Gods indgement seat: and so ^e ^ra^slateth
it in the text Act. 13. v. 39. and as though his guilty conscience were afraid
of a blow, he says he flees not the term of justifying or justification,
because he uses it in other places. He does so in deed, but the^ his
co^mentarie supplieth the ^urne: as To. 2. v 13. Not yt hearers of ye law are
RIGHTEOUS before God (so they delight to translate, rather than, JUST before
God) but the doers of the Law shall be Ius^i pronuntiabu^^^^.
IVSTIFIED, that is (says Beza) shall be pronounced just. The Apostle must
needs say by the coherence and consequence of his words, no^ the hearers are
just, but the do^rs shall be just or justified. Beza will in no case have it
so, but either in text or co^me^tarie make the Apostle say as him self
imagines. Yet in an Annot. To. 3. v 20.
other place he protests very solemnly, that to be justified, is not to be
pronounced or accounted just, but rather to be just in deed: and that, he
proves out of S. Paul. To. 5. v. 19. (...).
who makes it all one, to be justified, and, to be made just. And again by
this reason, that it should be manifestly repugnant to Gods justice, to
account him for just, that is not just, and therefore that man in deed is
made just. Thus Beza. Would you not think, he were come to be of our
opinion? but he reuolteth again, and interpreateth all these goodly words in
his old sense, saying, Not that any quality is inwardly Non quasi nobis
indatur qualitas.
given unto us, of which we are named just: but because the justice of Christ
is imputed to us by faith freely. By faith then at the least we are truly
justified. Not so neither, but faith (says he) is an instrument wherewith
Annot. in To. 4. v. 2*
we apprehende Christ our justice. So that we have no more justice in us, than
we have glory: for glory also we apprehend by faith.

FVLK. 2. Al learned me^ I hope do see, that you have no regard, how vainly
you cauil, so you may seem to the ignorant to say something against the^ that
be godly and learned. Act. 13. v. 39. Beza translateth (...), absolui, that is
(says he) to be declared just, or absolved. and gives this reason, why he
uses not the word iustifica^i in that place which he uses elsewhere. Ne quis
illud ab omnibus, perinde acciperet ac si casus esset modi, aut instrumenti,
per quod iusti^icemur, id est, iustifiamus, ac pronunciemur, aut pro justice
habeamur, hoc quidem loco malui absolue^di verbum vsurpare. vt magis perspicua
esset oration: Least any man should take this word of the text ab omnibus, as
though it were the case of the mean, or instrument, by which we are justified,
that is, made and pronounced just, or accounted for just. In this place I
chose rather to use the word of absoluing, that the sentence might be more
clear. The Latin ab omnibus, may signify by all things* or from all things.
Therefore, least any manne should mistake the Apostle, as though he said
we are justified by all those things, where he means we are justified
from all things, Beza in this place uses the word of absoluing or
acquitting, in the same sense that he does justifying in other places, where
he speaks of the same matter: and says as plainly as a man can speak,
that to be justified, and to be made just, or pronounced, or accounted just
before God is all one. Yet our Momus finds fault with him, for expounding,
to be justified, Romans 2. v. 13. to be pronounced just, as though God will
pronounce any man just, which is not just indeed. But Beza (he says)
elsewhere, protests that to be justified, is not to be pronounced or
accounted just, but rather to be just indeed. If Martin had not beelyed
Beza, we should have had Bezaes words set down, both in Latin and
English. But in truth Beza has no such words: yet in sense he has thus
much, that to be justified before God, is to be just indeed, and not to be
only pronounced or accounted just, when he is not so in deed. But that we
are made truly just indeed, by the justice of Christ, which is imputed unto
us freely by faith. And as for that new life or justice which is called
inhere^t in us, it is not the cause but the witness of that justice, by
imputation of which, we are saved, following him that is justified, and not
going before justification: and faith indede, is the instrument by which we
apprehend Christ our justice. Neither does Beza say, that we are not truly
justified by faith: but that faith is not the principal efficient cause, which
is the mercy of God, but the isntrumental cause, by which we take hold of
the mercy of God in Christ. In all this, Beza has said nothing contrary to
himself, nor to the truth. And it is no absurdity to say, that the justice of
Christ, by which we are justified is no more inherent in us, than his glory.
And yet both assured unto us by faith. As for that justice, which is an effect
of Gods sanctifying spirit, and a fruit of our justification before God, by
which also we are justified, or declared just before men, as S. James
teaches, is inhere^t in us: as also the first fruits of glorification, by that
peace of conscience, and joy that we have in God, being reconciled to us by
Christ.

MART. 3. For this purpose both he and the English Pro iustitia. (...).
Bibles translate thus: Abraham believed God, and it was reputed to him FOR
JUSTICE, Romans 4. v. 3. and 9. Where he interpreateth, for justice, to be
nothing else but. in Vice and loco.
the steed and place of justice: so also taking away true inherent justice
even from Abraham himself. But to admit their translation (which
notwithstanding in their sense is most false) must it needs signify, not true
inherent justice, because the Scripture says, it was reputed for justice? Do
such speeches import, that it is not so in deed, but is only reputed so? Then
if we say, This shall be reputed to thee for sin: for a great benefit, and
so forth: it should signify, it is no sin indeed, nor great benefit. But
let them call to mind, Reputabitur tibi in peccatum.
that the Scripture uses to speak of sin and of justice alike. It shall be
sin in thee, or, unto thee, as they translate Bibl. (...)
1577: or as S. Hierome translateth, It shall be reputed to thee for sin,
Deuteronomy. c. 23. and 24. and (as themselves translate) it shall be righteousness
unto thee, before the Lord thy God. And again, Deuteronomy. c. 6. This shall be our
righteousness before the Lord our God, if we keep all the commandments, as he
has commanded us. If then justice only be reputed* sin also is only
reputed: if sin be in v^ indeed, justice is in us indeed.

FVLK. 3. Our translation takes not from Abraham true justice, nor yet justice
inherent, but declares that he was not justified before God by works, that is
by justice inherent, but by faith which apprehends the justice of Christ,
which is altogyther without us. And therefore you cauil in your old rotten
quarrel, when you go about to make reputed to be contrary to truth, or
indeed. Faith was reputed by God to Abraham for justice indeed, but not as
justice inherent. And Abraham was truly justified by faith as by an
isntrumental cause, not that faith was the justice by which he was just in the
sight of God, excluding all other causes: but there was nothing in Abraham but
faith which God accounted for justice. But Abraham's faith embraced the mercy
of God in the promised seed, in which as well he, as all the tribes of the
earth should be blessed. The places of scripture that you cite speaking of
sin and justice alike, be not contrary to the imputation of justice unto them
in which it is not inherent. For in neither of both places the holy ghost uses
the word of imputation, howsoever S. Hierome translateth it, but the verb
substantive. And the meaning is plain. It shall be sin in thee: for sin is
indeed inherent, as perfect justice also should be if we could observe
all the commandments of God as Moses says. Deuteronomy. 6. and we should be
justified thereby. But by one just act whereof Moses speaks, Deuteronomy. 24.
though it proceed of justice that is in us, the scripture never says that
we shall be justified. To conclude, we confess, that both sin and justice
are in the children of God, but not that justice, whereby they are reputed
just or justified, or made just before God, but an effect or fruit thereof.

MART. 4. Again the Greek fathers make it plain, Oecum in caten. Phot^ni*
(...).
that to be reputed unto justice, is to be true justice in deed, interpreating
S. Paul's word in Greek, thus: Abraham obtained justice, Abraham was
justified. For that is, say they: It was reputed him to justice. Does not S.
James say the like (cap. 2. verse. 23.) testifying, that in that Abraham was
justified by faith and works, the Scripture was fulfilled, that says, it was
reputed him to justice? Genesis Cap. 15. verse. 6. In which words of Genesis,
where these words were first written by Moses, in the Hebrewe, there is not,
for justice, or in steed of justice, (which Beza pleads upon, by the
Hebrewe phrase) but thus, He (God) reputed it unto (...)
him, justice, though here also the English Bibles add, for. Which
precisely translating the Hebrewe they should not do, specially when they
mean it was so counted or reputed for justice, that it was not justice indeed.

FVLK. 4. I know not against whom you fight, but against your own shadow.
For we say, that to be justified, and be reputed just, and to obtain justice,
is all one in this case. But where S. James says, that Abraham was justified
by works, he means, that he was declared just before men, even as he says,
show me thy faith by thy works, for Abraham was not justified by a dead
faith, but by a working faith: and yet he was not justified before God by
works, but the Scripture was fulfilled which said, Abraham believed God, and it
was reputed to him for justice, which is as S. Paul expounds it, Abraham was
justified before God, by faith, and not by works, But in Genesis 15. v. 6. there
is not the preposition (for) or (in steed) but simply justice; therefore it
should be translated he reputed it to him justice. And will you then control
both the Apostles, Paul, and James, for adding the preposition (...); which
signifies unto, or for? Or will not common sense enforce the same
understanding that both the Apostles do give it? He reputed it to him as
justice, or for justice. Must not such particles in translation be always
expressed, to make the sense plain, which in English without the particle,
has no sense or understanding? To translate precisely out of the Hebrew, is
not to observe the number of words, but the perfect sense and meaning of them,
in fewer or more words, as the phrase of our tongue will serve to be
understood: or else 2. Cor. 8. qui multum, why do you translate, he that had
much? and, qui modicum non minorauit, he that had little wanted not? you should
have said which much, and which little not lessed, if you would have given word
for word, and not added any word for explication. Again, 2. Cor. 1. Supra
virtutem, above our power, why add you (our) which is not in the text? and in
deed not necessary to be added in the translation? Again, 1. Cor. 13.
Euacuaui quae erant paruuli, I did away the things that belonged to a little
one. Here for four Latin words you have given ten or eleven English
words, which no reasonable man can greatly mislike, if you were not such a
quarreller at other men's doing, without all cause, or wise color, but only to
bleare the eyes of the ignorant.

MART. 5. But as for either the Hebrew or Greek word, that is here used, to
repute or account, they are then used, when it must needs signify, that the
thing is so in deed, and not only so reputed. as Psalm. 118. octonario SAMEC. I
have reputed or accounted all the sinners of the earth, preuaricators or
transgressors. praeuaricantes reputaui. So did the (...). 2. Cor. 4.
Septuaginta take the Hebrew word, and read it. And S. Paul, So let a man
repute or account us as the Ministers of Christ. Let them go now and say, that
neither they, were sinn^rs in deed, nor these, Christ's ministers in deed,
because they were reputed for such. let them say the children of the promise
were not the seed of Abraham, because the Apostle says, Romans (...).
9. v. 8. they are reputed for the seed. But howsoever it be, the Protestants
will have it so to be taken, at the least in the matter of justification.

FVLK. 5. Silence were the best answer to these tedious repetitions. It were
sufficient once to say among reasonable men. When faith is reputed by God, or
accounted for justice, faith is truly and in deed the isntrumental cause of
justification, or apprehending the justice of Christ, by which we are accounted
and made just in the sight of God. It is therefore a most ridiculous cavil of
the difference between reputing just, and being just in deed. For God when he
justifies the ungodly, does both repute him, and make him just in deed, by
the justice of Christ, of his own mere mercy, and not of the man's merits, or
by justice inherent. For what justice can be in an v^godly man? and such is
every one of us, whom God does justify, and then give us his holy spirit, to
sanctify us in newness of life, to set forth his glory in our holy and
blameless conversation.

MART. 6. Again, where Saint Paul says, 2. Cor. 5. That we might be made
the justice of God in him: they in their first translations, intolerably
corrupt i^ thus: That we by his means should be that righteousness, Bib.
1562. (...).
which BEFORE GOD IS ALLOWED. Who ^aught them to translate so dissolutely,
Iustitia Dei, the righteousness which before God is allowed? did not their
error and heresy, which is, that God reputeth and accounts us for just,
though we be in deed most foul sinners, and that our justice being none at
all in us, yet is allowed and accepted before him for justice and
righteousness?

FVLK. 6. There is no text in all the Bible more clear against justification
by justice inhae^ent. than this 2. Corinthians. 5. wherein not altogether
causeless you reprove our first interpreters to translate dissolutely. There
it is certain they had no such purpose as you ascribe unto them. For their
translation does rather obscure than set out our justification by the
justice which is not in us, but in Christ. The text is therefore plain: him
that knew no sin, he made sin for us, that we might become the justice of
God in him, that is in Christ, and not in our sel^es. For though we be in deed
most foul sinners, and all our justice be (as the Prophet says) as a
menstruous cloth: yet in Christ he washes and cleanses us from our sins,
and reputing his justice as ours, he makes us truly just before him, not
having our own justice which is of the law, but the justice which is by
faith of Jesus Christ, the justice Philip. 3.
which is of God through faith. Where you charge us to affirm, that our
justice being none at all in us, yet is allowed and accepted before him for
justice and righteousness, it is no assertion of ours, but a dogged slander
of your own.

MART. 7. Again to this purpose: they make S. Paul 1. Ephesians. v. 6.
say that God has made us accepted, or freely accepted in his beloved son
as they make the Angel in S. Luke say to our Lady, Hail freely beloved: to
take away all grace inherent (...).
and resident in the B. Virgin, or in us: whereas the Apostles word
signifies, that we are truly made gracious or grateful and acceptable, that
is to say, that our soul is inwardly endued and beautified with grace and the
virtues proceeding thereof, and consequently is holy in deed before the sight
of God, and not only so accepted or reputed, as they imagine. If they know not
the true signification of the Greek word, and if their heresy will suffer
them to learn it, let them hear S. Chrysostom not only a famous Greek
Doctor, but an excellent interpreter of all S. Paul's epistles: who in this
place puts such force and significancie in the Greek word, that he says
thus by an allusion and distinction of words: He said not, WHICH (...).
HE FREELY GAVE US, but, WHEREIN HE MADE US GRATEFVL, that is, not only
delivered us from sin, but also made us beloved and amiable, made our soul
beautiful, grateful, such as the Angels and Archangels are desirous to see, and
such as himself is in love withal, according to that in the Psalm, THE KING
SHALL DESIRE, or BE IN LOVE WITH THY BEAVTIE. So S. Chrysostom, and after him
Theophylacte, who with many more words and similitudes explicate this Greek
word, and this making of the soul gracious and beautiful inwardly, truly,
and inherently.

FVLK. 7. We make S. Paul say no otherwise, than he says in deed: (...),
he has made us accepted, or he has freely accepted us in his beloved son.
And so we truly say, the blessed Virgin Mary was freely accepted, or freely
beloved. But this takes not away the gracious gifts of God, which the blessed
Virgin in most plentiful manner was, and we in some measure are endued by his
grace and favor, which also God loves in us, because they be his gifts, and
because he loves us freely in his beloved son, whom always you forget, when
you speak of justice, or acceptance before God. For that being sanctified by
his spirit, we are holy indeed, though not perfectly, as sanctification is
begun, and not consummate in this life: for if it were, we should be void of
sin, and death, we do thankfully acknowledge, yet those virtues wherewith
our soul is inwardly endued and beautified, are not the cause that justifies
us, or makes us acceptable in Gods sight: but only his mercy in Jesus
Christ, for whose sake also, he accepts this imperfect holiness and
righteousness, which is in us by his grace and gift, rewarding the same for his
sake also with everlasting glory. And nothing else does Chrysostom say, or
mean in the place by you cited, about whom you make so many words, that you
might be thought, by giving him his due praise, to have him as it were bound to
you, to maintain your unrighteous cause. But Chrysostom cares not for your
commendation, and that which he says, makes nothing for justice inherent, by
which we should be justified: for he says not so much, as that our soul is
made amiable and beautiful by virtues and good qualities infused by his grace,
much less that for such qualities inherent in us, GOD should justify us, but
he haeth made us acceptable in Christ, amiable, and beautiful, and lovely to
the Angels: some effect of which grace, also appears in our life and
conversation, to the praise of God, and good example of men.

MART. 8. And I would gladly know of the adversaries, if the like Greek
words be not of that form and nature, to signify so much as to make worthy,
to make meet: and whether (...).
he whom God makes worthy, or meet, or grateful, just, and holy, be not so
in very deed, but by acceptance only* if not in deed, then God makes him
no better than he was before, but only accepts him for better: if he be so in
deed, then the Apostles word signifies not, to make accepted, but to make
such an one as being by Gods grace sanctified and justified, is worthy to be
accepied, for such purity, virtue, and justice, as is in him.

FVLK. 8. I have told you before, that (...), signifies not to make worthy,
but to account worthy, for many a man may desire (using this verb) to be
accounted worthy of him, which can not make him worthy, but in his own
judgment and account. But where you demand further, whether he whom God
makes meet, worthy, grateful, just, holy, be not so in deed, but by
acceptance only: I answer, those whom he accepts for worthy, meet, just,
holy, grateful, are so in deed: but then it is further to be known, whether
they be such in them selves, or in Christ. We say they are not such in them
selves, but in Christ. Then are they made nothing better (say you) in them
selves. Yes verily, as soon as they are accepted to be Gods children, and the
justice of Christ is imputed to the^ through faith, they receive the spirit of
adoption, which renews them in the inward man, and begins in them
holiness, and justice, purity, virtue: but because all these qualities are
imperfect, they are not worthy in Gods justice to be accepted for them, but the
cause of their acceptance, is still the mercy of God in Christ, in whom both
they, and their imperfect good qualities are accepted to reward.

MART. 9. Again, for this purpose (Dan. 6. 22.) they (...)
will not translate according to Chaldee, Greek, and Latin, Justice was
found in me. but they alter it thus, My justice was found out. and other of
them, My vnguiltinesse was found out. to draw it from inherent justice, which
was in Daniel.

FVLK. 9. I can but wonder at your impudence and malice, which say so
confidently, that for this purpose they translated thus: Would any man by the
justice, or innocence that was in Daniel, or in any just man, fear lest any
thing should be detracted from the justice of Christ, whereby Daniel, and all
just men, are justified in Gods sight? Well, let that purpose rest in Gods
judgment, as Daniels justice did, when he was shamefully slaundered. But what
is the fault of the translation? According to the Chaldee, Greek, and Latin,
it should be, Justice is found in me. For Greek and Latin, we will not
contend, because we translate not Daniel out of Greek, and Latin, but out of
the Chaldee. But in good sadness, are you so deeply seen in Chaldee, that you
will avouch the proper signification of (...) to be in me. A hundredth boys in
Cambridge know, that it signifies as well in Chaldee, as in Hebrew, to me,
rather than in me. But most properly have our translators expressed the phrase
in English, saying, my justice, or vnguiltines was found out: for of a virtue
inherent, Daniel speaks otherwise, Dan. 2. v. 30. to the king (...) (...)
not by wisdom, which is in me. So that here your quarrel bewrays more
spite than wit, more malice than learning.

MART. 10. Again, it must needs be a spot of the same infection, that they
translate thus, As David DESCRIBES (...).
the blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputes righteousness. Romans 4. 6. as
though imputed righteousness were the description of blessedness. They know* the
Greek does not signify, to describe. I would once see them precise in
following the Greek, and the Hebrew* if not, we must look to their fingers.

FVLK. 10. It must needs come of an high wit, to have such deep insight into
other men's intents, and purposes. But why I pray you, is not righteousness
imputed by God, etc. and so forth, as Paul says, a description of man's
blessedness. If they had said, defines, where they say, describes, you would
have made much a do. But can you not allow this, that the Prophet says, to
be a description of man's blessedness? howsoever it is, (...) signifies not to
describe, but to speak, to say, to pronounce, and in effect, there is nothing
else meant by the word* describes, here used, but that David pronounces or
sets forth the blessedness of man in such words. You in your translation
say, terms, as David terms, which if you mean it not scornefully, comes
as near a definition, as, describes, the word which we use, and our,
describes, is as near the Greek (...), as your, terms, is to the Latin
dicit. But look to our fingers, and spare not to tell us where you see us go
wide from the Greek or Hebrew, but if you do nothing but trifle and quarrel,
as you have done hitherto, be sure we will be bold to beshrew your fingers* and
hit you on the thumbes now and then also to your discredit.

CHAP. XII.
Heretical translation for SPECIAL FAITH, vain security, and ONLY FAITH.

MARTIN.
AL other means of salvation being thus taken away, their 1.
only and extreme refuge is, Only faith, and the same not the Christian faith
of the articles of the creed, and such like, but a special faith and
confidence, whereby every man must assuredly believe, that himself is the Son
of God, and one of the elect, and praedestinate to salvation. If he be not by
faith as sure of this as of Christ's incarnation, he shall never be saved.

FVLK.
AL other means of salvation being taken away, 1.
and only faith apprehending the mercy of God in the redemption of Jesus
Christ, being left, we have great and sufficient cause, to account our selves
happy, and assured of eternal life, because he that has promised, is
faithful also to perform. But where you say that our only faith, is not the
Christian faith of the articles of the creed, you lie without measure
impudently: for that faith, and none other do we believe, teach, and profess.
And that faith is a special faith and confidence in the mercy of God, whereof
every man that believes, does make a singular confession for himself, saying,
I believe in God, etc. And of all things contained in that profession of faith
(that is, of forgiveness of sins, resurrection of our bodies, and life
everlasting, by belief and trust in God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven
and earth, and in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, conceived, borne,
suffered, crucified, dead, buried, descended into hell; risen again, and
ascended into heaven, and in God the holy Ghost, by whose gracious and mighty
working we are incorporate into the body of Christ, and made members of his
holy Catholic Church, which is the communion of Saints) every Christian man
ought to be as certainly persuaded, as the things are most true, being
inwardly taught by the spirit of truth, that he is the child of God, and
consequently elect, and predestinate unto eternal salvation. But that a man
s^^^l never be saved, except he have such certentie of this faith, as the truth
of Gods promises does deserve, none of us does teach, none of us does think.
For we know our own infirmity, we know the temptation of Satan,
nevertheless we acknowledge in our selves, and so seek to persuade all men,
that these things standing upon the immovable pillars of Gods promises, who
can neither deceive nor be deceived, ought to be most certain unto us, and for
daily confirmation and increase of this faith all those means are of us
diligently to be used, that God for this purpose in his holy Scripture has
appointed.

MART. 2. For this heresy, they force the Greek to express the very word of
assurance and certainty, thus: Let us (...).
draw nighe with a true heart, IN ASSVRANCE OF FAITH. Heb. 10. v. 22. and Beza,
Certa persuasione fidei, Annot. in 1. Luc. v. 1.
that is, with a certain and assured persuasion of faith: interpreting him
self more at large in another place, that he means thereby such a persuasion
and so effectual, as by which we know assuredly without all doubt, that
nothing can separate us from God. Which their heretical meaning makes their
translation the less tolerable, because they neither express the Greek
precisely, nor intend the true sense of the Apostle, they express (...).
not the Greek, which signifies properly the fullness and co^plement of any
thing, and therefore the Apostle joins it sometime with faith, else where
(Hebr. 6. v. 11.) with hope, with knowledge, or ( (...).
Col. 2. v. 2.) understanding, to signify the fulness of all three, as the
vulgar Latin interpreter most sincerely ( (...), Plenissime sciens.
To. 4. v. 21.) always translateth it: and to Timothee, ( (...).
2. Tim. 4.) he uses it to signify the full accomplishment and execution of
his ministry in every point. Where a man may wonder that Beza to maintain
his conceived signification of this word, translateth here also Ministerium
tu^m imple. An. 1577. An. 1562. Ignat. Ep. Smyrn. (...).
accordingly, thus: Ministerij tui plena^ fidem facito: but their more current
Church English Bibles are content to say with the vulgar Latin interpreter,
fulfill thy ministry: or, fulfill thine office to the utmost. And the Greek
fathers do find no other interpretation. Thus, when the Greek signifies
fullness of faith, rather than assurance or certain persuasion, they translate
not the Greek precisely. Again in the sense they err much more, applying the
foresaid words to the certain and assured faith that every man ought to have
(as they say) of his (...).
own salvation. Whereas the Greek fathers expound it of the full and assured
faith that every faithful man must have of al such things in heaven as he
sees not, namely that Christ is ascended thither, etc. adding further and
proving out of the Apostles Chrysostom. Theodor. Theophyl. upon To. 10.
words next following, that the Protestants* only faith is not sufficient, be
it never so special or assured.

FVLK. 2. Having nothing to impugn this clear interpretation of the Greek
word (...), but the imperfect translation of your vulgar Latin interpreter,
who was both an imperfect grecian, and a very barbarous Latinist, you are not
ashamed to say, we force the Greek, to make it signify assurance: which all
men that are but meanly learned in the Greek tongue, may know, that it
signifies assurance, or full and certain persuasio^. Although for the question
in controversy, the fullness of faith will prove the certeintie, as much in a
manner, as the assurance. But that the Greek signifies a full and certain
persuasion, I report me not only to the best Greek Dictionaries of this time,
but also to Budeus, who cites Isocrates out of Trapezuntius for proof, that
it is so used, and also interprets that of S. Paul Romans 14. (...), let every
man be certain of his own mind. But you have a doughty argument, that it is
not only joined with faith, but also with hope, knowledge, and understanding,
as though there could not be a certain persuasion and assurance of hope,
knowledge, and understanding: yea the assurance of hope depends upon the
assurance of faith, and the assurance of faith upon the certain persuasion
of knowledge and understanding. Yea your vulgar interpretor translating (...),
Romans 4. v. 21. Plenissime sciens, knowing most fully, may teach you, that it
signifies more than fullness, for else he should have said being fulfilled.
And better does Beza express the word (...), 2. Tim. 4. than some of our
English interpreters, which say, fulfill thy ministry: whereas the Apostles
meaning is, that he should approve the credit and dignity of his ministry,
unto other men. But the Greek fathers (you say) find none other interpretation
of it, and for proof you cite Ignatius ep. ad Smyr. which although it be not
authentical, yet I see no cause why we may not interpret (...), being
certainly persuaded in faith and love, and (...), in the assurance of faith.
And so is it translated in Bibliotheca sacra Margarini de la Bigne, Plene
instructae in fide and charitate, and cognoui vos absolute perfectos in fule
stabili, fully instructed in faith and charity, and I have known you
absolutely perfect in a steadfast faith. Chrysostom and Theodoret, because you
vouch at large, I know not what you would show out of them. In Theophylact I
find, that he speaks against all hesitation and doubtfulnesse of faith, but
against the certain persuasion thereof never a word. Ne aliquam inducas in
animum tuum haesitationem, neque pendeas animi, dubij quiddam cogitans. Bring
not into thy mind any staggering, neither be incertaine of thy mind, thinking
any doubtful thing. But for the signification of the word (...), S. Basil may
be a sufficient witness, who commonly uses it for assured and certain
persuasion. ^^ (...). 26. Every word and deed must be proved by^^^ testimony
of the holy Scripture, (...), to the full and certain persuasion of the go^^^*
and to the shame of the wicked. Again desin. 80. what is the property of a
faithful man (...), etc. By such assured persuasio^ to be disposed, etc. Eue^
so (...), to the certain persuasio^ of godliness etc. and so in other places.
And you your self confess as much, where you say, the Greek fathers expound
it of the full assured faith etc. which is enough to justify our translation.
Now if the fathers understood this full assured faith only of an historical
faith (as you say) and not of trust and confidence in God, it is an other
controversy. Our translation is not false, although we had a false meaning, if
it be answereable to the words. Neither does Chrysostom speak of an
historical faith only, by certainty whereof we have access unto God: but
also of confidence, which remission of our sins does cause, and that we are
made coheires with Christ, and that we enjoy so great love, neither does he
prove that the Protestants only faith is not sufficient to iustisie. But the
Apostle shows (says he) that not faith alone, but also a virtuous life is
required, and that a man be not guilty to him self of malitiousnes. For these
holy places do not receive those men, with certain assurance, which are not
made such. This judgment of Chrysostom the Protestants do allow of better tha^
the Papists: for we know, that a godly life is necessary in them that believe
to justification, without which they can have no assurance of faith, no nor
faith in deed, but that which is by aequiuocation called faith, such says as
the Devil and the reprobate may have.

MART. 3. Yet do these terms please them exceedingly, in so much that for the
chosen gift of faith, Sap. 3. 14. they (...), ^id^ donum electum. (...), ^^b.
1577. ^^^ 20. 6. ^^ 1^ 14. Hebr. 6. 9.
translate, THE SPECIAL gift of faith: and Romans 8. 38. ^^ni sure, that nothing
can separate us from the love of God. (...) though the Apostle were certain
and assured not only of h(...)wne salvation, but of other men's. For to this
sense they do (...) translate here, whereas in other places out of
controversy they translate the same word as they should do, I am persuaded,
they are persuaded, etc. For who knows not that (...) imports only a
probable persuasion? They will say that I am sure, and I am persuaded, is al
one. Being well meant, they may indeed signify alike, as the vulgar Latin
interpreter does commonly translate it, but in this place of controversy,
whether the Apostle were sure of his salvation or no, which you say he was,
yea without revelation, we say he was not: here why would you translate, I am
sure, and not as in other places, I am persuaded, but in favor of your error,
by insinuating the terms of sure, and assurance, and such like: as elsewhere
you neglect the terms of just and justification. 2. Cor. 4.
In which your secret things of dishonesties and craftiness (as the Apostle
calls it) we cannot always use demonstratio^s to convince you: but yet even
in these things we talk with your conscience, and leave the consideration
thereof to the wise reader.

FVLK. 3. Seeing they account the book of Wisdom to be of no authority to
establish the certainty of doctrine, it is not like they could have any such
respect, as you maliciously surmise. And yet the translation good and true.
For what is the choice gift of faith, but a special gift? Or dare you say,
that faith is not a special gift of God? They say not a special faith, but a
special gift of faith. The other quarrel of the translation of (...), I am
sure, is so brutish, that when you confess the vulgar Latin interpreater
commonly to translate it, Certus sum, and that in the end, you can use no
demonstration to convince us, yet still nevertheless you charge our conscience
with the secreate things of dishonestie. That the Apostle was sure of his own
salvation, by the testimony of Gods spirit which is given to al his children,
we doubt not, and that he was sure of the salvation of all Gods elect, of
which it is impossible, that any should perish. And seeing the same spirit of
adoption is given to all the children of God, which is the earnest of the
heavenly inheritance, we ca^ not affirm without blasphemy against Gods truth,
that any man ought to discredit the promises of God, or the testimony of his
spirit.

MART. 4. You hold also in this kind of contronersie, that a man must assure
himself that his sins be forgiven. but in the book of Eccle. c. 5. v. 5. We
read thus, Of thy sin forgiven, be not without fear. or (as it is in the
Greek) Of forgiveness (...).
and propitiation be not without fear, to heap sin upon sins. Which you
translate falsely, thus: Because thy sin is forgiven thee, be not therefore
without fear. Is that (...), because thy sin is forgiven thee? You know it is
not: but that we should be afraid of the very forgiveness thereof, whether
our sin be forgiven or no, or rather, whether our sin shall be forgiven, or
no, if we heap one sin upon an other. Which seems to be the truest
sense of the place, by the words following* as though he should say, Be not
bold upon forgiveness to heap sin upon sin, as though God will easly forgive, etc.

FVLK. 4. We hold, that a man, when he is truly penitent, ought to assure
himself, that his sins be forgiven him, because God has so promised, in an
hundred places, without injury of whose credit, we cannot doubt of the
performance of his promise. But that which the son of Syrach speaks of
propitiatio^, is meant of the shadowie propitiation by the sacrifices of the
law, which can not assure any man of the forgiveness of his sins by
themselves, much less them that heap sin upon sin, which are never truly
repentant. For unto true repentance is required an hatred of sin, and a
desire, and purpose of amendment. Our translation is (as your vulgar Latin)
not precise to the words of the Greek, but just unto the meaning, for the
words are, concerning propitiation, be not without fear: and your Latin is, De
propitiato peccato, of sin forgiven. And if you will reprove your Latin, as well
as our English, and say, we must be afraid of the very forgiveness, I have told
you, that the forgiveness of God testified by the sacrifices, pertained unto
them that be truly penitent, and not to hypocrites. And where you make it a
doubt, whether sin shall be forgiven, or no, in them that heap one sin upon
an other: we are out of doubt, that sin shall never be forgiven to such, as
so continue without true conversion unto God.

MART. 5. I touched before upon another occasion, how Bib. 1562.
you add to the text, making the Apostle say thus, Ephesians. 3. By whom we have
boldness and entrance with THE CONFIDEHCE WHICH Is by the faith of him, or Bib.
1577. (...).
(as in an other Bible, which is al one) in the confidence by faith of him. The
learned and skilful among you in the Greek tongue, know that this translation is
false for two causes, the one is, because the Greek in that case should be
thus, (...). an other cause is, the point after (...). so that the very simple
and sincere translation is this, we have affiaunce and access with
confidence, by the faith of him. even as elsewhere it is said, we have
confidence, 1. Io. 3.
if our heart reprehend us not: we have confidence by keeping the commandments,
by tribulations and afflictions, and al good Hebr. 10. 2. Cor. 3.
works. hope also gives us great confidence. Against all which, your
translation is prejudicial, limiting and defining our confidence toward God,
to be faith, as though we had no confidence by works, or otherwise.

FVLK. 5. For understanding of the article, I have answered already, and mean
not here to repeat it. The point you miss, in the Bible 1577. is observed in
that book which I have of Richard lugs printing. By whom we have boldness and
entrance in the confidence, by faith of him. But it cannot be, the confidence
(you think) but, confidence: because the article (...) is not put before the
word, that signifies confidence. But al Englishemen know that our English
(the) may be put, and sometime must be put before nounes, without any article
either in Greek or Latin. And in this place, I would not give a rush to
choose, whether it be in or out, for any sense that it changes. What
confidence we have by a good conscience, by suffering tribulation, and by all
good works, it skilleth not for this question, so it be determined, that we
have no confidence in the merits of a good conscience, of suffering, of al
good works that we can do* to have boldness and entrance unto God. But of
merits we have spoken before in their proper place.

MART. 6. For this confidence by faith only, Beza translateth so wilfully and
peruersly, that either you were ashamed to follow him, or you lacked a
commodious English word corresponde^t to his Latin. If I have all faith (says
the Apostle) and have not charity, I am nothing* totam fidem (says Beza) I
had (...). ^. Cor. 13. Annot. in No. Test. 1556.
rather translate, than, omnem fidem, because the Apostle means not al kind
of faith. to wit the faith that justifies: but he means, that if a man
have the faith of Christ's omnipotency, or of any other article of the Creed,
or of al wholly and entirely and perfectly, that is nothing without charity.
This is Bezaes tota fides, whole faith, thinking by this translation to exempt
from the Apostles words, their special justifying faith, and wrestling to that
purpose in his annotatio^s against Pighius and other Catholic Doctors.
Whereas every man of small skill may see, that the Apostle names al faith, as he
does al knowledge and al mysteries: comprehending al sorts of the one and of
the other: al kind of knowledge, al kind of mysteries, al faith whatsoever,
Christian, Catholic, historical, or special, which two later, are Heretical
terms newely devised.

FVLK. 6. When your spightfull and dogged malice cannot reprove our English
translation, then we must aunsweare for Bezaes Latin, who has sufficiently
answered for himself, to them that understand, and list to read him. In
the place mentioned by you, he chooses to say totam fidem, rather than omnem,
because it apeareth by the effects, that he speaks of faith, as it was a
special gift of working of miracles, of which effects he names one, removing
of mountains. And that (...) is so taken, namely for the perfection of one
kind, not the universal comprehension of al kinds, he brings you example,
To. 7. v. 8. and elsewhere oftentimes. But if it should be taken (as you say)
all knowledge, and all mysteries is generally to be taken, yet he tells you,
this separation is but upon an impossible supposition, for justifying faith
can never be separated from charity, but if it might be separated, it should
not profit to justify. The Angels of heaven can not preach an other gospel:
but if they did preach an other gospel, they should be accursed. A great
argument I promise you against justification by faith only, that a solitary,
dead, or barraine faith does not justify.

MART. 7. And I would have any of the Bezites give me a sufficient reason,
why he translated, totam fidem, and not also, totam scientiam: undoubtedly
there is no cause, but the heresy of special and only faith. And again, why
he translateth Iaco. 2. 22. Thou see, that faith was (administra) a helper of
his works: and expounds it thus, Faith was an efficient cause and fruitful
of good works. Whereas the Apostles words be plain, that faith wrought (...).
together with his works, yea and that his faith was by works made perfect.
This is impudent handling of Scripture, to make works the fruit only and
effect of faith, which is your heresy.

FVLK. 7. If you dare draw forth your pen against Beza, and demand an answer
of himself, although he has already given you a sufficient reason to induce,
that the Apostle speaks not of faith, as generally as of knowledge, because
by an example of removing mountains, he restrains it to one kind of faith.
As for the other question, why he translateth (...), Iam. 2. v. 22. was an
helper; me think you should make best answer your self, who not long since,
by force of that word, would needs prove, that men were helpers of God,
chap. 10. sect. 6. Have you so soon forgotten your own voice? and is this
impudent handling of the scripture, to translate, as you your self in an other
case though impertinently did contend the word to signify? But works you will
not have to be the fruit only and effect of faith: because the Apostle says
that faith wrought together with his works, and by works his faith was made
perfect, as though apples are not the fruit of the tree, because the tree
does bear them, and by them, if they be good, the tree is made a good tree.

MART. 8. Which heresy also must needs be the cause, that, to suppress the
excellency of charity (which the Apostle gives it above faith, or any other
gift whatsoever, in these words, And yet I show you a more excellent way, 1.
Cor. 12. v. 31.) he in one edition of the new Testament (in the year (...).
1556.) translateth thus, Behold moreover also I show you a way most
diligently. What cold stuff is this, and how impertinent? In an other edition
(an. 1565.) he mended it thus: And besides I show you a way to excellency. In
neither of both expressing the comparison of preeminence and excellency, that
charity has in the Apostles words, and in all the chapter following. Wherein
you did well (for your credit) not to follow him (no not your Bezites them
selves) but to translate after our vulgar Latin interpreter, as it has
always been read and understood in the Church.

FVLK. 8. The rareness of the phrase, (...) etc. as al indifferent men will
judge, rather than any mind to suppress the excellency of charity, caused
Beza to give diverse interpretations of that place, of which yet the latter
more commends the excellency of charity, than the vulgar Latin, or our
Eaglishe translation, which expounds it as the Latin does: for if charity
be the way to excellency, it is a greater commendation thereof, than to say,
it is a more excellent way than other gifts, whereof he spoke last, as of
healing, of tongues, of interpretations, etc. Luther. to. 2. fol. 405. edi.
VVittenb. an. 1551. Act. 9. 22. Bib. 1577. 1 Pet. 1. 25. 2. Par. 36. 8. 2. Cor.
5. 21. 1. Pet. 2. 13. in the Bib. 1562.


MART. 9. Luther was so impudent in this case, that, because the Apostle spoke
not plainly enough for only faith, he thrust (only) into the text of his
translation, as himself witnesses, you durst not hitherto presume so far in
this question of only faith, though in other controversies you have done the
like, as is showed in their places. But I will ask you a smaller matter, which
in words and show you may perhaps easily answer, but in your conscience there
will remain a gnawing worm. In so many places of the Gospel, where our
Savior requires the peoples faith, when he healed them of corporal diseases
only, why Mart. 10. 52. Luc. 18. 42. etc. 8. v. 48.
do you so gladly translate thus, Thy faith has saved thee, rather than thus,
thy faith has healed thee, or made thee whole? is it not, by joining these
words together, to make it sound in English ears, that faith saves or
justifies a man? in so much that Beza notes in the margent thus, fides
saluat: that is, faith saves. and your Geneua Bibles, in that place where it
can not be taken for faith that justifies, because it is not the parties
faith, but her fathers that Christ required, there also translate thus, Believe
only, and she shall be saved. Which translation, Luc. 8. 50.
though very false and impertinent for justifying faith, as you seem to
acknowledge by translating it otherwise in your other Bibles: yet in deed you
must needs maintain and hold See Gough^ sermon and Tomsons answer to the L^
Abbot of vvestmest.
it for good, whiles you allege this place for only faith, as is evident in
your writings.

FVLK. 9. That which Luther might well do as an interpretor, or expounder, it
was much boldness for him to do, as a translator: but seeing he him self
has redressed his own offense, we have less to say for him, and you against
him. For our additions, except such as the necessity of our English phrase
does require for understanding, you slander us to say, that we have in any
controversies done the like. The question you ask, is not worthy any answer,
why we translate, thy faith has saved thee, etc. seeing we use all these
words indifferently, healing, making safe, and making whole, as in S. James we
say, Can faith save him? And it is al one, to say, thy faith has saved thee,
and thy faith has made thee whole. But you say, we allege this place for
only faith justifying, citing the answers of Master Gough, and M. Tomson,
against Feckenham. I think you lie, as in other places very commonly. And yet
an argument, though not a plain testimony, may be taken out of these places
for only faith justifying. Seeing Christ was not a physician for the body, but
to teach me^ that he was a Physician for the soul, and as he healed the
diseased in body only by faith, so he cures the sickuesse of the soul by
the same instrument of faith only, which by other places may be more directly
proved, and here also in some sort is insinuated.

MAR. 10. This then you see is a fallacy, when faith only is required to the
health of the body, as in many such places (though not in all) there by
translation to make it sound a justifying faith, as though faith only were
required to the health of the soul. Whereas that faith was of Christ's
omnipotency only and power, which Beza confesses may be in the devils
themselves, and An. in. 1. Co. 13. 2
is far from the faith that justifies. If you say, the Greek signifies as
you translate: it does so in deed, but it signifies also very commonly to be
healed corporally, as (by your own translation) in these places, Marc. 5. v.
28. Marc. 6. v. 36. Luc. Bib. 1577.
8. v. 36. and v. 51. Where you translate, I shall be whole. They were healed.
He was healed. She shall be made whole. And why do you here translate so?
because you know, to be saved, imports rather an other thing, to wit,
salvation of the soul: and therefore when faith is joined withal, you
translate rather saved, than, healed, (though the place be meant of bodily
health only) to insinuate by all means your justification by only faith.

FVLK. 10. It is no fallacy: from the health of the body, to ascend higher
to the health of the soul, but that direct and plain way, by which Christ
himself would be known to be savior of the world, not of the body only,
but of the body and soul together. And commonly his bodily cures were joined
with forgiveness of sins, which are causes of al maladies, and with health
of their souls, whose bodies were made safe. As for justification by faith
only, we mean none otherwise to insinuate it in this place, than Christ him
self does, by doing miracles, in giving health of the body, to testify that
he is the only author of the salvation of men's souls.

CHAP. XIII.
Heretical translation against PENANCE and SATISFACTION.

Martin.
Upon the heresy of only faith justifying, 1.
and saving a man, follows the denial of all penance and satisfaction for
sins. Which Beza so abhors, ( Annot. in Mat. 3. v. 2) that he makes
protestation, that he auoydeth these terms, Poenitentia, (...).
and, Poenitentiam agere, of purpose: and that he will always use for them in
translating the Greek words, resipiscentia, and, resipiscere. Which he does
observe perhaps, but that sometimes he is worse than his promise, translating
most falsely and heretically, for resipiscentia, Act. 26. 20. in No. Test. an.
1556. and in his later translation, 1565 Mat. 3. v. 8. Luc. 3. v. 8.
resipiscentes: so that your English Bezites them selves are ashamed to
translate after him. Who otherwise follow his rule for the most part,
translating resipiscentia, amendment of life: and, resipiscite, amend your
lives. and the other English Bibles when they translate best, say, repentance,
and, repent: but none of them all once have the words, penance, and, do
penance. Which in most places is the very true translation, according to the
very circumstance of the text, and use of the Greek word, in the Greek
Church, and (...), Agere poenitentiam.
the ancient Latin translation thereof, and all the fathers reading thereof,
and their expositions of the same. Which four points I think not amiss,
briefly to prove, that the Reader may see the use and signification of these
words, which they of purpose will not express, to avoid the terms of
penance, and, doing penance.

Fulke.
IF by penance you mean satisfaction 1.
for sins, by any suffering of ours, we abhor your penance, as an horrible
blasphemy against the blood of Christ. And for that cause, Beza, as has been
showed before, uses the word resipiscentia, rather than poenitentia: because
the Greek word signifies, not only a sorrow for sin, but also a purpose of
amendment of life. We in English use the word repentance, or amendment of
life, which word of repentance, you use also sometimes, when it pleases you,
or when you can not for shame use your popish term of doing penance,

The cause why we never use that word penance, is, for that you mean not
thereby that which the Scripture calls (...), but a certain punishment taken
upon men, for satisfaction of their sins unto God, which is abominable for
all Christian ears to hear, which acknowledge that the blood of Christ only
purges us from all sin. But in four points you will prove, (if you can)
that we should translate (...), to do penance.

MART. 2. First, that the circumstance of the text does That (...). is to do
penance. (...), poenitentiam egissent.
give it so to signify, we read in S. Matthew, cap. 11. v. 21. If in Tire and
Sidon had been wrought the miracles that have been wrought in you, they had
done penance in hairecloth, or sackecloth and ashes long ago. And in S. Luke,
cap. 10. v. 13. they had done penance, fitting in sackcloth and ashes. I
beseech you, these circumstances of sackecloth and ashes adjoined, do they
signify penance and affliction of the body, or only amendment of life, as
you would have the word to signify? S. Basil says, in Psalm. 29. Sackcloth
makes (...).
for penance. For the fathers in old time sitting in sackcloth and ashes, did
penance. Unless you will translate S. Basil also after your fashion, whom you
can not any way translate, but the sense must needs be, penance, and, doing 2.
Cor. 7. 9.
penance. Again S. Paul says, You were made sorry to penance, or, to
repentance, say which you will: and, The sorrow which is according to God,
works penance, or, repentance unto salvation. Is not sorrow, and bitter
mourning, and affliction, parts of penance? Did the incestuous man 1. Cor. 5.
whom Saint Paul excommunicated, and afterward absolved him* because of his
exceeding sorrow and tears, for fear lest he 2. Cor. 2.
might be overwhelmed with sorrow, did he, I say, change his mind only, or
amend his life, as you translate the Greek word, and interpret repentance?
did he not penance also for his fault, enjoined of the Apostle? when Saint John
the Baptist says, and Mat. 3. Luc. 3. Act. 26.
Saint Paul exhorts the like, Do fruits worthy of penance, or as you
translate, meet for repentance: Do they not plainly signify penitential
works, or the works of penance? which is the very cause why Beza rather
translated in those Fructus dignos iis qui resipuerint. (...)
places, Do the fruits meet for them that amend their lives. or, give us
some other good cause Oye Bezites, why your master does so fo^ly falsify his
translation.

FVLK. 2. Such is your malicious frowardnes, that you will not understand
resipiscentia, repentance, or amendment of life, a sorrow or grief of mind for
the life past: which is testified sometimes by outward signs of sackcloth and
ashes, fasting and humbling of men's bodies, as in the texts of Math. 11. and
Luc. 10. and diverse other, is expressed. But show us that the wearing of
sackcloth and ashes, is a satisfaction for the life past, or any part of amends
to Gods justice, or else you do but trifle, and waste the time. But S. Basil
says, that sackcloth makes for penance, etc. I marvel whether you read that
saying in Basil, and durst for sin and shame allege it for your popist^
penance: where he plainly shows the use and end of sack cloth. (...),
Sackecloth is an helper unto repentance, being a sign of humiliation, for of
old time, the Fathers repented sitting in sackeclothe and ashes. This sign of
humbling, or of submission, you have clean omitted. Thus you use to gelde the
Doctors sayings, when you rehearse them. Sackecloth therefore serves to
repentance, as a testimony of sorrow, and humbling of our selves before God,
not as any satisfaction or amends for our sins. The rest of the places that
you cite, to prove, that sorrow is a part of repentance, are altogether
needelesse, for we also do acknowledge the same. Our question is not of
sorrow, but of satisfaction, to be a part of repentance. Likewise the works
worthy, or meet for repentance, do argue the repentance to be unfeigned, and
undissembled, but they prove not that by them a satisfaction is made for the
sins committed before repentance. For a new life, new manners, new fruits,
must follow a mind, that is truly turned unto God; and changed from delight
in sin, to hate and abhor sin, and to study unto amendment of life.

MART. 3. Secondly, for the signification of this Greek word, in all the
Greek Church, and Greek fathers, even from S. Denis the Areopagite S. Paul's
scholar, who must needs deduce it from the Scriptures, and learn it of the
Apostles: it is most evident, that they use this word for that penance which
was done in the Primitive Church, according to the penitential Canons, whereof
all antiquity of Councels and Fathers, is Ec Hier. c. 3. in principio.
Poenitentes. (...).
full: in so much that S. Denis reckoning up the three sorts of persons that
were excluded from seeing and participating of the divine mysteries of Christ's
body and blood, to wit, Catechumens, Poenitents, and the possessed of ill
spirits: for, Poenitents, he says in the Greek, (...). that is, such as were
in their course of penance, or had not yet done their full penance. Which
penance S. Augustine declares thus: (Ho. 27. inter. 50. ho. and ep. 108.) Est
poenitentia grauior, etc. There is a more grievous and more mournful penance,
whereby properly they are called in the Church, that are Poenitentes: removed
also from partaking the sacrament of the altar. And the Greek Ecclesiastical
history thus: In the Church of Rome there is a manifest and known place for
Sozom. lib. 7. c. 16 (...). See S. Hierome in epitap. Fabiola.
the POENITENTS, and in it they stand sorrowful, and as it were mourning, and
when the sacrifice is ended, being not made partakers thereof, with weeping and
lamentation they cast them selves flat on the ground: then the Bishop weeping
also with compassion lifts them up, and after a certain time enioined,
absolueth them from their penance. This, the Priests, or Bishops of Rome keep
from the very beginning even until our time.

FVLK. 3. Although Denis, whose books are now extant, were no more S. Paul's
disciple, than he was S. Paul himself: yet I will grant, that the public
testification of repentance, in such as had openly fallen, was in the
primitive church, not only called, (...), by a metonymie, but also, that the
word of satisfaction was used, not that they had any meaning to satisfy the
justice of God by such external works, but that by those outward trials of
their repentance, the Church was satisfied, which by their fall was offended,
and the governors of the Church by such signs of true sorrow, and amendment,
were persuaded to receive them again into the congregation, from whence,
until sufficient trial had of their repentance, they were separated and
excluded. But this proves not, that the inward repentance which God gives,
when he turns us unto him, has in it any satisfaction for our sins, which
no sacrifice was able to make, but only the lamb of God, which takes away
the sins of the world. The places you cite, as well out of Denis, as of S.
Augustine, and Sozomene, do prove this that I say, to be understood of
public signs of repentance, without that any satisfaction unto Gods
justice, in those times by such penance, was intended.

MART. 4. In these words and other in the same Li. 5. c. 10.
Chapter, and in Socrates Greek history likewise when they speak of
Poenitents, that confessed and lamented their sins, that were enjoined
penance for the same, and did it: I would demand of our English Grecians,
in what Greek words they express all this. Do they it not in the words
which we now speak of, and which therefore are proved most evidently to
signify penance, and doing penance? Again, when the most ancient
Council of Laodicea. can. 2. says, That the time of penance should (...).
be given to offenders according to the proportion of the fault: And again,
can. 9. That such shall not communicate till a certain time, but after they
have done penance, and confessed their fault, then to be received: And
again, can. 19. After the Catechumens are gone out, that prayer be made of
the Poenitentes, or them that are in doing penance. And when the first
Council of Nice says, can. 12. about shortening or prolonging the days of
penance, that they must well examine their purpose and manner of doing
penance. that is, with what alacrity of mind, tears, patience, humility,
good works, they accomplished the same, and accordingly to deal more
mercifully with them, as is there expressed in the Council: when Saint Basil,
Can. 1. ad Amphiloch. speaks after the same sort: when Saint Chrysostom
calls the sackecloth, and fasting of the Ninevites for certain days, tot
dierum poenitentiam, so many days penance: in all these places, I would
gladly know of our English Grecians, whether these speeches of penance, and
doing penaun^ce, are not expressed by the said greek words, which they will
in no case so to signify.

FVLK. 4. A matter of great weight I promise you, to enquire of our English
Grecians, in what Greek words they express all this. Verily, in the same
Greek words which signify repentance, or repenting, and so may be expressed
in English: neither is there any thing in any of the Councels or Doctors, by
you cited or quoted, that has any other intention, than I have before
expressed. The words of penance, and doing penance, if you meant the same by
them, that we and you do by repenting and repentance, we would not strive
with you for terms: but that you have an other meaning in them appears by
this that you translate the same word poenitentia, commonly penance, as when it
is agere poenitentiam, but when it is said that God does, dare poenitentiam,
then you translate it repentance. Whereby it appears, you mean the penance
which you would have men to do, is not that repentance which is the gift of
God. Else why say you not, Acts. 5. that God has exalted Christ to be Prince
and Savior, to give penance to Israel, and remission of sins, if penance
and repentance were al one? But you say repentance. Also, Act. 11. God then to
the Gentiles has given repentance to life, where the word is poenitentia in
both places. As also, 2. Tim. 2. where you say: least sometime God give them
repentance to know the truth. Of this repentance which God gives unto life,
and remission of sins withal, satisfaction is no part: of public repentance
so called, when indeed it was a public testification, that God had given
inward repentance, we acknowledge satisfaction to the Church, and to the
judgment of the gouernoures thereof to be a part.

MART. 5. Or, I would also ask them, whether in these places they will
translate, repentance, and amendment of life, where there is mentioned a
prescript time of satisfaction for their fault by such and such penal means:
whether there be any prescript times of repentance or amendment of life, to
continue so long, and no longer: if not, then must it needs be translated,
penance, and doing penance, which is longer or shorter according to the
fault, and the manner of doing the same* I may repent in a moment, and amend
my life at one instant, and this repentance and amendment ought to continue
for ever. but the holy Councels and Fathers speak of a thing to be done for
certain years or days, and to be released at the Bishops discreation: this
therefore is penance, and not repentance only or amendment of life, and is
expressed by the foresaid Greek words, as also by * an other equivalent there
unto. (...)


FVLK. 5. I have answered before, we may in all these places use the word of
repentance, as well as this word repent, the noune as well as the verb. And
if we would use the same figure, which they do, that call such external
testimonies of repentance, (...), we might use the word of amendment of life
also. The prescripte time of satisfaction, I have said was to the church, which
was offended and slaundered by their open offenses, and to the judgment of the
Bishop and Elders which had the appointing or releasing of such time of
repentance. The other Greek word which you say is aequiualent to (...),
namely, (...), signifies to fall down under, or knele before one, as
Tertullian expresses the phrase, praesbyteris aduolui, aris dei adgeniculari,
De poenitentia.
for one to be cast down in humble manner before the Council. Ancyr. can. s.
etc.
Elders, to kneel before the altars of God. Hereof (...) is used, for that
submission which public penitents did show to testify their inward
humility, and by a metonymie of the sign, is taken for that which it does
signify, namely, humble and hearty repentance, which is approved before men,
by such outward gestures, and tokens of inward grief and humility of mind.
So is public fasting in token of repentance, by Tertullian called (...),
because it is a sign and token of humiliation De ieiunio.
and submission of mind, which must of necessity accompany true repentance.
Wherefore it is untruly said, that (...) is equivalent with (...), which
signifies to change the mind frrm evil to good, whereas the other expresses
but an outward gesture, to signify inward repentance, and that in open
repentance only.

MART. 6. I omit that this very phrase, to do penance, is word for word
expressed thus in Greek, (...). And ^itur. Chry. in rubricis, pa. 69. 104
Metanoea. Annot. in 3. Mat. v. 2.
Ausonius the christian Poet (whom I may as well allege once, and use it not,
as they do Virgil, Terence, and the like very often) uses this Greek word so
evidently in this sense, that Beza says, he did it for his verse sake, because
another word would not stand so well in the verse. But the reader (I trust)
sees the use and signification of these Greek words, by the testimony of
the Greek fathers them selves, most ancient and approved.

FVLK. 6. You may well omit that which bears no credit of antiquity. The
Liturgy is not so ancient, as he whose name it bears, the Rubrike much
less. That Beza says of Ausonius, using (...) in the sense you mean, it
seems you do not understand him. For he says, that (...) is never used but
in good part. So that in my judgment, Ausonius would have said rather (...)
than (...) in that his known Epigram, if the measure of his Pentametre verse
would have borne it.

MART. 7. Thirdly, that the ancient Latin Interpreter does commonly so
translate these words through out the new Testament, that needs no proof,
neither will I stand (...) Poenitentiam agere.
upon it (though it be greater authority than they have any to the contrary)
because the Adversaries know it and mislike it, and for that and other like
points it is belike, that one of them says it is the worst translation of
all, whereas Beza his Master Discou. of Sand. Rock. page 147. Praefat. in No.
Test. an. 1557.
says it is the best of all. So well they agree in judgment, the Master and
the man.

FVLK. 7. The Latin interpretor as it appears in many places, had no perfect
understanding of the Greek tongue: but in the Latin it is manifest, that he
was very rude, in so much that Lindanus thinks, he was a Grecian, rather
than a Latinist. Yea he has a whole chapter thus entitled: That the Autors
of the De opt. Genesis in scr. lib. 3. cap. 6.
vulgar translation of the Psalter, and the new Testament, were Grecians, Nec
latin satis eruditos, and not sufficiently learned in the Latin tongue. By
which testimony it may be gathered, what credit is to be given to the
Latin terms that he uses, differing from the Latin phrase, used by them
that are learned in that tongue. I could bring example of many terms and
phrases, that you your self are ashamed to follow, which pretend so precise a
translation out of the vulgar Latin. What my mislike is of that translation,
and how contrary to that which Beza says thereof, I have opened else where
to your shame. Only here I must tell you, that albeit in respect of learning,
I disdain not to acknowledge my self Bezaes scholar (of whom nevertheless I
have learned very little) yet I would you should know, I am no strangers man,
though you, and such traitors as you are, had rather be the Popes men, than
true servants to the Queen of England.

MART. 8. I come to the fourth proof, which is, that all the Latin Church
and the glorious Doctors thereof have always read as the vulgar Latin
interpreter translateth these words, and expound the same of penance, and
doing penance. To name one or two for an example, S. Augustines place is very
Ep. 108.
notable, which therefore I set down, and may be translated thus: Men do
penance before Baptism, of their former Agunt homi^es poenitentiam. Act. 2.
sins, yet so that they be also baptized, Peter saying thus, DO YE PENANCE,
AND LET EVERY ONE BE BAPTIZED. Men also do penance, if after Baptism they do
so sin, that they deserve to be excommunicated and reconciled again, as in all Churches they do which be called, POENITENTES. For of Sicut agunt qui
Poenitentes appellantur.
such penance spoke S Paul. 2. Cor. 12. 21. saying, THAT I LAMENT NOT MANY OF
THEM WHICH BEFORE HAVE SINNED, AND HAVE NOT DONE PENANCE FOR THEIR
UNCLEANNESS. We have also in the Acts, that Simon Magus Act. 8. 18.
being baptized, was admonished by Peter TO DO PENANCE Vt ageret poenitentiam.
for his grievous sin. There is also in manner a daily Penance of the good and
humble believers, in which we knock our breasts, saying, FORGIVE US OUR
DETTES. For these (venial and daily offenses) fastes and alms and prayers are
watchfully used, and humbling our souls we cease not after a sort to do
Quotidianam agere poenitentiam.
daily penance.

FVLK. 8. That all the Latin Church and the glorious doctors thereof have
always red as the vulgar Latin interpretor translateth: you prove by an
example of S. Augustine. In which also it is manifest, that S. Augustine
understands the phrase, not only for the exercise of public poenitentes, but
also for the inward repentance of the heart. But because you challenge all the
doctors of the Latin Church, for the use of this word poenitentia, I pray you
consider what Tertullian writes against Marcion, who cauilled about the
repenting ascribed in Scripture to God. In Graeco sono, etc. In the Greek
sound the name of repentance, is made not of confession of an offense, but of
changing of the mind. And in his book De Poenitentia, where he treats even
of public repentance, citing the testimony of John Baptiste, he says, Non
tacet Johannes, poenitentiam initote In Ps. 118. pbe.
dicens. John holds not his peace, saying begin repentance. Hilarious also
shows what Poenitentiae does signify, when he says, Peccati poenitentia
est ab eo quod poenitendum intellexeris destitisse. Repentance of sin is to
have ceased from that, which you have understood that it must be repented
of. Likewise against the Nouatians that deny repentance, In Psalm. 137.
Cum ad Poenitentiam per quam a peccatis desistitur, when unto repentance by
which men cease from sins, the doctrine of the Law, Prophets, Gospels,
Apostles, exhorts them that have sinned. And even your vulgar interpreter in
Saint Mark says Poenitemini, for that he says in Matthew, Agite
poenitentiam, by which it is certain, that he means one thing in both,
namely repentance of heart, and no satisfaction of work.

MART. 9. In these words of S. Augustine it is plain that he speaks of
painful or penitential works for satisfaction of sins, that is, penance:
again, that there are three kinds of the same, one before Baptism, an other
after Baptism for great offenses, greater and longer: the other daily for
common and little venial saultes which the best men also commit in this frail
nature. Again that the two former are signified and spoken of in the three
places of Scripture by him alleged. Where we see, that he reads altogether
as the vulgar interpreter translateth, and expounds all three places of
penance for sin, and so approves that signification of the Greek word. Yea
in saying that for venial sins we knock our breast, fast, give alms, and
pray, and so cease not Quotidianam agere poenitentiam: what does he mean but
daily penance and satisfaction? Read also S. Cyprian (beside other places)
epist. 52. number. 6. Where his citatio^s of Scripture are according to the old
Latin interpreter, and his exposition according, of doing penance, and making
satisfaction for sins committed. But I need not proceed further in
alleging either S. Cyprian or other ancient fathers for this purpose, because
the Adversaries grant it. Howbeit in what terms they grant it, and how
malapertly they accuse all the ancient fathers at once for the same, it shall
not be amiss here to put down their words.

FVLK. 9. S. Augustine speaks nothing of satisfaction for sins, but as I
have said, of such exercises as were appointed by the Church, to testify their
repe^ta^ce. The occasion of all these words, was of one that was a Nouatian,
who said that Peter was not baptized, when he was received into repentance
after his denial. And where he used this word Egisse poenitentiam, S.
Augustine denies, that he did open penance, as they that we properly called
poenitentes: Quod autem dicitur Petrum egisse poenitentiam. But where it is
said that Peter did penance, we must beware that he be not thought so to
have done it, as they do it in the Church, which are properly called
Poenitentes. And who can abide this, that we should think, that the chief
of the Apostles is to be numbered among such poenitents? For it repented him
that he denied Christ, which thing his tears do show. These words declare,
that Agere poenitentiam with Augustine, signifies to be inwardly repentant, as
well as to do those external works, which are tokens of repentance. Also
that tears, fastings, and such like, are arguments, and signs of repentance
before God, and not any part of that repentance in deed and much less any
satisfaction for sins. Of this penance or repentance of S. Peter, S. Ambrose
says, Lachrymas eius lego, satisfactionem non lego, I read of his tears, I
read not of In Luc. lib. 10. cap. 22.
his satisfaction. In that Augustine uses the words of the old interpretor,
it is no matter, for he uses also his meaning. But this usage of his, proves
not the antiquity of the vulgar Latin translation, but contrari wise, it is
certain that S. Augustine followed an other translation, for in the text, 2.
Cor. 12. where your vulgar Latin has, Super immunditia and fornicatione and
impudicitia quam gesserunt. S. Augustine reads, Super immunditia and luxuria
and fornicatione quam egerunt. That S. Cyprian uses the term Agere
poenitentiam, and satisfaction also, speaking of public repentance, it shall
be easily granted, but in none other sense, than I have often declared. But
where you say, that his citations are according to the Latin interpretor, it
is false. For Apoc. 2. your vulgar text is, Memor esto itaque vnde excideris,
and age poenitentiam and prima opera fac. But Cyprians citation is, Memento
vnde cecideris, and age poenitentiam, and fac priora opera. Likewise Psalm. 88.
you read in your vulgar Latin, Visitabo in virga iniquitates eorum, and in
verberibus peccata eorum. But Cyprian cites thus. Visitabo in virga facinora
eorum, and in flagellis delicta eorum. But that his exposition is of any other
penance, than of open penance, or of any other satisfaction, than of
satisfaction to the Church, your adversaries will not grant you, although they
may grant you, that he ascribed too much unto such external tokens of
repentance.

MART. 10. Whereas the reverend, godly, and learned Father, Edmund Campion, had
objected in his book, the Protestants accusation of S. Cyprian, for the matter
of penance: the good man that answers for both Universities, says thus
Whitak. page 97. cont. ration. Ed^^. Camp.
to that point: But whereas Magdeburgenses (Lutheran writers of that city)
complain that he depraved the doctrine of repentance, they do not feine or
forge this Doctrinam poenitentiae.
crime against him, but utter or disclose it. For all men understand that it
was too true. Neither was this Cyprians fault alone, that he wrote of
repentance many things De poenitenti^. Imprudenter.
incommodiously, and unwisely, but all the most holy fathers almost at that
time, were in the same error. For whiles they desired to restrain men's manners
by severe laws, they made the greatest part of repentance to consist
Poenitentiae.
in certain external discipline of life, which them selves prescribed. In
that they punished vice severely, they were to be borne withal: but that by
this means they thought to pay the pains due for sins, and to satisfy
Gods justice, and to procure to them selves assured impunitie, remission, and
justice, therein they derogated not a little from Christ's death, attributed too
much to their own inventions and finally depraved repentance. Thus far the
Answerer.

FVLK. 10. If Campion was such a reverend, godly, and learned father among you,
whose leuitie, treason, and ignorance in divinity, has been so lately tried
among us, we know how to esteem of the whole pack of you. Whose learning if
it had been never so great, as by the time of his study in divinity, and the
trade of his travailing life, since he gave him self thereto, no wise man can
esteem that it was great: yet being so lately attaynted of high treason
against the Prince, and the state, none that is honest, and dutiful, would
have bestowed upon him the commendation of godliness. As for that which M.
Whitaker has answered against him although not in the name of both the
Universities, by whom he was never authorized to be their advocate, yet so, as
neither of both the Universities need be ashamed of his doing: for as much as
I know he has confuted your quarrels already, I will leave you in this matter,
wholly to contend against him. Assuring you of my credit, (which I know is but
small with you) that he shall be found sufficient to match with as strong and
adversary as the Seminary of Rhemes can make out against him.

MART. 11. Mark how he accuses the fathers in general of no less crime,
than taking away from Christ the merits of his Passion, attributing it to their
own penance and discipline. Which if they did, I marvel he should call them
in this very place where he begins to charge the^ with such a crime,
sanctissimos patres, most holy fathers. The truth is, he might as well charge
S. Paul with the same, when he says, we shall Romans 1.
Be the heirs of God, and coheires with Christ, yet so, if we suffer with him,
that we may also be glorified with him. S. Paul says, our suffering also with
Christ, is necessary to salvation: Master Whitakers says, it is a derogation
to Christ's suffering. Christ fasted for us, therefore our fasting makes nothing
to salvation. He prayed for us, was scourged, and dyed for us: therefore our
prayer, scourging, and emprisonment, yea and death it self for his sake, make
nothing to life everlasting, and if we should think it does, we derogate from
Christ's passion. Alas, is this the divinity of England now a days? to make
the simple believe that the ancient fathers and holy men of the primitive
Church by their severe life and voluntary penance for their sins, and for
the love of Christ, didd^ therein derogate from Christ's merits and passions?

FVLK. 11. If the fathers at some time, by attributing too much to external
discipline, were carried somewhat too far, whereby not a little was derogated
from the merits of Christ's death* yet they are not charged directly to have
impugned the dignity thereof, which, when their eyes were attentively bent
upon it, they did worthily magnify and extol. That we must be conformable to
the suffering of Christ, if we will be made partakers of his glory, it is the
divinity that is now taught in England: but that any sufferings, or any good
works of ours whatsoever, do merit any part of eternal glory, the divinity
preached in England does most justly abhor. But that the holy men of the
Primitive Church, by their severe life, and hearty repentance for their
sins, testified by tears, fasting, and other chastising of their flesh, for
the love of Christ, did derogate from Christ's merits and passion, it is a
lewd slander out of France, from the traiterous seminary at Rhemes, but no
part of the divinity of England, allowed by the Universities of Cambridge, and
Oxford, as you would make simple men believe that it is.

MART. 12. I may not stand upon this point; neither need I. the principal
matter is proved by the adversaries confession, that the holy Doctors spoke,
wrote, and thought of penance, and doing penance as we do, in the same terms
both Greek, and Latin: and with Catholics it is always a good argument, and
we desire no better proof, than this. The Protestants grant, all the ancient
fathers were of our opinion, and they say it was their error. For, the first
part being true, it is madness to dispute, whether all the ancient fathers
erred, or rather the new Protestants, as it is more than madness to think
that Luther alone might see the truth more than a thousand Augustines, a
thousand Cypria^s, a thousand Churches. Which, notwithstanding the palpable
absurdity thereof, yet M. Whitakers Page 101.
avouches it very solemnly.

FVLK. 12. The confession you charge the adversaries to make, is of your own
forgerie, not of their concession. But for want of other proof, it was the
best you could do, to feign our grant, but you are not able to show our
deeds thereof in writing. As neither of the rest that the ancient fathers were
all of our opinion, by the Protestants grant, that Luther might see more of
himself alone, than, etc. but whatsoever M. Whitaker has aduouched, I leave
to himself to answer.

MART. 13. And yet again (that the reader may see how they play fast and
loose at their pleasure) this is the man, that when he has given us all the
fathers on our side, not only in the matter of penance, but also in
invocation of Saints, Page 109. Page 101.
and in diverse other errors, as he calls them: the very same man (I say) in
the very next leaves almost, renueth Master Page 114. 117.
Jewels old brag, that we have not one clear sentence for us of any one
father within six hundred years after Christ, and again, that the same
faith reigns now in England, which these fathers professed. What faith, M.
Whitakers? not their faith concerning penance, or invocation of Saints (as
your self confess) or other such like errors of theirs, as you term them.
Why are you so forgetful, or rather so impudent, to speak contraries in so
little a room? Such simple aunswering will not serve your adversaries learned
book, which you in vain go about by foolish Rhetorike to disgrace, when the
world sees you are driven to the wall, and either can say nothing, or do say
that, which confuteth is self with the evident absurdity thereof.

FVLK. 13. Master Whitaker is not so inconsiderate, to play fast and loose, as
you are intemperate and untrue, in accusing him. Howbeit, there is no doubt,
but he will meet you, and handle you, according to your virtues. But seeing
you give such high commendation to Campions pamphlet, as that you call it a
learned book, (wherein beside a little rank Rhetorike, more meet for a boy,
that learneth to practice his figures, than for a grave Divine, to use in so
serious a cause, there is nothing that any learned man may think worthy of any
answer). we may well perceive what you count learning, and what be the
pillars of your popish religion. The books are both in print, let the world
judge of both indifferently.

MART. 14 But to leave M. Whitakers (who is a simple companion, to sit in
judgment upon all the ancient Doctors, and to condemn them of heinous error
in the matter of penance). I trust the Reader sees by the former discourse,
the usual Ecclesiastical signification, and consequently both the true and
false translation of the foresaid Greek words. Not that (...)
they must or may always be translated, penance, or doing penance. For in the
scriptures God is said Poenitentiam agere, who can not be said to do penance,
no more than he can be said to amend his life, as the Protestants commonly
translate this word. Therefore I conclude, that this word being spoken of God,
in the Scriptures, is no more prejudice against our translation of doing
penance, than it is against theirs, of amendment of life. Likewise when it is
spoken of the reprobate and damned in hell: who as they can not do penance
properly, so much less amend (...). Sap. 5. Poenitentiam a^ gentes.
their lives.

FVLK. 14. Master Whitaker takes not upon him to sit in judgment of all the
Doctors, although he may note some error or other, in every one of them, whose
writings of any substance, do remain with us. But after all this brabling
about poenitentia^ agere, you come home, and confess, that it must not always
be translated, doing of penance: because God him self after your vulgar
translation, is said, agere poenitentiam, which with the Septuaginta, is (...).
No man could better have confuted your vain quarreling* than you have done
your self: for by this it is manifest, that the vulgar Interpreter, did not
mean by agere poenitentiam, any more, than we do by repentance. And therefore
the best, and the most simple translation is, to use the words repent, and
repentance. And the Greek word, as Tertullian tells you, signifies changing
of mind, which may be without acknowledging of error. Although it can not vet
be properly said of God, that he changes his mind, when he is said to repent.
As likewise it is not necessary, that they which be in hell, should amend their
lives, when it is said they repent. Neither do we translate the word simply,
amendment of life, but show that amendment of life must necessarily follow in
them that truly repent, as the Scripture teaches us.

MART. 15. Moreover, it is purposely against penance, that they translate
amiss, both in Daniel, and Esdras, whose voluntary ^^^. e^p. 59. Dan. 10.
mourning, fasting, afflicting of them selves for their own sins, and the
peoples, is notoriously set forth in their books. There they make the Angel
say thus to Daniel. From v. 12. Bib. 1579.
the first day that thou did set thine heart TO HVMBLE thy self. What is this
humbling him self? can we gather any penance thereby? none at all. but if they
had said according to the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, from the first day that
thou (...),
did set thine heart TO AFFLICT thy self, we should vt te affligeres. (...)
easily conceive works of penance, and it would include Daniels mourning,
fasting from flesh, wine, and other meats, abstaining from ointments, the
space of the days, mentioned in the beginning of the same chapter.

FVLK. 15. The word humbling, does as well comprehend all those exercises of
fasting, and mourning, which the holy men did use, to testify their
repentance, and to provoke them selves to hearty repentance for their sins,
and the sins of the people, as the word afflicting. Another translation
calls it chastening, the Hebrewe word signifies to bring low, or cast
down, therefore it is spoken of women, that are carnally known, which is
without affliction. But when it is used of such godly exercises, it declares
for what end they serve, namely to humble and bring low our proud rebellious
nature, and to be signs of humiliation, as S. Basil says of sackcloth and
ashes, not to be by punishment, satisfaction for our sins. Your own vulgar
Latin interpretor tra^slateth the same word, Genesis 16 v. 19. humiliare* humble
thy self, or submit thy self under thy mistres hand, and often times in that
sense. And even in this sense of humbling* by signs of repentance, he uses
the word humilia^us, speaking of Achab, 2. Reg. 21. v. 29. where the Hebrew
word is otherwise. And Psalm 35. v. 13. the same word ^innethi he
translateth, humiliaham, And in their (...)
sickness. I put on sackcloth* and humbled my soul with fasting So does he
often times, when such bodily chastisement is signified thereby. Wherefore
this, as all the rest is a false and unreasonable quarrel* against our
translation, as though by it we meant to deny the use of afflicting, or
chastening the body, with fasting, mourning, and other like exercises of
repentance.

MART. 16. Again, in all their Bibles of the years 1562. 1577. 1579. they
make Esdras, c. 9. 5. after his exceeding (...).
great penance, say only this, About the evening sacrifice I arose up from my
HEAVINESS. neither translating the Hebrew, which is the same word that in
Daniel, nor the Greek, (...)
which signifies affliction, and humiliation.

FVLK. 16. First your Greek text of Esdras, confirms our translation of
Daniel. Secondly, I say, that by this heaviness, they mean, all that
humiliation and affliction, whereof he spoke before, which is easy for every
man to understand, that is not blinded with malice, and what other thing is
affliction, but heaviness, grief, and sorrow, whereof the holy man spoke twice
before, I think no wise man can tell.

MART. 17. Again, in the Prophet Malachie, (c. 3. 14.) they translate thus: Ye
have said, It is but vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we have
kept his commandments, and walked HVMBLY before his face? What is this same,
humbly? when we say in English, he goes humbly: we imagine or conceive no more
but this, that he is an humble man, and behaueth him self humbly* but they
know very well, the Prophet speaks of an other thing: and if (...)
it had pleased them to have translated the Hebrew word fully, and
significantly, in the sense of the holy Ghost, they might have learned by
conference of other places, where the same Hebrewe word is used, that it
signifies such heaviness, sadness, sorowfulnes, and affliction, as men express
by black mourning garments, the nature of the word importing blackness,
darkness, lowering, and the like. Which is far more than walking humbly, and
which is wholly suppressed by so translating. See the Psalm 34. v. 14. Ps. 37.
v. 7. Ps. 41. v. 10. Where the Prophet (...)
uses many words and speeches, to express sorrowful penance: and for that
which in Latin is always, contristatus, in Greek a word more significant, in
Hebrew it is the same kind of word that they translate, humbly. Whereas in
deed this word has no signification of humility properly, no not of that
humility I mean, which is rather to be called humiliation, or affliction, as
the Greek words implye. But it signifies properly the very (...)
manner, countenance, gesture, habit of a pensive or sorlorne man: and if they
will say, that they so translate it in other places, the more is their fault,
that knowing the nature of the word, they will notwithstanding suppress the
force and signification thereof in any one place, and so translate it, that the
reader must needs take it in an other sense, and can not possibly conceive
that which the word imports. for, to walk humbly, sounds in all English
ears, the virtue of humility, which this word does never signify, and not
humility or humiliation by affliction, which it may signify, though
secondarily, and by deduction only.

FVLK. 17. What a many of vain words are here spent, to make a vain cauil
seem to be of some value? what the etymology of the Hebrewe word is, the
translatours knew before you were borne. But what the word signifies here,
Pagnine is sufficient to teach both you, and them, who thus interpreateth it
in obscuro, id est, obscure, id est, humiliter. In the dark, that is darkly,
that is humbly. Your vulgar Latin translatour calls it, tristes, which is
as far from your pretended penance, as humility. The Septuaginta translate
the word (...), which signifies servile or servants. Benedict Arias
expounds it, supplices, humble. And to put al out of quarrelling, the
Antithesis or opposition of the proud and arrogant, in the next verse
following, proves, that in this verse, they speak of humility, which is
contrary to pride, and not of the tokens of repentance, which are mourning
apparel, and such like.

MART. 18. Again, what is it else but against penance and satisfaction, that
they deface these usual and known words Dan. 4. 24.
of Daniel to the king, Redime eleemosynis peccata tua, Redeem thy sins with
alms: altering and translating (...).
it thus, Break off thy sins by righteousness. First, the Greek is
against them, which is word for word according to the vulgar and common
reading: Secondly, the Chaldee word which they translate, Break off, by
Munsters own judgment (...)
in lexico Chald. signifies rather, and more principally, to redeem.
Thirdely, the other word which they translate, righteousness, in the
Scriptures signifies also, eleemosynam, as the Greek interpreaters, translate
it, Dent. 6. and 24 and it is most plain in S. Matthew, where our Savior says
(Mat. 6. (...). In Ps. 49. v. 5.
v. 1.) Beware you do not your justice before men* Which is in other Greek
copies, your alms. And S. Augustine proves it by the very text. For (says
he) as though a man might ask, what justice? he adds. WHEN THOVDOST AN ALMS
DEEDS. He signified therefore, that alms are the works of justice. And in the
Psalm they are made one, Psalm 111.
He distributed he gave to the poor, his justice remains for ever and ever*
Which Beza translateth, his beneficence or liberality remains, etc. Again,
S. Hierome, a sufficient Doctor to tell the signification of the Hebrew or
Chaldee words, both translateth i^so, and expounds it so in his co^mentarie.
Moreover, the words that immediately follow in Daniel, interpret it so unto us,
And thy iniquities with mercies Annot. in Mat. 6. v. 1.
to the pore. Lastly, Beza himself says, that by the name of justice with the
Hebrews, is also signified beneficence or beneficialnes to the pore yea, and
that in this place of 2. Cor. 9.
Daniel it is specially taken for alms. So that we see there is no
impediment, neither in the Chaldee, nor Greek, why they might not have said,
as the Church of God always has said, Redeem thy sins with alms, and thy
iniquities with mercies to the poor* but their heresy will not suffer them to
speak after the Catholic manner, that alms and merciful deeds are a
redemption, ransom, and satisfaction for sins.

FVLK. 18. Against popish penance and satisfaction, there is no doubt, but
the translatours were vehemently affected, yet in this translation they have
used no prejudice against repentance, and the true fruits thereof, but
rather more straightly have urged the same. For first, whereas in the vulgar
Latin text there is no word of repenting from sins, or forsaking of
sins, our translatour using the term of breaking off his sins, signifies
that all alms, and other apparent good deeds without repentance and breaking
off the cause of the former sinful life, are in vain and unprofitable.
Secondly, where the vulgar translatour uses the word of redeeming, or buying
out, which might bring the King into vain security, to think he might
satisfy for his sins, without repentance, by giving of alms, which is a
small penance for a King: our translatours tell him, that, he must break off
his sins, before any thing that he does be acceptable to God. Thirdly,
whereas the vulgar interpretour requires of him nothing but alms, and mercy
to the poor, which was a very easy thing for him to perform: our
translators enioine him righteousness, which comprehends all virtues, and is
a thousand fold harder penance for such a mighty monarch, than giving of
alms, and that to poor folks which he should never feel. Fourthly, the
words are plain for our translation: for pherak the Chaldee (...)
verb signifies as properly and as principally to dissolve or break off, as,
to deliver or redeem. Neither is Munsters judgment otherwise, although he
give the other signification first, which is a miserable argument, to prove,
that it signifies rather, and more principallye to redeem. But if any
signification were more principal than other, it were more reason to say,
that pherak signifies (...)
rather and more principally to break or dissolve, because the word signifies
so in the Hebrewe tongue, from whence the Chaldee is derived. And indeed
delyuering, is a kind of dissoluing or breaking from him, to whom he was
before addicte or bound. So that the verb helps you nothing, but rather
makes more against you. The other word, although very seldom by synecdoche,
it be taken for alms, yet every boy almost in Cambridge knows, that it
signifies properly and principally, universal justice, or all righteousness:
therefore the Chaldee text is plain for our translation, and enforced for
yours of alms. Being against all reason, that the Prophet should exhort
the King to gyuing alms, before he had exhorted him to repentance, and
forsakyng of his sins. Beside that, it is contrary to the whole scope of the
scriptures, to teach any other satisfaction or redemption from sin, than the
death and passion of Christ. But where you tell us of S. Hieromes translation,
it were somewhat worth, if you could show it. The vulgar Latin text we may
not grant you to be S. Hieromes, as for his commentary, teaches not the
word of redeeming, which is the principal word in controversy. And indeed
it is a very absurd kind of speech, to say, redeem thy sins, or deliver
thy sins, for pherak signifies none otherwise to redeem, (...)
than to deliver, whereas, if he had meant, as you think, he should have
said rather, redeem thy soul from sins. Christ himself the author of our
redemption, is not said to have redeemed our sins with his blood, but to
have redeemed us from our sins by his blood.

MART. 19. And what a miserable humor is it in these cases, to sly as far as
they can from the ancient received speech of holy Scripture, that has so
many years sounded in all faithful ears, and to invent new terms and
phrases, when the original text both Greek and Hebrew favors the one as much
or more, than the other* as, that they choose to say in the Epistle to Titus
(where the Apostle excedingly exhorts to good works) maintain good works,
and show forth good works, rather than according to the ancient Latin
translation, bonis (...).
operibus praeesse, to be chief and principal in doing good works, which is
the very true and usual signification of the greek word, and implies a
virtuous emulation among good men, who shall do most good works, or excel in
that kind. But they that look to be saved by faith only, no marvel if
neither their doings, nor tra^slatio^s te^d to any such excellency.

FVLK. 19. What a miserable humor is it, when the truth is plainly revealed,
by knowledge of the tongs, which was hidden from many of the ancient fathers,
to delight rather in error which is old, than in truth which is newly
discovered? The word (...) in the epistle to Titus we translate also to
excel, and it may signify, either to show forth, to maintain, or to excel.
And therefore your wrangling is vain and without reason. For that Christian men
ought with all diligent labor to excel in good works, it is always
acknowledged of us, although they must not look to be saved by their works
no nor by their faith only, if their faith be not fruitful of good works.
Such collections as these, and much better, it were no hard matter to make a
great number against you, to prove that you are enemies to faith, to
repentance, to good works, and to God him self.

CHAP. XIIII.
Heretical translation against the holy SACRAMENTS, namely BAPTISM and
CONFESSION.

Martin.
AN other sequel of their only faith is, that 1
the Sacraments also help nothing toward our salvation, and therefore they
partly take them clean away, partly deprive them of all grace, virtue, and
efficacy, making the^ poor and beggarly elements, either worse, or no better
than those of the old law.

Fulke.
THat the Sacraments help nothing toward 1
our salvation, is an other of Martins slanders, no assertion of ours. For
seeing we hold that the Sacraments are seals of Gods promises, to confirm
our faith, by which we are justified before him, how can we affirm, that they
help nothing to salvation? But this is the property of hers and slaunderers,
when they have nothing of truth to charge their adversaries, then they either
invent that which was never said or done by them, or else they violently draw
out of their sayings or doings by deprauing them some color of matter to serve
for a show of their slanders. So does our wrangler in this place after a
flat lie solemnly aduouched, against us, of that we say, the Sacraments
give no grace, Ex opere operato, of the work wrought, he frames his spiders
web, first that we deprive them, of all grace, virtue, and efficacy.
Because we do not include grace, virtue, and efficacy, within the external
Elements, or the ministry of man about them, but ascribe the same to the
mighty working of Gods spirit in his chosen children, which works all his
gifts in all men according to the good pleasure of his own will. Secondly
that we make the Sacraments poor and beggarly Elements. And thirdly either
worse or no better than those of the old law. The spiritual matter in deed
of the Sacraments of both the Testaments we confess to be Jesus Christ of
equal power unto salvation of his people living under both the states: but the
more abundant grace, and truth, according to the revelation of Christ in the
flesh, we acknowledge to be testified, and exhibited in our Sacraments than was
in theirs that lived under the law.

MART. 2. For this purpose Beza is not content to speak as the Apostle does,
(To. 4. v. 11.) that circumcision (...).
was a seal of the justice of faith, but because he thinks that, to small a
term for the dignity of circumcision, as him self confesses, he gladly
auoideth it (I use his own words) and for the Libens refugi. Quod obsignaret,
for, sigillum.
Nowne puts the Verb, so dissolutely and presumptuously, that the English
Bezites themselves here also dare not follow him in translation, though in
opinion they agree. The cause of his wilful translation he declares in his
Annotations upon the same place, to wit, the dignity of circumcision, equal
with any Sacrament of the new Testament. His words be these. What (says he)
could be spoken more magnifical of any Sacrament? therefore they that put a real
difference between the Sacraments of the old Testament and ours, never seem
to have known how far Christ's office extends. Which he says, not to
magnify the old, but to disgrace the new.

FVLK. 2. There was never man that had such an artificial conjecture of men's
purposes as you pretend your self to have, which not only where there is
likelihood to fasten a conjecture upon, but also when all likelyhoods are
against you, yet can so confidently pronounce of every man's purpose. Well let
the purpose go, which is known best to God, and next to them that will
judge of the man according to charity and good reason. You say Beza is not
content to speak as the Apostle does, that circumcision was a seal of the
justice of faith. Yes verily, his desire is to express that which the Apostle
says to the full. The name of seal therefore he auoydeth not, as you falsely
slander him, but for want of a convenient Latin word to express the
Apostles Greek word, he is content to use circumloquution by the verb, and
says, Abraham received the sign of circumcision, which should seal up, or
by seal confirm the justice of faith, etc. yet are not you ashamed most
impudently to say he refused the term of Seal sigillum, and for sigillum
has used quod obsignaret. Whereas the word that he says he refused, is
Signaculum. Signaculi nomen quod vetus interpres and Erasmus vsurpauit libens
refugi, partim quod non sit admodum vsitatum, partim quod non satis videatur
illam vim obsignationis declarare. The term signaculum which the old
interpretor and Erasmus has used, I have willingly refused: partly because it
is no very usual word, partly because it seems not sufficiently to declare
that virtue or efficacy of sealing. You see therefore what word he auoydeth,
and for what cause, and that vour eyes were not matches, or else they were
daseled with a mist of malice, when you read that he avoided Sigillum, and
placed quod obsignaret for sigillum. The word sigillum as he uses not, so
does he make no mention of it, I think because it being a diminutiue of
signum, and taken sometimes for a little image, vnde sigillares, etc. it is not
proper nor full to express the Greek word (...). That he makes circumcision
equal unto the Sacraments of the new Testament, I have showed before, that
it is in matter, substance, and end, which he that confesses not (as Beza
says) seems never to have known how far the office of Christ extends:
but that he has any purpose to disgrace the Sacraments of the new Testament
instituted by Christ him self, in a more clear dispensation of grace and
truth, you affirm with the same credit by which you said he put quod
obsignaret for sigillum.

MART. 3. Which is also the cause why not only he, but the English Bibles (for
commonly they join hands and agree together) to make no difference between
John's Baptism and Christ's, translate thus concerning certain that had not yet
received the holy Ghost: Unto what then were ye baptized? Act. 19. 3.
And they said, unto John's Baptism. Which Beza in a long discourse proves to
be spoken of John's doctrine, and not of his baptism in water. As though it
were said, what doctrine then do ye profess? and they said, John's. Whereas in
deed the question is this, and ought thus to be translated, In what then or
wherein were you Baptized? And they said, in John's Baptism. As who should say,
we have received John's Baptism, but not the holy Ghost as yet. And therefore
it follows immediately, then they were baptized in the name of Jesus, and after
imposition of hands the Holy Ghost came upon the^. Whereby is plainly gathered,
that being baptized with John's baptism before, and yet of necessity baptized
afterward with Christ's baptism also, there must needs be a great difference
between the one baptism and the other, John's being insufficient. And that
this is the deduction which troubles these Bezites, and makes them translate
accordingly, Beza (as commonly* still he utters his grief) tells us in
Anno. in Act. ^9.
plain words thus. It is not necessary, that wheresoever there is mention of
John's Baptism, we should think it to be the very ceremony of Baptism.
Therefore they that gather John's Baptism to have been diverse from Christ's,
because these a little after are said to be baptized in the name of Jesus
Christ, have no sure foundation. Lo* how of purpose he translateth and
expounds it John's doctrine, not John's Baptism, to take away the foundation
of this Catholic conclusion, that his Baptism differs and is far inferior
to Christ's.

FVLK. 3. And is John's Baptism now made a Sacrament of the old law? was John
the Baptist a minister of the law, or of the Gospel? Our Savior Christ, is
sufficient to teach us that the law and the Prophets prophesied until John:
but from the days of John the kingdom Matthew. 10.
of heaven suffers violence. But if you will make John's Baptism a Sacrament
of the new Testament, and yet differing from the Baptism of Christ, then you
make two Baptismes of the new Testament, contrary to the Nicene Creed, and
Christ him self, who was baptized for us, baptized with the worse. But
concerning that place Acts the 19. which has troubled so many interpreters
with the obscurity thereof, or rather with a preiudicate opinion of a
difference in the Baptism of John and of Christ, I am neither of Bezaes
opinion, nor yet of our translators, for the understanding and translation of
that place. Neither do I think that mention is made of any second baptism,
the avoiding whereof, has bred diverse forced interpretations: but that S.
Paul enstructeth those Disciples that knew not the grace of the holy Ghost,
that they which heard John's preaching to the people, that they should believe
in Christ Jesus, which was coming after him, were also baptized in the name of
Jesus, Christ, who had granted those visible graces of his holy spirit, to be
bestowed upon them that believed, by imposition of the Apostles hands. Thus
therefore I am persuaded those verses are to be translated. But Paul said,
John truly baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying to the people,
that they should believe in him, that comes after him, that is in Jesus: and
they which heard him, were baptized into ye name of our Lord Jesus. And after
Paul had laid his hands upon, etc. The argument of difference thereof
grounded upon this place, is nothing worth* where the baptism of John is
confirmed by imposition of hands, rather than disgraced by reiteration, which
gives strength to the error of the Donatists, and Anabaptists, for
rebaptization. Whereas it can not be proved, that any, which were once baptized
by John, were ever baptized again. But the contrary may easily be gathered:
for seeing our Savior Christ baptized none him self, it shall follow that the
Apostles were either not baptized at all, or else baptized only with John's
baptism. And where there is express mention of John's Disciples, that came
unto Christ, to become his Disciples* there is no mention of any other baptism
than they had already received.

MART. 4. But does the Greek lead him, or force him to this translation, In
quid? unto what? First him self (...).
confesses in the very same place, the contrary, that the Greek phrase is
often used in the other sense, wherein* or, wherewith, as it is in the vulgar
Latin, and Erasmus: but that in his judgment it does not so signify here,
and therefore he refuses it. Yet in the very next verse almost, where it is
said by the same Greek phrase, that they were baptized in the (...).
name of Jesus Christ, there both he and his, so translate is as we do, and
not, unto the name of Christ. Is it not plain, that all is voluntary, and at
their pleasure? For (I beseech them) if it be a right translation, baptized in
the name of Jesus: why is it not right, baptized in the baptism of John? Is
there any difference in the Greek? none. Where then? in their commentaries and
imaginations only, against which we oppose and set both the text and the
commentaries of all the fathers.

FVLK. 4. The Greek does allow him so to translate, and to be Baptized in the
name of Jesus, and into the name of Jesus is all one: as in the name of the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, or into the name of the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost, is al one. But if Beza that has discovered the
truth in so many places, did not see it in this one text, as neither you nor
any of the fathers which have written upon it, who are not many: he is
rather to be pardoned of all reasonable men, than to be rayled upon by such
one who in learning is no more like him, than a Goose to a Swanne in singing.

MART. 5. But no marvel if they disgrace the baptism of Christ, when they
are bold also to take it away altogether: Ioh. 3. v. 5.
interpreating this Scripture, Unless a man be borne again of water and the
Spirit, he can not enter into the kingdom of God, which a man would think
were plain enough to prove, that water in baptism is necessary:
interpreating (I Beza in 4. Io. v. 10. and in Tit. 3. v. 5.
say) this Scripture, Of water, and the spirit, thus: of water, that is, the
Spirit: making water to be nothing else in this place but the Spirit
allegorically, and not material water. As though our savior had said to
Nicodemus, Unless a man be borne of water, I mean, of the spirit, he can not
enter, etc. According to this most impudent exposition of plain Scriptures,
Calvin translateth also as impudently for the same purpose in the epistle to
Titus, making the Apostle to say, that c. 3. v. 5. Per lauacrum regenerationis
Spsancti QVOD effudit in nos abunde.
God powered the water of regeneration upon us abundantly, that is, the holy
Ghost. And least we should not understand his meaning herein, he tells
vt in his commentary upon this place, that when the apostle says, water
poured out abunda^tly, he speaks not of material water, but of the holy
ghost. Now indede the apostle says not, that water was poured upon us, but the
holy ghost. neither does the Apostle make water and the holy ghost al one, but
most plainly distinguishes them, saying that God of his mercy has saved us
by the lauer of regeneration Quem effudit, as Beza himself translateth.
and renouation of the holy Ghost, whom he has powered upon us abundantly. See
how plainly the Apostle speaks both of the material water, or washing of
Baptism, and of the effect thereof, which is the holy Ghost powered upon us.
Calvin takes away water clean, and will have him speak only Comment. in hunc
locum.
of the holy Ghost, which Flaccus Illyricus the Lutheran him self wondreth at,
that any man should be so bold, and calls it plain sacrilege against the
efficacy of the Sacraments.

FVLK. 5. The Sacrament of Baptism, how far we are from disgracing, or
taking it away altogether, when we affirm that the grace of Gods spirit, is
not so tied unto it, but he may work regeneration without it, in them that by
necessity are deprived of it, let all men of reason and indifferency, judge.
Our translation of John. 3. v. 5. being such, as he can find nothing to
quarrel against it, he begins a new controversy of our interpretation,
by which he might bring in five hundred places of scripture, in which we
differ from them in exposition. And a great absurdity he thinks he has
found out, in that we expound the water and spirit to signify one thing: as
though in Math. 3. v. 11. the holy ghost, and fire, are not put both for one
thing: and he may as well in the one place, urge the element of fire in the
baptism of Christ, as by this place prove the necessity of baptism in
water. And yet we take not away the sacrament of baptism, or the water, the
external matter thereof, which in other places is expressly commanded, when
we say it is not spoken of in this text, which is of the thing signified in
baptism, rather than of baptism, as in John. 6. our savior Christ speaks
in like terms of the thing represented in the sacrament of his supper, not of
the sacrament it self. The error of Caluines translation and exposition of
Titus 3 v. 5. we have before confessed, neither does any of our translations
follow him, and yet his error is no heresy, while he ascribes wholly to the
holy ghost, that which properly is his, but yet of the apostle is
figuratively ascribed unto the outward element, by which he works.

MART. 6. And if we should here accuse the English translatours also, that
translate it thus, by the fountain of the regeneration of the holy Ghost,
WHICH he shed on us, etc. making it indifferent, either which fountain, or,
which holy Ghost he shed, etc. they would answer by and by that the Greek
also is indifferent: but if a man should ask the further, whether the holy
Ghost may be said to be shed, or rather a fountain of water, they must
needs confess, not the holy Ghost, but water: and consequently that they
translating, which he shed, would have it meante of the fountain of water,
and so they agree just with Caluins translation, and leave Beza, who in his
translation refers it only to the holy Ghost, Sp. sancti, quem effudit.
as we do: but in his commentary plays the Heretic as Calvin does.

FVLK. 6. When Aristides could be accused of no crime, he was by his envious
enemies accused of justice. Even so this man, who is wont to prescribe us a
rule, to leave that in ambiguitie, which in the Greek is ambiguous, now
blames us for translating so, as either Caluines, or Bezaes sense may stand
with it. And al be it in all other places he is content to make us Bezaes
scholars: yet here because Calvin has the worse part, he will enforce us
to leave Beza, and stick to Calvin. Such a force has malice when it is
settled in man's heart, that it carries him oftentimes headlong against him
self. But seeing the holy Ghost, as the nearest antecedent is placed next
before the relative, why must we needs confess, not the holy Ghost, but
water to be shed upon us? Is any man so brutish, to believe the bold
surmises, what said I, surmises? nay impudent, and contentious affirmations of
this blind Bayard.

MART. 7. Of the Sacrament of penance I have spoken before, concerning that
part specially which is satisfaction: here I will only add of Confession,
that to avoid this term (namely in such a place where the reader might easily
gather Sacramental confession) they translate thus, Acknowledge (...).
Whereof Confession is called in S. Cyprian and other fathers, Exomologesis.
your faults one to an other. Iac. 5. It is said a little before, if any be
diseased, let him bring in Priests, etc. And then it follows, Confess your
faults, etc. But they to make al sure, for, Confess, say, Acknowledge: and for
Priests, Elders. What mean they by this? If this acknowledging of faults one
to another before death be indifferently to be made to all men, why do they
appoint in their Co^munion-booke (as it seems out In the order of visitation
of the sick.
of this place) that the sick person shall make a special confession to the
Minister, and he shall absolve him in the very same form of absolution that
Catholic Priests use in the Sacrament of Confession. Again, if this
acknowledging of faults be specially to be made to the Minister or Priest, why
translate they it not by the word Confessing and confession, as well as by,
Acknowledging? and why is not this confession a Sacrament, where them selves
acknowledge forgiveness of sins by the Minister? These contradictions and
repugnance of their practice and translation, if they can wittily and wisely
reconcile, they may perhaps in this point satisfy the reader. But whether the
Apostle speak here of Sacramental confession or no, sincere translators
should not have fled from the proper and most usual word of confession or
confessing, consonant both to the Greek and Latin, and indifferent to what
soever the holy Ghost might mean, as this word, acknowledge, is not.

FVLK. 7. Of the word of penance, and therevpo^ to wring in satisfaction, we
have heard more than enough: but that penance is a Sacrament, we have heard
never a word to prove it. But what say we against confession? Forsooth James
5. we translate (...) acknowledge your selfs. Why sir? does acknowledging
signify any other thing than confessing? you want then nothing else, but the
sound of confession, which among the ignorant would help you little, which
term your Popish acknowledging rather shrifte than confession. It is marvel
then that you blame us not, because we say not, shriue your selves one to an
other. A miserable* Sacrament, that has need of the sound of a word to
help it, to be gathered. But how I pray you, should the reader gather your
auricular shrifte, or Popish confession if the word confess your selves were
used by us? I ween because the Priests are called in a little before. It is
more than mough, if you might gain your Sacrament of anealing by their coming
in. But shrifte comes to late after extreme unction. Well admit, the
Apostle forgotte the order, and placed it after, which should come before,
must we needs have Priestly confession proved out of that place? does not S
James say, confess your selves one to an other, as he says, pray one for an
other? Then it follows, that the Lay man must shriue the Priest, as well as
the Priest must shriue the Lay man. And the Priest must confess him self
to the people, as well as the people must pray for the Priest. But you have
an objection out of the Communion book, to prove confession to be a Sacrament,
which appoints, that the sick person shall make a special confession to the
minister, and he to absolve him, etc. Will you never leave this shameless
cogging, and forging of matters against us? The Communion book appoints a
special confession only for them that feel their conscience troubled with any
weighty matter, that they may receive counsel, and comfort by the minister,
who has authority in the name of God, to remitte sins, not only to them
that be sick, but also to them that be whole: and daily does pronounce the
absolution, to them that acknowledge and confess their sins humbly before
God. But hereof it follows not, that this confession is a Sacrament, for by
preaching, the people that believe, are absolved from their sins, by the
ministry of the Preacher: yet is not preaching a Sacrament. A Sacrament must
have an outward element, or bodily creature, to represent the grace of
remission of sins, as in Baptism, and in the Lords supper. But where you
conclude, that sincere translators should not have fled the proper and most
usual word of confession, you speak your pleasure, for the word of
acknowledging, is more proper and usual in the English tongue, than is the
word of confessing. And if you can prove any Sacrament out of that text,
behold, you have the Greek and Latin untouched and the English answereable
to both: make your Syllogism out of that place to prove Popish shrift when you
dare.

CHAP. XV.
Heretical translation against the Sacrament of HOLY ORDERS, and for the
MARRIAGE OF PRIESTS and VOTARIES.

Martin.
AGAINST the Sacrament of Orders 1.
what can they do more in translation, than in all their Bibles to take away
the name of Priest and Priesthood of the new Testament altogether, and for it
to say, Elder and Eldership? Whereof I treated more at large Chap. 6.
in an other place of this book. Here I add these few observations, that
both for Priests and Deacons, which are two holy orders in the Catholic
Church, they translate, Ministers, to commend that new degree devised by
themselves. As when they say in all their Bibles, Fear the Eccles. c. 7. v.
31. (...).
Lord with all thy soul, and honor his ministers. In the Greek it is plain
thus, and honor his Priests, as the word always signifies, and in the very
next sentence themselves so translate, Fear the Lord and honor the Priests.
But (...).
they would needs borowe one of these places for the honor of Ministers. As
also in the Epistle to Timothee, where S. Paul 1. Tim. 3.
talks of Deacons, and names them twice: they in the first place translate
thus, Likewise must the Ministers be honest, Bib. 1562. and 1577.
etc. And a little after Let the Deacons be the husbands of one wife, Lo, the
Greek word being one, and the Apostle (...).
speaking of one Ecclesiastical order of Deacons, and Beza so interpreating it
in both places, yet our English translators have allowed the first place to
their Ministers, and the second to Deacons. and so (because Bishops also went
before) they have found us out their three orders, Bishops, Ministers, and
Deacons. Alas poor souls, that can have no place in Scripture for their
Ministers, but by making the Apostle speak three things for two.

Fulke.
FOR the names of Priest, and Elder, we 1.
have spoken heretofore sufficiently, as also for the name of Minister, which
is used for the same that Elder and Priest, although the word signify more
generally. That the word Ministers is put for Priests, I take it rather to be
an oversight of the first translatour, whom the rest followed, because that
(...) comes immediately after, than any purpose against the order of Priest,
or to dignifie the name of Ministers. For, seeing Syrachs son speaks of the
Priests and Ministers of the ^awe, his saying can make nothing to or froe, for
the names of the Ministers, Priests or Elders of the new Testament. That some
translatio^s in 1. Tim. 3. for (...) render Ministers, it is because they
supposed the Greek word to be taken there, in the general sense, as it is in
many other places, not to make three degrees of two, as you do fondly cauil.
For the orders of Bishops, Elders, or as you call them Priests, and as they be
commonly called Priests and Ministers is all one in authority of ministering
the word and the Sacraments. The degree of Bishops, as they are taken, to be
a superior order unto Elders or Priests, is for government and discipline,
specially committed unto them, not in authority of handling the word and the
sacraments.

MART. 2. There are in the Scripture that are called Ministers in infinite
places, and that by three Greek words, commonly: but that is a large
signification of minister, attributed to all that minister, wait, serve, or
attend to do any service ecclesiastical or temporal, sacred or profane. If
the world be restrained to any one peculiar service or function, as one of the
Greek words is, then does it signify Deacons only. Which if they know not,
or will not believe me, let them see Beza himself in his Annotations upon Saint
Matthew, who protests, that in Annot. c. 5. v 25.
his translation, he uses always the word, Minister, in the general
signification: and Diaconus, in the special and peculiar Ecclesiastical
function of Deacons. So that yet we can not understand, neither can they tell
us, whence their peculiar calling and function of Minister comes, which is
their second degree under a Bishop, and is placed in steed of Priests.

FVLK. 2. What the general word of Minister signifies, how it is taken, both
generally and specally, we are not so ignorant, that we need be taught of
you: And yet al learned men are not agreed, when the greek word (...) is
restrained to the Minister of the poor, and when it signifies generally, all
the officers in the Church. As for the name of Minister, by which, Elders or
Priests are commonly called among us, I have even now, and diverse times
before showed, upon what occasion it was taken up, so to be applied, which yet
generally signifies all that serve in the Church, and common wealth also.

MART. 3. Again, what can be more against the dignity of sacred orders and
Ecclesiastical degrees, than to make them profane and secular by their terms
and translations? For this purpose, as they translate, Elders and Eldershippe,
for Priests, and Priesthode, so do they most impudently term S. Peter and S.
John, (...). Act. 4. Bib. 1562. (...). For messenger and legate the Scripture
uses these words, (...).
lay men: they say for Apostle, Ambassador and Messenger: Ioh 13. v. 16. and
for Apostles of the Churches, Messengers of the same: 2. Cor. 8. for Bishops,
overseers, Act. 20. Why my masters, does idiota signify, a lay man? Suppose a
lay man be as wise and learned as any other, is he idiota? or that one of your
Ministers be as unlearned and ignorant as any shepherd, is he not idiota? so
then idiota is neither Clearke nor lay man, but every simple and ignorant
man. They that spoke with miraculous tongs in the primitive church, were they
not lay men many of them? yet the Apostle plainly 1. Cor. 14. 23. 24.
distinguishes them from idiota. So that this is more ignorantly 1. Tim. 3.
or wilfully translated, than Neophytus, a young scholar in all your bibles.

FVLK. 3. There can be no greater wrangling, nor more unprofitable, than about
words and terms. But why, I pray you, should the terms of Elder and
Eldershippe be more profane and secular in English, than they be in Greek,
yea, than the names of ancients and seniors, which you your selves in your
translation use for the same office? will you never be ashamed of these
vanities, which turn always to your own reproach? yet do they (say you) most
impudently term S. Peter and John lay men. And do not you dishonor them as
much, to say in your translation, they were of the vulgar sort? what
signifies (...), a lay man, but one of the vulgar sort, or common people?
Again, were they of that Clergy, whereof Annas and Caiphas were high
Priests, or were they not as perfectely distinct, from that sacrificing
Priesthode, as any lay man at this day is from the christian clergy? yet you
go on whether the fury of your malice does carry you, and say that Idiota, is
neither Cleark, nor lay man, but every simple and ignorant man. If it be so,
then reform your translation, as well in this place of the Act. 4. as in 1.
Cor. 14. where you call idiota of the vulgar sort, or the vulgar, and pluck
your self first by the nose, for false translating, before you find fault
with us. Again, if the high Priests did take the Apostles for unlearned and
lay men, what impudency is it, to say, that we term them so? And touching
your signification of idiota, although the Priests knew, that they had not bin
brought up in study of learning, as they themselves were: yet, hearing their
bold and wise answer, they could not take them for simple and ignorant
men, therefore it follows, that they meant they were none of their
clergy, rather than that they were ignorant, and foolish, for simple in the
good part, they would not acknowledge them to be. As for the term,
Ambassador, and Messenger, for the Greek word, (...), Io 13 v. 16. may well
be used in that place, seeing it is like he speaks, as generally of the word
(...), as he does of (...), which is a servant. The servant is not greater
than his Lord, nor the ambassador than he that sent him. And for the
messengers of the Churches, when those are understood by the word (...),
which are sent on message from the Churches, and not those that are sent by
Christ, to preach unto the Churches, no wise manne can blame the translation,
Acts. 20. where (...) are of us translated, overseers, of you Bishops, yet in
your note, you say, or Priests, as though the word may signify, Priests,
which all men of skill do know to signify overseers, although the term
be given to them, which before are called, (...), Elders or Priests. But it
proceeds of great ignorance, that Neophytus is translated in all our
Bibles, a young Scholar. O what knowledge have we learned of you, to
translate Neophytus, a Neophyte. For before, we did take Neophytus, to signify
one that is newly planted, or lately ^ngraffed, and by a Metaphor, one that is
a young and new scholar in the mysteries of Christian religion, But because
your Pope uses to make boys and unlearned young men Bishops, and great
Prelates in your Church, you can not abide, that a young scholar should by
Saint Paul's rule be excluded from a Bishopric, and therefore you mock the
reader with a Neophyte. We know, that in the ancient Church they were
called Neophyti, which were lately baptized: but yet in the same sense,
because they were young scholars, and therefore look in the Homilies that are
entitled, ad Neophytos, and you shall see, they are directed and spente almost
or altogether in teaching the principles of Christian religion plainly,
wherein they were but young scholars, not yet perfectly instructed.

MART. 4. Now for changing the name Apostle into Messenger, though Beza do so
also in the foresaid places, yet in deed he controuleth both him self, and
you, in other places, saying Annot. in c. 10. Mat. v. 2.
of the same word, Apostles: A man may say in Latin, Legates, but we have
gladly kept the Greek word (Apostle) as many other words familiar to the
Church of Christ. And not only of the principal Apostles, but also of the
Annot. in Romans 16. v. 7 and in 2. Cor. 8. v. 23.
other Disciples, he both translateth, and interprets, in his commentary,
that they are notable Apostles. and he proves that all Ministers of the word
(as he terms them) are and may be so called. And for your Overseers, he
says, Episcopos, and not, Superintendentes. Which he might as well have said,
as you, Overseers. But to say the truth, though he be too too profane, yet he
does much more keep and use the Ecclesiastical received terms, than you do,
often protesting it, and as it were glorying therein, against Castaleon In tit.
Euang. Math. and in c. 3. v 11. etc. 10. v. 2. etc. 5. v. 25.
especially. As, when he says, Presbyterum, where you say Elder: Diaconum,
where you say, Minister, and so forth. Where if you tell me that howsoever he
translate, he means as profanely as you, I believe you, and therefore you
shall go together, like Master, like Scholars, all false and profane
translators. for, this Beza (who sometime so gladly keeps the name of
Apostle) yet calls Epaphroditus legatum Philippensium, Philip. 2. verse 15.
Whereupon the English Bezites translate, your Messenger, for, your Apostle. As
if S. Augustine who was our Apostle, should be called, our Messenger.

FVLK. 4. You can not leave your old byas, in wresting men's sayings far
beyond their meaning. Therefore you allege against us, the saying of Beza, for
the term of Apostles, to be retained, where mention is made of the Apostles of
Christ, not only those that are specially so called, but also all the
ministers of the word. But what is this, to term them by the honorable name
of Apostles, which are not sent by God, but by men, about some civil or
Ecclesiastical business. For both he and we call Epaphroditus, the Messenger, and
not the Apostle of the Philippians, because he was sent by the Philippians unto
Paul, and not by Christ unto them. As for that Augustine which was sent by
Gregory, might better be called Gregory's Apostle, than our Apostle, for he
was not sent by us, but to us, not immediately from God, as an Apostle should,
but from Gregory, and by Gregory. Touching the terms of Bishops, Elders,
Ministers, Priests, etc. enough has been said already. Our translators have
done that, which they thought best to be done in our language, as Beza did in
the Latin tongue.

MART. 5. As also, when you translate of S. Matthias the Apostle, that he was
by a common consent counted No. Test. 1580.
with the eleven Apostles: Act. 1. v. 26. what is it else, but to make only a
popular election of Ecclesiastical degrees, as Beza Annot. ibid. and Act. 14.
v. 23.
in his annotations, would have us to understand, saying, that nothing was
done here peculiarly by Peter, as one of more excellent dignity than the rest,
but in common by the voices of the whole Church. though in an other place upon
this election, he notes Peter to be the chief or Corypheus. And as for the
Greek word in this place, if partiality (...).
of the cause would suffer him to consider of it, he should find, that the
proper signification thereof in this phrase of speech, is, as the vulgar
Latin Interpreter, Erasmus, and Valla, (all which he rejects) translate it,
to wit, He was numbered, Annumeratus est. cooptatus est.
or, counted with the eleven Apostles, without all respect of common consent,
or not consent, as you also in your other Bibles do translate.

FVLK. 5. The election of Matthias to be an Apostle, was extraordinarily, and
therefore permitted to the lot: the manner whereof, as it is not to be drawn
into example, so the proper election can not be proved thereby: yet has both
Beza, and the English translator, faithfully expressed the Greek word, which
S. Luke there uses: although, neither Erasmus, nor Valla, beside your vulgar
Interpretor, did consider it. Neither does that common consent, in accepting
Mathias for an Apostle, whom the lotte had designed, more prove a popular
election, or derogate from the singularity of Peter, than that by common
consent of the whole brotherhood, two were chosen and set up, that the
Apostleshippe should be laid upon one of them.

MART. 6. Which diversity may proceed of the diversity of opinions among
you. For we understand by Master His defense, or 2. book. page 157.
Whitegifts books against the Puritanes, that he and his fellows deny this
popular election, and give preeminence, superiority, and difference in this
case to Peter, and to Ecclesiastical Prelates* and therefore he proves at
large the use and Ecclesiastical signification of the Greek word (...), not
to be the giving of voices in popular elections, but to be the Ecclesiastical
imposing of hands upon persons taken to the Churches ministry. Which he
says very truly, and needs the less here to be spoken of, specially being
touched chap. 6. nu. 7.
elsewhere in this book.

FVLK. 6. The diversity of the translation, proceeds of this, that the
former translators did not observe the nature of the Greek word, which Beza
has considered more absolutely, than any interpretors before him Although it
is not unlike, that Chrysostom did well acknowledge it, when speaking of this
election, he uses In act. hom. 3.
these words. I am and illud considera, quam and Petrus agit omnia ex communi
discipu^orum sententia, nihil authoritate sua, nihil cum imperio. Now also
consider this thing, how Peter does all things by common consent of the
Disciples, nothing of his own authority, nothing with rule or commandment.
And as for the popular election, if you had read those books, you make
mention of, you might perceive, that neither of both parts, allow a mere
popular election. And that Master Whitgift, does not so much contend, what
form of election was used in the time of the Apostles, and of the Primitive
Church, as whether it be necessary that such form of election as then was
practiced, should in all ages of the Church, and in all places, be of
necessity continued, and observed.

MART. 7. One thing only we would know, why they that plead so earnestly
against their brethren the Puritanes, about the signification of this word,
pretending herein only the primitive custom of imposition of hands, in
making their Ministers, why (I say) them selves translate not this word Bib.
1577.
accordingly, but altogether as the Puritanes, thus: When they had ordained
them Elders by election in every (...).
Church. Act. 14. verse 23. For if the Greek word signify Beza ibid.
here the peoples giving of voices (as Beza forces it only that way, out of
Tullie, and the popular custom of old Athens) then the other signification of
imposing hands is gone, which Master Whitgift defends, and the popular
election is brought in, which he refelleth: and so by their translation they
have in my opinion ouershotte themselves, and given advantage to their
brotherly Adversaries. Unless in deed they translate as they think, because
in deed they think as heretically as the other, but yet because their state
of Eccles^asticall regiment is otherwise, they must maintain that also in
their writings, howsoever they translate. For an example, They all agree to
translate Elder for Priest: and Master Whitakers Page 200. ad rat. Camp.
tells us a fresh in the name of them all, that there are no Priests now
in the Church of Christ, that is, (as he interprets himself) This name
Priest is never in the New Page 210.
Testament peculiarly applied to the Ministers of the Gospel, this is their
doctrine. But what is their prastise in the regiment of their Church? clean
contrary. For in the order of the communion book, where it is appointed what
the Minister shall do, it is indifferently said, Then shall the Priest do or
say this and that: and, Then shall the Minister, etc. Whereby it is evident that
they make Priest a proper and peculiar calling applied to their Ministers, and
so their practice is contrary to their teaching and doctrine.

FVLK. 7. I have satisfied your desire before, if you list to know, our
translation must be, as near as it can, to express the true signification of
the original words, and so it is, in that place of the Acts. 14. v. 23. which
being granted by them, that deny the necessity of ^at form of election to
continue always, gives no more advantage to the adversaries, than they
would take out of the signification of the Greek word, how soever it were
translated. Your example of Master Whitakers denying the name of Priest to be
applied to the ministers of the Gospel, to prove that we must maintain our
Ecclesiastical state, how soever we translate, is very fond and ridiculous:
as also the contradiction that you would make between him and the service
book, touching the name of Priest there used and allowed. Master Whitakers
writing in Latin, speaks of the Latin term, Sacerdos, the Communion book
of the English word Priest, is not this a goodly net for a fool to dance
naked in, and think that no body can see him.

MART. 8. Now concerning imposition, or laying on of hands, in making their
Ministers, (which the Puritans also Beza Annot. Act. 6. v. 6.
are forced to allow by other words of Scripture, howsoever they dispute and
iangle against (...)) none of them all make more of it, than of the like
Judicial ceremony in the old Law, not acknowledging that there is any grace
given withal, though the Apostle say there is, in express terms, but they
will answer this text (as they are wont) with a favorable translation,
turning grace, into gift. As, when the Apostle says thus, Neglect 1. Tim. 4.
v. 14. (...).
not THE GRACE that is in thee, which is given thee by prophecy, with
impositio^ of the hands of Priesthood, they translate, Neglect not the GIFT.
and Beza most impudently, for, by prophecy, translateth, to prophecy: making
that only to be this gift and withal adding this goodly exposition, that he
had the gift of prophecy, or preaching before, and now by imposition of hands
was chosen only to execute that function. But because it might be objected
that the Apostle says, Which was given thee with the imposition of hands, or,
(as he speaks in an other place) by imposition 2. Tim. 1.
of hands, making this imposition of hands, an isntrumental cause of giving
this grace, he says that it did only confirm the grace or gift before given.

FVLK. 8. Though we find that by, or with imposition of hands, many rare and
extraordinary gifts of prophecy of tongues, and such like, were given in the
Apostles time, yet we find no where, that grace is ordinarily given by that
ceremony, used always in the Church, for ordination of the ministers thereof.
But whether there be, or not, our translation of (...), into gift, is true and
proper to the word. For albeit the word (...), be taken, not only for the
favor of God, but also for his gracious gifts: yet (...) is never taken in
the Scripture, but for a free gift, or a gift of his grace. That Beza refers
the preposition (...), to the end of the gift, he has the nature of the
word to bear him out, which may well abide that sense: and yet he does not
reject the other common interpretation by prophecy, that by appointment of the
holy Ghost, uttered by some of the Prophets. But where you wrangle about the
gift of prophecy, as though he were utterly void thereof, before he received
imposition of hands: I know not what you mean. Would you have us think,
that he was ordained Priest, or Elder, or to any office of the Church,
without competent gifts, meet to discharge his office? That the gift of
prophecy as well as of speakinge with tongues, might be given by and with
imposition of hands, Beza doubts not. But it is out of doubt, that to an
office, none was chosen or admitted by the Apostle and the rest of the
Presbytery of Ephesus, but such as had sufficient gifts to answer that
office.

MART. 9. Thus it is evident that, though the Apostle speak never so plain
for the dignity of holy Orders, that it gives grace, and consequently is a
Sacrament, they pervert all to the contrary, making it a bare ceremony,
suppressing the word grace, which is much more significant to express the
Greek word, than gift is, because it is not every (...).
gift, but a gracious gift, or a gift proceeding of marvelous and mere
grace. At when it is said, To you it is given Phil. cap. 1. v. 29.
not only to believe, but also to suffer for him. The Greek word signifies
this much, To you this grace is given, (...). Act 27.
etc. So when God gave unto S. Paul all that sailed with him, this Greek
word is used, because it was a great grace or gracious gift given unto him.
When S. Paul pardoned 2. Cor. 2. (...).
the incestuous person before due time, it is expressed by this word, because
it was a grace (as Theodorete calls it) given unto him. And therefore also
the alms of the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 16. v. 3. are called, their grace, which
the Protestants (...).
translate, liberality, neglecting altogether the true force and signification
of the Greek words.

FVLK. 9. Here is no evidence at al, that the order of Priesthood is a
Sacrament, or gives grace, but that God, by the ceremony of laying on of
hands, did give wonderful and extraordinary gifts, of tongues, and
prophesying, in the beginning and first planting of the Church. But, that
grace should always follow that ceremony, there is no proof to be made out
of the holy Scriptures. And experience shows, that he which was void of
gifts* before he was ordered Priest, is as very an ass and Dogbolte, as
he was before, for any increase of grace or gracious gifts: although he
have authority committed unto him, if he be ordained in the Church, though
unworthily, and with great sin both of him that ordains, and of him that is
ordained. But we suppress the word grace (you say) because charisma
signifies, at least, a gracious gift. See how the bare sound of terms
delights you, that you might therein seek a shadow for your singlesolde
sacrament of popish orders. The word signifies, a free or gracious gift,
and so will every man understand it, which knows, that it is given by God.
As also in all places, where mention is made of Gods gifts, we must
understand, that it proceeds freely from him, as a token of his favor and
grace. But that the Greek word (...), do the always import the grace or
favor of God, none either wise or learned will affirm, neither does your
vulgar interpretor express the word of grace in those places that you bring
for example, Phi. 1. v. 29. he says plainly, donatum est, it is given, and so
your selves translate it. Why, I pray you do you suppres the word grace, or why
do you thus trifle against us? When Saint Paul appealed to Caesar, Acts. 25.
affyrming, that no man could give him into the hands of his adversaries, he
uses the same word (...). So, when Festus tells Agrippa, that he answered
the Jews, that it was not the custom of the Romans, to give any man to
destruction, etc* Saint Luke uses the word (...), were not he a mad
translator* or interpretor either, that would expound this word of the grace
of God, which is spoken of the favor of men? So, when the Apostle, 1. Cor.
16. calls the alms of the Corinthians, their grace, is it not better
english to say, their liberality? for although their liberality proceeded
of Gods gift, yet the Apostle adding the pronoune (...), means the free gift
of the Corinthians, not the grace of God.

MART. 10. But concerning the sacrament of orders, as in the first to
Timothee, so in the second also, they suppress the word Grace, and call it
barely and coldely, Gift, saying: I put thee in remembrance, that thou stir
up the ^* Tim. 1. v. 6.
gift of God, which is in thee, by the putting on of my hands. Where if they
had said, the grace of God, which is in thee, by the putting on of my hands:
then were it plain, that S. Paul by the ceremony of imposing hands upon
Timothee, in making him Priest, or Bishop, gave him grace: and so it should be
a very Sacrament of holy Orders* for avoiding whereof, they translate
otherwise, or else let them give us an other reason thereof, specially the Greek
word much more signifying grace, than a bare gift, as is declared.

FVLK. 10. These colewoorts were sodden enough once before that they need not
be set on again. The word (...) if you find it an hundredth times, signifies
no more* but a free gift, or a gift that is freely given, even as the English
word gift does: whereof the Proverb is, what is so free as gift? Wherefore if we
had said the grace of God we had translated amiss, and otherwise than the
Greek word does signify. But where you trifle in your terms of a bare gift,
and we call it barely and coldly a gift, you do nothing but bewray your own
shame. Can the gift of God be called a bare gift? or does he speak barely and
coldly, that says the gift of God? Does the Apostle Ephesians. 2. speaking of our
salvation, and your vulgar interpretor, and you your selves speak of a bare
gift, and call it barely and coldly, the gift of God? When you say, you are
saved* through faith (and that not of your selves, for it is the gift of God)
not of works etc. See you not that while you seek to raze our skin, you
strike your self to the heart? Be wiser therefore, and spare your own
credit: find no fault with that which you cannot amend* and which if it were a
fault, you your selves commit as much as we.

MART. 11. The more to prosane this sacred order, whereunto continency and
single life has been always annexed in the new Testament for the honor and
reverence of the functions thereunto belonging, to profan^ the same (I say) and
to make it mere laicall and popular, they will have all to be married men, yea
those that have vowed the contrary: and it is a great credit among them, for
our Priests Apostataes to take wives. This they would deduce from the Apostles
custom, but by most false and impudent translation: making S. Paul say thus as
of his own wife and the other Apostles wives, Have not 1. Cor. ^ v ^. No.
Test. 1580.
we power to lead about a wife being a sister, as well as the rest of the
Apostles? Whereas the Apostle says nothing (...). Mat. 27.
else but, a woman a sister, that is, a Christian woman, meaning such holy
women as followed Christ, and the Apostles* to find and ^i. 1. aduers. Ioum. De
op. mon. ca. 4.
maintain them of their substance. So does S. Hierom interpret it, and S.
Augustine, both directly proving that it cannot be translated, wife, but,
woman: and the Greek fathers most expressly. And as for the Greek word, if
they say it is ambiguous* S. Augustine tells them that as the Apostle has
put it down In Collecta^. Decu. super hun^ docum.
with all the circumstances, there is no ambiguiti^ at all that might deceive any
man. Yea let us set a part the circumstances, and consider the Greek word
alone in it self, and Beza will tell us Annot. Mat. 5. v. 28. and 1. Cor. 7.
v. 1.
in other places, that it signifies a woman rather than a wife: reprehending
Erasmus for translating it, wife, because there is no Quia non additur. (...).
circumstance annexed why it should so signify: thereby declaring that of it
self it signifies, woman, and therefore much more when the circumstance also
(as S. Augustine says) makes it certain, that so it does signify.

FVLK. 11. If matrimony be a holy Sacrament, as you say, and an holy ordinance
of God as we both confess, how should the sacred order of Priesthood be
profaned thereby. That co^tinence and single life has always been annexed to
the Ecclesiastical functions in the new Testament, it is so manifest an
untruth, that I will not stand to confute it. As where you say, that we make the
order mere laycal and popular, that we will have all men to be married* yea
those that have vowed the contrary, these be most impudent assertions. Though
it be free for all men to marry, yet no man is willed, otherwise than he shall
find cause in him self. And for Priests that come from you, it is more
credit to marry, than out of marriage to live incontinently: otherwise they
are of as great credit that be unmarried, as they that be married. What the
custom 1. Tim 3. T^t. 1. 1. Cor. 9. etc.
of the Apostles was for having wives and keeping company with the^, not only
the Scripture of the Apostles, but also Clemens Alexandrinus a most ancient
writer is witness for us, and against your impudent assertion, alleging even
this text of 1. Cor. 9. To prove that they did lead their wives about with
them. P^r quas etiam in Gynecaum, etc. By means of whom the doctrine of our
Lord might enter into the closet of women, without any reprehension, or evil
suspicion. By which our translation is proved to be good and true, as I have
more at large declared before. Cap. 1. Sect. 18. Nether is there here any new
And Pr^fat. Sect. 36.
matter, which is not there sufficiently answered.

MART. 12. Wherefore great must the impudency of Beza be (and of the English
B^zites) that knowing this and protesting it else where in his Annotations, yet
here translateth, soro^em vxorem, a sister a wife, and saying after his lordly
manner, I doubted not so to translate it, disputing and reasoning against al
other interpreters both ancient and later, for the contrary, yea and aff^ming
that S. Paul him self, did foolishly, if Inepte facer^^.
he spoke there, of other rich women. Such a fancy he has to make the
Apostles not only married man, but that they carried about their wives with
them, and that they were the Apostles wives, (for so he translateth it Act. 1.
v. 14) that returned with them after Cum vxoribus.
our Lords ascension to Jerusalem, and continued together in prayer til the
holy Ghost came upon them. Whereas S. Luke there speaks so evidently of the
other holy and faithful women which are famous in the Gospel (as the Mary's and
other) that the English Bezites them selves dare not here follow his
translation. For I beseech you M. Beza (to turn my talk unto you a little) is
there any circumstance or particle here added why i^ (...). Vxorem non tangere.
(...).
should be translated wives? none. then by your own reason before alleged it
should rather be trs^lated, women* Again, did Erasmus translate well, saying,
It is good for a man not to touch a wife? 1* Cor. 7. v. 1. No, say you,
reprehending this translation, because it dehorteth from marriage. If not, show
your commission why you may translate in the foresaid places, wife, and wives,
at your pleasure: the Greek being all one, both where you will not in any wise
have it translated, wife, and also where you will have it so translated in any
wise.

FVLK. 12. Nay great must be the impudency of the Papists, that imagine the
Apostles, which had wives of their own, did leave them behind them, and lead
straung women about with them into all parts of the world. The first that
invented that gloss of co^tinent women, such as followed Christ, was
Tertullian, the Montanist in his book of Monogamy, which he wrote against the
Church, conde^ning second marriage, and reproving the Latin translation of his
time as it seems, which in this text. 1. Cor. 9. used the term of vxor, by
the ambiguitie of the Greek word (...), saying that if the Apostle had spoken
of matrimony, he would have understood this of wives, but seeing he speaks
De victuaria exhibitione, of the exhibition toward his living, he understands
it of such women as followed Christ. Than the which distinction nothing can be
more absurd: for speaking of exhibition toward his living, the Apostle
shows, that he might have lawfully charged the Church with finding, not only
of him self, but also of his wife, as the other Apostles did. Again if rich
women did follow the Apostles, ministering to the^ of their substance, as they
followed our Savior, this was no burden, but an easement unto the Church, which
the Apostle would not have absteined from as a thing burdenous to the Church of
Corinth. Concerning the other place Act. 1. v. 14. although perhaps it be not
necessary, to translate wives, yet it is necessary to understand wives. For to
answer you in M. Bezaes name, who tells you, that it was meet, as also
Erasmus thinks that their wives should be confirmed, who partly were to be
companions of their travail and peregrinatio^, partly to tarry patie^tly at
home, while their husbands were about the Lords business, and therefore their
wives also were present. Again, what a shameful absurdity were it, to think
that the Apostles would tarry in a close house, so long together with other
women than their wives, and shut out their own wives, which must needs have
been subject to great offense and obloquie. And what deuilish malice have you
against the Apostles wives, that you cannot abide, that they should join with
their husbands in prayer and supplication, and be made partakers of the holy
Ghost with them, as well as other women, which were also married women, Mary the
wife of Cleophas, Ioanna the wife of Chuza, and other holy women, the mothers
or wives of holy men? Will you say the Apostles had no wives? Peter's wives
mother will testify against you. Will you say she was forsaken Cleme^. Reco.
lib. 7. Cronica cronic. Fascicul. Temp.
by Peter? the story of his martiredome, if it be true, affirms, that she
continued with him to his dying day: will you say, he had no matrimonial
company with her? his daughter Petronilla will bear witness against you, so
young, that she was desired in marriage by Flaccus the Comes. Touching the
place, 1. Corin. 7. where Erasmus translateth, vxorem, I have answered
already, the circumstance of the place, does argue, that it is spoken
generally of continence, and not of abstinence in marriage only. And who is
such a nouice in the greek tongue, that he knows not, that the word (...)
signifies, a wife or woman, as the circumstaunce of the place requires, where
it is used?

MART. 13. Again, to this purpose they make Saint (...)
Paul say, as to his wife, I beseech thee also faithful yokfellow, Phil. 4. v.
3. for in English what does it else sound, but man and wife? but that S.
Paul should h^ere mean his wife, most of the greek fathers count it
ridiculous and foolish, S. Socie germane. Theophilacte says, if he spoke to a
woman, it should be^ (...) in the Greek. Li. 2. c. ^4.
Chrysostom, Theodorete, Oecumenius, Theophilactus. Beza and Calvin both
mislike it, translating also in the masculine gender, S. Paul himself says
the contrary, that he had no wife, 1. Cor. 7. And as for Clemens Alexandrinus,
who alleges it for Paul's wife, Eusebius plainly insinua^eth, and Nicephorus
expressly says, that he did it (...), by the way of contention and disputation,
whiles he ^arnestly wrote against them that oppugned matrimony.

FVLK. 13. The Greek word being (...), signifies a fellow or companion in
yoke, they have not therefore translated amiss, when they say yoke fellow*
which signifies, fellow in any yoke whatsoever. If it sound, man and wife in
English, what matter is that? for so it sounds in Greek. Men must not
follow the sound of words only, but examine the matter. And great
probability there is, that he speaks there of his wife, as Clemens
Alexandrinus thinks, neither does S. Paul himself say precisely, he had no
wife, 1. Cor. 7. but that he lived without the use of a wife, which might be,
his wife consenting to remain at ^hilippi. That the later writers mislike the
judgment of Clemens, and specially that fabulous historia^ Nicephorus, it
derogateth nothing to his credit* nor to the likelihoode of the matter. That
Theophy lact says, the adjective should be of the foeminine gender, he is not
to be credited above Clemens Alexandrinus, who knew the purity of the Greek
tongue, as well as he. But whether it be to be understood of his wife or no, we
leave it indifferent, and translate according to the Greek word, without
prejudice of either opinion, which kind of translation, at other times you do
highly commend.

MART. 14. Again, for the marriage of Priests, and of all sorts of men
indifferently, they translate the Apostle thus: wedlock Hebr. 13.
is honorable among al men. Where one falsificatio^ is, that they say, among
all men, and Beza, inter quosuis, and in No. Test. a^. 1565.
the margent, in omni hominu^ ordine, in every order or condition of me^, and
in his Annotation he raileth, to make this translation good whereas the greek is
as indifferent to signify, that (...).
marriage is honorable, by all means, in all respects, wholly, thoroughly,
altogether. So does, not only Erasmus, but also the greek fathers See, Oecum.
in ca^en^.
expound it, namely Theophilact, whose words in the greek be very significa^t*
but too long here to troble the reader with the^. Not in part says he,
honorable, and in part not: but wholly, throughout, by all means honorable and
undefiled, in all ages, in all times. Therefore, to restrain it in tra^slatio^ to
persons only (though it may also very well be understood of all persons that have
no impedime^^ to the contrary) that is to translate falsely.

FVLK. 14. I have answered already, that seeing the apostle threatens the
judgment of God against fornicators and adulterers, the most apt
signification of the words (...), is among al me^. Although that which you
would have, comprehe^deth al persons, as well as al other things, means,
respects, etc. If any persons have an impediment to the contrary, such as Gods
word does allow, their marriage by this text, is not authorized. But Priests
have no impediment, when they are, by the word of God to be chosen, as well of
marr^ed men, as of any other, 1. Tim. 5. Tit. 1. neither can it be any
falsification, to translate so, as both the words in the Greek tongue do
signify, and the reason of the place does require. Theophilacts words, you
say, be long, and so it seems, they be for your purpose, therefore you take
but a piece in the mids, cutting off, both the beginning, and the end that
make against you. In all (says he) not in men of riper age, and not in young men
also, but in all me^, or by all means, and in all times, not in affliction truly,
and in quietness not also. not in this part precious, and honorable, and in that
part, otherwise, but the whole, and through al parts, let it be precious. Here
heretics are made to blush, that slander marriage. For behold, he calls
marriage precious, matrimony honorable, which keeps a man in the virtue of
temperance. And afterward. If matrimony be permitted, the fornicators and
adulterers are justly punished. Who is so blind, that he will not see
Theophilact refer it to the persons, as well as to al parts of it? At least
wise, you should have remembered, that Theophilact, being a Bishop of the Greek
church, where their Priests have bin, and yet are suffered to be married men,
would not write any thing here, against the marriage of Priests. Neither does
Oecumenius exclude the persons, when he extolleth the perfection of marriage,
but rather does comprehend them. Chrysostom does plainly refer it to the
persons, insomuch, that he ioineth it in exposition with that text, Have peace
with all men.

MART. 15. An other, and the like falsificatio^ in this same short sentence,
is, that they make it an affirmative speech, by adding, is: whereas the apostles
words be these, Marriage honorable (...).
in all, and the bed undefiled. Which is rather an exhortation, as if he should
say, Let marriage be honorable, and the bed undefiled. How honorable? that (as
S. Peter speaks, 1. Pet. c. 3.) non co^uerse with their wives according to
knowledge, im^arting honor to them, as to the weaker vessels: that is, as S.
(...)
P. also explica^eth it* 1. Th. c. 4. possessing every man his vessel in
sanctification and honor, not in the passion or lust of concupiscence, (...)
as the Gentiles, etc. Lo what honorable marriage is, to wit, when the
husband uses the wife honorably and honestly in all respects, not beastly
and filihily according to all kind of lust and concupiscence. And that the
Apostle here exhorts to this honorable usage of wedlock, rather than
affirms any thing* it is most probable, both by that which goes before, and
that which immediately follows, al which are exhortations. and les the
Protestants give us a reason out of the Greek text, if they can, why they
translate the words following by way of exhortation, Let your conuers^tion be
without covetousness: (...).
and not these words also in like manner, Let marriage be honorable in all.
Certain it is, that the Greek in both is al one phrase and speech, and Beza
is much troubled to find a good reason against Erasmus, who thinks it is an
exhortation. The sentence then being ambiguous and doubtful at the least, what
ioly fellows are these that will so restrain it in translation, that it cannot
be taken in the other sense, and not rather leave it indifferently, as in the
Greek and vulgar latin it is, least the sense of the holy ghost be not that, or
not only that, which they translate.

FVLK. 15. I have already showed, that the Verb of the indicative mood, is
here to be understood, because the verb which follows in the same verse,
is of the indicative mood. Again, the participle (...)* as Beza tells you,
declares the first words to be uttered affirmatively: Marriage is honorable
among al men, and the bed undefiled, but fornicatours and adulterers God will
judge. Moreover, Chrysostom, Theodorete, Theophilact, Oecumeneus, do al prove
out of this place, the permission and lawfulness of marriage to all men,
which could not be except they understood the Apostles words affirmatively.
That married men must live temperately with their wives, it is also true,
but not the principal purpose of the Apostle here, to exhort thereunto, but
rather to dissuade men from fornication and adultery, because marriage is
honorable and undefiled in all sorts of men. The reason you require, Beza
has given you, and I have reported it. Neither is the sentence ambiguous,
neither has it been so taken, but of late days, in despite of holi^
matrimony, which though you can not deny in all men, yet you deface the honor
thereof, as the Manichees, and other Heretics did, when you affirm that the
sacred order of priesthood is profaned thereby. They be your own words
before, sect. 11. conuincing you to be a maintainer of the doctrine of devils.
1. Tim 4.

MART. 16. Moreover it is against the profession of continency in Priests,
and others, that they translate our Saviors words of single life, and the
unmarried state, thus: All men Mat. 19. v. 11.
can not receive this saying: as though it were impossible to live continent.
Where Christ said not so, that all men can not, but, All men do not receive
this saying. But of this I have spoken more in the chapter of free will. Here I
add only concerning the words following, that they translate them not
exactly, nor perhaps with a sincere meaning* for if there be chastity in
marriage, as well as in the single life, as Paphnutius the confessor most truly
said, and they are wont much to allege it, then their translation does nothing
express our Saviors meaning, when they say, There are some chaste, which have
made them Bib. 1561. 1577*
selves chaste, for the kingdom of heavens sake* for a man might say, all do
so that live chastely in matrimony. but our Savior speaks of them that are
impotent and unable to generation, called* Eunuchs, or gelded men, and that in
three (...)
diverse kinds: some that have that infirmity or maime from their birth,
othersome that are gelded afterward by men, and other that geld themselves for
the kingdom of heaven, not by cutting of those parts, which were an horrible
mortal sin, but having those parts, as other men have* yet geld themselves
(for (...),
so is the Greek) and make them selves unable to generation. Which how it can
be but by voluntary profession, promise, and v^w of perpetual continency,
which they may never break, let the Protestants tell us. Christ then as it is
most evident, speaks of gelded men, either c^rporally, or spiritually, (which
are al such as profess perpetual continency:) and they tell us of some that
were borne chaste, and some that were made chaste by men, and some that make them
selves chaste: ^ most foolish and false translation of the Greek words. (...)*
and (...)

FVLK. 16. Concerning the former part of this matter, Math. 19. v. 11. we have
answered sufficiently, in the chapter of free will, but here is a new cavil.
Because chastity is also in marriage, as in single life, our translators do
not well to express the word (...), and (...), by, chaste, and have made
chaste. I confess they should more properly have said, gelded men, or gelded
them selves, or else continent, and made continent. Although they mean none
other by the word chaste, which they use. And touching your question, how men
may lawfully geld them selves, but by voluntary purpose of continency, which
they may not break: I answer, that we deny not, but that such as be assured
they have the gift of continency, may profess to keep it, and after such
profession or promise, made to God, they sin if they break it. But if any
have rashly vowed that which they are not able to keep, they have sinned in
vowing, and can not keep their vow by abstinence from marriage, except they
abstain also from all filthiness out of marriage: for such, we hold with
Epiphanius, and Saint T^i^^. cont. Apost. 61. Hierom. ep. ad Demetriadem.
Hierome, that immoderate aduauncer of virginity, that it is better to marye,
than out of marriage to live incontinently.

MART. 17. The Bezites here, are blameless, who translate it word for word.
Eunuchs: but they are more to blame in an other place, where in derogation of
the privilege and dignity ^^^. 2. v. ^. (...).
of Priests, they translate thus: The Priests lips should preserve
knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth. where in the Hebrew and
Greek, it is as (...)
plain as possibly can be spoken, The Priests lips shall keep knowledge,
and they shall seek the Law at his mouth. Which is a marvelous privilege
given to the Priests The infallible judgment of ^he Priests, in questions of
religion.
of the old Law, for true determination of matters in controversy, and right
expounding of the Law, as we read more fully, Deutero. 17. Where they are
commanded under pain of death, to stand to the Priests judgment, which in
this place God by the Prophet Malachie, calls his covenant with Leui, and
that he v. 4.
will have it to stand, to wit, in the new Testament, where Peter has such
privilege for him, and his successors, that his faith shall not fail, where
the holy Ghost is President in the Church of Bishops and Priests. All which
these Heretics would deface and defeat, by translating the words otherwise,
than the holy Ghost has spoken them.

FVLK. 17. The verb in deed, which the Prophet Malachie uses, is of the
future temps. But who knows not, that the Hebrews lack the potentiall mode?
and therefore they do very often express it, by the future temps of the
indicative mode. Which if you should always translate by the future
indicative, you should make many fair promises to them that are sharply
rebuked. But the circumstance of the place, does plainly declare, that the
Priests of that time, had broken the covenant made with Leui, concerning
keeping of the law. Yea the very words following express the same. But you
have departed out of the way, and have caused many to fall against the law.
You have made void the covenant of Leui, says the Lord of Hosts. By which
words, it is manifest, that the Prophet before, spoke of that knowledge of the
law, which the Priest ought to have, and not which the Priests always had:
for certain it is, that many of them were ignorant, yea sometimes all: the
high Priest was often an Idolater. And who condemned Christ, and his Gospel,
but the high Priests? The authority that was given to the Priests, in case
of controversy, was limited within the bounds of Gods law, from which if they
declined* no man was bound to obey them. For who was bound to obey Vrias the
high Priest, preferring the idolatrous altar of Damasco, before the true altar
of the Lord? or those deuilish tyrants, Menclaus, Alcimus, and such other, as
occupied the Priests rooms in the time of the Maccabees, or Annas and Caiphas,
in the ^yme of Christ. Peter then having none other privilege for him and his
successors, than Aaron had, he and his successors might fall and be deceived:
although Christ prayed that his faith should not fail, as he prayed for all
the Apostles, and for all their successors, yea, for all beleuers, that they
might be sanctified in the truth: yet it were madness, to say, that none of them
could err. But whenever you will go about to prove this privilege, out of
those words of our Savior Christ, make your Syllogism, and let us have no
more brabling. Our translation in that place of Malachie, is more true, than
you are able to impugn, for those words are rather a commandment, what the
Priests lips should do, not a promise or assurance, that they always did so.

MART. 18. And when the Prophet adds immediately the cause of this singular
prerogative of the Priest, quia angelus Domini exercituum est, because he is
the Angel of the Lord of hosts, which is also a wonderful dignity, so to be
called: they after their cold manner of profane translation, say, because he is
the messenger of the Lord of hosts. So do they in the next chapter, call S.
John the Baptist, messenger: Malach. 3. v. 1.
where the Scripture no doubt speaks more honorably of him, as being
Christ's precursor, than of a messenger, which is a term for posts also and
lackies. The Scripture I say, speaks thus of S. John, Behold I send mine
Angel before thee: (...). Angelnm meum.
and our Savior in the Gospel, Mat. 11. Luc. 7. telling the people the
wonderful dignisies of S. John, and that he was more than a Prophet, cites
this place, and gives this reason, For this is he of whom it is written,
Behold I send mine Angel before thee. Which Saint Hierom calls meritorum
(...), Comment. in hunc locum.
the increase and augmenting of John's merits or privileges, that in Malachie
he is called an Angel: and Saint Gregori^ says, he which came to bring
tidings of Christ Hom. 6. in Euang.
him self, was worthily called an Angel, that in his very name there might be
a dignity, and all the fathers, and all wit and reason conceive a great
excellencye in this name: only our profane Protestants that think of all
divine things, and persons, most basely, translate accordingly, even in the
foresaid Gospel also, making our Savior to say, that John was more than a
Prophet, because he was a Messenger. Yea, where our Savior him self is
called, Angelus Testamenti, the Angel of the Testament, there they translate,
the messenger Malach. 3. v. 1.
of the covenant.

FVLK. 18. It is not safe, to translate always the messenger of God, by the
name of an Angel, which is commonly taken to signify a spirit, not a bodily
creature: therefore our translators thought good to express the signification
of the Hebrew, and Greek word in English, and to use the term of Messenger,
as the word does signify: nothing derogating from the dignity of the
persons, or office of them, of whom it is uttered, which consists in the
addition following of God, of the Lord, of the Church. For the name of Angel,
of it self, is no name of dignity, seeing there be Angels of the devil, and
of darkness, as well as of God, and of light. And Isidorus Clarius interprets
the word in this place of Malachie, Legatus, the Ambassador, or Messenger. It
is not therefore of any profane mind, that for Angel, we say Messenger. Your
own vulgar Interpretor, Agg. 1. v. 13. translateth Maleach Jehovah, nuncius
domini, the Lords Messenger, and so diverse times where mention is made (...)
of Gods Messengers. This is therefore a vain contention about terms, when
the matter is not in question. That the name of Angels sounds more honorably
as Hierom and other think, it is no rule to bind translators, but expounders
may as occasion is offered observe it.

MART. 19. If S. Hierome in all these places had translated, nuntium, then the
English were messenger: but translating it, angelum, and the Church and al
antiquity so reading and expounding it as a term of more dignity and
excellency, See Apoc. c. 2. and 3. in the English Bibl. 1562. To the messenger
of the congregation, etc. Angelo Ecclesia.
what mean these base companions to disgrace the very eloquence of the
Scripture, which by such terms of amplification would speak more
significantly and emphatically? what mean they I say) that so inuey against
Castaleo for his profaneness, them selves to say, for Angel, Messenger, for
Apostle, Legate, or Ambassador, and the like? Are they afraid, lest by calling
me^ Angels, it would be mistaken, as though they were Angels in deed by
nature? then S. Paul spoke daungerously, when he said to the Galathians, As
Gods Angel you received me, ^^l. 4. v. 14.
as Christ Jesus. But to proceed.

FVLK. 19. The very eloquence of the Scripture, is best expressed, when the
words are translated as they signify in the original tongue. And although
some words, be appropried to certain callings, which it is not convenient to
turn into the general signification: yet is neither the Hebrew, nor the
Greek word, that signifies Messengers in the Scripture, so restrained, but
that it is used, for all Messengers indifferently, of God and men yea of God,
and the devil. Wherefore there is no cause why we should use the Greek word
Angel, rather than the English word Messenger. And where you ask, whether we
be afraid, lest by calling men Angels, it would be mistaken, as though they
were Angels in nature: we may well fear, lest the ignorant and unlearned,
might so be deceived, when Bristow, so great a Doctor* and writer among you, is
so fondly disguised, that he mistaketh the Angel of the Church of
Philadelphia, Apo^. 3. ^^^st. repl. c. 6.
for an Angel by nature, and alleges, that which God promises, that his
enemies the Jews shall worship before his feet, to prove the invocation and
worship of heavenly Angels. Neither spoke Paul daungerously, when he said the
Galathia^s received him as an Angel of God as Christ Jesus. For the word
Angel in the Greek tongue signifies a messenger: it was easy to understand,
that the messenger or ambassador of a Prince is received as the Prince him
self, without confounding the persons, of the Prince and his messenger.

MART. 20. It is much for the authority and dignity of Gods Priests, that
they do bind and loose, and execute al Ecclesiastical function ^^ in the
person and power of Christ, whose ministers they are. So Saint Paul says, 2.
Cor. 2. v. 10. that when he pardoned or released the penance of the
incestuous Corinthian, he did it in the person of Christ. That is (as (...).
Saint Ambrose expounds it) in the name of Christ, in his steed, as his
Vicar and deputy. But they translate it, In the sight of Christ. Where it is
evident they can not pretend the Greek, and if there be ambiguitie in the
Greek, the Apostle him self takes it away interpreting himself in the very
same case, when he excommunicateth the said incestuous person, saying, 1. Cor.
5. v. ^.
that he does it, in the name and with the virtue of our Lord Jesus Christ: so
expounding what he means also in this place.

FVL. 20. That the Bishops, Elders, or Priests of gods Church do bind and lose
as in the person and power of Christ, in his name, and by his authority is
acknowledged by us: But when we translate (...), in the sight of Christ, we
respect, what the Greek phrase does more properly require, yea, what the
Hebrewe phrase mipenei, (...)
does signify, whereunto it is like, that the Apostle does allude. Otherwise,
Beza in his annotations upon the place, does not mislike the sense, and
interpretation of Ambrose, whereof he makes mention, but prefers the other,
as more simple and agreeable to the meaning of the Apostle in that place, and
to the nature of the Greek and Hebrew phrase.

MART. 21. And it may be, that for some such purpose, they change the ancient
and accustomed reading in these words of S. Matthew, Ex te enim exiet dux qui
regat populu^ meum Mat. 21
Israel: translating thus, Out of thee shall come the gouemour that shall feed
my people Israel. for, that shall No. Test. 1580.
rule my people Israel. This is certain that it is a false translation, (...).
because the Prophets words. Mich. 5. (cited by Saint Matthew) both in Hebrewe
and Greek* signify only, a ruler or Governor, and not a Pastor or feeder.
Therefore it is either (...)
a great over sight, which i^ a small matter in comparison of the least
corruption: or rather, because they do the like Act. 20. v. 28. it is done, to
suppres the signification of ecclesiastical power and government, that
concurreth with feeding, first in Christ, and from him in his Apostles and
Past^rs of the Church, both which are here signified in this one Greek word,
to wit, that Christ our (...).
Savior shall rule and feed, (Ps. 2. Apoc. 2. v. 27.) yea he shall rule in a
rod of iron, and from him, Peter and the rest, by his commission (...).
given in the same word feed and rule my sheep. Io. 21. yea and that in a rod
of iron, as when he stroke Ananias and Act. 5. ^. Cor. 4. v. 21. etc. 5. v 5.
and 2. Cor. ^0. v. 4. and 8.
Sapphira to corporal death, as his successors do the like offenders to
spiritual destruction (unless they repent) by the terrible rod of
excommunication. This is imported in the double signification of the Greek
word, which they to diminish Ecclesiastical authority, they translate, feed,
rather than, rule, or govern.

FVLK. 21. That we should not mean any thing against the government of
Christ, whom we wish and desire from our hearts, that he alone might
reign, and his servants under him, he himself is judge, to whom in this case
we do boldly appeal. But let us see, how we may be charged with false
translation. The Hebrewe and greek (say you) do signify only a ruler or
governor, Mich. 5. And do not we translate a governor or captain, which may
answer there the Hebrew of the Prophet, or the Greek of the Septuaginta, or
of the Evangelist. The word (...) that we translate, sometime to govern,
sometime to feed, is not in the Prophet, but in the Evangelist, and
signifies properly to feed as a sheepeheard, and metaphorically to govern.
What cause have you here to cry out, false translation, and to oppose the
Hebrewe word of the Prophet, which is fully satisfied in the word governor?
And the Greek word, which the Evangelist uses, has his proper signification
in some translations, in other, that which is figurative, neither does the one
exclude the other. But feeding does import governing. But it seems you would
have rule, without feeding, that you are so zealous for government. The word
(...), Act. 20. in some translations, is rendered. to rule, in other, to feed.
The more proper is, to feed, yet the greek word will bear the other also. But
feeding as a sheephearde does his sheep, comprehends both. The same word
Joan. 21. our Savior Christ limiteth rather to feeding as ye Evangelist
reports his words using (...) twice and (...) once. For by lording and ruling
Peter should not so well testify his love toward Christ, as by painful
feeding. And there your own vulgar interpreter translateth Pasce, and your
selves feed, though in the margent you would feign pray aid of the Greek to
establish your popes tyrannical rule. Yea you will give him a rod of iron
which is the scepter of Christ, yea an army of soldiers to subdue Irelande,
and to wrest it out of the Queen of Englandes dominion that is (...) feed and
rule my sheep in your secret meaning, and for that purpose you bring in the
miraculous striking of Ananias and Sapheira for their hypocrisy, pretending
that you mean but spiritual destruction by the rod of excommunication,
which how terrible it is, when it is duly exercised by the^ that have
authority, we need not learn of you. The other text Psalm the 2. Apoc. 2.
v. 27. we translate always rule. And your vulgar interpretor. Pet. 5.
translateth the same word pascite feed you the church of God, etc. and else
where diverse times. Does he so diminish ecclesiastical authority? etc.

MART. 22. To the diminishing of this Ecclesiastical authority, in the later
end of the reign of king Henry the ^ight, and during the reign of king
Edward the sixth, the only translation of their English Bibles, was, submit
your selves unto all manner ordinance of man whether it be UNTO THE KING, AS TO
THE CHIEF HEAD. (...).
1. Pet. 2. Where in this Queens time, the later translatours can not find
those words now in the Greek, but do translate thus, To the king as having
preeminence: or to the king as the Superior. Why so? because then the King had
Bibl. 1577. 1579.
first taken upon him this name of Supreme head of the Church, and therefore
they flattered both him and his son, till their heresy was planted, making
the holy Scripture to say that the king was, the chief head, which is all one
with, supreme head: but now being better advised in that point (by Calvin I
suppose and the Lutherans of Magdeburge, who do^ jointly inueigh against such
title, and Calvin against that by Calu. in c. 7. Amos. Magdeb. in praef. Cent.
7. fo. 9. 10. 11.
name, which was first given to king Henry the eight) and because they may be
bolder with a Queen than with a king, and because now they think their
kingdom is well established, therefore they suppress this title in their later
tra^slations, and would take it from her altogether if they could, to advance
their own Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, whithout any dependence of the Queens
supreme government of their church, which in their conscience (if they be true
Caluinistes, or Lutherans, or mix^ of both) they do and must mislike.

FVLK. 22. Touching this text 1. Pet. 2. I have answered before yt the word
signifies him that excels, and therefore it is no corruption to translate it
ye chief. For the name of supreme head in ye sense which Calvin and other
abroad did mislike it, it was never allowed, nor by authority granted to the
kings Henry and Edward but in the same sense it is now granted to Queen
Elizabeth whom we acknowledge to have the same authority in causes
ecclesiastical which her father and brother kings before her had and
exercised to Gods glory. But as Ste^en Gardener understood ye title in
conference with Bucer at Ratisbone we do utterly abhor it and so did all
godly men always, that a king should have absolute power to do in religion
what he will. In what sense the popish clergy of England, being cast in the
praemunire did first of all ascribe it to the king in their submission, look
you unto it: we think it was rather of flattery, than of duty, wisdom, or
religion. As for the ecclesiastical government which the scripture
prescribes may well stand, which craves the aid of a christian Prince,
which is ye Queens authority in causes ecclesiastical.

MART. 23. But howsoever that he, let them justify their translation, or
confess their fault. And as for the kings supremacy Epist. 7. ad Smyrnenses.
over the Church, if they make any doubt, let the^ read S. Ignatius words, who
was in the Apostles time, ^uen when S. Peter gave the foresaid admonition of
subjection to the king, and knew very well how far his preeminence extended,
and therefore says plainly in notorious words, that, we must first honor
God, then the Bishop, and then the king. Because in all things nothing is
comparable to God, and in the Chuch, nothing greater then ye Bishop, who is
consecrated to God for the salvation of the whole world, and (...).
among magistrates and temp^rall rulers, none is like the king. See his (...)
other words immediately following, where he prefers the Bishops office
before the kings and al other things of price among men.

FVLK. 23. Howsoever those Epistles be truly or untruly ascribed to Ignatius
which here I will not dispute there is nothing said in this that you cite of
the Bishops preeminence above the king, but we acknowledge it to be true of ye
meanest priest of Gods Church in matters properly belonging to his office which
yet does not exempt him from subjection to his prince, but that in causes
ecclsiasticall also he is to be commanded by his prince to do his duty, and
to be punished by him, if he do otherwise.

MART. 24. But in the former sentence of S. Peter, though they have altered
their translation about the kings headshippe, yet there is one corruption
remaining still in these words, Submit your selves UNTO AL MANNER ORDINANCE OF
MAN. Whereas in the Greek it is word for word as in the old vulgar Latin
translation, omni humanae creaturae, (...). 1 Pet. 2. v. 13 14.
and as we have translated, to every humane creature: meaning temporal
Princes and Magistrates, as is plain by the exemplification immediately
following, of king, and dukes, and other sent or appointed by him. But they in
favor of their temporal statutes, acts of Parliament, Proclamations and
Injunctions made against the Catholic religion, do translate all with one
consent, Submit vour selves to all manner ordinance of man. Does (...) signify
ordinance? or is it all one to be obedient to every one of our Princes, and to
all manner ordinance of the said Princes?

FVLK. 24. The word ordinance you do violently draw to every statute,
proclamation or iniunction, which is understood of the ordinance or appointment
of magistrates in what form soever they be created: or at the worst cannot be
referred but only to such decrees as are not contrary to the word of God.
The word (...) we know signifies a creature or creation, which speeches
being not usual in our English tongue to signify magistrates: our
interpretors have expressed the same by the word ordinance. You your selves
translate that which is in Greek (...) in Latin Creaturae mark 16. of the
creation and in the same sense do our translators use the word of ordinance.

MART. 25. A strange case and much to be considered, how they wring and wrest
the holy scriptures this way and that way and every way to serve their
heretical proceedinges. For when the question is of due obedience to
Ecclesiastical canons, and decrees of the Church and general Councels, where
the holy Ghost by Christ's promise is assistant, and whereof it is said, if he
hear not the Church, let him be unto thee as an Mat. 18. Luc. 10.
heathen and Publicane: and, He that hears you, hears me: he that despises
you despises me: there they cry out aloude and odiously term all such
ordinances* men's traditions, and, commandments of men, and most despitefully
contemn and condemn them. But here, for obedience unto temporal edictes and
Parliament statutes daily enacted in favor of their schism and heresies* they
once maliciously forged, and still wickedly retain without alteration, a text
of their own, making the Apostle to command submission unto all manner
ordinance of man, whereof has ensued the false crime of treason and cruel
death for the same, upon those innocent men and glorious martyrs, that chose to
obey God and his Churches holy ordinances, rather then man's statutes and laws
directly against the same.

FVLK. 25. It is no strange case for an heretic and a raytor that has sold
his tongue to utter slanders against the Church of God and the christian
magistrate protector of the same, to devise and surmise that which never was
intended, never was practiced. As yt against the godly and laweful decrees of
the Church we should translate men's traditions commandments of men, and to
the maintenance of all temporal laws be they never so wicked we should
translate ordinance in steed of creature. As for the crime of treason and just
execution of them that have suffered of your viperous brood, I refer to the
try all of the laws and judgments that have passed upon them, as no matter
meet for me to dispute of: only this all good subjects know, yea all the
world may know that they which take part with the pope, our princes open and
professed enemy, not in matters of religion only, but in cases concerning her
crown and dignity, her Realms and Dominions can not bear dutiful and
obedient hearts to her majesty. Whose clemency hitherto has spared them that
acknowledge her princely authority although in all other points of popery
they continue as obstinate as ever they were.

CHAP. XVI.
Heretical translation against the Sacrament of Matrimony.

BUT as they are injurious translatours to the sacred order of Priesthood, so
a man would think they should be very friendly to the sacrament of
Matrimony. For they would seem to make more of Matrimony then we do, making
it equal at the least with virginity. Yet the truth is, we make it, or
rather the Church of God esteems it as a holy sacrament, they do not: as
giving grace to the married persons to live together in love, concord, and
fidelity: they acknowledge no such thing. So that Matrimony with them is
highly esteemed in respect of the flesh, or (to say the best) only for a
civil contract, as it is among Jews and Pagans: but as it is peculiar to
Christians, and (as S. Augustin^ says) in the sanctification also and
holiness of a Sacrament, they make no account of it, but flatly deny it.

FVLK. 1.
VE make no more of matrimony than the holy scripture does teach us neither
do we in all respects make it equal with virginity, how so ever you do
slander us. But you so make it an holy sacrament that you think the holy order
of priesthood is profaned by it. We acknowledge that God gives grace to
them that be faithful, to live in love, concord and fidelity, even as he
did to the fathers of the old testament living in the same honorable estate,
which proves that matrimony is no sacrament of the new testament, although
it be an holy ordinance for Gods children to live in, and in it is contained,
a holy secret or mystery of the spiritual conjunction of Christ and his
church. It is therefore nothing else but a devilish slander to say that we
esteem it but in respect of the flesh or for a civil contract.

MART. 2. And to this purpose they translate in the epistle to the Ephesians,
5. Where the Apostle speaks of matrimony, Sacramentu^ hoc magnu^ est.
This is a great secret. Whereas the Latin Church and all the Doctors thereof
have ever read, This is a great Sacrament: the Greek Church and all the
fathers thereof, This is a great mystery* because that which is in Greek,
mystery: is in Latin, Sacrament: and contrariwise, the (...).
words in both tongue^ being equivalent. so that if one be taken in the large
signification, the other also: as, Apoc. 17. I will show thee the sacrament of
the woman. And I Sacramentu^ (...).
will show thee the mystery of the woman. And so in sundry places, again if
one be restrained from the larger signification, and peculiarly applied,
signify the Sacraments of the Church, the other also. As, the Sacrament of
the body and blood of Christ: or, the Mystery of the body and blood of Duo
Sacramenta. (...).
Christ: and the Caluinists in their Latin and Greek Catechism say, two
Sacraments. or, two Mysteries.

FVLK. 2. The English word secret signifies fully as much as the Greek word
(...), in which we must seek no holiness as papists do in vain sound of
words: but in the matter annexed, which plainly expresses that it is a great
secret of great holiness whereof the Apostle speaks. And it is very false
that you say that the Latin word sacramentum is equivalent to the Greek: for
both it signifies an oath which ye Greek word does not, and also it includes
holiness which the Greek word does not. Or else why says not your vulgar
translator and you the sacrament of iniquity. (...) therefore signifies
every secret, sacramentum only an holy sacrament, as when you say, Apoc. 17.
the sacrament of the woman, the meaning is the secret to be revealed concerning
her is an holy thing: else in the same chapter you have not a sacrament written
in her forheade but a mystery or secret Babylon the mother of abominations.
That the sacraments are called mysteries we confess, but that whatsoever is
called a mystery may also be called a sacrament, that do we utterly deny.

MART. 3. This being so, what is the fault of their translation in the place
aforesaid? this, that they translate neither Sacrament, nor, Mystery. As for
the word Sacrament, they are excused, because they translate not the Latin:
but translating the Greek, why said they not, Mystery, which is the Greek
word here in the Apostle? I mean, why said they not of matrimony, This is
a great Mystery? No doubt there can be no other cause, but to avoid both
those words, which are used in the Latin and Greek Church, to signify the
Sacrament^s. For in the Greek Church the Sacrament of the body and blood it
self is called but a mystery or mysteries, which Were it honest or lawful to
translate* Baptiso, I wash: or Baptismus, Washing: o^ Eua^geliu^. good news?
yet ye words profanely taken, signify no more.
yet the Protestants themselves call a true Sacrament. Therefore if they should
have called Matrimony also by that name, it might easily have sounded to be a
Sacrament also. But in saying it is a great secret, they put it out of doubt
that it shall not be so taken.

FVLK. 3. Seeing the word secret yt we use, signifies wholly as much as
mystery, we hope all reasonable men will allow ye same also. Sacrament without
prejudice to ye truth we could not translate, and mystery for the better
understanding of the people we have expressed in the English word, secret.
Out of which if it have any force of argument in it you may prove matrimony to
be a sacrament as well as out of the Greek word mystery. But it is the
sound of an unknown word that you had rather play upon in the ears of the
ignorants then by any sound argument out of ye scripture to bring them to the
knowledge of the truth.

MART. 4. They will say unto me, Is not every sacrament and mystery in
english a secret? Yes, as Angel, is a messenger: and Apostle, one that is
sent. But when the holy Scripture uses these words to signify more excellent
and divine things then those of the common sort, does it become translators to
use baser terms in steed thereof, and so to disgrace the writing and meaning
of the holy Ghost? I appeal to themselves, when they translat^ this word in
other places, whether they say not thus, And without doubt, great was yt MYSTERY
of godliness: God 1. Tim. 3. Col. 1. v. 26. Ephesians. 3. v. 9. 1. Cor. 15. V. 51.
was showed manifestly in ye flesh, etc. again, The MYSTERY which have bin
hid since ye world began, but now is opened to his saints. again* I show you
a MYSTERY, we shall not al sleep, but we shall all be changed. And the like.
Where if they should translate, secret, in steed of, mystery, as the Bezites
do in one of these places, saying, I will show you a secret thing: what a
disgracing and debasing were it to those high mysteries there signified? And if
it were so in these, is it not so in matrimony, which the Apostle makes such
a mystery* that it represents no less matter then Christ and his Church and
whatsoever is most excellent in that coniunctio^? No^then, if in all other
places of high mystery they translate it also, mystery, as it is in the
Greek, and only in Matrimony do not so, but say rather, This is a great
secret, using so base a term in so high and excellent a mystery, must we not
needs think (at no dout it is) that they do it because of their heretical
opinion against the Sacrament of Matrimony, and for their base estimation
therof^

FVLK. 4. Now you fly to your old shift of ye ecclesiastiall use of terms
which you cannot prove to be like of this English word mystery, which is
commonly as profanely and secularly used as any other word. For what is more
common among artificers, tha^ their science or mystery of weauing, of dying,
and such like? And yet the word may be used of the highest secrets of Christian
Religion, as it is of our translators. And wheresoever they have said a
mystery they might as truly have said a secret, and where they say a secret
they might have said a mystery. But where you say yt in all other places of high
mystery they translate ye word mystery it is false. For Mat. 13. Mark. the 4.
Luke the 8. where all ye mysteries of the kingdom of God are spoken of, they
translate mysteria, the secrets of ye kingdom of heaven. and 1. cor. 4. where
the sacraments and al other secrets of Christian Religion are spoken of they
translate (...) stewards of ye mysteries of God. Wherefore it is a shameful
and senseless slander that here only we use this word secret to show our base
estimation of matrimony.

MART. 5. But they will yet reply again, and ask us, what we gain by
translating it either Sacrament, or mystery? Does that make it one of the
Sacraments properly so called, to wit, such a Sacrament as Baptism is? no
surely, but howsoever we gain otherwise, at least we gain the commendation
of true translators, whether it make with us or against us. For otherwise it is
not the name that makes it such a peculiar Sacrament. For (as is said before)
Sacrament is a general name in Scripture to other things. Neither do we
therefore so translate it, as though it were forthwith one of the seven
Sacraments, because of the name: but as in other places wheresoever we find
this word in the Latin, we translate it, Sacrament (as in the Apocalipse, the
Apoc. 17*
sacrament of the woman) so finding it here, we do here also so translate it
and as for the diverse taking of it here, and else where, that we examine
otherwise, by circumstance of the text, and by the Churches and Doctors
interpretation: and we find that here it is taken for a Sacrament in that
sense as we say, seven Sacraments: not so in the other places.

FVLK. 5. No reasonable man can charge us to be false translators when we turn
the Greek word into that which it does generally, properly, and always
signify. And for all your bragging of sincere translating, if you should
translate Tob. 12. I am persuaded you would not say: it is a good thing to hide
the kings sacrament. Yet is the Latin word in that place Sacramentum: and
the Greek (...). But it is sufficient for you to have a shadow of something to
find your self occupied rather than you would be saying of nothing.

MART. 6. As when we read this name Jesus in Scripture common to our Savior
and to other men, we translate it always alike, Jesus, but when it is Inde. v.
5.
JESUS Christ, and when some other Jesus, Act. 7. v. 45. Colos. 4. v. 11.
we know by other circumstances. Likewise presuppose Baptism in the Scripture
were called a sacrament: yet the Protestants themselves would not, nor could
thereby conclude, that it were one of their two Sacraments. Yet I trow they
would not avoid to translate it by the word sacrament, if they found it so
called: even so we finding Matrimony so called, do so translate it, neither
concluding thereby that it is one of the Seven, nor yet suppressing the name,
which no doubt gave some occasion to the Church and the holy doctors to esteem
it as one of the Seven. They contrariwise, as though it were never so called,
suppress the name altogether, calling it a secret, to put it out of all
question, that it is no Sacrament: which they would not have done, if the
Scripture had said of Baptism or the Eucharist, This is a great Sacrament. So
partial they are to their own opinions.

FVLK. 6. Except you thought you had to do with very ignorant persons, or
else esteemed too much of your lately professed divinity, you would never
comber the reader with such childish trifles of the name of Jesus, of the bare
name of sacrament which could not prove baptism or the Lords supper to be
sacraments etc. and what we would do if we found them so called, etc. I have
already told you what we have done, where not only the sacraments, but all
other precious Jewels of Christ's church committed to the dispensation of his
ministers are called (...), and translated secrets without any abasement of
the dignity of them, or with out any intent to suppress any of the honor and
reverence which is due unto them. Wherefore using ye word secret in this text,
we had no purpose to derogate any thing from the worthiness of matrimony, much
less from the spiritual mystery which the Apostle offers to be considered
by it in Christ and his Church.

CHAP. 17.
Heretical translations against the blessed Sacrament, and Sacrifice, and
Altar.

NOW let us see concerning the Eucharist, which they allow for a Sacrament, how
they handle the matter to the disgracing and defacing of the same also. They
take away the operation and efficacy of Christ's blessing (...) Bib. 1562.
1577.
pronounced upon the bread and wine, making it only a thanksgiving to God:
and to this purpose they translate more gladly, thanksgiving then, blessing*
as Mat. 26. the Greek words being two, the one signifying properly, to
bless: the other, to give thanks: they translate both thus, Great difference
in the scriptures between blessing, and giving of thanks.
when he had given thanks. Likewise Marc. 14. in the Bible printed 1562. And
when they translate it, blessing, they mean nothing else but giving thanks,
as Beza tells us in his Annotations Mat. 26. ver. 26. We reply and by most
manifest Scripture prove unto them, that the former Greek word does not
signify thanks giving properly, but blessing, and a blessing of creatures to
the operation of some great effect in them: as when Christ took the five
loaves and two fishes, to multiply them, he blessed them Luc. 9. What say they
to this Benedixit eis (...). Annot. in 9. Luc. v. 16.
think you? Does not the Greek word here plainly signify, blessing of
creatures? No, (says Beza) no doubt but here also it signifies giving
thanks. How Beza? he adds, Not as though Christ had given thanks to the
bread, for that were too absurd: but we must mollify this interpretation
thus, that he gave thanks to God the father for the loaves and the fishes. Is
not this a notable exposition of these words, benedixit eis?

FVLK. 1
THE Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ being a matter of some great
weight and controversy between us, you might not omit but note our false
translations against it. But because we have dealt so syncerely as malice has
nothing to blame therein, you must feign a quarrel and forge a controversy
where none is between us, namely, that we take away Christ's blessing
pronounced upon the bread and wine making it only a thanksgiving unto God:
which is a false and impudent slander, as in that which follows concerning
this matter most plainly shall appear even by testimony of him whom you do
most slander in this case. But let us see what fault is in our translation.
Math. 26. and Man. 14. two of our translations for (...) say, when he had given
thanks. To this I answer, that Beza tells you that in seven Greek copies
the word is (...), which signifies giving of thanks, without controversy, as
also (...) does, but not only so expressing rather the Hebrew word (...)
which signifies both to bless, and to give thanks. But seeing Saint Luke and
S. Paul reporting the institution of the supper do use the word (...) which
signifies giving of thanks: we count them the best interpretors of the other
two Evangelists which plainly teach us that by blessing they mean giving of
thanks, or that the Greek word does here signify giving of thanks as in
many other places. The place Luke. 9. where Christ blessed the loaves is also
interpreted by S. John who reporting the same miracle (as Beza shows) uses
the word which signifies only thanks giving, but because (...) is in Luke
used as a verb transitiue, which cannot signify thanks giving or prayer made
to the creatures, we must understand, that he blessed the loaves, that is he
gave thanks to God for them, and with all prayed, that so small a quantity of
bread and fish might feed so great a multitude, and that this whole feast
might be referred to the glory of God. This is Bezaes interpretation, which
because it was too long for your quarrel you cut off the better part of it,
and like a grinning hypocrite scoff at a piece as though it were the whole
exposition of these words henedixit eis he blessed them.

MART. 2. We ask him in the like cases, when God blessed Adam and Eve, Genesis
1. and 9. Noe and his children, saying, Increase and multiply: when he
blessed the (...). Psalm. 106. (...).
children of Israel, and they multiplied exceedingly, when he blessed the
latter things of Job more than the first, Job. 42. Was this also a giving of
thanks, and not an effectual blessing upon these creatures? What will they
say, or what difference will they make? As God blessed here, so he was God and
man that blessed the loaves and fishes there. If they will say he did it as
man, and therefore it was a giving of thanks to God his father: to omit that
he blessed them as he multiplied them, that is, rather according to his
divine nature than humane: we ask them, when he blessed as man, was it always
giving of thanks? he blessed the little children, he blessed his disciples,
when he ascended: Luc. 24.
was this giving thanks for them, as Beza expounds his blessing of the
loaves and fishes? When Beza, loco citato. (...), which word can never
signify, giving thanks
we bless the table or the meat upon the table, When S. Paul says, 1.
Timoth. 4. all meat is lawefull that is sanctified by the word and by prayer:
is all this nothing but giving thanks? So says Beza in express words.

FVLK. 2. When I see those often most impudent inuectiues against Beza and
other, I muse with my self whether you have read Beza, and the other your
self, or whether you give credit to some malicious cauiller who is set on
work to pick quarrels out of other men's writings to serve your turn. But when
I consider all circumstances of every place, and namely how you object
against Beza, that which he says of the blessing or consecrating of our
ordinary meats and drinks, I think it is not like but that you have read
the places your self. And then of all that ever I knew, I must esteem you
the furthest from synceritie and honest dealing, that so often, so openly, so
confidently, so purposedly commit so vile and shameful forgerie. Beza says
that our meat is sanctified by the word of God and prayer and thanksgiving.
For the 1. Tim. 4. the Apostle joins both as here Luke 9. we must join both
together. For partly for the meat given to us thanks is given to God: partly
petition is made that we may use it purely and soberly, that we may spend the
rest of our life in the worship of God. Hereof it comes that Christians
are said to bless the table, and to consecrate the table, whereas yet this
blessing pertains not to the meats themselves, but to God rather, and them
that shall be partakers of them. But in the cup of blessing which we bless (as
it is written. 1. cor. 10. v. 16.) although the word of blessing may be
expounded after the same manner, yet the end of the blessing is altogether
diverse, as in due place we shall expound. These are the words of Beza. Is
all this nothing but giving of thanks?

MART. 3 We go forward, and prove the contrary yet more manifestly, in the
very matter of the blessed Sacrament, for the which they multiply all the
foresaid absurdities. We tell them that Saint Paul says thus, The chalice
of (...)
blessing, which we bless, is it not, etc. how could he speak more
plainly, that the chalice or cup (meaning that in the cup) is blessed? Which
S. Cyprian de Coen. Dom. explicateth thus, Calix solenni benedictione sacratus,
The (...).
Chalice consecrated by solemn blessing. Oecumenius thus* The Chalice which
blessing we prepare. that is, which we bless and so prepare, for so it must
signify, and not as Beza would have it, which with thanks giving we prepare.
and that I prove by his own words immediately Annot. in 1. Cor. 10. v. 16.
before, where he says that the Greek word being used of the Apostle
transitiuely, that is, with a case following, cannot signify giving thanks.
How then can it so signify in Oecumenius words, who does interpret the
Apostles meaning by the Apostles own words and phrase? yea (that you may note
a notorious contradiction) how does Beza then in the place of Luke before
alleged (where the same Greek word is a plain transitiue as in this place)
expound is of giving thanks (...).
for the bread and fishes? A liar (they say) must be mindful, to make his
tale agree in every point. He that before forced the word in every sentence
to be nothing else but thanks giving* even when it was a plain transitiue,
now confesses that he never read it in that signification, when it is a
transitiue. and so we have that the blessing of the cup or of the bread, is
not giving thanks as they either translate, or interpret it.

FVLK. 3. I must continue my admiration of your impudence, for Beza says
expressly in this place 1. cor. 10. that to bless here is to sanctify or
consecrate, because that the ordinance of God being rehearsed and set forth
the bread and wine are appointed to this holy use, that they should be the
sacraments of the true and natural body and blood of Christ, that is the
signs and pledges thereof, and that in such sort, yt the same thing which is
signified, is offered to us to be received spi ritually. And because this whole
actio^ is joined with the praise of God, and solemn thanksgiving, therefore I
esteem yt S. Paul signified this whole matter in the verb (...). So yt in my
judgment Oecumenius has plainly and briefly expounded (...), that is which
with praise and thanksgiving we prepare. Which I admonish, (lest any man should
think yt by the term of consecration, we mean any magical incantatio^.) That
you would prove by Bezaes words, yt he has not justly explicated ye mea ning
of Oecumenius, it is too too beyond all measure of impude^ce. For Beza not
contrarying yt which he said before, shows how the cup is blessed,
sanctified, consecrated, namely by prayer, praise of God, and thanksgiving. For
which he cyteth Chrysosto^ who expounds these words of S. Paul (which we
bless) to mean which we receive with thanksgiving. As for yc place of S. Luke
9. Beza himself cyteth it, and many other like, to prove that (...) with an
accusative case signifies to bless, to sanctify, to consecrate, as also in
yt place Luke. 9. he expounds it. And yet you will make him a lier, forgetting
what tale he told before. In deed yt rule you give, is meet for a crafty liar,
that has some care to maintain his credit. But such an impudent liar and
shameless forger as you are, has no regard of any thing, but to deceive them
whose ignorance and simplicity is such as they neither can, nor care to
examine your slanders.

MART. 4 And surely in the word (...) this is most evident, that it signifies
in this case the blessing and consecration of the creature or element: in so
much that S. Basil and S. Chrysostom in their Liturgies or Masses say thus by
the same Greek (...)
word: Bless o Lord the sacred bread. and Bless o Lord the sacred cup. and
why or to what effect? It follows, changing it by the holy spirit. Where is
signified the transmutation and consecration thereof into the body and blood.
But in the other word (...) there may be some question, because it signifies
properly to give thanks, and therefore may seem to be referred to God only,
and not to the element, and, creature. But this also we find contrary in the
Greek fathers, who use this word also transitiuely, saying, panem and (...).
calicem eucharistisatos, or, panem in quo gratiae actae sunt. that is the
bread and the cup made the Eucharist: the bread over which thanks are given:
that is, which by the word of prayer, and thanksgiving is made a consecrated
meat, the flesh and blood of Christ, as S. Iustine in fine 2. Apologo, and
Saint Irenaeus, lib. 4. 34 in the same places, expound it. Whereas it may also
signify that, for which thanks are given in that most solemn sacrifice of
the Eucharist, as S. Deny^ in one place seems to take it. Eccl. Hier. (...).
c. 3. in fine. Who in the self same chapter, speaks of the consecration
thereof, most evidently.

FVLK. 4. That the creatures, or elements, are blessed, and consecrated, that
by the working of Gods spirit, they should be changed into the body and
blood of Christ, after a divine and spiritual manner, unto the worthy
receyuers, Beza, and we agree with the Greek Liturgies. But that this blessing
is performed by the word of God, prayer, and thanksgiving, both Justinius,
and Irenaeus, do most plainly testify with Beza, and us. When the mixed
cup, and bread, says Irenaeus, receives the word of God, it is made the
Eucharist, etc. The bread on which, or for Lib. 5. cap. 4. Lib. 4. cap. 34.
Apolog. 2.
which, thanks is given. The bread which is of the earth, receiving the
vocation, or invocation of God. So says Justinius, the meat for which thanks
are given* by the word of prayer, which is received from him, and speaking of
the very manner of the consecration, used in his time. When the bread, and
wine, with water, is offered: the chief Minister sends forth prayers, and
thanksgiving, with all his might, and the people consents, saying, Amen.
Then follows the distribution, and participation of those things, for which
thanks was given to every one, etc. As for the Magical mysteries of Dionyse,
although in this behalf, they make nothing against us, we make not so great
account of, that we will stand to his judgment any more, than you to his
practice.

MART. 5. Whereby we have to note, that the Heretics in urging the word,
Eucharist, as mere thanksgiving, thereby to take away blessing, and
consecration, of the elements of bread and wine, do unlearnedly, and
deceitfully. because all the fathers make mention of both: Saint Paul also
calls it, blessing of the chalice, which the Evangelists call, giving of
thanks. Whose words Theophylacte explicateth thus. THE CHALICE OF BLESSING,
that is, of the Eucharist. For holding it in our hands, we bless it, and give
thanks to him that shed his blood for us. See here both blessing, and
Eucharist, blessing the chalice, and thanksgiving to Christ. Saint James, and
the Greek fathers Liturg. S. ^at. Basil. Chrysostom.
in their Liturgies, put both words in the consecration of each element,
saying thus, give thanks, sanctifying, breaking: and, giving thanks,
blessing, sanctifying: and, taking (...). Hom. 2. in Tim. 2. Hom. 83. in Mat.
Hom. de Judah proditore.
the cup, giving thanks, sanctifying, blessing, filling it with the holy
Ghost, he gave it to us his Disciples. Saint Chrysostom, who in many places of
his works speaks much of thanksgiving in these holy mysteries, does he not
as often speak of the blessing, consecration, yea, and the transmutation
thereof, and that with what words, and by what power it is done? Does not
Saint Augustine say of the same, Aug. ep. 59.
benedicitur, and sanctificatur, it is blessed, and sanctified, De bono viduit.
c. 16.
who often speaks of the solemn giving of thanks in the sacrifice of the
Church? Does not the Church at this day, use the very same terms, as in Saint
Augustines time, Gratias agamus Domino Deo nostro, Let us give thanks to the
Lord our God. and, Vere dignum and iustum est, semper and vbique tibi gratias
agere, etc. It is very meet and right, always, and in all places, to give
thee thanks: Which the Greek Church also in their Liturgies express most
abundantly? yet does there follow blessing, and consecration, and whatsoever
Saint Ambrose describes to be done in this holy sacrifice, touching this
point, writing thereof most excellently in his book, de ijs qui initiantur
mysterijs, c 9.

FVLK. 5. If it were to prove any thing that we deny, you would be as bare and
hungry, as now you are frank and plentiful of your testimonies. Theophylact
says the same that Beza said out of Chrysostom, and Oecumenius. The Greek
Liturgies, falsely entitled to Saint James, Basil, and Chrysostom, have no
other thing: nor any other author whom you name. But your popish Church, does
not, either as the Greek Liturgies, or as the Churches in Ambrose and
Augustines time. For they hold, that the elements are consecrared by prayer,
and thanksgiving, whereof, although you use some terms in your mass, yet
you hold, that the consecration consists only in a Magical murmuration of
the words, Hoc est corpus meum, over the bread by a Priest, with intent of
consecration, wherefore you are far from the judgment that the ancient
fathers had, and we have, of the consecration of the bread and wine, to be the
sacraments of the body and blood of Christ.

MART. 6. Of all which, this is the conclusion, that the Eucharist is a solemn
name, taken of the word (...), so called, because this sacrament and
sacrifice, is blessed, and consecrated with prayer, and thanksgiving, as S.
Iustine speaks, and because in this sacrifice, so blessed and consecrated
into the body and blood of Christ, him we offer up a most acceptable oblation
of thanksgiving, and a memory of all Gods marvelous benefits toward us. In
this sense, the fathers, and the holy Church, speak of the Eucharist,
including all the rest, to wit, sacrament, sacrifice, blessing, and
consecration, without which thi^ were no more to be called Eucharist, than any
other common giving of thanks, as S. Irenaeus does plainly signify, when he
declares, Lib. 4. cap. 3^.
that being before bread, and receiving the invocation of God over it, now is
no more common bread, but the Eucharist, consisting of two things, the earthly,
and the heavenly. So that it is made the Eucharist by circumstance of solemn
words, and ceremonies, and therefore is not a mere giving of thanks: and
further we learn, that S. Iustines, and S. Irenaus (...).
words before alleged, Panis and calix Eucaristisatus, signify, the bread
and chalice made the Eucharist: and consequently we learn, that the a(...)e
thereof, is, by thanksgiving to make the Eucharist. a(...) because the other
word of blessing, and this of thanksgiving, are used indifferently, one for
an other, in Christ's action, about this Sacrament, we learn undoubtedly, that
when it is said, (...), or, (...), the meaning is, blessing, and giving
thanks, he made the Eucharist of his body and blood, that is the Sacrament
and Sacrifice of a singular thanksgiving, which (as S. Augustine often is
wont to say) the faithful only do know and understand in the sacrifice of
the Church: and because the faithful only understand, therefore the
Protestants and Caluinistes are so ignorant in this mystery, that to take away
all the dignity thereof, they bend both their expositions and translations.

FVLK. 6. That the elements are blessed, and consecrated by prayer, and
thanksgiving, as Iustine, Irenaeus, and other ancient fathers write, it is
the thing that we contend for. But you (except you be a Schismatike from all
other Papists) do teach, that they are consecrated by these words,
pronounced by a Priest, this is my body: which are words neither of prayer,
nor of thanks giving. Nevertheless, to prick us with a pin, you have
wounded your self with a sword, and say the sacrament is blessed, and
consecrated with prayer, and thanks* giving. Except you have some Sophistical
meaning, that it is consecrated with them, but not by them. The signification
of the active, which you gather out of the passive, used by Justinius, shows
what a learned Clerk you are, Justinius writes to the Gentiles, or Heathen
men, of whom he could not have been understood, if he had not used the
passive, (...), in that signification, that all other men did use it in, in
that time. What we understand of the mystery of the Lords supper, and the
sacrifice of prayer and thanks gyuing, which is the only sacrifice of
Christians, as Justinius writes, the Church of God does acknowledge, though
the synagogue of Antichristian heretics will not confess it.

MART. 7. After they have turned blessing or consecration into bare thanks
giving, which is one step toward the denying of the real presence, they come
nearer, and so include Christ in heaven, that he cannot be withal upon the
altar, translating thus, Whom heaven must contain, until the (...). ad rat.
Came. page 43.
times that al things be restored, Acts. 3. v. 21. and yet Beza worse, and he
that alleadge^h him, M. Whitakers: who must be contained in heaven. Which is
so far from the Greek, that, not only Illyricus the Lutheran, but Calvin
himself does not like it. Beza protests, that he so translateth of purpose,
to keep Christ's presence from the altar: and we marvel the less, because we
are well acquainted with many the like his impudent Protestations. M. Whitak.
only we do marvel at, that he should be either so deceived by an other man's
translation, or himself be so ouerseene in the Greek word, that he knows
not a mere (...).
deponent, and only deponent, from a passive.

FVLK. 7. The aunsweare to this cavil is at large contained, Cap. 1. sect. 36.
your own translation is* whom heaven must receive. If there be now such
difference between, receiving, and containing* capere and recipere it is very
strange to learned ears, howsoever sottishe Papists will accept whatsoever
proceeds from you. But forasmuch, as this section, with two other
following, are directed principally against Master Whitakers, I shall need to
say little, seeing he has fully answered for him self. This one thing I may
say, concerning his knowledge in the Greek tongue, which you make to be so
small, that he knows not a deponent from a passive, he is well known to be
so well learned therein, that many of your Seminary may marvel at him as
you say, but neither you, nor any of you all is able to match him therein.

MART. 8. This does not become him that obiecteth Ibid. page 84.
ignorance of the Greek to an other manne, and that after he had well
tried by public conference, that If he had not yet tried him, he presumed to
belie him, before he knevve him.
he was not ignoraunte: and so obiecteth it, as though^ he knew not three
words in that tongue, whereas he had heard him read and interpreate Saint
Basil, not the easiest of the Greek Doctors. This is palpable impudency, and
a face that can not blushe, and full of malice against the saints of God,
who, if they knew not a word in the Greek tongue, were never the worse, nor
the less learned, but among fools and children, that esteem learning by
such trifles, which Grammarians know far better than great Divines. For,
were not he awise manne that would prefer one Maiser Humfrey, Master
Fulke* Master Whitakers, or some of us poor men, because we have a little
smacke in the three tongues, before Saint Chrysostom, Saint Basil, Saint
Augustine, saint Gregory, or saint Thomas, that understood well, none but
one? howbeeit, if they esteem learning by knowledge of the tongues, they will
not (I trow) compare with Catholics, either of former time, or of these
latter age, specially since their new Gospel began: and if they will
compare with us herein for their simple credit, we may perhaps give them
occasion ere it be long, to muster their men all at once, if they dare show
their face before our camp of excellent Hebricians, Grecians, Latinistes, of
absolute linguistes in the Chaldee, Syriake, Arabike, etc. whom they must
needs confess to have been, and to be, even at this day, their Masters and
teachers.

FVLK. 8. It becomes you that have cast off all fear of God, and duty to
your Prince, to cast off all civil honesty; and human modesty also. If
you speak of such matters* as you might not be controlled in them* yet, if
you forbear the truth, it were somewhat tolerable. But when you speak of
Campions learning in the Greek tongue, wherein you may be so manifestly
convicted by hundreths of witnesses, you stop the way from any credit to
be given you in other matters. All Oxforde knew, that Campion was no
Grecian, when he departed from that University. His time spent in Ireland,
and other places, where he travailed, would not yield him great knowledge
since his departure, except he had wholly applied it, which he could not
do, nor any other serious study in such sort as he traueiled in diverse
places. But admit he might have knowledge by extraordinary means or miracle
if you will, how shall he be tried, but by reading and understanding that
which greatly concerns his cause, in disputation and conference. You said
he did read and interpret Saint Basil, not the easiest of the Greek
Doctors. I was not present at that conference, and therefore have the less to
say: But I my self making trial of his skill. by a place of Epiphanius, both
read it to him, and offering him the book, he understood no more the matter
thereof, than if I had cited it in the Arabicke, or Persian language. And
therefore, upon the acknowledging of his dissembled ignorance, with great
laughter of the hearers, I was content to expound it to him in English,
before I could receive any aunsweare to the argument taken from that
authority. Wherefore, I verily think, and am certainly persuaded, that if he
pretended to interpret any thing out of Saint Basil, it was altogether by
artificial conjecture, either of the place which he knew, and had read in
Latin, or else by surmising of some one common word* he gathered what the
sense of the whole should be. Indeed* if he had never known a word of
Greek* although he had been no meet man to challenge a whole realm to
disputation: yet he might have been an honest man, and otherwise meanly
learned, so he had not pretended knowledge. when he was in a manner altogether
ignorant. For mine own part, though it please you to name me with Master
Humfrey, Master Whitakers, and others, I never took upon me but a mean
knowledge in the tongues, neither desire I in comparison to be preferred before
any learned manne, whose travails have bin profitable to the Church,
although he were ignorant in the tongues. Yet, this I must freely say, that
he which shall profess to be an absolute learned divine, without the
knowledge of three tongues, at the least, may think well of himself, but
hardely he shall get and retain the credit he seeks amoung learned
men in this learned age. And therefore Campion, if disputation had been
meante rather than sedition, for all his arrogance and impudence, was an unmeet
Apostle to be sent from Gregory of Rome, to challenge all the wise and
learned in England. Neither do I say this, as though I measured all learning
by knowledge of the tongues, but wherein soever any Papist in the world, shall
be bold to challenge the name of learning, in any knowledge, that ever was,
or is accounted good learning, God be praised, there are many of Gods true
Catholic Church, whereof we are members, able to match them therein. That I
say not to excel them. And whereas you would make us beholding to Papists
for such knowledge, as any of us has in the Greek, Hebrewe, Syriacke,
Chaldee* Arabicke tongues, etc. It is well known, the Papists are more
beholding to us. And although I confess, that some Papists of late days,
have bestowed fruitful pains, in setting forth some of the oriental
tongues: yet are they not the first, nor all that have traueiled profitably
that wai^. But many have attained to competent skill in those languages many
years before any Papists had written any thing that might further them
therein. You were wont to bear ignorant men in hand, that we were a sight
of English Doctors, understanding no languages but our mother tongue, which
has enforced diverse men to show their skill in the tongues, which otherwise
they would never have openly professed. But now that the world sees, to your
shame, how richly God has blessed us, with the knowledge, and interpretation
of diverse tongues, you exprobrate to us our knowledge in the tongues, and
traduce us among the ignorant, as though we esteemed all learning by knowledge
of tongues, and that we were but meare Grammarians, and often tell us of that
stale jest, that the kingdom of Grammarians is paste, as though it were but a
little Grammar, whereof we make a show. But for that general muster which you
threaten to drive us unto, ere it be long, if you come as learned men should
do, armed with books, pen, ink, and paper, I doubt not by the grace of God,
but you shall find them that dare confront you, and chase you out of the field
also. But if you come under the Popes banner with such blessing, as he sent
lately into Ireland, I hope you shall be met with all, as those his champions
were, and find that promotion for your good service, which you have long ago
deserved by your travails for upholding of his kingdom.

MART. 9. But to return to you M. Whitakers, greater is your fault in
divinity, than in the tongues, when you make your argument against the real
presence out of this place, as out of the Scripture and S. Peter, whereas they
are Bezaes words, and not S. Peter's. Again, whether you take Bezaes words,
or S. Peter's, your argument fails very much, when you conclude that Christ's
natural body is not in the Sacrament, because it is placed and contained in
heaven. For S. Chrysostom tells you, that Christ ascending into heaven,
both left us his Ho. 2 ad po. Antioch.
flesh, and yet ascending has the same. And again, O miracle, says he? He
that sits above with the Father, in Li. 3. de Sacerdotio.
the same moment of time is handled with the hands of al. This is the faith of
the ancient fathers, M. Whitakers, and this is the Catholic faith, and this
is (I trow) an other manner of faith and far greater, thus to believe the
presence of Christ in both places at once, because he is omnipotent and has
said^ the word: than your faith (whereof you boaste so much) which believes
no further than that he is ascended, and that therefore he cannot be present
upon the altar, nor dispose of his body as he list.

FVLK. 9. Master Whitaker is not so young a divine, but he knows that
Chrysostom speaks of the ineffable manner of Christ's presence spiritually*
though he be absent corporally. As in the place by you cited, Desacerdo^io, it
is most manifest, where he says that we may see the people dyed and made
red with the precious blood of Christ, which as it is not with the eye of
the body, but with the eye of faith, so is Christ that is corporally present
in heaven, spiritually present unto the faith of the worthy receyuer.

MART. 10. Again it is a very famous place for the real presence of the blood
(which we have handled at large Chap. 1. number. 38. (...).
else where, but here also must be briefly touched) when our Savior says,
Luc. 22. This is the Chalice the new Testament in my blood, which (Chalice) is
shed for you. For so (which) must needs be referred according to the Greek.
In which speech, Chalice must needs be taken for that in the chalice, and that
in the chalice must needs be the blood of Christ, and not wine, because his
blood only was shed for v^. And so ^e do plain^ly prove the real presence,
according a^ S. Chrysostom In 1. Cor. ca. 10. ^om. 24.
also said, Hoc quod est in calice, illud est quod ^^^xit delatere. That which
is in the Chalice, is the same that gushed out of his side. All which most
necessary deduction Beza would defeat, by saying the Greek is corrupted in
all the copies that are extant in the world, and by translating thus clean
otherwise than the Greek will bear, This ^^ppe is the new Testament in my
blood, which (blood) is (...).
shed for you.

FVLK. 10. It is a famous place in deed that never a one of the ancient
writers, could co^^^der for any real presence to be drawn out of it. How Beza
has translated it I have at large declared before, Cap. 1. Sect. 37. 38. 39.
That which Chrysostom says we confess to be most true, after a spiritual
and heavenly manner, and so he does expound him self, in the same place, where
he says that Christ suffers him self to be broken for us, in the oblation,
which he suffered, not on the cross, where no bone of his was broken. Which
none but a mad man would take otherwise than spiritually to be done, as he is
present after a spiritual manner.

MART. 11. But what pertains this to the English heretics, who translate,
which is shed, so indifferently that it may signify, which cup, or, which
blood is shed? Thus far it Ad rat. Camp. page 34.
pertains, because they do not only defend this translation by all means, but
they tell us plainly namely Fulke, that they refer Against D. Sand. Rock
page 309.
(which) to the word blood, and not to the word cup, ^ue^ as Beza does,
asking us what Grammarian would refer it otherwise. In which question he
shows him self a very simple Gra^marian in the Greek, or a mad Heretic,
that either knows not, or will not know, that in the Greek it can not be so
referred, and consequently neither in Latin nor English, which in true
translation must follow the Greek. But of these and other their Chap. 1. number.
37. 38. etc.
foul and manifold shif^es to avoid this place, I have spoken in an other
place of this book.

FVLK. 11. As you have placed your crimination in the first chapter to be sure
that it should be read of every man that takes your book in hand: So have I.
observing your order, answered you in the same place, and in such sort I hope
discharged my self, that you shall have little lust hereafter to insult
against mine ignorance, before you be able to weigh the matter your self with
sounder knowledge.

MART. 12. Only M. Whitakers (to say truly) has Page 35.
brought somewhat to the purpose, to wit, that S. Basil reads the Greek as
they translate. But he does well to make light of it, because it is evident that
S. Basil cited not the text of the Evangelist, Praef. in No. Test. an. 1556.
but the sense, which Beza notes to be the custom of the ancient fathers,
telling us withal that therefore the reading of the fathers, is no certain
rule to reform or alter the words of Scripture according to the same: and it
is very like that if Beza or Fulke his advocate had thought S. Basils reading
of any importance, they would have used it long since, rather than so many
other shifts and so absurd, as they do: unless we may think they knew it
not, and therefore could not use it. But for S. Basil, according to the sense
he cites it very truly: for, whether we say, the Cup that is shed, or, the
blood that is shed, both signifies the blood of Christ shed for us, as S.
Basil cites it. The difference is, that referring it to the cup, as S. Luke
has it, it signifies the blood both present in the cup, and also then shed
in a Sacrament at the last supper: but referring it to the word blood, as S.
Basil does, and as they translate, it may signify the blood shed on the cross
also, yea (as these tra^slatours mean and would have it) only that on the
Cross, not considering that the Greek word is the present tense, and
therefore rather signifies the present shedding of his blood then in mystical
sacrifice, than the other visible shedding thereof, which was to come in the
future tense. Lastly, they translate S. Lukes Gospel, and not S. Basil: and
therefore not following S. Luke, they are false translators, how soever S. Basil
reads.

FVLK. 12. The reading of S. Basil, whereof Beza makes mention, in his
Annotation upon this text of S. Luke, is also handled before. As the reading
of the Doctors, is no perpetual rule to reform the text of the Scripture
by, so is it not to be neglected, but that sometimes also the present reading
may be corrected thereafter. True it is, that Beza supposes, it rather to have
been added out of the margent, and I, as I have before declared, do think
that either it is to be read as Basil did read it, or else that the verb
substantive is to be understood, and the article taken for the relative, as it
is often both in profane writings, and in the new Testament it self, as by
sundry examples I have made it manifest.

MART. 13. As this falsehood is both against Sacrament and Sacrifice, so against
the Sacrifice also of the altar it is, that they control S. Hieroms
translation, in the old Testament, concerning the sacrifice of Melchisedec,
Who brought forth The sacrifice of Melchisedec.
bread and wine: Genesis 14. v. 18. that is, offered, or sacrificed bread and
wine: which we prove to be the true sense and interpretation (and that this
bringing forth of bread and wine, was sacrificing thereof) not only by all the
fathers expositions, that write of Melchisedeks priesthood, (Cypr. epist. 63.
Epiph. haer. 55. and 79. Hiero. in Mat. 26. and in epist. ad Euagrium.) (...)
and by the Hebrew word, which is a word of sacrifice, Iud. 6. v. 18. and by
the greatest Rabbines, and Hebricians, that a ri^^ See Pet. Galat* lib. 10. c
4. and 5. and Chro. Gene^ brardi, page 13.
thereof, but we prove it also by these words of the very text it self, He
brought forth bread, and wine, for he was the Priest of God most high. Which
reason immediately following, Because he was Gods Priest, proves evidently,
that he brought it not forth in common manner, as any other man might have done,
but as Gods Priest, whose office is to offer sacrifice. This consequence is so
plain, that for avoiding thereof* the adversaries will not have it translated
in any wise. For he was (...).
the Priest, as though the Scripture gave a reason, why he brought forth
bread, and wine: but, and he was a Priest, etc. (...)
Wrangling about the signification of the Hebrew conjunction.

FVLK. 13. That S. Hieronyme was author of the vulgar Latin interpretation, of
the old Testament, it is more boldly affirmed, than ever it can be
sufficiently proved by you. But what do we control, your vulgar interpreter
says, that Melchisedech brought forth bread and wine, and so say we. Which how
sent Hierom and other understands I have before declared Cap. 1. Sect. 42.

Against all the Fathers that expound, that bringing forth of bread and wine,
to pertayne to his Priesthood* I oppose the Apostle to the Hebrews, who could
not have omitted it, if it had been so. That the Hebrew word is a word of
sacrifice* it is most impudently affirmed of you. For Iud. 6. it signifies no
more to offer than hear, although there Gedeon desire the Angel to stay,
until he return and bring from his house with him a gift or oblation. But if
you will contend that what so ever is brought forth, where soever this Hebrew
word is used, is a sacrifice, you shall make an hundredth sacrifices, more than
ever God ordained. Neither will Galatinus or Gerebrardus for their credit,
once affirm that it signifies to offer sacrifice. Though it may be used in
bringing forth of Sacrifices as well as of all other things, that are brought
forth. But the conjunction causall makes it clear, that this bringing forth
was in respect of his Priesthood. In deed if the Hebrew conjunction were
causall and not copulative, we were driven to the wall: But seeing the Hebrew
conjunction copulative must be expounded according to the sense, you do very
unskillfully, to conclude the sense, which is in controversy, upon the
conjunction which is indefinite: and we without partiality have translated
the conjunction copulative, as it does most commonly and ordinarily signify.

MART. 14. Wherein the reader may see their exceeding partiality and
wilfulness. For, besides infinite like places of Scripture, whereby we do
easily show that this Hebrew particle is used to give a reason or cause of a
thing, themselves also in an other place prove it for us, and that by the
authority of ^^^^ ^nnot. in ^. Luc. v. 42.
Theophylact, and allegation of examples out of the Scripture, and translate
accordingly thus: Blessed art thou among women* No. Test. an. 1580* Benedicta
tu etc. and benedictus, etc. (...).
because the fruit of thy womb is blessed. Let them give us a reason, why the
said conjunction is here by their translation, quia, or, enim, where it was
never so translated before, and it must not be in any case in the other place
of Genesis, where it has been so translated, and generally received, even in
the Primitive Church. In other places of Scripture also, which Theophylact
alleges, and many more may be alleged, they confess, and like very well it
should so signify: only in the place of Genesi^, they can not abide any such
sense, or translation thereof: Genesis 14. v. 18.
but* He brought forth bread, and wine, and he was the Priest, etc. not,
because he was the Priest: What is the cause of this their dealing? None other
undoubtedly (and in all these cases, I knock at their consciences) but that
here they would avoid the necessary sequel of Melchisedecks sacrifice, upon
such translation, which typical sacrifice of bread and wine if it should be
granted, then would follow also a sacrifice of the new Testament, made of
bread and wine, aunswering to the same, and so we should have the sacrifice of
the altar, and their bare communion should be excluded.

FVLK. 14. Because we will not falsely translate, to maintain a color of your
popish sacrifice, we show great partiality. Wherein I pray you? The
conjunction copulative, we know may often be resolved, into the causall, where
the sense so requires: But it never has any force in it self, to breed such
a sense, or to conclude such a sense by it. It is against all reason
therefore, that you would urge us to translate contrary to that which in our
consciences before GOD we take to be the sense. Where you say, that the
sacrifice of Melchisedech, if it were granted, would bring in your Mass, and
exclude our communion, it is altogether untrue. For none of the ancient
fathers, (who were deceived, to imagine a sacrifice, where the Apostle seeking
al things, pertaining to Melchisedechs priesthood, could find none) does
allow your propitiatory sacrifice, but contrariewise, by those only speeches,
that they use about Melchisedechs oblation of bread and wine, we are able to
prove, that they did speak of a sacrifice of thankesgiuyng only. And your
sacrifice, in which, you say, is neither bread nor wine, should hardly
resemble Melchisedechs oblation made of bread and wine.

MART. 15. For which purpose also their partial translation about altar and
table, is notorious. For, the (...).
name of altar (as they know very well) both in the Hebrew and Greek, and by
the custom of al peoples* both Jews and Pagans, (...)
implying and importing sacrifice, therefore we, in respect of the sacrifice of
Christ's body and blood, say. altar, rather than, table, as all the ancient
fathers (Chrysostom. ho. 53. ad po. Antioch. and ho. 20. in 2. Cor. and in Demonst.
quod Christus sit Deus, to. 5. Nazianz. de Gorgonia sorore. Basil. in Liturg.
Socrat. li. 1. Hist. c. 20. and 25. Theodoret. hist. li. 4. c. 20. Theophyl. in
23. Mat. Cypr. epist. 63. Optat. cont. Parm. Aug. ep. 86. and li. 9. Confess.
c. 11. and 13. and alibi saepe) are wont to speak and write, (namely when S.
Hierom calls the bodies or bones of S. Peter and Paul the altars of Christ,
because of this sacrifice offercd over and upon the same) though in respect of
eating and drinking the body and blood, it is also called a table: so that with
us it is both an altar and a table, whether it be of wood or of stone. But the
Protestants, because they make it only a communion of bread and wine, or a
supper, and no sacrifice, therefore they call it table only, and abhor from
the word, altar, as Papistical. For the which purpose, in their first
translation (Bible an. 1562.) when altares were then in digging down
throughout England, they translated with no less malice, than they threw them
down, putting the word, temple, in steed of altar: which is so gross a
corruption, that a man would have thought it had been done by oversight, and
not of purpose, if they had not done it thrice immediately within two
Chapiters, 1. Cor. 9. and 10. saying: Know you not, that they which wait of
the TEMPLE, are partakers of the TEMPLE? and, Are not they which eat of the
sacrifice, partakers of the TEMPLE? in all which places the Apostles word in
Greek, is, altar, and not, (...). c. 9. v. 13. (...).
temple. and see here their notorious peevishness, where the Apostle says,
temple, there the same translation says, sacrifice: where the Apostle says,
altar, there it says, temple.

FVLK. 15. That the ancient fathers used the name of altar, as they did of
sacrifice, sacrificer, leuite, and such like improperly, yet in respect of the
spiritual oblation of praise and thanks gyuyng, which was offered in the
celebration of the Lords supper, we do easilye grant: as also, that they
do as commonly use the name of table, and that it was a table indede, so
standing as men might stand round about it, and not against a wall, as your
popish altares stand, it is easy to prove, and it has oftentimes been
proved: and it seems you confess as much, but that it is with you, both
an altar, and a table, with us indeed it is, as it is called in the
scripture* only a table. That we make the Sacrament, a communion of bread and
wine, it is a 1. Cor. 10. 11.
blasphemous slander, when we believe as the Apostle taught us, that it is
the communion of the body and blood of Christ, and the Lords supper, as for
the corruption Chap. 1 sect. 11.
you pretend, I cannot think (as I have aunsweared before) it was any thing
else but the first Printers oversight. For, why should the name of altar
mislike us in that place, more than in an hundredth other places, when it is
certain, wheresoever it is used in the scriptures, in the proper sense, it
signifies, the altares of the Jews, or of the Gentiles, and never, the
communion table, or that, at which the Lords supper is prepared and received.

MART. 16. Thus we see how they suppress the name of altar, where it should
be: now let us see how they put in their translation, where it should not
be* this also they do thrice in one chapter, and that for to save the honor
of their Dan^ 4. v. 12. 17. 20.
communion table, namely, in the story of Bell, where we have it thrice called
the table of that idol, under which Bells Priests had made a privy entrance,
and, that the king looked (...).
upon the table, and, that they did eat up such things as were upon the
table: these wicked translators fearing, least the name of Bells table might
redounde to the dishonor of their See the Bib. 1562. and 1577.
communion table, translate it, altar, in all these places. Wherein I cannot but
pity their folly, and wonder exceedingly how they could imagine it any
disgrace, either for table or altar, if the idols also had their tables and
altares, whereas S. Paul so plainly names both together, The table of our
Lord, and 1. Cor. 10. v. 2.
the table of Devils. If the table of Devils, why not the table of Bell? if that
be no disgrace to the table of our Lord, why are you afraid of Bells table,
least it should disgrace yours? Or if you had no such fear, then you must
tell us some other good reason of your unreasonable translation in this place,
why you translate, altar, for table, that is, chalk for cheese.

FVLK. 16. That the authors of the first translation in the fabulous story
of Bell, for table, translated altar, as I cannot excuse them of error, so I
dare discharge them of any partiality, or favor of the communion table. For,
in King Henry the eights time, when that translation was first printed, there
was never a communion table in any Church of England. It is like therefore,
they respected similitude of the placing thereof, so as a privy door might
be under it, which could not be conveyed in tables of such forms as now
adays are in use. The Bible 1577. in the margent places the word, table,
which is in the Greek, signifying, that there is no great matter whether word
you use. And that story being of no credit, the translatoures could have no
purpose, either to prove, or improoue, by authority thereof.

MART. 17. And here, by the way, the Reader may note an other exceeding folly
in them, that think the name of table, makes against altar and sacrifice,
their own translation here condemning them, where they call Bells table, an
altar. and Saint Paul, having said to the Corinthians, the table of our
Lord, says to the Hebrews. Haimoi Oecumen.
of the self same, we have an altar. and again, he says, the table of
Devils, which, I am sure, they will not deny to have been a true altar of
Idololatrical sacrifice* and Malach. 1. v. 7. in one sentence it is called both
altar and table, whereupon the Jews offered their external and true
sacrifices* and all the fathers, both Greek and Latin, speaking of the
sacrifice of the new Testament, call that whereupon it is offered, both
altar and table: but the Greeks more often, table, the Latin fathers more
often, altar: and why, or in what respects, it is called both this and that,
we have before declared, and here might ad the very same out of S. Germanus
Arch. B. of Constantinople, in his greek commentaries (called mystica theoria)
on the Liturgies or masses of the Greek fathers* but to proceed.

FVLK. 17. It were an infinite matter to note, not only all the follies, that
you commit, but also the impudent assertions that you make, upon your own
surmise* without all proof. Who made you so privy of our thought, that you
affirm us to think the name of table, makes against altar, and sacrifice?
We know the name of table, proves no sacrifice, but that the fathers call the
same, both a table and an altar, we do never deny unto you. Yet, that the
Apostle to the Hebrews, 12. calls that same an altar, which Saint Paul to
the Corinthians names a table, you shall never be able to prove: Howsoever
Oecumenius and Haimo, two late writers, doat upon that place which is
evident, even by the text, to be understood of the only sacrifice of
Christ's death upon the Cross. That the people whom the Prophet Malachie
reproves, called the Lords altar, his table, is no sufficient proof, that
it might be called by the one name as well as the other. And although, in
respect of the meat offerings and drink offerings, it was also a table, at
which God vouchsafed to be entertained by the people, as their familiar
friend. But, what is this to the purpose of any controversy between us. The
altar was called a table, in the old Testament, but the table is never called
an altar, in the new Testament, although by the a^ntient fathers, oftentimes.

MART. 18. There are also some places less evident, yet such as s^ach of the
like heretical humor against the B. Sacrament. In the prophet I^re. c. 11. v.
17. we read thus, according to the Latin and the Greek, Let us cast Lignum in
panem eius. (...).
wood upon his bread, that is, says S. Hierome, in comment. huius loci, the
cross upon the body of our Savior. For it is he that said, I am the bread
that descended from heaven. Where the Prophet so long before saying, bread,
and meaning his body, alludeth prophetically to his body in the B. Sacrament
made of bread, and under the form of bread, and therefore also called bread
of the Apostle. So that both in the Prophet and Apostle, his bread and his
body is alone, ^. Cor. 10.
and least we should think, that the bread only signifies his body, he
says, Let us put the Cross upon his bread, that is, upon his very natural
body, which hung on the Cross. Now for these words of the Prophet, so
usual and well known in the Church and al antiquity, how think you do these
new Masters translate? in one Bible thus, Let us destroy the tree with the
fruit thereof. Another, we will destroy his meat with wood. or as they
should have said rather, the wood with his meat. Do you see how properly
they agree, whiles they seek novelties, and forsake the ancient usual
translation?

FVLK. 18. The phrase or manner of speech which the Prophet Jeremy uses,
being somewhat obscure, and unusual, has bredde diverse translations. The
most simple meaning, and agreeable unto the Hebrew, is this: Let us destroy
him with woodde in steed of bread, that is, let us famishe him in a close
prison, or in the stocks, etc. and so may the Greek and vulgar Latin be
expounded, let us give him woodde for bread, rather than that violent
exposition of Saint Hierome, is to be admitted, which refers it to his
crucifying, where beside, it were an intolerable figure in that place to
understand his body by bread, it is clean contrary to that you said. For,
the Cross was not put upon Christ, but Christ upon the Cross. Such
wresting of the Scripture, where no need is, makes the Christians ridiculous
to the Jews. And yet it is more far fetched, to draw it to the sacrament,
which is called bread, and is not bread: Neither does Saint Hierome extend his
interpretation so far.

MART. 19. They will say, the first Hebrewe word can not be as Saint Hierome
translateth, and as it is in the Greek, and (...).
as all antiquity reads: but it must signify, Let us destroy. They say
truly, according to the Hebrewe word which now is. (...)
But is it not evident thereby, that the Hebrewe word now is not the same
which the Septuaginta translated into Greeke^ Psalm. 21.
and S. Hierom into Latin? and consequently the Hebrew is altered and
corrupted from the original copy which they had: perhaps by the Jews (as
some other places) to obscure this prophecy also of Christ's Passion, and
their crucifying of him upon the Cross. Such Jewish Rabbines and new Hebrew
words do our new masters gladly follow in the translation of the old
Testament, whereas they might easily conceive the old Hebrew word in this
place, if they would employ their skill that way, and not only to novelties.
For who sees not that the Greek Interpreters in number 70. and al Hebrews of
best skill in their Destruamus. Ponamus. Mittamus.
own tongue, S. Hierom also a great Hebrician did not read as now we have in
the Hebrew, Nashchita, but, Nashitha, or, Nashlicha? Again the Hebrew word
that now is, does so little agree with the words following, that they cannot
tell how to translate it, as appears by the diversity and difference of
their translations thereof before mentioned, and transposing the words in
English otherwise than in the Hebrew, neither of both their translations having
any commodious sense or understanding.

FVLK. 19. If we should acknowledge the Hebrew word to be altered in so many
places, as the 70. depart from it, we should not only condemn the Hebrew
text, that now is, in many places, but your vulgar Latin text also, the
translator whereof differing oftentimes from the Greek, follows the truth of
the Hebrew, or at least comes nearer unto it. Your argument of the number of
the 70. interpreters al Hebrews, is very ridiculous and childish. Hierom him
self will laugh you to skorne in it, who acknowledged for certainty, no more
than the books of the law translated by them. And Lindanus proves manifestly
unto you, that some parts of the old Testament in Greek, which we now have,
are not the same that were counted the 70. translation in the ancient fathers
time. Whether Hierom in this place did consider the Hebrew text, we know not,
for he does not, as his manner is, show the diversity of the Hebrew and the
Septuaginta in this chapter, beside he professes great brevity, entreating
upon so long a Prophet. But whether a letter in this word have been altered or
no, or (...)
whether it were corrupt in the copy, which the Greek translater and Hierom
did read, for the true or simple sense thereof, there is no great difference.
No nor for that sense which Hierom bringes, which although it seems to be
far from the Prophets meaning, yet it may have as good ground upon the word
Naschita, as upon the word Nashlicha.

MART. 20. But yet they will pretend that for the first word at the least,
they are not to be blamed, because they follow the Hebrew that now is. Not
considering that if this were a good excuse, then might they as well follow the
Hebrew that now is Psalm. 21. v. 18: and so utterly suppress and take out of
the Scripture this notable prophecy, They pierced my hands and my feet: Which
yet they do not, neither can they do it for shame, if they will be counted
Christians. So that in deed, to follow the Hebrew sometime where it is corrupt,
is no sufficient excuse for them, though it may have a pretense of true
translation, and we promised in the preface, in such cases not to call it
heretical translation.

FVLK. 20. To this cavil against the certain truth of the Hebrew text, I
have sufficiently answered in my confutation of your preface Sect. 44. showing
that the true reading of this word, as Felix Prate^sis, Ioannes Isaak,
Tremelius, and other do acknowledge, is still remaining and testified by the
Mazzorites.

MART. 21. But concerning the B. Sacrament, let us see That water and wine
ought to be mingled in the chalice. Pro. 9.
once more how truly they follow the Hebrew. The holy Ghost (says S. Cyprian
ep. 63. nu. 2.) by Solomon foresheweth a type of our Lords sacrifice, of the
immolated host of bread and wine, saying, Wisdom has killed her hosts, SHE
HAS MINGLED HER WINE INTO the cup. Come ye, eat of my bread, and drink the
wine that I HAVE MINGLED for you. Speaking of WINE MINGLED (says this holy
doctor) he foresheweth prophetically the cup of our Lord, MINGLED WITH WATER
AND WINE. So does S. Hierom interpret this mixture or mingling of the wine in
the chalice, so does the author of the commentaries upon this place among S.
Hieroms See S. Augustine De Ciuit. Dei lib. 17. c. 20.
works, so do the other fathers. So that there is great importance in these
prophetical words of Solomon. She has mingled her wine into the cup, and,
the wine which I have mingled, as being a manifest prophecy of Christ's
mingling water and wine in the Chalice at his last supper, which the Catholic
Church observes at this day, and whereof S. Cyprian writes the foresaid
long epistle.

FVL. 21. It had been to be wished that S. Cyprian when he goes about to
prove the necessity of wine, in the celebration of the Lords supper, against
the Heretics, called Aquarij, that contended for only water, had retained the
precise institution of Christ in wine only, which the Scripture mencioneth,
and not allowed them a mixture of water, and for that purpose driven him self
to such watrie expositions, as this of Proverbs 9. which without good
warrant, he draws to represent the Lords supper. Where if he had been urged
by the adversaries, whereto the beasts slain were referred in this Sacrament,
he must have been driven to some violent comment. But whereto tends this
preparation?

MART. 22. But the Protestants counting it an idle superstitious ceremony,
here also frame their translation accordingly, suppressing altogether this
mixture or mingling, and in steed thereof saying, She has drawn her wine,
and, Bibl. 1579.
drink the wine that I have drawn: or (as in other of their Bibles) She has
powered out her wine, and, the wine An. 1577.
which I have powered out: neither translation agreing either with Greek or
Hebrew. Not with the Greek, which does (...), Miscuit. (...), Miscut.
evidently signify, mingling and mixture, as it is in the Latin, and as all the Greek Church from the Apostles time has used this word in this very case
whereof we now speak, of mingling water and wine in the chalice. S. James,
and S. Basil in their Liturgies expressly testifying that Christ did so, as also
S. Cyprian (...).
in the place alleged. S. Iustine in the end of his second Apology, calling
it of the same Greek word (...), that is (according to Plutarche) wine
mingled with water: likewise S. Ir^neus Mixtus calix. Conc. Constantinop. 6.
can. 32.
in his fifth book near the beginning. See the sixth general Council most
fully treating hereof and deducing it from the Apostles and ancient fathers,
and interpreting this Greek word by any other equivalent, and more plain to
signify this (...).
mixture.

FVLK. 22. The authority of the holy Scriptures with us is more worth than
the opinion of all the men in the world. In the Scripture we find the fruit
of the vine, water we find not, therefore we account not water to be of any
necessity in the celebration of the Lords supper. In the primitive Church, we
know water was used first of sobriety, then of ceremony, and at length it
grew to be compted of necessity. The Armenians therefore are commendable in
this point, that they would never depart from the authority of the
Scriptures, to yield to the custom, practice, or judgment of any men. But
against this mixture, as you surmise, we have translated powered out or drawn.
I confess our translators, should more simply according to the word have
said, mingled her wine, and the wine that I have mingled, but because that
speech is not usual in the English tongue, it seems they regarded not so
much the property of the word, as the phrase of our tongue. But that they had
no purpose against the mixture of the wine with water in the Sacrament, it is
manifest by this reason, that none of them did ever think, that this place was
to be interpreted of the Lords supper, but generally, of such spiritual food
as wisdom gives to men's souls. Therefore it is certain they had no meaning
to avoid the word of mixing for any such intent as you surmise.

MART. 23. Thus then the Greek is neither drawing of wine, nor pouring out
thereof, as they translate, but mingling. But the Hebrew perhaps signifies
both, or at the least one of the two, either to draw, or to pour out. Gentle
Reader, if thou have skill, look the Hebrew Lexicon of Pagnine, esteemed the
best: (...)
if thou have not skill, ask, and thou shall understand, that there is no
such signification of this word, in all the Bible, but that it signifies
only mixture and mingling. A strange case, that to avoid this mingling of the
cup, being a most certain tradition of the Apostles, they have invented two
other significations of this Hebrew word, which it never had before.

FVLK. 23. The Dictionaries are more sure to teach what a word does signify,
than what it does not signify. I confess, Pagnine gives none other
signification of that root (...), but miscuit. But even the word miscuit, may
signify, a pouring out, when there is no respect of joining diverse things
together, but of serving one with the cup, as Tullie uses the word. Qui
alteri misceat mulsum, ipse non sitiens. He that serves an other with sweet
wine, when he is not a thirst him self. So is the Hebrew word used, Esai. 19.
where the Prophet says. The Lord has powered forth among them, the spirit
of error. Where the word of mixture, is not so proper. Again, your own
vulgar Latin Interpretor, Proverb. 23. translateth mimsach, a word derived
from the same root, (...)
not for any mixture, but for drinking up, or making clean the cups, and
student calicibus epotandis, which study how to empty or drink up all that is
in the cups. In Hebrew it is, which go to seek strong wine, or mingled wine.
And if a mixture be granted in the place you require, how prove you a mixture,
with water rather than with any thing else. Verily, the circumstance of the
place, if there must needs be a mixture, requires a mixture of spices, honey,
or some such thing, to make the wine delectable, unto which, Wisdom does
inuit, and allure all men to drink it, rather than of water only, to abate
the strength of it. As also in the text, Proverbs 23. the drunkards that
continued at the wine, and went to seek (...) mingled wine, went not to seek
wine mingled with water, but some other delicate mixture. And Esaias. 5. where
woe is pronounced to drunkards, the same word is used: woe be to them, that are
strong to drink wine, and men of might, limsoch, to mingle strong drink, not
(...)
to mingle it with water, for sobriety, but with some other delectible matter,
to provoke drunkenness, as your vulgar Interpretor translateth it. So that
albeit the word did signify to mingle, never so properly, and certainly, you
can make no good argument for mingling with water, in that place. Proverbs 9.
where either it signifies simply to draw, broche, or power out, or else to
prepare with some other more pleasant mixture, than of water only.

CHAP. XVIII.
Heretical translation against the honor of SAINTS, namely of our B. LADY.

Martin.
LEt us pass from Gods holy Sacraments, to 1.
his honorable Saints in heaven, and we shall find that these translations
pluck from them also as much honor as they may. In the Psalm 138. where the
Catholic Psalm. 138.
Church, and all antiquity reads thus, Nimis honorati sunt amici tui Deus,
etc. Thy friends O God are become exceeding honorable, their princedome is
exceedingly strengthened: which verse is sung and said, in the honor of the
holy Apostles, agreeably to that in an other Psalm, Constitues cos principes
Psalm. 44.
super omnem terram, Thou shall appoint them Princes over all the earth: what
mean they in all their English Bibles to alter it thus: How dear are thy
counsels (or thoughts) to me O God: O how great is the sum of them? Does not
the Hebrew make more for the old received (...)
Latin translation, than for theirs, because the Hebrew word is used more
commonly for to signify friends, than cogitations? does not S. Hierom so
translate in his translation of the Psalms according to the Hebrew? does not
the great Rabbine R. Solomon? Does not the Greek put it out of doubt, which is
altogether (...).
according to the said ancient Latin translation?

Fulke.
THe context of the verse going before, and also 1.
the verse following, not any envy against the Saints of god, have moved our
translators to depart from the vulgar translation, which is neither so proper
for the words, and altogether impertinent to the matter of the text. For when
the Prophet had in the verse going before, celebrated the wonderful work of
God, in the framing of his body in his mothers womb, in this verse, he breaks
out into an exclamatio^, to behold the marvelous and unsearchable wisdom of
gods councels, whose strength is above man's reach, whose number is as the sand
of the sea. To answer R Salomo^, we have R. David Kimchi, as great a Rabbine as
he, and a more sincere Interpretor, that expounds the whole verse even as we
do.

MART. 2. And you my Masters, that translate otherwise, I beseech you, is it
in Hebrew, How great is the sum (...)
of the^: and not rather word for word most plainly, how are the heads of them
strengthened, or their Princedoms, as in the Greek also it is most manifest?
Why do you then hunt after (...).
novelties, and forsake the trodden path of the ancient, and pass the bounds
which our holy forefathers have set and appointed, preferring your own
singularities and new devises., even there where you can not justly pretend
either the Hebrew, or Greek? Epito. Thesau. Pagn. an. 1570. in radi^^.
When the Hebrew Lexicon has given the common interpretation of this place,
and then says, Quidam exponunt, Some expound it otherwise: why had you rather
be of that lesser, some that expound (...)
otherwise, than of the great society of all ancient interpreters.

FVLK. 2. The Hebrew is as we have translated, how great is the sum of them.
So does Kimchi expound it, so does Pagnin, and to the same effect, Justinian.
And the (...)
same word, ^atsemu missapel* the sum of them is greater than can be numbered,
Psalm. 40. Where the Prophet speaks of the counsels or thoughts of God as in
this place. Where you quarrel at us, for following the lesser number when
Pagnin says, Quidam, etc. You may know if you list, that Pagnine him self is
one of those quidam, that translateth even as we do, How precious are their
thoughts unto me, how are the sums of them multiplied? As for Hierom, whom
you would have us to follow, in steed of Princes, has poor men. And
therefore you do injuriously, to require us to follow him, whom you follow
not your selves. You must therefore indite Pagnine of heretical translation,
beside all Protestants, or else you are very partial.

MART. 3. But this new fangled singularity of teaching and translating,
otherwise than all antiquity has done, shall better appear in their dealing,
about our B. Lady, whose honor they have sought so many ways to diminish,
and deface, that the defense and maintenance thereof against the Heretics of
our time, is grown to a great book, learnedly written by the great Clerk,
and Jesuit, father Canisius, entitled, Mariana.

FVLK. 3. I think Canisius in all his great book called Mariana, medleth not
with our English translations, and therefore very idly was this matter
brought in, to tell us of Canisius book, called Mariana. I have seen a
blasphemous book against, I may justly say, (though it were pretended in the
honor of) the blessed Virgin, called Mariale. I have seen that horrible
blasphemous Psalter of Bonauentur, perverting all the Psalms unto the honor
of the Virgin Marie, with intolerable blasphemy against God, and the holy
mother of Christ, whose greatest honor is in the kingdom of her son, and in
his infinite glory.

MART. 4. Concerning our purpose, what was ever more common, and is now more
general, and usual, in all Christian Countries, than in the Aue Marie, to
say, Gratia plena, full of grace, insomuch, that in the first English Bible, it
has continued so still, and every child in our country, was taught so to say
till the Aue Marie was banished altogether, and not suffered to be said,
neither in Latin, nor English? What ancient father of the Latin Church, has
not always so read, and expounded? What Church in all the West, has not ever
so sung, and said? Only our new Translators have found a new kind of speech,
translating thus: Hail thou that art freely beloved* Bib. 1579. and 1577
and, Hail thou that art in high favor. Why this, and that, or any other
thing, rather than, Hail full of grace? S. John Baptist was full of the holy
Ghost, even from his birth, S. Iuc. 1. v. 15. Act. 7. v. 8.
Steven was full of grace, as the scripture records of them both: why may not
then our Lady much more be called full of grace, Ambr. lib. 2. in 1. ^uc.
who (as S. Ambrose says) only obtained the grace, which no other women
deserved, to be replenished with the author of grace?

FVLK. 4. The salutation of the Virgin, may be said still, either in Latin,
or English, as well as any part of the holy Scripture beside. But not to make
a popish Orizon, of an Angelike salutation. That we have translated Hail Marie
freely beloved, or, that art in high favor, we have followed the truth of the
Greek word, not so denying there by, but that the virgin Marie of Gods
special goodness without her merits, as she confesses was filled with all
gracious gifts of the holy spirit, as much as any mortal creature might be,
except our Savior Christ, whose only privilege it is to be free from sin,
and to have received the gifts of the holy Ghost without measure in his
manhood.

MART. 5. They will say, the Greek word does not so signify. Does it not? I
make them selves witnesses of the contrary, and their own translation in
other places shall confute them, where they translate an other word of the
self same nature and form and in all respects like to this, full of sores. If
Luc. 16. v. 20.
(...) be full of sores, why is not (...) full of grace? Let any Grecian of
them all, make me a difference in the nature and significancie of these two
words. Again, if vlcerosus (as Beza translateth) be full of sores, why is not
gratiosa (as Erasmus translateth) full of grace? or why does Beza marvel, that
Erasmus translated, gratiosa, when him self translateth the like word,
vlcerosus? All which adjectives in osus (you know) signify fulness, as,
periculosus, aerumnosus. Yet what a stir does Beza keep here in his
annotations, to make the Greek word signify, freely beloved?

FVLK. 5. The signification of the Greek word, with your foolish cauillation
of Vlcerosus, I have discussed sufficiently. cap. 1. sect. 43.

MART. 6. But has it in deed any such signification? tell us you that
profess this great skill of the tongues, what syllable (...).
is there in this word, that sounds to that signification? S. Chrysostom, and
the Greek Doctors, that should best know the Comment. in Ephesians. ^.
nature of this Greek word, say that it signifies, to make gracious and
acceptable, and beloved, and beautiful, and amiable, and so to be desired, as
when the Psalm says, The king shall desire thy Psalm. 44.
beauty. Beza him self says, that it is word for word, gratificata, made
grateful, and yet he expounds it, accepted before God, and translateth it,
freely beloved, because he will have no singular grace or goodness, or virtue,
resident in our B. Lady, but all by imputation, and acceptance, whereof I have
spoken before. S. Athanasius a greek doctor says, that she had this title
(...), S. Athan. de S. deip.
because the holy ghost descended into the Virgin, filling her with all graces
and virtues, and I beseech the reader, to see his words, which are many more
concerning this fullness of Ep. 140. in expos. Psalm. 44.
grace and al spiritual gifts. S. Hierome, that knew the Greek word as well as
the Protestants, reads, Gratia plena, and finds no fault with this
interpretation. but says plainly, she was so saluted, full of grace, because
she conceived him, in whom al fullness of the deity dwelt corporally.

FVLK. 6. Look in the best Greek Lexicons, and you shall find it the same
signification, that we translate, and none other. Chrysostom is of the same
judgment, as I have showed, in the place above mentioned. That the Virgin
Marie was justified before God by faith, imputed to her for righteousness
without works or justice, as you will have it called, we doubt no more of her,
than of Abraham. But, that she was also sanctified with most excellent
graces, and endued in her soul, with all christian virtues, Beza, and all that
esteem Beza in the word, will confess as much as is convenient for her
honor, so nothing be derogated from the honor of God. That which Athanasius
says, we do likewise admit, and that which Hierome writes also. But this is
all the controversy, whether the Virgin Marie were freely accepted and
beloved of God, and so by his spirit endued with gracious virtues, or whether,
for her virtues which she had of her self, she were worthy to be beloved of
God, and deserved that honor, whereof she was vouchsafed to become the mother
of God. Athanasius says expressly, that all those graces and gifts were freely
given her by the obumbration or ouershadowing of the holy Ghost, which the
Angel promised should come upon her.

MART. 7. Now let the English Bezites come with their John Keltridge preacher
of the word in London. In his Sermons within the tower, printed, fol. 14.
Gross ignorance and singular pride in many of the new Clergy. So he called
the Priests of the Seminary, as if one would call a Monk a Monastery, or a
Nonne a No^ry.
new term, freely beloved, and control these and all other ancient fathers
both Greek and Latin, and teach them a new signification of the Greek word,
which the^ knew not before. Let John Keltridge one of their great Preachers in
London, come and tell us, that the Septuaginta and the best tra^slatio^s in
Greek have no such words as we use in the Aue Marie, but that the word which
the Septuaginta use, is (...) etc. Who ever heard such a jest, that the
preacher of the word of God in London (so he is called in the title of his
book) and preacher before the Jesuits and Seminaries in the tower, which is
next degree to the disputers there, whose sermons be solemnly printed, and
dedicated to one of the Queens Council, who seems to be such a Grecian that
he confuteth the vulgar Latin translation by the signification of the Greek
word, and in other places of his book alleges the Greek text: that this
man for all this, refers us to the Septuaginta either Page 37. of the ^.
part.
as authors of S. Lukes Gospel, which is too ridiculous: or as tra^slators
thereof, as though S. Luke had written in Hebrew, yea as though the whole new
Testament had been written in Hebrew (for so no doubt he presupposed) and that
the Septuaginta had translated it into Greek as they did the old, who were
dead three hundred years before S. Lukes Gospel and the new Testament was
written.

FVLK. 7. Concerning John Keltridge, against whose ignorance and arrogancy you
insult, I can say nothing, because I have not seen his book. But knowing how
impudently you slander me, M. Whitaker, Beza, and every man almost, with whom
you have any dealing, I may well suspecte your fidelity in this case, and
think the matter is not so hard against John Keltridge, as you make it seem
to be. If he have ouershot himself (as you say) he is the more unwise, if you
slander him, as you do others, you are most of al too blame.

MART. 8. All this is such a pitiful jest, as were incredible, if his printed
book did not give testimony. Pitiful, I say, because the simple people
count such their preachers jolly fellows and great Clearks, because they can
talk of the Greek and of the Hebrewe text, as this man does also, concerning
the Hebrew letter, Tau, whether it had in old time, the form of a Cross, or
Fol. 11. part. 2.
no, even as wisely and as skilfully, as he did of the Septuaginta, and the
Greek word in S, Lukes Gospel. Whose incredible folly and ignorance in the
tongues, perhaps I would never have mentioned (because I think the rest are
sorry and ashamed of him) but that he boasts of that, whereof he has no
skill, and that the people may take him for a very pattern and example of many
other like boasters and braggers among them, and that when they hear one talk
lustily of the Hebrewe and Greek, and cite the text in the said tongues, they
may always remember John Keltridge their Preacher, and say to themselves, what
if this fellow also be like John Keltridge?

FVLK. 8. Reserving John Keltridge to the trial and defense of himself, I say,
you have showed your self as ridiculous in this book diverse times, and so
have many that bear a greater countenance among you tentimes, than John
Keltridge does among us, how so ever it pleases you to make him the next
degree to the disputers: But if John Keltridge have showed him self to be a
vain boaster of that knowledge whereof perhaps he is ignorant, what reason is
it that other learned men, which know the tongues in deed, should be drawn
into suspicion of ignorance for his folly? But that you delight by all means
to discredit their learning and good gifts of God in them, to whom if you
were comparable your self, yet it were not tolerable, that you should seek
their reproach, before their unskillfulness may plainly be reproved.

MART. 9. But to proceed: these great Grecians and Hebricians that control
all antiquity and the approved ancient Latin translation by scanning the
Greek and Hebrew words, that think it a great corruption Genesis 3. to read,
Ipsa conteret caput tuum, she shall bruise thy head, because it pertains to
our Ladies honor, calling it Sand. Rock discou. page 145.
a corruption of the Popish Church, whereas S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S.
Gregory, S. Bernard, and the rest read so, as being the common received text
in their time (though there has been also always the other reading even in
the vulgar Latin translation, and therefore it is not any late reformation of
these new correctors, as though the Hebrew and Greek text before had been
unknown) these controllers I say of the Latin text by the Hebrew, against
our Ladies honor, are in an other place content to dissemble the Hebrew word,
and that also for small devotion to the B. Virgin: namely Hierom 7. and 44.
Where the Prophet inueigheth against them that offer sacrifice to the Queen of
heaven, this they think is very well, because it may sound in the peoples
ears against the use of the Catholic Church, which calls our Lady, Queen
of heaven. But they know very well that the Hebrew word does not signify
Queen in any other place of the Scripture, and that the Rabbines and later
Hebricians (whom they gladly follow) deduce it otherwise, to signify rather the
whole corpse and frame of heaven, consisting of all the beautiful stars and
planets, and the Septuaginta call it See Pagn. in radice.
not only (...)* Queen, but (...): the host of heaven, c. 7. Hierem: and S.
Hierom not only, regina^, but rather, (...) and (...)
militiam coeli: and when he names it reginam, Queen, he says we must
understand it of the moon, to which and to the other stars they did
sacrifice and commit idolatry. But the Protestants (against their custom of
scanning the Hebrew and the Greek) translate here, Queen of heaven, for no
other cause in the world, but to make it sound against her, whom Catholics
truly call and worthily honor as Queen of heaven, because her son is king,
and she exalted above Angels and all other creatures. See the New Test Annot.
Act. 1. v. 14.

FVLK. 9. We think it in deed a shameful corruption of the Scripture, that
your vulgar Latin text, for ipsum, or ipse, as it is in the Greek, reads
ipsa, and blafphemous it is to ascribe that to the mother of Christ, which is
proper unto him self. But many of the ancient Fathers did read so, and
therefore Fulke did ignorantly be like, in calling it a corruption of the
Popish Church. The best property I find in you, (for which I am beholding to
you) is that when you have made a lie, and slaundered me, you will note the
place your self, where I may be discharged and your own impudency be
co^uinced. My words in the place by you noted be these: Disc. Sand. page 145.
Finally, how the Romish Church in these last days has kept the Scripture
from corruption, although I could show by an hundereth examples, yet this one
shall suffice for all. The very first promise of the Gospel, that is in the
Scripture, Genesis 3. That the seed of the woman should break the Serpents
head, the Popish Church has either wilfully corrupted, or negligently suffered
to be depraved thus: Ipsa conteret caput tuum, she shall break thine head,
referring that to the woman which God speaks expressly to the seed of the
woman. Whether the mystery of iniquity working in the Latin Church, long
before the Apostasy thereof into the kingdom of Antichrist began this
corruption, I leave it in doubt, but that the Popish Church has suffered this
deprauation to continue, it is out of all question, although you say you have
the other reading also, which though some copies have, yet will you not admit
it to be authentical. And whereas you brag that this reading has been
always in your vulgar Latin translation: Hentenius confesses that of 28.
ancient copies, by which he reuised the vulgar translation, he found it only
in two. As for S. Ambrose how he did read, it is not certain: for in his
book De fuga saeculi, Cap. 7. where this text is cited, though the printed
books have Ipsa, yet there is nothing in his exposition that agrees
therewith, and seeing that he followed the Greek text, which has the pronoune
of the masculine ge^der, it is like he did read rather Ipse, but because his
Greek was very corrupt, so that for (...), conteret, he did read (...),
seruabit. There is no great account to be made of his reading. S. Augustine in
Psalm. 103. reads Ipsa, but he refers it to the Church, not to the virgin
Marie, as also for conteret, out of the corrupt Greek he reads obseruabit.
Gregory follows the same corrupt version, out of the Greek Ipsa obseruabit,
but he refers it to every Christian man, which is the seed of the woman,
not to the virgin Marie. Mor. lib. 2. Cap. 38. By which it is evident that
your vulgar Latin text, was not received in the Church of Rome for six
hundredth years after Christ. For you read conteret, and not obseruabit. Only
Bernarde in deed a late writer has your reading ipsa conteret, which he
expounds as prophecy of the virgin Marie. Who withstood the temptations of
the Devil, not understanding the promise of the ouercomming of the Devil, by
Christ, even as the Apostle alludeth to it, the Lord shall tread down
Satan under your feet. Romans 16. The same Bernarde, Sermon. de villic. Iniquo,
reads the text, Genesis 4. Si recte offeras, and non recte diuidas, after the
Greek, by which also it is plain, as by other arguments, that your vulgar
Latin translation was not received for 1000. years after Christ. How true
therefore it is that you said Ipsa conteret caput tuum, was the common
received text in the ancient fathers time, the readers may see and judge.

But the chieefe complaint is behind, that in Hieremie 7. Cap. 44. we
translate the Queen of heaven, as the Septuaginta, Hierom, and the vulgar
Latin translation does, and we only do it in despite of the virgin Marie,
because the Papists blasphemously call her the Queen of heaven. The Hebrew
word in deed may signify Queen, although with those points it be not else
where read for a Queen, and it may signify the workmanship, but then you
must supply Aleph of the root, that is wanting, and rests under no long
vowell, and so some Protestants do translate it, as Tremelius and Iunius. But
if we be accused of heretical translation, when we ioigne with your vulgar
Latin, with Hierom, with the Septuaginta, it is very strange, that they should
nor bear the blame with us. Certain it is, no Protestant did ever teach,
that the Jews did worship the virgin Marie for the Queen of heaven. But
the Sun, the Moon, or some great star as Pagnine says. How truly you
call the virgin Marie queen of heaven, and how well you prove it in your
notes, upon Acts 1. 14. Some other more convenient time, and place may be
granted to consider.

MART. 10. Agine, why does the Geneua new Testament An. 1580* Cap. 1. v. 25.
Cap. 1. v. 31.
make S. Matthew to say, that He (to wit, Joseph) called his name Jesus? Why not
she, as well as he? For in S. Luke the Angel says to our Lady also, Thou
shall call his name Jesus. S. Matthew then speaking indifferently, and not
limiting it to him or her, why do they give this preeminence to Joseph rather
than to the B. Virgin? did not both Zachary and ^uc. 1. v. 60. and 63.
also Elisabeth his wife by revelation give the name of John, to John the
Baptist? yea did not Elisabeth the mother first so name him before Zachary
her husband? much more may we think, that the B. Virgin the natural mother
of our Savior, gave him the name of Jesus, than Joseph his putatiue father.
specially, if we consider, that the Aungel reu^aled the name first unto her,
saying, that she should so call him: and the Hebrewe word, Esaias. 7. whereunto
the Aungel alludeth, is the foeminine gender, and referred by the great
Rabbines, Rabbi Abraham, and Rabbi David, unto her, saying expressly in their
commentaries, Et vocabit ipsa puella: and the maid her self shall call. and
surely, the usual pointing of the Greek text (for Beza makes other points of
his own) is much more for that purpose. Now, if they will say, that
Theophylacte understands it of Joseph, true it is, and so it may be
understood very well: but if it may be understood, of our Lady also, and
rather of her, than of him, why does your translation exclude this other
interpretation?

FVLK. 10. The matter is not worth the weight of an hair, whether we read,
he called, or, she called, for both called him so. But, because Joseph had a
commandment, in the same chapter, that he should call his name Jesus, it is
more probable, that S. Mathewe, in this place meant of him, rather than her: at
the least, it is no heretical translation, to say, that Joseph did that,
which he was in few verses before, commanded to do: and it was more ordinary
and usual, that the man gave the name, rather than the woman, although, in
this case, the woman had more right than the man. As for Elizabeth's example,
proves nothing, because she spoke when her husband was dumb.

MART. 11. Where, by the way I must tell you (and elsewhere perhaps more at
large) that it is your common fault, to make some one Doctors interpretation,
the text of your translation, and so to exclude all the rest that expound it
otherwise, which you know is such a fault in a tra^slator, as ca^ by no means
be excused. Secondly, the reader may here observe and learn, that if they
shall hereafter defend their translation of any place, by some Doctors
exposition, agreeable thereunto, that will not serve nor suffice them, because
every Doctor may say his opinion See chap. 1. nu. 3. 43. chap. 10. nu. 1. 2.
chap 19. nu. ^.
in his commentaries, but that must not be made the tex^e of Scripture, because
other Doctors expound it otherwise: and being in it self, and in the
original tongue, ambiguous, and indifferent to diverse senses, it may not be
restrained or limited by translation, unless there be a mere necessity,
when the translation cannot possibly or hardly express the ambiguitie and
indifferency of the originaltexte.

FVLK. 11. The authority of one Doctor, agreeing with the propriety of the
original tongue, is more worth, than an hundredth against it. We never follow
one Doctor, as you falsely slander us, to make his interpretation the text,
but where that one Doctor did see the truth of the natural sense, according to
the ^ong, that perhaps was hid from other Doctors, whose wrytings we have. As
for ambiguities, and indifferences unto diverse senses, are better reserved to
commentaries and lectures upon the Scriptures, than that they either can or
ought to be retained in the translations.

MART. 12. As (for example) in this controversy concerning 2. Pet. 1. v. 15.
Saints, S. Peter speaks so ambiguously, either, that he will remember them
after his death, or they shall remember him, that some of the Greek fathers
gathered, and concluded (...).
there upon ( Oecum. in Caten. Gagneius in hunc locum) that the Saints in
heaven remember us on earth, and make intercession for us. Which ambiguitie
both in the Greek, and the Latin, should be also kept and expressed in the
English translation, and we have endeavored as near as we could possibly so
to make it, because of the diverse interpretations of the ancient fathers. But
it may seem perhaps to the reader, that the said ambiguitie cannot be kept
in our English tongue, and that our own translation also can have but one
sense. If it be so, and if there be a necessity of one sense, then (as I
said) the translator in that respect is excused. But let the good reader
consider also, that the Caluinistes in restraining the sense of this place,
follow not necessity, but their heresy, that Saints pray not for us. Which
is evident by this, that they restrain Eeza.
it in their Latin translations also, where there is no necessity at al, but
it might be as ambiguous and indifferent, as in greek, No. Test. Grae. Henr.
Steph. an. 1576.
if it pleased them: yea, when they print the Greek Testament only, without
any translation, yet here they put the Latin in the margent, according as they
will have it read, and as though it might be read no otherwise, than they
prescribe.

FVLK. 12. Oecumenius, who lived in a superstitious time, tells, that some
men understood this saying of Peter, by an hyperbaton, etc. meaning to show,
that the saints, eue^ after their death, do remember those things, which they
have done here, for them that are alive. But other handling this matter
plainly, etc. do give the usual sense. First Oecumenius counts this an
enforced exposition, because it cannot stand, but by an hyperbaton. Secondly,
he speaks never a word of the intercession of Saints for us. Thirdly, he
prese^reth the common sense, that all the fathers before him given of this text,
as plain and simple, and yet this must be sufficient for us to change our
iuterpretation, although we were put in fault immediately before, as though
we made one doctors interpretation, a sufficient ground of our translation. Yet
is not this an opinion approved, but reported only by Oecumenius* and
Oecumenius himself, a Doctor of as little authority, as any other, in
respect of the late season, in which he lived. As for Gagneius, that came
after him, who sees not how little we are to account of his credit, that
would wreste the deciding of an unprofitable question, out of this place,
whether Saints make intercession for us, which, if it were granted, it
follows not, that we must make intercession to them.

CHAP. XIX.
Heretical translation against the distinction of LATRIA and DVLIA.

Martin.
IN this restraining of the Scripture to the 1.
sense of some one Doctor, there is a famous example in the epistle to the
Hebrnes, Hebr. 11 v. 21.
where the Apostle says, either Jacob adored the top of Joseph's scepter, as
many read and expound: or else, that he adored toward the top of his
scepter, as other read and interpreate: and beside these, there is no other
interpretation of Quest. in Genesis Bib. 1579.
this place in all antiquity, but in S. Augustine only, as Beza confesses:
yet are they so bold to make his exposition only, and his commentary
peculiar to him alone, the text of the scripture in their translation, saying:
Jacob leaning on the end of his staff, worshipped God, and so excluding all
other senses, and expositions of all the other Fathers, excluding, and
condemning their own former translations, adding two Bib. 1562. 1577.
words more, than are in the Greek text, leaning, God: forcing (...) to
signify (...), which may be, but is as rare, as virgae eius, for virgae suae:
turning the other words clean Gen 47. v. 31.
out of their order and place, and form of construction, which (...)
they must needs have correspondent, and aunswereable to the Hebrewe text,
from whence they were translated: which Hebrewe words themselves translate in
this order, He worshipped toward the beds head. If he worshipped toward the
beds head, according to the Hebrewe: then did he worship toward the top of his
scepter, according to the Greek: the (...).
difference of both being only in these words, scepter, and bed, (because the
Hebrew is ambiguous to both) and not in the order or construction of the
sentence.

Fulke.
THe restraining of simple men from 1.
error, is counted of you the restraining of the Scripture, as though the
Scripture were a nose of wax, as some of you have called it, which might be
writhed every way, and especially it pleases you, when it may be wrested to
some color of your error. So have you not one place of Scripture clear on
your side, for any of your heresies, but you are glad to uphold ambiguities,
and diversities of senses, whereas, if you had the truth, you might have texts
of infallible certainty, whereof there could not be diverse interpretations,
without manifest violence offered unto the words and true signification of
them. But concerning the place now in question, your vulgar text, omitting the
preposition, which is both in the Greek, and in the Hebrew, has committed a
manifest error, in saying, that Jacob worshipped the top of his rod or
staff, where S. Augustine has rightly observed the true sense of the place,
and says, that Jacob (as a weak old man) worshipped upon the top of his
staff, that is, leani^g on his staff. The Hebrew is, toward the beds head.
Although it is not unlike, that either the Apostle did read the word Mattah,
which we read Mittah, or else that Mittah signifies a staff, as well as
Mattah. For it is not like as Beza says, that Jacob kept his bed, when Joseph
came first to him, for after it was told Joseph that his father was sick. That
other translators observed not this matter, whereto shall it be imputed, but to
humane imperfection? That we add to the text, it is false, the words,
leaning, and God, are printed in the small letter, to signify that they are
not of the original text, but added for plainness. And yet the sense may
stand without them: and he worshipped upon the end or top of his staff.
That (...) is forced to signify (...), it is a forgerie of you, and no
enforcement by us: for it is in a manner as commonly taken so, as otherwise,
except there be an other antecedent, to whom it may be referred, then to
avoid ambiguitie, it is (...). rather than (...) As Math. 4. his paths, his
meat, his hand, Math. 5. his Disciples, and else where in every place.

MART. 2. To make it more plain, when the Prophet David says, Adorabo ad
templum sanctum tuum, Psalm. (...).
5. and 137. is not the true translation, and grammatical sequel of the
words, thus: I will adore toward thy holy temple? Is it not a common phrase in
the Scripture, that the people of God adored toward Jerusalem, toward his holy
mount, before (...). Dan. 6. 3. Reg. 8. Psalm. 98. Ios. 7. (...). Psalm. 1^1.
the Arc, toward the place where his feet stood? May any man be so bold, by
adding and transposing to alter and obscure all such places of holy Scripture,
that there may appear no manner of adoration toward or before a creature? and
for worshipping or adoring toward the things aforesaid, and the like, may we
say, leaning upon those things to worship, or adore God? Were they afraid,
lest th^se speeches of holy Scripture might warrant and confirm the Catholic
and Christian manner of adoring our Savior Christ, toward the holy Roode, at,
or before his image and the crucifixe before the altar, and so forth? For had
they not feared this, why should they translate (...), leaning upon, rather
than, toward, yea, why in Genesis, toward his beds head, and here not,
toward?

FVLK. 2. You abound in leisure, thus to trifle about nothing, we allow
worshipping toward the temple, the holy hill, the footestoole, the Ark of God, and such like: yea if you will have it toward the beds head, or the
toppp of his staff, what gain you for the worshipping of images, forbidden by
the second commandment, or before images? for so you would creep upon poor
men's consciences, first, to worship before images, then to worship images,
thirdly, to worship, them with Dulia, and not with Latria, at last to worship
the image of God, of Christ, of the Trinity, with Latria, even the same
worship that is due to God him self.

MART. 3. And (which is more) when the ancient Greek fathers, Chrysostom. Oecum.
in Collectan. Damase. lib. 1. pro imaginibus, Leont. apud Damasc. put so little
force (...).
either in this preposition (...), (or the other alleged) that they expound
all those speeches, as if the prepositions were of phrase only, and not of
signification, saying: Jacob adored Joseph's (...).
scepter, the people of Israel adored the temple, the Arc, the holy mount, the
place where his feet stood, and the (...).
like, whereby S. Damascene proves the adoration of creatures, named Dulia,
namely, of the cross, and of sacred images: if I say they make so little force
of the prepositions, that they infer not only adoration toward the thing,
but adoration of the thing: how do these goodly translators, of all other
words, so strain and rack the little particle (...), to signify, leaning
upon, that it shall in no wise signify any thing, tending toward adoration?

FVLK. 3. The worship that Chrysostom, and Oecumenius speak of, is a civil
reverence done to Joseph, or to his scepter, in respect of the kingdom of
Ephraim, that should be set up in his posterity. What Damascene gathers
hereof, to maintain idolatry, we regard not, certain it is, that Jacob
worshipped none but God, and bowed him self, either toward the beds head, or
leaning upon his staff, as S. Augustine says That they which follow
constrained expositions, are enforced to neglect the prepositions, it is no
warrant for us, when we see how the sense may best stand without making the
prepositions, which the holy Ghost uses, idle or unprofitable, both in the
Hebrew, and in the Greek. And if (...) should signify toward, as it does not
properly, but upon, your counterfeit distinction of Dulia, and Latria, should
never the sooner be received.

MART. 4. And if the Greek Doctors suffice not to satisfy these great
Grecians herein, tell me, you that have skill in the Hebrew, whether in the
foresaid speeches cited out of the Psalms, there be any force in the Hebrew
prepositions? surely (...)
no more than if we should say in English, without prepositions, Psalm. 98. 13^.
Adore ye his holy hill: we will adore the place (...)
where his feet stood: Adore ye his footestoole: For you know that there is
the same preposition also, when it is said, Adore ye our Lord: or, as your
selves translate, worship Psalm. 95. or 96.
the Lord: where there can be no force nor signification (...)
of the preposition. And therefore in these places also, your translation is
corrupt, and wilful, when you say thus: We will fall down before his
footestoole. fall ye down before his footestoole, before his holy mount, or
worship him upon his holy hill: Where you shun and avoid, first the term
of adoration, which the Hebrewe and Greek, duly (...)
express by terms correspondent in both languages, throughout (...)
the Bible and are applied for the most part, to signify adoring of
creatures. Secondly, you avoid the Greek phrase, which is at the least, to
adore toward these holy things, and places: and much more the Hebrew phrase,
which is, to adore the very things rehearsed: to adore Gods footestoole (is
the Psalm says) because it is holy, or, Psalm. 98.
because he is holy, whose footestoole it is, as the Greek reads.

FVLK. 4. If the Apostle had meant nothing by the preposition, he might, and
would, (as it is most like) have left it clean out, yea, if he had meant no
more, but the adoration of Joseph's scepter, what needed he to have added the
top, or the extremity? or why was the top of his scepter more to be adored,
than all the other length of it? But certain it is, the Apostle would express
the Hebrewe preposition, which must needs have some signification. And where
you ask them that have skill in the Hebrewe, whether there be any force in the
preposition, in those sayings out of the Psalm, that speak of worshipping, or
falling down before his footestoole, his holy hill, etc. I answer, yea,
there is great force, for the hill was not to be worshipped, but he whose
tabernacle or temple was on it. But you object, that we our selves neglect the
preposition, Psalm. 96. and say, worship the Lord. The fault is the less,
because the worship is referred to none but the Lord: yet the precise
translation in that place, should be, bow down, or fall ye down before the
Lord, in the glorious sanctuary. And where you say, we shun the word of
adoration, which the Hebrew, and Greek, duly do express, by terms applied,
for the most part signify adoring of creatures. You have packed up a great
number of untruths, together, as it were in a bundell. First, that we shun
the term of adoring, for doubt of your Dulia, which is utterly untrue, for it
is avoided partly, because it is more Latin, than English, partly because it
does not express either the Greek, or the Latin terms, which the Scripture
uses. Secondly, you avouch, that both the Hebrew, lishtachauoth, and the
Greek (...), (...)
whereas all that be learned in both the tongues, do know, that the Hebrew
word does signify properly, to bow down, and therefore is used of such
bowing down, as is not to the end of adoration, as Psalm 42. v. 5. 6. Why
art thou cast down O my soul, and in diverse other places. The Greek word
also signifies, to use some gesture of body in worshipping, and sometimes, to
fall down as Herodotus, (...), they must worship the King falling down before
him. Finally, where you say, they are applied to the adoring of creatures, if
you call it adoration which is used in civil manner to Princes, and other
persons of authority, I grant it is often so applied, but if you mean of
religious adoration, it is expressly forbidden to any creature or Image of
creature, by the second commandment in the Hebrew term, and by the words of
our Savior Christ to the Devil, Math. 4. In the Greek word, Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Where Satan desired
not to be worshipped as God with divine honor, but that our Savior Christ
would fall down before him and worship him, as an excellent minister of God, to
whom the disposition of all the kingdoms of the world, as he falsely said, were
by God committed, Luke 4. v. 6. which utterly overthrows your bold
distinction of Dulia and Latria, seeing it was that which you call Dulia, that
the Devil required, but our Savior Christ tells him, that all religious
worship and service pertains only to God. Touching the adoration of Gods
footestoole, I have spoken sufficiently before, Cap. 1. Sect. 41.

MART. 5. This being most manifest to all that have skill in these tongues, it
is evident that you regard neither Hebrew nor Greek, but only your heresy:
and that in S. Paul's place aforesaid of adoring Joseph's scepter, you alter it
by your own fancy, and not by S. Augustines authority, whom I am sure you
will not admit reading in the Psalm, Adore ye his footestoole: and so
precisely and religiously reading thus, that he examineth the case, and finds
thereby that the B. Sacrament must be adored, and that no good Christian does
take it, before he adore it. Neither will you admit him when he reads thus
of David, He was carried in his own hands, and Praef. in Ps. 33.
interprets it mystically of Christ, that he was carried in his own hands,
when he gave his body and blood to his Disciples. Yet are S. Augustines
interpretations (how so ever you like or mislike the^) very good, as also that
above named of Jacobs leaning upon his staff, and adoring, may be one good
sense or co^me^tarie of that place, but yet a co^mentarie, and one Doctors
opinion, not the sacre text of Scripture, as you would make it by so tra^slating.

FVLK. 5. Let Pagnine for the Hebrew word, the Greek Lexicons for the other,
be judge between us. For you are the most impudent aduoucher I think, that
ever became a writer. That we lean to Augustines judgment, in this case, it
is not because we make him an author of truth, but a witness of the same,
against such venomous tongues and pens, as yours is, that call every thing
heretical, that sauoureth not of your own drowsy dreams, of antichristian
heresy. Neither is it reason that by using the testimony of Augustine, where
he bears witness to the truth, we should be bound to every interpretation of
his* when he declineth therefro. Where you say, that by adoring the footestoole
of God, he finds that the blessed Sacrament must be adored, you say untruly,
he gathers that Christ's humanity or body, must be adored, but not the
blessed Sacrament thereof. Likewise when he says, upon a feeble ground, of a
false interpretation, that Christ was carried in his own hands in the
Sacrament, he affirms it not so absolutely, as you allege it, but quodam
modo, after a certain manner, he bare himself in his hands, when he said,
this is my body. Yea, in that place Augustine, as in many other, declares his
judgment, that he acknowledged not the corporal manner of presence, and eating
of Christ's body, in the sacrament, for which, you Papists so greatly
contend, that you ate content to make so many senses of the scripture, it
declares, that you acknowledge none certain, and so derogate al credit and
authority from the word of God, which may have so many meanings, as there be
diverse doctors that have commented upon it. Whereas diverse interpretations may
have al a true sense, but it is impossible, that they should al be senses of
the same Scripture.

MART. 6. And if S. Hierome like not the Greek doctors interpretation, in this
place of adoring Joseph and his scepter, yet he also says, that Jacob adored
toward Joseph's rod, or toward the beds head, and not, leaning upon his
staff he adored, which you make the text of Scripture. And though he
think, that in this place is not meant any adoration of Joseph, yet, I am
sure, for adoration of holy things, namely, Relics, the holy land, and all the holy places and monuments of Christ's being and doing upon the earth, you
will not be tried by S. Hierome. And again, why S. Paul should say, that by
faith he adored, and in respect of things to come, it is not otherwise easy to
understand, but that he partly for saw the kingdom of Ephraim, the posterity
of Joseph: partly the kingdom of Christ prefigured in Joseph then Prince of
Egypt, and so by faith adored his scepter or toward his scepier (which is all
one) as the Greek fathers for the most part expound it. But let us hasten
toward an end.

FVLK. 6. S. Hierom in deed denies that Jacob did worship his staff or his
scepter, or toward the top of his Sons scepter, but only toward the beds
head as the Hebrew text is. For reverent estimation of relics, the Holy land,
and the monuments of Christ's doing and being, as he sometime upon contention
perhaps was immoderate, so for adoration of such things, after such Idolatrous
manner as is used in the popish Church, he was far off: yea, he says
expressly, that he does not allow the adoration of any creature, and that, to
adore any creatures, is plain idolatry. Has autem non dico martyrum
reliquias, etc. But we do worship and adore, I say, not the relics of
martyrs, but neither the sun truly, nor the moon, etc. not Aungelles not
Archaungels, not Cherubin, not Seraphin, or any name that is named in this
world, or in the world to come, least we should serve the creature rather
than the creator which is blessed for ever. But we honor the relics of
martyrs, that we might adore him, whose martyrs they are.

Do you not hear how Hierome allows the adoring of creatures? I see no
cause therefore why we may not be tried by his judgment, for adoration of
holy things, and namely, relics, and whatsoever you will name beside, seeing
he makes adoration proper only to God.

Finally, the Apostle says, not that Jacob adored, in respect of things to
come, but, that by faith, he blessed his son, concerning things to come, and
worshipped God, whom no man can worship truly, but by faith. And Jacobs
faith, was the more commendable, that being near his end, and in that
infirmity of body, he both believed the promises of God made to him
concerning his sons, and also gave thanks unto God, for those benefits
which he should never taste of in the flesh, but was assured by them, as
tokens of Gods favor toward him, to the attainement of the land of eternal
life, whereof the land of Canaan was but a holy figure and sacrament.

CHAP. XX.
Heretical translation, by ADDING TO THE TEXT.

Martin.
BEcause in the last corruption I spoke of adding 1.
to the text, though i^ be their common and universal fault in every
controversy, as is to be seen in every chapter of this book: yet here I
will add certain places, not yet mentioned. As, The rest of the acts of
Iehoakim, 2. Paral. 36. v. 8. in Bib. 1562.
and his abominations which he did, and CARVED IMAGES THAT WERE LAID TO HIS
CHARGE, BEHOLD THEY ARE WRITTEN, Against Images.
etc, these words, carved images laid to his charge, are more than is either in
the Greek, or the Hebrewe.

Fulke.
YOu forget your self in the first place, whereof 1.
made mention, Chap. 3. sect. 9. where I have aunsweared, that our first
translators added that which is the common interpretation, and supply of them
that write upon this place, but, because that had been better in the note,
than in the text, it is corrected in two later translations

MART. 2. Again, Saul confounded the Jews, proouing (by conferring one
Scripture with an other) Act. 9. v. 22. Bib ^577. For conference of Scriptures,
against fathers, Councels, etc.
that this is very Christ. These words, by conferring one Scripture with
another, are added more than is in the greek text: in favor of their
presumptuous opinion, that conference of scriptures is enough for any man to
understand them, and so to reiecte both the commentaries of the Doctors, and
exposition of holy Councels, and Catholic Church, it is so much more, I
say, than is in the Greek text, and a notorious corruption in their Bible,
read daily in their churches, as most authentical. See the rest of their
Bibles, and thou shalt find no more, for all those words, but, affirming, or,
confirming. and the (...). c. 2. v. 16. (...).
self same Bible, in the first epistle to the Corinthians, translateth the
same Greek word thus, Who shall instruct? And indeed, that is the true and
usual signification of the word, both in the old Testament, and in the new*
as Deuteronomy. 4. Thou shall (...)
teach them thy children. And Esaias 40. Who shall instruct our Lord? The Hebrewe
word also in both places, signifying no more, but instructing and teaching.
And so does the Apostle cite i^ to the Corinthians out of Esaias, and he uses i^
to the Coloss. (c. 2. v. 2. in the same signification, as the Church reads
and expounds it, and so consequently, S. Luke in the place whereof we now
treat, says nothing else, but that S. Paul earnestly taught or instructed
them, that Jesus is Christ. And yet our new translators without respect of
Hebrewe, or Greek, have coined a new signification, of conferring one
scripture with an other. So ignorant they are in the signification of Greek
words, or rather, so wilfully malicious.

FVLK. 2. Either you make aloude lie, or else some one print, which you have of
the Bishops Bible, which you call, Bib. 1577. has put that into the line that
should be the note in the margent. For, of four translations that I have, never
a one has that addition. The Bishops Bible has that 22. verse Chap. 9.
this. But Saul increased the more in strength, and confounded the Jews, which
dwelt at Damascus, affirming, that this was very Christ. The Geneua Bible
thus. But Saul increased the more in strength, and confounded the Jews that
dwelt at Damascus, confirming, that this was the Christ* where the note in the
margent upon the word, confirming, is this: proouing by the conference of the
scriptures. Thomas Mathews Bible translateth that verse thus. But Saul
increased in strength, and confounded the Jews, which dwelt at Damascus,
affirming, that this was very Christ. Master Couerdales Bible 1562. hatla it
thus. But Saul increased the more in strength, and confounded the Jews which
dwelte at Damascus, affirming, that this was very Christ. Thus are al our
translations without that addition, which, although it is not to be borne in
the text, yet is no heretical addition, except you count it heresy, to
prove a thing by conference of Scriptures.

MART. 3. Again, in the first epistle of Saint Peter ^. Pet. ^. v. 35. Bib.
1562. 1577. Against traditions.
they translate thus: The word of the Lord indureth ever: and this is the
word which by the gospel was preached unto you. where these words, by the
Gospel, are added deceitfully, and of il intent, to make the reader think,
that there is no other word of God, but the written word, for the common reader
hearing this word Gospel, conceiueth nothing else. But indeed al is the
gospel, whatsoever the Apostles taught, either by writing, or by tradition and
word of mouth, a^ S. Paul speaks, 2 Thessalonians. 2. and S. Peter says nothing
else in the place alleged, but, This is the word which is preached among
(...).
you, as the Geneua Bibles translate, or more significa^tly, which is
Euangelized among you, as we translate, for, though there be greater
significancie in the Greek word, than is expressed by bare preaching or
telling a thing, as having a goodly relation, and allusion to the word,
Euangeliu^* Gospel, yet neither do they Euangelizo.
in any other place, neither can they translate it, to preach by the gospel,
but simply, to preach, to tell, to show. as, preaching peace by Jesus Christ,
Act. 10. verse 39. so themselves translate it. (...).
and Psalm. 95 (or 96. v. 2.) Be telling of his salvation from day to day.
Which in other places is spoken by other Greek words, that have no
signification at all of Gospel, (...).
as immediately in the said Psalm, 95 (or 96. v. 3) and Psalm 104. (or 105.
v. 1.) and Act. 13. v. 5. and c. 17. v. 23. and Io. 1. v. 3.

FVLK. 3. The other before is not a more lewd slander, than this is a
foolish cavil. The Greek word signifies not simply to preach the gospel, or
good tidings, which, both may, and ought to be expressed, where the phrase of
our tongue will abide it. And therefore the Geneua translation is imperfect in
this place, rather than the other. When you say Euangelized, you do not
translate, but feign a new word, which is not understood of mere English
ears, as you do in an hundredth places beside, to make the scripture dark and
unprofitable to the ignorant readers. And if the word signifies no more but,
to preach, to tell, to show, as you would seem to prove by a number of
quotations, why do you use that new word, Euangelize? which, if it were
understood and in use, is more, than simply, to preach, to tell, to show.
But of all other your mad surmises, this is the most monstrous, that this is
added, to make the reader think, that there is no other word of God, but the
written word. Does Gospel, I pray you, signify the written word? The common
hearer, you say, hearing this word Gospel, conceiueth nothing else. I am
persuaded there is no such reader in England, except it be some of your
viperous brood, that thinks the Gospel, to be nothing but the story
written by the four Evangelists: whereas all true Christians know the Gospel
to be contained, not only in those stories, but also in other writings of the
Apostles, and that the Gospel is preached, whenever a good sermon teaching
the way unto salvation is preached. Howsoever the Septuaginta used the word
Euangelizo in the old Testament, we are not to learn the signification
thereof, out of their translation, but out of the Scribes of the holy ghost,
in the new Testament.

MART. 4. All which words signify only to tell, to show, to declare, and are
used indifferently for and with the other word which they here only translate,
to preach by the Gospel. Whereas in all others places when they will translate
it Luc. 2. v. 10. Act. 13. v. 32. Gal. 3. 8. Dominus dabit verbum
euangelizantibus. Qui Euangelizas Jerusalem. Ps. 67. Isa. 40.
most significantly, they express it by bringing glad tidings: and in some
places where it should be expressed most significantly in respect of
euangelizing or preaching the Gospel, there they translate it barely,
preachers, and preaching. Only S. Peter's place aforesaid, must be stretched to
signify, The word preached by the Gospel, to insinuate and uphold their
heresy of the written Gospel only, or only written word, against Apostolical
traditions not written. If this be not their meaning, let them give us a good
reason why they translate it so in this one place only.

FVLK. 4. When we vary about the signification of the word (...), or in deed
when we vary not in substance, though you must brabble about it for a
countenance, what mean you to teach us the signification of other words,
except you would make folk believe, that we know nothing, but what we learn of
you? I say again, if in the new Testament we have not fully expressed the
signification of the Greek word, (...), either it is because our English
phrase could not express it, or else it is a fault of negligence. But in the
old Testament, where we have not that word, because we translate out of
Hebrew, what reason is there, that you should exact the significancie of that
word, when we do not translate it? The insenslesse insinuation that you dream
of, I am sure was far from the translators minds, seeing we have manifest
and inevitable Scriptures to confound your heretical blasphemy of the
imperfection and insufficiency of the word and Gospel of God written unto
eternal salvation. And if the word Gospel, when it is added to the text out
of the verb of Euangelizing* do insinuate the heresy of the written Gospel
only, why do you Math. 11. v. 5. translate, Pauperes Euangelizantur, to the
poor the Gospel is preached? Would you think it were an honest surmise of
me, to say you avoid the name of the Gospel, so often as you express it not
in translating that word, for hatred you bear the Gospel? And yet it has
more likelihood, than many that you have invented, and prosecuted against us.

MART. 5. It is written of Luther that he for the self ^ind. Dubit. page 88.
same heresy, in his first translation into the Germane tongue, left out these
words of S. Peter altogether, This is the word which is euangelized or
preached to you. Why so? because S. Peter does here define what is the word of
God: saying, that which is preached to you, and not that only which is written*
which false dealing of Luther is no small presumption against the like
heretical meaning of our English Protestants, who (I am sure) in this point of
controversy of the word written and unwritten, will not deny that they agree
with the Lutherans.

FVLK. 5. That any such sentence was upon any purpose lest out by Luther in
his translation, for my part I believe it not, neither upon your report, nor
upon your author Lindanus credit. If the Printer did omit a line, yet what
reason were it to think that Luther did it, upon such a cause? which were to
no purpose for him except he should have left out all those textes of
Scripture, where preaching of the Gospel, or word of God is mentioned. What you
have left out, I have noted before, and yet I have not pronounced the cause
why, so confidently as you do of that omission, which you know not whether it
be so or no.

MART. 6. Again in the epistle of S. James, they add Ia 4. v. 6.
the word, Scripture, into the text, saying, But the Scripture offers more
grace. Where the Apostle may say as well, and indifferently, The Spirit or holy
Ghost gives more grace, and it is much more probable, and is so expounded of
many. Let the good reader see the circumstance of the place, and abhor their
sauciness in the text of holy Scripture.

FVL. 6. The nominative case in the Greek is wanting, which is expressed in
the verse before, and in this verse is supplied by the translators: yet
printing it so in another letter, that the reader may know it is not in the
Greek, as they do in 500. places beside, where a verb or a nowne, or a
pronowne, or any other word, must of necessity be understood, to fill up the
sense: which you in your precise tra^slatio^ observe not, when you add any
such thing beside many imperfect sentences that you make, because you will not
seem to add, that which in translation is no addition, but a true
translation. But here you say, the Apostle may as well understand the holy
Ghost, as the Scripture. When there is a nominative case before, that agrees
with the verb, and the sense, it is far fetched to understand a nominative
case of him, that is not spoken of. I will set down the whole text, that the
reader may judge, what perilous addition is here committed, by our translators.
Do you think that the Scripture says in vain, the spirit that dwells in
us, lusts after envy. But (the Scripture) or, it gives more grace, and
therefore says: God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. In
Gra^mar schools they use to examine it thus, who, or what gives, who, or what
says? does not the Scripture mentioned immediately before, answer to these
questions most aptly? yet me^ must abhor our sauciness, or rather your
spiteful malitiousnesse.

MART. 7. One addition of theirs I would not speak of, but only to know the
reason why they do it, because it is very strange, and I know not what they
should mean by it. This I am sure, if they do it for no purpose, they do it
very folishly, and forgetfully, and contrary to themselves. In the Gospel of
S. Mark, in the reckening of the Apostles, they add Marc. 3. v. 16.
these words, And the first was Simon, more than is in their Bibl. 1579.
Greek text. Which addition they learned of Beza, whose contradictions in this
point are worthy nothing. In S. Matthew Mat. 10. v. 2.
where these words are, he suspecteth that, first, was added by some Papist,
for Peter's primacie: here, where the word is not, he avouches it to be the
true text of the Gospel, and that because Matthew reads so. There he
alleged this reason, why it could not be said, the first, Simon, because there
is no consequence nor coherence of second, third, fourth, etc. here he says,
that is no impediment, because there be many examples of such speech, and
namely in the said place of S. Matthew. There he says it is not so, though al
Greek copies have it so: here it must needs be so, though it be only found in
certain odd Greek copies of Erasmus, which Erasmus him self (as Beza
confesses) allowed not, but thought that these words were added in them out
of S. Matthew. What these contradictions mean I know not, and I would learn
the reason thereof, of his scholars our English tra^slators, who by their
Masters authority have made the self same addition in their English
translation also.

FVLK. 7. It seems you like the addition well enough, because it imports a
shadow of Peter's primacie, but yet your malice is so great against Beza, whose
sincerity in this case you should rather commend, if there were any spark
of honest equity in you, that you cannot pass it over without quarrelling,
and cauilling. But your pretense is to know the reason why they do it. I have
some marvel, that you should be ignorant of such things, as are compted so
material for the maintenance of the Popes primacie. Especially since Beza
tells you so plainly the reason of it. True it is, that the common printed
books have not that addition. But Beza takes Erasmus to witness, that in
diverse Greek copies these words are expressed, and because they agree best
with the context, Beza translateth them out of those copies. For except you so
read (says Beza) the next verse beginning of the particle (...), shall have no
word at all, with which it may be knit. But in S. Matthew (you say) he
suspecteth that the word (first) was added by some* Papist for Peter's
primacie. He only obiecteth, what if it were so, and answers the objection
him self out of S. Mark: as upon S. Mark, for the coherence with that which
follows: wherefore it is not without great and malicious impude^ce, that you
charge him with co^tradiction, where there is none, and where he says more
toward your cause, than any of you could say for your selves.

MART. 8. There is also an other addition of theirs, either proceeding of
ignorance, or of the accustomed humor, when they translate thus: If ye continue
stablished in the faith, Col. 1. v. 23.
and be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel, which ye have heard how it
was preached to every creature: or, whereof ye have heard how that it is
preached: or, whereof ye have heard, and which has been preached to every
creature, etc. For, all these varieties they have, and none according to the
Greek text, which is word for word, as the vulgar Latin Interpretor has most
sincerely translated it, Immovable from the hope of the Gospel, which you
(...).
have heard, which is, or has been preached among all creatures, etc. So that
the Apostles exhortation is unto the Colossians, that they continue grounded
and stable in the faith Romans 16. Gal. c. 1. and 2* 2 Thessalonians. 2. Heb. 13. 1.
Tim. 6. 2. Tim. 1. and 2*
and Gospel, which they had heard and received of their first Apostles: as in
the epistle to the Romans, and to the Galatians, and to the Thessalonians, and
to the Hebrews, and to Timothee, and S. John in his first Epistle, c. 2. v.
24. and S. Jude, v. 3. and 20. all use the like exhortations.

FVLK. 8. Here is no addition of any word, that may not be comprehended in the
Greek. For (...) being the genitive case, signifies not only, which, but
also, whereof, or of which, and (...), that has been, or which has been
preached. Here is only the poor word (how) which is a superfluous word, even
in our English, for the sense is all one, if you leave it out, Immovable from
the hope of the Gospel, of which you have heard, that it has been preached
among, or, to all creatures. Here is therefore no addition to the text, but a
sense differing from that which pleases you best, and yet your vulgar Latin
may well bear that sense, which our translators do follow.

MART. 9. But this does not so well like the Protestants, which* with
Hymenaeus, and Alexander, and other old Heretike^, 1. Tim. 1. and 6.
have fallen from their first faith, and therefore they alter the Apostles
plain speech, with certain words of their own, and they will not have him
say, Be immovable in the faith and Gospel which you have heard and received:
but, whereof you have heard, how that it is preached: as though he spoke not
of the Gospel preached to them, but of a Gospel which they had only heard
of, that was preached in the world. Certain it is, these words, whereof you
have heard, how it was preached, are not so in the Greek: but, which you have
heard, which has been preached. Which is as much to say, as that they should
continue constant in the faith and Gospel, which them selves had received* and
which was then preached, and received, in the whole word. So say we to our
dear countriemen, Stand fast in the faith, and be immovable from the hope of
the Gospel, which you heard of your first Apostles, which was, and is preached
in all the world. If the Protestants like not this exhortation, they do^
according to their translation.

FVLK. 9. The Lord is witness, there is nothing likes the Protestants
better, than that all nations should continue grounded, and stable in that
faith and Gospel, which they had heard, and received of their first Apostles:
but in this place, our translators understand, not only that continuance in
the Gospel, but also they comprehend the mystery of the preaching of the
Gospel, to the Gentiles, whereof the Apostle in this text, begins to
speak, that the Collossians might know, that they have been enstructed in that
Gospel, which at such time as the Apostle did write unto them, had been spread
by preaching, according to our Savior Christ's commandment, over all the
world. As for your brutish collection, as though he spoke not of the Gospel
preached to them, but of a Gospel, which they had only heard of, that was
preached in the world. What ground can it have of our translation, according to
the sense I show, that the translators followed? Is it possible they should
continue in a Gospel that was not preached unto them, but whereof they had
heard only a fame, that it was preached to others? The whole context before,
inforceth as much as you say, is the sense of the place. And the vulgar
translator seems to favor this sense, that our translators follow, rather
than that bare translation of yours, because he says not, a spe Euangelij,
quod audistis praedicati in vniuersa creatura, etc. but, a spe Euangelij quod
audistis, quod praedicatum est in vniuersa creatura. The words of the
exhortation you make to your countrymen, are well to be liked, if your meaning
were as good. But when by the Gospel, you mean popish traditions, by your
first Apostles, not the Apostles of Christ, but of the Bishop of Rome, by,
which was preached in all the world, the doctrine of Antichristian apostasy,
we are so to consider, that under so good and holy words, so diuilish and
detestable a meaning is craftily covered, and cloked with hypocrisy.

CHAP. XXI.
Certain other heretical TREACHERIES, and CORRVPTIONS, worthy of observation.

Martin.
THey hold this position, that the Scriptures 1.
are not hard to be understood, that so every one of them may presume to
interpret, and expound them. And because S. Peter says plainly, that S.
Paul's Epistles are hard, 2 Pet. 3. Corruption concerning the easines of the
scriptures. Beza in Annos.
and other Scriptures also, which the unlearned (says he) pervert to their
own destruction, therefore they labor tooth and nail, to make this subtle
difference, that S. Peter says not, Paul's Epistles are hard, but some things
in S. Paul's epistles are hard, (as though that were not all one) and therefore
they translate so, that it must needs be understood of the things, and not of
the Epistles, pretending the (...). Test. Gr. Crisp.
Greek, which yet they know in some copies can not be referred to the
things, but must needs be understood of the Epistles. Wherefore, the Greek
copies being indifferent to both, and the thing also in very deed being all
one, whether the hardness be in the Epistles, or in the matter, (for when we say
the Scripture is hard, we mean specially the matter) it is not only an
heretical, but a foolish and peevish spirit, that makes them so curious and
precise in their translations, as here to limite and abridge the sense to the
things only, Beza translating, inter (...)
quae sunt multa difficilia, and not, in quibus, as it is in the old vulgar
translation, most sincere, and indifferent both to Epistles, and things.

Fulke.
WE hold of the Scriptures, as S. Augustine 1.
teaches, de doct. chr. lib. 2. cap. 6. that the holy Ghost, has so
magnifically and wholsomly attempered the holy Scriptures, that with open and
clear places he has provided against famine, and in dark and hard places, he
has wiped away lothsomnes. And that nothing almost is gathered out of those
dark places, which is not found else where to be uttered most plainly,
specially, if it contain matter necessary unto salvation. But that every one
may presume to interpret and expound the Scriptures, it is one lie of an
hundred, that Martine has made in this book, and has feigned of us, never
held or maintained by us. But S. Peter (you say) plainly says, that Saint
Paul's epistles are hard, and other Scriptures also. Howbeit, Saint Peter
says, neither the one, nor the other, especially not the latter. For albeit in
the most approved Greek copies, the relative be of the neuter gender, limiting
that which S. Peter speaks, not to any matter at large in S. Paul's Epistles,
but to those things which S. Paul has written, concerning the second coming
of Christ, yet of the other Scriptures, he says not, that they are hard,
although he might say, there is hard things in the^, but that the unstable
and unlearned pervert the^ to their own destruction, which they do oftentimes,
when they be most plain and easy, and not only where they be difficult and
hard. That you can understand no difference between the sense, which is made
of the neuter gender, and that which the faeminine gender does yield, I know
not whether it be to be imputed, to the dullness of your wit, but rather I
think it proceeds of the crafty malice of your mind. As also that you
charge us with an heretical, foolish, and peevish spirit, when we translate
according to the most usual Greek copies, and according to that which is most
agreeable to the place. For to accuse all S. Paul's epistles of difficulty and
hardness, had not been agreeable to that excellent commendation, which S.
Peter before did give him. For every man, that desires to teach, as S. Paul
did by his Epistles, ought to frame his speech, to be as plain, and easy to
be understood, as the matter whereof he speaks will admit. But that some
things about that high mystery of the second coming of Christ, are hard to
be understood, discharges Paul of affectation of difficulty, or not regard
of perspicuitie, showing the cause of the hardness, to be in the height of the
matter, not in the handling of the writer. And that some did misunderstand the
Apostle S. Paul writing of that matter, it is apparent, by the second epistle
to the Thessalonians, Chap. 2.

MART. 2. An other fashion they have, which can not Corruption to make God the
Author of sin.
proceed of good meaning, that is, when the Greek text is indifferent to
two senses, and one is received, read, and expounded of the greater part of
the ancient fathers, and of all the Latin Church, there to follow the other
sense, not so generally received and approved, as in Saint James epistle,
where the common reading is, Deus intentator malorum est, God is no tempter to
evil, they translate, Gad cannot be tempted with evil, which is so impertinent
to the Apostles speech there* as nothing more. But, why will they not say, God
is no tempter to (...).
evil, as well as the other? is it because of the Greek word, which is a
passive? Let them see their Lexicon, and it will tell them that it is both an
active, and passive. so say other learned Grecians, Gagneius.
Interpreters of this place. so says the very circumstance of the words next
going before, Let no man say that he is tempted of God. Why so? Because God is
not tempted with evil, say they* is this a good reason? nothing less. how
then? Because God is no tempter to evil, therefore let no man say, that he is
tempted of God.

FVLK. 2. You have a fashion, common to you, with many of your fellows, to
snatch all occasions that you can get, to make a show, for your heinous
slau^ders, wherewith you seek to ouerwhelme the Saints of God, and especially
those, whose labors have been most fruitful to his Church. Whereof you give us
an evident example in this translation, which you follow with such egernes in
three large sections, that the ignorant Reader, which can not examine the
matter, might think you had great and urgent cause so to do. The Greek of S.
James, (...), we translated passiuely, as the word signifies, and as words of
that form do signify. God is not, or can not be tempted with evil. But
against this translation, you oppose the Lexicon, which following the judgment
of the vulgar Interpretor, that has translated it actiuely, does in deed make
it indifferent, to both significatio^s, but example gives none thereof, but
this now in controversy* You allege further learned Grecians interpretors of
this place, and namely Gagneius a late writer, to whom I may oppose Hentenius,
who translating Oecumenius upon S. James, turns this place of Scripture thus.
Deus enim malis tentari nequit. And Oecumenius in his co^mentarie is plain of
the same judgment, for repeting the text as before, he says: Iuxta eum qui
dixit (quanqua^ externus sit a nobis and a fide aliemis) diuina beataque natura
neque molestias sustinet neque alijs praebet. God cannot be tempted with evil,
according to him which said (although he be a foriner from us, and a stranger
from the faith) the divine and blessed nature, neither suffers griefs, nor
offers to other. And this judgment of Oecumenius, is collected out of a
great number of Greek doctors. But the very circumstance of the words next
before (say you) does require it should be taken actiuely. A good interpretor
will consider the circumstances of the words following, as well as of the words
going before. For the words following declare, that it must be taken
passiuely, or else the Apostle speaks one thing twice together, without any
cause why. Whereas the passive taking of that word, agrees to the circumstance,
as well going before, as following after. The whole context is this: Let no man
say, when he is tempted, I am tempted of God. for God cannot be tempted of
euilles, neither does he tempt any man. The meaning is plain, god is so far
from tempting unto evil, as his divine nature is incapable of any temptation of
evil. For temptation to evil, could not come from God, except it were first in
God, but seeing it cannot be in God, it cannot proceed from him, and so does
Oecum. interpret the place.

MART. 3. This reason is so coherent and so necessary in this place, that if
the greek word were only a passive (as it is not) yet it might beseme Beza to
translate it actiuely, who has turned the active into a passive without
scrupulositie, as him self confesses, and is before noted, against the real
presence. Much more in this place might he be bold to translate that
actiuely, which is both an active and a passive, specially, having such an
example, and so great authority as is all the ancient Latin church til this
day. But why would he not? surely, because he would favor his and their
heresy, which says clean contrary to these words of the Apostle, to wit,
that God is a tempter to evil. Is that Annot. No. Test* an. 1556. Mat. 6.
verse. 1^*
possible to be proved? yea, it is possible and plain. Bezaes words be these,
Inducit Dominus in tentatione^ eos quos Satanae arbitrio permittit, aut in quos
potius Satanam ipsum indueit, vt cor eorum impleat, vt loquitur Petrus, Act. 5.
v. 3. that is, The Lord leads into tentation those whom he permits to
Satan's arbitrament, or into whom rather he leads or brings in Satan himself
to fill their heart as Peter speaks. Mark that he says God brings Satan
into a man, to fill his heart, as Peter said to Ananias, Why has satan filled
thy heart, to lie unto the holy Ghost? So then, by this man's opinion, God
brought Satan into that man's heart, to make him lie unto the holy Ghost, and
so led him into tentation, being author and causer of that heinous sin.

FVLK. 3. How necessary the coherens is, with the former words, that it
makes an absurd repetition in the words following, I have noted before. And
therefore, there is no cause, that should drive Beza, to translate a word of
passive signification actiuely, as you slander him to have translated an
active passiuely, against the real presence, for that you mean of Act. 3. he
translateth not passiuely, so as the passive is opposite to the active, but as
the one may be resolved into the other, the same sense remaining, which every
child in the Grammar school knows. Ego amo ^e, ^^ amaris a me, I love thee,
thou art loved of me: and not as they may disagree, I love thee, but I am not
loved of thee.

But Beza (you say) would not follow the vulgar Interpretor, whose antiquity
I have showed for universal receiving, not to have been above five hundredth
years: seeing Bernard, which lived a thousand, and one hundred years after
Christ, uses it not always. And why did Beza leave the vulgar translation, in
this place? surely, in favor of our heresy, that God is a tempter to evil.
The Lord him self be judge, whether we abhor not that heresy. Yet you say,
it is both possible, and plain to be proved, by Bezaes own words. In his
later edition, an. 1565. his words are these, upon that petition of the Lords
prayer* Lead us not into temptation. I^ducit autem Dominus in tentationem eos
quos Satanae arbitrio permistit, vt cor eorum impleat, sicut loquitur Petrus,
Act. 5. The Lord leads into temptation them, whom he permits to the will
of Satan, that he may fill their heart as Peter speaks. These words declare,
that God leads some men into temptation, and how he leads them into
temptation, namely, by giving them over to Satan, who fills their heart with
all iniquity. But hereof it can not be proved, that he tempts unto evil. He
sent the lying spirit into the mouth of Achabs Prophets, for a punishment unto
Achab, and them: yet he neither tempted Achab to evil, nor his Prophets to lie.
But you grate upon these words, in the first edition, God brings Satan into
a man. Beza means no otherwise, than for a punishment, they are delivered to
Satan, as the lying spirit was sent to deceive Achab, not that God fills
their hearts, but that Satan fills their hearts, to their destruction, as
Peter says: where you do slanderously apply that which Peter says of Satan,
filling the heart of Ananias, to the whole sentence: as though Peter were
alleged to say, that God sends Satan into a man's heart. That God did lead
Ananias into temptation, for his hypocrisy, and gave him over to Satan, who
filled his heart, and possessed him, so that he lied unto the holy Ghost, we
may safly affirm, and yet it follows not, that God either tempted Ananias to
his sin, or else was author aund causer of that heinous sin, otherwise than
he is the good author and causer of all things, which as they are caused by
him, they are good. And yet of such things (as S. Augustine says,) he is no
evil author, he may be, and is a just revenger. Wherefore you can no better
gather of this saying, that God is the author of sin, than when we say, that
God created the devil, or man to be of free will, for if they had not been of
free will to sin, they should not have sinned. Or if God had not suffered,
and ordained the devil first to fall, he could not have tempted Eve, and so
have brought man to sin. But as God is clear from the sin of the devil,
and of Adam, which yet he might have kept from sinning: so is he clear from
the sin of them, whom for a just plague, he leads into temptation, and
gives into the power of Satan, to work his wicked will in them, to their
eternal destruction.

MART. 4. Is not this to say, God is a tempter to evil: clean contrary to S.
James the Apostle? or could he that is of this opinion, translate the contrary,
that God is no tempter to evil? Is not this as much to say, as that God also
brought Satan into Judas to fill his heart, and so was author of Judas treason,
even as he was of Paul's conversion? Let Beza now, and See Beza An. not. in
Romans c. 1. v. 24. Act 2. v. 23. W^^it. ad rat. Camp. page 139. 145.
Master Whitakers, or any other Heretic of them all, wrest and wring them
selves from the absurdity of this opinion, as they endeavor and labor to do
exceedingly, because it is most blasphemous: yet shall they never be able to
clear and discharge them selves from it, if they will allow and maintain
their foresaid exposition of Gods leading into temptation. Does not Beza for
the same purpose translate, Gods providence for, Gods (...). Act. 2. v. 23.
prescience? Which is so false, that the English Bezites in their translation,
are ashamed to follow him.

FVLK. 4. Beza that said the one, desieth the other. For S. James says, that
God tempts no man to evil* as he him self is not tempted of evil.
Therefore it is most ridiculous that you imagine, that Beza should not
translate the word actiuely, to avoid that sentence (God is no tempter to evil)
which follows in the very next words, God tempts no man. That God gave over
Judas unto Satan, it implies not, that God was the author of Judas treason, no
more than when the Apostles say, that Herod and Pontius Pilate came together,
with the Gentiles, and people of Israel, against Jesus Christ, to do whatsoever
the hand and counsel of God had determined, Act. 4. v. 27. 28. Behold all
they that murdered Christ, Herod, Pilate, Judas, Annas, Caiphas, with all the
rest, did whatsoever the hand and counsel of God had before determined to be
done. Was God then author of their sin? God forbid. And yet without horrible
sin, those things could not be done, which God had determined to be done, by
those wicked instruments, yet necessary by Gods appointment, for our
redemption. Beza therefore needed not for any such end, as you slander him,
to have translated Gods providence, for Gods prescience, which I have answered
before. Neither is there any need for M. Whitaker, or other to wrest and wring
themselves from this absurdity, which they never granted, but may easily be
avoided by them* that hold the doctrine of Gods eternal providence, and
foreappointment of all things as we do.

MART. 5. An other exceeding treachery to deceive the Reader, is this: that
they use Catholic terms and speches in such Corruption in abusing Catholic
words. 2. Match. 6. v. 7.
places where they may make them odious, and where they must needs sound
odiously in the peoples ears. As for example, this term, procession, they put
very maliciously and falsely, thus: When the feast of Bacchus was kept, they
were constrained Bib. 1570. (...). Procession. Bib. 1562. 1577*
to go in the procession of Bacchus. Let the good reader see the Greek
Lexicon, if there be any thing in this word, like to the Catholic Churches
processions: or whether it signify so much as, to go about, as their other
Bibles are translated, which meant also heretically, but yet durst not name,
processio^.

FVLK. 5. Your popish ceremonies are many of them so heathenish, and
idolatrous, that they may well be resembled to the customs, and solemnities of
the Gentiles, from whom they were taken. And as for the Greek word, (...), it
signifies to go in a solemn pomp, such as your processions are, and so does
our Lexicon teach us, in pompa incedere, to go solemnly in a pomp. And if it
signifies not so much, as to go about, as you say: I pray you tell us, why
your vulgar Latin Interpretor has translated it by circuire, or whether
circuire does not signify to go about: or whether the worshippers of Bacchus
did not go about, with garlands of yuie on their heads, as your Priests went
with garlands of flowers at sometime of the year.

MART. 6. Again* He put down the Priests (of Baal) Founded.
whom the kings of Judah had founded to burn incense. (...)
4. Reg. 23. verse 5* So they translate (the Hebrewe being simply to give,
make, appoint) because in the Catholic Church, there are foundations of
chaunterie Priests, Chapples, diriges, etc. Neither is it sincerely, and
without ill meaning, that they say here the Priests of Baal, whom etc. Because
the Hebrew word signifies all those that ministered in the temples of false
gods.

FVLK. 6. A childish folly. As though we were enemies to good and godly
foundations, because we mislike idolatrous and superstitious fou^dations. The
Hebrew word which signifies to give, according to the circumstances of this
place, may well be translated to found, because the text speaks of a gift of
perpetuity, intended by those wicked kings. That Chemarim were the Priests
of Baal, the story does declare, although they had that name of their black
garments, which they did wear superstitiously, as your black monks do: or
if you doubt whether Baal had Sacerdotes. sacrificing Priests, you may read,
4. Reg. 11. v. 18. where Mathan, Baals Priest, was killed before his altar. And
if the Hebrew word signify all those that ministered in the temples of false
gods, your vulgar Latin translator, by your own judgment, has erred in
translating it Aruspices, which is a kind of Soothsayers.

MART. 7. Again, Silver shrines for Diana, Act. 19. Shrines. (...).
v. 24. Because of the shrines and tabernacles made to the image of our B.
Lady: the Greek word signifying* temples, and Beza says, he can not see how
it may signify shrines.

FVLK. 7. The word in that place, is taken neither for shrines, nor temples,
but for pieces of coin, in which was stricken the similitude of Dianaes temple,
in deed such a thing, as your shrines, and tabernacles are, or rather such as
your brooches, and leaden coins are, which are used at your solemn
pilgrimages, and idolatrous festiuities, such as I have seen a number at
Amiens in France, prepared on S. John Baptistes eve, having the print of S.
John's head in a platter, on them, and I know not what beside. But of this
place, I have spoken before. cap. 1. sect. 16.

MART. 8. Again, As I passed by, and beheld your Devotions (...).
devotions, I found an altar, Act. 17. v. 23. So they call the superstition of
the Athenians toward their false Gods, because of Catholic peoples devotions
toward the true God, his Church. Altars, Saints, etc. the Greek word
signifying the things that are worshipped (as 2 Thessalonians. 2. v. 4. and Sap. 15.
v. 17.) not the (...).
manner of worshipping.

FVLK. 8. Of this also I have spoken in the place above mentioned, the word
may signify the exercise of there religion. And seeing S. Paul accompteth the
altar, which he found dedicated to the unknown God, among their (...), it
seems he takes the word more generally, than to signify their Gods. For the
altar was not worshipped, as God, but dedicated to the unknown God. Again,
what folly is it to think, our translators had respect to your Popish
devotions, by the name of devotion so applied to discredit them, when the
term of devotion is indifferent, as the term of religion, either to true or
to false devotion* and religion?

MART. 9. Again, The Jews had agreed, that if any (...).
man did confess that he was Christ, he should be excommunicate, Ioh. 9. v.
22. And Jesus heard that they had excommunicated him, v. 35. to make the Jews
doing against the^ that confessed Christ, sound like to the Catholic Churches
Excommunication.
doing against Heretics in excommunicating them, and so to disgrace the
Priests power of excommunication: whereas the Jews had no such spiritual
excommunication, but (as the Greek must needs only signify) they did, put
them out of Aposynagogum sacere.
the Synagogue, and so they should have translated, the Greek word including
the very name of Synagogue. But they, as though the Church of Christ and the
Synagogue of the Jews were all one, so translate, exco^municating, and putting
out of the Synagogue, as all one.

FVLK. 9. The like discipline to the Churches excommunication, had the Jews,
in excluding men from their Synagogues, or assemblies, and therefore of the
similitude the one has to the other, in the thing, as well as in the end, our
translators have used the word of excommunicating in this place, and yet not
excommunicating alone, for they al add out of the Synagogue, to make it more
plain, which you do fraudulently suppress. But how vain a thing it is, that
we should have any purpose against the discipline of excommunication, all the
world may see, when we practice it our selves, and teach, that it is
necessary to be perpetual in the Church, against them that hold it was but
temporal. And what we are to esteem of the excommunication of heretics, both
out of this place, and diverse other, we may be sufficiently instructed.

MART. 10. I omit here as spoken before, that they call an Idol, the Queen of
heaven, because we call our Lady by that title: so to make both seem like.
Also, that they say Bells altar Altar^.
thrife, for Bells table, to disgrace altars: and that for idols, they say
images, in despite of the Churches images: that they say tradition Images.
Traditions.
du^ly in the ill part, yea sometime when it is not in the Greek, to make
traditions odious, and such like. Thus by similitude and like sound of words
they b^guile the poor people, not only in their false expositions concerning
Iudaical fasts, mea^s, observation of days (as is else where showed) but also
in their translations. So does Caluins new Testament in french, for Nolite Mat.
23.
vocari Rabbi, translate, Be not called nostre maistre, or Magister noster: in
derision and disgrace of this ^ill^ and ^alling, which is peculiar to Doctors
of Diuiniue in the Catholic Universities beyond the seas: even as Wi^l^sse
their grand* father did upon the same words condemn such degrees in
Universities. But their Rabbines can tell them that Rabbi signifies* Magister,
and not, Magister noster. And S. John tells them so chap. 1. v. 38. and chap.
3. v. 2. and chap. ^0. v. 16. and yet it pleases them to translate otherwise
and to abuse Christ's own sacred words against Catholic Doctors and
schools: not considering that as Christ forbad them to be called Rabbi, so he
forbad them the name of father and fathers* and yet I ^rowe they will not
scoff at this name either in their own fathers, or in themselves so called of
their children: though in Religious men, according to their heretical humor,
they scoff also at this name, as they do at the other in Doctors.

FVLK. 10. And I omit here, as answered before, the Queen of heaven* Altars,
Images, and Traditions. But owe as though we had any thing to do therewith, we
are charged with Caluines new Testament in French, which translateth Math. 23.
Nolite vocari Rabbi, be not called Nostre maistre, or Magister noster. I
suppose it is not credible, that any man would translate, Rabbi, nostre
maistre, or Magister noster. Specially seeing it is made a great difference
among dunsticall Doctors, between Noster magister, and Magister noster, as
also it is a like i^ste between Noster magistrande, and Nostrande magister*
Wherefore, except I see the book of Caluines translation, I must think you
feign. For I have two new Testamentes printed at Geneua, the one 1555. the
other 1559. and in both them, Rabbi is translated consona^tly, Maistre, and
not, Nostre maistre, or Magister noster. That the text may be well applied
against your pompous titule^ Doctors, that desire to be called Nostre maistres,
as also that which follows against your Iebusites, that must be called
fathers, though they be but young and light persons, I will not deny. And yet I
think, the titles of Doctor, and Master, in the universities, and of fathers,
ascrib^d to any ancient and grave personage, in respect of civility* and not
of superstition, may be well used without transgression of our Savior Christ's
commandment* Math. 23.

MART. 11. Contrariwise as they are diligent to put A hea^e of corruptions.
some words odiously where they should not, so they are as circumspect not to
put other words and terms, where they should. In their first Bible (printed
again An. 1562.) not once the name of Church: in the same, for charity, love:
for altar, temple: for heretic, an author of sects: and for heresy, sect^^
because in those beginnings, al these words sounded exce^dingly against, them.
The Church they had then forsaken, Christian charity they had broken by
schisine, altars they dug down, here sie and heretic they knew in their
conscience more like in the peoples ears to agree unto them, rather than to
the old Catholic faith and professors of the same. Again in all their Bibles
indifferently, both former and later, they had rather say righteous, than just:
righteousness than justice: gift, than, grace, specially in the sacrament of
holy orders: secret, rather than mystery, specially in matrimony*
dissension, than, schism: and these words not at all, Priest, (to wit. of the
new Testament) Sacrament, Catholic, hymns, confession, penance
iustifications, and traditions in the good part: but in steed thereof, Elders,
secret, general, praise^, acknowledging amendment of life, ordinances
instructions. And which is, somewhat worse, carcas, for soul, and grave for
hell. Demosth. (...).
We may say unto you as Demosthenes, said to Aeschines (...). that are these?
words or wonders? certainly they are wonders, and very wonderful in Catholic
men's ears, and whether it be sincere and not heretical dealing, I appeal to
the wise and indifferent reader of any sort.

FVLK. II. For all the terms quarrelled at in this Section, we have answered
before: except perhaps for the term of love, which is used, in steed of
charity, expressing what charity is in deed, and not as it is commonly taken
of the common people, for an effect of charity, when they call alms,
charity. No man that patiently could abide the people to be instructed would
cavil at the explication of the word charity, by love, when in the English
tongue, the word charity of the common people is either not understood, or
taken for an other thing, than the Latin word Charitas do the signify. As
for the wonders of words, that Demosthenes spoke of, I know not where more
properly they shall be found, than in your affected novelties of terms, such as
neither English, nor Christian ears ever heard in the English tongue.
Scandal, prepuce, neophyte, ^^^osium, gratis, parasceue, paraclete, exinanite,
repropitiate, and a hundred such like inkehorne terms. Yea I would gladly
know, why among so many Greckish and Latinelike terms, Gazophylac^^, is not a
Gazophilace, but a treasury: en^aenia, the dedication, and not the encaenes;
as well as pasce, Pentecost, azymes, parasceue, belike the Church must have
treasure, and the feast of dedication must not ^e hid in a new found term.
Why should Aduentus be sometime the coming, and sometime the aduent, except
it were for the sound of the time of aduent, before the feast of the
nativity of Christ? Why should Latin words be translated in Greekish terms?
as scissuras Romans 11. Act. 20.
into selismes, aemulatores, zelators, and such like. These, and such other,
be wonders of words, that wise men can give no good reason, why they should
be used.

CHAP. XXII. Other faults Iudaeical, profane, mere vanities, follies, and
novelties.
Martin.
NOW leaving matters of controversy, let 1.
us talk a little with you familiarly, and learn of you the reason of other
points in your translation, which to us seem faults, and savor not of that
spirit which should be in Christian Catholic translatours.

Fulke.
OUR translations, as near as the translators 1.
could see the truth, are even, and just with the original text, the sense
whereof, if it do not always contain such excellent matter, as the
Septuaginta, or vulgar Latin translation have supposed, there is no cause why
our translators should be blamed, whose office is to regard what the
original truth is, and not to draw it for any respect to an other meaning,
tha^ the spirit of god expresses in those words.

MART. 2. First, you are so profane, that you say, The ballet of ballets of
Solomon, so terming that divine book, Canticum canticoru^, containing the high
mystery of Christ and his Church, as if it were a ballet of leave between
Solomon and his concubine, as Castaleo wantonly translateth it. But you say
more profanely, thus, we have conceived, we have born in pain, as though we
should have brought ^oo^ ^^^ wind. I am ashamed to tell the literal
commentary of this your Esaias. 26. v. 18.
translation* why might you not have said, we have conceived and as it were
traueled to bring forth, and have brought forth the spirit? is there any thing
in the Hebrewe, to hinder you thus far? Why would you say, wind, rather than,
spirit: knowing, that the Septuagintain Greek, and the ancient fathers, and
S. Hierome himself, who translateth according to Ambr. li. 2. de interpel. c.
4. Chryso. in Ps. 7. prope finem. See S. Hierome upon this place.
the Hebrew, yet for sense of the place, al expound it both according to Hebrew
and Greek, of the spirit of God, which is first conceived in us, and
begins by fear, which the scripture calls, the beginning of wisdom* in
so much, that in the Greek there are these goodly words, famous in all
antiquity: Through the fear of thee o lord we conceived, and have travailed
with pain, and have brought forth the spirit of thy salvation, which thou
have made upon the earth. Which does excellently set before our cies, the
degrees of a faithful man's increase, and proceeding in the spirit of God,
which begins by the fear of his judgments, and is a good fear, though
servile, and not sufficient. and it may be, that you condemning with Luther
this servile fear, as evil and hurtful, mean also some such thing by your
tra^slatio^. But indede the place may be under stood of the other fear also,
which has his degrees more or less.

FVLK. 2. I marvel why this word ballet should seem to you to be profane,
more than this word song, or canticle: songs and ca^ticles be many as il as any
ballets. But the other matter is of great weight, Esaias. 26. where, for the
spirit, we translate wind, which is such an absurdity, that you are ashamed
to tell the literal co^mentarie of this our translation. Belike you are afraid
of such a fault as S. Lambert, in your legend is reported to have committed.
But except you had a profane mind, you would never have imagined any such
matter thereof, which you are ashamed to utter. The circumsta^ce of the place
requires, that we should translate the word in this place for wind, and not
the spirit: for the pro phets pur pose was to show, that people were in desperate
case, without hope of help, til God did raise them, eue^ as it were from death.
The similitude is taken of a travailing woman, whose womb, if it be full of
wind, she is in great torments. But you ask us whether there be any thing in
the Hebrew, that hinders us to say, we have conceived, and as it were
traueled, and have brought forth the spirit. Yea verily the co^text of the
Hebrew words, will not bear that translation for the word chemo, quasi, as it
were, is (...)
placed before the word ialadhenu, which signifies, bringing forth, and not
before chalnu, which signifies travailing in pain. Therefore the text is word
for word as we have translated it. And the word following: we could make no
help to the land, or there was no help in the earth, declares a continuance
of their misery, and cannot agree with that sense, which you would have,
because they which have received the holy Ghost, have found help, and are
able to help. Beside that, it is a monstrous phrase, that the godly should
say, they have conceived, travailed, and brought forth the holy Ghost, by
which they are borne again to be the children of God, rather, than that they
have conceived or brought forth Gods spirit. And therefore, howsoever Hierom
like your interpretation, it agrees neither with the words of the Hebrew, nor
with the circumstance of the place, and it is scarce tolerable, to make such a
conceptio^, and generation of Gods spirit in men. That servile fear is to be
reproved in the children of God, which: should fear him, as sons, and not
as slaves, we are content to acknowledge with Luther. But what place is this
for us to mean any thing against servile fear, wh^ there is no mention of
fear in the Hebrewe text? and the Greek has such licentious additions,
that Hierome is feign to strike them through with a spitte, and note them to be
wiped out.

MART. 3. But to say, we have brought forth wind, can admit no such
interpretation* but even as if a mere Jew should translate or understand it,
who has no sense of Gods spirit, so have you excluded the true sense which
concerns the holy Ghost, and not the cold term of wind, and whatsoever
naked interpretation thereof. And it is your fashion in all such cases, where
the richer sense is of Gods holy spirit, there to translate wind, as Psalm.
147. v. 1^. as you number the psalms.

FVLK. 3. We must say in english, as the prophet has said before us in Hebrew,
and so truly translate the scripture, that never a Jew in the world, may have
just cause to accuse our falshode or partiality. And how cold soever the term
of wind seem to your crooked mind, and how naked soever the interpretation
be thought of your cloaked hypocrisy, it is the word of the everliving God,
and the true sense thereof, as it is expressed by the Prophet. Likewise, Psalm
147. the Prophet shows who does execute the commandment of God, in thawing,
and dissoluing the frost namely, the wind, which being southerly, we see the
effect of it, what need we here to cause the holy ghost to be sent to melt
the ice.

MART. 4. And it is not unlike to this, that you will not translate for the
Angels honor that carried Abacu^, He set (...).
him into Babylon over the lake by the force of his spirit: but thus, through
a mighty wind, so attributing it to the wind, not to the Angels power, and
omitting clean the Greek pronoune (...), his, which shows evidently, that
it was the Angels spirit, force, and power.

FVLK. 4 That we have translated in the story of Abacuks taking up, that it
was through a mighty wind, it has good probability by the circumstance of
the place, and the signification of (...), which is a force with with a noise,
is more apt to the wind, than to the spirit. And in other writers (...), is
taken for the vehement noise of winds: but the pronoune, I confess, should
not have been omitted, and then it may be referred, either to the wind, or
spirit of God, whose Angel this is said to be: rather than to the Angel. For
the Angel being nothing but a spirit, it is not so convenient to say, by his
spirit, as by his own force: again, the pronoune is not (...), but (...),
whereof you made great difference, as in deed there is difference in another
case.

MART. 5. Again, where the Prophets speak most manifestly of Christ, there
you translate clean an other thing: as Esa. 30. v. 20. When S. Hierom
translateth thus, and the church Bib. 1579.
has always read accordingly* Non faciet auolare a te vltra Doctorem tuum:
and erunt oculi tui videntes praeceptorem tuum. that is, And (our Lord) shall
not cause thy Doctors to fly from thee any more: and thine eyes shall see (...)
thy Master. Which is all one in effect, with that which Christ says, I will
be with you unto the e^de of the word. there you translate thus, Thy rain
shall be no more kept back: but thine eyes shall see thy rain. So likewise
Joel 2. v. 23. where the holy Church reads, Rejoice you children of Sion in
the Lord your God: because he has given you the Doctor of justice: there you
translate, the rain of righteousness. Does the Hebrew word force you to this?
you See (...) ^yrain 30. Esa.
Jews themselves, partly understand it of Esdras, partly of Christ's Divinity.
Why are you more profane (I will not say more Iudaical^) than the Jews
themselves? why might not S. Hierom a Christian Doctor and lacking no skill in
the Hebrew (as you well know) satisfy you, who makes no doubt but the Hebrew
in these places is; Doctor, Master, Teacher? Who also (in Psalm. 84. 7.)
translateth thus, With blessings shall the Doctor be araied: meaning Christ.
Where you with the later Rabbines, the enemies of Christ, translate, The rain
co^ereth the pooles. What cold stuff is this in respect of that other
translation, so clearly pointing to Christ out Master and doctor?

FVLK. 5. I have told you in the beginning of this chapter, we must not,
neither is it safe for the strengthening of our faith, to draw places of
Scripture unto Christ, which by the holy Ghost had an other meaning: so shall
the Jews laugh us to scorn, and the faith of the ignorant, which is grounded
upon such translation, if it shall be opened unto them, that it is untrue,
shall be mightily shaken, and brought in doubt of all other places of
Scripture, applied to the like end. God be thanked, there be plain and
evident testimonies of Christ, in the Scripture, which no malice of Jewish or
Heathenish enemies, can wrest out of our hands, which are sufficient for
instruction, and confirmation of our faith. Now concerning those places, where
you would have (...), to signify a Doctor, Teacher, or Master: first, it
seems you have your Hebrew, but from hand to mouth: for chapter 3. sect. 25.
whereas we translate, moreh shaker, a teacher of lies, Abacuc. 2. you say, we
(...)
translate another thing, without any necessary pretense of Hebrewe, or Greek:
and here you would have it of the necessity of the Hebrew, that we should
translate a teacher: yet Pagnine in the root (...), whereunto you refer us,
says, that Esaias, the 30. verse 20. this word is taken either for rain, or for
a teacher, Joel the 2. he makes no question* but it signifies rain: saving
that some think it to be the name of a place. In the third place, Psalm 84.
after he has told you, how Hierome translateth it, he tells you how R.
David, and other do translate it for rain, as we do: and in all these
places, the sense is more proper for rain, than for a teacher, saving that in
Esaias, perhaps, it may signify more aptly a teacher, and so the Geneua
translation notes it. In Joel, where the Prophet before had threatened
famine through drought, nothing is so convenient to be understood, as
seasonable rain. In the Psalm 84. where the Prophet commends the courage of
the people that travailed to Jerusalem, through the dry deserts, and places
that wanted water, it is most apt to understand, that God fills their pits
with rain, for their comfort. This, how cold soever it is counted of you that
care not whereon faith should be grounded, yet is it an hundred times more
comfortable to a godly conscience, that desires to be established in truth,
than any violent wresting of the Scripture, from the true and natural sense,
to any other interpretation, how good in show soever it be.

MART. 6. And again, where S. Hierom translateth, Esa. 5^.
and the Church reads, and all the fathe^s interpret and expound
accordingly, There shall be faith in thy times: to express the marvelous faith
that shall be then, in the first Christians specially, even unto death, and in
all the rest concerning the hidden mysteries of the new Testament: there you
translate, There shall be stabilitie of thy times. The Prophet joins together
there, judgment, justice, faith, wisdom, knowledge, the fear of our Lord:
you for a little ambiguitie of the Hebrew word, turn faith into stabilitie.

FVLK. 6. The word stabilitie Esai. 33. v. 6. excludes not faith, but shows
wherein faith is grounded. And therefore, this is as all the rest, a fond
quarrel, without any good ground at all. Seeing our translation may stand with
the truth of the words, and of the matter, and comprehends as much as you
would have, and more also. Yea it shows that faith is settled upon stabilitie,
and steadfastness of truth, which shall flourish in the time of Christ.

MART. 7. If I should burden you with translating Esa. 2.
thus also concerning Christ, Cease from the man whose breath in his nostrels:
for wherein is he to be esteemed? You would say I did you wrong, because it is
so pointed now in the Hebrew. Whereas you know very well by S. Hieroms
commentary (...)
upon that place, that this is the Jews pointing or reading of the word,
against the honor of Christ: the true reading and translation being as he
interprets it, for he is reputed high* and therefore beware of him. Otherwise
(as S. Hierom says) what a consequence were this, or who would commend any man
thus, Take heed ye offend not him, who is nothing esteemed? yet that is your
translation. Neither does the Greek help you which (if the accent be truly
put) i^ thus, because he is reputed for some body or some thing* (...). Gal. 2.
v. 6.
as S. Paul speaks of the chief Apostles, and it is our phrase in the
commendation of a man.

FVLK. 7. So long as you acknowledge, we have translated truly according to
the Hebrew text that we read, there is no reason, that you should burden us
with false interpretation. The Septuaginta, as Hierome confesses, did read as
we do, and plain it is, not oneli^ by the vowels, but also by the contexte,
that so it must be read. For the Prophet disswadeth the people from putting
affiance in any mortal man, for God will bring down the pride of all such, as
they trust most in, as it follows in the next chapter, whereof this verse
should be the beginning. The dismembring whereof, by the ill division of the
Chapter, deceived Hierome, to think the Prophet spoke of Christ, when he
spoke of a proud man* whose breath was in his nostrels, and therefore he was of
no strength: even as David uses the same argument, Psalm. 146. for the
purpose, The Chaldee Paraphrase also did read, even as the Septuaginta.

MART. 8. The like excuse you would have by alleging the Hebrew vowels, if
you were told, that you much obs^ure a notable saying of the prophet concerning
Christ, or rather the Osee. 12. 10.
speech of Christ himself by his prophet, saying: I have spoken by the
Prophets, and I have multiplied vision, and in the hand of the Prophets, (that
is, by the Prophets) have I been resembled. Which later words do exceedingly
express, that all the Prophets spoke of Christ: as o^r Savior himself
declares, beginning from Moses and all the Prophets to ^uc. 24. v. 27.
interpret unto the two disciples, the things that concerned Acts. 3.
him: and as S. Pet^r says in these words, All the prophets from Samuel and
that spoke after him did tell of these days. This prophecy then being so
consonant to these speeches (...).
of the ^ewe Testament, the Greek also being word for word so, the Hebrewe by
changing one little prick (which the latter Jews have added at their own
pleasure) being fully so as we (...)
^eade with the Catholic Church: why pretend you the Jews authority to
maintain an other less Christian translation, which is thus: I use
similitudes by the ministry of the Prophets. as though there were nothing
there concerning Christ* or the second person peculiarly?

FVLK. 8. Seeing our Savior Christ has promised, that never a prick of the
law shall perish, we may understand the same also of the Prophets, who have
not received the vowels of the latter Jews, but even of the Prophets
themselves, howsoever that heathenish opinion pleases you, and other Papists.

MART. 9. You will also perhaps allege, not only the The Hebrevve text, is
no certain rule to interpreate by.
later Jews, but also some later Catholic men, that so translate the Hebrewe.
But the difference between them and you, is, that they, with reverence and
pre^erment always of S. Hi^roms, and the Churches a^^^ient translation, tell us
how it is now in the Hebrewe: you, with derogation and disanulling the same
altog^ther, set down your own, as the only true interpretation according to
the Hebrewe: a^ouching the Hebrewe that now i^, and as now it is printed, to
be the only authenti call truth of the old Testament. Where you can never
answer us, how that in the Ps. 22. As a lion my hand and my feet, (as now it
is in the Hebrewe) can be the true and old authentical Hebrewe, (...)
which none of the fathers knew, the ancient Rabbines condemn as a
corruption, your selves translate it not, but after the old accustomed
reading, They have pierced my hands and my feet. Which is a notable prophecy
of our Saviors kind and manner of Passion, being crucified on the Cross.
Only the later Jews, and such Heretics, as think he died upon a gallow^s
or gibbes, and not upon the Cross, they like this Hebrew textwel, and stand
upon i^, as you do upon al without exception, and yet, when it comes to
certain particulars, you are compelled to forsake it. as in certain other
places* for example.

FVLK. 9. Isidorus Clarius, retaining the word, assi^ulatus sum, does thus
expound it, in his note. Hoc est voluntatem meam similitudinibus and varijs
l^cutioni^ gene^ibu^ ^locutus sum. That is, I have uttered my will by
similitudes and diverse kinds of speech: you see therefore, how you are
deceived in aduouching this matter of your own pseudocatholikes, when this
Bishop, not departing from your reading, yet expounds this text according to
the Hebrewe, and was allowed in so doing, by the Deputies of the Council of
Trent, whose sensure was observed in printing this Bible. Where you repeat yet
once again, that we can never answer that of a lion, Psa. 22. you show your
skill, and great reading* I have answered before in the preface sect. 44. that
we forsake the hebrew in this, or in any other, it is utterly false, for we
follow no text, but the Hebrew, so near as we can understand it, and express
it.

MART. 10. Where the Hebrewe says, Achaz king of Israel, 2. Paralip. 28. v.
19. which is not true, you are compelled Faults in the Hebrew text.
to translate, Achaz king of Judah, as the truth is, and as it is in the Greek
and the vulgar Latin. yet some of your Bibles Bib. 1579.
follow the falshode of the Hebrew.

FVLK. 10. While you take upon you, to discover faults in the hebrew text, you
bring three examples, which if they were all faults, contain no matter of
doctrine, whereby we may be deceived in any article of faith. The first is,
that Achaz, z. Chr. 28. v. 19. is called King of Israel, whereas he was King
only of Judah. But I pray you sir, was not Judah part of Israel? why might he
not then be called a king, or one of the Kings of Israel? The Queen of
England, may well be called Regina Brytanniae, although there be a King in
Scotland. Although there may be an other cause why Achaz is called King of
Israel, because in his days when Pekah the son of Remaliah was slain, the
kingdom of Israel, that had continued from Ieroboams time, until then, was now
in a manner decayed. For Hosea was of small power, and made tributarie to the
King of Assyria, and peradventure also in the time of Achaz was kept in prison:
as it is certain he was emprisoned, 2. Reg. 17. v. 4. so that, when there was
none other King of Israel to account of, Achaz might be called king of Israel,
as also in the same chapter the last verse, though he were buried at Jerusalem,
and in the city of David, it is said, that he was not laid in the sepulchers
of the Kings of Israel: where your vulgar Latin text has, Israel, and not
Judah.

MART. 11. Likewise, where the Hebrewe says, Zedechias his brother, meaning
the brother of Ioachim, you translate, Bib. 1579.
Zedechias his fathers brother, as indede the truth is, according to the
Greek, and to the Scripture, 4. Reg. 24. v. 19. and therefore your Bible which
follows the Hebrewe here also, translating, his brother, yet in the margen:
puts down a^ more true, uncle.

FVLK. 11. This argues no fault in the Hebrew text, but gross ignorance of the
Hebrew ^ong in you, which knew not, that ach, signifies, not only a brother,
but also, (...)
any other kinsman, as the uncle, cousins, and such like, as, Genesis 13. Abraham
and Lot, are called brethren, yet was Abraham Lots uncle, Deuteronomy. 25. when
brethren shall dwell together, the law of marying the brothers wife, that died
without issue, there the word brethren pertains to kinsmen far off, as
appears in the story of Ruth, ca. 3. and 4. finally, it is a thing so
commonly known to the^, which have but a little smacke in the Hebrew tongue,
that I will spend no time about it. And eue^ your vulgar translation in some
ancient copies, has fratrem, and not patr^u^, as you may see in the Bible
printed by Plantin 1567.

MART. 12. Likewise in an other place, the hebrewe is so out of frame, that
some of your Bibles say, he begat Azuba of his wife Azuba. and othersome
translate, He begat Ierioth of his wife Azuba: the hebrew being thus: he begat
Azu ba his wife and I^rioth, which, neither you, nor any man else can easily
tell what to make of. Thus you see how easy it were (if a man would multiply
such examples) to show by your own testimonies the corruption of the Hebrewe,
and that your In the preface of the ne^ve Testament.
selves do not, nor dare not exactly follow it, as of the Greek text of the new
Testament also is declared else where.

FVLK. 12. The third fault you find, is 1. Chron. 2. v. 18. where the
interpretors are deceived, while they take (...)
eth, for a sign of the accusative case, which in that place, as in diverse
other, is taken for a preposition, of, or by, as Genesis 4. Eve says, I have
obtained a son eth Jehovah, of the Lord, or by the Lords gift, etc. Genesis 44.
they were gone out eth hayir, of, or from the city. So here the true
translation of this verse in question, is this. Caleb the son Chet^ron,
begat of Azuba, his wife, and of Ierioth: that is, he had children by these
two women, Azuba his wife, and Ierihoth, which was his concubine, so they
called them, that were lawful wives, in respect of matrimony, but yet had not
the honor of wives, but being of base condition before they were married, so
continued: by this Ier^hoth he had those three sons, that in this verse are
named, his children by Azuba are named afterward, verse. 42. Wherefore here
is no fault in the Hebrewe, but in your vulgar translator, which makes
Ierihoth the son of Azuba, and adds to the text, because he understood it
not. It is false therefore that you say, we dare not follow the Hebrewe, because
some translator, by oversight, has not attained to the right understanding
thereof: as also, that we dare not exactly follow the Greek of the new
Testament, which we desire to follow as exactly as we can.

MART. 13. But it is greater marvel, why you follow not the Hebrewe in other
places also, where is no corruption. You protest to translate it according to
the points or vowels that now it has, and that you call the Hebrewe verity.
Tell me then I beseech you, why do you in all your Bibles translate thus, O
Virgin, daughter of Sion, he has despised thee, and Esaias. 37. v. 22.
laughed thee to scorn: o daughter of Jerusalem he has shaken his head at
thee. In the Hebrew, Greek, S. Hieromes (...).
translation and commentary, it is clean contrary, The Virgin daughter of
Sion, has despised thee (O Assure:) (...).
the daughter of Jerusalem has shaken her head at thee. All are the foeminine
gender, and spoken of Sion literally, and (...)
of the Church spiritually triumphing over Assure, and all her enemies: you
translate all as of the masculine gender, and apply it to Assure, insulting
against Jerusalem, etc. I can not conceive what this translation means, and
I would gladly know the reason, and I would have thought it some gross
oversight, but that I find it so in all your English Bibles, and not only in
this place of Esaias, but also in the books of the kings, 4. Reg. 19. where the
same words are repeated. And it is no less marvel unto us, that know not the
reason of your doings, why you have Bib. 1577.
left out Alleluia Alleluia.
nine times in the six last Psalms, being in the Hebrew nine times more than
in your translation: specially when you (...)
know that it is the ancient and joyful song of the Primitive Church. See
the new English Testament, Annot. Apoc. 19.

FVLK. 13. It seems that our translators followed too much the judgment of
the Tigurine translator, who, what reason moved him so to translate, I know
not, it seems they weyed not well the Hebrew in that place, but such is man's
frailty, that he is apt and easy t^ ^b deceived, if he be not very vigilant,
and attentive in those cases. And the example of one man's error, that is of
credit, soon draws other men into the same, by countenance of his
authority. Nevertheless two of our translations, the Bishops Bible, and
Couerdales Bible, translate the very same words according to the Hebrew, 2.
Reg. 19. referring the saying against Senacherib despised, and laughed to
scorn by Jerusalem. And therefore you say untruly, that is is in all our
English Bibles, 4. Reg. 19. Where you marvel, why we have left out Alleluia
nine times in the six last Psalms, I marvel as much, why you should so
say: for in the Bishops Bible which I have, and which you call Bib. 1577. It
is ten times in the five last Psalms, and ten times there is in the
translation, Praise ye the Lord. In the 145. it is not in the Hebrew. But in
the other five Psalms, it is both in the beginning, and in the end of every
one of them.

MART. 14. Again, you translate thus: Many which had seen the first house,
when the foundation of this house was laid before their eyes, wept, etc. Look
well to your Hebrew, and you shall find it according both to the Greek and the
Latin, thus: Many which had seen the first house in the foundation thereof,
(that is, yet standing upon the foundation, not destroyed) and this temple
before their eyes, wept. You imagined that it should be meant, they saw
Salomons temple, when it was first founded, which because it was impossible,
therefore you translated otherwise than is in the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin.
But yet in some of your Bibles, you should have considered the matter better,
and translated accordingly.

FVLK. 14. The Hebrew is indifferent, Ezra. 3. to either of both translations,
and the sense is all one, whether beiasedho be referred to the first house,
named before, (...)
or to this house before their eyes, which follows. And therefore your
conjecture of our imagination, as in other places, is no more bold, than vain.
(...)


MART. 15. And surely why you should translate (4. (...)
Reg. 23. v. 13.) On the right hand of mount Oliuete, rather than as it is in
the vulgar Latin: and why, Ye abject of (...).
the Gentiles, Esa. 45. v. 20. rather than, ye that are saved of the Gentiles:
you belike know some reason, we do not, neither (...)
by the Hebrew, nor the Greek.

FVLK. 15. The Geneua Bible has according to the Hebrew, the mount of
corruption, which was in deed the Mount Oliuet, as is proved by 1. Reg. 11. v.
7. and 2. Sam. 15. v. 30. and of the fruitfulnes of oil was called
Mischethith: but in this place, in detestation of the idolatry, is called
Maschith, signifying corruption, as Bethel was called Bethauen. Osec. 4. v. 15.

In Esai 45. two of our translations, have according to the usual
signification of the Hebrewe word pelitei, (...)
you that escaped of the people, but that the word also signifies an abject,
you might have learned by Pagnine, and so ceased to have maruailed, why the
Geneua Bible translateth, you abiects of the Gentiles. As your own vulgar
translation, Ier. 44. tra^slateth it, of them that fled, or fugitives.

MART. 16. Howbeit in these lesser things (though nothing in the Scripture is
to be counted little) you might perhaps more freely have taken your pleasure, in
following neither Hebrew, nor Greek: but when it concerns a matter no less
than usury, there by your false translation to give occasion unto the Reader,
to be an usurer, is no small fault, either against true religion, Bib. 1562.
1577.
or against good manners. This you do most evidently in your most authentical
translations, saying thus: Thou shall Deuteronomy. 23. v. 19.
not hurt thy brother by usury of money, nor by usury of corn, nor by usury
of any thing that he may be hurt withal. What is this to say, but that usury
is not here forbidden, unless it hurt the party that boroweth, which is so
rooted in most men's hearts, that they think such usury very lawful, and (...)
daily offend mortally that way. Where Almightye God in this place of holy
Scripture, has not a word of hurting, or not hurting, (as may be seen by the
Geneua Bibles,) but says simply thus: Thou shall not lend to thy brother to
usury, usury of money, usury of meat, usury of any thing that is put (...)
etc.
to usury.

MART. 17. Mark the Hebrew, and the Greek, and see, and be ashamed, that you
strain and pervert it, to say for, Non foenerabis fratri tuo, which is word
for word in the Greek, and Hebrew, Thou shall not hurt thy brother by usury.
If the Hebrew word in the use of holy Scripture, do signify, to hurt by
usury, why do you in the very next words following, in the self same Bibles
translate it thus, unto a stranger ibid. v. 20.
thou may lend upon usury, but not unto thy brother? Why said you not, A
stranger thou may hurt with usury, but not thy brother? Is it not all one
word and phrase, here and before? And if you had so translated it here also,
the Ie^es would have thanked you, who by forcing the Hebrewe word as you do,
think it very good to hurt any stranger, that is, any Christian, by any
usury, be it never so great.

FVLK. 16. and 17. You say well, that in the Scripture, nothing is to be
counted little, and therefore, even in these little things, we have endeavored
to follow the Hebrew, and have so well followed it, that though you say much,
yet you can prove little against us. But concerning this text of usury, whereof
you would make us great patrones, it is marvel that you can not find in your
Dictionaries, that the verb, nashach, signifies to (...)
bite, at least wise you should have regarded, that your vulgar Latin
Interpretor, Number. 21. tra^slateth it to strike, or hurt, as they were, that
were hurt, or bitten by the fiery serpents. The consent of all Hebritians also
is, that neshech, the name of usury, is derived of biting, and hurting, (...)
wherefore the Bishops Bible, meaning to express, that all usury is hurtful,
according to the etymology of the word, rather than to defend, that any usury
is lawful, other than such as God him self allows. And therefore it had been
well to have translated also in the next verse, a stranger may thou bite, or
hurt with usury, howsoever the Jews would take it, whose abominable usury,
under pretense of that place, sure I am, our translators purpose was not to
defend.

MART. 18. What shall I tell you of other faults, which I would gladly account
ouersights or ignorances, such as we also desire pardon of, bus all are not
such, though some be. As, Two Cant. Cantic. c. 8. v ^2.
thousand, (written at length) to them that keep the fruit thereof. In the
Hebrew, and Greek, two hundred. Again, in ^ab. 2579.
the same book, c. 1. v. 4. As the fruits of Cedar. in the Hebrew, and
Greek, Tabernacles. And, Ask a sign either in Isa. 7. v. 11.
the depth or in the height above, for, in the depth of Hell. And, Great works
are wrought by him. for, do work Mat. 14. v22.
in him. as S. Paul uses the same word, 2. Cor. 4. v. 12. And, (...). Bib.
1577.
To make ready an horse. Act. 23. v. 24. in the Greek, beasts, And. If a man
on the Sabbath day receive circumcision, without breaking of the law of Moses.
Io. 7. v. 23. For, to the end that the law of Moses be not broken. (...).
And, The son of man must suffer many things, and be reproved of the elders,
Mar. 8. v. 31. For, be rejected. As (...).
in the Psalm, The stone which the builders rejected, we say not, reproving of
the said stone, which is Christ. And (...), 1. Tim. 3. Mar. 3.
a young scholar, in all your translations, falsely. And, Simon of Chanaan or
Simon the Cananite, who is called otherwise, Zelotes, that is Zealous, as an
interpretation of the Hebrew word, Cananaeus: which I marvel you considered
not, specially considering that the Hebrew word for Zealous, and the other for
a (...)
Cananite, begin with diverse letters. And, least at any time Heb. 2. v. ^.
we should let them slip. For, least we slip or run by, and so be lost.

FVLK. 18. The first in Can. 8. is doubtless the printers fault, who did
read in the written copy, one Cipher to much. That the second Can. 1. v. 5.
was the printers fault, which did read fruits for tents, it is plain by the
note upon the word Kedar, which is this, Kedar was Ischmaels son, of whom
came the Arabians, that dwelt in tents. In the third place Esai 7. there
lacks this word (beneath) or toward the pit downward, for Shealah is here
opposite to Lemayelah above, or upward, (...)
which omission, I know not whether it is to be imputed to the negligence of
the Printer, or of the translators, but not withstanding the sense is all one.
In the fourth text also, there is no difference for the meaning, and some are
of opinion, that (...), may be taken passiuely, as (...), Beza in Marc. 6. v.
14. other translations turn it actiuely. In the fifte text. Act. 23. if for an
horse, they had said horses, it had been no fault, for it is not like they
rod upon Asses, or Camels. The word signifies beasts, that are possessed,
and of possession they be called (...), but here it is certain, beasts meet
for carriage of men are signified. In the sixte, Joan. 7. v. 23. I think the
translators were deceived, supposing that (...) might be translated, so that
the law of Moses be not broken, as perhaps it may: but hereof I will not
determine, commonly (...) signifies to the end: yet is there no ungodly sense
contained in this translation. The seventh, Mar. 8. v. 31. Is but a knot in a
rushe: for reproved in that place, signifies nothing but refused, or rejected.
Your vulgar Latin says Reprobari, which is plainly to be reproved, and 1.
Pet. 2. The stone which the builders reproved, Reprobauerunt, refused. By
reproved, they do not mean reprehended, or rebuked, but utterly refused, and
not accepted. The eight, Neophytus, a young scholar, as I have showed before
is better Englished, than a Neophyte, which is neither Greek, Latin, nor
English. The ninth, is corrected in two translations, and the Geneua Bible
tells you, that for Cananite you may read Zealous, so that we are not
beholding to you for this correction, as it seems you would have us. Touching
the tenth text, Heb. 2. both those translations that say: least at any time
we should let them slip, have this note in the margent, by which they
declare they mean even as you would have them say: least like vessels full of
chappes we leake, and run out on every part, for vessels that do run out,
do let go or let slip that licour that is put into them.

MART. 19. And as for the first Bible, which was done A^. 1562.
in have, and not yet corrected, but is printed still a fresh: that says,
With Herod's servants, as though that were the only Mat. 22.
sense: that calls idiotas lay men: Mat. 24.
(...), a ship: Mar. 5.
(...), wondering: Mat. 25. Ephesians. 3.
(...), are gone out: (...), his substance: and, To know the excellent love of
the knowledge of Christ. For, the love of Christ that excels knowledge. And,
of men that turn away the truth. For, that shun the truth Tit. 1*
and turn away from it. And, Mount Sina is Agar in Arabia. For, Agar is mount
Sina, etc.

FVLK. 19. The first Bible was not that you mean, but not much differing from
it, neither was it done in have, but with as good consideration, as god gave
for that time: neither was it printed these 22. years, for ought I know, which
you say is printed still a fresh. In that Bible Herod's servant, put for the
Herodians, was lack of knowledge of what sect the Herodia^s should be.
Idiotas, Lay me^, is no more fault, than, of the vulgar sort, which you say.
The ship for the Arc, is a small fault, seeing that arc into which Noe
entered, was a ship, or in steed of a ship. The wo^dring, for the tumult, is
a populer term: for so they call a great noise made by a multitude. The lamps
are gone out, or are quenched, I know not what great difference may be in it.
His substance (...), I know not where you mean, except it be Mark. 13.
where Erasmus notes, that he has read in some copy (...), substance, which
seems to agree aptly with the place. In the text Ephesians. 3. the true
translation is as we have corrected it in the later editions: yet the words
may bear that other interpretation also. In Titus the first, the participle
is of the mean voice, and therefore may signify actiuely or passiuely. In
Gal. the transposition, Sina before Agar, seems to be the fault of the
Printer, rather than of the translator.

MART. 20. Let these and the like be small negligences or ignorances, such as
you will pardon us also, if you find the like. Neither do we greatly mislike,
that you leave those words, Deuteronomy. 33.
Vrim and Thummim, and 4. Reg. 23.
Chemarim, and Ierem. 50.
Ziims, and Iims, untranslated, because it is not easy to express them in
English: and we would have liked as well in certain other words, which you have
translated, images, images, and still, images, Hamanim. Esa. 17. Gillulim. Ier.
50. Miphlet seth. 3. ^o. 15.
being as hard to express the true signification of them, as the former. And
we hope you will the rather bear with the late Catholic translation of the
English Testament, that leaves also certain words untranslated, not only
because they can not be expressed, but also for reverence and religion (as S.
Augustine says) and greater majesty of the same.

FVLK. 20. Some in deed are small faults, some none at al. That you mislike
us not, for not translating a few words, whose signification is unknown, or
else they can not be aptly expressed in the English tongue, it is of no equity
toward us, but that you might under that shadow, creep away with so huge a
multitude of words, which may as well be translated, as any in the Bible, and
that in the new Testament, which is scarce the sixte part of the whole Bible.
The words which we have translated Images, are out of question terms
signifying Images, and of your translator, they be called either imagines,
simulachra, sculptilia, Idola, etc. Our English tongue, being not so fruitful
of words, we call them sometimes Idols, sometimes Images, which when we speak
of worshipped images, can be none other, but such as you call Idols. To obscure
such a multitude of words, and so much matter by them, as you do, S. Augustine
will not warrant you, who speaks only of two, or three words usually received
in the Latin Church in his time, not of such a number as you have
counterfaited.

MART. 21. Of one thing we can by no means excuse you, but it must savor
vanity, or novelty, or both. As when you affectate new strange words which
the people are not acquainted with all, but it is rather Hebrew to them than
English: Fib. 1579.
(...), as Demosthenes speaks, uttering with Demosth.
great countenance and majesty, Against him came up Nabucadnezzar king of
Babel, 2. Par. 36. v. 6. for, Nabuchodonosor 2. Par. 36. r. 6. c. 32. Fol. 172.
173. Fol. 160. Epistle to the Queen.
king of Babylon: Saneherib, for Sennacherib: Michaiahs prophecy, for
Michaeas: Iehoshaphats prayer, for Iosaphats: Vzza slain, for Oza. When
Zerubbabel went about to build the Temple, for Zorobabel: Remember what the
Lord did to Miriam, for Marie, Deuteronomy. 34. And in your first translation, Elisa
for Elisaeus, Pekahia and Bibl. 1562. 4. Reg. c. 15. 16.
Pekah for Phaceia and Phacee, Vziahu for Ozias, Thiglath-peleser for
Teglath-phalasar, Ahaziahu for Ochozias: Peka the son of Remaliahu, for,
Phacee the son of Romelia. And why say you not as well Shelomoh for Solomon,
and Coresh for Cyrus, and so alter every word from the known sound and
pronunciatio^ thereof? Is this to teach the people, when you speak Hebrew
rather than English? Were it a good. ^y hearing (think you) to say for JESUS,
Ieshuah, and for MARIE his mother, Miriam: and for Messiah, Messiach, and John,
Iachannan, and such like monstrous novelties? which you might as well do, and the
people would understand you as well, as when our preachers say, Nabucadnezer King
of Babel. Cal^i^.


FVLK. 21. Seeing the most of the proper names of the old Testament were
unknown to the people, before the Scripture was read in English, it was best
to utter them according to the truth of their pronuntiation in Hebrewe, rather
than after the common corruption, which they had received in the Greek and
Latin tongs. But as for those names which were known unto the people out of the
new Testament, as Jesus, John Marie, etc. it had bin folly to have taught me^
to sound the^ otherwise than after the Greek declination, in which we find
them. Prafat. in Esa.


MART. 22. When Zuinglius your great Patriarch did read in Munsters
translation of the old Testament, Iehizkiabu, Iehezchel, Choresh, Darianesch,
Beltzezzer, and the like, for, Ezechias, Ezechiel, Cyrus, Darius, Baltasar: he
called them barbarous voices, and uncivil speeches, and said, the word of God
was soiled and depraved by them. Know you not, that proper names alter and
change, and are written and sounded in every language diversely? Might not al
antiquity, and the general custom, both of reading and hearing the known
names of Nabuchodonosor, and Michaeas, and Ozias, suffice you, but you must
needs invent other which the people never heard, rather for vain ostentation,
to amase and astonish them, than to edification and instruction Which is an
old heretical fashion, noted by Eusebius, lib 4. c. 10. and by the author of
the imperfect commentaries upon S. Matthew, ho. 44. and by S. Augustine, lib. 3.
c. 26. contra Cresconium.

FVLK. 22. That Zuinglius is no Patriarch of ours, you may know by this, that
we do freely dissent from him, when we are persuaded that he dissenteth from
the truth. But where you charge us, with an heretical fashion in sounding
Hebrew names, according to the truth of the Hebrew tongue if your authors be
well weyed, they will convince you of an heretical fashion, in framing of new
words, which are more apt to amase and astonishe men, than to instruct or
edify them: and in using strau^g language in all your Church service, and in
that also diverse Hebrew words. So did the Marcosians, of whom Eusebius out
of Irenaeus writes in baptising. And the author of the imperfect work upon
Matthew, though him self an Heretic, yet truly says of heretic Priests, as
you are, in the homily by you quoted, Sic and modo haeretici Sacerdotes, etc.
Even so the Heretic Priests shut up the gate of truth. For they know that if
the truth were made manifest, their Church should be forsaken, etc. For which
cause, until this time, you have been utter enemies to the translation of the
Scripture. But now you see you can not prevail against the translation, you
have begun so to translate the Scripture, as in many things it were as good
not translated, for any thing the people shall understand by it. For you have
not explicated the fourth part of the feigned inkehorne terms that you have
used. And that Saint Augustine says, Cresconius went fondly about to terrify
him, with the Greek word Anti^athegoria, you do the like with Parasceue,
Azymes, scandals, Neophyte, yea with Latin words, gratis, depositum, and such
like, seek to bring the ignorant in great admiration of your deep knowledge,
which is nothing else, but an heretical fashion, under strange terms, to hide
the poison of your pestilent doctrine.

MART. 23. What shall I speak of your affectation of Jehovah. (...)
the word Iehoua (for so it pleases you to accent it) in steed of Dominus,
the Lord: whereas the ancient fathers in the very Hebrewe text did read and
sound it rather Adonai, as appears both by S. Hieromes translation, and also
his commentaries, and I would know of them the reason, why in the Hebrewe
Bible, whenever this word is joined with Adonai, it is to be read Elohim, but
only for avoiding Adonai, twice together. This I say we might justly demand
of these that take a pride in using this word Iehoua, so often, both in English
and Latin, though otherwise we are not superstitious, but as occasion serves,
only in the Hebrew text, we pronounce it and read it Again we might ask
them, why they use not as well Elohim in steed of Deus, God: and so of therest,
changing al into hebrew, that they may seem gay fellows, and the people may
wonder as their wonderful and mystical divinity.

FVLK. 23. In our English translation, Iehoua is very seldom used in other
speech, no wise man uses it oftener, than there is good cause why. And when
there is cause, we have no superstition in pronouncing it, as we are not
curious in acce^ting it. Although, perhaps you quarrel at our accent, because
you can not discern between time and time. The middle syllable we know to
be long, whether it be to be elevated we make no question, we know where the
accent is in the Hebrew, but we think not that all accents be sharp, and
eleuate that syllable in which they are. It is a great matter, that you
demand the reason why ioygned to Adonai, it is to be read Elohim, you
should rather demand why it is otherwise pointed, when it is ioygned with
Adonai, for being pointed as it is, I see not why it should not be read
according to the vowels, Adonai Iehouih. Many other questions might be moved,
about the names of God, in pronouncing or writing of which we know the Jews
were reuerente, even to superstition: and therefore in books that should come
in all men's hands, made other alterations, than you speak of, and yet
retained in other authentical copies, the true letters and points. If any
desire vain gloriously to utter his skill in the tongues, when he should
edify the people, of all them that be wise and learned, he is misliked for so
doing.

MART. 24. To conclude, are not your scholars (think you) much bound^ unto
you, for giving them in steed of Gods blessed word and his holy Scriptures,
such translations, heretical, Iudaical, profane, false, negligent,
fantastical, new, naught, monstrous? God open their eyes to see, and
mollify your hearts to repent of all your falsehood and treachery, both that
which is manifestly convinced against you and can not be denied, as also that
which may by some show of answer be shifted of in the sight of the ignorant,
but in your consciences is as manifest as the other.

FVLK. 24. Happy and thrice happy has our English nation been, since God has
given learned translators, to express in our mother tongue the heavenly
mysteries of his holy word, delivered to his Church in the Hebrew and Greek
languages. Who, although they have in some matters of no importance unto
salvation, as men been deceived: yet have they faithfully delivered the whole
substance of the heavenly doctrine, contained in the holy Scriptures, without
any heretical translations, or wilful corruptions. And in the whole Bible
among them all have committed as few ouersights for any thing that you can
bring, and of less importance, than you have done only in the new Testament.
Where beside so many omissions, even out of your own vulgar Latin
translation, you have taken upon you, to alter that you found in your text,
and translate that, which is only in the margent, and is read but in few
written copies. As for Italia you say A^talia, noted before Heb. 13. for
placuerunt you translate latuerunt, 2. Pet.2. for coinquinationis which is in
the text, you translate coinquinationes, which was found but in one only
copy, by Hentenius, as the other but in one or two of thirty diverse copies,
most written.

FINIS.
A brief table to direct the Reader to such places as Martin in this book
cauilleth to be corrupted in diverse translations of the English Bibles, by
order of the books, chapters, and verses of the same, with some other quarrels
against Beza, and others for their Latin translations, with the aunsweares of
W. Fulke.
Genesis.
CHap. 4. v. 7. page 31. numb. 28. and page 316. number. 9. chap. 14. v. 18. p.
55. numb. 42. and page 447. chap. 34. v. 35. p. 206. number. 7. chap. 42. v. 38.
p. 216. number. 12.
4. of the Kings.
Chap. 29. v. 5. p. 501. numb. 6.
2. Paralipomenon.
Chap. 28. v. 19. p. 518. nu. 10. chap. 38. v. 8. p. 116. number. 19. and p. 4^3.
number. 1.
1. Esdras.
Chap. 9. v. 5. p. 373. number. 16.
Psalms.
Psalm. 48. v. 16. p. 252. psalm. 84. v. 7. p. 511. psalm. 85. v. 13. p. 218. number.
13. and p. 59. number. 46. psalm. 89. v. 48. p. 219. number. 14. psalm. 95. v. 6. p.
478. psalm. 98. v. 5. ibidem. psalm. 131. v. 7. ibid. psalm. 138. v. 17. p. 460.
psalm. 147. v. 19. p. 252. and ^. 18. p. 516. number. 3.
Proverbs.
Chap. 1. v. 12. p. 22^. numb. 22. chap. 9. v. 2. p. 456. nu. 21. cum sequent.
chap. 27. v. 20. p. 228 chap. 30. v. 16. ibid.
Cantica canticorum.
Chap. 6. v. 8. p. 155. number. 10 chap. 8. v. 6* p. 29. number. 46. see p. 508.
numb. 2
Of Wisdom.
Chap. 3. v. 14. p. 346. number. 3 chap. 15. v. 13. p. 127. number. 27
Ecclesiasticus.
Chap. 5. v. 5. p. 348. numb. 4 chap. 7. v. 31. p. 390
Esaias.
Chap. 2. p. 513. numb. 7 chap. 26. v. 18. p. 508 chap. 30. v. 22. p. 121. number.
23 and v. 20. p. 511. number. 5 chap. 33. p. 513. number. 6
Hieremie.
Chap. 7. v. 18. p. 467. number. 9 chap. 11. v. 19. p. 453. number. 18 chap. 44. v.
19. p. 467. number 9
Daniel.
Chap. 4. v. 24. p. 375. numb. 18 chap. 6. v. 22. p. 256. number. 3 chap. 10. v.
12. p. 372. number. 15 chap. 14. v. 4. p. 126. number. 26 and v. 12. 17. 20. p^. 451.
number. 16
Osee.
Chap. 12. v. 10. p. 514. number. 8 chap. 13. v. 14. p. 159 number. 46 and p. 221.
number. 16
Joel.
Chap. 2. v. 23. p. 511
Habacuc.
Chap. 2. v. 18. p. 122. number. 23 see p. 510. number. 4
Malachie.
Chap. 2, v. 7. p. 412. number. 17 chap. 3. v. 1. p. 414. number. 18 and v. 14. p.
374. number. 17
1. Machabees.
Chap. 1. v. 51. p. 252. chap. 2. v 21. ibid.
2. Machabees.
Chap. 6. v. 7. p. 501. number. 5
S. Matthew.
Chap. 1. v. 19. p. 257. number. 4 and v. 25. p. 470 chap. 2. v. 6. p* 417 chap.
3. v. 8. p. 355. chap. 16. v. 18. p. 140. numb. 2 and p. 144. number. 5 chap. 18.
v. 17. p. 140 chap* 19. v. 11 12. p. 314. nu. 8 and p. 411. number. 16 chap. 26.
p. 429.
S. Mark.
Chap. 10. v. 52. p. 352. number. 9 chap. 14. p. 429
S. Luke.
Ch^p. 1. v. 28. p. 56. numb. 43. and p. 463. number. 4 and v. 6. p. 252. p. 257.
nu. 4 chap. 3. v. 8. p. 355 chap. 1. v. 48. 50. p. 353. nu. 9 chap. 18. v. 42.
p. 353. numb. 9 chap. 22. v. 20 p. 444. number. 10 and p. 445 number. 11
S. John.
Chap. 1. v. 12. p. 300 chap. 9. v. 22. 23. p. 503. number. 9 chap. 13. v. 16. p.
392. number. 3
Acts.
Chap. 1. v. 26. p. 396. number. 5 chap. 2. v. 27. p. 200. nu. 3* 4. 5 chap. 3. v.
21. p. 439. number. 7 chap. 4. v. 13. p. 392. number. 3 chap. 9. v. 22. p. 4^4. number.
2 chap. 14. v. 22. p. 162. number. 5 and v. 23. p. 398. number. 7* chap. 15. v. 2. 4.
6. 22. 23. p. 161 number* 4* chap. 16. v. 4. ibid. chap. 17. v. 23. p. 503. number. 8
chap. 19. v. 24. p. 502. number. 7 and v. 3. p. 382. number. 3 chap. 20. ibid. and v.
28. p. 417. nu. 21. and v. 17. p. 166. n. 8
Romans.
Chap. 2. v. 26. p. 252 chap. 5. v. 6. page 323. numb. 13 and v. 18. p. 328
chap. 8. v. 18. p. 263 and v. 38. p* 346* number. 3 chap. 9. v. 16. p. ^12. nu. 7
chap. 11. v. 4. p. 116 number. 19
1. Corinthians.
Chap. 1. v. 10. p. 135. number* 3 chap. ^* v. 11. p. 12. number. 6 chap. 9. v. 5. p.
450* chap. 10. v. 21. p. 451. number. 16. chap. 11. v. 2. p. 89. number. 23 chap. 15.
v. 5. p. 426. number. 4 and v. 10. p. 301. number. 2 and v. 55. p. 221. number. 16
2. Corinthians.
Chap. 2. v. 10* p. 417. number. 20 chap. 4. v. 17. p. 273 number. 7 chap. 5. p. 336.
number. 6 chap. 6. v. 16. p. 90* number. 3 and v. 1. p. 309* number. 6 chap. 8. p* 392.
number. 3
Galathians.
Chap. 5. v. 20. p. 135. number. 3
Ephesians.
Chap. 1. v. 6. p. 338. number. 7 and v. 22. p. 140. number. 2. and v. 22. 23. p.
163. number. 6 chap. 3. v. 12. p. 303. p. 349. n. 5 chap. 5. p. 424. number. 2 and v.
5. p. 6. number. 5. pa. 88 number. 1 and v. 32. p* 133. number. 2 and v. 25. 32. p. 140.
number. 2
Philippians.
Chap. 2. v. 15. p. 395. number. 4 chap. 4. v. 5. p. 407. number. 13
Colossians.
Chap. 1. v. 23. p* 491. number. 8 and v. 12 p. 284. number. 17 chap* 2. v. 20. p.
13. number. 8 chap. 3. v. 5. p. 6. number. 5 pa. 87. number. 9. p. 103. numb. 12
2. Thessalonians.
Chap. 1. v. 4. p. 258. number. 5 and v. 11. p. 282. nu. 15 chap. 2. v. 15. p. 76.
number. 2 chap. 3. v. 6. ibid.
1. Timothee.
Chap. 3. v. 6. p. 392. number. 3 and v. 8. p. 390. and v. 15. p. 140. number. 2
chap. 4. v. 14* p. 166. number. 8. p. 399. number. 8 chap. 5. v. 17. 18. p. 166.
numb. 8. p. 198
2. Timothee.
Chap. 1. v. 6. p. 402. number. 10 chap. 4. v. 8. p. 258. number. 5
Titus.
Chap. 3. v. 8. p. 378. and v. 10. p. 17. number. 13. p. 135. number. 3
Hebrews.
Chap. 2. v. 9. p. 270. numb. 6 chap. 5. v. 7. p. 58. number. 45. pa. 243. number.
37. chap. 6. v. 10. p. 258. number. 5 chap. 10. v. 29. p. 280. number. 13. and v. 22.
p. 328. number. 2. and v. 20. p. 242. number. 36 chap. 11. v. 21. p. 474. chap. 12.
v. 23. p. 140. number. 2 chap. 13. p. 408. number. 14. and v. 5 p. 56. number. 44
S. James.
Chap. 1. v. 13. p. 495. number. 2 chap. 4. v. 6. p. 488. number. 6
1. Peter.
Chap. 1. v. 18. p. 83. number. 6. and v. 25. p. 485. number. 3 chap. 2. v. 3. p.
419. number. 22. p. 421. number. 24 chap. 5. v. 1. p. 168. number. 9
2. Peter.
Chap. 3. v. 16. p. 493
1. John.
Chap. 5. v. 3. p. 325. number. 14 and v. 21. p. 105. number. 13
Apocalipse.
Chap. 19. v. 8. p. 256. number. 3
BEZAES CORruptions.
Psalms.
Psalm. 51. v. 6. p. 27. number. 26
S. Matthew.
Chap. 23. p. 504. number. 10
Acts.
Chap. 1. v. 14. p. 405. number. 12 chap. 2. v. 23. p. 33. number. 31. pa. ^97. number.
3. and v. 24. p. 33 number. 32. 34. and v. 27. p. 33 number. 31. p. 198. number. 2.
chap. 3. v. 21. p. 35. number. 36 chap. 13. v. 39. p. 330. number. 2 chap. 26. v. 20.
p. 58. number. 45 pa. 355. number. 1
Romans.
Chap. 4. v. 11. p. 380. number. 2
1. Corinthians.
Chap. 12. v. 31. p. 352. numb. ^ chap. 13. v. 2. p. 350. number. 6 chap. 15. v.
10. number. 27
2. Thessalonians.
Chap. 2. v 3. p. 78. number. 3
Titus.
Cha. 3. v. 5. p. 385. and v. 6. pa. 46. number. 46
Hebrews.
Chap. 5. p. 32. number. 29

FINIS.
A BRIEF CONFVTATION OF SUNDRY CAVILS AND QVARELS, uttered by diverse Papists
in their several books and pamphlets against the writings of William Fulke.
I Were very much to blame, if I would not confess with S. Augustine, that as
Ad Victor. lib. 4. cap. 1.
in my manners, so in my writings many things may be justly reprehended, at
which I ought not to be offended, no not although I were reproved by mine
adversaries. But when the enemies of Gods holy religion, and of the quiet
state of this realm, seek by wounding of me, to hurt the truth, and if it
were possible through my sides, to wound her to death: I ought not to be silent
in this case, but by showing mine honest defense, as it were by holding up my
buckler, to bear off their blows as well as I can, to maintain the credit of
that cause which I have taken in hand: lest whilst I forbear to defend my
self, the truth might seem to have taken a foil. And yet I mean not so to
confound my case with the state of truth, that wheresoever I may be justly
convinced, truth should be thought to have lost the victory. For I am but one
poor soldier among many thousand captains, that fight under the banner of
truth, which if I have not in every respect performed al duties of an expert
warrior, it is reason the reproach of my defaultes should rest and stay only
in mine own ignorance or rashness which have not so happily executed that
which of good will to fight in truths cause I have attempted within these five
or six years. I have set abroad sundry treatises in confutation of popish
books written in English, which purpose if God give me strength, to answer
as many as within twenty years of her majesty's reign, had been set forth
by the Papists, and are not yet confuted by any other. This purpose of mine,
the Papists have not greatly hindered by replies, for (except one only
Bristowe, who observing no good order of replying, but gathering here and there
at his pleasure, whatsoever he thought himself best able to reprove, has made
a show of defense of Allens Articles and Purgatory) none other have as yet set
forth any just replication to the rest of my writings. And as for Bristow, he
has my reioynder unto his reply these two years in his hand to consider upon,
the other that of late have set forth Popish treatises, have endeavored
themselves almost cuery one of them, to have a snatch or two at some one od
thing or other in my books, wherein they would seem to have advantage, and
that belike they would have their simple readers think, to be a sufficient
confuration of all that ever I have written against them. I have thought good
therefore as near as I can, to gather all their cauils together, and briefly
to shape an answer to every one of them, that the indifferent reader may see
and judge what sound matter they have brought against me where with in show of
words, they would have it seem, as though they had confuted me.

First Master Allen in his late Apology. fol. 63. accusing the Protestants to
feign an appellatio^ unto the judgment of the most ancient fathers of the
primitive Church, and yet not to abide by it, not esteeming them better than
the present government of the Popish Church, but as of men deceived, as of
humane traditions, etc. As in their writings says he, it is most evident,
where from Peter's time downward, they make the chiefest fathers the ministers
and furtherers of Antichrist. For this evidence he quoteth Beza in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
and Retentiue p. 248. How unjustly Beza is slandered to be a witness of this
accusation, they that understand y^ Latin tongue, may see in the places
quoted. But touching my self, the book which he quoteth having scarce half
so many pages, I might entreat him for a new quotation, but that I guess he
means a place in my confutation of Sanders book which he calls the Rock
of the church, which was printed with the Retentiue, and continues the number
of pages from it. In that book page 248. there is nothing that sounds toward
such a matter, except it be these words: As for Leo and Gregory bishops of
Rome, although they were not come to the full pride of Antichrist, yet the
mystery of iniquity having wrought in that seat, near five or six hundred
years before them, and then greatly increased, they were so deceived with the
long continuance of error, that they thought the dignity of Peter was much
more over the rest of his fellow Apostles, than the holy scriptures of God
(against which no continuance of error can prescribe) does either allow or
bear withal. Wherefore although he have some show out of the old writers, yet
has he nothing directly to prove, that Peter did excel the other Apostles in
bishoplike authority: and out of the word of God, no one jot or title, that
Peter as a bishop excelled the other Apostles, not as Apostles but as bishops.
First it is manifest even to the eye, that Allens slander is not expressed in
these words. Then let us see, if it may be employed. The mystery of iniquity
did work in the sea of Rome from the Apostles time, taking increase by little
and little, until six hundred years and more after Christ, when Antichrist
began to be openly showed: and many of the ancient fathers not espying the
subtlety of Satan's secret purpose, were deceived to think something more of
Peter's prerogative, and of the bishops of Romes dignity, than by the word of
God was granted to either of them: this is in effect as much as I affirm, but
here of it follows not, that I make them the ministers and furtherers of
Antichrist. For those are the ministers and furtherers of Antichrist, which
willingly lend all their power to maintain, and uphold his kingdom, after he
has invaded the tyranny: The ancient fathers meant nothing less by
admitting of the bishops of Romes prerogative, under color of Peter's
successor, than to serve him or advance him into the throne of Antichrist. Not
every one whom Satan has seduced that he might prepare a way for the
advancement of his tyranny, is a minister and furtherer of Satan or his
tyranny, for then should all men be counted ministers or furtherers of Satan,
seeing the kingdom of sin is increased by the frailty of all men, which by
temptation of the devil fall into sin. Beside that, many of the ancient
fathers, openly resisted the usurped power of the bishops of Rome, when it
began only to budde up, and was yet far off from Antichristian tyranny,
although it tended somewhat toward the same. Eusebius. lib. 5 ca. 25. and 26 Conc.
Carth.
So did the bishops of the East churches countermaund Victor bishop of Rome,
contending about the celebration of Easter. So did Irenaeus, Polycrates, and
many other 3. ca. 26. Gratian did. 99.
godly fathers, in public writings openly reprehend him. So did Cyprian in
diverse Epistles expostulate with the bishops of Rome, for meddling with causes
Mileuit. ca. 22.
that pertained to his jurisdiction. So did all the bishops of Aphrica make
decrees against the usurped authority Conc. Aph. ad Celestin.
and titles of the bishops of Rome, denying all appeals unto the sea of Rome,
and exco^municating all them that would appeal to any place beyond the sea,
discovering also the forged Canon of the Nicen Council, by which the bishops of
Rome challenged that prerogative. So that M. Allen by this his slander, has
done injury to me, and hurt to himself, while men by this example may judge
of his synceritie in other matters.

Next comes in the discovery of I. Nicols, denying that they make the
Catholic religion local, or of one province, as he charge me (with some
scornful terms of reproach) to affirm in my bad answer to Howlet. I said
in deed, that S. Augustine De unit. Eccles. Cap. 4. does clear us of schism,
who willingly communicate with all the whole body of Christ's Church, dispersed
over the world, and charge the Popish faction both of schism and heresy: of
schism, because they maintain the Church to be only in a part of Europe, as
the Donatistes did in Aphrica, etc. And what injury have I done to the Papists
in so saying? The Donatists said, the Church was perished out of all the
world, and remained only in Aphrica: not assigning any place of Aphrica,
whereunto the Church must be regardant, as the Papists do the city of Rome:
but affirming that true Catholics remained only in Aphrica, being consumed
out of all other parts of the earth. And what say the Papists of all the
Oriental churches of Greece, of Asia, of Aphrike, that acknowledge not the
Popes authority? Do they not account them all for heretics or schismatikes?
Then it follows, that they acknowledge the Church to remain only in those
parts of Europe, that are subject to the Pope, and Church of Rome. But perhaps
they will allege their newly founded Churches in India and America, which vain
brag I will not stand to confute: but seeing this enlargement is but new
begun, in our graundfathers days, before those parts of the earth were
discovered by navigations of the Portingals and Spaniardes, where was the Romish
church and pope thereof acknowledged but only in a piece of Europe. If yet
they will allege the submission of any Patriarchs or Prelates of the
Ethiopian or Armenian churches made to the Pope by some wandering pilgrims,
which are of no credit among wisemen, yet all men may know, that those
Christians continuing to this day, in the same religion, rites and ceremonies,
that they did before such pretended submissions, holding and doing many things
contrary to the Romish religion and custom, which argues plainly, that they
neither were, nor mean to become members of the church of Rome, and subjects
to Popish religion, which they refuse to receive in as many points, as ever
they did. Wherefore the Popish church remains still shut up within the
streites of Europe, for any accession of them. And what enlargement so ever it
has in the new world, it is rather by colonies of Portingals and Spaniardes,
than by conversion of those barbarous nations. For as for them that were for
fear of death compelled to receive baptism, as many of the barbarous people
have been, no true Catholic can acknowledge for good and Catholic Christians,
who as occasion always served them, spared not to give sufficient testimony
of their counterfeit conversion, whereby it appeared, that the sacrament of
baptism was in them profaned, rather than that they by it were sanctified. As
for my bad answer to Howlet, as it seems was so sufficient, that never a
Papist these two years can find time to confute it. Although if they thought
it too bad to confute, there has been since a better set forth with more
advise, by master Wyborne, but the reply we shall have at greater leisure, the
Howlet as I guess being otherwise occupied in defense of his Censure, for that
his proud stomach had rather play the Judge than the defendant.

The next quarrel follows in the third lease after, where he approves I.
Nicols affirming, as he says, that Purgatory, prayer for the dead, and
invocation of Saints, are late inventions of Popes and Papists. Whereas his
own companions, namely Fulke in his late answer to doctor Allen and doctor
Bristowe confesses that all these three errors were received in the church
above 1200. years, that is in the times of Augustine, Jerome, Ambrose and
upward, and that these fathers with other believed them also. If to those
three doctors which he named, he had not added upward, I must have abated one
hundred years at least of his account. But now let us see, what I have
confessed of these doctors and upward. First against Purgatory, page 306. But
whosoever shall vouchsafe to turn the book to that page, shall find never a
word of my writing, good or bad, but only the first section of the ninth
Chapter of Allens second book. Well, this may be the printers fault,
peradventure it is page 106. because it is not like that 306. should come
before 115. the next quotation that follows, but neither is there any thing
to this purpose. Then let us see what may be found page 115. even as much as
in page 306. for there is never a word of my writing in that page, but all is
Allens. 8. chapter of the first book. Then come we to the third quotation
page 316. and there in deed is something sounding toward this matter, touching
prayer for the dead, which Augustine did allow, but of purgatory there is
nothing. Of invocation of Saints there is mention, but no affirmation that
Augustine did believe it, for in the next page follows a discourse to prove
that S. Augustine, as he declares in his book De cura pro mortuis etc. was
not certain how the Saints departed should know any thing that is done in
this world, although he inclined to that opinion, that they might have
knowledge by relation of dead men, or of Angels, or else he knows not how,
and so does plainly confess. From hence we must pass to page 320. where in
deed, I do confess that Ambrose allows prayer for the dead, as it was a
common error of his time, but not sacrifice of the mass in that sense that
Papists do. Last of all. Ar^. page 39. I deny, that for 200. years after
Christ, it can be proved, that any Catholic writer does allow prayer for the
dead, or invocation of Saints, and that the later error was not confirmed 400.
years after Christ, namely in Saint Augustines time, in that small help was
acknowledged by Chrysostom, to come to the dead by prayers made for them. In
all those places S. Jerome is not once named, nor purgatory confessed to be
received, whereof S. Augustine the last of the three sometime doubts,
sometime utterly denies any third place: neither did I ever confess, that any
of those three errors were holden by these ancient fathers in all respects, as
they are by the Papists, nor that purgatory was ever believed of any of them,
only Augustine sometimes speaks of it, as of a doubtful matter, De oct.
Dulcit. quest. q. 1. De fid. and op. c. 16. ser. in mont. lib. 1.
which he says may be inquired, whether there be any such place or no: and
yet confuted those interpretations of the scriptures which the Papists make
their chiefest grounds of it. By this you may see, how liberal this Jesuit
is in extending my confession further than ever it was made or meant by me, or
can be proved by him or any Papist of them all.

The third leaf again, after this, he says that Nicols by citing a place of
Augustine, would have men think that S. Augustine disallowed prayer to
Saints, which is contrary to Fulkes opinion, who confesses Augustine to have
defended this superstition, as he terms it, and rayleth on him for it. For
this is quoted Purg. page 315. 316. 317. How he gathers, what Nicols would
have men think, let other men judge. And what mine opinion is of Augustines
allowing of prayer to Saints, I have before expressed out of the places quoted:
but where he says, I rail on him for it, that is but a friars report, which
seldom differs from a lie. For this is all I say of him for it. By such
places as I have in those pages cited out of Augustine, it is proved, that
although Augustine were willing to maintain the superstition, that was not
thoroughly confirmed in his time, about burials and invocation of Saints, yet he
has nothing of certeintie out of the word of God, either to persuade his own
conscience, or to satisfy them that moved the doubts unto him. Whether in
these words I have rayled, I submit my self to the judgment of the reader,
that will weigh what I have cited out of S. Augustine, in the pages mentioned.

In the same leaf, and the next page, the margent is painted with quotations
out of my book against Purgatory. But what think you to prove? Forsooth,
that his adversaries do confess all the old fathers to be on their side, and
to have erred with them, as Fulke does of S. Ambrose, Austen, Tertullian,
Origin, Chrysostom, Gregory, and Bid by name, with most reprochefull and
contemptuous words against them. This is spoken generally, as though we
confess all the doctors to be on their side, in every controversy, which we
do not acknowledge to be true in any one, although many of the later sort do
in some part favor one or two errors of theirs among an hundredth. But let us
examine his proves, which seem to be very plentiful, yet of nine quotations
I must needs strike out two, page 306. and 279. because in them is not one
syllable of my writing, but all of Allens. In the pages 315. and 316. is
nothing more contained touching this matter, than I have already declared.
There remains now, page 349. where I say touching a rule of S. Augustine,
which he gives to try faith and doctrine of the Church only by the
scripture, that if he had as diligently followed it, in examining the common
error of his time, of prayer for the dead, as he did in beating down the
schism of the Donatistes, or the heresy of the Pelagians, he would not so
blindly have defended that which by holy scripture he was not able to
maintain, as he does in that book De Cura pro mortuis agenda, and else
where. What most reprochefull or contemptuous words are here against S.
Augustine? Seeing the holy scripture is a light shining in a dark place, as
S. Peter says, who so goes without it must walk blindly, which I say in
commendation of the light of the scripture, not in contempt of Augustines
reason, whom as I may not honor, with contempt of the truth: so when he is a
patron and maintainer of the truth, I honor him from my heart. Likewise page
78. Saint Ambrose is named, but nothing acknowledged to favor any popish
error. Augustine is again noted speaking of the amending fire, whereof he
has no ground, but in the common error of his time, and whereof he affirms
sometimes, that it is a matter that may be doubted of, sometimes that there is
no third place at all. Wherefore this place has neither reprochful words, nor
confession of any constant opinion of Augustine, inclining to your errors.
Then let us pass to the next place which is page 435. where concerning this
matter, I have written thus: I deny that any of the ancient fathers in
Christ's time, or scholars to his Apostles, or within one or two hundredth years
after Christ, except one that had it of Montanus the heretic, as he had more
things beside, in any one word, maintained your cause for purgatory or prayers
for the dead. Secondly of them that maintained prayers for the dead, the most
confessed, they had it not out of the scriptures, but of tradition of the
Apostles, and custom of the church, therefore they are not to be compared unto
us in better understanding of the scriptures, for that point, which they denied
to be received of the scriptures. Thirdly, those of the ancient fathers that
agreed with you in any part of your assertion (for none within 400. years was
wholly of your error) notwithstanding many excellent gifts that they had, yet
maintained other errors beside that, and about that, diffented one from
another, and sometime the same man from himself, and that is worst of all,
from manifest truth of the holy scriptures. Therefore neither is their
erroneous interpretation in this matter to be received, nor M. Allens wise
judgment of us to be regarded. Here also I appeal to the judgment of
indifferent readers, what confession I have made of the fathers to be on their
side, or what reprochefull or contemptuous words I have used against them, for
dissenting from us. The next place is quoted, page 247. where I say against
Allen, boasting of ancient testimonies, for prayer for the dead: I will not
deny but you have much dross and dregs, of the later sort of doctors, and
the later, the fuller of dross. But bring me any word out of Justinius Martyr,
Irenaeus, Clemens Alexandrinus, or any that did write within one hundredth
years after Christ, that aloweth prayer or alms for the dead, and I will say
you are as good as your word. Here except he will cauil, that I acknowledge
much dross and dregs to be in the later sort of doctors, I know not what he
finds that has any shadow of his slander. But the truth must be confessed,
that the pure waters of life are to be found only in the word of God, and
beside that the best and purest liquors that are to be seen, are not clear
from all dregs and dross of humane error and frailty. In the next page
Origin delivered from the shameful mangling of Allens allegation, is showed
plainly to be an enemy of purgatory and prayer for the dead, in that he
affirms the day of a Christian man's death to be the end of all sorrow, and
the beginning of all felicity. There remains now the last place quoted,
page 194. where I acknowledge, that Gregory, Bernard, and Bid, upon the text
Matthew. 12. are of opinion that sins not remitted in this world, may be
remitted in the world to come. But how happens it (say I) that Chrysostom
and Ieronyme which both interpreted that place, could gather no such matter,
although they otherwise allowed prayer for the dead. The reason must needs be,
because the error of purgatory growing so much the stronger, as it was nearer
to the full revelation of Antichrist, Gregory and Bid sought not the true
meaning of Christ in this scripture, but the confirmation of their plausible
error. Here is all the confessions, most reprochefull and contemptuous words,
that are contained in so many of those places as he has quoted, in which I
will not tarry to rehearse how many untruths he has uttered against me,
but wish the indifferent reader to consider, that if he be so bold to slander
me concerning a book printed in English, by which he may be convinced of
every simple reader, what dare he not aduouch of matters done and past at
Rome, whither none may travel to try out his tretcherie, but he is in
manifest danger never to return the answer of his message?

From this Popish Parson whatsoever his name be, I must pass to another
gentleman namelesse in deed, but not blameless, yea much more blame worthy
than the other: who among so many and so great flanders, as it is wonder how
they could be conveyed into so The epistle ^f persecution.
small a book, against our prince, her laws, her counselors, her judges, her
officers, the nobility, the comminaltie, the church, the governors, the
pastors, and the people thereof, against all states and persons of the land, in
whom there is religion toward God, joined with duty toward their prince
and country, has found yet some empty corners where he might place me in
particular. And first of all, page 46. of his Latin Epistle, after he has
described the manner of quartering used in the execution of traitors, and most
impudently flandered the officers of Justice, to make such haste in cutting
down the Papists, which are hanged, as they use not in punishment of other
traitors, to the end they might satisfy their cruel minds in their torments,
which is proved false by many thousand eye witnesses, that have not lightly
seen any of them revive with any sense of their pains, except one Story, who
also did hang so long before he was cut down, that it was great wondering to
many to see him so soon recovered, not only in life, but also in strength.
At length he comes in his tragical manner, to inueigh against the cruelty of
their adversaries, whom this cruel sight does nothing at all move to pity,
but they laugh and make sport at it, and insult against them that are a dying.
But especially (says he) if any overcome with pain, has given forth any
groaning which yet happens most seldom, so one of them no mean preacher in a
certain imprinted book, does gather that ours are not true martyrs, because
one of them (as he himself affirms) gave forth a certain howling as of an
helhound, that I may use his own words. O sentence worthy of a preacher! O
new charity of the new gospel! What ruffinaly thief at any time has not
blushed to utter such a voice? What murderer did ever show a mind so cruel
and barbarous? This froth of words I might easily match with like rhetorical
exclamations. O impudent liar, O shameless slanderer* O traiterous backbyter,
etc. But I had rather beat it down with truth of matter. Bristowe in his
book of Motives, makes Martyrs his 15. Motive. Among whom he commends as
well for the goodness of their cause, as also for their patient suffering: The
good Earl of Northumberland (I use his own traitorous words) Story, Felton,
Nortons, Woodhouse, Plomtree, and so many hundreths of the Northeren men,
whom approved by miracles undoubted he opposes against Foxes martyrs as he
calls them. Against this traitorous commendation of open rebels and traitors,
among other things thus I have written, Retent. page 59. Seeing not the pain
but the cause, makes a martyr, whosoever have suffered for treason and
rebellion, may well be accounted Martyrs of the popish church, but the church
of Christ condemns such for enemies of Christ's kingdom, and inheritours of
eternal destruction, except they repent and obtain mercy for their horrible
wickedness. And seeing patient suffering is by Bristowes own confession, a
gift of God unto all true martyrs, such as were manifestly void of patience
can be no true martyrs, as were most of these rebels and traitors, and Story
by name: who for all his glorious tale, in the time of his most deserved
execution by quartering, was so impatient, that he did not only roar and cry
like an helhound, but also struck the executioner doing his office, and
resisted as long as strength did serve him* being kept down by three or four
men, until he was dead. O patient martyr of the popish church! What cause had
this slanderous spirit upon these my words, to make such hydeous outcryes,
what thief? what ruffian? what murderer? or what matter is ministered in this
my saying, to accuse all the adversaries of Papists in England, of such
barbarous cruelty? We are not so void of humanity, but we lament ye misery
even of our greatest and most graceles enemies: but yet we are not so void of
understanding, to acknowledge impatient suffering to be true martyrdom, no
not if the cause were never so good. Not that we think true martyrs to be
void of sense and feeling of their torments, or that they may not testify
their pains, even with tears and strong crying sometimes, but that there is a
great difference between the crying of patient martyrs unto God for strength
and comfort, and the brutish roaring of impatient sufferers, expressed only
with pain and torment, as was this of Story, who uttered no voice of prayer
in all that time of his crying (as I heard of the very executioner himself,
beside them that stood by) but only roared and cried as one overcome with the
sharpnes of the pain, as no martyr is, whom God is faithful to deliver out
of temptation: so that although they have never so great sense of their
torment, yet are they never overcome thereby. But peradventure this orator for
the popish traitors, will take me up, for concluding against Story, that he did
not pray, because no voice of prayer was heard to come from him* as though I
could not consider, that he was immediately before strangled, so that the
passage of his voice might be stopped, that albeit that roaring were his
prayer, yet it might not be understood by them which heard it. In deed if
there had been no other sign of his impatiencie, but his crying, I would not
have been bold to have judged thereof, and made him an example of impatiencie,
as I did. But what patient martyr ever struck his tormentor? Who praying for
his persecutors, would strive to buffet and beat them. What man submitting
himself to the will of God in his suffering, would resist the executioners
that he might not suffer? yea, when there was no remedy but he must suffer?
except God for his cruelty showed against his patient saints, had not only
given him a taste of such torments as he procured to others, but also made him
an open spectacle of the impatient and uncomfortable state of them, that
suffer, not in a good cause, and with a good conscience. By this it is manifest
how honestly this proctor of the persecuted Papists reports, that upon a
little groaning I gather that he was no true martyr, and further rayleth as his
faculty well serves him.

The like honest dealing and truth is showed in the English translation of
this pamphlet, toward the latter end, where he speaks of certain
imprisoned and pyned with famine at York. There in the margent, Fulke is
placed, as though he had been author or executer of some persecution at York,
near to which city, he never came by 40. miles. But this will be excused
perhaps by the printers fault, because it is not mentioned in the Latin.
Howsoever it be, it argues a lying and a slanderous stomach of the setters
forth of this treatise, that would suffer so open and so apparent a slander,
to pass uncorrected being in such a place where it could not escape their
sight and knowledge.

But the story of the conference at Wisbich, is a worthy matter, wherein not
only this rhetoritian, but also the confuter of M. Charke (if they be not both
one Parson, as I guess they be) have thought good to exercise their style. The
truth whereof is this, as it is easy to be proved in every respect by
sufficient testimonies. It pleased the Lords and other of her majesty's
council, after those obstinate recusantes were committed to safe keeping in
Wisbich castle, to direct their letters to the Bishop of Elye (in whose
diocese and castle the prisoners were kept) requiring him to provide, that
they might have conference, if they would admit any, and be called upon to
come to the Church, and hear the preaching there: whereupon the Bishop
making choice of me, among other whom he purposed to send unto them, desired
me by his Chauncellor M. Doctor Bridgewater, to repair unto him into the
Isle, from whence he sent me with a gentleman of his house, to signify to them
that had the charge of those prisoners, the cause of my coming. Whereupon
ensewed that speech in the presence of certain honest men specially called
and required to be witnesses, besides a number of other of good credit, the
sum whereof as it was written at the present time, by three or four that came
with me, of which one is a learned preacher, was collected to certify the
Bishop as near as could be, what communication had passed between us, without
any further purpose of publishing the same. But the copy thereof coming into
the hands of a friend of mine at London, and by him communicated to some
other of his friends, at last came into a printers hand, who suddenly set it
abroad unknowing to my friend and me. Which how well it was liked of me and
my friend, some of the best of the company of Stationers can testify, by
that, means was made to have the printer punished, and had not Campions
proud and vain challenge come even in the nicke, I could not have been
persuaded by my friends, to have suffered the party to go so clear as he
did. This is the whole truth and every part thereof, which if this dainty
orator durst show his face in any honest presence in England, may be proved by
such sufficient witness and evidence, as no reasonable person could refuse.
Notwithstanding let us see, what a rhetorical lier without fear of God, or
shame of the world, without knowledge of the matter, or means to have
intelligence, can devise to publish in the face of the world, to bolster the
obstinacy of those wilful recufants, and to deface the honest endeavor of
them that seek first to reform them, and if that can not be, to take away
excuse of ignorance from them. There is a certain minister (says he) great in
his own opinion, but in other men's opinion but mean, etc. Mark how boldly
even in the beginning he blusheth not to affirm, that which it is impossible
for him to know. For albeit I were as great in mine own opinion, as he
reports me to be, yet how could he be privy to my concept, who though he
know my person, yet is he not acquainted with my manners, that he might make
conjecture by them. Neither is it like, he can hear it by report of other men.
For I trust they which know me most familiarly, cannot report, that my
behavior argues any such great opinion of my self. But he gathers it
perhaps either by my preaching, or by my writing. What skill I have in any
thing God knows best, and then they with whom I live. And that I make as
little show of that I know, as any man in such cases may conveniently, I
answer, they that have most cause to understand what I am, will not refuse to
testify. That he says I am mean in other men's opinions, it greeueth me
nothing: rather I am afraid least a great number accept me to be better than I
deserve. But to omit this matter, by which yet you may gather, what
likelihoode of truth is in the rest of his assertions, he proceeds to accuse
me that for hope of a little vaineglorie, by contending with noble men, cum
magnatibus (so the honest subject calls Watson the Bishop, and Fecknam the
Abbot so long since by lawefull authority deprived of those dignities) I crept
secretly into the castle unlooked for. But if my coming were of hope to win
glory, why did I not rather come openly, or cause them to be brought into the
Church before the whole multitude? Well, admit I was so blind with desire of
vaineglorie that I could not see* which way I might best come to it. Why should
he say that I crept into the castle, as it were by stealth? Belike because I
came without authority, for so he says afterward, the papists saw that I
came to offer them conference by no public authority. If that had been so,
how could this stand which he says, Sisti iubet omnes ad s^^m conspectum,
he commands them all to be brought into his presence. Did he command them by
his private authority? or were they which had them in custody so simple, that
they would obey an unknown person, a mean man, of small or no account,
coming without authority or commanding in his own name, or pretending the
name of them that had authority without sufficient warrant? or rather was it
not well said, that a liar in a large tale is the best confuter of himself?
Although in very truth, I gave no commandment for their appearance before me,
only the bishops will was declared by the gentleman his servant, unto their
keeper. But what should I stand to rippe up those vanities? All reasonable
conditions of books, time and order for the conference were offered them. To
conclude, I am certainly persuaded, that something perhaps the disdain of my
person, but more the fear of the weakness of their cause stayed them, that
they would not adventure their credit in trial by disputation. For if the
contempt of my lightness and rashness (as their proctor says) had been the
only cause of their refusal, why did they not yield to dispute in the
university in which are many of more gravity or learning, yea why did they
conclude in the end that all disputation in matters of faith, was
unprofitable, alleging examples of the disputation in the convocation house,
in the beginning of the Queens majesty's reign* and the conference at
Westminster in presence of almost all the learned and wise of the realm in the
beginning of her majesty's reign? For the publishing of the report and the
certeinty of the contents thereof, I have showed sufficiently, as the truth of
the matter was, and as I will be able to justify by good witness, whatsoever
this impudent lier has aduouched to the contrary. The same is also sufficient
to confute the same slander repeted by the confuter of Master Charke in Epist.
pa. 9. concerning my only looking into Wisbich castle, and printing a pamphlet
in mine own praise, where if I had fained matter for my praise I might as well
have feigned, how valiantly I had vanquished mine enemies. For small praise is
gotten where there is no victory, and victory can be none where there is no
battle. The like slander he has, but with more words of reproach page 2. of
his defense, where beside his ruffianlike railing, which is a greater fault in
him that reproves others, for intemperate speech, there is nothing more in
substance, but that I did set forth that pamphlet in mine own commendation,
and I attempted the matter without authority, wherein without all rhetorike I
must tell him plainly, he lies impudently. As for the disputation he says
they have sued for in seditious manner, and for a purpose of sedition by Campion
their valiant champion* for other suite they cannot prove that ever they made,
or by any other means that ever I heard of, how like it is they would sewe
for it we may know by this, that they would not accept it when it was offered,
and how well it was discharged by Campion their lusty chal^nger, when he could
not refuse it, there be many both wise and learned witnesses, that can
testify, to the reproof of such impudent reports, as have been bruted in
popish pamphlets, by ignorant asses: to whom their own champion is so little
beholding, that they have for the most part made his answer a great deal more
absurd, and further from show of learning, than in deed it was. But if you
be so sharp set upon disputation, as you pretend, why does never a papist of
you all answer my challenge made openly in print to all learned papists,
almost three year ago, set before my Retentiue against Bristowes Motives,
wherein you may express, what you have in mainteinaunce of your opinion,
without suite, without danger, and to the best and surest try all of the
truth. But now it is time to come to other cauilles of this syrly censurer.
They are of two sorts, the one concerning words, the other touching matter. I
will begin first with the words, and as near as I can readily find them, I
will quote the places of my books where I have used them. And letting the
reader see what cause moved me sometimes to such vehement terms, I refer it
to his judgment. whether I have passed the bonds of modesty, or equity, yea
or nay. First he charge me with a ruffianlike spirit, because I say to
Allen: Show me Allen if thou can for thy guts. page 241. In that place I
answer to Allen, which scornefully bids the Papists say unto us: M.
Protestant, let me have sight of your only faith, I would be of that religion,
etc. that James calls pure and unspotted, etc. Whiles he requires a sight of
our faith by our good works, I answer that because the trial of singular
persons is uncertain, and impossible, let us consider the whole states. Then
follows: Show me if thou can for thy guts, or name any popish city,
that has made such provision for the fatherless and widows, as the city of
London, etc. What speech is hear like a ruffian? Except the delicate censurer,
cannot abide to hear Allens guts named, but he thinks it russianlike: as
though he had never heard of these phrases, ruparis licet, non si te ruperis
inquit, rumpantur ut ilia Codro. In which, saving the authority of this noble
censurer, no wise man did ever conceive any ruffianlike spirit. It sauoureth a
great deal more of a ruffianlike spirit, that himself abuses the phrases of
the holy Ghost, to scorning and scoffing, as hear in the margent, Doctor
Fulkes tallent in railing, and page 50. Luthers Def. pa. 13.
lying with a nun in the lord, who but an atheist, would not abhor to speak
so? But let us examine what railing he has noted out of my Retentiue against
Bristowes Motives. First, leaud Losell, and unlearned dogbolt, which I find
page 6. where I say, that some of the Papists were moderators of the
conference at Westminster, at least one: namely, D. Heath then occupiing the
place of the Bishop of York. Therefore not only lay Lords and unlearned
heretics, as this leaude losell, and unlearned dogbolt, and traiterous papist
(I am bold with him because he is so malepeart with the learned and godly
nobility of England) most slanderously and maliciously affirms, were only
moderators of that disputation, but some of the popish faction, were not only
present, but presidentes of that action, beside all the rest of the popish
prelates, which then were of that parliament, for information whereof that
conference was appointed. I say let the reader judge, whether he have not
deserved those terms, that being but a man of very mean learning, as his
writings declare, was not ashamed to call all the nobilities and commons of
the parliament, lay lorde^ and unlearned heretics.

Again, page 58. I call Bristowe a traitorous Papist, because he slaundereth
our state not only for public execution of open rebels and errant
traitors, as the Earl of Northumberlande, Story, Felton, Nortons, Woodhouse,
and so many hundreths of the northeren men, whom all he calls holy martyrs,
proved by miracles undoubted, but also with privy murdering by poisoning,
whipping, and famishing, what less I could have said of him for this high
treason openly printed, and what an honest Papist the censurer is for
reproouing me in so terming him, I refer to the judgment of all Christian and
faithful subjects.

To proceed I call him shameless beast page 18. because he makes a shamlesse
and beastly conclusion in those words: Whosoever have at any time, set
themselves against any doctrine confirmed by miracle, they have been against
the truth. There can to this no instance be given: our doctrine which they
resist has been confirmed by miracles, therefore plain it is that they are
enemies of the truth. Do you not hear this shameless beast say (quod I)
there can be no instance given against his proposition, when the Lord himself
gives an express law against a false prophet, which shows signs and
miracles? Deuteronomy. 13. etc. Weigh the term with the desert of the person in this
bold assertion, and if it be too extreme, I desire no favor.

Yet again page 10. I write thus: Where Luther confesses that the mockers of
the true Church were commonly called heretics, his conscience did not accuse
him (as Bristowe said of him) that his side were heretics. For he was able
to put a difference between him that by heretics is called an heretic, and
him that is so indeed: although Bristowe, either for his blockish wit cannot,
or for his spiteful malice will not conceive it. Here I do not simply accuse
his wit, but either his wit or his malice: and that one of them was to blame,
if not both, every wise man may see by his argument.

Furthermore, page 39. I say, he is an impudent ass, which to stablish his
ground of custom, is not ashamed to falsify the words of holy scripture.
For he had said, that Saint Paul after many reasons 1. Cor. 11. for the
uncomeliness of women's going bareheaded, recoyleth to this invincible fort: Si
quis etc. But if any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom (for
women to pray uncovered) nor the church of God. His ignorance and impudence is
manifest in this place. If the term ass offend any man, let him consider
that nothing but an ignorant person is noted thereby, as also page 88. where
he is called a blind bayarde and blockheaded ass, because he disdainefully
vpbraydeth all our doctors, and universities of much ignorance, and lack of
learning, and Calvin he says erred about the trinity through ignorance, with
such odious comparisons, as in so vain and unlearned a fellow, as Bristowe
shows himself to be, is intolerable.

To note his bold ignorance also I said page 74. The more beastly is the
blundring of this Bristowe, who dreameth that the council of Constantinople
the first, which made this confession by the Apostolic Church, did not only
mean the Roman Church, but also none other but the Roman church: whereas
the council knowing well the catholic church of the world, from the
particular Church of Rome, gave like privileges of honor to the Church of
Constantinople to those which Rome had, reserving only senioritie to old Rome:
beside many other reasons, they alleged to prove, that they acknowledged no
such authority of the Church at Rome, as the papists now defend.

Likewise page 89. I call him blundring Bristowe* for charging M. Jewel with
ignorance, for affirming Christ to be a priest according to his deity, of
which assertion I shall have occasion to speak afterward against the last
slander.

And page 75. where Bristowe says, that in all innouations both great and
small that ever by heretics were attempted, they can show under what pope
they chanced, what tumultes rising in the world thereon, what doctors
withstand it, what councels accursed it, etc. I reply thus: What an impudent
liar is this Bristowe, to brag of that, which at this day is impossible to be
done, by any man living in the world? For of so many heretics as are
rehearsed by Epiphanius and Augustine, not the one half of them can be so
showed, as Bristowe like a blind bayarde boasts they can do.

Yet more touching his ignorance page 43. I say Hierome was not so gross, to
count walking about the city, to be a peregrination. But what is so leaden or
blockish, which these doltish papists will not aduouch for the mainteinance of
their trumperie? This I write because Bristowe would have Hierome, by often
entering into the cryptes or vaultes of the Churches at Rome, to signify, that
he went on pilgrimage. Where the collector of the phrases does me some wrong,
to say I call Bristowe leaden, blockish, and doltish Papist* where I say those
doltish papists which avouch any thing, never so leaden or blockish. Only I
require the indifferent reader to consider whether I have just cause to charge
him with ignorance and impudence: as for the terms, I will not stand, either
to justify them, or to revoke them, but refer them to every reasonable man's
censure.

Furthermore page 48. I say that proud scoff, of parliament religion, (which
Bristowe uses) bewrays the stomach of a vanteparler, and not the spirit of
a divine, or good subject. Hear I think the term of vantparler, was too
mild for such a known traiterous Papist, as commends open rebels for
martyrs, as affirms that the Queens subjects are lawfully discharged of
the oath of obedience given to her majesty, as derideth the religion
established by parliament page 51. I say, the Papists like impudent dogs,
yelpe and bark against us, that the fathers are all on their side, because
they have sucked out of their writings, a few dregs of a great quantity of
good liquor contained in their vessels, having the fathers in the most and
greatest matters wholly against them. And page 55. I say that Bristowe
quarelling with D. Humfrey, yelpeth like a little curre, against a great lion,
and snatching pieces of his sentences, gnawen from the rest, squeleth out as
though he had heard some marvelous strange soundes, etc. If this allegory
be too base for Bristowes dignity, let him humble himself and crave pardon of
his treasons, for I will do no reverence to a traitor, that openly bewrays
himself in a printed book, as he and other of his accomplices have done. A
proud hypocrite priest, of stinking, greasy, antichristian and execrable
orders, I cannot find where I have termed him, except I should read over the
whole book: but if I have used such speeches, I think they are no worse than
his wicked behavior, and popish sacrificing priesthood deserve to have.
Blasphemous heretic he gives me often occasion to call him, and namely page
81. where I reprove him for calling the blessed sacrament his Lord and God,
which although transubstantiation were granted, yet because the Papists
affirm, that this sacrament consists of accidents, as the sign or
external part thereof, seeing accidents are neither God nor in God, it could
not be said, without blasphemy, that the sacramentis Lord and God.

Next follow reproachful terms used against Allen. The first, brazen face and
iron foreheade, I do not yet find: but it signifies nothing but notable
impudence, which is noted page 23. where I call him impudent blasphemer because
he had said of us: That to such as make no store of good works, they cast
only faith under their elbowes to lean upon: where as none of us did ever
teach that such a faith as is not lively and fruitful of good works, did ever
profit any man but to the increase of his damnation.

Again page 24. I note him to pass impudency it self in shameless lying,
where he says: Commit what you list, omit what you list, your preachers shall
praise it in their words, and practice it in their works.

Also page 147. I charge him with an impudent lie, where he says, that M.
Calvin does expound the oil whereof Saint James speaks cap. 5. for a
medicinable salve or ointment, to ease the sick man's sore, when it is
manifest, that Calvin utterly rejects and confuteth that exposition.
Likewise page 259. I convince him of impudent lying, because he does wilfully
falsify the decrees of two councels at a clappe, saying they excommunicate all
such as in any wise hinder the oblations for the departed, when both the
councelles Vase, and Carthage speak of them that detain the oblations or
bequestes of the dead given to the church for the use of the poor. These and
many like shameless assertion^, do prove that he has a brazen face and Iron
foreheade, which shameth not to put in print such monstrous untruths, and
wilfullyes. But let us pass to other points. Where this impudent merchant
Allen had rayled intollerably against the reverend father M. Jewel, calling
him the English bragger, one that in summer games might win two games of
cracking and lying, with like shameless stuff: I said and do not a
whitrepent me: How M. Jewel has answered his challenge, his own learned
labors do more clearly testify unto the world, than that it can be
blemished by this sycophants brainelesse babbling.

Moreover page 343. where Allen had called that learned father M. Pilkington a
mock Bishop: I said* If he be a mock Bishop, which beside his excellent
learning, is also a paineful and diligent preacher of the gospel, what are
those unlearned asses, and retchlesse ruffi^ns of your sect, which have nothing
of a Bishop, but a rotchet and a myter? Such are many of the prelates of other
countries. Erasmus said that only England had learned Bishops. Likewise I
say that Allen rayleth like a ruffian at our ministers in the ruff of their
new communion. page 259. The term of scornful caytife, I find not, but
well he deserves it, by deryding and scoffing at such godly learned and
honorable fathers, as you may perceive by that which I have noted in him
against the Bishops of Salisbury and Durisme, which is not yet the 40. part of
his proud mockes and disdainefull gibes.

Desperate dicke I find page 371. where Allen had picked a quarrel to M.
Pilkington of Durisme, as he calls him in his margent, scoffing at him in
his text, that he was ashamed of his name, and therefore should loose the
glory of his assertion, etc. I answered: you would feign have such a man to
be your adversary, that though you took the foil, yet you might boast, that
you were so bold as to fight with him. But it is an easier matter for such a
desperate dicke to begin a fraie than to end it.

Page 97. where Allen said, that David seeks to be better cleansed than by
remission of sins only, and to have his sins wholly blotted out, and to be
made as white as snow, by his own suffering, which was not done by Gods
merciful pardon in the sprinkeling of the blood of Christ, I could not
forbear, but cry out, O horrible blasphemer. Likewise page 298. where he
challenges to the popish clergy, the priesthood after the order of
Melchisedeck confirmed by an oath Psalm. 110. which is peculiar only to our
savior Christ, I affirm it more horrible blasphemy, than ever turk or Jew
durst presume to boast of.

Also page 240. where we affirm, that men's works must not presume to win
heaven, nay to purge sins, nor to meddle with Christ's work of redemption
and the office of only faith, which assertions Allen calls corruptions of
Christian conditions, I say, it is a blasphomous barking of an horrible hell
hounde. And I think I have said nothing more hardely, than such a deuilish
blasphemy deserves to hear.

But leaving Allen, let us come to Stapleton, where he says, our preachers
have a new trick, to make the audience cry, Amen. But to tears, to
lamenting or bewailing of their sins, no Protestant yet moves his audience,
(which is such a lie, as the devil in his own person for his credites sake
would be ashamed to pronounce) I say it is an old trick of a cancred
stomacked Papist. page 112.

To proceed, page 110. and 111. where Stapleton had alleged, that which
Eusebius speaks of a heavenly crown of glory the ornament of Gods friends
and priests, to prove y^ antiquity of Popish shaven crowns: I thought I had
good reason to say, he is worthy to be shorn on his poll with a number of
crowns, that understands this of a shaven crown. And I ask if there be any
block so senseless, to think that Eusebius called a shaven head, the
heavenly crown of glory?

Page 98. I said: They had in the first 600. years men that lived a solitary
life called Monachi, Anachoritae, Heremitae, etc. but no more like our Popish
boares, living in their frankes, than Angels are like devils, noting the
Epicurian marks of these last times.

Also page 103. where Stapleton had cited a falsified Canon of the Nicen
Council, confuted by the Greek copies and the right translation of the
Latin, by Ruffinus, by Peter Crabs confession. I conclude, But such draffe and
dregs of falsifications, additions, detractions, mutatio^s, etc. are good
enough for popish swine.

Page 79. where he complains, that Protestants have taken away Authority of
making that which Christ bad them to make, in his last supper. I answer. If
you say you make the body of Christ, in such sense, as you affirm he
sacrament to be the body of Christ, Gods curse light on you. For to say,
they can make the natural body of Christ it is blasphemy, and therefore they
are to be accursed. Otherwise I said, The doing of all that which Christ
commanded to be done in remembrance of him, (which Hierome calls making the
body of Christ meaning the sacrament of his body) we take not away.

The term of brazen faced Stapleton, I find not, but notable impudency
proved by him in sundry places. As page 28. where he is noted for charging the
Protestants to say: That these 900. years and upward the church has
perished, it has been overwhelmed with idolatry and superstition, which is a
loud impudently, for the Protestants never said so. Again, page 39. where he
is reproved for affirming Calvin to teach, that God is the cause and author of
evil, which blasphemy Calvin always abhors and confuteth. Also page 40.
he is convicted of many impudent slanders. And page 46. where he says the
Protestants commonly call S. Gregory that Antichrist, which I know not
whether to impute it to impudence or madness. These few examples among a great
number, do prove that he deserves the epithets of brazen faced or impudent
Stapleton.

Page 77. I call him blockheaded papist, having often before detected his
gross ignorance, because he scorneth at M. Haddon, as though he alleged
prescription of 30. years continuance, except six of the Protestants
doctrine: whereas the Papists as he says have 900. years.

Page 75. thus I write: The miracles reported by M. Fox, the shameless beast
when he cannot deny, being testified by witnesses above all exception he can
make, affirms to be esteemed of his own fellows but as civil things, and
such as may happen by course of reason. I say not this as though I would have
our doctrine to be credited one jot more, for any such miracle, but to show
the shameless dogged stomach of this Popish slaunderer, which when he had none
other answer to make, as concerning such miracles, forgeth that we our selves
deny all such to have been miracles, which he is not able to prove, although
he would burst for malice against the truth.

The term of gross and beastly ignorance, although I find not, yet I think
I have used, as I had often occasion, whereof I will note one, that page 99. To
prove the antiquity of Augustine friars, he translateth in S. Augustine frater
a friar, whereras that order began more than a 1000. years after S. Augustine,
Anno Domini 1406.

Finally, page 43. where he will prove that the church of the Jews never erred,
because the high priests answered truly of the nativity of Christ, and
because Cayphas prophesied unwittingly of ye virtue of Christ's death, I say
there can be nothing more blockish, than such kind of reasoning. Again, where
he says, the whole synagogue, before the law of Christ took place, in
necessary knowledge of the law did never err. For proof of this (said I)
more like a block than a man, he brings such places of Scripture, as either
show what the priests duty should be, but affirm not what their knowledge
was, or else prophecy a reformation of the corrupt state of the clergy from
ignorance to knowledge. Last of all, I say, what drunken flemming of Doway
would reason thus (as Stapleton does?) The Scribes and the Pharisees sat in
Moses chair, therefore the Synagogue did never, or not then err. Whereas the
false doctrine of the Scribes and Pharisees, concerning adultery, murder,
swearing, the worship of God, not only the person but also the quality of
Messiah and his kingdom, our Savior Christ him self so often and so sharply
does reprove.

Thus have I set down the occasions of as many of these speeches as I could
find, except I should have read over the whole books, that the indifferent
reader may see, when they be in their proper places, they sound not so hardly,
to prove me a rayler, as they seem for the most part, by extreme malice,
impudence, ignorance, ungodliness, disdainfulnes of the adversaries to have
been rather wrested from me, than of any uncharitable affection uttered by
me. But in common civility, as our stately Censurer judges, I should have
forborne these learned and reverend men, which in many respects to say the
least, may be counted my equals: seeing these or the like terms, were not used
amongst the Gentiles, nor of any honest or Christian writer since. I answer,
civility is to be used with citizens, but not with traitors: learning and
other good qualities to be respected in Christian Catholics, or at the
leastwise in them that are no professed enemies of Christian Catholic
religion, not in malicious heretics. For equality in learning I will not
contend with them, but for superiority in truth. And yet as unlearned as I
am, let the proudest of them all, or this Censurer, whom in pride and
disdainfulnes I think to pass them all, attaint me of such ignorance, as I
convince these learned principal pillars of Popery, in their several printed
books, in so many books as I have written against them: and then let me
justly bear the reproach that I shall be proved to deserve. Where he says
these terms were not used among the Gentiles, (I will add with approbation of
Christians) nor of any honest or Christian writer since: his pen runs
before his memory, if he have read: or before his wit and modesty, if he have
not read, what both Gentiles against traitors, and Christians against
heretics and traitors have written. And if this issue might be tried in
presence, I would not doubt but make his blushing countenance bewray his
guilty conscience. But of this ministers scurrilitie against many men, he
says he might repeat a great deal more. I would he might come forth, and
show what bull he has, to rail, and use scurrilitie against all men, and
yet condemn whom it pleases him of railing scurrilitie. But because this
minister answers many men forsooth, one said well of him, that he is the
common posthorse of the Protestants, to pass you any answer without a bait,
against any Catholic book which comes in his way. This is even as good, as
because this Censurer slaundereth many men, another might say of him, he is
the common packhorse of the Papists, to carry any fardell of lies devised
against any Christian man or book that comes in his way, and the rather
because he wears a pair of winkers over his eyes like a milhorse, being
ashamed to show either his face or his name. And more truly than of me, for
(with what speed soever) I pass no man's answer but mine own: where as he
takes up the bundell of slanders, devised by Staphylus, Eccius, Cocleus,
Lindanus, Bolsec, and a number of other beside. But mine answers are not
passed in such have as the replies are returned with laisure, it seems the
beasts that should bring them, are afraid of stumbling. Yet Martials
epithetes remain to be examined, who being a person so vile and absurd, to
rail so vnmeasurably and continually against that godly learned man M. doctor
Calfhil of learned and Christian memory, I was bold in my Reioynder against
him, to handle in part, according to his virtues.

In the beginning, which is page 121. of the volume, in consideration of his
intolerable ignorance, arrogancy and impudency, which appears throughout
all his book, I say that whereas he terms himself to be a bachiler of the
law, he is more like a wrangling pettifogger in the law, than a sober student
in divinity, which also he professes to be, for he does in a manner nothing
else but cauil, quarrel, and scolde. Likewise in the very end of my book,
exhorting the Papists for their credits sake, to make out a better champion
hereafter, I tell them as the truth is, that in this his reply, he does
nothing in a manner but either construe like an Usher, (as he was sometimes of
Winchester school) or quarrel like a dogbolt lawyer. To the same purpose, page
128. where master Calfehil said: If an Angel from heaven teach otherwise than
the Apostles have preached unto us, be he accursed: Martial the quarelling
lawyer finds fault with his translation, because Euangelizamus may be
referred, as well to the disciples as to the Apostles, so that the disciples
preaching are to be credited as well as the Apostles. No doubt (say I) if they
preach the doctrine of the Apostles, of which the controversy is, and not of
the persons that preached. But these quarrels sir Bachiler, are more meet for
the bumcourts, where perhaps you are a prating proctor, than for the schools
of divinity. In this saying, if the term of bumcourts seem too light, I
yield unto the censure of grave and godly men.

Page 138. where Martial cites Constantinus for the commendation of his
cross, I say, he shows him self an egregious ignorant person. For the sign
which the Emperor commended to be a healthful sign and true token of virtue,
was the name of Christ, expressed in the Charecter which he saw. And page 154.
where he makes this syllogism to prove that in time of the Eliberin
Council, pictures were worshipped, which he says, follows necessarily upon
the words of the Canon thus: That was worshipped that was forbidden to be
painted on the walls: but pictures were forbidden to be painted on the walls,
ergo pictures were worshipped. Answer master Calfe. Hereunto I reioyne. Who
would have thought that an usher of Winchester and student in Louaine that
teaches us (as he said) an old lawyers point, would also teach us a new
Logike point, to conclude affirmatively in the second figure, and that all upon
particulars? Answer master Calfe, quod Martial. Nay answer goose to such an
argument. And reason who will with such an ass any longer about this matter,
for I will hearken to his law, seeing his Logike is no better.

If sir Censurer will defend this syllogism, and prove it to be good and
lawful, I will revoke my terms.

Page 142. where he says, that bread and wine of the sacrament have no
promise, I tell him he lies like an arrogant hypocrite, for bread and wine
have as good promise in the one sacrament as water in the other.

Page 178. where M. Calfebill had distinguished traditions into some
necessary, some contrary to the word, some indifferent: I say Martial like
an impudent ass, calls on him to show in what scripture, doctor, or
council he finds this distinction of traditions. As though a man might not
make a true distinction in disputation, but the same must be found in so many
words, in scripture, doctor, or council, when he himself cannot deny, but
the distinction is true, and every part to be found in the scriptures,
doctors, and councelles.

Page 133. I call Martial blockeheade and shameless ass, because he would
prove, that the spirit of God is not judge of the interpretation of the
scriptures: because Paul and Barnabas in the controversy of circumcision,
went not to the word and spirit, but to the Apostles, and elders at Jerusalem.

Also page 213. I call him asseheade, because he says that M. Calfehill
condemns his doctrine of only faith justifying, when he affirms that
outward profession is necessary for every Christian man.

Likewise page 215. where Martial would learn whether M. Calfehill kneeling
down before his father to ask him blessing, did not commit Idolatry? I say
he is an ass that can not make a difference between civil honor and
religious worship.

Page 202. I call not only Martial, but all Papists shameless dogs and
blasphemous Idolaters, which mainetaine, and make vows to Images, which
travel to them, and offer up both prayers and sacrifices, of candels, money,
Jewels, and other things unto Images. Whose Idolles have given answers, have
wagged their heads and lips.

Page 198. I say he rayleth upon Calvin, like a ruffion and slandereth him
like a devil, because he says a ship would not carry the pieces of the
cross that are showed in so many places, which yet is confirmed by testimony
of Erasmus.

Page 170. where Martial goes about to prove that the sacraments are no
helps of our faith, I said, Did you ever hear such a filthy hog grunt so
beastly, of the holy sacraments, that they should be no helps of our faith?

These are as many of the speeches noted by the censurer, as I can find,
wherein I trust the indifferent reader, weighing upon what cause they were
uttered, will not so lightly condemn me for a rayler, seeing to rail is of
private malice to revile them, that deserve no reproach, and not of zeal in
defense of truth, to use vehement and sharp speeches, as all the prophets, and
the mildest spirited men that ever were have used against the adversaries
thereof. But the most heinous accusation is behind, that I call Staphylus a
counselor to an Emperor rascal. I might answer as S. Paul did, when he was
reproved for calling the high priest, painted wall: Brethren, I knew not yt
he was an Emperors counselor: or in very deed, I know nothing in him worthy
to be an honest man's counselor. But seeing it pleased an Emperor to accept
him, it is as great a fault, as if an enemy of mean condition, should call an
English counselor, rascal. So says our sharp censurer. But if he mean
those that be of the Queens majesty's privy counsel, I will not say he
plays the rascal, but either the ignorant fool, or the malicious vile
person to compare y^ Apostata Staphylus, even in his counsellership, with the
meanest of their honors. For they that know the manner of the princes of
Germany and of other foreine princes can testify, that personages of mean
estate, only being learned in ye laws, are accepted of the Emperor and other
states, as their counselors, whose counsel perhapes they never use, but may
if it please them, as of counselors at law. So that one man is counselor to
the Emperor, and to many other princes. As for example, Lutolphus Schraderus
doctor of both laws, was ordinary professor in the University of Frankeforde,
and counselor of the Emperor, of the Elector, and Marquis of Brandeburge, of
the dukes of Brunswich, Luneburge, Megelburge, and of many other princes of
Germany. This was a very great and wise man, but Cassanaeus in Cat. glor.
^^^di, part. 10. Consid. 41. says, that every simple advocate did use to call
him self the kings counselor of France, before order was taken, that none
should usurp that title, except he were called unto some office in the
courts. And speaking of such as were counselors in office, in his time, of
whose dignity he writes much, he complayneth that they were promoted unto
that dignity in parliamentes, by means of money, or some other unknown
means part. 7. Conf. 13. Such a noble counselor was Staphylus, having some
knowledge in the laws, being preferred to that title by the Papists of favor
more than of worthiness to give him some shadow of countenance, when he
became an Apostata from true religion, and from those Christian princes and
noble men, by whom he was before vpholden. And yet in truth, if the printer
had not mistaken my writing, I called him Renegate and not rascal, as before I
called him beastly Apostata. Perhaps the censurer will say, I mende the matter
well to call an Emperors counselor, a beastly Apostata. But so might I have
done, though he had been an Emperor himself, for what else was Julian the
Emperor but a beastly Apostata or Renegate from Christian religion which once
he professed? Yea such an Apostata is worse than a beast, for he declares
himself thereby to be a reprobate. Therefore the Christians in his time,
whereas the church had always used to pray for heathen tyrants, that held
the empire, and made havoc of the church by persecution, contrariwise prayed
against this Apostata, that God would confound him and shorten his time. Yea
the godly constant Bishops, did openly inueigh against him, as Mares Bishop of
Chalcedon, which openly called him impious, Atheist and Apostata. And when
Julian counterfaiting mildenes did nothing but revile him by his blindness,
saying the Galilean thy God cannot cure thee, he answered, I thank my Trip.
hist. li. 6. Cap. 6.
God Christ, that I am blind, that I might not see one so void of godliness
as thou art. Therefore Staphylus being but an Emperors counselor, as he was,
^^y endure to hear worse for his Apostasy, than I have spoken against him.

The quarrel of words being ended, it is time to go to the matter. First page
14. of his answer to Master Charkes preface, he notes that D. Fulke against
Bristowes Mot. pa. 98. finds, that it is evident by scripture, that heretics
may be burned, against Luther. That blasphemous heretics are to be put to
death, I find in scripture, by the law of blasphemers Leu. 24. and by the
law of false prophets Deuteronomy. 13. neither does Luther (I think) deny, but the
equity of the same laws does still remain, although not every one that
erreth obstinately, ought to be dealt with so extremely. Also page 82. of that
book I say, that all protestants are one in God and Christ, their redeemer,
from which unity, dissension about ceremonies cannot separate them: and yet I
except such schismatikes as delight in contention. The controversy between
Luther and us, does not hinder us from this unity, although Luther and other
of preposterous zeal of godliness, do otherwise account of us, which error
is of infirmity and not of malice.

The page 23. of the same answer, there is another charge where I say: that
text, Vow ye and render your vows to the Lord, is a text that pertains to
the old Testament, meaning that it must have the exposition according to the
law, of such things as God did allow and were in men's power to perform.
For what if a man vowed to sacrifice a dog? What say we to Iepthes rash
vow? To the vow of them that vowed to kill Paul? Our censurer reports my
words, that this text belongs only to the old Testament, as though I
said, there was no use of it in the new Testament. There is one lie by
addition. In the same place to the text, If thou will be perfect, go and s^ll
what thou have, etc. I say, it is a singular trial, to that one person. F^^
every man is not bound so to do, yet our censur^^ cauileth, that so all the
other words spoken to that young man, may be restrained and made singular, as
whatsoever else was spoken to any singular person. As though my reason were,
that therefore it was singular, because it was spoken to one man. As if we had
not general laws and rules to know what is enjoined to all men, what to some
men, and what to a singular person. In the next page 24. he quarelleth at my
exposition of the saying of S. James cap. 2. that a man is justified of works,
and not of faith only. Where I say, works, are not denied to justify before
men, and only faith without works, is thought to justify before God, Romans 3.
This he calls a poor devise, because Saint James talking of faith without
works, says it cannot save a man. Nay rather this is a poor cavil. For S.
James talks of another kind of faith, as well as of an other kind of
justification, when his saying seems to be contradictory to Saint Paul. And
that in the place in question he means justification before men as in the
other place a faith void of good works, it is manifest, both by his own
words: Show me thy faith by thy works, and also by the example of Abraham's
trial, which was not to inform God of his justification, but to give
testimony before men.

Page 25. to show how protestants deny all fathers, he brings me for an
example in many places. First he says, the consent of ancient fathers is
alleged, attributing superiority to Peter, upon that text Math. 16. Thou art
Peter, etc. This he says I avoid very lightly, saying that diverse of the
ancient fathers were deceived in opinion of Peter's prerogative. As for the
consent of all, which he would seem to make for it, is false: but this is not
all mine answer, but that this prerogative appears not in the scriptures,
which was heuier than the answerers pen could bear: or if he think it
does, let him prove by syllogism out of the scriptures if he can. But until
he can, I will say this is a lie by detraction.

Secondly where I say, those ancient fathers that expound Against the Rock p.
291
the text John 5. I came in my fathers name, etc. of antichrist, have no
ground of their exposition. I prove it by example of Theudas, the Egyptian,
Cocabus, and other that deceived the Jews in their own name, yet none of them
was antichrist.

Thirdly where he says, Jerome with all the ecclesiastical writers, are
alleged for the interpretation of the words of Daniel cap. 7. which
interpretation I do not admit, because it has no direction out of the
scriptures, he makes a lie by multiplication: for only Jerome, with such
ecclesiastical writers out of whom he gathered his interpretation, is alleged.

Fourthly he slandereth me, when he charge me Against the Foretresse. page
52.
to say, Austine does wrongfully interpret the place, for I allow of
Augustines sayings to be true, but I say he speaks it upon a text wrongly
interpreted, that is falsely translated. He has placed his Tabernacle in the
sun, whereas the truth is, He has made in the heavens a Tabernacle for the
sun, and so does Hierome interpret it ^o^i posuit tabernaculum in eis.

Fifthly. where he says, that S. Ambrose, Ephrem, Against pur gatorie. p. 262.
and Bid are alleged for interpretation of certain scriptures, he says, he
notes not what, for they are alleged for memories of the dead, which I say I
will not deny but they were used before their times, and prayer for the dead
also: but without warrant of Gods word, or authority of scriptures, but such
as is so pitifully wrested and drawn unto them, as every man may see, the holy
ghost never meant any such thing, as they gather of them. This I speak not of
these three, but of such as would go about to prove prayer for the dead out
of the scripture: as Chrysostom, who follows Page 237.
in the sixth place, who in deed I say alleges scripture for it, but he
applies it madly, and yet he often applies it to the same purpose, belike it
was the best he had for that purpose. God says unto Ezechias, I will defend
this city, for mine own cause, and for David my servants sake. Alas good
man, what manner of reason is this? Be it as he says, that the memory of David
being a righteous man, and not rather the truth of Gods promise made to David,
moved him to defend the city from the enemies: does it therefore follow that
prayer and alms are auayleable for the dead? etc. If M. Censurer think
Chrysostom have applied the scripture rightly, let him gather his argument
into a syllogism, and we will shape him another answer.

Seventhly I will not deny, but I said that those fathers, Against Martial.
P. 146.
whom Martial coted, did rather dally in trifling allegories, than soundly
prove, that the cross was prefigured in such places of scripture as they
allege. As Augustine makes the two sticks, that the widow of Sarepta
gathered, a figure of the cross. Augustine and Tertullian, the lifting up of
Moses hands, etc. in which places yet they meant the virtue of Christ's death,
rather than the holiness of the sign.

Moreover, page 33. Master Fulk is charged to abuse the simple people, in
saying often times: prayer for the dead is an heresy, because the Montanistes,
which were heretics held it. Nay sir, because the Montanistes are the first
that invented prayer for the dead, and Purgatory, seeing neither in scripture,
nor doctor, is any mention of either of both before Montanus, therefore he
says prayer for the dead is an error. But he will have me prove, that this
was ever accounted one of Montanus heresies. Tertullian being a Montanist
proves it sufficiently, for he inueigheth against the Catholics of his
time, whom he used to call Psychicos, for de^^^ing Purgatory, and obiecteth
against them the paraclet which was the spirit of Montane, which affirmed,
that none but martyrs went straight to heaven, and that all other went to hell,
where they must pay the uttermost farthing before they come forth, lib. de
anima, capite de inferis, and an aliquid patiantur apud inferos animae, whereas
he was of another judgment, while he was a Catholic, and did write against
Marcion, noting it as one of his errors, that he affirmed all the fathers
before Christ, to have gone to hell, as you Papists do. Aduersus Marcionem
lib. 4. whereas he says against Martion, aliud enim Inferi vt puto, aliud
quoque Abrahae sinus: Hell I trow is one thing, and Abraham's bosom another
thing. But against the Catholics, he writes, that Christ descends to hell,
to make the patriarchs and prophets partakers of him, whereby (says he) you
may knock them on the elbowe, qui satis superbe non pu^ent animas fidelium
inferis dignas: serui super dominum, and discipuli super magistrum, aspernati
si forte in Abrahae sinu, expectandae resurrectionis solatium capere, which
proudly enough think, the souls of the faithful are not worthy of hell,
being servants above their Lord, and scholars above their master, which
disdain to receive the comfort of the resurrection looked for, if it were
perhaps in Abraham's bosom. That other later Catho like writers, which lived
long after Tertullian, allowed prayer for the dead, it proves not that it was
no error in Montanus, but rather that it was an error in them, seeing before
Montanus no Catholic allowed prayer for the dead. To his proud challenge, I
offer not only this that I have said, of the error of praying for the dead,
and Purgatory, but of some parts of the heresy of the Pelagians, condemned
in old time, and accused for heresy: revived by the Papists, and the
contrary doctrine by them accursed. As the Tridentine Council, Sess. 6. Can.
7. Accurseth them that say^ that all works done before justification, howsoever
they are done, are sins in deed, or deserve the hatred of God, or by how
much so ever a man does endeavor to dispose himself to grace, that he sins
so much the more grievously. This doctrine, and that which necessarily
follows of it, is directly contrary to the scripture, saying that whatsoever
is not of faith is sin, and to the decree of the Mileuitane Council, Cap. 5.
and to the scripture there alleged, Without me you can do nothing, ergo a man
without grace cannot dispose himself to grace. For no man can dispose himself
to grace, except he please God, but without faith it is impossible to please
him.

Again, where the 16. Can. of the same Tridentine Chapter, accurseth him that
shall say: That the commandments are impossible to be kept, by a man
justified and set under grace: it is contrary to the sixth Canon of the
Mileuitane Council, which concludes, that no man can be without sin,
according to the saying of the Evangelist: If we say we have no sin, etc.

But whereas we acknowledge, that we hold for truth, that which by Epiphanius
and Augustine was held for an error, in Aerius, namely, prayer for the dead,
aunswering that those two doctors were deceived, he says, we condemn the
whole church, as though it were necessary that the whole church were deceived
as much as they, or if the whole church were deceived, that we condemn it of
heresy, seeing prayer for the dead as it was allowed by those fathers, was an
error, not an heresy. But when by Epiphanius images in the Church are
condemned and defaced, when the worshipping of the image of Christ and his
Apostles, is both by Epiphanius and Augustine condemned for an heresy of the
Carpocrati^es and Gnostikes, what have they to answer but either to condemn
those fathers, or themselves of error, or else to find out some cauil against
their own conscience, and against the knowledge and judgment of all learned
and indifferent men?

Page 54. against Bristowes Motives, I say that Vigilantius (whom the Papists
make so great an heretic, for denying invocation of Saints and superstitious
reverence of their relics) was banished only by Hierom, of other learned men
in his time he was counted a godly man, and a learned. Master Censurer changes
my words, as pleases him. The pride and cruelty page 333.
of Augustine the Monk, which came to convert the Saxons, is accused by our
British stories, and proof thereof brought of his disdainfulnes, in receiving
the British bishops, and in procuring the slaughter of so many hundred
students of Bangor. His ignorance and unskillfulness is bewrayed by him self in
his writing to Pope Gregory: where he moves questions, which a mean
licentiate in Louaine, would be ashamed to doubt of. And truly I said of
him, that he did not so Against Brist. M^t. page 19.
much good in planting faith where it was not, as in cor rupting the synceritie
of the faith where it was before he came. And if he planted any humane
traditions, and confirmed them by lying signs and miracles, as a forerunner
Against Stap page 1.
of Antichrist, which was even immediately after his time to be openly showed:
or if by subtle practice, miracles have been fained to have been done by him
and reported by a credulous man Bid, it hurts not Gal. Mon.
our cause: seeing other writers report him to have bin both a proud and a
cruel man. And yet we receive all that doctrine which he taught, agreeable to
the doctrine of the Apostles of Christ: whatsoever he taught beside, we are
not to receive it of an Angel from heaven, much less of Augustine from Rome.
But where the Censurer reports, that I should call Bid a fabulous man, he is
not able to bring any proof thereof: for albeit I acknowledge, that he
reports many fables for true miracles, yet this reverence I profess to have
of him, that I think, he fained not one of them him self, but had them as he
confesses by relation of other. Purg. 333. But a fabulous man is he, that
makes lies, and ^uenteth fables. Page 97. he accuses me of palpable
flattery, because I say, that Howlet had no consideration of her majesty's
singular virtues, and other of high estate under her, while he complains of
the wicked and loose times: and this I did to scrape a little favor from the
court, and to make the other odious. I thank God, favor is not so hard for
me at the court, that I need to scrape it, especially by such fond means
which has rather flowed toward me from her majesty and other of high place
more than I have deserved: But to make the other odious for his slanderous
railing and hypocrisy, I will not deny but my purpose was, and yet with
truth, and sufficient ground of his own writings. For whereas in public
writing, both he and some other of his accomplices have professed their reverent
opinion of her majesty's singular virtues, and other of high estate, that are
under her, in his familiar letter to his worshipful friend, he condemns all
persons of this time, to be void of all sense of virtuous life, except these
few popish gentlemen, which he terms precise in matters of religion, and
respective of their conscience, whom he does so ambitiously commend, that he
does most slanderously condemn all other, that be friends to religion and
the state, among whom there be (God he praised) great numbers to speak
nothing of the prince and nobility, who in godly life and precise walking in
the fear of God, and the obedience of his laws, may shame all the popish
hypocrites in the world. But it is best to set down Howlets own words and
mine answer to them, that the reader may judge, whether I have flattered as
the Censurer says more palpably, or Howlet slaundered more venemously.

It was no mean comfort unto me (says Howlet) to consider that in those
wicked and loose times of ours, wherein there is no feeling or sense of virtue
left, but all men enwrapped in the love of Gods professed enemy, the world,
following with all force and fully sail the vanities and ambition of the same:
that there should be found in England so many gentlemen both for their
years, liuinges, and other abilities, as fit to be as vain as the rest, yet
so precise in matters of religion, and so respective to their consciences, as
that they will prefer their soul before their body, etc.

Heereto I began to answer thus:

In deed sir you have followed your shameless slander with full sail, and
have had wind at will. What say you? Is there no sense or feeling of virtue
left, but all men enwrapped in the love of Gods enemy, except those few
gentlemen, the matter of your rare comfort? In your familiar letters, we must
suppose you write as you think, and as to your dear and worshipful friend:
Wherefore whatsoever you do in common writings profess, of your reverent
opinion of her majesty's singular virtues, and other of high estate, that are
under her, executers of her christian laws, all is but dissimulation and
hypocrisy, feigned glosing and servile flattery. For you acknowledge not only
no virtue, but not so much as any sense or feeling of virtue, to be left in any
other, than those gentlemen recusantes, all other men not allured nor
entangled, but inwrapped in the love even of Gods professed enemy the world,
not seduced and drawn thereby, but following and that not slowely, but with
all force and full sail, vanities and ambitions of the same. If this were
true, it would make a more miserable estate of England, than you before
imagined, by imprisonment of a few good housekeepers. And I would heartily
wish that you falsely say of all, might not be verified of some. But that there
is no sense or feeling of virtue, but all men enwrapped in the love of Gods
professed enemy, and that in so extreme a degree: except a small number of
obstinately and wilfully blinded Papists, that is more than ever could be
justly said, almost of any Heathenish or Turkish state, in which the sense or
feeling of virtue, was never so wholly extinguished, but some remained even in
the^ that knew not God nor served him aright, etc.

Beside this intolerable slander of the whole state, and all the professers of
the truth, from the prince to the poorest subject, I would the hypocrisy and
flattery of this Papist, and other of his cote were known, who in his public
epistle which he presumes to dedicate to the Queens majesty, not a little
extolleth her princely virtues, with no small commendation of the nobility,
but here in his familiar letter, sent over sea to his friend, bewrays that
he has no opinion in deed of any sense of virtue, remaining in any person,
save only in a few obstinate Papists. Wherefore let men of understanding
judge, whether he in his dedicatorie epistle, or I in this reproof of his
familiar letter, have flattered so palpably: and whether in this reply I have
played the parasite, or the censurer in this malignant slander, the shameless
sycophant. But let us hear what reason he has to convince me of flattery.
When men accuse the times (says he) must they except Princes by name or else
be accounted traitors? As though Howlet accuses the times only and not the
persons also. Yea all men except the recusantes, are with him utterly void of
all sense of virtue, and in worse case also. But why say you, men must be
accounted traitors? I accused Howlet but of dissimulation, and flattery* but
belike you acknowledge such slander more meet to discry an heinous traitor,
than a dissembling flatterer. I do not altogether mislike your censure*
although for that matter my purpose was not to accuse him so deeply. But you
proceed and ask, What Apostle, what ancient fathers did ever so? And I will
ask you again, what Apostle, what ancient father, did ever in public writing
profess his reverent opinion of any princes singular virtues and of other of
high estate under him, and yet nevertheless in a familiar letter, condemn the
whole state of that princes government (as Howlet does) excepting no persons,
but such as are disobedient subjects, and the princes, either privy or
professed enemies? Beside that the comparison is very odious, between an
Apostle and an Howlet, a public trumpet sounding against sin, and a bird of
the night schriching in a secret and familiar letter. And if you will say, it
was not meant, that the letter should be private, but public, as I can easily
believe you, if you do affirm it: I will answer, that such Howlets come not
from Athens, as can no better observe the measure and comeliness of the person
they pretend to be. For to use such hyperbolicall amplifications, in a
familiar epistle as by zeal could not honestly be excused in a public sermon,
saving your censure and his correction, I take it to be but homely rhetorike.
But you pardon our necessity, because extreme poverty drives us to these
shifts. You are a man of great consideration, to bear with our infirmities:
yet I hope you shall find few men so easy to believe, as you are bold to
affirm, that only want of other reasons, makes us fly to accusing of your
persons, of disloyalty and disobedience to the prince and state. But if you
will in deed discover our poverty, answer our writings thoroughly, directly,
and orderly, or else giving over all preiudicate conceit of former handling or
mishandling any cause. Take any question in controversy, and set forth the
riches of your arguments in plain syllogismes, and try whether we be able to
answer you, or else if you had rather answer us, let us know your mind, and
you shall find some ready to maintain any cause of ours, by plain
syllogismes only. In the mean time to find you occupie^* ^here has been a
book called syllogisticon set foo^th by master Fox, more than twenty years
ago: let us see in a sheet of printed paper, what ye have to answer those
syllogismes, whether you will find them defective in form or matter, or else
there is no reason, but you should grant their conclusion.

Page 146. to prove that protestants are lords of the scripture, to make
them say what they list, D. Fulkes Against Mot. p 6. 8.
words to master Bristowe are cited. For the division of parishes,
excommunication, suspension, public solemnizing of marriages, with the laws
thereof, and punishing of heretics by death, they are all manifestly proved
out of the scripture. This I say alleging no one place of scripture to prove
it, says our censurer. I say as much of holding of councels, which Bristowe
with the rest, will have us as apes to have borrowed of the popish church.
Whereas I affirm, they are proved out of the scriptures, if Bristow will reply
and deny, yt such things may be proved out of the scriptures, it shall be no
hard matter to do it.

Yet in the mean time, if you think I have said more than I can show, I
will give you this taste. For division of Churches or parishes Act. 14. v. 23.
Elders in every church and Tit. 1. v. 5. elders in every city or town.
Holding of councelles Act. 15. excommunication where the party cast out is to
be taken for an heathen or publicane. Math. 18. v. 17. separation or suspension
where the party separated is to be taken as a brother. 2 Thessalonians. 3. public
solemnizing of marriage Mat. 1. v. 18. where betrothing and public coming
together are expressed. Example Joan. 2. for punishment of heretics, I have
cited before. What the Puritans will grant, I care not, although I think there
are none of them that are so called will deny any of these except he be some
mad schismatike: and for the last, which you say, was for a long time denied
by our selves, till now we have burned some for religion in England, you
should have told how long. For we have not now first of all consented to the
burning of heretics. The Arrians and Anabaptists burned in king Edwardes
days, for thirty years ago can bear witness. But you may say your
pleasure. I know few in other countries, but heretics themselves, that deny
it to be lawful to punish blasphemous obstinate heretics by death. If any have
any private opinion, what have we to do which it, or to be charged by it? If I
should note your phrase, when you say that protestants do now reign in
England, as though there were more kings than one: you would say perhaps I
were over captious. Well, let it pass. But such things (said I) as are not
evidently contained in the word, a Christian is not absolutely bound to
believe them. In plain dealing you should have bestowed a note in your
margent, where I have so said, as well as placed there heretical audacitie,
of your papisticall charity. The saying I confess or the like, yet the
circumstances of the place, where it was uttered, would perhaps have bewrayed
some part of your usual and honest dealing. But what cause have you to cri^
^ut so loud. Behoulde the last refuge of a proud heretical spirit, in
breaking where he cannot otherwise get out? Call you it proud heresy to hold
that nothing is to be credited upon necessity of salvation, which has not
authority of the holy scripture, which are able to make a man wise to
salvation, which are written that believing we might be saved, which are able
to make the man of God perfect prepared to every good work?

And why do ye dare M. Charke to a^ouch, that which I have affirmed? I know
he dare affirm and is able to defend this truth, but there is no reason that
he should be dared with my assertio^s. I dare affirm to your face, if you dare
show it, that a christian man is not bound to believe, that the common creed
was made by the Apostles, after that fabulous manner that you papists do
teach: Namely, that Peter made one piece, Andrewe another, and so of the rest:
yet I doubt not, but it is gathered out of the doctrine and writings of the
Apostles. But you have ancient doctors, which affirm that it was made by the
Apostles. Origin, Ter^llian, Jerome, Ruffinus, Ambrose, Austen, and all the
primitive church do so constantly affirm to be their doing^s. Let us consider
then in order. First Origin in pro^^. lib. de princip. testifies, that the
Apostles by their preaching did most plainly deliver ye sum of faith
according to the capacity of the most simple, whereof he makes a rehearsal
containing in deed some articles of the creed, but neither al nor any one in
such form of words as our creed does express them. And before he begins
the rehearsal of them, thus he says: Species vero eoru^ quae per
praedicationem Apostolica^ manifest traduntur, istae sunt. These are the
particulars of those things, which by the preaching of the Apostles are
manifestly delivered. Which words do show, that the Apostles in deed taught
the doctrine, yet prove not that they made this creed, rather than the Nicen
creed or Athanasius Creed.

Tertullian against Praxeas, much after the same manner, yet more near the
words of the creed rehearses the articles pertaining to the three persons of
the deity, and then he adds: H^^c regulam ab initio euangelii de cucurrisse,
etiam ante priores quosque haeretic^s, nedum ante Praxeam hesternum, probabis
^^^ ipsa posterita^ omnium h^^^^icorum, quam ipsa nouellitas Praxeae hesterni.
That this rule has run down from the beginning of the gospel, even before
all former heretics, not only before Praxeas a yesterdayes bird, as well the
later spring of all heretics shall prove, as the very novelty of Praxeas
one that came but yesterday.

That the rule of faith contained in the Creed, is as ancient as the
preaching of the Gospel, I always agreed with Tertullian: but that the
Apostles made the Creed, I hear him yet say never a word.

Ierom ad Pammachium against the errors of John of Jerusalem, says: In
symbolo fidei and spei nostrae, quod ab Apostolis traditum, non scribitur in
charta and atramento, sed in tabulis cordis carnalibus, post confessione^
trinitati^, and vnitatem ecclesiae, omne Christiani dogmatis sacrament^m carnis
resurrectione includitur. In the symbol of our faith and hope, which being
delivered from the Apostles, is not written in paper and ynke, but in the
fleshie tables of our hearts: after the confession of the Trinity, and the
unity of the Church, all the mystery of Christian doctrine is enclosed in the
resurrection of the flesh. Although it be granted that Saint Jerome here
speaks of our common Creed, yet it follows not, that he affirms it to
be made by the Apostles, which it is sufficient, that it is received of the
doctrine of the Apostles. Ruffinus in deed, expositione in symbolum, says it
was an opinion received from the elders, that the Apostles before their
dispersion made this brief form of belief, which is called their Creed. And
I acknowledge the opinion has some probability, but that it is to be believed
of necessity of salvation, neither Ruffinus says, nor if he did were he able
to prove it. Ambrose, Ep. 81. Syricio, to prove that Marie in the birth of
Christ was a virgin, says: Credatur symbolo Apostolorum quod Ecclesia Romana
iteratum semper custodit and seruat. Let credit be given to the Apostles
Creed, which being repeted often, the Church of Rome does always keep and
observe. That this Creed is called the Apostles symbol or Creed, it may well
be, because it contains the sum of the Apostles doctrine although it had
not been compiled by them. The testimony of Augustine, which you quote Sermon.
118. De tempore, must needs be some younger man's, because he repeteth the very
words of Ruffinus. which Augustine living almost in his time, would not
repete as his own. You might as well, and more for your purpose have quoted
Sermon. 115. De tempore, where every Apostle makes an Article, which is the
absurd opinion of the late Papists, but never was credited by Augustine
himself, howsoever these sermons have gotten under the shadow of his name. To
conclude, as some of the ancient fathers think the Creed was of the Apostles
making, so none of them affirms, that it is damnable to doubt thereof, so a
man doubt not of the doctrine contained therein, whereof the holy ghost is
author, as it is proved by the holy scriptures, whether the Apostles or their
successors did gather this short sum or form of belief, which we call the
Apostles Creed.

For the observation of the Easter day, which is the second point wherein you
dare Master Charke, I dare affirm, that seeing it is not commanded in the
scripture, the observation thereof is not necessary to salvation. That
Eusebius calls it an Apostolic tradition, it is not material, seeing that
very contention, which he reports was about the observation of Easter,
according to the Apostolic tradition, by the immediate successors of the
Apostles, Anicetus and Polycarpus do plainly testify, what credit is to be
given to the traditions of the Apostles without the warrant of the Apostles
writings. Eusebius. lib. 5. Cap. 26. For while Anicetus pretends the tradition
of S. Peter, and Polycarpus S. John, and neither would yield to other, they
teach us what to esteem of traditions apostolical, not contained in the holy
scriptures: Namely, that in these days there can be no certeintie of them,
when they which might see and hear the Apostles themselves, could not agree
about them. Last of all, which you make the greatest matter, the perpetual
virginity of the mother of Christ after his birth, although for my part I do
believe it, and wish all men so to do, yet dare I affirm, that it is not
damnable, not to believe it except it can be proved, that the scripture has
taught it. But you object against me, first the condemnation of Heluidius,
testified by Sozomenus. Whereto I answer, that he was justly condemned, not
because he believed not, but because he did obstinately deny it, and troubled
the peace of the church, about an unnecessary question.

But you ask us, if we remember not the solemn curse for this matter, of so
many holy bishops recorded and confirmed by S. Ambrose. Ep. 81. and 79. It
seems you remember it not your self, for that curse contained in the end of
the Ep. 81. was against them that like Manichees, denied that our Savior
Christ took flesh of a virgin. And Ep. 79. he reprooueth them which did
contend, that the virgin Marie had more sons than our Savior Christ, which
to affirm is a great error: and convinced by the authority of the scripture,
seeing as Ambrose well notes, our Savior Christ committed his mother to John
the Evangelist, which had not been needful, if she had natural sons of
her own, which might take care of her.

But you will stop our mouths if you can, (as you say) with these words of
Saint Augustine, Integra fide credendum est, etc. We must believe with a
sound faith blessed Marie the mother of Christ to have conceived in
virginity, to have brought forth her son in virginity, and to have
remained a virgin after her childbirth, neither must we yield to the
blasphemy of Heluidius. Your author goes on and tells, what that was. Qui
dixis, fuit virgo ante partum, non virgo post partum. Who said, she was a
virgin before her childbirth, she was no virgin after her childbirth. But
where shall we find this saying in Saint Augustine? Your quotation directs
us to Augustine in Encherid. Cap. 34. where in deed some mention is of Mary's
virginity, namely, that she conceived in virginity, but nothing of Heluidius
or his heresy. Wherefore it secmeth, that out of Canisius, or some other man's
collection, your common places of the doctors sayings are borrowed, and not
taken out of your own reading. Therefore howsoever you have mistaken the
matter, the saying you allege is in the bastard book De dogmatibus
Ecclesiasticis, Cap. 69. which may as easily be known from Augustines writing,
as a goose from a swanne. And yet if it were of as good authority as
Augustines own writing, it were not sufficient to stop our mouth, when we
hear that we are slaundered. For we dare not say, with Heluidius, (which is
the blasphemy noted by that writer) that the virgin Marie was no virgin
after her childbirth, although we say, that it is no article of faith,
necessary to salvation, except it have demonstration out of the holy
scriptures: neither does your author say, it is blasphemy to doubt of it, but
to deny it, although for my part I do neither deny it, nor doubt of it, but
believe it as I do many other truethes, not expressed in the scripture, but
yet not as articles of Christian faith necessary to salvation. I will conclude
with a saying of Saint Jerome, and stop your mouth if I can, which concerning
this very question in controversy against Heluidius, to show what a man is
bound to believe upon necessity of salvation, even that which is contained in
the scriptures: and that which is not contained, that he is not bound upon
loss thereof, to believe, thus writes: Sed vt haec quae scripta sunt, non
nega^ius, ita ^a quae non sunt scripta, renuimus. Natum D^^^ es^e de virgin
credimus, quia legimus: Mariam ^^psisse post partum non credimus, quia non
legimus. But as we do not deny those things that are written, so we do refuse
those things that are not written. That God was borne of a virgin we believe,
because we have read it: that Marie used marriage after her childbed, we
believe not, because we have not read it. That you say, Lo M. Chark S.
Augustine makes it both a matter of faith, and the doubting thereof to be
blasphemy: how will you avoid this? It is easily avoided, for it is false in
many respects, first S. Augustine fayeth it not, but some obscure man of much
latter time, less learning, and authority, as the barbarous style in many
places declares* secondly, he faith not, that it is a matter of faith, to
believe the perpetual virginity of Marie, but that she conceived, brought
forth, and remained a virgin after her childbirth. Thirdly, he makes not the
doubting thereof to be blasphemy, but the obstinate denying of Heluidius,
which said she was no virgin after her childbirth. But how will you avoid
that which S. Jerome writes, We refuse those things that are not written, we
believe not because we have not read in ye scripture, anything hereof as
necessary to salvation.

Page 158. you do not see why you should believe a Charke or a Fulke, coming
but yester day from the grammar schole, before a Cyprian, a Tertullian, a
Basil, a Ierom, an Ambrose, or an Augustine, especially in a matter of fact (as
your case is) seeing they lived more than twelve or thirteen hundred years
nearer to the deed doing than these ministers do. Why sir, I pray you, who
requires you to believe any minister of these days, before any of those
ancient fathers, in respect of the credit of the persons, and not of the
truth which they bring? You know that Panormitane thinks more credit is to
be given to one lay man, speaking the truth according to scripture, than to
all men of all ages, speaking contrary to the truth or beside the truth of
the scriptures. But it is a matter of fact you say, whether such and such
traditions came from Christ and his Apostles or no, and therefore they that
lived nearer the time of the deed doing by twelve or thirteen hundredth
years, are more like to know the truth than we. I answer, that all things
that you pretend for traditions, are not of one sort, some are contrary to the
word of God, and are reproved by evidence of the holy scriptures, other are
beside the word of God, and therefore not necessary to be received, because
they are not found in the holy scriptures. As for the prerogative of
antiquity, cannot argue a certain knowledge of the fact in these ancient
fathers, seeing in two or three hundredth years, that was before their time,
and the time of the deed supposed to be done, any fable might be obtruded
under pretense of such tradition as we prove that many were. Yea when they
that were nearest of all to the Apostles time, as Polycarpus and Anicetus, do
not agree what was the Apostles tradition, which was not expressed in their
writing, it is manifest, that they of much latter time, could have no
certeintie thereof. And that whatsoever ceremony or practice the Apostles
delivered, which was not expressed in the scripture, was but temporal or
arbitrarie in the power of the Church to use, or not use, as it might best
serve for edifying. Finally, where you affirm, that Fulk came but yesterday
from the Grammar schole* to make it seem that he is but a young grammatian,
either your days be near as long as thirty years, or else your pen runs
beyond your knowledge of him, or at leastwise your malice over reaches your
knowledge. But yet to this extremity (of crediting one Charke, or Fulke before
so many ancient fathers) you say you are driven, and bid men hearken a little
how D. Fulke handles these men about traditions. And first S. Cyprian
alleging Against Mart. p. 170
the tradition of Christ himself, concerning the mingling of wine and water in
the chalice: but if Cyprian had been well urged (faith Fulke) he would have
better considered of the matter. Thus you would make men believe, that I
oppose nothing but mine own authority or credit against S. Cyprian. But then
you shamefully beelie me: for this is the matter, and these are my words which
you have gelded at your pleasure.

Whereas Cyprian ad Pompei^^ calls all traditions to the writings and
commandments of the Apostles, Martial cries out, that Cyprian is slandered,
because he himself alleges the tradition of Christ, for mingling of water
with wine. If Cyprian break his own rule, who can excuse him? But if he had
been urged as much for the necessity of water, as he was for the necessity
of wine in the sacrament, he would have better considered of the matter. Who
sees not I suppose no less authority against Cyprian, than of Cyprian
himself, and therefore I boast not of mine own credit above his?

To proceed, Tertullian is alleged saying that the blessing with the sign of
the cross, is an apostolic tradition. Fulke: Tertullians judgment of
tradition without scripture in that place is corrupt. If I should search no
further, here is a reason of Fulkes mislike of Tertullians judgment added,
because he affirms tradition Against Mart. p. 178.
of the Apostles, without the writing of the Apostles. But in deed there is in
the place by you noted, other arguments in these words: Tertullians judgment
of tradition without scripture in that place is corrupt, for Martial himself
confesses, that a tradition unwritten should be reasonable and agreeable to
the scriptures: and so he says the tradition of blessing with the cross is,
because the Apostles by the holy ghost delivered it: But who shall assure us
thereof? Tertullian and Basil are not sufficient warrant for so worthy a
matter, seeing S. Paul leaves it out of the universal armor of God. This
last and invincible argument in rehearsing my words you leave out, which
because perhaps you could not see in sewe words, I will set it more abroad.
The universal spiritual armor of God, is delivered by S. Ephesians. 6.
Paul Ephesians. 6. blessing with the sign of the cross is not there delivered by
S. Paul: therefore blessing with the sign of the cross is no part of the
spiritual armor of God. Now let us see, whether you will believe a Paul
before a Tertullian, or a Basil: or a Fulke with S. Paul, before a Basil with
Tertullian without S Paul or against S. Paul?

But you go forward. S. Jerome is alleged, saying that lent fast is the
tradition of the Apostles. Fulke. Jerome untruly ascribes that tradition to
the Apostles. My words are against Bristowes Mot. page 35. these: Again S.
Jerome faith, it was a tradition of the Apostles to fast 40. days in the
year. If this be true, then is the popish story false, that makes
Telesphorus bishop of Rome author of that lenten fast. Eusebius shows ye
great diversity of fasting before Easter. li. 5. cap. 26. saying that some
fasted but one day, some two days, some more, some 40. hours of day and
night. This diversity proves, that Jerome untruly ascribes that tradition
to the Apostles, which should have been kept uniformly, if it had any
institution of the Apostles. Among so many arguments and authorities, cited
for proof you can find nothing, but Fulke faith bluntly, Jerome untruly
ascribes that tradition to the Apostles. Sed perge mentiri. S. Chrysostom is
alle^ged saying that the Apostles decreed, that in the sacrifice of the ^^^tar,
there should be made prayer for the departed: Fulke: where he says, it was
decreed by the Apostles, etc. he must pardon us for crediting him, because he
cannot show it out of the acts and writings of the Apostles. If I had added
none other argument, this had been sufficient for us, to for bear crediting
any thing of the Apostles, whereof we have not the holy ghost in their
writings to be witness. But you shall hear what I oppose against
Chrysostom, beside this. Against page 303. it follows immediately upon these
words noted by M. Censurer: And we will be bold to charge him with his own
saying: Hom. de Adam and Heus, S^^is sufficere. etc. We think it suffiseth
enough, what soever the writings of the Apostles have taught us, according to
the foresay de rules, insomuch that we count it not at all catholic,
whatsoever shall appear contrary to the rules appointed. And again in Genesis
H. 58. Vides in quantam, etc. Thou see into how great absurdity they fall,
which will not follow the canon of holy scripture, but permit all things to
their own cogitations. But if we be further urged, we will allege that which
he says in Euang. Joan. H. 58. Quisacra. etc. he that uses not the holy
scripture, but clymeth another way, that is by a way not allowed, is a thief.
We may be as bold with Chrysostom, as he said he would be with Paul
himself, in 2. ad Tim. Hom. 2. Plus aliquid dicam, etc. I will say somewhat
more, we must not be ruled by Paul himself, if he speak any thing that is
his own, and any thing that is humane, but we must obey the Apostle, when he
carries Christ speaking in him. Wherefore seeing it is certain, that by
testimony of Justinius Martyr, that there was no mention of the dead, in the
celebration of the Lords supper, for more than an hundred years after Christ,
we must not believe Chrysostom without scripture, affirming that it was
ordained so by the Apostles. As though this place had not been sufficient to
convince your impudent lying, you go forward, and say that page 362. and 363.
of the same book I answer to diwerse fathers alleged together, beside
Chrysostom, for the same purpose: Who is witness that this is the tradition
of the Apostles? you will say: Tertullian, Cyprian, Austen, Jerome, and a great
many more. But I would learn why the Lord would not have this set forth by
Matthew, Mark, Luke, and Paul? Why they were not chosen scribes hereof rather
then Tertullian, Cyprian, Jerome, Austen, and other such as you n^me? But this
is a counterfaite institution, and fained tradition. Here you note in the
margent a proud question, which is not so right as if I should note against it
a proud censure. For it is a question that may be demanded in humility, why
the Lord if it were his pleasure, that the dead should be prayed for at the
communion, as a thing necessary for them, and dutiful for us: would not
reveal so much by those witnesses that are above all exception, rather than by
such as are all manifestly convicted of errors, as you Papists cannot deny.
But because neuera Papist of you all is able to answer this question, to the
satisfaction of any man's doubtful conscience, you think best to reject it,
and say it is a proud question. As though it were pride for any man to seek
confirmation of his faith, against so In diverse proud and foolish questions.
just a cause of doubt. But in truth, my words are more full than you allege
them, against the pretended institution. If it be lawful for me once to pose
the Papists, as you do often the protestants, I would learn why the Lord
would not have this doubtless institution, and as you take it the most
necessary use of the sacrament, plainly, or at the leastwise obscurely set
forth by Matthewe, Mark, Luke, or Paul, which all have set forth the story
of the action of Christ, the institution of the sacrament, and the end or use
of the same. If it were not meet at all to be put in writing, why was it
disclosed by Tertullian, Cyprian, Augustine, etc? If it were meet to be put in
writing, why were not those chosen scribes, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and Paul,
worthy of all credit, rather appointed for it, than Tertullian, Cyprian,
Augustine, and such as you name? But against this counter faite institution,
and feigned tradition S. Paul cries with open mouth unto the Corinthians 1.
Cor. 11. That which I delivered to you I received of the Lord, etc. which
wrote to that effect. Last of all you say, that being urged by the like, I
discredit all Ag. Brist. M^t. p. 36.
antiquity, saying: It is a common thing with the ancient writers to defend
every ceremony which was used in their time, by tradition of the Apostles. In
deed the words are mine, the occasion as of all ^he rest frandulently and
falsely omitted. For upon occasion of Chrysostom, alleged to prove that
mention of the dead was made at the communion, by tradition of the Apostles,
for which I remit him to mine answer of Allen lib. 2. ca. 5. I ad moreover
these words. If we should admit all things to be ordained of the Apostles,
which some of the old writers do ascribe to their traditions, we should
receive many things, which even the Papists themselves do not observe. As
that it is a wicked thing to fast on sunday, or to pray kneeling, that
oblations are to be made for men's birth days, etc. Which with diverse other
superstitions, Tertullian fathereth upon the tradition of the Apostles, as
well as oblations for the dead. De cor. Mil. Hearing therefore such manifest
vnthruthes, are fathered upon the Apostles tradition, by most ancient writers,
what certainety can we have of their tradition, without their writing? By this
the reader may see, how honestly and truly, you say there are set before you,
a pair of balances, with Charke and Fulke, in one end: and Cyprian, Origin,
Tertullian, Basil, etc. in an other end. And Fulke opposes himself against
them all. Whe^^as in every place by you noted, he opposes either the holy
scriptures, or other ancient writers, or the same writers themselves, or
evident and manifest reason, to prove that such things are untruly fathered
upon the Apostles tradition.

Last of all, for your farewell, you charge D. Fulke to affirm, that the book
of the Maccabees was written with a profane and Ambitious spirit. Against
purg. page 209. In deed in that place among many other reasons which I bring,
to prove that story not to be the Canon of the scriptures, I say, that he
makes a very profane preface, ambitiously commending his travels and showing
the difference between a story at large and an abridgement etc. If you be
able to defend that book to be Canonical, answer my reasons, and prepare
your self to answer as many ^^re, as may be alleged to convince the vanity
and falshod of that stories and so I leave you to a better mind, if it be Gods
will to give it you.

I find also, that in the Popish annotations, upon the new Testament printed
at Rhemes, my writings are carped at in two places, the former upon 2. These. 2.
where my words against Saunders Rock, page. 248. and page 278. are rehearsed:
In which I say that Leo and Gregory bishops of Rome, although they were not
come to the full pride of Antichrist, yet the mystery of iniquity having
wrought in that seat near five or six hundred years before them, and then
greatly increased, they were so deceived with the long continuance of error,
that they thought the dignity of Peter, was much more over the rest of his
fellow Apostles, than the holy scriptures of God (against which no continuance
of error can prescribe) does either allow or bear^ withal.

Again, the testimonies of Leo and Gregory, bishops of Rome, as always so
now I deem to be unmeet to be heard in their own cause, though otherwise
they were not the worst men, yet great furtherers of the authority of
Antichrist, which soon after their days took possession of the chair, which
they had helped to prepare for him.

For this I am called a malepeart scholar of Bezaes impudent school. But by
what reason? For placing the mystery of Antichrist, as woorking in the sea of
Rome even in S. Peter's time. That the mystery of Antichrist did work in S.
Peter's time, the text of S. Paul is plain. That it did work in Rome, where
Antichrist should be openly showed, S. John is plain in the Revelation. Ca.
17. ver. 9. and 18. yea, the Papists confessing that S. Peter called Rome
Babylon, must needs grant as much: this only then remains in controversy,
whether in the sea or church of Rome, the mystery of iniquity did work, from
the Apostles time, until Antichrist was openly showed. Seeing it wrought at
Rome, it wrought either in the church or altogether out of the church: but it
wrought not altogether out of the church, therefore it wrought in the church.
That the mystery of iniquity preparing for that Antichrist wrought not
altogether out of the church, it is manifest, because the seat of Antichrist is
prophesied to be in the Temple and Church of God. Without the Church, was not
the mystery of iniquity against Christ, but open wickedness and persecution
of Christ's Church. Therefore within the Church that mystery did work. By
what means first, it is not certain, because it was a secret, not revealed
by the Apostle. Some conjecture that it was by preferring one bishop before all
the clergy of elders or priests, which at the first were equal. Some think
that such factions began at Rome, as afterward were at Corinth, one holding of
Cephas, that is Peter, another of some other. How ever it was, the challenge
made to Peter's chair, and from the days of Victor, diverse bishops of Rome
creeping up by little and little, and pretending authority over other Churches,
and other churches reuerencing that see, for many good respects, were abused by
Satan to set forward his purpose in aduauncing the throne of Antichrist. And
where I said, that Leo and Gregory were great furtherers of the authority of
Antichrist, my meaning was not, that they did wittingly and willingly prepare a
seat for Antichrist, but that the d^uel by Gods permission, because he was to
send the efficacy of error into the world, took hold in the time appointed of
that authority, which the bishops for the dignity of their see, and as they
thought for the benefit of the church, did labor so greatly to maintain and
increase. Neither write I any thing contrary to the challenge of that reverend
father the bishop of Sarum, as they charge me, who said at Paul's cross, O
Gregory, O Leo, if we be deceived, you have deceived us: For his meaning was
not thereby to allow whatsoever they had done or written, but that in some such
matters as are in controversy between the Papists and us* even Gregory and
Leo are witnesses against them.

A great accusation is in the note upon Heb. 5. ver. 6. in these words: You
must beware of the wicked heresy of the Arrians and Caluines (except in these
latter it be rather an error proceeding of ignorance) that stick not to say,
that Christ was a priest, or did sacrifice, according to his godhead, which is
to make Christ God the fathers priest, and not his son, and to do sacrifice
and homage to him, as his lord, and not as his equal in dignity and nature.
Therefore S. Augustine says: in Psalm. 109. That as he was man* he was priest:
as God, he was not priest. And Theodoret in Psalm. 109. As man he did offer
sacrifice, but as God he received sacrifice. And again, Christ touching his
humanity was called a priest, and he offered none other host but his own
Re^em. p. 89
body, etc. D^m. 1. circa med. Some of our new masters not knowing so much,
did let fall out of their pens the contrary* and being admonished of the
error, and that it was very Arrianisme, yet they persist in it, of mere
ignorance in the grounds of divinity. First note the intolerable pride of
these Popish interpreters* that challenge to themselves all learning and
knowledge in divinity, condemning all other men of ignorance and mere
ignorance in the grounds of divinity. So plays Bristowe with the bishop of
Sarum, whom in the place by them quoted, I reproved in these words: The like
impudent cauil he brings against M. Jewel, who^ no man I think without
laughter can read, to be charged with ignorance by blundering Bristowe, for
affirming Christ to be a priest according to his deity, whom the Apostle
expressly says by his eternal spirit to have offered himself, Heb. 9.
ver. 14. But that you may the better understand this controversy between us,
we deny not that Christ was a priest according to his humanity, but we
affirm that whole Christ is a priest as he is both God and man. For in the
office of priesthood two things must be considered, a ministry and an
authority. In respect of the ministerial part, our Savior Christ performed
that office as man: but in respect of authority of entering into the holiest
place, and reconciling us to God and presenting us unto God, which was the
principal part of his priesthood, he did perform it, as the son of God,
as Lord and maker of the house, and not as a servant, but as God, which has
created all things. Heb. 3. verse. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. and 6. Against this sound
doctrine, let us examine what the heretics allege. First, they charge it most
odiously with Arrianisme, but without all ^parke of reason, seeing we
distinguish plainly the authority of God the son, which is equal with his
father* from the ministry of ye man Jesus Christ inferior to his father as
touching his manhood. Secondly, they charge us that we stick not to say:
Christ was a priest or did sacrifice according to his Godhead. We say he was a
priest and did offer sacrifice, both according to his godhead and according to
his manhood. And the same sa^eth the Apostle in effect, when he says: The
blood of Christ, which by his eternal spirit offered himself unreprovable to
God, shall purge your conscience, etc. Heb. 9. 14. For not ye blood of beasts,
nor of any man though he had been innocent, but the blood of that man which
was God, was the price of our redemption, in which respect the Apostle Act. 20.
ver. 28. says that God purchased his Church unto him self by his own blood.
For by the eternal spirit is understood that infinite power of the divinity,
united to the humanity, by which the sacrifice of Christ was consecrated, that
by the same lively or quickening virtue, by which he created us he might also
restore us. Whereunto our Savior Christ had regard, when he said Ioh. 6. It
is the spirit that gives life, the flesh profits nothing. But this (say the
Papists) is to make Christ God the fathers priest, and not his son. Nay
rather, this is to acknowledge Christ to be both his fathers son, and his
priest, even as the Apostle says: The law appoints priests, men that have
infirmity: but the word of the oath which is after the law, the Son for
ever perfected. Heb. 7. v. 28. Where by the oppositio^ of men having
infirmity, with the Son perfected for ever: it is most clear, that the
word of the oath makes Christ, as he is the Son of God, a priest after the
order of Melchisedech. Where I cannot omit the shameful corruption of this
text, in the popish translation, which to hide this opposition, between men,
and God the son of God, has altogether left out this word, men, although it
be in the Latin expressed manifestly: Lex enim homines constituit sacerdotes
infirmitatem habentes, which they translate thus: For the law appoints
priests, them that have infirmity.

But to proceed. Our accusers add further, that our assertion is to make
Christ to do sacrifice and homage to God his father, as his Lord, and not as
his equal in dignity and nature. I answer no more than when S. Paul says,
that Christ when he was in the form of God, and thought it no robbery to be
equal with God* he made himself of no reputation, took upon him the shape of
a servant, became obedient to the death, even the death of the cross. I have
sufficiently before distinguished, that all parts of his priesthood that
required obedience, service, homage, ministry, subjection, he performed as
man: but the authority of reconciling men unto God, he wrought as God and man,
even as the Apostle writes: God was in Christ reconciling the world to him
self, 2. Cor. 5. ver. 19. That he might be a priest therefore able and worthy
to make atonement with God, he was God: that his reconciliation and
satisfaction might extend to men, he was man: and so being God and man he is
^ perfect mediator between God and man, and an high priest for ever after the
order of Melchisedech.

All this notwithstanding, they oppose against us the authority of the
fathers, who doubtless had no other meaning, than we to keep this
distinction. First Augustine in Psalm. 109. is produced to say: that* as he was
man he was priest: as God he has not priest. But Augustines words are somewhat
otherwise upon the text, Iurauit Dominus, etc. Ad hoc enim natus ex vtero ante
luciferum, vt esses sacerdos in aeternum secundum ordine^ Melchisedech. Si
natu^ ex vtero de virgin intelligimus ante Luciferu^ noctu, sicut ^uangelia
contestantur, procul dubio inde ex vtero ante luciferu^, vt esset Sacerdos in
aeternu^ secundu^ ordinem Melchisedech. Nam secundum id quod natus est de patre
Deus apud Deum, coaeternus gignenti, non Sacerdos: sed sacerdos propter carnem
assumptam, propter victimam, quam pro nobis offerre^: a nobis acceptam. The
Lord has sworn, etc. For to this end thou wast borne out of the womb
before the day star, that thou might be a priest for ever after the order
of Melchisedech. For according to that he is borne of God the father God with
God, toeternall with him that begets, he is not a priest: but a priest for
his flesh assumpted, for the sacrifice which being taken of us, he might offer
for us.

In these words Augustines meaning is plain enough that Christ according to
his divine and eternal generation, could not have been a priest for us,
except he had taken our flesh and been borne a man, which we do always
confess. But that our redemption by his sacrifice was the mere work of his
manhood only, he says not but the contrary if he be marked. For he says
that the son of God was a priest, for the flesh which he took of us, that
he might offer for us that sacrifice which he took of us. Here it is plain
that Christ as God offers sacrifice, but he offers as a priest, for to
offer sacrifice pertayneth to a priest, therefore Christ as God, is a priest:
yet not as God only, but as God and man. Whereupon the same Augustine says
afterward: O domine qui i^rasti, etc. O Lord which have sworn and said,
Thou ar^ a priest for ever, after the order of M^lchis^dech, the same priest
for ever, is the Lord on thy right hand, the very same I say priest for ever,
of whom thou have sworn, is the Lord on thy right hand, because thou have
said to the same my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, until I make thine
enemies thy footestoole. Here he affirms, that the eternal God David's
Lord, as he was God, David's son as he was man, is that eternal priest. And
to what end? but to perform those parts of a priest, which were proper to
God, that is to reconcile us unto God, to have authority of himself and of
his own nature and worthynesse, to come before God, and to remain in the
favor of God always, which no creature has but through his worthiness and
gracious gift.

The next authority brought against us is Theodoret in Psalm. 109. who is cited
thus: As man he did offer sacrifice, but as God he did receive sacrifices:
verily, we say as much and more also, that he offered sacrifice as God also
reconciling the world to himself. But in truth the words of Theodoret are
otherwise and to an other end. Sacerdos autem non est Christus, qui ex Judah
secundum carnem ortus est, non ipse aliquid offerens, sed vocatur caput eorum
qui offerun^: quandoquidem eius corpus ecclesiam vocat, and propterea
sacerdotio fungitur, vt homo, recipis autem ea quae offeruntur vt Deus: offeri
vero ecclesia, corporis eius and sanguinis symbola, omne fermentum per
primitias sanctificans. And Christ is now a priest, which is sprung of Judah
according to the flesh, not offering any thing himself, but is called the head
of them that offer, seeing he calls the church his body, and therefore he
exercises the priesthood as a man, and he receives those things that are
offered, as God: and the church truly does offer the tokens of his body and
blood sanctifying every leaven by the first fruits. In these words Theodoret
speaks not of the sacrifice that Christ offered himself, but of the
spiritual sacrifice of thanksgiving which the church offers to him in
celebrating the memory of his death. Not of the priesthood which Christ did
exercise in earth, but of the priesthood that he does exercise in heaven, not
now offering any thing, but as God receiving oblations. And where he says
that now he exercises the priesthood as man, he denies not but that he
does exercise it as mediator, God and man. Which is more plain in his
exposition of the Epistle to the Heb. cap. 8. where he enquireth how Christ
does both sit at the right hand of majesty, and yet is a minister of the holy
things. Quonam enim munere sacerdotali fungitur qui seipsum semelobtuli^, and
non offert amplius sacrificium? Quomodo autem fieri potest vt idem and sedea^,
and socerdotali officio fungatur? Nisi forte dixerit quispiam esse munus
sacerdotale, salutem quam vt dominus procurat. Tabernaculum autem vocauit
coelum, cuius est ipse opifex, quem vt hominem dixit Apostolus fungi
sacerdotio. For what priestly office does he exercise, which has once offered
up himself, and does no more offer any sacrifice? And how can it be that the
same person should together both sit, and exercise the priestly office? Except
perhaps a man will say that the salvation which he procures as Lord, is a
priestly office.

Neither has he any other meaning: Dialog. prime, where his purpose is to
prove, that Christ had a body. Si est ergo sacerdonum proprium, offerre
munera, Christus autem quod ad humanit atem quidem attinet, sacerdos appellatus
est, non aliam autem hostiam quam suum corpus obtuli^, Dominus ergo Christus
corpus habui^. If therefore it be proper for priests to offer gifts, and
Christ as concerning his humanity truly is called a priest, and he offered
none other sacrifice but his own body, therefore our Lord Christ had a
body. He says not that Christ is a priest according to his humanity only,
whereas the excellency of his person being both God and man, caused ^is
sacrifice to be acceptable, and available for the redemption of man. But to
make the matter clear, beside that which the Apostle writes to the Hebrews
ca. 9. these arguments may plainly be drawn out of the 7. cap. where he
speaks expressly of his priesthood after the order of Melchisedech.

Christ as he is without father and without mother is ^ priest after the order
of Melchisedech:

Christ as he is God and man is without father and without mother, therefore
Christ as he is God and man is a priest after the order of Melchisedech.

Again, Christ as he has no beginning of his days nor end of his life, is a
priest after the order of Melchisedech:

Christ according to his divinity has no beginning of his days nor end of
his life according to his whole person:

Therefore Christ according to his divinity and according to his whole person
is a priest after the order of Melchisedech.

Again, except you understand Christ to have been a priest according to his
divinity, he was tythed in the loins of Abraham as well as Lcui, but
according to his divinity he was not in the loins of Abraham, and therefore
paid no tithe in Abraham as God, though as man he was subject to the law, but
received tithes of Abraham in his priest and figure Melchisedech. For the
priest receives tithes in the name of God, as also he blesses in the name of
God. Therefore if Christ give priestly blessing in his own name, he gives it
as he is God and not as man only. Finally to say, that that Christ was a
priest only in respect of his manhood, ^auoreth rankely of Nestorianisme,
whereas our assertion that Christ is an high priest both according to his
deity, in which he is equal with his father, and also according to his
humanity, in which the father is greter than he, is as far from Arrianisme,
as the Papists are from honesty and synceritie, to charge us with such open
blasphemy.

God be praised*
Imprinted at London by George Bishop, and Henry Binneman.

1583.


