THE CHRISTIANS PROFESSION, OR A Treatise of the grounds and principles of
Divinity, by way of question and Answer. In which all the chief grounds of
Religion are so plainly proved and explained by the Word of God, as that the
meanest capacity may by reading understand the same.

We have a most sure words of the Prophets, to the which, ye do well to take
heed,

2. Pet. 1.19. And that thou have known the holy Scriptures of a Child, which
are able to make thee wise unto salvation, through the faith which is in Christ
Jesus.

2. Tim. 3.15. London, Printed by T. P. for John Deuer. 1630.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Sir John Shurley Knight, one of his Majesty's
Justices of peace for the County of Sussex; and to the Lady Dorothy his wife:
together with the Right Worshipful Sir Giles Ouersberry Knight, and to the
Lady Anne his wife: I. G. wishes increase of saving knowledge in this life,
and the fruition and enioyment of Eternal glory in the life to come for ever
hereafter.
RIght Worshipfuls, it behooves all people of what calling, state, or
condition soever, to give all diligence to acquaint themselves with the will of
God revealed in his Word; and as with the Word of God in general, so to know
God and our selves in particular, (according to the word of God.) The want of
the knowledge of which, is the cause of all errors, both in judgment and
practice: neither is it sufficient that we endeavor our selves to attain to
the knowledge of the same in some measure, but also that we endeavor to
instruct others in the knowledge of the same, especially those whom God has
committed to our charge. Wherefore since it has pleased the Lord in some
measure to acquaint me with his will revealed in his word; and to call me to
have charge of those few of mine own family, I indeauoured to instruct them in
the word of God, according to the measure of knowledge which the Lord has
given me. And observing by experience, that a set form of Catechizing upon the
grounds of Religion was most profitable and less labor, I resolved with my
self, to write down at such times as I had best opportunity, in regard of
other employments, the chief heads and grounds of Divinity in the plainest
manner and method that possibly I could devise: not that I did either despise
or disregard those Catechismes which are already printed and set forth by many
reverend and learned Divines, in using of which I might have saved that labor:
but because I desired to have all the grounds of Divinity, not only delivered
as near as possibly may be, in the very words and phrases of the Scripture,
and the quotations of the Scriptures for every ground: but also that the words
of every Scripture should be written down, which are pertinent to the proving
of every grownd, with the explication of such things as might seem to be dark
and obscure to the understanding of the meanest capacity: the which order I
could not find in any printed Catechism; the consideration of which, moved me
the rather to put my resolution into practice; the which I began long since,
not having the least thought that ever it should have come to the press, as
the Lord who is the searcher of all hearts knows. But when I had finished the
same, it grew to a far greater volume then I expected. Afterward some of my
friends that were conversant at my house desired coppies of the same in
writing, the which I knew by experience, would be both troublesome and
tedious; yet being desirous to pleasure my friends in what I might, preferring
a public good before a private, I asked a Printer who was a friend of mine,
whether he thought he could have the same authorized to be printed showing him
the coppie; he was desirous both to get it authorized, and to have the printing
of it. Whereupon I took advice of some of my friends, whose judgments I
preferred before mine own, showing them the coppie, who gave me encouragement
concerning the same: then I gave it into the Printers hand to get it authorized
if Authority should think it fitting, although I confess I did not expect
that it would have been authorized: but how ever, it was authorized contrary
to my expectation: and therefore I was willing to admit the same unto the
press, although I confess that there are many printed Catechismes se^ forth
by many reverend learned men to whom I am far inferior, and whose works are
more learned and eminent: yet considering of the great use that now at this
present there is of Catechismes in regard of the order of Catechizing enjoined
by public Authority over all England: And considering that diners people are
of diverse minds and opinions, some liking and approving of one Catechism, and
some of another: And considering withal, that all people generally are
affected with new books, I adventured to present the same to public view,
hoping that it will be profitable unto some, and then I know, I shall not lose
my labor. Howsoever, I desire that the ignorant may be instructed thereby:
and that all in general which read the same, may be furthered, built up,
strengthened and confirmed in the truth, and armed against all errors and false
doctrine; the which my poor labors, I make bold to dedicate unto your
Worships: And although I confess it may seem strange unto your Worships, that
I should presume to present to you a Treatise of the first principles of
religion; whom God has endued with so great learning and wisdom, yet I was
theereby the more encouraged thereunto, both because that I conceive that you
are thereby the better able to judge and discern of the matter contained in
the same: and also because it is the glory of a wise man to pass by
infirmities, as Solomon says; and I was the rather moved thereunto because I
desired to give this testimony of my true thankfulness for those testimonies
of love which I have received from you, and especially unto you right
worshipful in the first place unto whom I am engaged in a double respect;
first, in regard of your ancient and long continued love unto my Parents;
Secondly, in regard of the continuance of the same unto their children, and
unto my self in particular. And especially for that first testimony of your
love, when you promised in my stead, that I should profess the Faith of Christ
crucified; the which profession of my faith, I publicly declare in this
treatise following unto all in general, and unto your self in particular.
Secondly, as a testimony of that unfeigned love I bear unto you all, and that
not only in regard of those outward bonds and ties of those many favors
received from you, and that natural affection which I bear toward you, in
that I was of a child brought up among you, but principally in regard of your
pious zeal and forwardness in Religion which I have obseru^^^ to both in you
and your virtuous Ladies. thirdly, because I am persuaded by obser^ing your
worships care in your family, that you will make some good use of the same.
Lastly, I presumed to dedicate the same unto your worships, and your Ladies
jointly together, both because of that near relation that is between you, and
also because of my self being so much obliged unto you, humbly craving pardon
for this my boldness; and humbly suing that these my poor labors may find
acceptance: I commit both you and all of yours unto the blessing and protection
of Almighty God, unto whom my prayers shall ever be directed for your
continual joy and comfort in the inioyment of all out ward mercies, so far
as in mercy he shall see best for you; and for your continual growth and
increase in the apprehending and assurance of his free grace and favor here,
and the inioyment of ever lasting glory for ever hereafter; and so I reft

Yours to command in what I may, I. G.

An Epistle to the Christian Reader.
CHristian Readers, when I writ this Treatise, I never intended the same should
come to public view: I only intended the good of my own private Family,
thereby judging my labors altogether unworthy of common view. But afterward
considering that a public good is ever to be preferred before a private, and
being published it might dee more good in the hands of many in one day, then in
my own private Family in many years: I was moved through the importunity of
some friends to present the same, resolving that it will meet with many
exceptions and objections among many people, as always the works and labors
of others going before have done.

Wherefore Christian Reader, I thought good to acquaint you with such reasons
as moved me to publish the same, and to remove such objections as I conceive
may be made against the same. The first reason is, because of all these
errors and contentions which dee now so much abound, is ignorance of the
grounds of Religion grounded upon the Word of God: Ye err not knowing the
Scriptures, Mat. 22.29. And therefore we have cause to bless God for that
order of teaching enjoined by public authority by way of Catechism, that so
people may thereby be the better instructed in the grounds and principles of
Divinity; and that the public Catechizing may be the more profitable; it is
necessary that people do acquaint themselves in private with such Catechismes
as do most plainly by the Scriptures set forth the grounds and principles of
Religion; and among the rest of Catechismes that are published, Christian
Reader, you shall not find your labor lost in the reading of this Catechism,
for this I dare presume that those that read the same with understanding, shall
be able to understand in some measure any ground of Religion that is taught by
the Minister in public; which would be to no small profit both to the
Minister and people. Secondly, because I have observed by experience that the
more Ministers contend against those errors which do now so much abound
either in their Sermons or writings, the more they spread abroad: because such
is the corruption of man's nature through pride, that the more he is opposed in
those errors which he mayntaines the more strongly he labors to defend them
and spread them abroad. Whereby the peace and unity of the Church is much
broken and disturbed to the great grief and wounding of the souls of all Gods
people, and therefore I conceive that the best way both to suppress heresy,
and to maintain the peace and unity of the Church, is positiuely to maintain
those grounds of divinity which are established and enjoined by public
authority, grounded upon the Word of God; for one contrary will expel another,
when light comes, darkness is expelled: and so when the light of Gods Word is
clearly set forth, and shines in the Church, the darkness of Popery and all
other errors will be daily expelled: like as it was with the Philistians
Dagon, when the Arc was set up Dagon fell to the ground of himself. So when
Christ and his Gospel is set up and maintained, who is the true Arc, then
Dagon, all false Religion will fall down to the ground; for nothing so much
ouer-throwes Satan and his Kingdom. For by the preaching of the Gospel
Satan is said to fall from Heaven like lightning; and therefore we have
great cause to bless God in that we have those grounds of Religion grounded
upon the word established by public authority, and inioyning all the Ministers
of this Land to teach and maintain the same, the which I could wish were not
too much neglected by many. For my own part that love that I bear to the
truth of Gods Word, and to the peace and unity of the Church, moved me to cast
in my Mite, desiring that it may be a means to stir up others who are far
more able, to cast in out of their treasures, that so the truth of Gods Word
may be more cleared: the doctrine of the Church, the peace and unity of the
same more defended and maintained; the ignorant instructed, and errors
suppressed, all of which by this means through the blessing of God may be
effected. I take not upon me to teach any, but I only show my judgment as an
inferior, not passing for the censure of any. It may be some will be ready to
object and say that this was agreat deal of needless labor spent. For we
have no need of new Catechismes now seeing we have so many Printed already made
by worthy learned men: and seeing that there is public Catechizing in every
Congregation: to which I answer, I confess that there are many public
Catechismes made by learned men: to whom I judge my self far inferior, and
yet I say that among all those varieties of printed Catechismes, you shall find
this differing from all other in matter, method, or manner, if not in all: for
I never yet saw two Catechismes that were just alike in matter, method, and
manner, although they were both concerning the same grounds, but how-euer, in
this one thing it is different from all the Catechismes that ever I yet saw,
namely in the manner of proving the grounds: for in all ordinary Catechismes
the places of Scripture are only quoted to prove the grounds, by reason where
of people that are not acquainted with the Scriptures, knows not whether those
grounds be agreeable to the word of God or no, and to turn to every proof is
such a labor as that few will undertake the same. Wherefore to ease the Reader
I have taken the more pains not only to quote the proofs of Scripture, but
also to write them down, framing every answer so near as I could to the very
words of my Text alleged for the proving of the same, with explication of
such things as are obscure: which labor I shall think well bestowed in
writing so that it may be profitable to the Reader. Again I conceive that
there is the more need of Printed Catechismes in regard of that public
Catechizing enjoined by authority, that by reading in private they may be the
better able to understand the Minister in public, and so shall the Minister
profit the people with less labor in teaching in regard of often repeating of
the same grounds: and indeed to speak truly it is the duty of every Master or
Governor of a Family to teach and instruct their own Family in the grounds of
Religion in their own private Houses, and not leave all for the Minister to
do in public: and because all are not able in regard of knowledge to instruct
their Families of themselves, it is necessary that they get such Catechismes as
are printed, in which the grounds of Religion are most plainly preoued and set
forth. And among many other Chatechismes as I conceive, you shall find this to
be one, by which you may benefit both your selves and your family; especially
if you in reading mark and observe what dependencie one thing has upon
another. But it may be some will object and say, that this Chatechisine is too
large, concerning too many things; for one thing is necessary to be known,
which is God in Christ; and therefore what need people trouble their heads to
know so many things? To which I answer, That I freely confess, that according
to the words of Christ, John 17.3. This is life eternal, to know thee to be
the very God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ: the which are the maine
things contained in this Chatechisme, for to know God aright, is to know him in
his nature, in his Attributes, in the Trinity of persons, and in his works.
And to know Christ aright, is to know him in his Person, in his Natures, and in
his Offices. And whosoever does not in some measure thus know God and Christ,
knows neither God nor Christ, but merely a fantacy of their own brains.
Neither could I well tell how to contract those grounds into a shorter volume,
for sure I am that the gleanings which are left behind are more then the whole
Croppe here gathered together. Again, I did so near as possibly I could make
Christ the maine subject of this Treatise: and that those that read with
understanding, may plainly see by the drift and scope of the same; for all
those things which go before the covenant of grace, concerning the fall of man,
his misery by reason of sin, and the puninshment thereof, serves to make man
see how miser able he is without Christ. And all those things concerning the
law, are to serve unto Christ, as the ministry of John Baptist going before to
make way for Christ, Mat. 3.3. and all the rest following, are either
concerning the person of Christ, the two natures of Christ, the offices of
Christ, or the Kingdom of Christ: so that Christ and his Kingdom are the
main things contained in this Cathechisme. Wherefore I desire not to write
much in commendation of the same, but rather desire that the work may praise
it self, wishing that the reader may find as much benefit in reading as I
found in writing; howsoever, I desire that it may be accepted as a testimony
of my love unto the truth, and the Church and people in which I live; for whose
sakes I have improued that small talent which the Lord has lent me, desiring
that it may be to Gods glory, and his Churches good: which that it may so be,
I commend and commit both you and it unto the blessing of almighty God, and
rest yours in the Lord, I G.

A Table containing the chief heads and Principal matters in this Treatise.
COncerning the Scriptures, and the Attributes of them. page 1. Concerning God.
page 5. Concerning the Attributes of God. ibid. Concerning the Trinity of
Persons. page 6. Concerning the Works of God. page 9. Concerning the Decree of
God, in general. ibid. Concerning Predestination in special. page 10.
Concerning Election with the cause and end thereof. ibid. Concerning
Reprobation, and the end thereof. ibid. Concerning the Execution of Gods
Decree. page 12. Concerning the Creation in general. ibid. Concerning the
Creation of Man in special. page 14 Concerning the parts of Man. ibid.
Concerning the Dignities of man in his Creation. page 15. Concerning the
Creation of the Angels in general. page 16. Concerning the Nature of the
Angels. page 17. Concerning their knowledge. ibid. Concerning their Power and
Office. ibid. Concerning Gods Providence, how far it does extend. page 19.
Concerning the Providence of God in the fall of Men and Angels. page 21.
Concerning the Fall of Man. page 22. Concerning Original Sin. ibid.
Concerning the guilt and punishment of Sin. p. 23. Concerning the Extent
thereof unto us, the posterity of Adam, with the cause. page 24. Concerning
Man's inability to help himself out of that Condition. page 26. Concerning the
Restoring of Man, and the means thereof. ibid. Concerning the outward means
in which God does reveal the threefold estate of Man. page 28. Concerning the
Law and covenant of Works. ibid. Concerning the use of the Law to the
Reprobate. page 30. Concerning the use of the Law to the Elect. ibid.
Concerning the use of it before calling. page 31. Concerning the use thereof to
them after calling. page 34. Concerning the giving of the Law to Adam in
Innocence, with the cause. page 36. Concerning the giving of the Law to the
Israelites in Mount Sinai. ibid. Concerning the Establishing of the Law by
Christ. page 39. Concerning the manner of the Preaching of the Law. page 40.
Also what Rules are to be observed for the understanding of the Law. page 42.
Concer: the sum of the First and Second Table of the Law. page 43. Concer:
the Gospel, or Covenant of grace. ibid. Concer: Christ, the substance of the
same. p. 46. Concer: the Person of Christ. ibid. Concer: the Office of Christ.
page 48. Concer: the Mediator ship of Christ and the parts thereof. ibid.
Concer: the Priesthood of Christ, and the parts thereof. page 49. Concer: our
Redemption, and the parts thereof. p. 51. Concer: Justification, the first part
of Redemption. ibid. Concer: the parts of Justification. page 52. Concer:
Sanctification, the second part of Redemption. page 54. Concer: the parts of
Sanctification. page 55. Concerning the Intercession of Christ. page 57.
Concerning the Kingdom of Christ. ibid. Concer: the greatness of Christ's
Kingdom, with the Nature of it. page 59. Concer: Faith, with the Definition of
it. ibid. Concer: the Spirit with it is diverse works. p. 62. Concer: the
outward things in the Kingdom of Christ. page 63. Concerning the Ministry of
the Word. ibid. Concerning the Sacraments in general. ibid. Concerning
Baptism. page 65. Concer: the Lords Supper. page 67. Concer: the censures of
the Church. page 69. Concerning Prayer. page 73. Concer: the Lords Prayer.
ibid. Concer: Fasting, with the kinds thereof. page 84. Concerning the Author
of a Fast. page 85. Concer: the causes of a Fast. page 86. Concer: the parts of
a Fast. ibid. Concer: the ends of a Fast. page 88. Concer: a holy Feast. ibid.
Concer: the exercises for the day. page 89. Concer: the Persons belonging to
the Administration of the Kingdom of Christ. page 90 Concerning the death of
the Righteous and the wicked. page 91. Concerning what is common to both, and
proper to each. ibid. Concerning the last Resurrection. page 92. Concerning the
last Judgment. page 93. Concerning the signs going before. page 95. Conce:
the end of Christ's coming to Judgment. page 96. Concer: the Glorification of
the Saints. ibid. Concer: Christ's delivering up his Kingdom to his Father.
ibid. Concer: God being All in All. page 97.
The Christians Profession.
Question.

WHereupon ought Faith and true Religion to be grounded?

Answer.

Upon the written Word of God contained in the holy Scriptures of the old and
new Testamen; Ephe. 2.20. Concerning the Scriptures, and the Attributes of them.
And are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ
himself being the chief corner stone.

Qu. Who is the author of these ^oly Scriptures?

An. God himself, Heb. 1.1
Who at sundry times and in diverse manners spoke in times past unto the Fathers
by the Prophets.

Qu. How came these Scriptures first to the Church from God?

An. By divine inspiration, 2. Tim. 3.16.
All Scriptures is given by inspiration of God: 2. Pet. 1.20
Knowing this first, that no pro phecy of the Scripture is of any private
interpretation, for the Prophecy came not in the old time by the will of man,
but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost.

Qu. To what end were they given?

An. Perfectly to teach us what to believe to salvation, and how to live well.
2. Tim. 3.16.
All Scripture is profitable for Doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for
instruction in righteousness.

Qu. Of what authority be these holy Scriptures?

A. Of the highest authority, above al men or Angels; and therefore the
authority of the Church, Councels, Fathers is far inferior thereunto: Gal. 1.8.
But though we or an Angel from heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you,
then that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed.

Qu. What is the reason of this?

An. First, because they are of God. Secondly, because they only, and not the
Church nor any humane authority do bind the conscience: Isa. 33.22.
For the Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiuer. the Lord is our King, he
will save us.

Qu. Which be those books of the holy Scriptures?

An. the Old and New Testament.

Qu. Which be those of the Old Teastament?

An. The Law and the Prophets.

Q. Which be those of the Law?

A. The five book of Moses called Genesis. Exodus. Leuiticus. Numbers.
Deuterono.

Q. Which be those of the Prophets?

An. Some are Historical, Some Doctrinall, and some Prophetical, greater and
lesser.

Histo. Joshua. Judges. Ruth. 1.2. Samuel. 1.2. Kings. 1.2. Chron. Ezra.
Nehemia. Hester.
Doct. Job. Psalms: Proverbs. Ecclesiastes. Canticles. Lamentati.

Propheti. greater Isaiah. Jeremiah. Ezekiel. Daniel.
Lesser. Hosea. Joel. Amos. Obadia. Jonah. Micha. Nahum. Habakk^k. Zephania.
Haggai. Zacharia. Malachi.


Qu. What be the Books of the new Testament?

An. Some are Historical, some Doctrinall, and some Prophetical.

Histo. of Christ and the Apostles. Matthew. Mark. Luke. John. Acts.
Doct. The Epistles of Paul to the Churches. Romans. 1.2. Cor. Galathi.
Ephesia. 1.2. These. The Author to the Hebrews.

Doct. Paul's Epistles to particular Persons. 1.2. Tim. Titus. Philemon.
The small Epistles written by seueralmen James. 1.2. Peter. 1.2.3. John Jude.


The Revelations, which is Prophticall.

Qu. How is it proved that these Scriptures are the word of God?

An. First, by the perfect concord and agreement between all the writings,
notwithstanding the diversity of persons, by whom, place where, times when, and
matters whereof they were written.

Secondly, the admirable force and majesty that is in them; Mebr. 4.12
For the word of God is lively and mighty in operation, and sharper then any
two edged sword, and enters through, even unto the dividing asunder of the
soul and the spirit, and of the joints and the marrow, and is a discerner of
the thoughts and the intens of the heart.

Thirdly, by the Spirits accompanying the same in the minestery thereof.

Hitherto of the Scriptures.
Qu. What do you consider of concerning God?

An. Four things. 1. His Nature. 2. His Attributes. 3. The Trinity of persons.
4. His works.

Qu. What is God? Concerning God.


An. An eternal Essence that has being of himself: Ex^. 3.14.
And God answered Moses, I AM that I AM.

Qu. Of how many sorts be his Atributs?

An. Of two sorts. 1. Incommunicable. Concerning the Attributes of God.
2. Communicable.

Qu. What be the Attributes of God incommunicable?

An. Two, 1. Simplenes of Nature. 2. Infiniteness.

Qu. What is that you call simpleness of Nature?

An. It is an essenticall property in God, whereby every thing in God is God
himself, 1. John 4.16.
God is Love.

Qu. What do you consider of his infiniteness?

An. That is either in greatness or eternity.

Qu. What is his greatness?

An. It is an essential property in God, whereby he contains al things, and
is contained of nothing.

Qu. What is his infiniteness in eternity?

An. It is an essential property in God, whereby Reave. 1.8.
He is the first and the last.

Qu. What are the Attributes in God which are communicable?

An. Those which he does communicate to others, Exodus 34.6.
as power, wisdom, mercy, and such like.

Qu. Are these in men or Angels, as they are in God?

An. No, in God they be essential, in us by participation; in him absolutely
perfect, 1. Cor. 13.9.
in us imperfect: in him without measure, and in all fullness; in us by
measure: Ioh. 1.16
of his fullness we receive.

Qu. What is further to be considered of concerning God?

An. Concerning the Trinity of person^. Ioh. 14.16.
The Trinity of persons.

Qu. What is a person in Trinity?

An. A distinct substance, having in it the whole Godhead Colos. 2.9.
In him dwells all the fullness of the godhead bodily.

Qu. What is the Father?

An. The first person in the Trinity who has of himself begotten his son:
Psalm. 2.7.
Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee.

Qu. What is the Son?

An. The second person in Trinity, eternally begotten of the substance of the
Father: John 1.18.
no man has seen God at any time, the only begotten son, which is in the
bosom of the Father, he has declared him.

Qu. What is the holy Ghost?

An. The third person in Trinity, proceeding eternally from the Father and the
Son: Ioh. 15.26
But when the comforter shall come whom I will send unto our fro the Father, even
the spirit of truth which proceeds of the Father.

Qu. Is every one of the three persons the eternal God?

An. Yes, the Father is God: Romans 1.7. John 17.3.
Grace and peace be with you from God the Father. The Son is God, Isa. 9.6.
For unto us a child is borne, and unto us a son is given, and the government
is upon his shoulder, and he shall call his name wonderful, counselor, the
mighty God. Ioh. 1.1. 1. Ioh. 5.20.
In the beginning was the word, and the word was God. The holy Ghost is God.
Act. 5.3.
then said Peter, Ananias, why has Satan filled thine heart that thou
should lie unto the holy Ghost? Thou have not lied unto men, but unto God.

Qu. How are these three said to be one?

An. They are one in being and Essence, but three persons and substances.

Qu. Every one of these being true Gods, are there more Gods then one?

An. No, there is but one God only. 1. Cor. 8.5.6 Deuteronomy. 6.4.
For though there be that are called Gods; yet unto us there is but one God.

Qu. What is the reason that these three are but one God?

An. Because the godhead is communicable to all the persons, but the persons
are not communicable. Ioh. 14.10.
Beleeuest thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father is in me?

Qu. What are the personal properties?

An. In the Father to beget, in the Son to be begotten; in the holy Ghost to
proceed from the Father and the Son; Ioh. 1.18.
No man has seen God at any time the only begotten son of the father he
has declared him; Ioh. 15.26
but when the comforter the holy Ghost shall come, whom I will send unto you
frothe Father, even the spirit of truth which proceeds from the Father.

Hitherto of the Trinity.
Qu. What do you consider concerning the works of God?

An. Two things. 1. The decree of God. Concerning the Decree of God in general.
2. The execution of the decree.

Qu. What is God decree?

An. It is the most perfect will of God, whereby he appoints all things.
Ephe. 1.11.
In whom also we wre chosen, when we were predestinate according to the purpose
of him which works all things after the counsel of his own will.

Qu. What do you consider of his decree?

An. Two things, 1. That it is general. 2. That it is special.

Qu. What is his general decree?

An. It is that which is universal of all things, from the beginning of the
world, unto the end of the same: Act. 15.18
From the beginning of the world, God knows all his works.

Qu. What is his special decree?

An. It is that which is special and particular of some things, as men and
Angels, called predestination: Romans 8.30
Whom he predestined.

Qu. What is Predestination?

An. Concerning Predestination in special.
It is the decree of God concerning the eternal estate of men and Angels.

Qu. What are the parts of Predestination?

An. Two, 1. Election. 2. Reprobation.

Qu. What is Election?

An. Concerning Election, with the cause and end thereof.
Gods eternal choosing or appoynting of certain men and Angels to eternal
life: Ephe. 1.4.
He has chosen us in him before the foundatio of the world: Romans 9.23.
And that he might declare the riches of his glory upon the vessels of mercy
which he has appointed unto glory.

Qu. Concerning reprobation and the end thereof.
What is Reprobation?

An. Gods eternal appoynting of some men and Angels to destruction. Romans 9.22.
What if God would to show his wrath and to make his power known, suffer with
long patience the vessels of wrath appointed to destruction: 1. Pet. 2.8.
And a stone to stumble, and a rock of offense, even to them which stumble at
the word, being disobedient, unto the which thing they were ever ordained: Jude
4.
For there are certain men crept in which were of old ordained to this
condemnation.

Qu. What is the cause of this decree?

An. The will of God only, Romans 9.18
Therefore he has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens.

Qu. When did this decree begin?

An. It was before the foundation of the world was laid, therefore eternal:
Ephe. 1.4.
He has chosen us in time before the foundation of the world.

Qu. What is the end of his Election?

An. The praise of his glorious grace: Ephe. 1.5, 6.
Who has predestined us in him, to the praise of the glory of his grace.

Qu. What is the end of his reprobation?

An. The praise of his glorious Justice: Pro. 16.4.
God made all things for his own glory, even the wicked for the day of wrath.

Qu. Can this decree be altered?

An. No, but remains unchangeable, the same for ever; James 1.17.
Every good and perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the Father
of lights, with whom is no variablenes, neither shadow of turning.

Hitherto of the Decree.
Qu. Concerning the execution of Gods Decree.
What is the execution of the decree?

An. The fulfilling of that which is decreed: Ephe. 1.11 Daniel 4.21
Who works all things after the counsel of his own will.

Qu. What are the parts of execution?

An. Two, 1. Creation. 2. Providence.

Qu. Concerning the Creation ^ngenerall.
What is Creation?

An. The giving of the first being, form, and quality to every creature.

Qu. What are the parts of Creation?

An. Two, 1. The rude Mass of the world, wherein all things were confounded
one with another. 2. The beautiful frame and fashion of the world.

Qu. Whereof was this rude Mass made?

An. Of nothing, Heb. 11.3.
Through faith we understand that the world was ordained by the word of God, so
that the things which we see are not made of things that did appear.

Qu. How was it kept and preserved?

An. By the holy Ghost: Genesis 1.2.
And the earth was without form and void, and darkness was upon the deep,
and the Spirit of God moved upon the waters.

Qu. What do you consider in the frame and fashion of the world?

An. Two things, 1. The Elemens which are most simple substances. 2. The bodies
which are compounded of the Elements.

Qu. What are those Elements?

An. They are four, First, Fire. Secondly, Air. Thirdly, Earth. Fourthly,
Water.

Qu. What understand you by the bodies compounded?

An. The rest of the creatures made of the uneven mixture of the Elements.

Qu. How many sorts of creatures be there created?

An. Two 1. Visible. Col. 1.16.
For by him were all things made which are in heaven and which are in earth,
things visible, and things invisible. 2. Invisible. Col. 1.16.
For by him were all things made which are in heaven and which are in earth,
things visible, and things invisible.

Qu. How many sorts of visible creatures be there?

An. Two, 1. Sensible. Sensible, man: Insensible, all the rest of the creatures.
2. Insensible. Sensible, man: Insensible, all the rest of the creatures.

Qu. What do you consider in the cretion of man? Concerning the Creation of
man in special.


An. Three things, 1. His Parts. 2. His Sexes. 3. His Dignity.

Qu. Concerning the parts of man.
How many parts be there of man?

A. Two, 1. Body. 1. These. 5.23.
And I pray God that your whole spirit and soul, and body, may be kept
blameless. 2. Soul. 1. These. 5.23.
And I pray God that your whole spirit and soul, and body, may be kept
blameless.

Qu. Whereof was the body made?

An. Of the dust of the ground, and therefore mortal. Genesis 2.7.
The Lord made man of the dust of the ground.

Qu. What is the Soul?

An. A spiritual substance, therefore immortal. Genesis 1.27.
And the Lord breathed in his face the breath of life, and man was made a
living soul.

Qu. Why is not the soul mortal?

An. Because it was not made of any of the Elements; it being then free from
composition, it is also free from decay and perishing.

Qu. What are the diverse sexes?

A. Two, 1. Male. Genesis 1.27. Genesis 2.22.
Then God created man in his Image, he created them Male and Female 2. Female.
Genesis 1.27. Genesis 2.22.
Then God created man in his Image, he created them Male and Female

Qu. What are the dignities? Concerning the dignities of man in his Creation.


A. Two, 1. To be made after Gods own Image. 2. To have power and dominion
over the creatures.

Genesis 1.26.
And God said, Let us make man in out Image, according to our likeness, and
let them rule over the fish of the sea, and over the fowls of the heaven, and
over the beasts, and over the earth, and every thing that creeps and moves
on the earth.

Qu. What understand you by the Image of God?

An. Perfection in knowledge and purity of nature, whereby man perfectly knew
the will of his Creator, and had power and ability perfectly to perform the
same, whereby he had fellowship and communion with God his Creator; sof arre
forth as was possible for the creature with the Creator. Colo. 3.10.
And have put on the new man which is renewed in knowledge after the Image of
him that created him. Ephe. 4.24
Put on the new man which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness.

Qu. Were all men created in this estate of perfection, in knowledge and
righteousness?

An. Yes, because Adam was not made as a particular private person, but as a
public person, containing the stock and root of all mankind: in whose loins
all his posterity was contained. Eccles. 7.31
Only this I found, that God has made man righteous.

Qu. What are the Invisible creatures?

An. Concerning the Creatition of the Angels in general.
The Angels.

Qu. Of what did God make the Angels?

An. Of nothing.

Qu. What consider you of these Creatures?

An. Four things, 1. Their Nature. 2. Their Knowledge. 3. Their Power. 4.
Their Office.

Qu. What is their nature?

An. It is not of any corporal matter but merely spiritual and
incorruptible. Heb. 1.14
Are they not all ministering spirits?

Qu. What is their knowledge.

An. Threefold. 1. Natural, for they be inteligent spirits in a far higher
degree then the spirit of man. 2. Experientall. Concerning the nature of the
Angels.
3. By revelation.

Qu. What is their power?

An. It is very great, Concerning their power and Office.
yet it is limited to do only what God will. 2. These. 1.7.
Mighty Angels.

Qu. What is their Office?

An. Twofold. 1. To defend, protect, and deliver the righteous. 2. To destroy
the wicked.

Acts 12.7.8.11.15.
The Lord sent his Angel to deliver Peter out of prison from the hand of Herod.
2. Kings. 19.35.
The Angel of the Lord went out the same night and smote in the Camp of
Ashur, and Hundredth Fourscore and Five Thousand.

Qu. How many sorts of Angels be there?

An. Good and Bad.

Qu. How were they created?

An. They were all made Angels of light.

Qu. How came some of them to be bad?

An. Not by creation, but by transgression. Jude. 6.
The Angels which kept not their first Estate, but left their own habitation,
he has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of
the great day.

Qu. Whereby did God make all things?

An. By his Word only. Hob. 11.3.
By Faith we understand that the World was made by the Word of God.

Qu. In what Estate were the rest of the Creatures made and placed?

An. They were all made good and perfect in their kind. Genesis 1.31.
And God saw all that he made, and lo, it was very good.

Qu. What was the end of all the works that God made?

An. His own glory. 1 Romans 11.36.
For of him and through him, and for him are all things; to him be all glory.

Qu. Did all the three persons create?

An. Yes, because all the works of the Trinity that are adextra from without,
are common to them all, so that the Father did create, the Son did create,
and the Holy Ghost did create. Genesis 1.26
Let us make man in our Image. Heb. 1.2.
In these last days he has spoken unto us by his Son, by whom also he made
the world. Genesis 1.2.
The spirit of God or the Holy Ghost moved upon the waters.

Hitherto of the Creation.
Qu. What is providence?

An. Concerning the providence, and ^^w far it does extend
A most wise disposing of all things to their proper and appointed ends.

Qu. How far does this providence extend it self?

An. First to all things both small and great. Mat. 10.29.
Are not two sparrowes sold for a farthing: and not ^ne of them falls to the
ground without the providence of your Father?

Secondly, to matters of chance or accident. Pruo. 16.33.
The lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord.

Thirdly, unto actions of evil, though not as they are evil. Am^^ 3.
Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? 1 K^^^s 21.25.
Now therefore behold the Lord has put a lying spirit in the mouth of all
these Prophets, and the Lord has appointed evil against thee. Genesis 45.8.
And Joseph said to his Brethren, You sent me not hither; but the Lord sent me
hither.

Qu. Is not God then the author of sin?

An. Noe, for he that is goodness it self, cannot be the author of any thing
but of that which is most perfectly good; and therefore does that well and
justly which the instrument does ill and unlawfully.

Qu. Is it not better to say these things are done by Gods permission then by
his providence and appointment?

An. God permits nothing but that he wills to be done, other permission there
is none in God.

Qu. How does Gods providence bring things to pass?

An. Sometimes by means, and sometimes without means. Act. 27.30
By means the Lord saved Paul, and the rest that were in the ship. Isa. 37.21.
And recovered Hezekiah of his sickness by means, applying the plasters of
dried figs to the sore. Dent. 8.4
Without means when he caused the Children of Israel to pass through the
Wilderness, and their garments nor their shoes waxed old.

Qu. Of what thing chiefly is this providence?

An. Of men and Angels.

Qu. What of them especially is to be considered? Concerning the providence of
God, in the fall of man and Angels.


An. The fall of both, and restoring of some men.

Qu. What do you consider of the fall of man?

An. Two things. 1. The causes of the fall. 2. The fall it self.

Qu. What are the causes of the fall?

An. They are either. Without man. Or in man.

Qu. What are the causes without man?

An. Two 1. Principal as the devil. 2. Isntrumental as the Serpent.

Qu. What are the causes in man?

An. Two 1. The outward senses 2. The inward affection.

Qu. What was the fall it self?

An. Concerning the fall of man.
A voluntary transgression of that law which God gave man, from whence came
original and actual sin.

Qu. What is original sin?

An. A privation of original purity, Concerning the original sin.
and a corrupting of the powers and faculties of nature.

Qu. How is original sin called in the Scriptures?

A. Romans 6.6.
The old man, concupiscence, sin that dwells in us, the body of sin. Romans
7.20.23.
The law of the members.

When does this original sin begin?

An. In the very conception, Psalm. 51.5.
Behold I was conceived in sin.

Qu. What is actual sin?

An. It is the breaking of the law of God either in thought, word, or deed. 1
John 3.4
Sin is the transgression of the law.

Qu. Are all sins equal and alike?

An. All sins are damnable, even the least e uill thought, and yet are
pardonable, except the sin against the Holy Ghost. Mat. 12.31.
Wherefore I say vnyou, every sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men,
but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men.

Qu. What followed sin?

An. Two things. 1. Guilt. 2. Punishment.

Qu. What is guilt?

An. It is the desert of sin whereby the Creature becomes subject to the
wrath and punishment of God.

Qu. What does this guiltiness work in the person guilty?

An. It does work accusations and unquietness in the mind. Romans 2.15.
Their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing one
another.

Qu. What is the punishment of sin?

An. It is all evil both in this life, and in the life to come.

Qu. What are the evils in this life?

An. Twofold, first upon the soul, ignorance, darkness of mind, hardness
of heart, pronenesse to sin. Ephesians. 4.18.19.
Having their cogitation darkened, and being strangers from the life of God
through the ignorance that is in them, because of the hardness of their hearts,
having given themselves unto wantonness to work all uncleanness even with
greediness. Secondly, upon the body all calamity and misery both in goods and
name, as it is largely set forth in the 28. Deuteronomie. The Lord shall send
upon thee cursing, troble, and shame in all that thou set thine hand to
do, until thou be destroyed.

Qu. What is the evil in the life to come?

An. Everlasting destruction of body and soul in hell. Romans 6.23.
For the wages of sin is death.

Qu. Did this sin, guilt, and punishment rest in Adam, and extend it self no
farther?

An. It did not rest in him, but spread it self unto all his posterity. Romans
5.12.19.
Wherefore as by one man Adam sin entered into the World: Concerning the extent
thereof unto all the posterity of Adam with guilt.
and death by sin; and so death went over all men, forasmuch as all men have
sinned, and by one man disobedience many were made sinners.

Qu. Why should the posterity of Adam be guilty of the sin they never
committed?

An. Because all mankind was in Adam's loins when he sinned, Heb. 7.8.
As in Abraham, Levy is said to have paid tithes to Melchesedec; so that it
was committed in their natures, though not in their persons, and therefore they
sin.

Qu. What follows upon this?

An. That by propagation from the last Parents all are partakers of the
transgression of their first Parents: and of the guilt and punishment both
temporal and eternal, and so are all borne Children of wrath, and firebrarnds
of hell.

Qu. Is not God unjust in so severe punishment of that one sin of Adam, that
all his posterity perish as has been showed?

An. No: because such is the infinite pure righteous nature of God that he
must needs curse and abhor the creature that is defiled with sin, all sin
is committed against an infinite God; and therefore in instice deserves an
infinite punishment. Habak. 1.13.
He is of purer eyes then to behold iniquitia.

Qu. Can man no ways by no means help himself out of this miserable
condition?

An. Concerning (...)
No, but still run themselves deeper into condemnation.

Qu. Has God then appointed that all men should everlastingly perish in this
miserable condition?

An. No, God has appointed to glorify the attribute of his mercy in the
salvation of some, as well as to glorify the attribute of justice in the
condemnation of others.

Qu. What is the restoring of man?

An. Concerning the (...) of man and the (...)
It is a delivering of all the Elect from the Estate of sin and misery, and a
restoring them to a far better Estate then ever they had in Adam. ^om. 5.1^.
For if through the offense of one many be dead, much more the grace of God and
the gift by grace which is by one Man Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many.

Qu. What is the way which God has appointed for his Elect to attain to this
new estate and condition?

An. Only Jesus Christ apprehended by Faith. Joh. 14.6.
Jesus said, I am the way, the truth, and the life.

Qu. How does that appear?

An. Because the Scriptures shows that the Fathers before the Law, and under
the Law, and under the Gospel were by this way only justified and saved. Genesis
15.6.
And Abraham believed the Lord: and he accounted that to him for
righteousness. Heb. 13.8.
Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day, the same also for ever.

Qu. Have not the Angels some part in this restoration by Jesus Christ?

An. No.

Qu. Why did it not belong unto them also?

An. First, because the promise of restoring was made only unto man and not
unto them. Genesis 3.15.
The seed of the woman shall break the head of the serpent. Secondly, because
this restoration was wrought in the nature of man and not in the nature of
Angels. Heb. 2.16.
For he in no sort took the nature of Angels, but he took the seed of
Abraham.

Qu. What are the outward means in which God does ordinarily reveal and make
known effectually unto man this threefold Estate and condition which we have
before set forth?

An. The Word of God.

Qu. Concerning the outward means in which God does reucal the threefold
estate of man.
What are the parts of the Word of God?

An. Generally they be two.

Qu. Which be they?

An. First, the Law called the Covenant of works. Secondly, the Gospel
commonly called the Covenant of grace, or new Testament.

Qu. Which is that you call the Law or Covenant of works?

An. The decalog or Ten Commandments, commonly called the Moral Law.

Qu. What does the Law or Covenant of works require?

An. Perfectly to keep and perform all things which it requires, both for
matter, and manner, upon pain of the curse and wrath of God, for the least
breach of the same, either in thought, word, or deed. Gal. 3.10.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are written in the
book of the Law to do them.

Qu. Is any man now able thus perfectly to keep the Law?

An. No man is now able perfectly to keep the Law, but continually break the
same both in thought, word, and deed. 1 Ioh. 1.8.
In many things we sin. Genesis 6.5.
And all the thoughts and imaginations of man's heart were only evil
continually.

Qu. Is not God unjust in giving such a Law to man as he is no ways able to
keep?

An. No: because God did give man power and ability to keep it in his first
Creation; and in that he is not now able to keep it, the fault is from
himself, and God is just in that he requires but his own. Eccle. 7.31
Only this have I found that GOD made man righteous: but they have sought many
inventions.

Qu. Seeing man is not now able to keep the Law nor cannot be justified by
it: is there then no more use of the Law?

An. Yes, the Law is still of great use in the Church of God. 1 Timothy 1.7.
And we know that the Law is good, if a man use it lawfully.

Qu. Of what use is the Law?

An. The Law is of great use both to the reprobate and to the Elect.

Qu. Of what use is the Law to the Reprobate?

An. Concerning the use of the Law to the Reprobate.
First, that they may justify God in their own consciences, in his
pronouncing of the sentence of death and condemnation against them. Romans
2.15.16.
Which show the effect of the Law written in their hearts, their consciences
also bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing one another, at the day when
God shall judge the secrets of men.

Secondly, to be as a hook or bridle to keep in, curb or restrain their
violent corruptions from breaking forth, that so blood may not touch blood. 1 Timothy 1.9.10.
Knowing this that the law is not given unto a righteous man, but unto the
lawless, disobedient, to the ungodly, and to sinners, to the unholy, and to
the profane, to murderers of Fathers, and Mothers, to man-slayers, to
whoremongers, to buggerers, to to liars, to perjured.

Qu. Of what use is the Law to the Elect?

An. Concerning the use of the Law to the Elect.
It is twofold, first before their calling.

Secondly, after their calling.

Qu. Of what use is the Law to the Elect before their calling?

An. First to discover unto them their lost miserable estate by nature,
Concerning the use of it to them before calling.
by reason of sin as well as others. Romans 3.19.
Now we know that whatsoever the Law faith, it says to them that are under
the Law that every mouth may be stopped, and all the World guilty before God.

Secondly, to aggrauate their sins. Romans 7.11
But sin took occasion by the Commandment. Romans 3.20.
For by the law comes the knowledge of sin. Romans 7.8.
And I had not known sin except the law had said thou shall not lust.

Thirdly, to kill them and slay them, that so they may receive the sentence of
death in themselves. But sin, that it might appear sin working death in
me, Romans 7.13.
by that which is good, that sin might be out of measure sinful by the
Commandment. Romans 7.9.
I was once alive without the Law, but when the Law came, sin reviued, and I
dyed.

Fourthly, to be a Schoole-maister to drive them to Christ. Call. 3.24
Wherefore the Law was our Schoole-maister to bring us unto Christ.

Qu. Has the Law this power in it self to work these effects?

An. No: the Law in it self is a dead letter, but the Law is a means or an
instrument which God uses, his spirit being the efficient accompanying the
same, working these effects. Ioh. 16.8.
The spirit shall convince the World of sin; that is, the Spirit of GOD,
without man, the Law being the ordinary instrument.

Qu. Are all the Children of God convinced alike by the Law, of their lost
condition?

An. All those that live under the means being capable, are convinced alike
for quality: that is, they all see themselves, and feel themselves all lost in
Adam, and borne Children of wrath; but not alike in quantity, measure, or
degree: as does appear by the example of Zacheus, and Lydia, whom for ought
we find were nothing so deeply convinced by the law as others of whom we
read, as the three thousand that were convinced at Peter's Sermon; and the
Iaylor and the like, and yet no doubt but they were truly convinced.

Qu. What may be the reason of this difference?

An. I conceive chiefly, because the Lord by his Spirit will not be tied unto
any ordinary course or means: But works where, when, and after what manner he
will; because the Lord will not always have man to render a reason of all his
works: Joh. 3.8.
The wind blows where it lists. Again it may be in regard of those secret
seeds of grace which God bestows upon his Children even in their infancy,
ordinarily in Baptism; Now in some, these seeds do begin to spread forth,
and to be expressed even in their very childhood: so that they begin to have
some measure of apprehending of Gods free grace bestowed upon them in their
Baptism before they go on in a customed course of sin; but contrariwise,
the seed of grace which many received in their Baptism lies hid a long time
before it break forth and manifest it self; and they go on a long time in a
customed course of sinning, by reason whereof when they come to be convinced,
they are ordinarily stricken with amore deeper apprehension of their misery by
reason of sin, questioning whether God ever did or ever will bestow any mercy
upon such miserable sinners as they are.

Qu. Of what use is the Law unto the Children of God, after their calling?

An. Concerning the of thereof to them after ^alling.
First, to stir them up to thankfulness unto God, for delivering them from
so great a bondage. Romans 7.15
I thank GOD through Jesus Christ my Lord.

Secondly, to beat down their sense, and reason, and pride by the severity of
the same, that so they may not rest in their own way of works, for sense and
reason knows no other way to life but works; And therefore when the young
man, the great Ruler, came running unto Christ saving, good Master, what shall
I do that I may have eternal life; all his learning, wisdom, and reason
knew no other way to life, but by doing. Mat. 19.16.
That way his wisdom and reason directed him. Wheerefore Christ, that his
high thoughts of his wisdom and reason might be confounded and brought
down, sets him such a task as he knew full well he was no ways able to
do. Mat. 19.17.
If thon wilt enter into life keep the Commandments; Now this way of works
is so natural that the Children of God after they are come to Christ have much
ado to deny themselves, and all their works, and therefore to that end they
have continual use of the Law.

Thirdly, to drive them more and more out of themselves that they may cleave
close unto Christ: and this it does by the curse and terrors of the same: and
this as I conceive was prefigured Genesis 3.24.
by the Lords hanging of the blade of a glittering sword shaken to keep the way
of the tree of life; for although the Lord had revealed unto man a new way unto
life and happiness which was only by believing GODS promise concerning Christ
the seed of the Woman to break the head of the Serpent, yet man naturally
wise, and inclined to rest and seek for life in the old way of works, and
therefore it is probable that the Lord knew that Adam would be ready to think
that as he lost life by the eating of the Tree of knowledge of good and
evil, that so by the eating of the Tree of life he might come to life again:
And therefore the Lord hung a glittering sword to drive him off from that way,
that so he might be driven to Christ that new and living way which God had
reu^aled them.

Qu. When was this Law given?

An. First, it was given by the Lord to Adam in the estate of innocence, and in
him to all his posterity.

Secondly. ^^^^d. 20.
It was given by God himself unto the children of Israel in Mount Sinai.

Thirdly. Exodus 15.21.
It was given by Moses from the Lord unto the children of Israel.

Qu. Concerning the giving of the Law to Adam in innocence with the cause.
How was the Law given by the Lord to Adam in innocence?

An. By writing in it his heart. Romans 2.15
Which shows the effect of the Law written in their hearts.

Qu. How was the Law given by the Lord unto the Isralites in Mount Sinai?

An. Concerning the giving of the Law to the Israelites in want.
By voice in thunderings and lightnings, and the sound of trumpets in a
terrible manner. Heb 12.18.19.20.21.
For ye are not come unto the Mount that might not be touched, nor unto
burning fire, nor to blackenesse and darkness and tempest, neither unto the
sound of a trumpet, and the voice of words which they that heard it excused
themselves that the words should not be spoken to them any more, for they
were not able to abide that which was commanded, yea though a beast touched the
Mountain it shall be stoned or thrust through with a dart: and so terrible
was the sight which appeared, that Moses savd, I fear and quake.

Qu. How was the Law given by Moses from the Lord to the Children of Israel?

An. It was given in two Tables of of stone which were to be put into the Arc,
and so to be delivered unto the children of Israel. Exodus 24.26.27.
And the LORD said unto Moses, write thou these words: For after the tenor of
these words I have made a covenant with thee, and with Israel. Exo. 25.21
And in the Ark thou shall put the testimony which I will give thee; and he
writ in the tables the words of the covenant, even the ten commandments.

Qu. Why was the Law given at the first, written in the heart of man?

An. First, that the Law might be known unto all men by the light of nature.

Secondly, that thereby all men might be left without excuse. Romans 1.14.15.
For when the Gentiles which have not the Law do by nature the things
contained in the Law, they are a law unto themselves which show the effect of
the law written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and
their thoughts accusing one another.

Qu. Why was the Law given by the Lord unto the Israelites in such a terrible
manner as has been showed?

An. To fright and terrify man thereby, that so he might not dare to rest in
the same for life and salvation, and therefore the Apostle says, 2 Corinthians.
3.9.
That it was the minstery of condemnation even to condemn them that were under
it.

Qu. Why was the Law given by Moses from the Lord written in tables of stone,
and put into the Arc?

An. Because in that he was a type of Christ the mediator, who was the true
Arc in whom the Law was to be perfectly kept. Gal. 3.22.
And it was ordaidayned by Angels in the hand of a mediator. Heb. 8.1.^
Now we have such a mediator as is a minister of the sanctuary, and the true
tabernacle, or Arc, which the Lord pight, and not man.

Qu. In what manner was the Law given to the Israelites?

An. It was delivered with many legal promises and threatenings annexed
thereunto, as does appear at large in the 27. and 28. Chap. of Deuteronomie,
which was the pedagogie or schoole-maistership of the same, which was to make
them long and groan for the coming of the Messiah, at whose coming this
pedagogie was to have an end, so that it was proper to the Jews only.

Qu. What other Laws were given to the Jews?

An. Diverse ceremonies which was to tipe out and set forth Christ to come, who
was their Gospel, which ceremonies were to have an end when Christ the
substance was come; and therefore were proper to the Jews.

Qu. Is not the morrall Law abolished by Christ, nor no part of the same, after
men are brought unto Christ by Faith?

An. No: the Moral Law nor no part of the same is abolished by Christ, neither
by his coming in the flesh in general, nor yet by his coming to dwell in
men's hearts in particular: he only translates them that believe from under
that Covenant and brings them under a new: but leaves the first standing in
his full force and power. Mat. 5.17.18.
Think not that I am come to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it; for verily I
say unto you, till heaven and earth perish one jot or one tittle of the Law
shall not escape till all things be fulfilled.

Qu. How is the Law to be preached unto men?

An. Concerning the manger of the preaching of the Law.
First, to show unto men what a pure and perfect estate they once had by their
creation, when they had power and ability perfectly to keep such a most pure
and perfect Law.

Secondly, to show and discover unto men their corrupt, lost, miserable estate
and condition by reason of sin.

Thirdly, to show and discover unto men the pure righteous nature of God by the
purity of his most pure and righteous law, which he must have perfectly kept,
or else he comes to judge and condemn men. Exodus 34.7
For he is a God that cannot quit the guilty.

Qu. Seeing men in themselves are now no ways able to keep the Law, are they
not to be commanded and exhorted to do the Law, or the things contained in
the Law?

An. First, the law is to be preached or used by the Magistrate politically to
curb, bridle, restrain, and keep in the unruly corruptions of gross wic ked
men, by the threatenings and terrors of the same.

Secondly, the law is to be preached unto men that are civil, or out wardly
religious being in the estate of nature, perfectly to be done upon pain of the
eternal curse and wrath of God; that so they may not rest in that their way of
works, nor in their endeavors and desires to keep the law, but that they may
be wearied and tired in their condition, that so they may have that preparatiue
disposition being robbed and spoiled of all: that so way may be made for
Christ; And this was the end of Christ's preaching the law to the rich young man
that came to him. Mat. 19.17.
Keep the commandments.

Thirdly, men that are brought unto Christ are to be exhorted and stirred up by
the ministry of the Word, to walk in the matter of the law out of love and
thankfulness unto Christ, to show forth and declare the truth of their faith
before men. Mat. 5.26
Let your light so shine before men that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in heaven.

Qu. What rules are to be observed for our better understanding of the Law?

An. Concerning what rules are to be observed for the understanding of the Law?
First, that in every commandemet there is a figurative speech where by more is
commanded or forbidden then is named.

Secondly, that in every commandment there is two parts, affirmative, and a
negative, whereof one is expressed, and the other is employed.

Thirdly, that whatsoever every commandment commands or forbids, it commands
and forbids all means and occasions thereunto.

Fourthly, that the law is spiritual, and therefore it binds the spirit of
man, or inward man, so that the least motion of the heart is a breach of the
same.

Qu. Why is every commandment set out in the second person, and singular
number, Thou?

An. That every particular person may know that God speakesto him or her in
particular, as it were by name.

Qu. How is the Law divided?

An. Into two Tables, the First and Second.

Qu. What is the sum of the First Table?

An. Mat. 22.37.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, Concerning the sum of
the first and second table of the Law.
with all thy soul, and with all thy might.

Qu. What is the sum of the Second?

An. Mat. 22.39.40.
It is like unto the First, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self: On
these Two commandments hangs the whole law and the Prophets.

Hitherto of the Law of Covenant of works?
Qu. What is the Gospel or Covenant of grace or new testament? Concerning the
Gospel or covenant of grace.


An. It is, that God will freely give eternal life through Jesus Christ to all
his Elect. Ez^k. 16.6.8.
I saw thee in thy blood, and I said unto thee, Live, yea I swore unto thee,
and entered into a covenant with thee, and thou becamest mine. Iere. 31.32
And in those days says the Lord, I will make a new covenant with the house
of Israel, and with the house of Jacob. 1 Ioh. 5.11
And this is the record, that God has given us eternal life, and this life is
in his Son.

Qu. Why was this covenant of grace given?

An. Because. Romans 8.3.
The covenant of works cannot by reason of the infirmity of man's flesh give
life to any.

Qu. When was this covenant of grace given?

An. It was first given so soon as Adam was fallen, though darkely in these
words: Genesis 3.24.
The seed of the woman shall break the head of the Serpent; after ward renewed
to Abraham in a more plainer manner; and so from time it was more dearly
revealed even until Christ came in the flesh, by whom it was fully revealed and
made known.

Qu. Is there no condition required on man's part in this covenant?

An. No: because then should it not be freely given by grace. Romans 3.24
And are justified freely by his grace.

Qu. Did not the Lordrequire a condition in his covenant made with Abraham in
these words, Walk before me, and be thou perfect?

An. No man's walking with God in works can be any condition of that covenant,
because then it should be partly by works: so that by those words walk before
me and be thou perfect, we are to understand Abraham's walking the life of
faith, by living of which life in believing Gods promise, his perfection did
consist.

Qu. Is not faith then a condition of this new covenant of grace?

An. No, Faith is no condition required on man's part, but rather a disposition
or power of receiving and laying hold of the covenant which God freely gives
unto man: so that there is nothing required on man's part to be done, but only
to receive that freely which God freely gives; and that power which he has to
receive, comes not by his own industry, striving, labor, or pains, but it
comes merely, and alone from the grace of God. Ephesians. 2.8.
For by grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it is
the gift of God.

Qu. What is the substance of this new covenant?

An. Concerning christ the substance of the same.
The second person in the Trinity Christ Jesus the only son of God.

Qu. What do you consider in Christ?

An. His Person and his Office.

Qu. What consider you in his Person?

An. Concerning the Person of Christ.
His Godhead that makes his person far to excel in power and dignity either
men or Angels.

Qu. What consider you in his Godhead?

An. That he is the only Son of God his Father, coequall with his Father,
and the Holy Ghost.

Qu. What consider you of his Manhood?

An. Heb. 2.6.
That the divine nature took to himself a reasonable soul and body.

Qu. Was there no change of these two natures one into another nor any mixture
of them?

An. There was no change of the natures themselves, nor of their essential
properties: but these two natures were united in one person, yet distinguished
in substance, and properties, and actions.

Qu. Why must Christ be man?

An. First, because he might be fit to die.

Secondly, because by man the sin was committed, and therefore by man the
recompense must be made, the Justice of God so requiring.

Qu. Why must Christ be God?

An. That he might be able to overcome the in finite sufferings which he
suffered for man.

Qu. When were these two natures united?

An. From the first moment of Christ's conception in the womb of the Virgin
Marie.

Qu. What is the use of the conjunction of these two natures?

An. That the Manhood of our Savior Christ being personally united to the
Godhead, the obedience of Christ might be of in finite merit as being the
obedience of God.

So much of the Person of Christ.
Qu. What is his Office?

An. Mediator.

Qu. What Name is given unto him in regard of his Office?

An. Christ.

Qu. What does this Name signify?

An. Anointed.

Qu. How many Mediators be there?

An. Only one Christ Jesus. 1 Timothy 2.5
There is one Mediator between God and man, which is the Man Christ Jesus.

Qu. Why must Christ alone be Mediator?

An. Because Christ alone did partake both of the nature of God and man which
is of absolute necessity for him that should be a Mediator between both.

Qu. What be the parts of his Mediatourship?

An. Two. 1. His Priesthood. 2. His Kingdom.

Qu. What be the works of his Priesthood?

An. Two. 1. Teaching. 2. Meriting.

Qu. How did Christ teach the will of his Father?

An. First by himself in his own personal ministry: Mat. 7.19
For he taught them as one having authority, and not as the Scribes.

Secondly, by his servants, both before and after him: 1. Pet. 3.16.
By the which he also went and preached unto the spirits that are in prison:
Luke 10.16
He that hears you, hears me.

Qu. What is the other work of his Priesthood?

An. The meriting of the redemption of the Elect: Heb. 9.11.12.
But Christ being become an high Priest of good things to come, and botained
eternal redemption.

Qu. How did Christ perform this redemption?

An. First, by the actions he did in his humiliation.

Secondly, by the actions he did in his exaltation.

Qu. What are the actions he did in his humiliation?

An. They are two, 1. Sufferings. 2. Fulfilling.

Qu. What was his sufferings?

An. That in body and soul he suffered the uttermost of Gods wrath, which was
due unto man for sin, as it is largely set forth in the 26. of Matthew, from
the first verse to the end of the chapter, Isa. 5.3.5.
But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken for our iniquities.

Qu. What do you understand by fulfilling?

An. That Christ perfectly kept the whole Law of all the Elect: Mat. 3.15.
Then Jesus answered and said unto him, suffer it now, for thus it behooves me
to fulfill and righteousness.

Qu. What are the actions he did in his exaltation?

An. They were three, 1. His resurrection 2. His Ascension. 3. His sitting at
Gods right hand.

Romans 1.4.
And declared mightily to be the Son of God by the resurrection from the
dead. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? seeing Christ is
dead, or rather is risen again for our Justification, Romans 8.34.
and ascended into heaven, and sits at the right hand of God his Father.

Qu. What fruit and benefit have the Elect by these works of his Priesthood?

An. They are specially Two, 1. Redemption. 2. Intercession.

Qu. What is Redemption?

An. To be delivered from under the Kingdom of sin and Satan; Concerning
our Redemtion, and the parts thereof.
and to be restored into the Kingdom of Christ: Col. 1.13.
Who has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has translated us
into the Kingdom of his dear Son.

Qu. What are the parts of Redemption?

An. They are chiefly two, 1. Justification. 2. Sanctification.

Tit. 2.14.
Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purge us or make us pure to be a peculiar people unto himself, zealous of
good works.

Qu. What is Justification?

An. Concerning Justification, the first part of Redemption.
To be made clean or cleared from all sin, guilt, and punishment before
God; and to be made and presented perfectly righteous before God, in and
through the righteousness of Christ: Act. 13.38.39.
Be it known unto you therefore men and brethren, that through this man is
preached unto you the forgiveness of sins, and from all things from which
ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses, every one that believes is
justified: Romans 8.24.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? seeing it is Christ that
dyed for our sins, or rather which is riser again for our Justification, By
the death and resurrection of Christ the Elect are so justified, that nothing
can be laid to their charge: and they who can have no fault laid to their
charge, are freed from guilt and punishment: for faultlesse persons, are
neither guilty nor punishable. 2. Cor. 5.21.
And he has made him sin for us, which knew no sin, that we should be
made the righteousness of God in him: Col. 1.28.
And that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus, that is, before
God in that righteousness of Christ they are presented perfect.

Qu. What are the parts of Justification?

Concerning the parts of Justification.
A. They are two, 1. Remission of sins. 2. Imputation of righteousness.

Act. 10.13.
Heb. 10.17.18. Col. 2.13.
Their sins and iniquities will I remember no more, now where remission of
these things are, there is no more offering for sin; that is, where remission
of these sins are: Romans 4.23.24.
Now it is not written for him only, that it was imputed to him for
righteousness, but also for us to whom it shall be imputed for righteousness.

Qu. What is Remission?

An. The utter abolishing of all sin by the blood, death, 1. John 3.5.
and sufferings of Christ from before God for ever: Heb. 9.20.28.
But now in the end of the world has he appeared once to put away, take or
abolish away sins by the sacrifice of himself; so Christ was once offered to
take away the sins of many: 1. Ioh. 1.7.
And the blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanses us from all sin: Re^e. 1.5.
And washed us from our sins in his blood. Heb. 1.3.
And has by, himself purged our sins: (...). 5.26.27.
And gave himself for his Church; that he might sanctify it and cleanse it
by the washing of water through the word, that he might make it unto himself
a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinckle, or any such thing; but that it
should be holy and without blame. Col. 1.22.
In the body of his flesh through death to make you holy and unblameable and
without fault in his sight, that is, in Gods sight, or before God.

Qu. What is imputation?

An. It is the reckoning, accepting, or pronouncing of al believers perfectly
righteous in the righteousness of Christ: Romans 4 4.
But to him that works not, but believes in him that justifies the ungodly,
his faith is counted for righteousness: that is, Christ or the righteousness
of Christ which is the object of faith, and is counted or reckoned for
righteousness: Romans 4.11.
That righteousness might be imputed to them also.

Qu. Is a believer made thus perfectly righteous now in his Justification?

A. Yes, for this righteousness of Justification is one individual act wrought
at one and the same time. Heb. 9.24.
But is entered into very heaven now to appear in the sight of God for us: Heb.
10.14
for with one offering has he perfected for ever them that are sanctified: 1 John 4.7.
As he is, so are we in this present world Col. 2.10.
And ye are complete in him.

Qu. Concerning Sanctificaon, the second part of Redemption
What is Sanctification?

An. It is the work of the Spirit of Christ in a believer, whereby the body of
sin is daily weakened, and whereby by they daily grow like unto Christ their
head by imitation, in showing forth the truth of their faith by good works. 2.
These. 2.13.
God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation through sanctification of
the Spirit, 1. Pet. 1.2. And therefore called the spirit of sanctification, Romans
1.4. Romans 8.10
And if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the spirit is
life for righteousness sake.

Mat. 5.16
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works and
glorify your father which is in heaven.

Jam 2.18.
Show me thy faith out of thy works, and I will show thee my faith by my
works.

Qu. What are the parts of Sanctification?

An. They are two, First, Mortification. Secondly, Quickening.

Col. 3.5.
Mortify therefore your members which are on the earth.

Romans 8.11
But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he
that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies
because that his Spirit dwells in you.

Qu. What is Mortification?

An. A subduing of the power of sin, Mica. 7.19
The Lord by his spirit will subdue our iniquities and our sins.

Qu. What is Quickening?

An. A renewing of the believer to newness of life: Romans 6.4.
We are buried with him by baptism into his death, that like as Christ was
raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, so we also should walk in
newness of life: Romans 6.5.
For if we be grafted with him to the similitude of his death, even so shall we
be likewise of his resurrection.

Qu. Is this sanctification perfected at once in a Christian in this life?

An. No, it is perfected by degrees, and never fully perfected till the end of
this life. 2. Cor. 7.1.
Seeing then we have these promises dearly beloved let us cleanse our selves
from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and grow up unto full holiness
in the fear of God, or perfecting holiness.

Qu. Why is not this sanctification perfect in this life?

An. Because the Lord will have a Christian live by faith, and not by sense and
feeling: 2. Cor. 5.7.
For we walk by faith, and not by sight.

Qu. What is that other part of Christ's priesthood which you called
intercession?

An. Concerning the intercession of Christ.
It is that whereby Christ does continually present before God the virtue of
his death and sufferings, by which the pollution of a believers works are taken
away before God. 1. Ioh. 2.1.
My babes, these things write I unto you that ye sin not: and if any man
sin, we have an advocate or intercessor with the father Jesus Christ the
Just: For the office of intercession and redemption are joined together.

Qu. What is the other part of Christ's mediatorship?

An. His Kingdom whereby all the works of his Priesthood are made profitable
to all the Elect.

Qu. What is to be considered in the Kingdom of Christ unto the Elect?

A. Two things, 1. The kingdom it self. 2. The administration of it

Qu. What is to be considered in the Kingdom it self? Concerning the
Kingdom of Christ.


An. Two things, 1. That it is a kingdom of grace. 2. That it is a Kingdom of
glory.

Zech. 12.10.
And I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of
Jerusalem the spirit of grace. Ioh. 17 5.22.
And now glorify me O Father with thine own self or own glory; and, The
glory that thou gave me I have given them.

Qu. What else consider you in this Kingdom?

An. Two things, 1. The greatness of it. 2. The nature of it.

Qu. Wherein does the greatness of it consist? Concerning the greatness of
Ch^^^^s Kingdom.


An. In Two things, 1. In the extent which is universal. 2. In the power of it
which is absolute.

Psalm. 1.8.
Ask of me and I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the
ends of the earth for thy possession. (...). 3.7.
Which has the Key of David, who opens and no man shuts, shuts and no
man opens.

Qu. Of what nature is this Kingdom?

An. Concerning the nature of it.
First, it is spiritual, Ioh. 18.36.
My Kingdom is not of this world.

Secondly, it is eternal: Dan. 7.27.
And the Kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the
whole heaven shall be given to the holy people of the most High, whose kingdom
is an everlasting kingdom, and all powers shall serve and obey him: Luke 1.33.
And he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom
shall be none end.

Qu. Are all believers partakers of this Priesthood and Kingdom?

An. Yes, they are all made Priests and Kings: 1. Pet. 2.9.
But ye are a chosen generation, aroyall Priesthood: Reave. 1.6.
And made us Kings and Priests unto God even his Father, to him be glory and
dominion for evermore, Amen.

Qu. Wherein does the administration of this Kingdom consist?

An. In things and persons, Concerning the administration of Christ's Kingdom.


Qu. What be the things?

An. They be of two sorts, First inward. Secondly outward

Qu. What be the inward?

An. The spirit, peace, joy, righteousness, faith: Romans 14.17
For the Kingdom of God is not meat nor drink, but righteousness, and
peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. Concerning Faith, with the definition of it.


Qu. What is Faith?

An. A receiving or an applying of Christ and al his benefits unto my self, in
particular that he is mine and I am him.

John 1.12.
But as many as received him, to them he gave power to be the sons of God,
even to them that believe in his name.

Ioh. 20.28.
Then Thomas answered and said unto him, Thou art my Lord, and my God.

Cant. 2.16
My beloved is mine, and I am his.

Qu. What consider you in Faith?

An. First it is not of our selves: Mat. 16.17
And Jesus answered and said to him, Blessed art thou Simon, the son of
Jonas, for flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which
is in heaven. Ephe. 2.8.
For by grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it is
the gift of God.

Secondly, that it is not in all, but in the Elect: 2. These. 3.
For all men have not faith. Act. 13.48
And as many as were ordained unto eternal life believed.

Thirdly, that it is manifested to menward by the fruits thereof which are good
works: Iam. 2.18.20.
And I will show thee my faith by my works. But will thou understand O thou
vain man, that the faith which is without works is dead?

Forthly, that it is common to all the faithful, and yet in a different
measure. 2. Pet. 1.1.
Simon Peter, a servant and an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to you which have
obtained the like precious faith with us. 1. Cor. 12.11.
And all these things works even the selfsame spirit, distributing to every
man severally as he will.

Fifthly, that it is not here perfect in any but increases and grows daily:
Romans 1.17.
For by it the righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith.

Sixthly, that the least measure of faith receives Christ for salvation: Mat.
17.20.
For verily I say unto you, if ye have faith as much as is a grain of mustard
seed, ye shall say unto this mountain Remove hence to yonder place, and it
shall remove, and nothing shall be impossible unto you.

Seventhly, that it can never be utterly lost in any, where it is wrought in
truth: Romans 11.29
For the gifts and callings of God are withont repentance.

Qu. What do you understand by the spirit you said was in the Kingdom?

An. That power of God which works in the hearts of men those things which by
nature they cannot attain unto. Concerning the Spirit with its diverse works


Qu. What are the diverse workings of the Spirit in the Church or Kingdom of
Christ?

An. It is first in things common to the Elect and reprobate: Secondly, in
things proper to the Elect.

Qu. What is common to both?

An. Illumination, knowledge, gifts of preaching, praying, hearing with joy,
and doing of many things.

Mat. 7.22.
Many will say to me in that day Lord, Lord, have we not by the name
prophesied and cast out Devils, and done many great works?

Mat. 13.20.
And he that received the seed in the stony ground, is he which hears the
word and with joy receives it.

Qu. What is the work of the Spirit proper to the Elect?

An. To work a particular Justifying faith, and sanctification of the spirit.

Qu. What be those outward things which you said were in the Kingdom of
Christ?

An. Concerning the outward things in the Kingdom of Christ.
First, such ordinances as God has given his Church. Secondly, such as the
Church gives unto God for service according to his word.

Qu. What be those ordinances which God has given unto his Church?

An. They are three, 1. The Ministry of the word. 2. The Sacraments. 3. The
Censures of the Church.

Qu. What is the Ministry of the word?

An. Concerning the ministeri^ of the Word.
It is an ordinance of God in the Church, which he has appointed for the
opening and applying of the scriptures, thereby to call men to a sight of their
lost miserable estate by nature, and to call them to the knowledge of salvation
by Jesus Christ.

Qu. What is a Sacrament?

A. It is a work of the whole Church, Concerning the Sacraments in general.
wherein by outward things done according to Gods appointment, inward things are
offered to all; and exhibited only to the faithful to strengthen their faith
in the eternal covenant.

Q. What do you consider in a Sacrament?

A. First, some things that are outward. Secondly, some things that are inward.

Qu. What are the outward things in a Sacrament?

An. First the persons that do administer and receive.

Secondly, that which they do minister and receive.

Qu. What be the persons?

An. The Minister and the persons that do receive.

Qu. What belongs to the Minister?

An. Chiefly to consecrate and deliver the outward Elements.

Qu. Wherein stands that consecration?

A. First, in the declaring and opening the ministration of the Sacrament.

Secondly, in prayer and thanksgiving to God, the Church joining with him.

Q. Is not the nature and substance of the Elements changed by this
consecration?

An. There is no change of the substance of the Elements, for then there were
no Sacrament.

Qu. Is there no difference then between these Elements and others of that
kind in common use?

An. None at all in substance, but only in their use during the time of the
present action.

Qu. Why then are the outward Elements, called by the name of the thing
signified, as the Bread, the body of Christ; the Wine, the blood of Christ?

An. First, 1 Cor. 10.16.
To show the inseperable conjunction of the thing signified with the outward
sign to the worthy receiver.

Secondly, the more fully to assure the worthy receiver that he does as verily
receive the thing signified as he does the outward signs.

Qu. How many Sacraments be there?

An. Only two.

Qu. Why were there no more ordained?

An. Because by these two the faith of the believer is sufficiently strengthened
in the assurances of the free grace and favor of God here, and eternal glory
for ever hereafter.

Qu. Which is the first Sacrament?

An. Baptism.

Qu. What is Baptism?

An. It is a Sacrament of the new Testament, whereby all that are baptized are
entered and made members of the outward visible Church, and all the Elect
ordinarily are entered into and made members of the invisible Church the
mystical body.

Qu. What is the outward sign in the Sacrament of Baptism?

An. Water.

Qu. What does that signify?

An. Washing.

Qu. What agreement is there between the sign and the thing signified?

An. As water washes away all the filth of the body, so does the blood of
Christ cleanse the Elect from all sin original and actual, past, present,
and to come.

Qu. What benefits have the Elect by Baptism?

An. Chiefly three, 1. The forgiveness of all their sins. 2. Secondly their
union with Christ. 3. Their regeneration.

1 Pet. 3.21
To the which also the figure that now saves us, even Baptism agrees, not
the putting away of the filth of the flesh: but in the answer of a good
conscience to Godward; that is by having remission of sins: Gal. 3.27.
For all ye that are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ: Tit. 3.5.
According to his mercy he saved us by the washing of the new birth.

Qu. Who are to be Baptized?

An. The children of those that are joined members of the true Church, and
those that are converted and turned to be Christians.

Qu. What is the second Sacrament?

An. The Lords supper.

Qu. What is the Lords Supper:

A. It is a Sacrament of the new Testament, Concerning the Lords Supper.
whereby the faith of the worthy receiver is strengthened and confirmed in the
assurance of the free grace of God in Christ unto him in particular.

Qu. What are the outward signs in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper?

An. Bread and Wine.

Qu. What do they signify?

An. The body and blood of Christ.

Qu. What agreement is there between the signs and the thing signified?

An. As bread and wine do nourish the body, so does the body and blood of
Christ nourish the souls of the faithful unto eternanll life.

Qu. Who are to be made partakers of this Sacrament?

An. Only such as be of the Church, having knowledge to render a reason of
their faith, and live without scandal.

Qu. What is required of those that come to this Sacrament?

An. That they be prepared and fitted for the same.

Qu. What is that which prepares and makes fit?

An. Only the righteousness of Christ apprehended by faith, which is the
wedding garment by which they are made fit guests for the Lords table.

Qu. How does Baptism and the Lords Supper agree, and wherein do they differ?

A. They agree in the spiritual matter which is Christ, and in the end to
strengthen faith.

First, they differ in the sign, as Baptism has Water and washing, the Lords
supper has Bread and Wine, eating and drinking.

Secondly, they differ in the manner of signifying, as first Baptism
signifies our first entrance into the covenant and receiving into the Church;
and the Lords Supper our continuance in the same by Jesus Christ. Secondly,
Baptism signifies our new birth, that we are the children of God by Jesus
Christ; and the Lords Supper our growing more and more in the assurance of the
same.

Thirdly, Baptism is but once administered, because we are but once borne to be
children of God by Christ. But the Lords Supper is often to be received, that
thereby our Faith may be strengthened in the apprehending of Christ and his
righteousness for our Justification, and may daily grow and increase in
sanctification till we come to the last fruition and enioyment of eternal
life.

Qu. What is common to the Word and Sacraments, and what is proper to each?

An. Common to both to increase faith: Proper to the word to begin faith:
Proper to the Sacrament more fully and effectually and sensibly to confirm
faith, than the word alone without the Sacrament.

Qu. What is the reason of this?

An. Because the Sacrament speaks to more of our outward senses than the word
does.

Qu. Concerning the censures of the Church.
What use is there of the censures of the Church?

An. First, to keep the members of the same in order.

Secondly, to put from amongst them, such as live not in uniformity to the will
of God revealed in his word. 1 Cor. 5.2.
That he that has done this deed might be put from among you.

Qu. What is the end of the Censures of the Church?

An. To bring them to a sight of their sin, and so to repentance.

Qu. How many sorts are there of these Censures?

An. Two, First, Public. Secondly, Private.

Qu. What are the private?

An. First, privily and alone to admonish the off^nder: Mat. 18.15.
Moreover, if thy brother offend against thee, go and tell him his fault
between thee and him alone.

Secondly, if he repent not, to admonish in the hearing of others: Mat. 18.16.
But if he hear thee not, take yet with thee one or two; that by the mouth of
two or three witnesses, enery word may be confirmed.

Qu. What are the public?

An. Two, 1. Suspension. 2. Excommunication.

Number. 9.6, 7.
And certain men were defiled, and those men said unto Moses and Aaron, We are
defiled by a dead man, wherefore we are kept back that we may not offer an
offering unto the Lord in the time thereunto appointed.

Mat. 18.17.
And if he will not vouchsafe to hear them, tell it unto the Church; and if
he refuse to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an heathen, and a
publican.

1. Cor. 5.4.5.
When ye are gathered together, and my Spirit in the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, that such a one I say, by the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, be
delivered unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be
saved in the day of the Lord.

Qu. Why are these Censures to be used in the Church?

An. First, that the name of God be not evil spoken of by suffering scandalous
persons amongst them.

Secondly, least others that are in the Church be corrupted, and the weak
offended.

Thirdly, least some without be hindered from joining themselves to the Church.

Q. What is the power of these Censures?

An. To bind and loose the sins of men: Mat. 18.18.
Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall be bound in
heaven: and whatsoever ye loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven

Qu. Who appointed the censures in the Church?

A. Our Savior Christ himself, and they were practiced by the Apostles: 1 Timothy 1.20.
Of whom is Hymeneus and Alexander, whom I have delivered unto Satan, that they
might learn not to blaspheme.

Hitherto of those Ordinances which God g^^eth unto his Church.
Qu. What are those ordinances which the Church performs unto God according
to his word for service?

An. They be chiefly three. 1. Prayers or thanksgiving. 2. Lasting. 3. Holy
^^asting.

Psalm. 116.12.13.
What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me? I will
take the cup of salvation and call upon the name of the Lord: Psalm. 5^.23.
He that off^^reth praise shall glorify me.

Qu. What is Prayer?

An. A calling upon God alone in the name of Christ ^^ough faith. Concerning
Prayer.


Qu. By what are believers moved and enabled to pray?

An. By the Spirit of God, and the apprehending of their own wants and
necessities of the Church in general, or any member of the same in particular.

Qu. Why does the Spirit of God move believers to pray for others?

An. Because they have tasted and apprehended the love of God, by which their
hearts are inflamed with love to God and men.

Qu. For what things are believers to praey for?

An. Only for those things which God in his word has promised to gin^.

Qu. What patter^e is there in Scripture of Prayer, according to which the
faithful are to p^ay?

An. That which Christ himself taught his Apostles in the 6. of Mat.
Concerning the Lords Prayer.
After this manner therefore pray, ye, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

Qu. What is to be considered in that Prayer?

A. Two things in general, 1. The Preface. 2. The Petitions and Thanksgiving.

Qu. What is a preface?

An. Some thing that goes before the thing it self.

Qu. What is a Petition?

An. The requesting or desiring of some thing.

Qu. What is the Preface in the Lords Prayer?

An. Our Father which art in Heaven

Q. What is contained in the Preface?

An. Two things, 1. The love of God, in that he is a Father. 2. The power of
God, in that he is in Heaven.

Qu. Why is it said, our Father, and not my Father?

An. Because we are to pray for others as well as our selves.

How is God said to be our Father in the Preface?

An. By Adoption in Jesus Christ.

Qu. How many Petitions be there in the Lords Prayer?

An. Six.

Qu. What do the three first concern?

An. Gods glory.

Qu. What do the three last concern?

An. Our good, both in the things of this life, and in the things of a better
life.

Qu. What do you consider in the three first in general?

An. The first concerns Gods glory immediately, and the two other the means
whereby he is glorified.

Qu. Which is the first Petition?

An. Hallowed be thy name.

Qu. What is to be understood by the name of God in that Petition?

An. God himself, his Attributes, 1 King. 5.5.5
Works, Word, Sacraments, and Censures.

Q. What is meant by this word, hallowed

An. To put apart from common use to that which is holy.

Q. What do we pray for in this Petition?

An. First, for the true knowledge of God and his Word and Works.

Secondly, that we may glorify God by believing of his word though it seem
to us never so impossible, and against our sense and reason.

Romans 4.20
Neither did he doubt of the promise of God through vnbeleese, but was strong
in faith, and gave glory to God.

Thirdly, for zeal for Gods ordinances: (...). ^.8.
Give unto the Lord the glory of his name, bring an offering and enter into his
Courts. (...) ^.9.
For the zeal of thin^ ho^^^ has eaten me.

Fourthly, that we and others may glorify God before m^n, by a holy lite and
conn^^sation. 1. T^t. 2.^1.
And having your conn^^sation honest among the gentiles, that they which speak
evil of (...) as of evil doers, may by your good works which they shall see,
glorify God in the day of visitation.

Fifthly, that we may praise God for a^ his mereies both spiritual and
temporal.

Qu. What do we pray against in this Petition?

An. (...)
First, against ignorance and hardness of heart.

Secondly, against all things that hinder Gods glory.

Thirdly, against vnbeleese and coldness in Gods service.

Fourthly, against profaneness of life and unthankfulness.

Fifthly, against giving of worship to creatures.

Qu. Rehearse the second Petition.

An. Thy Kingdom come.

Qu. What is meant by Kingdom?

An. The Kingdom of power, and the Kingdom of grace.

Qu. What desire we touching the government of the world?

An. First, that God by his ouerruling power would dispose of all persons and
things as may be most for his own glory.

Secondly, that this gonernment may be for the enlargement of his Kingdom
here, and accomplishing of it at the day of Judgment.

Qu. For what things do we pray in this Petition?

An. First, for the establishment of all Gods ordinances in the Church, as the
Word, Sacraments, and censures, and that they may be rightly administered.

Secondly, that God would furnish his Church with fit, able, and faithful
officers, both to teach and govern.

Thirdly, that so many both l^w^s and gentiles as belong to Christ may be
called.

Fourthly, for the powerful working of Gods Spirit in the renewing and
quickening every member of the Church.

Fifthly, that Christ would hasten his second coming.

Qu. What do you pray against?

An. First, the bondage of sin and satan, both in our selves and others.

Secondly, against all plotts, counsels and powers, that do oppose the Gospel
of Christ and the free passage of the same.

Qu. Rehearse the third Petition.

An. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.

Qu. What is meant by the will of God?

An. That which he has revealed in his Word.

Qu. What is meant by these words, earth and heaven?

An. Those things which are in earth and heaven.

Qu. What do you pray for in this Petition?

An. First, that we and all men may know Gods will revealed in his Word.

Secondly, for patience and cheerfulness under crosses and afflictions,
submitting our wills unto the same, because it is Gods will.

Thirdly, that we may deny and forsake our own wills.

Qu. What do you pray against in this Petition?

An. Ignorance and disobedience.

Qu. What is meant by these words, in earth as it is in Heaven?

An. That we and all others may do the will of God as the Angels do it.

Qu. How do the Angels do the will of God?

An. Most willingly, readily, and speedily.

Qu. Rehearse the fourth Petition.

An. Give us this day our daily bread.

Qu. What is meant by this word Bread?

An. All things both for necessity and Christian delight,

Qu. What is prayed for in this Petition?

An. The inioyning of all outward blessings according to the will of God

Qu. What is prayed against in this Petition?

An. The removing and keeping back of outward evils as the Lord sees good.

Qu. What do you learn from this word, give?

An. That whatsoever we have or enjoy, we enjoy by gift, and not by desert.

Qu. Why do we say, give us, when we have it already?

An. Because the creature of it self has no power to nourish; and therefore
we pray for a blessing upon them. Man lives not by Bread only, Mat. 4.
but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of the Lord.

Qu. Why is it added for the day, give us this day?

An. To teach us to rest contented with our present condition: 1 Timothy 6.8
Therefore when we have food and raiment, let us there with be content.

Qu. Why is it called our Bread?

An. To teach us to use all lawful means for those things we have.

Qu. What is meant by this word daily?

An. All things fitting and agreeable to our present condition and calling.
Pro. 30.8.
Give me not poverty nor riches, feed me with food convenient for me.

Qu. Rehearse the fifth Petition.

An. Forgive us our trespasses, as we also forgive them that trespass against
us.

Qu. Why do we pray, forgive us our trespasses, seeing Christ has fully
satisfied for them?

An. Because although Christ paid the ransom to his Father for them; yet,
they are forgiven us, because we paid nothing for them our selves, and
therefore, we pray, Forgive us.

Qu. What do we learn from these words, forgive us?

An. First, that the faithful have sin in them as well as others, and
therefore are sinners in themselves, and therefore are daily to confess their
sins.

Secondly, that God would more and more manifest unto their apprehension, and
give them the assurance of the pardon of those sins which God has pardoned
already; for he does not daily pardon sin by peece-meale, as the faithful
commit them, but all at once, past, present, and to come.

Thirdly, that no man can merit the pardon of sin.

Fourthly, that all sin is pardoned only for Christ's sake.

Qu. What do we pray for in this Petition?

An. First, that by faith we may apprehend the righteousness of Christ, by
which our sins are covered from Gods sight.

Secondly, for inward joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 5.1.
and peace of conscience in the assurance of the same.

Qu. What do we pray against in this Petition?

An. Impenitency, hardness of heart, 1 Ioh. 4.18.
slavish fear, unbelief.

Qu. What is meant by these words, as we forgive others?

An. That those which by faith apprehend the love and mercy of God in the
pardon of their sins, are of a loving and a merciful disposition, ready to
forgive others.

Qu. How are we said to forgive sin?

An. We forgive not sin, as it is a sin against God, but only the wrong or
injury against us.

Qu. Rehearse the sixth Petition.

An. Lead us not into tentation, but deliver us from evil.

Qu. What is meant by tentation?

An. All allurements and inticements unto sin by the world, the flesh, and
the devil.

Qu. What is meant by leading into tentation?

An. Not to be given over to the power of tentation.

Qu. How is God said to tempt?

An. When he gives man over to his corruption, and the tentations of Satan.

Qu. What is meant by evil?

An. Sin and Satan.

Qu. What do we pray against in this Petition?

An. First, against the rebellion of our corrupt natures.

Secondly, against our pronenesse to yield to sin and Satan.

Qu. What do we pray for in this Petition?

An. That God would give us more power over sin and Satan.

Qu. Rehearse the thanksgiving.

An. For thine is the Kingdom and the power and the glory for ever, Amen.

Qu. What is meant by Kingdom?

An. Absolute right, and sovereignty over all things.

Qu. What is meant by Power?

An. The rule and government of all things after the counsel of his own will.

Qu. What is meant by glory?

An. That praise which is due unto him.

Qu. What learn you from these Words?

An. That Christians ought continually to be thankful unto God for all his
mercies and benefits, and especially for the great work of redemption wrought
by Christ.

Qu. What is meant by this word for ever?

An. Eternity.

Qu. What is meant by this wor^ Amen?

An. First, an earnest desire of the things prayed for.

Secondly, the assurance of faith to receive them in due time.

Qu. What are those other ordinances which the Church performs unto God?

An. Fasting, and holy Feasts.

Qu. What is a Fast?

An. Concerning Fasting with the kinds thereof.
An abstinency commanded by the Lord for the whole day, with contrition and
Prayer.

Qu. How many kinds of Fasts be there?

An. Two 1. Public. 2. Private.

Qu. What is the Public?

An. When all the whole Church or Kingdom in general, or any particular
congregation in the same, performs it; being commanded thereunto by the
Magistrate.

Qu. What is the Private?

An. When a Family, or any particular person in the same performs it.

Qu. What consider you in a Fast?

An. Four things in general. 1. The author of it. 2. The causes of it. 3. The
parts of it. 4. The ends of it.

Qu. Who is the author of a Fast?

An. God himself. Concerning the author of a Fast.


Luke 5.35.
For the days will come ever when the Bridegroom shall be taken away from
them: then shall they fast in those days.

Q. What are the causes of a public fast?

An. Either a judgment already upon the Church, Nebe. 1.4.
or else some judgment which they perceive coming upon them near at hand,
Hest^^^. 4.16
or else some great business of weight to be undertaken and performed by the
whole Church or Kingdom.

Qu. What are the causes of a private Families Fast?

An. Concerning the causes of a Fast.
Either some present evil upon the Family, or else some benefit which they
desire and sue for at the LORDS hands.

Qu. What are the causes of a particular Christian Fast?

An. Either the want of the apprehending of Christ the Bridegroom; or else
some great business of weight which he is to undertake, in regard of some
public affairs: either in Magistracy, or in the Ministry, or the like; or
else the present estate and condition of others.

Qu. What are the parts of a Fast?

Concerning the parts of a Fast.
An. Two 1. Outward. 2. Inward.

Qu. What consider you in the outward?

An. Two things. 1. Matter of ceremony. 2. Matter of substance.

Qu. What are the outward ceremonies in a Fast?

An. First, to abstain from meat and drink. Hester. 4.16.
Go and assemble all the Jews that are found in Shushan, and fast ye for me,
and eat not, nor drink not in three days, day nor night.

Secondly, mean apparel.

Jonah 3.5
So the people of Nineveh believed the word of God, and proclaimed a Fast; and
put on sackcloth from the greatest of them even to the least of them.

Thirdly, to rest from labor.

Esaias. 58^6
Ye shall not exact your labors in the days of your fast.

Fourthly, to mourn.

Hester. 4.3
And there was great sorrow among the Jews, and fasting, and weeping, and
mourning.

Fifthly, separation from the marriage bed.

1 Cor. 7.5.
Defraud not one another except it be with consent for a time, that ye may give
your selves to fasting and prayer. Joel. 2.16.
Let the Bridegroom go forth of his chamber, and the Bride out of her
Bridechamber.

Qu. What things are those in the outward, which are matter of substance?

An. Preaching, praying, reading of the Scriptures, Nebe. 9.3.
confessing of sins unto God.

Qu. What is the inward part of fasting?

An. An inward sorrowful broken melted heart for sin. Joel. 2.17.
Rent your hearts and not your garments, says the Lords

Qu. What are the ends of a Fast?

An. First, to witness our sorrow for sin. Concerning the ends of a Fast.


Secondly, that we may be the better stirred up to pray with more feruency.

Thirdly, to remove some present judgment, and to prevent those that are
coming: and to obtain some great mercy at the Lords hands.

Qu. What is an holy feast?

An. Concerning a holy Feast. Number. 10.^0 Zach. 1.8.10
It is a solemn thank esgining unto God for some special mercy obtained from
God, especially by means of fasting.

Qu. Wherein does it consist?

An. Partly in outward bodily exercises, and partly in exercises of godliness.

Qu. What are the outward?

An. A more liberal use of the creatures then at other times, as meat,
drink, apparel. Nehe. 8.10.
Nehemiah said unto the people in the days of their feast, Go and eat of the
fat, and drink of the sweet.

Qu. What are the exercises of godliness for that day?

An. It is in duties to God, and kindnesses to men. Concerning the exercises
for the day.


Qu. What are the duties to God?

An. A thanksgiving unto God for the present benefit, and that in an
extraordinary manner; both in regard of the inward joy and gladness of heart,
and length of time, with preaching, praying, reading the Word of God and
singing of Psalms. Nehe. 8.4.5.6.
And upon the feast day Ezra the Scribe stood upon a Pulpit of wood, which he
had made for the Preaching. And Ezra opened the book before all the people,
for he was above all the people: and when he had opened it all the people stood
up, and Ezra praised the Lord; and all the people answered, Amen, amen, with
lifting up of hands. Nehe. 8.8.12.17.
And they read in the book of the Law of God distinctly, and gave the sense:
and then all the people went to eat and to drink, and made great joy, and
there was very great joy.

Qu. What are the kindnesses unto men?

A. 1. To send gifts unto our friends.

2. To send portions to the poor. Hest.. 9.22
And Mordecai wrote letters unto all the Jews that dwelt in all the Vilages
and Towns; That on the 14 day of the Month Adar, they should keep a Feast unto
the Lord, even a joyful day to send presents or gifts to their Neighbors, and
gifts to the poor.

Hitherto of those things that belong to the administration of the Kingdom of
Christ?

Qu. What are the Persons belonging to the administration of Christ's Kingdom.

An. Concerning the Persons belonging to the administration of the kingdom of
Christ.
First, such Officers as God has appointed to govern his Church.

Secondly, such as are to be governed.

Qu. What be those Officers?

An. First, such as deal in the Word and Sacraments, as Bishops, Pastors, and
Teachers.

Secondly, such as deal not in the Word and Sacraments, as Elders and Deacons.

Qu. What are those that are to be governed?

An. The rest of the people, of what calling, state, or condition soever.

Hitherto of the government of the Kingdom of Christ concerning such as live
here in this mortal life?

Qu. Rehearse the 16 of Luke and v. 22

An. Concerning the death of the righteous and the wicked.
And it was so that the beggar dyed and was carried by the Angel into Abraham's
bosom, the rich man died also, and was buried.

Qu. What is the doctrine of this place?

An. It does set forth the estate of the dead.

Qu. What is to be observed concerning that point?

An. First, some thing common to good and bad.

Secondly, some thing proper to each.

Qu. What is common to both?

An. First, a separation of the soul from the body. Concerning what is com mon
to both, and proper to each.


Secondly, the putrefaction of the body in the grave.

Qu. After death what is proper to each?

An. First, the souls of the righteous go unto everlasting blessedness. Ioh.
14.3.


Secondly, the souls of the unrighteous to extreme torments in hell fire for
evermore.

Qu. When do their souls pass to the place appointed for them?

An. Immediately so soon as the soul leaves the body, it goes to the place
appointed. Luke. 23.43
Then Jesus said unto him, verily I say unto thee To day shall thou be with me
in Paradise.

Qu. Rehearse the 1. of Corinthians Chap. 15. and the 51.52 verses.

An. Behold I show you a secret thing, Concerning the last resurrection.
we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed in a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet; for the trumpet shall blow, and the
dead shall be raised up incorruptible; and we shall be changed.

Qu. What learn you from this place of Scripture?

An. First, that the bodies of the faithful shall rise.

Secondly, in what manner the shall rise.

Qu. By what arguments does the Gospel prove that the bodies of the faithful
shall rise?

An. First, because Christ is risen.

Secondly, that else the preaching of the Gospel, our baptism, and sufferings
should be vain.

Thirdly, that else we should be still in our sins: and then most miserable of
all creatures.

Qu. In what manner shall the bodies of the faithful be raised?

An. It shall be changed from a body subject to weakness and infirmities,
dishonor and corruptions, into a body perfectly strong, glorious, and
immortal.

Phil. 3.21
Who shall change our vile bodies that they may be fashioned like unto his
glorious Body.

Qu. Shall all the bodies of the faithful be thus changed?

An. The dead shall be first raised, and thus changed: and then those that are
found alive at his coming, shall be thus changed.

1 These. 4.16.17.
And the dead in Christ shall first rise; then shall we which live and remain,
be caught up with them also in the clouds to meet the Lord in the Air.

Qu. Rehearse the 25 Chapter of Matthew, and the 31.32.33.34.35. ver.

An. And when the Son of man comes in his glory, and all the holy Angels
with him, then shall he sit upon on the throne of his glory; And before him
shall be gathered all the Nations of the earth, and he shall separate them one
from another, as a shepherd separateth the sheep from the Goats. And he
shall set the sheep on his right hand, and the Goats on the left.

Then shall the King say to them on his right hand: Come ye blessed of my
Fathers, inherit ye the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the
world.

After shall he say unto them on the left hand, Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire which is prepared for the devil and his Angels.

Qu. What is the scope of this place of Scripture?

An. The last judgment.

Qu. What have we to consider concerning that?

An. Four things. 1. The certainty of it. 2. The tokens of it. 2. The manner
of it. 4. The end of it.

Qu. What is the certainty of it?

An. Revel. 10.6.
Christ has often foretold it, and sworn it.

Qu. What be the tokens of it going before?

An. First, a general apostasy. Concerning the signs going before


2 These. 2.3
Let no man deceive you by any means, for that day shall not come except there
first come a falling away.

Secondly, adeparting from the Doctrine of Faith, and multiplitciy of Heresies.

1 Timothy 4.1
Now the Spirit speaks evidently, that in the latter times some shall depart
from the Faith; and shall give heed unto the spirits of errors, and doctrines
of devils.

Luke 18.8.
But when the Son of Man comes, shall he find faith on the earth?

3. Mat. 24.12.
The love of many shalwax cold.

Fourthly, a general security.

Mat. 24.37.38.39.
But as in the days of Noah, so likewise shall the coming of the Son of man
be. For they did eat, and drink, and married, and gave in marriage: and knew
nothing till the Flood came end took them all away; So also shall it be at
the coming of the Son of Man.

Qu. In what manner shall Christ come to judgment?

An. With great power and glory.

Mark. 13.26.
And then shall they see the Son of Man coming in the Clouds with great
power and glory.

Qu. What is the end of Christ's coming to judgment?

Concerning the end of Christ's coming to judgment.
An. It is twofold. 1. To give sentence. 2. To execute the same.

Qu. What consider you in the sentence?

An. 1. That it is for the righteous. Mat. 25.35.
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you.

2. That it is against the wicked. Mat. 35.38.
Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his Angels.

Q. What consider you in the execution?

An. First, the casting of the wicked into hell.

Secondly, the triumphant going of the righteous into Heaven.

Qu. What is to be considered in that their estate of glory?

An. Their full fruition and inioyment of their glorious inheritance which
Christ their head merited for them; prepared for them; and kept for them.

Qu. Shall then the administration of Christ's Kingdom have an end?

An. Yes, It shall then have an end when he has delivered up the Kingdom to
God even the Father when he has put down all rule, and all authority, and
power.

1 Cor. 15.28.
And when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also
himself be subject unto him that did subdue all things under him: that God
may be All in All.

Qu. How shall Christ deliver up his Kingdom unto his Father, and be subject
unto him?

An. As he is Man, Mediator, Head of his Church; being perfected with his
fellow heirs, deliver his kingdom to God his Father: and so as he is man
subject, to God the Father, with whom as he is God, he is equal, and with
the Holy Ghost in the Godhead.

Qu. How shall God be All in All unto the Saints?

An. Concerning God, being All in All.
By their being perfectly filled with his glory and felicity, God and his glory
shall be all in all; To which glory the LORD in his appointed time bring us for
his Sons sake: to whom be all honor; and glory, both now and for evermore,
Amen.

FINIS.

