See here the fface of Romes renowned ffoe.
Grave, larned, Fulk, whose worth his works, best show.


T. STAPLETON and Martial (two Popish Heretics) confuted, and of their
particular heresies detected.

By. D. Fulke, Master of Pembrooke hall in Cambridge.

Done and directed to all those that love the truth, and hate superstitious
vanities.

Seen and allowed.

AT LONDON, Printed by Henry Middleton for George Bishop.

ANNO. 1580.

A CATALOGVE OF ALL SVCH Popish Books either answered, or to be answered,
which have been written in the English tongue from beyond the Seas, or
secretly dispersed here in England have come to our hands, since the beginning
of the Queens Majesty's reign.
1 HArding against the Apology of the English Church, answered by M. Jewel,
Bishop of Sarum. 2 Harding against M. Jewels challenge, answered by M. Jewel.
3 Hardings reioynder to M. Jewel, answered by M. Edward Deering. 4 Coals
quarrels against M. Jewel, answered by M. Jewel. 5 Rastels return of
untruths answered by M. Jewel. 6 Rastell against M. Jewels challenge, answered
by William Fulke. 7 Dorman against M. Jewel, answered by M. Nowel. 8 Dormans
disproofe of M. Nowels reproof, answered by M. Nowel. 9 The man of Chester
answered by M. Pilkington Bishop of Duresme. 10 Sanders on the Sacrament in
part answered by M. Nowell. 11 Fecknams Scruples, answered by M. Horn B. of
Winchester. 12 Fecknams Apology, answered by W. Fulke. 13 Fecknams objections
against M. Goughes sermon, answered by M. Gough, and M. Lawrence Tomson. 14
Stapletons counterblast, answered by M. Bridges. 15 Marshall his defense of the
cross, answered by M. Caulfehill. 16 Fowlers Psalter, answered by M. Sampson.
17 An infamous libell or letter (incerto authore) against the teachers of Gods
divine providence and predestination, answered by Master Robert Crowley. 18
Allens defense of Purgatory, answered by W. Fulke. 19 Heskins parle^^ent
repealed by W. Fulke. 20 Ristons chall^ng, answered by W Fulke, and Oliver
Carter 21 Hosius of Gods express word translated into English, answered by W.
Fulke. 22 Sanders rock of the Church, undermined by W. Fulke. 23 Sanders
defense of images answered by W. Fulke. 24 Shaclockes Pearl answered by M.
Hartwell. 25 The hatchet of heresies, answered by M. Bartlet. 26 Master Euans
answered by himself. 27 A defense of the private Mass answered (by
conjecture) by M. Cooper Bishop of Lincoln. 28 Certain assertions tending to
maintain the Church of Rome to be the true and catholic church, confuted by
John Knewstub. 29. Sander upon the Lords supper fully answered by D. Fulke. 30
Bristowes motives and dema^des, answered by D. Fulk. 31 Stapletons Differences,
and Fortress of the faith, answered by D. Fulke. 32 Allens defense of Priests
authority to remit sins, and of the Popish Churches meaning concerning
Indulgences, answered by D. Fulke. 33 Martials Reply to M. Calfehill, answered
by D. Fulke. 34 Frari^s railing declamation, answered by D. Fulke.
These Popish treatises ensuing are in answering, If the Papists know any not
here reckoned, let them be brought to light, and they shall be examined.

1 Stapletons return of vntrruthes. 2 Rastels replye. 3 Vaux his Catchisme. 4
Canifius his Catechism translated.
AN OVERTHROW BY W. Fulke Doctor of Divinity, and Master of Pembroke hall in
Cambridge: to the feeble Fortress of Popish faith received from ROME, and
lately advanced by THOMAS STAPLETON Student in Divinity.
THOMAS STAPLETON student in Divinity, translated the 5. Books of Bedes
history of y^ English Church into the English tongue, before which history, it
pleased him to set a table of 45. differences, between the Primitive faith of
England, continued almost a thousand years, and the late pretended faith of
the Protestants, all which we will consider in order.

First are five Apostolical marks found in their preachers, and wanting (as
he says) in ours.

1 Augustine (whom he calls their Apostle) showed the token of his
Apostleship, in all patience, signs, and wonders, Bed. 2. lib. 1. c. 30. and
31. l. 2. c. 2. Miracles in confirmation of their doctrine, Protestants have
yet wrought none.

I answer, Peter, Paul, Matthewe, James, John, etc. are Apostles to us, sent
not from Gregory of Rome, but by Christ him self, out of Iewrie, y^ sign of
whose Apostleship, being showed in all patience, signs, and wonders, and our
doctrine being the same which we have received of their writings, needs no
other confirmation of miracles, to be wrought by us. If Augustine sent from
Gregory a man, have planted any humane traditions, and confirmed them by
li^ing signs and miracles, as a forerunner of Antichrist, which was even
immediately after his time to be openly showed, or if by subtle practice
miracles have been feigned to have been done by him, and reported by a
credulous man Bid, it hurts not our cause: Gal. Mon.
seeing other writers report him to have been both a proud and a cruel man.
And yet we receive all that doctrine which he taught, agreeable to the doctrine
of the Apostles of Christ: what so ever he taught beside, we are not to receive
it, of an Angel from heaven, much less of Augustine from Rome.

2 Their Apostles tendered unity, laboring to reduce the Britains to the
unity of Christ's Church. Nothing is more notorious in Protestants then their
infamous dissension.

Augustine in deed labored to bring the Britons in subjection to himself and
to the Church of Rome, which argues no desire to Christian unity, but
favors of Antichristian ambition and tyranny, as his cruel threatening
executed upon them, did show sufficiently.

The dissension of the Protestants is not in articles of faith: nor such, but
that they are all brethren, that unfeignedly profess the doctrine of
salvation: although they dissent in the matter of the sacrament, in orders,
rytes, and ceremonies.

3 Their Apostles were sent by an ordinary vocation, Protestants have
preached without vocation or sending at all, such as the Church of Christ
requires.

They were sent by Pope Gregory, who had none ordinary authority to send
Apostles or preachers into foreigne countries. Wherefore if they had any
sending, it was extraordinary: of charity, and not of office. The Protestants
that first preached in these last days, had likewise extraordinaire calling.
But if the calling of the Papists may be counted a lawful calling: they were
called of the Popish Church to be preachers and teachers, before they knew or
preached the truth of the Gospel.

4 Their preaching was of God by Gamaliels reason, because their doctrine
continued 900. years, whereas the Protestants faith is already changed from
Lutherane to Sacramentarie, in less then 20. years.

This reason of Gamaliel would prove Mahometes enterprise to be of God, because
it has likewise continued 900. years: and yet it is false, that the Popish
faith has had so long continuance. For the Papists are departed as from many
other points of doctrine, so even from that of the Lords supper, which
Augustine planted among the Saxons, unto carnal presence and
transubstantiation, the contrary of which were taught by Augustine, as
appears by the public Saxon Homely, lately translated into English, and
imprinted. The diversity of opinions concerning the sacrament, makes no
alteration of faith in them that agree in all other necessary articles. Besides
that, it is most false which he says, that Luther of the Protestants is
counted a very Papist.

5 Their Apostles taught such a faith, as puts things; by the belief and
practice whereof, we may be saved. The faith of the Protestants, is a denial
of Popish faith, and has no affirma^iue doctrine, but that which Papists had
before.

The Protestants faith affirms, that a man is justified by it only. That the
sacrifice of Christ's death is our only propitiatory sacrifice. That Christ
is our only mediator of redemption and intercession etc. Generally it
affirms what so ever the Scripture teaches, and denies the contrary.

Then follow 39. differences in doctrine.

6 Their Apostles said Mass; which the Protestants abhor.

The Popish Mass was not then all made, therefore they could not say it. They
ministered y^ communion, which Bid and other writers called Missa, they said
no private Mass, such as the Papists now defend.

7 In the Mass is an external sacrifice; offered to GOD the father, the
blessed body and blood of Christ him self. lib. 5. cap. 22. This doctrine is
expressly reported. This seems blasphemy to the Protestants.

The words of Bid, according to M. Stapletons own translation, are these,
out of the Epislte of Ceolfride to Naitan king of the Pictes. All Christian
Churches throughout the whole world (which al joined together make but one
Catholic Church) should prepare bread and wine, for the mystery of the flesh
and precious blood of that immaculat lamb, which took away the sins of the
world, and when all lessons, prayers, rytes, and ceremonies used in the solemn
feast of Easter, were done, should offer the same to God the father, in hope of
their redemption to come. Here is no sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ,
but of bread and wine for the mystery thereof: no sacrifice propitiatory for
sins, but of thanksgiving, and remembrance of the propitiation made by the
lamb himself, in hope of eternal redemption. No oblation by by the priest
only, but by the whole Church, and every member thereof, as was the oblation of
the Paschall lamb, whereunto he compares this sacrifice, interpreting those
words of Exodus 12. Every man shall take a lamb according to their families and
housholdes, and offer him in sacrifice at the evening. That is to say, (says
Ceolfride) all Christian Churches etc. as before. By which words it is
manifest, that the Papists now adays, are departed even from that faith of
the sacrament and sacrifice thereof, that Augustine brought from Rome.

8 This sacrifice is taught to be propitiatory: lib. 4. c. 22. which
Protestants abhor.

There is no mention of propitiatory sacrifice in that chapter, but there is
told a tale of a prisoner, that was loosed from his bonds, so often as his
brother which was a Priest, said Mass for his soul, supposing he had been
slain in battle: by which many were persuaded, that the wholesome blessed
sacrifice, was effectuous to the everlasting redemption and ransoming both of
soul and body. So were they worthy to be deceived that would build a doctrine
without the word of God, upon the uncertain report of men, who either devised
this tale as being false, or else if it were so, could not discern the
illusions of Satan, seeking to maintain an error, contrary to the glory of
Christ.

9 Confession of sins made to the priest, lib. 4. cap. 25. and 27. This
sacrament of the Protestants is abolished.

In neither of these chapters is mentioned the Popish auricular confession, as
a sacrament necessary to salvation. In the 25. mention is made of one, which
being troubled with conscience of an heinous sin, came to a learned priest to
ask counsel of remedy, and showed what his offense was. In the 27. chapter
it is expressly said, that all the people did openly declare unto S. Cutbert in
confession, the things that they had done. Such confession as either of both
these were, the Protestants have not abolished, although they number not
confession among the sacraments.

10 Satisfaction and penance for sin enjoined, appears lib. 4. cap. 25.
which the Protestants court admits not.

There is no word of satisfaction for his sins, but of fasting and prayers,
as fruits of repentance, whereunto he was first exhorted by the priest,
according to his power and ability, but he not content herewith, urged the
priest to appoint him a certain time of fasting, for a whole week together,
to whose infirmity the priest somewhat yelding, willed him to fast two or three
days in a week, until he returned to give him farther advice. Every man may
see broad difference betwixt this counsel and Popish satisfaction and penance.

11 Merit of good works in this story is eftsoons justified. lib. 4. cap.
14. and 15. which the Protestants count preiudidiciall to Gods glory.

In the 14. chapter there is no mention of the merit of good works, but that
after the brethren had fasted and prayed, God delivered them of the pestilence.
We never denied, but that God regards our prayer and fasting, though not as
meritorious, but as our obedience which he requires of us, and saves us only
for his mercy sake. The 15. chapter scarce touches any matter of religion, and
therefore I know not what he means to quote it, except it be a error of y^
Printer.

12 Intercession of Saints, Protectants abhor the practice, whereof appears
lib. 1. cap. 20. and lib. 4. cop. 14.

In the former place Beda supposes, that God gave the Britains victory at
the intercession of S. Albane, but where learned he this kind of intercession,
out of the holy scriptures?

In the latter place a boy being sick of the plague, reports, that God would
cease the plague, at the intercession of S. Oswald: as the Apostles Peter and
Paul declared to him in a vision. But seeing the Apostles have taught no such
doctrine in their writings, they have admonished us to beware of such
fantastical visions. Gal. 1. 2 Thessa. 2.

13 The Clergy of their primitive Church after holy orders taken, do not
marry, lib. 1. cap. 27. Now after holy orders and vow to the contrary,
priests do marry.

The Counsel of Gregory to Augustine is this. If there be any among the
Clergy out of holy orders, which can not live chaste, they shall take wives.
These words command some of the Clergy to take wives, they forbid not the
rest to marry. For what shall they that are in holy orders do, if they can
not live chaste? Again, the histories are plentiful that Priests were married
in England three or four hundredth years after Augustine.

14 In their primitive Church the vow of chastity was thought godly and
practiced: now they are counted damnable and broken.

Such vows as were made without consideration of men's ability to perform
them, are justly accounted rash and presumptuous. Such is the vow of
virginity in a great many, which our savior Christ affirms to be a rare
gift, not in every man's power. As for the vow of chastity, if any were made
by Popish priests, it was oftener broken before the restoring of true
knowledge, then since. Whose incontinencie has infected the world with
whoredom and uncleanness.

15 Such Monks and virgins lived in cloisters, in obedience and poverty,
which are overthrown of Protestants as a damnable estate.

The horrible abuse of Cloystrall life, has caused the subversion of them,
beside their errors, superstition and idolatry.

16 Prayer for the dead, Dirige over night, and Requiem Mass in the morning,
was an accustomed manner, lib. 3. cap. 2. lib. 4 cap. 21. which the Protestants
count to be abomination.

Prayer for the dead is an older error then Popish religion. But Dirige and
Requiem Mass had an other meaning, lib. 3. cap. 2. then the Papists have now,
for there it is said. In the self same place the religious men of Hagustalden
Church, have now of long time been accustomed to come every year, the eve and
the day that the same king Oswald was afterward slain, to keep Diriges there
for his soul, and in the morning, after Psalms being said solemnly, to
offer for him the sacrifice of holy oblation. You must understand, that this
Oswald was of them that so did, taken for an holy martyr, and therefore these
Psalmodies and sacrifices were of thanksgiving for the rest of his soul: not of
propitiation for his sins, as the Papists account them. lib. 4. cap. 21.
there is nothing to the matter in hand, but in the next chapter following, is
the tale of him that was loosed from his fetters by saying of Mass, by the
relation whereof, and not by the word of God, many began to think the
sacrifice of the Mass profitable for the dead.

17 Reservation of the sacrament thought no superstition, lib. 4. cap. 24. now
counted profanation of the sacrament.

Reservation was an older error then Popery, yet contrary to the
commandment of Christ: Take ye, and eat ye.

18 Houseling before death used, as necessary for all true Christians, lib. 4.
cap. 3. and 24. Protestants under pretense of a Communion, do now wickedly
bereave Christian folk of it.

These chapters show that it was used, but not that it was used as necessary.
The Communion of the ficke is also used of us. Neither can M. Stapleton prove,
that it was then ministered to the sick person alone, as is used among them.
But in the 24. chapter of the 4. book it may be gathered, that as many as were
present with the party, received with him, because there was a mutual demand
of his being in charity with them, and they with him.

19 Consecrating of Monks and Nuns by the hands of the Bishop, a practiced
solemnity in their primitive Church, lib. 4. cap. 19. and 23. which
Protestants by the liberty of their Gospel laugh and scorn at.

Chap. 19. it is said, that Wilfride gave to Ethelrede the veil and habit of
a Nun, and cap. 23. that one Hein took the vow and habit of a Nun, being
blessed and consecrated by Bishop Aidan. In those elder times, no virgin was
suffered to profess virginity, but by the judgment of the Bishop, who was
not only a minister of the ceremony of profession, but also a judge of the
expedience and lawfulness of the vow, so that the vow of virginity was
moderated and kept within more tolerable bounds, then is used of the Papists.

20. Commemoration of Saints at Mass time, lib. 4. cap. 14 and 18. such
commemorations in the Protestants Communion are excluded, as superstitious and
unlawful.

Chap. 14. it it said upon the report of a boys vision, And therefore let
them say Masses, and give thanks that their prayer is heard, and also for the
memory of the same king Oswald, which sometime governed their nation. Admitting
this vision to be true, here is but Mass and memory of thanksgiving: in the
18. chap. is nothing to any such purpose. In the Communion of our Church is a
thanksgiving, with Angels, Archangels, and all the glorious company of
heaven, although we make no special mention of any one Saint by name.

21 Pilgrimage to holy places, especially to Rome, a much waitie matter of all
estates, lib. 4. cap. 3. and 23. and lib. 5. cap. 7. Nothing sounds more
profane and barbarous in the ears of Protestants.

In the first of these places, there is mention of pilgrimage into Ireland, not
for y^ holiness of the place. but for the wholesome instruction that then was
there. For it seems by the story in many places, that Ireland (although not
subject to y^ See of Rome) was the^ replenished with godly learned men, of
whom men sought out of Britain, to be informed in religion. Peregrination to
Rome was used of superstition, and opinion of great learning to be had from
thence. Yet was there no pilgrimage to images, nor to Rome, so filthy a sink
of all abominations, as it has been since those days.

22 Of the relics of holy men, of reverence used toward them, and miracles
wrought by them, the history is full. Nothing is more vile in the sight of
Protestants, then such devotion of Christians.

Such superstition and credulity of the former age, is justly misliked of us,
but the idolatry and forging of relics, which is too common among the
Papists, is rightly detested of us.

23 Blessing with the sign of the Cross, accounted no superstition, lib. 4.
cap. 24. and lib. 5. cap. 2. In the devotion of the Protestants is esteemed
magike.

Signing with the sign of the Cross, which sometime against the Gentiles was
an indifferent ceremony: used of the Papists for an ordinary form of
blessing, is both superstitious and idolatrous.

24 Solemnity of burial Protestants despise, whereas it was the devotion of
their primitive Church, to be buried in monasteries, Churches, and chapels.

Honorable burial of the Saints bodies, which were the temples of the holy
Ghost, and are laid up in hope of a glorious resurrection, Protestants
despise not. Yet were the first Archbishops of Canturburie buried in a Porch
beside the Church, lib. 2. cap. 3. There was no burial place appointed in the
Monastery of Berking, until by a light it was revealed, as the history says,
lib. 4. cap. 7. but with time superstition on of burial grew, yet nothing
comparable in that age to the superstition of Papists of these latter times.
There was no burial in S. Frances Coule, nor after the Popish solemnity.

25 Benediction of the Bishop as superior to the people, was used, which
Protestants scorn at, lib. 4. cap. 11.

The Protestants allow benediction of the Bishop in the name of God, as the
superior, although they justly deride the Popish manner of blessing, by cutting
the air with crosses: neither is there any such blessing spoken of in the
chapter by him cited.

26 The service of the Church was at the first planting of their faith in the
Latin and learned tongue, lib. 1. cap. 29. lib. 4. cap. 18. which the
Protestants have altered.

There is no such thing to be proved in the first place, nor any thing sounding
the way, but only this, that Gregory sent into England to Augustine many
books, of which it is a Popish consequence to gather, that they were books of
Latin service. In the latter it is declared, that John ye Chaunter of Rome,
brought from thence the order of singing, and reading: and put many things in
writing, which pertained to the celebration of high feasts and holidayes, for
the whole compass of the year. But this being almost an hundredth years after
the coming of Augustine, it appears the Church of England had no such Latin
service before. For Gregory willed Augustine to gather out of every Church,
what ceremonies he thought expedient for the English Church, and bound him not
to the orders or service of the Church of Rome. And it may be gathered, that
long after there was no certain form of administration of the sacraments put
in writing and generally received; but that the priests which then were
learned, ordered the same according to their discretion, for their chief
labor was in preaching and instructing. For Beda reports upon the credit of
one which lived in his time, and was Abbot of Wye, Herebald by name, that he
being in great extremity and danger of death, by falling from an horse, S.
John of Beuerlaye the Bishop, that was his master, asked him whether he knew
without all scruple or doubt, that he was baptized or no, to whom he
answered, that he certainly knew that he was baptized, and told the
priests name that baptized him. To whom the Bishop replied, saying: If you
were baptized of him, doubtless you were not well baptized: for I know him
well, and am right well assured, that when he was made priest, he could not for
his dulheaded wit, learn, neither to instruct nor to baptize. And for that
cause I have straightly charged him, not to presume to that ministry which he
could not do accordingly. By this it may be gathered, that the form of
baptism was not set down in writing, which every dulheaded dogbolt priest can
read, but that it was referred to the learning of the minister which did
instruct them that were of age, and came to receive baptism. But this ignorant
priest whom S. John of Beuerlay deprived of his ministry, could neither
cathechise nor baptize: for which cause, the young man being cathechised again,
and after he recovered of his fall, was baptized a new, as one that was not
rightly baptized before. Moreover, lib. 4. cap. 24. Beda shows of one Cednom
in the Abbay of Hilda, to whom was given miraculously the gift of Singing and
making Hymns for religion in his mother tongue, of the creation of the world,
and all histories of the old Testament, of the incarnation, passion,
resurrection, and ascension of Christ, etc. which by all likelihoode were used
in the Churches. And when Latin service was first used, it is not incredible,
but that the people did meetely well understand it, for the Latin tongue was
in those days understood in most places of the Western Church. And Beda notes
some especially which understood no language but the Saxon. The interpreters
which Augustine brought out of France, do confirm this conjecture. For the
rude Latin tongue spoken in France, was better understood of the vulgar
people, then that was spoken at Rome and in Italy: for which cause, there was
a Canon made in the third Council at Toures, that the Homilies should be turned
in rusticam Romanam linguam, into the rude Latin tongue, that they might more
easily be understood of all men. Again, the Britains and Pictes which
converted the greatest part of the Saxons, how could they have been understood
preaching in Welsh, but that the vulgar Latin tongue was a common language to
them both. Finally, the manifold uses of diverse Churches, as Sarum, York,
etc. declare, that the Latin service was but lately in comparison set down,
when knowledge decayed both in the Priests and the people.

27 Protestants have plucked down altars, which they had of old time.

They had altars, but standing in the midst of the Church, as y^ tables stood
in the Primitive Church.

28 Altar clothes and vestments used of them, Protestants admit not.

A sorry ceremony, in which no part of Christianity consists. The like I
say of the 29. holy vessels, 30. holy water, and 31. Ecclesiastical censure,
about which there was no small ado.

32 Their primitive Church was governed by Synodes of the Clergy only, in
determining controversies of religion, which Protestants have called from
thence unto the Lay court only.

The latter part is a slander upon the Protestants, the former part a lie
upon the ancient Saxons, for at the Synod holden at Strenshalch, Vz. Whitby
in Yorkshire.
not only the kings Oswine and Alfride were present, but also king Oswine did
order the Synod, and in the end concluded the matter in controversy, lib. 3.
cap. 25.

33 The spiritual rulers of the primitive Church were Bishops and pastors
duly consecrated, protestants have no consecration, no true Bishops at all.

This is an other lewd slander against ye Protestants, for they have true
Bishops, though not consecrated after the Popish manner. Laurence the second
Archbishop of Canterbury, acknowledges the Ministers of ye Scots and
Britains for Bishops, although they were not subject to the Church and See of
Rome, lib. 2. cap. 4. Aidanus, Finanus, Colmanus, are judged of Beda for true
Bishops, although they were divided from the Church of Rome, and so are such
Bishops as were ordained by them, for they converted the greatest part of the
Saxons unto Christian faith: As Northumbrians, Mertians, and East Saxons.

34 Protestants have brought the supreme government of the Church to the Lay
authority: in the primitive faith of our country the Lay was subject to the
Bishop in spiritual causes.

And so are they now in such causes as they were subject then. But that the
supreme authority was in the civil Magistrate at that time, it may appear
by these reasons. First Pope Gregory him self calls the Emperor Mauritius
his sovereign Lord, lib. 1. cap. 23. and 28. and 29. and 30. and after him
Pope Honorius called Heraclius his sovereign Lord, lib. 2. 18. King Sonwalch
Preferred Agilbert and Wini to be Bishops, afterward he deposed Wini, which for
money bought for Wulfher king of Mercia the Sea of London, lib. 3. cap. 7.

Earcombert king of Kent, of his princely authority purged his realm of
idolatry, and commanded that the fast of 40. days should be kept, lib. 3.
cap. 8.

King Oswine ordered the Synod at Strenshalch, li. 3. cap. 25. Oswine and
Ecgbert kings, deliberate touching the peacable government of the Church, and
by the choice and consent of the Clergy, did nominate Wighard Archbishop of
Canturburie, lib. 3. cap. 29.

King Ecgfride deposed Bishop Wilfride, li. 4. ca. 12.

Ost for at ye commandment of king Edilred was consecrated by Wilfrid Bish. of
ye Victians, li. 4. ca. 23. These places of the history show, that kings had
chief authority both over persons and causes Ecclesiastical, such as we now
acknowledge our Princes to have.

35 The final determination of spiritual causes rested in the Sea Apostolic
of Rome; which is now detested of protestants.

Although the Sea of Rome usurped much in those days, yet was not the
authority thereof acknowledged by the Churches of the Britains, Irish, and
Scots. The Britains before Augustines time sent not to Rome, but unto France
for aid against the Pelagian heretics. At Augustines coming and long after,
they refused to yield obedience to the Sea of Rome; yea among the Saxons them
selves, Wilfrid deposed by the king, and absolved by the Pope, could not be
restored, but by a Synod of his own country, li. 5. c. 20.

36 Their faith and Apostles came from the Sea of Rome: the protestant
departs there fro.

The Protestants are returned to the ancient faith which was in this land
before Augustine came from Rome, which did not so much good in planting faith
where it was not, as in corrupting y^ sincerity of faith where it was before
he came.

37 Their faith was first preached with cross and procession, Heresies first
raged by throwing down the cross, and altering the procession therewith.

The Popish faith began with superstition, which the Christian Catholics
have justly abolished.

38 Their first Apostles were Monks. The first preachers of the protestants
have been apostataes, as Luther, Oecolampadius, Martyr, etc.

Nay, they have returned from apostasy to the true faith and religion of
Christ. Augustine and the rest of the Monks of that time, differed much from
the Popish Monks of the latter days. For they were learned preachers, lib. 3.
cap. 26. these idle loyterers: they labored with their hands, lib. 5. cap.
19. these lived of the sweat of other men's brows. They made no such vow but
they might serve the common wealth, if they were called thereto. Sigbard of a
Monk was made King, lib. 4. cap. 11. these professed them selves dead to all
honest travel, either in the Church or common wealth.

39 The first impes of their faith, and scholars of the Apostles, were holy
me^. Luther confesses his scholars to be worse then they were under the Pope.

There were hypocrites in those days, also there were incontinent Nuns, lib.
4. cap. 25. And Beda confesses, that Aidane (which was no slave of the Romish
See) was more holy, then y^ Clergy of his time, whose devotion was key cold.
If Luther flattered not his scholars, he is more to be commended, yet can not
Stapleton prove, that he speaks so of all, but of some carnal professors
only.

40 Their first preacher lived apostolically in voluntary poverty. This
Apostolical perfection protestants that bear them selves for the Apostles of
England, neither practice them selves, nor can abide in other.

First it is a slander, that any Protestants bear the^ selves for Apostles
of England: secondly, let the world judge whether the preachers of the Gospel,
come nearer to the poverty of the Apostles, then the Pope their great Apostle
of the Romish Church, with the rest of the pillars of the same, the Cardinals,
etc.

41 Their faith builded up Monasteries and Churches, protestants have thrown
down many, erected none.

The first Monasteries were Colleges of learned preachers, and builded for
that end. King Edilwald builded a Monastery, wherein he and his people might
resort to hear the word of God, to pray, and to bury their dead, lib. 3. cap.
23. The like practice was in the Abbay of Hilda lib. 4. Ca. 23. From which use
seeing they were of late degenerated into idleness and filthy lusts, they
were lawfully suppressed. And as for building of Churches, where they lack,
Protestants have and do employ their endeavor. 42 By the first Christians of
their faith, God was served day and night, protestants have abolished all
service of God by night, and done to the devil a most acceptable sacrifice.

Protestants have abolished no service of GOD by night, but such as was either
impious or superstitious, for they also serve God both day and night, even with
public prayer, and exercise of hearing the word of God preached.

43 By the devotion of the people, first embracing their faith, much voluntary
oblations were made to the Church, by the rechlesse religion of the
Protestants due oblations are denied to the Church.

Of them that be true professors of the Gospel, both due oblations are paid,
and much voluntary oblations also, for the maintenance of the preachers, for
relief of the poor, the straunges and captives, etc.

44 Princes endued the Church with possessions and revenues. The lewd
looseness of the Protestants has stirred princes to take from the Churches
possessions so given.

Nay, the pride, covetousness, and luxuriousness of Popish Clergy, have
moved them to do that is done in that behalf.

45 Last of all, their faith reduced the Scottishmen living in schism, to the
unity of the Catholic Church. This late alteration has moved them from
unity to schism.

Nay, their superstition at length corrupted the sincerity of faith in the
Britains and Scots, and from the unity of ye Catholic Church of Christ,
brought them under the schismatic faction of the Sea of Rome, from which
they are now again returned with us, God be thanked, to the unity of
Christ's true Catholic and Apostolic Church.

These differences which he has either falsely observed, or else craftily
collected out of the dross and dregs of that time, he promises to prove, to
concur with the belief and practice of the first 600. years, in the second
part of his feeble fortress, which is easily blown over, with one word.
Although some of these corruptions have been received within the first 600.
years, yet is he not able to prove, that they have been from the beginning,
and so continued all that time, wherefore his Fortress will do them small
pleasure, to establish them for Christian truths, which have had a later
beginning then our Savior Christ and his Apostles.

But for as much as he has gathered differences of the first Church of the
Saxons from ours, I have also gathered differences of the same from theirs at
this time, and let the readers judge of both indifferently.

1 The Church of English Saxons for 300. years after Augustine, did believe
bread and wine to remain in the sacrament after consecration, which the Papists
deny, proved by a Sermon extant in the Saxon tongue, translated out of Latin by
Aelfrike Archbishop of Canturburie or Abbot of S. Albones, appointed to be read
unto the people at Easter before they received the Communion, also by two
Epistles of ye same Aelfrike.

2 The Church of English Saxons believed the sacrament to be the body and blood
of Christ, not carnally but spiritually, expressly denying as well the carnal
presence as transubstantiation which the Papists hold Aelf. Sermon. Pasc and Ep.

3 The Church of English Saxons did give the communion under both kinds unto
the people, which the Papists do not, Aelf. Sermon. Pasc and Beda lib, 1. cap.
27. and lib. 5. cap. 22.

4 The Priests of that time said no private Mass on working days, but only
on holy days, which therefore were called Mass days, Aelfr. Ser. Pasc.
Popish priests every day.

5 The people did then communicate with the priest, Beda lib. 2. cap. 5. The
Popish priest eats and drinks all alone.

6 The English Saxon Church did celebrate Easter with the old Jews in one
faith, although they differ from them in the kind of external sacraments:
whereby they affirmed the substance of the sacraments of both the testaments to
be all one, which the Papists deny. Aelfr. Sermon. Pasc. and Epist. Bed lib. 5.
ca. 22.

7 The sacrament of the Lords Supper was not then hanged up to be worshipped
nos carried in procession, because they had not the opinion of carnal presence
which the Papists have, etc.

8 The English Saxons Church denied, that wicked men received the body and
blood of Christ. Aelfr. Sermon. Pasc. The Papists hold, that not only wicked
men, but also brute beasts eat the body of Christ, if they eat the external
sacrament thereof.

9 The English Saxons allowed the Scriptures to be read of the people in the
Saxon tongue, whereof Canutus made a law, that all Christian men should
diligently search the law of God. The Papists deny the search of Gods law
to all Christian men, that are not of the Clergy, or learned in the Latin
tongue.

10 The English Saxons decreed in Synod after Latin service prevailed, and
the knowledge of Latin decayed, that the priests should say unto the people on
Sundays and holy days, the interpretation of that Gospel in English. Aelfr.
lib. Can. which the Papists neither do nor will suffer to be done.

11 The English Saxons commanded that al men should be instructed by the
Priests to say the Lords prayer, the Creed, and the ten Commandments in
the English tongue. Will. Mal. li. 1. de part. Aelfr. in lib. Can. Canut in leg.
which the Papists have taught to be heretical.

12 The English Saxons decreed in Synod, and king Canutus made a law, that
the priests should instruct the people in the understanding of the Lords
prayer, the Creed, etc. vbi supra, which the Papists altogether neglect,
affirming ignorance to be the mother of devotion.

13 The worshipping of images, and the second Council of Nice that decreed the
same, was accursed of the Church of God in England and France, and written
against by Alcuinus, in the name of the Church of England and France. Math.
West. Symeon Dunel. Rog. Houed etc. The Papists defend both that idolatrous
Council, and their wicked decree.

14 The Priests in the primitive Saxon Church, were married for three or four
hundredth years, witness all histories of England, which the Papists do not
allow.

15 The vow of chastity was not exacted of them that were made Priests, for
the space of more then 400. years after the ariuall of Augustine into Kent,
which decree was made by Lanfrancus in a Synod at Winchester, Anno 1076.

16 Notwithstanding this decree and many other, both Priests refused to make
that vow, and kept their wives by the kings leave. Gerard. Ebor Ep. ad Anselm.
Histor. Petroburg. Papists permit neither of both.

17 Lanfrancus decreed, that such priests as had wives, should not be
compelled to put them away, the Papists enforce Priests to put away their
wives.

18 The Popes yt were founders of ye English Saxon church, acknowledged the
Emperors to be their sovereign Lords. Bed. li. 1. cap. 23. lib. 2. cap. 18

19 Pope Honorius took order yt the Archb. of Canturb. might be consecrated in
England, without traveling to Rome. Bed. l. 2. ca. 18. The latter Popes denied
this.

20 Pope Gregory exhorts king Ethelbert to set forth the faith of Christ to
his subjects, to forbid the worship of idols, etc. Bed. lib. 1. cap 32. The
Papists would not have the civil magistrate govern in Ecclesiastical causes.

21 And least you should say (as M. Sander does) that the king was herein the
Bishops Commissarie. Earcombert king of Kent of his princely authority purged
his realm of idolatry, and commanded the fast of 40. days to be kept. Bed.
lib. 3. cap. 8. The Papists deny that a king may do such things of his
princely authority.

22 Kings in those times preferred men to Bishoprikes, Bed. lib. 3 cap. 7.
which the Papists affirm to be unlawful.

23 Kings in those days deposed Bishops, as Senwalch did Wini, Bed. li. 3.
cap. 7. Ecgfrid deposed Wilfride, lib. 4. ca. 12. which the Papists do not
admit.

24 King Ecgfride would not receive Wilfrid being restored by the Pope, Bed.
lib. 4. cap. 13. and lib. 5. cap. 10. The Papists count it blasphemy not to
obey the Popes decree.

25 The same Wilfride being again deprived by means of king Aldfride, and
being the second time absolved by ye Pope, could not be restored to his
Bishoprike. but by a Synod of his own Clergy, Bed. lib. 5. cap. 20. By
which it appears, the Clergy were not then in perfect slavery to the Pope.

26 Kings in those days were present at Synodes, and ordered them, and
concluded in them as Oswine did at Strenshalch, lib. 3. cap. 25.

27 Archbishops were commanded by Kings to consecrate Bishops, as Wilfride was
to consecrate Ostfor at the commandment of king Edilred, Bed li. 4. cap. 23.
Papists deny Kings to have sovereign authority in ecclesiastical causes.

28 Privileges of Monasteries sought at Rome, had first the consent of the king
unto them, Bed. lib. 4. cap. 18. Papists of later times seek privileges
against the kings will.

29 Monks in yt time were called to serve ye Common wealth, as Sighard a Monk
was made king of ye East Saxons, lib. 4. ca. 11. Papists call such Apostataes.

30 Monasteries were the^ Colleges of learned me^ to furnish the Church with
Ministers and Bishops, li. 4 ca. 23. Among Papists they be stals to feed idle
bellies, yt serve neither the Church nor the Common wealth.

31 Study of the Scriptures and hand labor was the exercise of Monks in
those first and better times, Bed. lib. 4. cap. 3. Idleness and vain
ceremonies is the exercise of Popish Monks.

32 Monasteries were founded, that men might in them hear the word of God, and
pray. Bed. li. 3. ca. 23. Popish Monasteries in latter times were builded only
to pray for men's souls, and to say Masses in them, etc.

33 Upon Sundays the people used ordinarily to flock to Churches and
Monasteries to hear the word of God. Bed. lib. 3. cap. 26. In popish
Monasteries there neither was nor is any ordinary resort to hear the word of
God, nor any ordinary preaching.

34 The Monks of that time were all learned preachers, Bed. lib. 3. cap. 26.
The Popish Monks are most unlearned, and few preachers out of their dens.

35 In those days every Priest and Clearke was a preacher, so that when any
came to any town, ye people would resort to them to be taught of them. Bed.
lib. 4. cap. 16. The greatest number of Popish Priests in these latter days,
are most ignorant Asses, and void of all spiritual understanding.

36 Unlearned Priests were forbidden to serve in the Church, Bed. lib. 5. cap.
6. in so much that S. John of Beuerley baptized again a young man, which was
baptized of an unlearned Priest. The Papists allow unlearned Priests to
baptize and say Mass, that can not cathechise and instruct their hearers.

37 Songs and Hymns out of the holy Scriptures were made meet for religion
in the mother tongue. Bed. lib. 4. cap. 24. Papists can abide no songs of
scripture in the English tongue.

38 Anchorets of that time labored with their hands, Bed. lib. 4. cap. 28.
Popish Anchorets live idly, and labor not with their hands.

39 Dirige and Mass was said for Saint Oswaldes soul, by which it is
manifest, that they esteemed the Mass to be a sacrifice of thanksgiving. lib.
3. cap. 2.

40 Bega a Nun, after she saw the soul of the Abbess Hilda carried into
heaven, exhorted her sisters to be occupied in prayers and Psalms for her
soul. Whereby it appears that the doctrine of purgatory was not yet
confirmed among them. Lib. 4. ca. 23. Nothing is so certainly defended among
Papists as purgatory.

41 Holy men fasted then with eating of milk, as Egbert. Bed. lib. 3. ca. 27.
and Cedda fasted lent with eggs and milk lib. 3. ca. 23. Papists of later
times have utterly forbidden all white meats in Lent and fasting days.

42 There was a Church of Christ in Britain before the coming of Augustine
not subject to the sea of Rome, which continued long after his coming lib. 2.
cap. 4. The Papists account none Christians, but such as be bondslaues to the sea of Rome.

43 Laurence the 2. Archbishop. of Canter. accompteth the Bishops of the
Scotts and Britains for Bishops, although they were not subject to the sea
nor Church of Rome. Bed lib. 3 cap. 4. The Papists take none for Bishops that
be not under the sea of Rome.

44 The Churches of the Britains were builded after another form then the
Churches of the Romish obedience Bed. lib. 3. cap. 4. The Papists affirm
there were no Churches ever builded but in fashion and use of popery.

45 The Schottish Church instructed from Ireland observed all such works of
devotion as they could find in the Prophets, Gospels, and Apostles writings,
and therefore of Bid and the English Church were acknowledged for Christians,
although they would not become members of the Church of Rome Bed. li. 3. ca.
4. The Papists hold that there is no salvation out of the Church of Rome;
which is a new Church in England, in comparison of the elder that was before
Augustines time.

46 Aidanus a preaching Bishop having no possessions, laboring to fulfill all
that was written in the holy scriptures, the prophets and Apostles, shining in
miracles both in his life time and after his death, was never subject to the
Church of Rome, yet accounted a Saint of the Church in those days Bed. lib. 3.
cap. 16. The Papists allow no saints but canonized by their Pope.

47 The exercise of Aidanus company both shorn and lay men, was reading of the
Scriptures and learning of the Psalms Bed. lib. 3. cap. 5. The exercise of
Popish Bishops servants is nothing less.

48 The greatest part of the English Saxons, were converted to Christianity,
by the Britains and Scotts that were no members of the Church of Rome. As all
the kingdom of Northumberland both Bernicians and Deires, were converted by
Aidanus except a few persons whom Paulmus the Roman in long time had gained.
The whole kingdom of Mercia, which was the greatest part of England, received
the faith and baptism of Finanus the Scot the successor of Aidanus Bed. lib.
3. cap. 21. The East Saxons by Cedda that was also of the Scottishe ordering
lib. 3. cap. 22. The Papists affirm that all our religion came from Rome.

49 Ceadda was consecrated by Wini bishop of the West Saxons, assisted by two
Britain Bishops that were not subject to the sea of Rome, and was nevertheless
accounted for a lawful bishop Bed. lib 3. 28.

50 Beda accounted Gregory for the Apostle of the Englishmen lib. 2. cap. 1.
The Papists now take Augustine for their Apostle.

I omit many other opinions and ordinances of that age: as Augustine would have
none forced to religion, that Wednesday should be fasting day. The bishop of
London should have a pall as well as York etc. wherein the Papists differ
from them that brag of nothing but antiquity, universality and consent.

AN OVERTHROW of Stapletons Fortress, or as he calls it himself, the pillar
of Papistrie.
The first Book.
CAP. I.
AN introduction, declaring the necessity of the matter to be treated upon,
Stapleton.
and the order which the auothour will take in treating thereof.

OMitting the necessity of the matter, Fulke.
his order which he promises to keep is this. First he will prove, if he can,
that Papistrie is the only true Christianity. This proposition he will follow
by two principal parts. In the former he will prove by authority of
Scriptures, and answering of the adversaries objections, that the Church cannot
possibly err. Secondly that this Church must be a known Church, that no
malignant Church can prevail against it: that Papistrie can be no schism nor
heresy. In the latter part after a few reasonable demandes that protestants
must not refuse to answer, putting the case that the known Church of 900.
years is a kind of papistry, he will prove that the faith of protestants is
differing from that was first planted among English men in more then forty
points, and that in all those points of difference, he will show they agree
with the first 600. years, which he says (but falsely) that protestants offer
to be tried by. For although the Bishop of Sarum made challenge of many
articles now holden of the Papists, not to be found within the compass of
the first 600. years, and therefore to be new and false doctrines, yet
neither he, nor any protestant living, or dead, did ever agree to receive what
doctrine so ever was taught within the first six hundredth years. But this I
dare avowe, that what article of doctrine so ever we do affirm, that same has
been affirmed of the godly fathers of the primitive Church, what so ever we
deny, the same can not be proved to have been universally affirmed and received
of all the godly fathers by the space of the 600. years together.

CAP. II.
That protestants do condemn the vuiuersal Church of Christ of these many
hundredth years, Stapleton.
and the reason of the whole disputation following grounded thereupon.

To prove that the Protestants condemn the uniuersall Church of Christ these
many hundredth years, Fulke.
he alleges the sayings of some Protestants, miserably wrested from their
meaning: that Latimer was our Apostle, that Luther begat truth, that the
Gospel does arise in the first appearing of the Gospel, etc: or as though by
these sayings and such like they should deny, that ever there had been any
Church in the world before these times, whereas every child may understand,
they speak of the restitution of the truth of the Gospel into the open sight
of the world, in these latter days. Likewise where some have written, that the
Pope has blinded the world these many hundredth years, some say a thousand
years, some 1200. some 900. some 500. etc. And the Apology affirms that
Christ has said: the Church should err, he cauilleth that all the Church for
so many years is condemned of all error. Whereas it is evident to them that
will understand that although some erroneous opinions have prevailed, and in
process of time have increased in the greatest part of the Church, for many
hundredth years, yet so long as the only foundation of salvation was retained,
the universal Church of Christ so many hundredth years is not condemned. But
when Antichrist (the mystery of whose iniquity wrought in the Apostles time.
2 Thessalonians. 2.) was openly showed, and that apostasy which the Apostle
foresheweth, was fulfilled then and from that time, whenever it was, not the
universal Church of Christ is condemned, but the general apopasie of
Antichrist is detected.

THE ARGUMENT WHEREVP-on this first part of the vawmure of this Fortress is
builded, is thus framed by the builder himself.
The known Church of Christ does continue, and shall continue always,
Stapleton.
without interruption in the true and upright faith.

But papistrie was the only known Church of Christ all these nine hundredth
years.

Ergo papistrie all these nine hundredth years has continued and shall continue
always even to the worlds end without interruption in the true and upright
faith.

This argument has never a leg to stand upon, Fulke.
for understanding (as he does) the known Church, to be that which is known
to the world, to continue without interruption: so known to the world, the
mayor is false. For although the Church shall continue always without
interruption, yet it shall not continue always so known, but, as in the days
of Elias, be hid from the outward view of men.

Again, the minor, that Papistrie was the only known Church, understanding
(as he does) that it was only reputed, taken, and acknowledged so to be, it is
utterly false. For the Greek and Oriental Church, which is not the Popish
Church, has been reputed, taken, and acknowledged to be the Church of Christ,
by as great a number of professors of Christianity, as have acknowledged the
Popish Church. So that where he thinks and says, al his labor remains to
prove ye mayor, you see that if he could prove it, yet al his labor is lost.
But to follow him in his mayor, he deuydeth it into two parts. The one, that
the Church does always continue in a right faith. The other, that this is a
known Church. Both these he promises to prove by Scripture. And the first
truly he shall not need: but yet it follows not, but that the church may
err in some particular points, not necessary to salvation, although it
continue in a right faith, concerning all principal and necessary articles.

CAP. III.
Evident proofs and clear demonstrations out of the Psalms, Stapleton.
that the Church of Christ must continue for ever without interruption, sound
and upright.

He is plentiful in proving, that which needs no proof, Fulke.
that the Church of Christ shall continue always: and first out of the 88
Psalm, which he rehearses and interprets of the Church out of Augustine,
lest he should trust his own judgment, as he fantasieth, that our preachers
do, altogether refusing to read interpreters. We affirm that the Church of
Christ has and shall continue to the worlds end, but we deny, that the
Popish Church is that, which could not be before there was a Pope, before their
heresies were brought out of the bottomless pit, which were not breathed up
all in 600. years after Christ, no not in 1000 years after Christ, and some
not almost in 14. hundredth years after Christ, I mean the sacrilegious taking
away of the communion of the blood of Christ from the people in the council of
Constance. What impudency is it of Papists, to urge the perpetual
continuance of Christ's Church, without interruption, and then to begin at
600. years after Christ: and not to be able to show a perpetual course of all
their doctrine, from Christ his Apostles and the primitive Church?

But to prove that the church of Christ cannot possibly (as Protestants
wickedly do fable,) have failed and perished these many hundredth years, he
cites the 61. Psalm, with Augustines exposition thereupon. But what
Protestant so fableth M. Stapleton? you had need to make men of paper, to
fight against the paper walls of your fantastical fortress. The Papists
when they cannot confute that we say, they will beat down that we say not. How
say the Protestants that these 900. years and upward, the Church has
perished: it has been overwhelmed with Idolatry and superstition? The
Protestants never said so M. Stapl. The Church has not perished, though the
greatest part of the world has been overwhelmed with idolatry and
superstition. God can provide for his chosen, that they shall not be drowned,
when all the world beside is overwhelmed. Another testimony to the like
effect, and with the like conclusion, he brings out of ye psalm. 104 and
thereupon a pithy syllogism. We prove the Catholic Church by the continuance
of Christianity. The continuance of Christianity only in Papistry is clear,
ergo Papistry is only the true Church of Christ. Nego tibi minorem M. Stepl.
When will you prove the continuance of Christianity only in Papistrie, when
Papistrie began since Christ and his Apostles: and if you mean Christianity,
for the external profession of Christ's religion: then will you prove the
Oriental Churches to be papistrie, which defye the authority of your Pope?

Last of all, out of the Psalm. 101. and Augustines application of the same
against the Donatistes, which said that the church was perished out of all the
world except Africa where they were, he would compare the Protestants to them,
whereas in deed the Papists are more like to them. For they holding that
there is no Church of Christ but the Romish church, affirm in effect as the
Donatistes, that the Church of Christ for many hundredth years has perished
out of all parts of the world beside Europa, where only and yet not in all
parts thereof they have borne the sway. Whatsoever therefore Augustine writes
against the Donatistes, for shutting up the Church of Christ only in Africa,
may be rightly applied to the Papists, for restraining it only to a part of
Europa. But contrary to the Papists and Donatistes, we affirm, that the
Catholic church of Christ is and has been, even in the most dark times of
Antichrists kingdom, dispersed throughout the whole world, nothing doubting,
but God, which preserved 7000. in one corner of Israel, not much greater then
some shyere of England, has preserved seven thousand thousand, in all parts
of the wide world, which never bowed their knees to the Romish Baal, nor kissed
him with their mouth.

CAP. IIII.
Proofs and testimonies one of the Prophet Esaias, Stapleton.
that the Church of the Messiah continues for ever unto the worlds end,
assisted always by God himself.

The testimonies of the perpetuity of the Church out of the Prophet Esaias,
Fulke.
with the exposition of Hieronyme upon them, makes nothing against us, which
willingly acknowledge the same: But deny that they perteine to the Popish
Church, which had her beginning long after Christ and his Apostles, and her
full tyranny confirmed more than 1000. years after Christ. The same Hierome
disputes against the custom of the particular Church of Rome, and appealeth
to the Church of all the world. Si auctoritas quaeritur, orbis mayor est vrbe,
etc. If authority be sought, the world is greater then a city. And again:
Quid mihi profers vnius vrbis consuetudinem? What bring thou forth to me
the costome of one city? Euagr. We stand for the Catholic Church of Christ
dispersed over all the world, against the particular, schismatic,
heretical, and Antichristian church of Rome, which though she have invaded by
tyranny over a great part of Europe, yet never did she prevail over the whole
Church throughout the world, not yet over all Europe.

CAP. V.
The doctrine of Calvin touching the Church, Stapleton.
is examined to the touchstone of the holy Scriptures alleged: Wherein also is
treated and disputed, by what marks the Church may be known.

First he confesses that Calvin has learnedly, largely, and truly, Fulke.
treated of the unity, authority, and obedience of the Church. He affirms
also, that he acknowledges a visible Church in the world, whose communion we
ought to keep, and of her to receive the spiritual food of doctrine and
sacraments, which ought not to be forsaken for the evil life of the members
thereof. All this he commends and allows. But herein he shows his
malicious cauilling stomak, that he supposes Calvin to affirm, that the
universal Church of Christ is visible, where he speaks but of particular
congregations members of the whole, which are visible, not to the world always,
but to the members of the same.

The marks of the Church which Calvin says to be, true preaching of the
word of God, and due administration of the sacraments, although he confesses
them to be in the Church, yet he denies them to be the marks of the Church.
For the mark must be better known then the thing whereof it is a mark, but
the Church is more evident then those marks: ergo they be no true marks. The
minor he proves by that which Calvin teaches, that we must learn of the
Church the true meaning of the Scripture. But hereof it follows not, that ye
Church is better known then these marks. For there is a farther trial which
ought to be better known: by which both are to be known: namely the word of
God, whereunto we must have recourse, to try whether those things that are
preached, are even so in deed, as the Thessalonians did, by the preaching of
Paul and Barnabas, Act. 17. ver. 11. The immovable truth is to be sought in
the Scriptures, what preaching or Church agrees with that truth, is to be
received and none other. And whereas he says that Heretics challenge these
marks as well as Catholics, I grant they do so, but no more do they challenge
these marks, then they challenge the Church to be on their side, for there was
never heresy, but they bragged as much of the Church as of the truth.
Therefore the Church is not more clear then these marks, but these marks
tried by ye word of God, are more clear then the Church, which is therefore
the Church because it maintains true doctrine. The doctrine is not true
because the Church maintains it. The cause is better known then the effect:
for knowledge is to understand by causes.

But M. Stapl. has two better marks then Calvin describes. To wit: the
universality and communion of all nations: The continuance and euerremaining
thereof among Christians. These marks by no Logyke, can be causes of the
Church, but adjuncts unto it, and therefore the worst arguments that can be to
know it by: even such as the foolish man's argument was, that knew his horse by
the bridle. But admit these to be proper adjuncts of the Church, yet shall not
the popish Church be able to prove those to be her marks. For Popery neither
does, neither ever did possess all the world, except a piece of Europe be all
the world. The Church of Christ is Catholic, although there were but three of
four persons in all the world that maintained true doctrine, as there was not
many when Christ and his Apostles and a few other were the only Church in all
the world, and the Catholic Church, before they were dispersed into many
nations. For ye Church is called Catholic or universal, not because all men
or most men do pertain vno it, but because all that be members of Christ, how
many or how few so ever they be, and wheresoever they be, are members of that
Church But M. Stapl. says: The universality of the Church is a matter evident
to the eye, and therefore the Catholic Church is always visible. To this I
answer, that if the Catholic Church, or the universality thereof, were
always visible, or at any time visible, or the universality thereof evident
to the eye: it should be no article of faith: for faith is of such things as
are not seen with the eye, but believed with the heart. Heb. 11. ver. 1. We
agree with Augustine against the Donatists, that no heresy was in all
countries and in all ages. For Papistrie which is the greatest heresy and
apostasye, was never in all countries and all ages. But if an heresy were in
all countries and ages, yet proves it not it self to be a Catholic truth.
Idolatry has been in all countries and ages, yet is it not thereby proved
to be a Catholic truth. The Church of Christ whereof we are members, has
been in all parts of the world, and in all ages, though not always not ever
received of the greatest part of men. And if this be a most clear and evident
mark (as he says) that no heretic can pretend to be joined in communion
with all Christian countries. The Popish Church has not this mark, which is
not joined in communion with the Greeks, Armenians, Chaldeans, Aethiopians,
and so many nations as at this day, and since the Apostles times have been
Christened Countries.

But now we come to the second mark of the Church. The continuance thereof
from the beginning to the end of the world, which is in deed a proper
adiunct of the Church of Christ, not to be found in any heresy, nor in
papistry the greatest of all heresies. But M. Stapleton, which cannot prove
that Papistrie has continued always, will argue upon that it has continued
a certain time. The Church (says he) has continued a certain hundred years
in that faith and doctrine only which Papists do teach: But in those very
hundredth years, the Church neither could lack, neither could have a wrong
faith, or be seduced with damnable doctrine. Therefore Papists had all that
time the true faith, and their faith and doctrine is true, sound, and upright.
The mayor of this argument he affirms to be our confession, which is nothing
else but an impudent lie of his own confiction. For which of the Protestants
ever confessed that the Church has continued so many hundredth years in that
faith and doctrine only, which the Papists teach? If he have the wit to draw
such confessions from us, he may prove what he list against us. But he
promises to prove abundantly the continuance of Popish doctrine from the
beginning, which we so stoutly deny. In the mean time he returns to
Calvin, whom he charge to have learned his opinion and doctrine of the
Donatistes, concerning the marks of the Church. Taking to witness the Ep. 48.
of Augustine ad Vincentium, where the Donatistes answered the argument of
universality: that the Church was called Catholic, Not because it did
communicate with the whole world, but because it observed all Gods
commandments and all his sacraments. But what a vain quarrel this is, he
him self does sufficiently declare, when he brings in Augustine immediately,
confessing the Church to be called Catholic, because it holds that verity
wholly and thoroughly, whereof every heresy holds a part or piece only, and
adds thereunto the communication with all nations: videlicet, that hold that
verity wholly and thoroughly. And lest this might seem to be borrowed of the
Donatistes only, Augustine him self affirms as much, de Genesi ad literam
imperfect. Cap. 1. Constitutam ab eo matrem ecclesiam, (...) Catholica dicitur,
ex eo quia vniuersaliter perfecta est, and in nullo claudicat, and per totum
orbem diffusa est. That by him the Church is appointed our mother, which is
called Catholic, for that it is universally perfect, and halteth in nothing,
and is dispersed throughout the whole world. Whereas Augustine requires
universal perfection in all true doctrine and administration of the
sacraments with universality, the Papists take universality alone, which
Augustine never said nor taught, to be a sufficient note of the Church.

After this he charge Calvin to deny the perpetual continuance of the
Church, because he said, that the pure preaching of the word has vanished
away in certain ages past, by which he means not (as this foolish cauiller
takes him, or rather mistaketh him) that true preaching had utterly perished
out of the whole world, but out of the Popish Synagog, which in Europe boasted
it self to be the only Church of Christ, when in the chief articles of
Christianity, it derogated from the glory of Christ, and was subject to the
doctrine of the man of sin, the adversary and enemy of Christ. And if malice
had not blinded him, he would have so understood Calvin, alleging his
saying immediately after, wherein he confesses, that the Church of Christ never
failed out of the world. Whereupon he demands whether the Church of the
Protestants is that which has never failed? If we say, it is, he demands
further, where those marks of preaching and ministering of the sacraments have
been these many hundredth years? which question he hops some disciple of
Calvin will assoile him. I answer those marks were to be seen in such
places, where the Churches were gathered, that had separated them selves from
the Church of Rome. If he urge me further, to show him the particular places,
let him resort to the book of Acts and monumentes, which it seems he has
read over. If that will not satisfye him, by example of our Savior Christ I
will refell his vain question with another question: Where did those 7000.
that GOD preserved in the days of Elias, assemble for prayers, preaching, and
sacrifice. If he cannot tell, no more am I bound to show him in what
particular places they preached and ministered the Sacraments. And therefore
neither need the Apology to recant, nor the Harborough be revoked, nor M.
Fox call in his book, nor M. Nowell his reproof. It will not suffice a
wrangling cauiller, an hundredth times to affirm, that the Church has always
continued, even when Papistrie most prevailed, and even under the tyranny and
persecution of Papistrie: like as the Church was among the idolatrous Baalites
in the days of Elyas, or among the wicked Jews that persecuted the Prophets.
But hereto he replyeth, that though the assemblies of the Jews were no
Churches, yet their temple, sacrifices, ceremonies, law, and doctrine was
good. I answer, so much of these as they retained according to Gods law, was
good, and so I confess of the doctrine and sacraments of the Papists. As
Baptism, concerning the substance of the sacrament: the historical faith of
the Trinity: of the incarnation, passion, resurrection of Christ, etc. But if
these and many more pieces of truth, might be sufficient to make them the
Church of Christ, many heretics might challenge the Church, which have
confessed and practiced a great number of truths, more then they, which err
but in one article, as the Arrians, Pelagians, etc. Where as the Papists err
in many: yea, in the whole doctrine of justification by faith, and the worship
of God. And therefore Papistrie is not only a schism, error, or heresy: But
as Calvin out of Daniel 9. and Paul, 2. Thessal. 2. rightly concludes, an
apostasy, defection and antechristianitie, not abolishing, but reteining the
names of Christ, of the Gospel, and of the Church: but the true virtue,
power, and strength of the same, utterly forsaking, denying, and persecuting.

CAP. VI.
Other prophecyes alleged and discussed for the continuance of Christ's
Church, Stapleton.
in a sound and upright faith.

Diverse textes of Scripture are cited, Fulke.
some rightly, some strangely applied, to prove that we deny not, namely the
perpetual continuance of the Church of Christ, in a sound and right faith, in
all matters necessary to salvation. Upon every one of which, he infers:
how could Christ forsake his Church these ^00. years, as though we said
that Christ has had no Church in the space of nine hundredth years, which we
never doubted of.

CAP. VII.
Proofs out of the Gospel, Stapleton,
for the continuance of Christ's Church, in pure and unspotted doctrine.

When M. Stapleton comes to prove that which we deny, Fulke.
his proofs will be neither so plentiful, nor so sufficient. His counterfeit
painted Fort must have puppets made to assail it. The Church of Christ
concerning the substance of doctrine necessary to salvation, shall continue
pure and unspotted, although in other matters, she may be deceived, even as
every one of Gods elect, for whom our Savior Christ prays, John 17. which
text M. Stapleton cites to prove the continuance of the Church. We will never
say, that hell gates have prevailed against the universal Church of Christ,
though they have prevailed against the sea of Rome. Yet must we say, as the
Scripture teaches us, that Antichrist shall prevail in the world, 2. Thessal.
2. One Scripture is never contrary to another. We are challenged to read you
out of the Scriptures, the breach, interruption, and failing of the Church of
Christ so many hundredth years. As you understand the breach and failing, for
an utter abolishing of the Church of Christ out of the world: such breach and
failing, as we do not read it, so we do not affirm it. But that we affirm,
we read that in the latter days some shall depart from the faith, attending
to spirits of error in hypocrisy, etc. whose marks are to forbid marryage,
and to abstain from meats which God has created, etc. 1. Tim. 4. We read,
that before the coming of Christ, shall be an apostasy, and the man of sin
shall be openly showed, which shall deceive a great part of the world, 2 Thessalonians. 2. We read that the whore of Babylon, which all ancient writers
expound to be Rome, shall with her sorcerie enchaunt and make drunk all
nations, etc. Apoc. This and much more we read, to show what your
universality is, and to take away the objection of our paucitie, and not
appearing to the greatest part of the world, at such time as it pleased God,
for the unthankfulness of men, to send them the efficacy of error, to be
deceived, because they would not receive the truth.

CAP. VIII.
To deny the continuance of the Church in a sound and upright faith, Stapleton.
is to defect the mystery of Christ's incarnation.

This man has great leisure, with store of ynke and paper, Fulke.
that fills so many chapters, which proof of that, which none of his
adversaries will deny Who al with one mouth confess, and cry out against him
so loud, that if he were not either deaf or dead, he might hear: that as
Christ the head continues for ever, so does the Church his body: but that
the Popish Church at this time and many hundredth years before this time is
the body of Christ, the spouse of Christ, the flock of Christ's sheep,
which is divided from Christ, which is an adulteress from Christ, which
hears not the voice of Christ: this we all deny, and this you shall never be
able to prove while the world stands, babble and scrible as long as you will.

CAP. IX.
That Protestants do condemn the practice and belief of the first 600.
years in many things, Stapleton.
no less then of this latter age.

If Papists do allow the practice and belief of the first 600. years in
all things, Fulke.
they may justly reprove us for refusing the same in some things. But if they
refuse the practice and belief of that age in many things, because their
Church, their judge, does now practice and hold the contrary: why should they
require us to be bound to the practice and opinion of those times in all
things, when by Scriptures, the only rule of truth, with us, we find that
they have erred in some things. But to leave his impudent railing and lying,
that we or any of us, did ever offer to justify what so ever was done or held
by godly men of the first 600. years: let us see what practice and belief he
charge us to condemn.

First (says he) they not only reprove certain Fathers for certain errors,
but in many points they condemn all the Fathers, for common errors: as
invocation of Saints, and prayer for the dead. And do not you Papists,
reprove the practice of all the Fathers, and Pope Innocent with them, not only
for ministering the Communion to infants, but also for holding that they be
damned, except they receive the Communion? Augustim. Cont. duas ep. Pelag. ad
Bonifac. lib. 2. cap. 4. Do you not reprove ye practice and opinion of all y^
Fathers, for allowing marriage in the ministers of the Church, which you utterly
condemn? What shall I say of the Communion in both kinds, given to the lay
people, by consent of all antiquity, of communicating with the Priest, and
many such like things: the practice and belief whereof you utterly refuse?

But to return to the examples of invocation of Saints, which Stapleton
says, are clear by all writers of the first 600. years, railing like a
saucie merchant at M. Jewel and M. Grindall, men whose learning and godliness
he may envy, but will never attain unto. What a bold bayard is this, to
affirm that innocation of Saints is clear by all writers of the first 600.
years, when no writer of 300. years after Christ, has any one jot either of
practice or belief to allow it? Epiphanius among the heresies of y^ Caianes
counts invocation of Angels. Tom. 3. Haer. 3. The other error of praying for
the dead is more ancient, but yet it sprang first from the heresy of
Montanus, neither is there any writer auncienter then Tertullian a Montanist,
in whom any steps of prayer for the dead are to be found. To these he
adioyneth a slander of Calvin, whom he affirms to teach, that God is the
cause and author of evil: which how impudent a lie it is, all they that have
read Calvin of Predestination can testify. The reservation of the Sacrament
of the Lords supper, Calvin confesses to have been an erroneous practice of
the ancient Church. And what say you Papists? was it not erroneous to reserve
that which Christ commanded to be eaten and dronken? But you make no bones of
Christ's commandment. If it were not erroneous, why was it forbidden in
diverse Councels?

If you care not for that, yet think not to mock ye world with the ancient
practice of reservation, which you your selves condemn. Will you suffer men
and women to carry home the sacrament and lock it in their chestes? to hang it
about their necks, to receive it in their houses when they list? If you allow
not these things which was the reservation of ancient times, you are twice
impudent to charge us for reproving that practice, which you your selves do
not admit to be lawful. But yet again, he charge Calvin to condemn the
whole primitive Church of Jewish superstition, for saying the Fathers followed
rather the Jewish manner of sacrificing, then the ordinance of Christ in the
Gospel. What a shameless beast is this, to slander Calvin to condemn the
whole primitive Church? when he speaks only of the later and more corrupt
times, in which he shows their error, but condemns not the Church.

But now he will prove, that Protestants hold six heresies condemned within
the first 500. years. The first is justification by faith only, condemned in
Aerius and Eunomius, August. Haer. 54. Epiph. Haer. 76. which is a very
shameless slander, for there is no such justification by faith only
condemned in them, as we hold, which no man of the ancient Fathers more
copiously defends, then Augustine him self. The second is also a most
impudent lie, that to condemn free will in man, to work well, as we mean it,
is an heresy of ye Manichees and Marcionistes: for both which opinions as we
hold them, Augustine him self shall speak, Ep. 105. Sixto. Restat igitur vt
ipsam fidem vnde omnis iustitia sumit initium, propter quod dicitur ad
ecclesiam in Cantico canticorum: Venies, and pertransies ab initio fidei, non
humano, quo isti extolluntur, tribuamus arbitrio, nec villis praecedentibus
meritis, quonia^ inde incipiunt bona quaecunque sunt merita, sed gratitu^ donum
Dei esse fateamur, si gratiam veram, id est, sine meritis cogitemus. Therefore
it remains, that we ascribe not faith it self (from whence all
righteousness takes beginning, for which it is said unto the Church in the
Balat of Balats, Thou shall come and pass through from the beginning of faith)
unto man's free will, whereof they are proud, nor to any merits going before,
for all good merits what so ever they are, begin from thence* but that we
confess it to be the freely given gift of God, if we think o^ true grace
which is without merits. Thus writes Augustine against the Pelagians, which
maintained free will to do well, and were counted heretics therefore: the
contrar^e whereof Stapleton does now count to be heresy in us. The third
heresy imputed to Aerius, was the denial of prayer for the dead, which
neither Augustine, nor Epiphanius that count it for an error, can by the word
of God convince to be so. The fourth is Iouiniaans opinion* making marriage
equal with virginity, which we do not hold, but that in some respect
virginity is preferred, as the Apostle teaches, 1. Cor. 7. But yt we exhort
them to marry which can not keep their vow of continence, which rashly and
presumptuously they made, we are warranted by Epiphanius Contra Apostolicos,
Haer. 61. Hieronym. Ad Demetriadem. The fifth, that is, the contempt of fasting
days appointed by the Church, we hold not with Aerius and Eustachius, but
contrariwise, that they are to be observed, although we make none account of
the fasting days appointed, and superstitiously kept by the Popish Church. The
sixth, the superstition of Christians used at the tombs of Martyrs, we condemn
with Vigilantius and Augustine, De moribus ecclesiae Catholicae lib. 1. cap.
34. Neither is Vigilantius condemned of any man in his time, but by the private
judgment of Hieronyme only.

Now in how many heresies the Papists communicate with the old heretics, I
have showed before in other treatises, which it were needless here to repeat.

CAP. X.
Objections of Protestants to prove the Church may err, Stapleton.
by the example and similitude of the old law, answered and confuted.

The objection is only this out of the Defense of the truth fol. 94. as he
says: The Church of the Jews lacked not Gods promises, Fulke
succession of Bishops and priests, opinion of holiness and austeritie of
life, knowledge of the law of God: And yet they erred, why may we not think
the like may be in this our time. Both mayor and minor of this argument he
says is false: for first they had not such promises as the Church of Christ
has, of perpetual continuance in the truth, because they were not appointed
to continue always, wherein he bewraieth his gross and beastly ignorance,
that can not discern between the nation of the Jews, and the Church of God
among the Jews, which has even the same promises of everlasting continuance,
that the Church of the Gentiles has, which is not an other Church from the
Church of the Jews, but an accession and an addition unto it. How many
promises of eternal continuance, be made in the Prophets to Israel, to Zion,
to Jerusalem? Read Esa. ca. 60. 62. and 63. among a number. The acco^plishment
whereof, although it be seen in the Church gathered of the Gentiles, yet who
would be so impudent to deny, that they pertain principally to the Church of
Israel, as to the elder brother? But what strive we further? when the Apostle
to the Romans, cap. 9. verse. 3. expressly affirms, that the promises pertain
to Israel, even as the adoption, the glory, the covenants, the giving of the
law, etc. yet M. Stapleton thinks him self a sharp disputer, when he
obiecteth out of the Epistle to the Hebrews, Heb. 8. that the testament of
Messiah is established in more excellent promises, because of ye new covenant
out of Jeremy 31. as though both the testaments did not pertain to the
Catholic Church of Christ, as well that of the Jews, as this of ye Gentiles.
The new Testament and promises are better, then that was made in Sinai, but
the new testament of Messiah, pertains as much to the Church of ye Jews, as
to the Church of ye Gentiles. Or else the Apostle had labored in vain, writing
to the Jews, to draw the^ from the ceremonies of the old testament, to the
covenant of Messiah, established only in mercy and forgiveness of their
sins. Christ was the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, whose
redemption pertained as much unto the fathers that lived before his
incarnation, as unto them that are borne sincer therefore the promise of the
eternity of the Church, begins not at the nativity of Christ, but at the
beginning of the world. So that for continuance and perpetuity of Gods spirit
with his Church, without the which it can not be the Church of God, the
promises from the beginning, have been the same that are now, although
according to Gods most wise dispensation, they have been more clearly
revealed in the latter times, and most clearly of all by Christ himself and
his Apostles.

Now remains the minor to be proved. That the Church of the Jews has erred.
Which he denies, because the high priests answered truly of the nativity of
Christ, and because Caiphas prophesied unwittingly of the virtue of Christ's
death, then the which nothing can be more blockish. They erred not in one
article, ergo they erred not at all. One of them spoke the truth against his
will in one point, ergo the synagogue of the Jews never erred. Again he
says, the whole synagogue, before the law of Christ took place, in necessary
knowledge of the law of Moses did never err. For proof whereof, more like a
block then a man, he brings such places of Scripture, as either show what
the Priests duty should be, but not affirm what their knowledge was, or else
prophecy a reformation of the corrupt state of the Clergy, from ignorance to
knowledge. As Ez. 44. The Priests and Levites shall teach my people. And Mal.
2. The lips of the Priest should keep knowledge, and men should require the
law of his mouth. Agg. 2. Ask the priest the Law. But what dronken Flemming
of Douaie, would reason thus? The Scribes and the Pharisees sat in Moses
chair, therefore the Synagogue did either never or not then err. Our Savior
Christ willed the^ to be heard, while they spoke out of Moses chair, not while
they taught to worship God in vain, preferring their traditions before the
commandment of God. But who would spend any more time in reasoning against
such a one, as defends that the Scribes and the Pharisees did not err, whose
false doctrine concerning adultery, murder, swearing, the worship of God, not
only the person, but also the quality of Messiah and his kingdom, our
savior Christ him self so often and so sharply does reprove. But the whole
synagogue (says he) in necessary knowledge of the law of Moses did never
err. If he understand the whole synagogue for every man, we confess the
same, and so we say that the whole Church, that is all the elect, neither in
the first six hundredth, nor in the latter nine hundredth years, did never err
in necessary knowledge of the Gospel. But if you take the whole synagogue, for
the whole multitude that had the ordinary authority, and did bear the outward
face and countenance of the Church, they have erred before the coming of
Christ* Example in the whole synagogue, in the days of Josias, when the very
book of the law was unknown unto the Priests, until it was found by
occasion of taking out of money out of the temple, by Hilchiah the priest. So
that from the beginning of the reign of Manasse, until the 18. year of the
reign of Josias, which was almost 80. years, Idolatry openly, prevailed in
the temple of God, the whole synagogue, that is, all in authority and
countenance, embracing the same, except a few poor Prophets, that were
slain for crying out against it. 2. King. 22. and 2. Chro. 34. And such was
the state of the Church in the most corrupt times, continuing as then, but yet
in persecution, adversity, and being unknown unto the world, except now and
then God stirred up some witness to testify his truth, which was slain of
the beast Apoc. 11. Now concerning the childish sophisme, that although it was
not possible that the Church could err, yet it is not proved, that it has
erred, what should I speak? When the defender directly oppugneth that paradoxe
which the Papists hold: namely, that the Church cannot err. To conclude,
while he walks under a cloud of the Church sanctified, and assisted by the
holy Ghost, defended by the presence of Christ, etc. He plays bo peep under
a coverlet. For what so ever promises are made to the faithful spouse of
Christ, pertain nothing at al to the Popish Church of Antichrist, which is
departed from the faith, carrying the brandmarks of hypocrisy, in prohibition
of marriage and meats, so evident, that all the water in the sea can not wash
them out.

CAP. XI.
Objections out of the News Testament moved and assoyled. Stapleton.


The first objection is the abomination of desolation standing in the holy
place, that is the Church, Matthew. 24. He asks where the defender has learned
to expound this holy place of the Church? Forsooth where M. Stapleton learned,
that it may be understood of the temple at Jerusalem, where Pilate placed
Caesar's image, or of the Image of Adriane. Namely, in Hierome, upon this text
Matthew. 24. which understands the abomination of desolation to be Antichrist,
of whom Saint Paul speaks, whom he denies not, but that he shall sit in the
Church: his words are these. De hoc and Apostolus loquitur, quod homo
iniquitatis and aduersarius eleuandus sit contra omne quod dicitur Deus and
colitur: ita ut audeat stare in templo Dei, and ostendere quod ipse sit Deus:
cuius aduentus secundum operationem satanae destruat eos, and ad Dei
solitudinem redigat, qui se susceperint, Potest autem simpliciter aut de Anti
christo accipi, aut de imagine Caesaris, etc. Of this abomination of
desolation the Apostle also speaks, that the man of sin, and the adversary
shall be lifted up against all that is called God, or worshipped: so that he dare
stand in the temple of God, and show himself as God: whose coming, according
to the working of Satan, may destroy them and bring them to solitarines from
God, which shall receive him: and it may either be taken simply of Antichriste,
or of the image of Caesar, etc.

Let him now reason with Hieronyme, how the sacrifice should cease after the
end of 62. weeks? Although for my part, I think, the pollution of the
temple, which was a token of the desolation imminent, was a figure of the
corruption of the Church by AntiChriste.

The 2. objection. S. Paul witnesses that Antichrist should sit in the temple
of God, that is in the Church. What of this? (says he) will it follow that he
has sitten there these 900. years? As though the defender were to prove how
long Antichrist should sit, and not rather that the visible and outward
multitude of the Church should err.

Like madness, shall I say, or impudence, he shows, where he says, the
protestants commonly name S. Gregory to be that Antichrist. Which I am sure
he never read nor heard any protestant affirm. But the Pope cannot be
Antichrist (says he) because Antichrist should then labor to extirpe the
faith of Christ, for the Pope has called people from infidelity to
Christianity. That lets not, but that he is Antichrist: for the Pope
calls none but unto the name of Christianity, under color of which, he
exercises tyranny, otherwise he labors to extirpe the faith of Christ, and
to prefer himself before Christ, whose redemption, he teaches to take away
only the guilt of sin, whereas his pardon takes away, both the pain and
the guilt of sin.

The third objection is out of S. Peter, that in the Church should be many
masters and teachers of lies: But these (says he) shall not tarry 900. years,
for their destruction sleeps not. A wise shift, as though the Apostle gave
not a general admonition, for the Church in all ages, even in that wherein he
lived himself.

The last is out of 1. Tim. 4. that in the latter days such should come, which
shall give ear to the doctrine of devils, forbidding to marry and eat such
meats as God has created to be received with thanksgiving. In this matter he
professes to be short, as he has no lust to tarry being in that, wherein his
cauterized conscience is so galled. But he answers briefly, it was fulfilled
in the Manichees, what then? does it follow that it is not fulfilled in the
Papists? Does the spirit speak evidently of the Manichees, an obscure
heresy, and not rather of the Apostasy of Antichrist, whose hypocrisy should
be cloaked by fained chastity and fasting? No no, Master Stapleton, your
conscience although marked with a whot iron, yet can not but inwardly confess,
that this prophecy perteyneth especially to Papistrie, the greatest heresy
that ever was.

CAP. XII.
Other common objections of protestants, taken out of the law, Stapleton.
discussed and assoyled.

The objections are these: where was the outward face of the Church in the
time of Noe, Fulke.
in the time of the departing of the ten tribes, in the days of Elias? He
answers out of Augustine De vnitate ecclesiae against the Donatistes, cap.
12. which made the same objections, that as these examples of fewness of the
Church are read in the Scriptures, so the Church to be dispersed over all the
world, is read in the same Scriptures, and therefore it can not be restrained to
the communion of Donatus in Affirica.

The like say we, (how of ever it pleases his malice to slander us) that the
Church is and was these 1500. years dispersed over the whole world, and
therefore can not be restrained to the faction or communion of the Pope in a
part of Europe.

Concerning the apostasy of the 10. tribes, he answers, that the Clergy,
vide licet the Priests and Levites, remained in sound religion, and many of the
people, so God has his Church always, which we deny not. Yet in the days of
Manasse, where can he show me any Clergy of the Jews that continued in
sound religion? And yet I doubt not, but there were some particular persons,
for GOD had his Church among them even then. But the outward face of the
Church, was all turned into idolatry and false worshipping of God. Where he
says; except the Church had remained in Europe these 900. years, protestants
should not have had from whence to depart. I answer, protestants are not
departed out of the Church of Christ, but out of Babylon. And yet I
acknowledge, that there were members of Christ's Church dispersed, yea and
Churches gathered also in the time of deepest ignorance, in most regions of
Europe, though not regarded, or condemned for heretics, in Calabria, in
France, in England, in Bohemia. Finally whereas he would seem to repair the
Popes loss in Europe, with the recovery of large countries in the East, wise
men may easily see, and fools also may laugh at it, how vain a brag it is,
to boast of matters so far of as none can bear witness of, but himself,
and such as he is.

CAP. XIII.
That the true Church of Christ, Stapleton.
which continues for ever, is a visible and known Church, no privy or secret
congregation.

His name is Thomas forsooth, and therefore he says, Fulke.
he will never believe, that there was any other Church, but the Church of
Rome, except he may so see it, that he may point to it with his finger. But
gentle Thomas, our Savior Christ says, blessed are they that believe and see
not. If the catholic Church of Christ might be seen at any time, it should be
no article of our faith, which is an evidence of things that are not seen,
Heb. 11. The members thereof, as several congregations, are seen, sometimes
of many of all sorts of men, sometimes of them only, that are true members of
them, but Jerusalem which is above, and is the mother of all the faithful, is
not seen, but with the eyes of faith. Therefore Thomas, if you will never
believe the Catholic Church, except you see it with your bodily eyes, you can
never be any member thereof.

You allege out of Esaias 2. The hill of the house of the Lord shall be prepared
in the top of all hills, etc. This is fulfilled in the calling of the
Gentiles, which have not ceased to walk in the light of our God* since they
were first called, though not always in like numbers, not always in favor
with the powers of the world, nor always in sight of the blind worldlinges.
And Christ is the light of the Gentiles, Es. 49.
unto the uttermost parts of the earth, therefore not unto one part of Europe
only, as you Popish Donatistes do affirm. And the Apostles were the light of
the world to carry the light of salvation unto the furthermost parts of the
earth. Matthew. 5. Es. 61.
And their seed shall be known among the Gentiles, and their buddes among the
people. All that see them shall know them, that they are the seed which the
Lord has blessed. The Church of the Gentiles, confesses the seed of Abraham,
which sometimes was obscure and known to few, to be the blessed seed, and
rejoices that by faith she is engraffed into the stock of Abraham, to be
partaker of the same blessing.

All this proves no light, sight, or knowledge of a Church to be pointed at
with unfaithful Thomas his finger, but heavenly, spiritual, and to be
discerned by faith.

Again when Esaias says: God has prepared his arm in the eyes of all
nations, and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of our God, Es.
52.
he means to the elect and chosen of all nations, to the predestinate
people. Not only so sir Protestant: Why so sir Papist? The Prophet says
further, Quibus non est narratum, viderunt, and qui non audiuerunt contemplati
sunt. Such as the Messiah has not been preached unto, yet they have seen.
And such as have not heard, have yet beholden.

Ergo not the Elect only: What then sir Papiste, tagge and ragge, all the
reprobate of al times: is this your interpretation? But Thomas? I pray you give
us leave to believe the interpretation of S. Paul before you, who expounds
it clean contrary to you. Romans 15. ver. 20. Yea I enforced my self to
preach the Gospel, not where Christ was named, least I should have built on an
other man's foundation. But as it is written: Es. 52.
To whom he was not spoken of, they shall see, and they that heard not shall
understand. Lo Thomas, Saint Paul expounds this text of them which had
seen Christ and known the Gospel, first, by his preaching, and not of such
as the Messiah has not been preached to. Therefore be no more unfaithful, but
believe the Catholic Church, though it can not be seen. Yet will he not leave
the matter so, for Esaias prophecyeth.

That the Lord would be a perpetual light and glory of his Church: That the
sun of the Church shall not go down any more, nor the moon vade, because
the Lord shall be her everlasting light. Nations shall walk in their light, and
kings in the brightness of her arising.

Verily Thomas, though our bodily eyes can not see this, yet do we most
constantly believe, that it is fulfilled in the Church as it was promised.

But that the external brightness of the Church is not promised to be in all
ages alike, we may clearly see by this, that he says: Kings shall walk in
the brightness of thy rising up. For every age of the Church has not had
kings to walk in the brightness of her light.

Let Thomas which will not believe the continuance of our Church, except it be
so showed that he may point at it with his finger: Let him I say point out
with his finger, what Kings in every age for the space of the first three
hundredth years, did walk in the brightness of the Churches arising. It will
not serve him to name Algarus of Edessa, or Lucius of Britain. But he must
show a continual succession of Kings for all that time, or if he can not,
let him confess, that the external glory and brightness of the Church, is
not in all ages to be seen, as the spiritual magnificence and light thereof
is everlasting.

His next reason is, of the continuance of Pastors and teachers in the
Church, which he imagines to have failed in our Church, for nine hundredth
years, but he is altogether deceived. For when the state of the Romish
Church was grown to be such a confuse Babylon, that it was necessary for GODS
people to go out of it. Apoc. Chap. 18. verse 4. Which came not to the full
ripeness of iniquity, until a thousand years after Christ, GOD sent
Pastors and teachers to his Church so departed out of Babylon, in these
parts of Europe, which continued by succession, even until GOD restored his
Gospel into open light of the world again.

Beside that a great number of Eastern Churches, have continued even from the
Apostles time unto this day, though not in soundness of all opinions, yet in
open profession of Christianity, among whom doubtless, some retained the
foundation always, which were never obedient to the sea of Rome, neither
partakers of a great number of her horrible heresies, so that if it were
granted, that the Church must always be visible, yet the Papists are never
the near, to prove their faction to be the Church, because the Greek Church,
for outward show of a Church, has been always as notorious in the East, as
the Latin Church in the West.

Finally, where Augustine says (although upon a text wrongly interpreted)
that the Church is placed in the sun, that is, a manifest place of the
world, not in a corner, like the conuenticles of heretics. He means not,
that the Church is always seen of all men, but that it seeks no corners or
couerture of darkness, as heretics do, to shroud their falshoode in:
although in the time of persecution it be driven into streightes, and is
content to be hidden from the adversaries thereof, except in some cases, where
the glory of CHRIST requires an open confession.

The same Augustine, would have the Church to be known only by the Scriptures
De vnitate Ecclesiae. Cap. 16. Sed utrum ipst Ecclesiam teneant, non nisi
divinarum scripturarrum Canonicis libris ostendunt. But whether they hold the
Church, let them show by none otherwise, but by the Canonical books of the
holy Scriptures. If the Papists were able to prove their doctrine by the
scriptures, they would not labor so much for the title of the Church, which
of necessity would follow them if they taught nothing but that, and all that,
which the holy Scriptures do teach.

CAP. XIIII.
Three reasons why the Church of Christ ought of necessity always to be a
clear, Stapleton.
evident, visible, and known Church. In the second of which reasons a
sensible disputation is made to try whether our country among other might
possibly have attained to the right Faith without the help of a known
Church, in all this pretensed time of Papistrie.

The first reason is, that except the Church and true pastors thereof might be
openly known, Fulke.
the infidel seeking for Christianity shall come from paganism to heresy
etc. the grace and gift of Christ should be unprofitable as a rich treasure
fast locked up etc. which were inconvenient in many respects etc. therefore the
Church must be openly known and evident etc. I answer: this reason sauoreth
of Pelagianisme, which is enemy to the grace of God, presupposing that
Infidels of their own good motion, without the grace of God, may seek
Christianity. But if we remember what our Savior Christ says: No man
comes unto me, except my father draw him: Joan. 6. ver. 44. We must
acknowledge, that as it is the only grace of God, that moves in infidels a
desire to seek Christ, so the same grace, and no outward appearance, to be
judged by carnal reason, shall direct them, whom he has chosen to eternal
life, among so many sects in the world, to find, see, and acknowledge the
only true Church, and pillar of truth, out of which there is no salvation.
Wherefore this reason has no ground, but upon a supposition of Pelagianisme,
that GOD has only revealed his truth unto men of the world, and left men
to their own reason to find it out by external notes, such as Infidels not
lightened by Gods grace, by the light of natural reason may descerne.

The second reason is, that it has pleased God, that because The second
reason is, that it has pleased God, that because faith leans upon
authority, and authority is strong in a multitude, although in the primitive
Church by miracles and evident gifts of the holy ghost, the authority of a
few drew whole countries to the faith, yet miracles ceasing, to keep the
Church always in a known multitude, whose authority might draw the simple,
persuade the learned, and keep out the heretics. If this carnal reason were
good, there were small or no use of the scriptures at all. The authority of the
Church, and that always known, might suffice for all matters. But Augustine
(says he) in his book de vxilitate credendi, ad Honoratum. Cap. 14. uses
this reason to bring Honoratus from the Manichees to the Catholics, out of
whom he cites a long discourse to this effect: That as the common multitude
and fame moves a man to believe, that there was such a one as Christ, and that
his writings and scriptures are to be credited, so of the head rulers of that
multitude, and not of any privy and new sect, such as the Manichees was, he
must learn the understanding of this book and scriptures. This he takes
upon him to exemplify, by the state of our country, at the first conversion
thereof by Augustine. Although this carnal reason might have some show with
Honoratus, a stranger from the Church, and one not lightened with the spirit
of God: yet how vain it is, being applied to the Papists, you may easily see
by this, that since the Church of Rome has been the Church of Antichrist, as
great a multitude, which might and has moved many infidels to receuie the
profession of Christianity, has been separated from it, as has cleaued to
it. Put the case then of an infidel in the East, which moved by the fame and
consent of many nations, has thought well of Christ, has given credit to the
Scriptures: to what head rulers should be resort for instruction in the
Scriptures? to the rulers of that multitude, by which he was first moved to
believe? then should he never become a Papist: For all the Patriarchs of the
East Church have been and are still at utter defyance with the Pope of Rome. You
see therefore by plain demonstration, that this reason holds no further then
Augustines authority extends: who in other places appealeth only to the
Scriptures, and even against the Manichees confesses, that the plain
demonstration of the truth (which is to be found in the holy Scriptures) is
to be preferred before the consent of nations, authority of miracles,
succession of Bishops, universality, consent, name of the Catholic Church,
and whatsoever can be taught beside, Contra Epist. Manich. quam vocant
fundamenti Cap. 4.

The third reason, why the Church must always be a known multitude, is for
keeping out of wolves and heretics, which must be, yt they which are tried,
may be made manifest, which cannot be in a secret congregation. Yes M.
Stapleton, very well. The Church was never so secret, but it was known to the
members of it, which might use the authority thereof, for trying, avoiding,
and excommunicating of heretics, according to the holy scriptures. But
evermore you do wilfully deceive your self, when you affirm that there was no
Christians known in the world by the space of 900. years but Papists. You
cannot deny, but Brytannie, Scotland, and Irelande had Christians at and
since the coming of Augustine, which were no Papists, as by the history of
Beda is manifest. What should I here name so many nations of Europe, Asia, and
Africa? which yet to this day continue in profession of Christianity, and
never were subject to the tyranny of the Romish bishop, and from whom the
Romish bishop, with his sect of Papists, has clearly departed many hundredth
years ago. Wherefore, according to Augustines sentence: the Catholic church
is not a particular sect in Europe, but an universal gathering of ye dispersed
over all the world, Cont. Faust. li. 13. Ca. 13.
where God has his elect in all places. Or if you understand the Church for a
visible multitude professing Christ, there is no reason why the churches of the
East, so many, so large, so ancient, should be excluded, and the multitude of
Papists holding of one city in Italy only, to be received.

CAP. XV.
A number of shameless shifts and seely surmises, Stapleton.
which Protestants have invented to establish their variable doctrine, and to
confound the authority of the Church.

In deed a number of these which he rehearses as shameless shifts, are
shameless lies and impudent slanders, devised by the devil, to bring the
truth in disdain: but yet so openly proved to be false, Fulke.
that they need no confutation. First he says, that Luther condemned all
councels and fathers, yea, al learning of Philosophy and humanity, so that
books were burned, and common schools ceased for certain years in Germany,
with other like monstrous lies, alleging for his author that beastly Apostata
Staphylus. This slander deserves no answer, being raised by one shameless
liar against an hundredth thousand witnesses.

The second shift is, that Luther did afterward receive Philosophy, and
books of humanity, yea and divines of* 500. or 600. years, and some Councels
also, with this perilous condition, so far as they repugned not to holy
Scripture. This seems an unreasonable condition to Stapleton, who belike
would have all gentylitie, and many heresies absolutely receyed.

The third: The fathers should not be admitted, when they taught any thing
beside the express scripture. As worshipping of Images, praying to Saints,
etc. which they had by tradition. If such things came from the Apostles, why
were they not written by them, as well as such fathers of later time? yea, why
did the Apostles write that which is contrary to such traditions?

The fourth: The first 600. years they did admit, because they knew there was
little in them against them clear and open, because few books were written in
that time, and many lost that were written. And yet there remain more written
in that time then a man can well read over in seven years. Again cities
being stuffed with heathen, Jews, and heretics, every mystery was not opened
in pulpit, nor committed to writing. These belike were greater mysteries then
the Apostles and Evangelists have committed to writing. But I marvel how
they were taught, if neither in pulpit nor in writing, belike in secret
confession, but our Savior Christ would have his mysteries preached in the
house tops. Last of all, for that many controversies now in hand were never
heard of in those days. Therefore M. Jewel made his challenge of the first
600. years, which Stapleton thinks he was not able to abide by, and that M.
Nowel suspected no less, because he accounted it a very large scope. But how
he has abyden by it, is sufficiently proved to the glory of the truth, and
the confusion of Papistrie.

The fifth: They reject the latter 900. years, because Paynims yelding to the
faith, and heretics to the Church, the mysteries of our faith were more openly
published in Pulpits and writings. It appears, and that in records of the
latter 900. years, that many old heretics still remained in the cities, beside
the Jews remaining until this day, of which he made the fathers of the first
600 years so much afraid, for uttering the mysteries, a^ of Paynims and
heretics.

The sixth: Some hold, that all the Church might err for a time. None ever
held that all the Church might err so far, as that they fell away from
Christ.

The seventh: Other said, there was a Church all this 900 years, but oppressed
by the miscreants, being privy and unknown. This he says is vain and
blasphemous, being against holy Scripture and good reason, as he has proved.
What he has proved, you have seen, and how the Scripture must be fulfilled,
which prophecyeth of the coming of Antichrist, and the apostasy of men from
the faith: which cannot be, if the Church should always flourish in multitude
and external appearing of visible glory.

The eight: That Protestants books have been lost.

The ninth: Books of holy fathers have been corrupted.

The tenth: False writings have been devised and fathered upon the first Popes
of Rome. All these he compteth to be but suspicions and surmises, which are yet
so manifest truths, that even Thomas the unbelieving Apostle without the
judgment of his senses, might feale them with both his hands, and be
satisfied, although Thomas the Apostata from God, and traitor to his Prince
and country will neither see nor handle them. But all these surmises he will
overthrow with supposing one case. If a man have continued in possession, and
could bring records of his right from William the Conqueror, and all his
neighbors to say for his quiet possession, without check or nay, as the
Papists can deduct the possession of their religion from 800. years, etc.
were it a good plee against such a man to say: his records are false, his
evidences forged, his possession injurious, etc. without bringing in any
affirmative proofs, records, evidence, or witness, etc. I answer, it were
no good plee. But first I deny, that you Papists can bring such records,
witness, and possession of 900. years. And secondly, I affirm that we can
bring good records, evidences, and witness to the contrary. Wherefore this
case helps you nothing at all, as it is false that the religion now called
Papistry has been professed these 900. years, which I have proved by more
then 40. differences, gathered out of the history of Bid, and other monuments
of antiquity.

CAP. XVI.
A note of countries and provinces brought to the faith of Christ from
Paganism, Stapleton.
within the compass of those latter 900 years.

He begins with the conversion of the English Saxons and Britanie, Fulke.
and so proceeds to the conversion of diverse small nations in Germany, and
other parts: last of all, he comes to the conversion of many thousands in
the Isle of Goa, testified by letters of the Jesuits, al which he makes to be
converted into one faith and religion of Papistrie. But that is false, for I
have proved by many differences, that although the first beginning of these
900. years was corrupt in many things, yet was it not so corrupt as
Papistrie, nor agreeing with Papists in many of their chief heresies for 300.
or 400. years after. Now touching such as have been converted to plain
Popery since yt time, or by ye Jesuits in this time, if their monstrous
reports be credible, it proves not yt they are of an Apostolic spirit. The
Scribes and Pharisees were zealous to make Proselites to Iudaisme. The great
and mighty nations of the Goths, Vandales, Hunnes, etc. that ouerranne the
greatest part of the Roman Empire, were converted from Gentilitie by the
Arrians, whose heresy along time they held, as all histories do record. The
Nestorians converted great nations that yet continued in their heresy. Photius
the heretic converted the Bulgarians. Finally, the Greek Church has
converted as many nations unto their profession of Christianity, as the
Romans have done to their Papistrie: wherefore this argument of conversion of
nations does no more prove Papistrie to be true Christianity, then it does
justify Iudaisme, Arrianisme, Nestorianisme, Grecisme, which the Papists
count to be an heresy as well as the other.

CAP. XVII.
Whether at any time the religion of Protestants have converted any infidels to
the faith. Stapleton.


The religion which we hold, whom he calls Protestants, Fulke
being the same which was delivered by Christ him self and his Apostles, has
converted all nations of the world that ever were converted, from infidelity
to ye true faith and religion of Christ. Wherefore it is a folish fantasy,
that he requires us to show one country, city, or man, converted within
these 900. years. If Protestants could brag as well as the Jesuits, they might
boast of many thousands converted by them in the new found lands of Gallia
Antarctica, and India, beside many Jews that are known to be turned to the
Christian faith in this part of the world. If in the time of persecution, when
they had much ado to save their own faith from deceiving, and their lives from
cruelty, they had no leisure to travel into Heathen countries, to seek the
conversion of infidels, no wise man will marvel. The slanderous reports of
Villegagnon and the Jesuits are of as good credit, as their persons are of
honesty and soundnes of religion.

CAP. XVIII.
The argument of continuance of the known Church, Stapleton.
is fortified out of the most ancient and learned Fathers.

The ancient and learned Fathers, never allowed any continuance of the
Catholic Church and faith, but such as had their beginning at Christ and his
Apostles, and not such as began five or six hundredth years after Christ,
Fulke.
as all the testimonies which he cyteth, do plainly prove unto us. First
Augustine, Ep. 166. reproves the Donatistes. For that they would not
acknowledge the Church which Christ him self had planted, and which had
continued even until that time. But it pleases this man greatly, which
Augustine writes. Cont. Ep. Parm. lib. 3. cap. 5. That there is no security
of unity, except the Church be declared out of the promises of God, which as
it is said, being set upon an hill can not be hid, and therefore it is
necessary that it be known to all parts of the earth. The known Church. that
Augustine speaks of, is not the peculiar Church of Rome, but the universal
Church of Christ dispersed over all the world: which is in such sort known and
seen, as the mountain whereon it is builded, is known and seen. But that
mountain is Christ, spoken of in Daniel, which is not known or seen but by
faith, no more is the universal Church of Christ known or seen but by faith.
And thus he writes against the Donatistes, which challenged the society of
the just to be only in Africa, whereon as also that the mountain in ye which
ye Church is set, is Christ, August. writes in ye same chapter. Qui ergo no^
vult sedere in concilio vanitatis, non euanescat typho superbiae, quaerens
conuenticula, iustorum totius orbis vnitate separata, quae non potest inuenire.
Iusti autem sunt per vniuersam ciuitatem, quae abscondi non potest, quia supra
montem constituta est. Montem illum dico Dani^lis, in qu^ lapis ille praecisus
sine manibus, creuit and impleuit vniuersam terram. Per totam igitur istam
ciuitatem toto orb diffusam, iusti gemunt and moerent, ob iniquitates quae
sunt in medio eorum. He therefore that will not sit in the council of vanity,
let him not vanish away in swelling of pride, seeking the conuenticles of the
just, separated from the unity of all the world, which he can not find. Now
the just are throughout the whole city, which can not be hid, because it is
set upon an hill. I mean, that hill of Daniell, in which that stone being cut
off without hands increased, and filled the whole earth. Therefore in all this
city dispersed over all the world, the just do groan and mourn, for the
iniquities which are in the midst of them.

Thus Augustine being rightly understood, makes altogether against the
schismatic Church of Rome, which is not set upon that mountain which is
invisible to the eye of the flesh, but seeks the utter ruin of that city
which being builded on Christ, is known in all parts of the world by faith.

But Hieronyme says much for the matter, Contra Luciferianos. I could dry up
all the streams of thy propositions, with the fame of the Church. And who
douteth, but where the Church is acknowledges to be, the clear doctrine
thereof may stop the mouth of any heretic which acknowledges it for the
Church? The same Hieronyme Ad Dam. match. and Oceanum de error* Orig. cur post
etc. writes thus: Why after 400. years labourest thou to teach us which we
knew not before? Why do thou bring forth that which Peter and Paul would
never teach? Even until this day the Christian world was without these
doctrine, I will hold that faith an old man in which I was borne a child. A
worthy saying of Hierome, which may be rightly applied against the Papists,
which teach such doctrine, as neither Peter nor Paul would ever teach, nor the
Christian world knew for 600. years after Christ, yea for almost a thousand
years after Christ in many points. The like force is in the saying of
Gregory Nazianzen, against the Arrian, Ep. 2. ad Clidon. Si ante hos triginti
etc. If our faith began but 30. years ago, when there are almost 400.
years since Christ was showed, and the Gospel has for so long space been in
vain, our faith also has been in vain: and they which have given witness
thereto, have testifid in vain, so many and so worthy prelates in vain have
governed the people. This saying is verified of Christian faith, which had
continued in the world six, seven, or eight hundredth years, before Papistrie
in many points began, Christ has been preached, and yet Papistrie never heard
of, yea what so ever doctrine had a latter beginning then Christ and his
Apostles, this father condemns of error. Even as the same man writes in the
other place by M. Stapl. cited, De Theod. li. 2. Vt haec praesidia omittam etc.
To omit these helps, yet it should satisfy us, that none of those which have
been inspired with the spirit of God, has hitherto either pronounced this
sentence, or allowed it being uttered by any other, and the doctrine of our
church does abhor it. He braggeth not upon the present opinion of ye Church,
but as the same has always been allowed of all the Apostles and their
successors, and ye contrary never received. Therefore whereas Theodoret
reports yt that confession of the faith was admitted (in ye Council of Nice)
which prevailed, and was published throughout ye world, he means not yt the
Fathers followed either ye multitude, or the common opinion of men, which were
reputed for the Church in that time, but because ye same confession had always
even from the beginning, been received and continued in ye Church, as consonant
and agreeable to ye word of God, by which the Church must be tried to be ye
true Church, and whereas articles of faith are not proved true, because they be
held by the^ y^ are commonly taken to be of ye Church. To conclude: The
prescription of Tertullian against Hermogenes we do willingly admit, and offer
to be tried thereby: yt whether of our religion or theirs is ye more ancient,
yt undoubtedly must be truth. But the^ ye prescriptio^ of 900. years whereof
Stapl. so often and so much does cackle, will not serve ye Papists, as they
cannot prescribe scarce half so long, for many of their opinions. For except
we be able to prove our religion, as ancient as the time of Christ and his
Apostles, we refuse not to be accounted heretics. If we teach nothing but that
we can justify, by manifest demonstration out of the holy Scriptures, y^ same
also in the most principal points, being confirmed with the testimony of the
ancient fathers of the primitive Church, the Papists which accuse us of
heresy, shall be found not only to be heretics, but blasphemers of God, and
slaunderers of his Saints.

CAP. XIX.
It is proved by three reasons or arguments deducted out of holy Scripture,
Stapleton.
that all the time of Papistrie can be no schism on heresy, and therefore was
true Christianity.

The first reason is this. No heresy or schism is universal. Fulke.
The faith of England these 900. years was universal, ergo, it was no schism
or heresy. The minor which is false, he would prove by this reason. The faith
of England was the faith of France, Spain, Italy, Germany, and of all other
Christian countries, therefore it was universal. This antecedent is false, for
beside yt in England, France, Spain, Italy, etc. since the Church of Rome
ceased to be the Church of Christ, there were always true Christians, which
yielded not to Papistrie: as many regions as he has named of the East country,
held not the faith which was then openly received in England, in many
principal articles, and namely in that which they make to be ye chief of all,
ye article of the Popes supremacy and subjection to the Church of Rome:
therefore al Christened countries were not of ye same faith of Papistrie these
900. years. He laboreth like a wise man to prove yt no sect is universal: but
that Popery was universal, it is sufficient for Papists to say, because they
are never able to prove it.

The second reason is, that no heresy is of long continuance to prevail over
true believers, to oppress the truth, etc. Papistrie has continued these
900. years, therefore Papistrie is no heresy. Although the minor be not
simply true, yet ye mayor is utterly false. But he would prove the mayor out of
S. Paul, 2. Tim. 3. saying of such as should withstand the truth, like Iannes
and Iambres, that they should not further prevail, for their foolishness
shall be made known to all men, even as theirs was. Admit that this were
spoken of those which should forbid marriage and meats which he would have to
be the Manichees, 1. Tim. 4. as it is spoken of hypocrites, which shall be in
the Church to the end of the world, yet here is no shortness of time
prescribed for the continuance of their error, for he said before, 2. Tim. 2.
verse. 16. That they shall increase unto more ungodliness, and their word shall
fret as a canker. He means therefore, that they shall not long continue
unknown, not to all men, but to all faithful and godly men, as the folly of
Iannes and Iambres was not made manifest to all the Egyptians, but unto the
Israelites. Likewise, whereas Peter says, 2 Peter 2. That the destruction of
false Prophets sleeps not, he means not, but that they may have by
succession a long continuance in the world, for he him self admonishes us,
that we may not count the Lords delaying of judgment to be slacknesse, as
Stapleton does, if it should be deferred 900. years: for one day with the Lord
is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day. Heretics therefore
shall have a quick judgment, and heresy shall shortly have an end: for that
neither of both shall continue always uncondemned. But that his mayor proposition
is utterly false, which is: No heresy is of long continuance; I show by these
instances. The heresy of them that joined Circumcision with the Gospel, is
more then 1500. years old, and yet it continues in Africa among
Aethiopians, as witnesses Munster and other writers of Geographie, as also the
heresy of the Nestorians, which is 1200. years old, and yet continues among
the Georgians. Finally, so ancient as the full tyranny of the Pope is, so
ancient is the departure of the Greek and Eastern Churches from him, which
they count to be a schism and heresy.

The third reason: No heresy can continue and ouergrowe the true Church,
Papistrie has continued, Ergo: Papistrie is no heresy. The minor of this
syllogism is false, for Papistrie has not continued from the time of Christ,
but has had her beginning long since, and was not grown to a ripeness of all
her heresies in more then a thousand years after Christ* as I have showed in
the table of differences. Therefore what so ever he says to prove the mayor,
is to no purpose, when the minor is manifestly false.

CAP. XX.
The third reason of the former chapter, Stapleton.
is fortified out of the aunicient and learned Fathers.

Now he takes in hand a goodly piece of fortification, Fulke.
and like a worthy surueior of the Popes buildings, he bestows great cost
out of Hilarious, Chrysostom, and Clemens Alexandrinus, for defense of such a
point, as none of his adversaries would ever offer to assail. Nameley, the
continuance of the Church, and true religion, which can not be overcome, not
kept down by any tyranny or heresy, but the more it is persecuted and
oppressed, the more it will flourish and increase. And for this cause the true
Church and faith of Christ, although it have been long trodden down and
afflicted by the tyranny of Antichrist, even to such time as God had
appointed, that Antichrist should rage in the world, for the sins thereof, and
especially for the contempt of the truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2. yet has it in the end
prevailed, increased, and flourished, and by no craft or cruelty of
Antichrist, could any longer be suppressed or kept under. Let not Papists
therefore brag, that they have prevailed so long, but let them now behold
their overthrow, by the increase of Gods Church, and look for their final
destruction, at the glorious appearing of our Savior Christ. We doubt not
therefore, but determine with Augustine De vtilitate credendi, to rest in ye
bosom of that Church, which from the seat of the Apostle, by consent of
mankind, has continued by succession of Bishops, and has obtained the height
of authority, all heretics barking about it, which partly by the judgment of
the people partly by the gravity of Councels, partly by the majesty of
miracles have been condemned. But we utterly deny the Popish Church to be this
Church, which has had no continuance of succession from the Apostles seat, in
faith and doctrine, though it claim never so much the succession of persons
and places: with the Donatistes, Simon Magus, Martion, Eunomius, and other
heretics, we have nothing to do. If truth in Aerius and Vigilantius was
condemned for error, not by the scriptures, but by the tradition of men, such
condemnation can be no prejudice to them or their opinion, when being called
again into judgment, they are found by sentence of Gods word, and the
judgment of the more ancient Fathers, to have been wrongfully condemned. To
conclude, Papistrie has not prevailed against the church of God, which having
sought by all means so long time to root her out of the earth, yet was never
able to bring to pass her wicked device, but that the Church of Christ, and
the true religion thereof, has at last, in the sight of al men, gotten the
upper hand, in despite of the Pope and Papistrie, and all Papists.

THE SECOND part of the Fortress.
CAP. I.
Certain demaundes to Protestants, Stapleton.
putting the case that Papists these many hundredth years have lived in a wrong
faith: all which (the case so put) they ought of necessity to satisfy.

WHat so ever the Protestants can say for them selves (as their credit is not
great with him) except they can prove one of his two demau^ds, Fulke.
he thinks no godly or wise man will regard any thing they can say.

The first demand is, where, or under what Pope, or Emperor, Papistrie
began. I answer, Papistrie being antichristianitie, the mystery of that
iniquity began even in the time of the Apostles, 2 Thessalonians. 2. Claudius being
Emperor of Rome, and so contiuned increasing in Apostasy, until the time of
Sigismund the Emperor, who procured the Council of Constance, in which the lay
people were robbed of the cup of the Lords blood. Stapleton must bear with
me, if I can not name the Pope, because at that time there were no less then
three Popes at once, and no man then living, but as he was affectionate to one
of those three, could determine which of them was Pope. This Stapleton, though
he have a brazen face, will not deny. He requires us further to show the
complaint of other Churches against Papistrie. First, for the beginning of the
mystery of iniquity S. Paul complains, 2 Thessalonians. 2. And for the proceeding
of that which was ye chief point thereof, namely the tyranny of ye Bishop of
Rome, always as it showed it self, some there were which complained of it.
Victor is the first Bishop of Rome, which discovered the hid mystery of
iniquity, in usurping against his fellow Bishops, in the time of the Emperor
Seuerus, against whom complained and sharply reproved him Irenaeus Bishop of
Lions, Polycrates, and many other, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 25. Afterward in the
days of Theodosius, Honorius, and Arcadius, the Emperors, when the Bishops of
Rome Innocentius, Bonifacius, Zosimus, Anastasius, and Celestinus usurped more
openly, in so much that they forged among them a decree of the Council of Nice,
whereby they claimed their authority, they were complained of by the Bishops
and Church of Africa in open Council, the forgerie detected, and decrees made,
that none in Africa should appeal to any Bishop over the Sea. And that the
Bishop of the first See should not be called prince of Priests, nor by any
such name of pride, but only Bishop of the first See. Conc* Mileuit. c. 22.
Conc. Carth. 6. cap. 4. Conc. African c. 92. and Ep. Council. ad Bonifac. and
Caelestinum.

Afterward in the days of the Emperor Mauritius. when John of Constantinople
usurped the title of universal Bishop, as the forerunner of Antichrist,
Gregory him self Bishop of Rome complained of him, and pronounced that he was
the forerunner of Antichrist: Wherefore Stapleton lies shamefully, when he
says, we make him the first Antichrist: for as I have testified before,
although there was in him a superstitious affection unto ceremonies, and that
he was infected with certain old errors that had prevailed before his time,
yet because he held the foundation of salvation by Christ only, and detested
the usurpation of that Antichristian title, we account him for a member of the
true Church of Christ. But after him when in the days of Phocas, Bonifacius by
pride and symonie, had usurped the same Antichristian authority, and procured
that the Church of Rome should be counted head of all Churches, he was
complained of by the Church of Rauenna in Italy, which would not acknowledge
that Antichristian title, neither would submit her self unto the whore of
Babylon before the time of Donus the Pope, which was almost seventy years
after: that Master Stapleton misnameth Martianus in steed of Mauritius I will
impute it to no ignorance, although, if such a fault escape any of us, we are
by and by cried out upon, to be ignorant in all antiquity, etc. Thus have I
answered Master Stapletons demand, concerning the principal foundation and
rock of Papistrie, although no necessity, such as he supposes, does move
me. For albeit the precise time of the entering of any heresy can not be
named, yet it follows not that the same heresy is a truth therefore.

The second demand is: when, and by whom Luther was called, when he begun
to preach the Gospel? I answer, if calling of the Popish Church be
lawful, as the Papists will not deny, Luther had such ordinary calling, as
the Church where he lived did allow, for he was called to be a public
teacher, before the Popes pardoner came into Saxony, against whose most
impudent blasphemies and shameless errors he first inueyghed, in his public
sermons. Wherefore concerning his vocation, the mouths of Papists ought to be
stopped. But Stapleton will not be so satisfied, for he says, that the Popish
Church would never call him to preach against her self: that is not
material: the Popish Church gave him such authority as she had to preach,
which he used first to seek her reformation, if she had been reformable: but
when he saw her oppose her self against the manifest truth, he had just
cause to depart from her, unto the Catholic Church of CHRIST.

It suffices not Stapleton, that he learned by the Scriptures, that the
Church erred, because all heretics abuse the Scriptures, as though there
were no certainty of truth to be found in the Scriptures, which blasphemy
derogateth all authority from the holy Scriptures inspired of GOD, which the
Apostle says to be able to reprove all errors, that the man of GOD may be
perfect prepared to all good works. 2. Tim. 3. ver. 16. Again, where he
affirms that he had the interpretation of the Scriptures from heaven,
Stapleton urges, that then he must show some miracle, as if the ordinary
inspiration of Gods spirit, (without the which no man can understand any of
Gods mysteries) of necessity requires confirmation of miracles. But Luther
him self (he says) requires miracles of Muncer, which boasted of
Revelation, and so ought we to do of Luther. No sir, Muncer boasted of an
extraordinary Revelation, and taught a doctrine directly contrary to the word
of GOD written, and therefore the case is nothing like. After this he tells
a slanderous fable out of that runnagate Baldwine, of the conference at
Poissie, that Beza and Martyr could not agree, whether their calling was
ordinary or extraordinary: the conclusion whereof was this, that Beza was
ordained of Calvin, and Calvin as Beza said of none. Which how impudent and
shameless a lie it is, that Beza should reprote of Calvin, it is manifest to
all men, that know the story of that Church, and city of Geneua, that
Calvin was called and ordained by the Church there, when he was altogether
unwilling to remain in that City, but in a manner compelled by the earnest
obtestation of Farellus. Call. in Praefa, in Psalm. Beza in vita Caluini.

And yet more monstrous is that lie, that Beza should grant the rebellion that
followed, to be a sign of his vocation, when the world knows, that the
beginning of these civil wars* came altogether from the Papists, the Duke
of Guise giving the occasion, by the Diuelishe slaughter and buchery of Vassie.
But to the principal matter in question: that Luther and some other having an
extraordinary calling from God, to teach and reform the Church, need not to
con^irme their calling by miracles, when they teach nothing but that is
confirmed by manifest authority of holy Scriptures, in the consciences of all
men, that wilfully oppose not themselves against the truth, either y^ they
will not know it, or that they will not obey it: It is evident, by so many
prophets, as God stirred up, in the old time, which had no extraordinary
calling of the Church, being not of the tribe of Leui, yet being only
interpreters of the law, needed no signs or miracle to confirm their calling.

Our Savior Christ himself confirms the extraordinary calling of the
Scribes and Pharisees, when he wills them, to be heard sitting in Moses
chair, of which yet a great number, and almost all, were no Levites nor
Priests, therefore had no ordinary calling.

Yet Gregory himself in the history of Bid, at the first planting of the
particular Church in England, allows extraordinary ordeyning of Bishops.
Lib. 1. Cap. 27.

Wherefore if Luthers calling were altogether extraordinary, (as Papists can
not say, except they deny the calling of their own Church) he is not bound to
approve his calling by miracles, when his doctrine, and all things in which he
departs from the Church of Rome, is proved true and agreeable to the word of
God.

The third demand is, that we must show a succession from the Apostles, as
the Scripture witnesses the Church to have, and the ancient fathers exacted
of Heretics.

The Scripture requires no succession of names, persons or places, but of
faith and doctrine, and that we prove, when we approve our faith and doctrine
by the doctrine of the Apostles. Neither had
the fathers any other meaning in calling upon new vpstart heresies for their
succession, but of a succession of doctrine, as well as of persons. Which is
manifest by Tertullian De praescript, Ita per successiones etc. So coming
down by successions, from the beginning that their first bishop have for his
authors, and antecessours, one of the Apostles or Apostolic men, but yet such
a one as has continued with the Apostles. These words of Tertullian are
manifest, that succession of Bishops even to the Apostles, helps not,
except there be a continuance in the doctrine of the Apostles, which when the
Papists can show, we will gladly yield unto them. In the mean time, it is not
the continual succession of persons in any place, which teach contrary to their
antecessours, which have taught in that place, that can carry away the credit
of the whole doctrine, and religion of Christ.

CAP. II.
An Introduction to the proofs which follow in the second part of this
fortress. Stapleton.


Repeating what he fantasieth he has fortified before, Fulke.
(which how weak it is, I have sufficiently discovered) in this Chapter: he
promises first to declare by diverse sure and necessary tokens, which
protestants do lack, that the faith then planted, was a right faith: which
in many principal points, we do not deny, but that it was a right faith.

Secondly, repeating the difference in doctrine, government, ceremonies,
course and consequence of both the religions, he will prove all that they had
differring from us, partly by Scripture, and partly by the faith of the first
six hundredth years. To which I replye. First, that what so ever was then
taught contrary to that we teach, for matter of faith, can not be proved by
Scripture. Secondly, that although some errors, which then were taught, may be
proved to have been held within the six hundredth years, yet they can not
be proved, to have been held always, especially in the oldest times, and
therefore can make no prejudice against our cause, which take not upon us to
allow all things that were held in six hundredth years, no more then the
Papists themselves do. Finally, I have showed as many differences of that
time from the Papists, as he is able to show of us from them, and yet some of
his differences are impudent forgeries.

CAP. III.
Five apostolical marks found in our Apostles, Stapleton.
and wanting in Protestants, who must be our Apostles, if the other were not.

The Protestants take not upon them to be Apostles, Fulke.
but professors and teachers of the Apostolic doctrine. And therefore they
boast of no miracles, which is with him the first note of Augustines
Apostleship: which miracles if they were testified to us by an Evangelist, we
might well believe them: but seeing they are written by a credulous man, yt
records every fable that was told him, we have small cause to credit them*
Bedes history is no Gospel. Beside that, ye bryttish histories utterly deny
those supposed miracles, reporting Augustine to be a minister of Satan rather
then of God.

But admit that he did some of those things, as are reported of him, it might
please GOD in respect of Christian faith, which he planted among the English
nation, to work some miracles by him, and yet not to allow all things that
he taught. Shall not the very workers of iniquity say in that day: Lord,
we have wrought miracles in thy name, Matthew. 7. verse. 22. As for the miracle
supposed to be done by Master Lane of Westchester, which he scorneth at, I
see not, but it is as good as the best done by Augustine, and yet for mine own
part, I think it was no miracle, but a natural work, the maid perhaps
being affected with the mother or some such like disease.

The lies he tells of Luther and Calvin, out of that ungodly rascal
Staphylus, I think not worthy to be spoken of: although he make him self
witness of the one, and the other is a monstrous invention of Satan, which
being reported to be done in a noble city, and before so many witnesses, can
find none that had the brazen face like Staphylus, to say he saw it. Which
making and loving of lies, shows Papists to be the right begotten children
of the devil, the father of lies.

The miracles reported by Master Fox: the shameless beast, when he cannot
deny, being testified by witnesses: above all exception he can make, affirms
to be esteemed of his own fellows, but as civil things, and such as may
happen by course of reason. I say not this as though I would have our
doctrine the rather to be credited one iotte more for any such miracle, but to
show the shameless dogged stomach of this Popish slaunderer, which when he
had none other answer to make as concerning such miracles, forgeth that we
our selves deny all such to have been miracles, which he is not able to
prove, although he would burst for malice against the truth.

The second mark and difference is, that there was one heart of the
believers, Augustine and his company never disagreed. The Protestants are at
great variance among them selves, not for learnings sake, as the Concurrents in
Italye, nor upon quirkes and subtilties, in matters indifferent, as the
schoolmen that hold positions; but upon the weightiest articles of our
belief, as heretics are wont to hold opinions.

I answer, among them that have departed from ye Church of Rome unto y^ Church
of Christ, there has been some variance about the Lords supper, but yet in
no greater matters, then has been between two godly martyrs of the primitive
Church, Cornelius of Rome, and Cyprian of Carthage, about baptism, although
not handled with like modesty on the one part, as was then of both: yea, no
greater then as yet remains undecided among the Papists, touching y^
authority of the Pope and the Popish general Council, although they all,
like Pilate and Herod, the Pharisees and Saducees, can agree together to put
Christ to death, and to persecute the truth. Finally, if in the first
restoring of the truth, some matters to some men were not so apparent, what
marvel? when your Augustine, and ours also, as far as he was Christ's, was
doubtful and ignorant, even in very small and trifling matters, which argued
some dissension of opinion in him and his monks, or else those questions might
have been determined without sending to Rome, li. 1. Cap. 27. etc.

The third mark is an ordinary vocation, which Luther lacked. I deny that
Augustine had an ordinary vocation to preach in England, or that the Bishop
of Rome has any ordinary authority, to send Apostles into the countries of
any Infidels: which if he had, they should be the Bishop of Romes apostles, and
not the Apostles of Christ. For they be his apostles which has authority to
send them. But if Augustine had ordinary vocation by the Bishop of Rome, why
had not Luther ordinary vocation of that church, which authorized him to
preach. If you say he could have no ordinarye vocation, because he was an
heretic, I answer: It follows not, for even heretics have had ordinary
vocation: namely, so many bishops and priests of Rome, Alexandria, and other
places, as after their calling have fallen into heresies. Wherefore leave his
vocation, which against you is good enough, and try his doctrine. If his
doctrine be found true, and agreeable to the word of God, who has stirred him
up to discover openly the heresies of Antichrist, let not his doctrine be
refused for his extraordinary calling. The slanders and unlearned conclusions
against Luther. I omit, as unworthy any answer, being either false lies of
Staphylus, or inconsequent collections of Stapleton.

The fourth Apostolical mark, is the continuance of 900. years, whereas the
Protestants doctrine has continued but 30. years, or as the blockheaded
Papist scorneth at M. Haddon 30. years except 6. with Gamaliels counsel upon
the matter, which with this Popish priest, is good divinity: If this Council
or work be of men, it will come to naught, etc. whose antecedent being true,
the conclusion is stark naught. To this I answer: I have showed by many
differences, that the religion brought in by Augustine, has not continued
without alteration in many points, these 900. years. And albeit it had, yet
it is not thereby proved true, because diverse heresies have continued much
longer time, which are not thereby justified, as of the circumcisers,
Nestorians, etc. yea, Mahometisme, has continued 900. years, begone with
fained miracles, commended by Sergius a monk, which had ordinary vocation to
teach, continued with great consent these 900. years, which are 4. of
Stapletons apostolik marks, and also techeth many things that before were
unknown, which is the fifth mark.

Whereas Protestants have added nothing to the faith of Christ, but taken many
things away from it. I answer: if Augustine with him brought in all truth,
and besides that some errors, which have increased in process of time, thick
and threefolde, Protestants were worthy of thanks for removing the errors,
though they brought in no new matters of faith: as he is thanks worthy, which
weedeth a garden or feelde, although he sow no new seeds therein. But it is
most untrue, that Papists had all truth before we discovered their errors,
for the doctrine of justification, of the worship of God, of the use of good
works, and of the sacraments, was either almost or altogether lacking in
Popery, which by the doctrine of the Gospel is restored. But now let us see
what Protestants have taken away. Forsooth: From the quick, from the dead,
from faith, from the Church, from Saints, from God. From the quick: free will,
state of perfection, and all merit of good works. Yea, sir Pelagian, the
Scripture says: No quick man shall be justified in the sight of God, Psalm.
143. v. 2. which takes away all that you have given him. From the dead: all
prayer and intercession for them. When you can allow the dead these things out
of the Scripture, we will not deny it to them. From the faith: an article of
Christ's discention into hell. A lewd lie of a slanderous Papist. From the
Church, as it is the whole body: five sacraments. Three more then Christ
instituted. The continual assistance of Gods holy spirit, promised by our
Savior. A shameful lie. And the visible sight in this world assured unto us
by holy scripture. That Scripture is yet to show, whereby the Church should
be promised always to be in open sight of y^ greatest part of the world.
From the Church, as the spiritual part, they have taken supreme government
in matters Ecclesiastical. None other then such as is against the Scripture:
Let every soul submit it self to the higher powers, Romans 13. ver. 1.
Authority of making that which Christ had them to make in his last supper. If
you say you make the body of Christ, in such sense as you affirm the
sacrament to be the body of Christ, Gods curse light on you. The doing of
all that Christ commanded to be done in remembrance of him, we take not away.
The power of binding and loosing, with most of the authority due unto that
estate and vocation. A very slander. From the Church they take Altars,
crosses, Images, etc. Because the temple of God has nothing to do with
Images, 2. Cor. 6. ver 16. From God him self: an external sacrifice, the true
proper service due to God only, and continually, as Saint Augustine proves
at large De ciuitate Dei. A slander of Augustine which lib. 10. Cap. 20.
calls the Lords supper a sacrament of the oblation of Christ, the only
singular sacrifice, so that now there remains no more sacrifice for sin:
for by one sacrifice once offered, he has made perfect for ever those that are
sanctified, Heb. 10. ver. 14. by which only sacrifice, there was forgiveness
of our sins, and where there is forgiveness of sins, there is no more
sacrifice for sin, Heb. 10. 18. You see what sure and steadfast apostolic
marks these are, which are found in Mahomet, as much as in Augustine, so that
if Augustine had not the word of God to warrant the principal parts of the
faith, which he preached in England, by these five marks, he might neither be
proved to be an Apostle, nor yet a true preacher.

CAP. IIII.
Differences in doctrine between the primitive faith of England, Stapleton.
and the heresy of Protestants. And first of Mass, of the propitiation
thereof: of intercession of Saints: of their commemoration at Mass time: of
confession of sins, and of merit of good works.

Concerning the differences, I have written already in answer to his table of
differences. Fulke.
Now must we see how he proves them by testimonye of y^ first 600. years.
The first in this Chapter and sixth in number, is the Mass, whose name he may
in deed find within the compass of 600. years, although otherwise taken
then it is of papists, but yet from Christ until 400. years be complete, the
name of Missa is not found in any ancient authentical writer. And therefore
he begins with Ambrose in his Epistle E. 33. which place you shall find
discussed in mine answer to Heskins lib. 3. Cap. 32. letting you to
understand by the way, that he cites the words otherwise then they be, and
so does M. Heskins, and yet neither of the^ both as they be in Ambrose: by
which it appears, that neither of them both read them in Ambrose. Stapleton
cites them thus: Missam facere caepi: Dwum offerrem, nuntiatum est, etc. I
began to say Mass: while I offered, word was brought to me, etc. Ambrose says
somewhat otherwise. The next testimonies he cites are out of Augustine, Ser.
251. and 237. de tempore, which all learned men know to be none of Augustines,
but if they were, they be after 400. years beforesaide. The next is Leo, Ep.
81. Cap. 2. which in mine answer to Heskins before quoted, you shall find
handled at large. After this follow the Canons of 7. or 8. councels
provincial, in which the name of Missa is found: but all kept above 400.
years after Christ, and therefore prove not a perpetual continuance of that
name from Christ until the first 600. years ended. Besides that, the Masses
so named were neither inform nor matter, that which the popish Mass is. For,
concerning y^ form, it was patched together in many parts long after the
first 600. years, as their own Pontifical and other histories witness.
Concerning the matter, it was not the Popish Mass, for that there was in it a
Communion, and the natural body of Christ was not offered therein, which
within the first 600. years, was not believed to be really and corporally in
the Sacrament.

The seventh difference is: that the Mass is a propitiatory sacrifice, and
was so believed in the first 600. years. Whereof he reports him to Cyprian,
Ser. 5. De lapsis: who says: The conscience of sinners is purged with the
sacrifice of the priest. But Cyprians words are not so, he speaks of them,
which being fallen in time of persecution, made have to the communion without
dew repentance, and public satisfaction to y^ church, and prayer of the
priests made for their sins. Ante exomologesin factam criminis, ante
purgatam conscientiam sacrificio and manu sacerdotis: before confession of
their offense being made, before their conscience be purged by sacrifice and
hand of the Priest, etc. These words do show, yt he means none other purging
of their conscience by sacrifice, then by imposition of y^ priests hands, which
can be no propitiatory sacrifice, but the sacrifice of prayer of the priest
for them: as for y^ sacrifice of the Mass, there is no mention of it. Again,
he reports him to Hierome. To. 1. in Iouinianum, saying: The Priest to offer
daily for his own sins, and the people. Neither are Hieromes words as he
cites them, but thus: Sacerdoti, cui semper pro populo offerenda sunt
sacrificia, semper orandum est. The Priest which must always offer sacrifice
for the people, must always pray. Where is here the sacrifice propitiatory of
the Mass? when Hyeronyme expounds his sacrifice for prayer, in the second
part of the same work, saying that Christ In typo sanguinis sui non obiulit
aquam, sed vinum. In the figure or type of his blood offered not water but
wine. Both denies transubstantiation and the carnal presence, and also
expresses, what manner of oblation he means, when he uses the name of
sacrifice, offering, oblation, namely a sacrifice of thanksgiving in
remembrance of Christ's death. Thirdly he reports himself to Ambrose, lib.
1. Offic. Cap. 48. who affirms: Christ to be yet offered in the Church for
the remission of our sins. But the report of Ambrose is clean against him.
Ante agnus offerebatur, offerebatur vitulus. Nu^c Christus offertur: sed
offertur quasi homo, quasi recipiens passionem, and offert se ipse quasi
sacerdos, vt peccata nostra remittat Hic in imagine, ibi in veritate, vbi apud
parem pro nobis quasi aduocatus interuenit. Before a lamb was offered, a calfe
was offered. Now Christ is offered: but he is offered as a man, as suffering
his passion, and he offreth him self as a priest, that he may forgive our
sins. Here in an image, there in truth, where he makes intercession for us
as an advocate with the father. What can be more evident against the sacrifice
of the Mass? then that he says, Christ is offered here in an image, not in
truth: he is offered by him self, not by a popish priest: he is offered as a
man suffering his passion, therefore not in an unbloody sacrifice, but in an
image of his bloody sacrifice.

Fourthly, he reports him self to Gregory Nazianzene Orat. 1. in Iulianum,
who says, that by the oblation of this sacrifice we are made partakers of the
passion of Christ. He speaks not of the Mass, but thus he says: Mox
incruenti sacrificii oblatione manus commaculat, per quod nor Christo vnimur,
nec non passionis ac diuinitatis eius participes reddimur. Anon he defiles his
hands with the offering of the unbloody sacrifice, by which we are united to
Christ, and are made partakers of his passion and divinity. He calls the
ministration of the communion, the oblation of the unbloody sacrifice, as the
fathers of that time did speak improperly. But else where he shows
expressly, that the only sacrifice of Christ's death, is a propitiatory
sacrifice, and such as cannot be repeated. In sanct Pasc. Or. 4. Magnum illud
and insacrificabile (vt ita dicam) sacrificium, quod in prima natura legalibus
intermixtum est hostiis, non pro parua orbis part, neque pro paucis, sed toto
mundo purgationem obtulit aeuiternam. That great and vnsacrificable sacrifice
(as I may call it) which in the first age was set forth by the sacrifices of
the law, he offered to be an eternal purgation not for a small part of the
world, nor for a few, but for the whole world.

His fifth report out of the counterfeit Epistle of Alexander Bishop of Rome, I
will not vouchsafe to answer.

His sixth reporter is Origin. Hom. 13. in Leuiticum, who writes of the
commemoration that Christ commanded in his last supper to be done, that: Ista
est commemoratio sola quae propitium facit hominibus Deum. This is the only
commemoration which purchases propititation and mercy of GOD to men. Although
here be never a word of the sacrifice of the Mass, yet how shamefully he
applies only to the commemoration of the last supper that which Origin
speaks not of that only, but of the propitiation by faith in his blood, you
shall easily see by Origens whole sentence, out of which he has gelded this
patch: Sed parua satis and tenuis est huiusmodi intercessio. Quantum enim
profecit ad repropitiandun, vbi vniuscuiusque tribus per panem fructus, per
fructus opera considera^da sunt? Sed si referantur haec ad mysterii
magnitudinem, inuenies commemorationem istam habere ingentis repropitiationis
effectum. Si redeas ad illum panem qui de coelo descendit, and dat huic mundo
vitam: illum panem propositionis, quem praeposuit Deus propitiationem per fidem
in sanguine eius: and si respicias ad illam commemorationem de qua dicit
dominus: hoc facite in meam commemorationem: inuenies quod ista est
commemoratio sola, quae propitium faciat hominibus Deum. Speaking of the show
bread of the Law, he says: But small and little worth is such intercession.
For how much has it profited unto propitiation, where the fruit of every
tribe by bread, and by their fruit their works are to be considered? But if
these things be referred to the greatness of the mystery, thou shall find this
commemoration to have effect of great propitiation. If thou return to that
bread which came down from heaven, and gives life to the world: that bread of
proposition, which God has set forth to be a propitiation by faith in his
blood: and if thou look unto that commemoration, of which the Lord says: do
this in remembrance of me, thou shall find that this is the only
co^memoration which makes God merciful to men. Thus you see that Origin takes
not the sacrament alone, but Christ and faith in his blood, whereof the
sacrament is a commemoration, to be the only propitiation for our sins,
figured in the show bread.

His last man is Augustine, De ciuitate Dei, li. 22. Ca. 8. Vir tribunitus
Hesperius etc. Hesperius a worshipful man who is with us, has in his
territory of Fussala a piece of ground called Cuber. In y^ which place,
understanding his house to be vexed with evil spirits, to y^ great affliction
of his cattle and servants, required in my absence our priests, that some of
them would go thither, by whose prayers they might depart. One went thither. He
offered there the sacrifice of the body of Christ, praying as much as he was
able, that the same vexation might cease. Incontinently through y^ mercy of
God (...) ceased. Here is nothing but the name of sacrifice, which the fathers
then used improperly for y^ celebration of the communion. But that by merit of
that sacrifice, God was pacified to cast out those devils. Augustine says
not, but Stapleton absurdly gathers. For Augustine calls the death of
Christ the singular and only true sacrifice. Cont. advers. leg. and proph.
lib. 1, Cap. 18. Therefore the communion was improperly a sacrifice, but of
thanks giving, as the same Augustine writes De fide ad Pet. Cap. 19 and Cont.
aduers. leg. and Proph. lib. 1. Cap. 20. Wherefore his Popish bragg
notwithstanding, here is never an ancient father within the 600. years that
acknowledges the propitiatory sacrifice of the Mass.

The eight difference, is intercession of saints, which Protestants abhor.
There is no man denies, but that this error prevailed within the time of the
first 600. years, and namely in the later 300. years. For in the first 300.
there is nothing to be found, whereby it may be gathered. Epiphanius accompteth
invocation of Angels an heresy of the Caiani. Tom. 3. H. 38. And although some
show of invocation of saints in the later time may be excused by rethorical
exornation, as M. Grindall truly said, and some prayers for the dead, as yt of
Ambrose for Theodosius, whom both he calls a perfect servant of god, and yet
prayth fos his rest, which agrees not with popish prayers for them in
Purgatory: yet it is confessed yt this was one of y^ spots of that time, which
being not proved by scripture, can be nothing else but a superstition of men.
What said I? can it not be proved by scripture? behold the learned clerk M.
Stapl. proves it out of S. Peter, Ep. 2. Ca. 1. I think it right as long as I
am in this tabernacle, to stir you up and admonish you, being certain that I
shall shortly leave this tabernacle, according as our Lord Jesus Christ has
signified unto me. But I will endeavor also to have you often after my death,
that you may remember these things. Here is a strange kind of translation of
these words of his own Latin text. Dabo autem operam and frequenter habere
vos post obitu^ meu^, vt horum memoriam faciatis. But I will endeavor also yt
you may have after my departure, whereby to make remembrance of these things.
For I will neither trouble him with the Greek text, which perhaps he regards
not, nor with Erasmus translation, which are without all ambiguitie. But I
apeale to Gra^marians, whether habere vos, in this place may be reasonably
construed, to have you, or else be resolved by vt habeatis vos, that you may
have. His collection is more monstrous then his construction: for thus he
adds immediately after his translation. I ask here: How will S. Petter after
his death endeavor and procure, that the people may remember his sayings? They
will not, I dare say, say that he will come in a vision, or by revelation unto
them. What remains then, but that he will further them with his good prayers?
And so do the ancient Greek Scholies expound this place. And I ask here:
How prove you that S. Peter after his death will endeavor and procure for
them? O shameless corruption. S. Peter says, that because he has not long to
live, he will not only put them in remembrance living, but also leave his
Epistle, that it may be a perpetual admonition of them, even after he is
dead. But the ancient Greek Scholies (as he says) do so expound it. Why
are not those Scholies set down, and their antiquity showed to be within the
compass of the first six hundredth years? In deed Occumenius which lived
about five hundredth years last past, reports that some did wrest that text
unto such a sense, but they which did simply handle y^ words of S. Peter, did
expound it as I have done before.

The 9. difference, is commemoration of Saints at Mass time. If you mean
commemoration only, as I have showed before, we make it in our Communion, and
therefore this is no difference, but a lie of Master Stapleton, for we say:
Therefore with Angels and Archangels, and all the holy company of heaven, we
laud and magnify etc. Likewise in the Collectes mention is made of the
Apostles, whose memory our Church does keep. In deed, we use no invocation
of Saints, which was used within the latter 300. years, but not to be proved
in the first 300 years. Neither do we think the honor of Saints to be a
dishonor to God, but such honor as robs God of his glory, which he will
not communicate with any creature. But Augustine shows the memory of Martyrs
to be kept of the Christian people, Ad excitandam imitationem, and vt merius
eorum consocietur atque orationibus adi^uetur. To stir up imitation, and that
they may be joined in fellowship of their merits, and helped with their
prayers. The fellowship of their merits, he means to be made like them in
good works. For he acknowledged no desert of our good works, but only the
mercy of God. It is pity that Julian the Apostata had so great occasion to
charge the Christians with superstition of sepulchers, whereof they had no
ground in the Scriptures. Although Cyrillus defends no superstition, but only
a reverent estimation of the tombs of the Martyrs for their virtues sake,
after the example of the heathen. Again he says, that the relics of the
dead were not seen bare, and negligently cast upon the earth, but well laid
up: and hidden in the bosom of their mother in the deapth of the earth,
wherein they differred not a little from the usage of Papists, about their
relics. Cyrill. Contr. Julian lib. 10. The pride of Eustachius in contemning
the public Churches, ministering in corners, we condemn with the Council of
Gangra. Concerning the reading of the passions of Martyrs in the Church, which
he cauilleth that Master Jewel left out in his reply to Doctor Harding, out
of the seven and forty Canon of the Council of Carthage 3. Bartholmewe
Garizon confesses, that it is an addition, and without all such addition, the
same that M. Jewel requires, that nothing be read in the Church, but the
canonical books, as the 59. Canon of the Council of Laodicea.

The 10. difference is of confession and penance, in which he makes two kinds,
open confession and private, for the open confession used in the primitive
Church, he brings many proofs out of Acts 19. Augustine, Tertullian,
Cyprian, the council of Nice. Which need not, for we grant that it was used,
and we our selves according to such discipline as our Church of England has,
do use it, that public and notorious offenders make public confession of
their faults, for satisfaction of the congregation. But when this public
confession was abused, he says, that this practice of the Church and the
counsel of S. James, willing Christians to confess one before an other, was
restrained to the auricular confession of y^ priest only. But neither he
shows when, nor by what authority the counsel of y^ the Apostle, and
practice of the Church was thus altered. He cites an Epistle of Innocentius ad
Decentium. cap. 7. to prove, That particular confession was not first
instituted in the Council of Latarane, as Calvin babbleth, but that if a man
were diseased, he should not tarry for the time of Easter, but Mox confiteri,
be shriuen out of hand, which was not done in the face of the Church, but
privately in the chamber. Whereas this Mox confiteri for all his shameless and
ignorant babbling, is not at al in that chapter, which is this. De poenitentibus
vero, qui sieve ex grauioribus commissis, save ex leuioribus panitentiam gerunt.
si nulla interueniat aegritudo, quinta feria ante Pascha eis remitte^dum,
Romanae ecclesiae consuetudo demonstrat. Coetterum de pondere aestimando
delictorum, sacerdotis est iudicare, vt attendat ad confessionem poenitentis,
and ad fletus atque lachrymas corrigentis, ac nom iubere dimitti, cum viderit
congruam satisfactionem. Sane, si quis in aegritudinem inciderit, atque vsque
ad desperationem deuenerit, ei est ante tempus pasche relexandum ne de saeculo
absque communione discedat. Now concerning penitents, which either for greater
or smaller offenses do penance, if no sickness come between, the custom of
the Church of Rome shows, that they must be released the fifth day before
Easter. But as for esteeming their offenses, it is the priests part to judge,
that he may give heed to the confession of him that repents, and to the
tears and weeping of him that amendeth, and then to bid him be dismissed, when
he shall see convenient satisfaction. But truly if any man fall into
sickness, and that he be come even to desperation, he must be released before
the time of Easter, that he depart not out of the world without the Communion.
Here is no word of shriuing, for the confession was made publicly before
penance enjoined, and if in this case, of necessity there were confession in
the chamber, it is not proved to be auricular, nor common to all men without
the case of necessity. That which he cites afterward out of Hierome in
Eccles. cap. 10. is meant of asking counsel of an afflicted conscience. For
Innocentius that was after Hieronyme, testifies of the public confession of
the Church. The rest also that he cites out of Augustine and Cyprian is plain
of open confession, and never a word of auricular confession enjoined by
Papists under pain of damnation he can bring within the first 600. years.
Wherefore I will help him. Sozomenus lib. 7. cap. 16. shows, that in the
Church of Constannople, a Priest was appointed, which should hear confessions
of them that came to him, and inioyning penance, should absolve them, but by
Nestorius this order of confession was taken away, because a certain noble
woman was corrupted in the Church by a Deacon. Where also he shows, that the
custom of Rome was to do open penance, and not private. This writer testifies
of private confession used and abolished within the 600. years, but with
infinite inconveniences instituted a fresh in y^ later Romish Council of
Latrane.

The 11. difference is of the merit of good works, which he will prove by
Scripture, first out of Ecclesiasticus 16. All mercy shall make place to every
man according to the merit of his works. Which is neither canonical
scripture, nor rightly ta^slated, for according to y^ truth of the Greek it is
thus. He will give place to al good deeds, and every one shall find according to
his works. The second text is 1. Pet 4. Charity covers the multitude of
sins. By which y^ Apostle means (as Solomon, out of whose Proverbs he
cites it) that even as hatred causes brawling, and discovering of men's
infirmities, so charity covers and concealeth the multitude of our brothers
offenses. This is nothing for merit. The third place. 2. Pet. 1. When he
bids us to labor, to make sure our vocation and election by good works. By
which words the Apostle wills us to confirm unto our selves the certainty
of our calling and election, (which is most certain to God,) by the necessary
effects and fruits of our election and calling, which are good works, not
the cause, but the effect and end of our election. He has chosen us that we
might be holy Ephe. 1. not because we were holy. His fourth text is, 2. Cor. 8.
Let your abundance supply their lack, that their abundance may supply your
lack also. Which I agree with him, and Theodoret to be the communion of
Saints, but I deny that the communion of Saints is of merits, but of graces
and benefits of God.

The last text is Col. 1. S. Paul performed in his flesh such as lacked of the
passions of Christ, that is, the effects and fruits thereof, which was to
suffer with Christ, for his body, which is the Church, meaning that the Church
and not he only should have merit thereby. This blasphemy was far from S.
Paul's meaning, who says not, that he should merit any thing which Christ had
not merited, but that he as a member, should suffer that which Christ had not
suffered, who suffered as the head for our eternal redemption, and Paul as a
member suffered to be made conformable to the head, not to redeem the Church,
but to give testimony to the Gospel of salvation, for the edifying of the
Church. Wherefore I will conclude with Ambrose ad Virgin. exhor. Vnde mihi
tantum meriti est, cui indulgentia pro coronae est? Whence should I have so
great merit, when mercy is my crown? and with Augustine in Psalm. 43. Quid
dicturi sumus? merita nostra fecisse vt nobis illa salus perpetua mitteretur a
domino? absit: si merita nostra aliquid facerent, ad damnationem nostram
veniret. What shall we say? that our merits have caused that this perpetual
salvation should be sent to us from the Lord? God forbid. If our merits did
any thing, it should come to our damnation.

CAP. V.
Of the single life in the Clergy, Stapleton.
of the state of Virginite in Nuns, of Monks and Friars, of the vowed
profession of both.

The 12. difference is the single life of the Clergy. Fulke
He says we read expressly lib. 1. cap. 27. in Bedes history, that none of
the Clergy had wines that were within holy orders. How expressly we read,
you shall hear the very words of his own tra^slatio^. And if there be any among
y^ Clergy out of holy orders, which cannot live chaste, they shall take wives,
and have their stipend allowed them without. Here is no express words, that
none of the Clergy that were within holy orders had wives: but a particular
order for Augustine, and in respect that he was a Monk, not to have his
portion of the oblations severed from his Clergy, and if any of his Clergy
were married, so that he was not to live in the College among unmarried men,
that he should have his stipende allowed abroad. For the manner of the sea
Apostolic was then, (as Gregory says) which the Papists now observe not,
to give commandment to such as be made bishops, that all manner of oblations
that are given, be divided into 4. portions. And the one thereof given to the
Bishop toward his hospitality, the other to the Clergy, the third to the
poor, the fourth to the reparation of the Churches. So that there is no rule
for the Clergy of other Bishops, yt were no Monks, but that they might
marry, if they could not live chaste, as well within holy orders as without,
and so was the practice of the Church of England, more then 400. years after,
until the decree of Lanfrancus. Anno 1076., who yet was more favorable to them
that had wives, then Stapleton, which would have them put away. Decretu^ est,
vt nullus Canonicus vxore^ habeat, Sacerdotu^ vero in Castellis vel in vicis
habitantium habentes vxores, non cogantur ut dimittant: non habentes
interdicantur, ut habeant. Et deinceps caueant Episcopi, vt sacerdotes vel
diacones non praesumant ordinare, nisi prius profiteantur vt vxores non
habeant. It is decreed, yt no Canon may have a wife. But of Priests dwelling
in towns and villages, such as have wives, let them not be compelled to put
them away. But such as have not, let them be forbidden to have. And from
henceforth let Bishops take heed, that they presume not to ordeine priests
or deacons, except they do first profess to have no wives.

This decree proves that before this time, not only married men were
ordained priests, but also that priests after they were ordained did take
wives. The same is proved by the words of the Epistle of Gerardus, which was
afterward Archb. of York, unto Anselm Archb. of Canterbury. Cum ad ordines
aliquos inuito, dura ceruice renituntur, ne in ordinando castitate^
profiteantur. When I call any to orders, they resist with a stiff neck, that
in taking order they do not profess chastity. But now when this iolye
fortifier should prove the single life of all the Clergy in the first six
hundredth years, he can bring nothing but certain decrees, that such as were
promoted to priesthood unmarried, should not after marry, yet he confesses
that there were many married men taken unto the order of priesthood, but
seldom, he says, in the Latin Church. Yet let us see his authorities: first
Augustine lib. 2. cap. vlt. de adulter. in coniugis: says that they were wont
to bring example of the continencye of Clearkes, to persuade men to abstain
from adulterous marriages. Solemus eis proponere etiam continentiam clericorum,
qui plerumque ad eandem sarcinam subcundam capiuntur inviti, eamque susceptam
vsque ad debitum finem Domino iuuante producunt. We are wont to set before them
the continency of Clearkes, which are oftentimes taken against their wills to
bear the same burden, and when they have taken it upon them do bring it to
the due end, the Lord assisting them. Of this he gathers, that the Clergy
in Saint Augustines days refrained from wives all the days of their life,
which as it is true of some, so it is utterly false of all. Again the
compulsion which he speaks of, was not unto continency, but unto the
ministry, and in the ministry not of necessity of greater estimation. As
the words immediately following do declare. Dicimus ergo eis, quid si and vos
ad hoc subeundum populorum violentia caperemini: nonne susceptum cast
custodiretis officium, repent conuersi ad impetrandas vires a Domino de quibus
nunquam antea cogitastis? Sed illos inquiunt honor consolatur. Respondemu^, and
vobis aemplius limor moderetur. Si enim hoc multi Dei ministri repent atque
inopinate impositum susceperunt, sperantes se illustrius in Christi haereditate
fulgere, quanto magia vos adulteria cauendo vivere debetis, metuentes non in
regno Dei minus lucere, sed in Gehennae ignibus ardere. We say therefore unto
them. What if you also were taken by the violence of the people to bear the
same? Would you not keep chastely the office taken upon you: being suddenly
turned, to obtain of the Lord such strength as before you never thought of?
But the honor (say they) does comfort them. We answer. And fear should more
restrain you. For if many ministers of God have taken upon them this thing
being laid upon them suddenly and unlooked for, hoping that they shall shine
more notably in the inheritance of Christ: how much more ought you to live so
as you beware of adultery, fearing not to shine less in the kingdom of God,
but to burn in the fires of hell?

Next he cites a Canon ascribed to the Apostles, out of Justinian confirmed in
the sixth general council of Constantinople in Trullo. Ex coniugatis, etc. Of
such as come to the clergy unmarried and after will marry, we permit that
only to the readers and singers. Nevertheless he confesses, that Zonoras
expounds this so, that if any refuse to live chaste being asked at his
orders taken, he is permitted first to marry, and then admitted to the
ministry. And the council of Constantinople in the same sixth Canon. Si quis
autem eorum qui in Clerum accedunt, velit lege matrimonii mutieri coniungi,
antequam Hypodiaconus vel Diaconus vel presbyter ordinetur, hoc faciat. But if
any of them which come into the Clergy, will be joined to a woman by the
law of matrimony, let him do it before he be ordained Subdeacon, Deacon or
Priest. Where is now the necessity of single life in the Clergy.

After this he cites the council of Ancyra Can. 10. which is clean contrary
to his purpose, if he had recited it whole as he only takes the tail. The
Canon is this. Diaconi quicunque cum ordinantur, si in ipsa ordinatione
protestati sunt dicentes, velle se habere vxores, nec posse se continere, hi
postea si ad nuptias venerint, maneant in ministerio, propterea quod his
Episcopus licentia^ dederit. Quicunque sane tacuerunt and susceperum manu^
impositionem, professi continentiam, si postea ad nuptia^ venerint, a
ministeria cessare debebunt. Whosoever ever when they are ordained Deacons, if in
the very time of their ordeyning, they make protestation and say, that they
will have wives, and that they can not conteyne, if these afterward come to be
married, let them remain in the ministry, because the Bishop has given them
license. But truly whosoever has held their peace, and received imposition
of hands, professing continence, if after they marry, ought to cease from
the ministry. This Canon shows, that it was lawful for the Clergy being
in holy orders to marry, if they professed not continence, to which profession
none was bound, as they are in Popery.

Again if after profession they married, they were not deuorced as Papists
used in Queen Mary's time, but commanded to abstain from the ministry.

The last authority he cites is out of the Synod of Neocaesaria presbiter,
etc. A priest if he marry a wife ought to be deposed from his order. It
follows in the same Canon. But if he commit fornication or adultery, he
must be moreover cast out of the Church, and driven to do penance among lay
men. This was a decree of 17. Bishops in the province of Paulus Polemoniaca,
and is to be understood of such a priest as professed continency. Whose
marriage yet was not made void, but he put out of his office, whereas he that
had committed fornication, was put both out of the ministry, and of the
Church, which seeing the Papists observe not in their lecherous priests, they
have small right to use this Canon, which yet binds none but that province
that made it.

Now where he says, it was a rare thing for the Clergy of the Latin Church
to be married, Hierome no friend to marriage, shall testify the contrary, who
speaks of it as of an ordinary matter. Eliguntur mariti in sacerdotium, non
nego, quia non sunt tanti virgins quanti necessarii sunt Sacerdotes. Married
men are chosen unto the Priesthood, I deny not, because there are not so many
virgins, as it is necessary there should be priests. And Oceano he confesses
that by the doctrine of the Apostles, priests might have wives, complaining
that in his time all other qualities of a minister described by the Apostle
were neglected, only the liberty of marriage looked unto. Qui dixit vnius
vxoris virum, etc. He that said the husband of one wife, even he commanded
that he should be unreprovable, sober, wise, comely, harberous, a teacher,
modest, not given to wine, no fighter, no quareller, not covetous, no young
nouice in the faith. Ad haec omnia claudimus oculos, solas videmus vxores. At
all these things we shut our eyes, we see nothing but their wives.

Likewise in Aggeum Cap. 1. He inueygheth against the rulers of the Church,
which building their carnal house, providing for their children and
possessions, neglected the building of the temple of God. Again in Epi. ad
Ephesians. li. 3. Ca 6. He inueygheth against Bishops and priests of his time, that
broughtvp their children in secular and profane learning, peradventure at the
charges of the Church. Yea diverse Popes have been married men, for Pope
Siluerius was son of Pope Hormisda, as the very pontifical witnesses: and
Beda shows lib. 2. cap. 1. that Pope Felix was great grandfather to Pope
Gregory.

I will spend no more time in so clear a matter. Wherefore the single life
required of necessity in the Clergy, is not proved within the 600. years
so often named.

The thirteenth difference is, of the state of virginity in men and women.
Such state protestants acknowledge not, but rather abhor it, and persecute
it. It is a mere slander, for we honor virginity that is not counterfeit, in
the^ that had made them selves chaste for the kingdom of heaven. But when
Master Stapleton will make virginity impossible to no man, he is directly
contrary to our Savior Christ. Non omnes etc. all men can not receive this
saying, but they to whom it is given; Mat. 19. and to Saint Paul. 1. Cor. 7.
Qui non conunet, he that can not contain, let him marry. I confess also,
that within the six hundredth years, there were some Colleges of virgins,
which differed as much from Popish Nuns, as many Popish Nuns from honest
women. They lived not idly, as Popish Nuns, of their lands and revenues,
but with spinning, and making of cloth, they maintained themselves, August. De
moribus Eccl. Catholi^ae Cap. 31. They lived continently, or else they married.
Popish Nuns though they live never so incontinently, yet will they never
marry. Epiph. lib. 2. Tom. 1. Her. 61. Popish Nuns are for the most part,
like those Monks and Nuns of the heretics, Originiani Turpes. Non student
Castitati, sed simulatae castitati, and nomen sal^e^ habenti. They study not
for chastity, but such as is feigned chastity, and has only a name of chastity
Volentes esse in honor propter putatam apud ipsos castitatis exercitationem.
Willing to be in honor, for the supposed exercise of chastity among them,
when there is nothing less then chastity.

Concerning the rule of Augustine Ep. 109. praescribed to the virgins that
tumultuously and seditiously would have changed their gouernesse, if we do
admit it to be written by Saint Augustine, yet it is not sufficient to
authorize the superstitious orders of Popish Nuns. Among whom their habit is
not the least part of their superstition, which Augustine in his virgins
forbids to be notable or differing from other women. Non sit notabilis
habitus vester, nec affectetis vestibus placere, sed moribus. Let not your
apparel be such as may be noted or marked, neither desire ye to please with
garments, but with manners. The like writes Hierome concerning the apparel of
virgins of his time. Again Saint Augustines virgins were not bound to their
Cloister, but might depart, if they liked not the severity of their rule, or
else were expulsed from thence. Conuicta secundum praeposuae vel praesbyteri
arbitrium debet emandatoriam sustinere vindictam, quam si forte recusauerit,
and siipsa non abscesserit, de vestra societate proijciatur. She that is
convicted (but of wanton looks) according to the decree of the Gouernesse or
priest, ought to sustain a punishment for her amendment, which if she refuse
to bear, and if she her self depart not away, let her be cast clean out of
your society. If this rule were observed, few Popish Nuns should be left in
their Cloisters. Moreover, Saint Augustines virgins were commanded to
understand what they did pray or sing, not one among forty of Popish Nuns
understand their Popish service which they sing. Psalmis and Hymnis cum oratis
Deu^, hoc versetur in cord, quod profertur in voce. When you pray to God with
Psalms and Hymns, let that be in your heart which is pronounced in your
voice. These and many other differences may be observed which are sufficient
to confute Stapleton, which would make his Popish Nuns al one with ye virgins
of the ancient and purer Church. But Eusebius out of Philo shows ye even in
the Apostles time there were (...) Oratories and Monasteries of men and women
lib. 2. cap. 16. It is true ye Eusebius so judges: but who so reads Philo
his own writing shall plainly see y^ he speaks rather of a sect of Jews at
Alexandria given to conte^platio^, and not of Christians. Beside this ye
monasteryes which he speaks of were not Abbeys, wherein they lived, but only
solitary places of study for a time. For in them they had neither meat nor
drink, as Philo expressly affirms. To conclude, seeing that in the scripture
we have no commandment for virgins, we commend them y^ have the gift, and
exhort them so to continue. But seeing the gift is rare in our days, and the
examples of them that have professed virginity, and lived abhominably, are too
many, we think it neither needful nor expedient, to set up Colleges of
virgins, nor to exact any vow of them, but to leave them to their conscience
and liberty, which the holy Ghost has given them.

The fourteenth difference is of Monks and religious men, as though none were
religious, but Monks. I confess they had within the six hundredth years, men
that lived a solitary life, called Monachi, Anachoreti, Fremitae etc. but no
more like our Popish boares, living in their frankes, then angels are like to
devils. Their differences I have showed even out of Bid in the table of
differences. But Stapleton says, that the faults of a few ought not to have
caused subuertion of the whole orders. I answer, they were so few that
offended, that they were almost all naught. And what be the Monks of Flaunders
where he dwells at this day? be they much reformed? Is not idleness,
drunkenness, brawling their greatest exercise, when they be free from
idolatry and superstition? How many learned men be in those Cloisters that
are diligent preachers, even in the Popish Church? What their chastity is God
knows. But the Country speaks evil of them. In his title of the Chapter, he
speaks of Friars, whereof I had great marvel to see his impudency, that
would promise to prove them to have been within the first six hundredth
years, that sprung not up more then twelve hundredth years after Christ. But
in this section of the Chapter there is no word of them. Neither could the
Popish Monks themselves abide them, ever since their arising.

The fifteenth difference is vows of virginity, both in men and women, and
here he brings in Friars in the Devils name, to be as ancient as S.
Augustine, Whose words he thus translateth in 1. Tom. 5. Nemo ergo positus in
Monasterio frater, dicat, recedo de Monasterio. Therefore let no Friar placed
in a Monastery, say, I will depart out of the Monastery etc. This testimony
of Saint Augustine (he says) may suffice to show that in the Church of the
first six hundredth years both Friars and Nuns vowed virginity etc. Surely
my lunges will not serve me to cry loud enough against the impudency of this
shameless creature, that to abuse the ignorant, translateth Frater, in S.
Augustine, by ye Popish French-English name of Friar, to make them believe,
that the Augustine friars were instituted by Saint Augustine, which are not yet
two hundredth year old. For about the year of our Lord one thousand four
hundredth and six, this order of Friars under the name of Saint Augustine, was
first erected by one Redus Comes montis granelli, and one Gualterus Marsus his
coadiutor at Fesula a City of Hetruria, confirmed by Gregory 12. one of the
two Popes, that then ruled the roast both togeher, the one in Italy the other in
France. Cronic. Cronicorum. Herm. Sched.

Now touching the vow of virginity made in those ancient times, that it was
not free to return to the world as both Erasmus and Polidore affirm, whom he
charge very fondly and ignorantly so to write. How far it did bind, you
shall hear, first out of Epiphanius, and then out of Hierome. Epiphanius
contra Apost. Haer. 61. lib. 2. To. 1. thus writes.

Melius est iraque vnum peccatum habere and non plura. Melius est lapsum a
cursu palam sibi vxorem sumere secundum legem, and a virginitate multo tempore
poenitentiam agere. and sic rursus ad Ecclesiam induci, v^lut qui mala operatus
est, velut lapsum and fractum and obligatione opus habentem: and non quotidie
occultis iaculis sauciari ab improbitate quae a diabolo ipsi infertur. Sic
noui^ Ecclesia praedicare. Haec sunt sanationis medicamenta. Therefore it is
better to have one sin and not many. It is better for him which is fallen
from his course, openly to take him a wife, according to the law, and to
repent long time from his virginity, and so to be brought again unto the
Church, as one that has wrought evil, as one that is fallen and broken, and
having need of binding up, and not to be daily wounded with secret darts,
which of the devil are cast against him. So knows the Church to preach,
those be the medicines of healing.

Saint Hierome ad Demetriadem writes thus. Sanctum virginum propositum and
Coelestis angelorumque familiae gloriam, quarundam non been se agentium nomen
infamat. Quibus aperte dicendum est, vt aut nubant si se non possunt continere,
aut contineant si nolunt nubere. The report of some that behave not themselves
well, slaundereth the holy purpose of virgins, and the glory of the heavenly
and Angelical family. To whom it must be said openly, that either they should
marry, if they can not contain, or else they should contain, if they will not
marry. Wherefore by these two doctors judgment, our doctrine differs not from
the doctrine of the primitive Church, within the six hundredth years after
Christ.

CAP. VI.
Of prayer for the dead, Stapleton.
Of solempnitie in Christian b^rialles, Of houseling before death, Of
reservation of the sacrament. Of the sign of the cross, Of Benediction of
Bishops.

The sixteenth difference is prayer for the dead, Fulke.
with dirige, and Mass in the morning, the fortification thereof he leaves,
because it is done sufficiently by another, he means Master Allen of
purgatory, and for the assault and battery of that piece, I also refer the
reader to my overthrow of the same defense.

The seventeenth difference is solemnity of Christian burial, which is used
and allowed of us so far as it is without superstition He alleges that
Paulious did write to Saint Augustine, from the sea coasts of Italy to the sea
costs of Africa, to be fully instructed, whether the holiness of the place any
thing auayled the burial of the body, etc. But why did not he send nearer
home, to the Apostolic see of Rome, the Pope whereof (or else you lie) can not
err? For Augustine was not able to resolve him, who although he suppose this
benefit there may be, that the friends of the body buried near a martirs
tomb, may be occasioned thereby in remembering the place of his burial, to
commend his soul to that Martyr, yet he can not tell how the Saints departed
should know the requests of them that live. Cap. 16. lib. De cura pro mortuis:
and except this occasion of praying for their souls, he knows not what the
holiness of the place can help them, wherein he differs from Papists, Cap.
2.
that think it a great matter of it self, to be buried in a holy place, which
of them for that purpose is exorcised and hallowed.

The 18. difference is: Houseling before death, which the sacramentaries make
to be of no necessity, because they bind the sinner to a number of other
communicantes. If it be a matter of necessity, how is it with all infantes,
how with many that die suddenly, etc. are all such damned? But he says, the
practice of the primitive Church proves it to be necessary, as in the example
of Serapion Eusebius. lib, 6. cap. 44. and of Satyrus Saint Ambroses brother In
obitum Satyri, etc. And is it even so? Does the example of one man that was
excommunicated, and could not be quiet until he had received the communion,
and of an other that never received it, nor was baptized, prove it necessary
for all men? Yea (says Stapleton) who will read only but one Canon of the
Nicene council, shall find therein not only a general commandment for all
Christendom, but also the ancient practice of the Church before that time.
And I say who so will read not only the whole Canon, but the very title
thereof, shall find, that it was a remission only for excommunicated persons.
C^no. 12. De excommunicatis a saeculo ex^untibus. Of excommunicated persons
departing this world, De his vero qui recedunt ex corpore antiquae legis reguia
obseruabitur eti^ nunc, ita vt si forte quis recedat ex corpore, necessario
vitae suae viatico non defraudetur. Quod si desperatus aliquis recepta
Communione superuixerit, si^ inter eos qui sola oratione co^municant. De
omnibus tamen his qui a corpore recedunt in tradendo eis Communionem, and cura
and probatio sit episcopi. But concerning them which depart out of this body,
the rule of the ancient law shall be observed even now also, so that if
perhaps any depart out of ye body, he may not be defrauded of the necessary
provision of his life. But if any being at the point of death after he have
received the Communion, do recover and live, let him be among them that
communicate in prayer only. Nevertheless, concerning all those men that
depart out of ye body, in delivering to them the communion, let both the charge
and the trial be in the bishops discretion.

This Canon was not made for all Christian men, that at times of public
administration of the sacraments might freely be partakers, but only of such
as were excommunicated and appointed a time of penance for their trial, before
they should be admitted to the Lords supper: before which time, if they were
at the point of death, and the bishop allowed of their repentance, this Canon
provides, that they might be received to the Communion, for their comfort: but
yet so; that if any did recover and live, they should accomplish their time
among the penitentes that was before enjoined them. This thing being so
apparent, what shall we say of these English Louanistes, that either they
never read the books out of which they cite their authorities, or else without
all shame they wrest them against their own conscience?

The 19. difference, is the reservation of the sacrament, wherein, as I
confess in some erroneous kind of reservation we differ from some of the
primitive Church, so they differed from Christ, which commanded it to be eaten
and dronken. And it is manifest, yt their reservation differed from the popish
reservation, both in the manner and in the end. But concerning reservation, I
refer the reader to mine answer to D. Heskins first book Cap. 24. 25. 26.
and 27. where you shall find all his authorities discussed, except the 14.
Canon of the Council of Nice, out of which he alleges, that the Deacons
might, absente Episcopo and presbitero proferre communionem and comedere. In
the absence of the Bishop and priest, take out the communion and receive it.
Whereby he says, it is evident, that it was reserved in the Churches, where
the Deacons might come to receive it. But I must admonish the reader, yt these
words which he cites are an addition of Gratian and the popish church, and
are not in the true copies in Greek of that Council, nor in the right Latin
translation, as even Peter Crabb the Papist confesses, nor yet in the edition
of Ruffinus. But such draffe and dregs of falsifications, additions,
detractions, mutations, etc. are good enough for popish swyne.

The 20. difference is blessing with the sign of the Cross: for fortification
of which piece, he refers the reader to Martials treatise of the Cross. And
I to M. Calfhils Answer, and my Reioynder.

The 21. difference is benediction of the bishop, which he says is mocked at
and reviled by Protestants. But he says untruly: for although we may
justly deride the vain ceremonial casting of crosses in the air of their
bitesheepes rather then bishops, with their two fingers, which is nothing else
but a ridiculous superstition, yet we contemn not the godly benediction of a
Christian Bishop and pastor, which uses the same according to the word of
God. Therefore the examples of Nectarius which desired the benediction of his
Bishop Diodorus at his departure, and Aurelius which blessed Augustine and his
company, after he had visited them, show no difference of them from us. And if
Eudo^ia the Empress desired Chrysostom to bless her son Theodosius his
godson. What did Chrysostom but pray for him, and with him well in the name of
the Lord? And how did Diodorus bless Nectarius? And Aurelius bless Augustine
and the rest, but by godly prayer made to God for them? not with vain, dombe
and idle ceremonies after the Popish manner. So that the manner of blessing of
the ancient times, does rather prove a difference of Papists from them, then
of us from them. And moreover you may consider, how to make up a number of
differences, what small matters he is feign to fly unto, and even such as he
has no show of hold at all in the writers of the ancient Church of 600.
years after Christ, for them. But only to set a face of the matter, as though
there were nothing new amongst them, when not only their ceremonies, but
also many of the principal articles of their doctrine, wherein they differ
from us, were either not heard of in those ages, or else were openly impugned
by writers of those times. Only the dregs and refuse of the former age they
retain, as prayer for the dead, invocation of Saints, and a few other such
matters.

CAP. VII.
Of pilgrimage and relics, Stapleton.
of Church service, of Altars, of Church ornaments and holy vessels, of the
ecclesiastical ^onsure, and of holy water.

The 22. difference is pilgrimage to holy places, Fulke.
especially to Rome. In deed we find that peregrination to Jerusalem was
esteemed of many, and great resort to Rome, of the wiser sort not for the
holiness of the places, but for the frequence of godly and learned men then
living in those places. Otherwise for the holiness of the place, S. Hierom ad
Paulinum, whether M. Sapleton sends us, does sufficiently declare what was to
be esteemed of it. Non Hierosolymis fuisse, sed Hierosolymis been vixisse
laudandum est. It is no praise to have been at Jerusalem, but to have lived
well at Jerusalem. And speaking even of our own country, he adds. Et de
Hierosolymis and de Britannia aequaliter patet aula coelestis. The court of
heaven is open equally, from Jerusalem and from Britain. Again: Beatus
Hilarion cum Palestinus esset and in Palestina viueret, vno tantum die vidit
Hierosolimam, vt nec contemnere loca sancta propter vicinitatem, nec rursus
dominum loco claudere videretur. Blessed Hilarion when he was a Palestine
borne, and lived in Palestine, saw Jerusalem but one day only, that neither he
might seem to contemn the holy places because of neerenesse, nor again to
shut up the Lord in a place. And because Master Stapleton makes pilgrimage a
matter of faith, he says further: After he has showed how many excellent men
never came at Jerusalem, etc. Quorsum inquies haec tam longo repetita
principio? Videlicet ne quicquam fidei tuae deesse putes, quia Hierosolymam non
vidisti. Thou will say, to what end are these things fetched from so long a
beginning? verily, that thou should not think any thing to be wanting to
thy faith, because thou have not seen Jerusalem. Thus Hierome, albeit it was
much used, yet judged peregrination unto Jerusalem, to be a matter of small
importance.

By Chrysostom says, Hom. 5. de beato Job: that if strength of body did
serve, and that he were not let with the charge of his Church, he would have
traveled to Rome, to see the cheines wherewith Saint Paul was bound. And this
Stapleton will warrant, to have been done without superstition. I would feign
know how he will discharge this saying of his in the same homely, either of
superstition, or of an excessive commendation. Si quis me coelo condonet omni,
vel ea qua pauli manus vinciebatur catena, illam ego honor praeponerem. If any
man could give me all heaven, or else that chain, wherewith Saint Paul's
hand was bound, I would prefer that chain in honor. Excuse this if you
can, so it be not with a rethoricall exornation, for ye you cannot abide.
Nevertheless, the same Chrisostom shows, yt it was not needful for
obtaining remission of finnes, to take in hand any pilgrimage. In Epist. ad
Phil. Hom. Non opus est in longinqua peregrinando transire, nec ad remotissimas
ire nationes, non pericula, non labores tolerare, sed velle tantummodo. There
is no need to go a pilgrimage into far countries, nor to go to the furthest
nations, nor to suffer perils nor travels, but only to be willing. Now let the
wisdom of the Papists take heed, as he admonishes the wisdom of the
Protestants, that they charge not Chrysostom with the heresy of sola fides,
or licentious liberty, more then we check him for superstition. The like of
remission of sins, without pilgrimage, he says: Hom. de. Anima and
educatione Samuelis, which is as contrary to y^ draffe of popish pilgrimage, as
the peregrination used in this day is out of use with us. For Papists were wont
to make pilgrimage a meritorious work, and many had it in penance persuaded by
their ghostly father, they could not otherwise have remission of their sins,
except perhaps by a Popes pardon, with a commutation of penance. Concerning the
place of Augustine, which he cites Ep. 137. It proves no ordinary pilgrimage
then in use, but only shows Augustines devise in a case of such doubt, as he
could not find out the truth between one that was accused and his accuser,
that it was not amiss they should both travel to some such place, where
miracles are said to be wrought, if happily there in such place, the truth
might be revealed by miracle.

And yet I confess not urged by any thing Stapleton says, that Augustine else
where speaks of peregrination to Rome in Psalm. 85. Quales isti principes
venerunt de Babylone? Principes credentes de saeculo, principes venerunt ad
vrbem Roman, quasi caput Babylonis, non ierunt ad templum imperatoris, sed ad
memoriam piscatoris. What are these princes that came from Babylon? Princes of
the world that believe, the princes came to Rome, as to the head of Babylon,
they went not to the temple of the Emperor, but to the memory of a Fisher.

To conclude, as there was used Peregrination to Jerusalem, and other places to
the memories of Martyrs, so was there never any pilgrimage to images, which is
the greatest pilgrimage of Papists, within the 600. years mentioned, wherein
Papists differ as much from their practice, as we, and more also.

The 23. difference is the reverence of relics, used within the 600. years,
as witnesses Basil, Chrysostom and other. The relics or bodies of the
Saints we reverence, so far as we have any warrant out of the holy
Scriptures. Neither did those ancient fathers, (although immoderate in that
kind of reverence) yet make idols of them, nor set them bare to be seen or
handled, and worshipped, but laid up in the earth, as I have before showed out
of Cyrillus: Lib. 10. Contra Iulianum. But what inconvenience grew by that
excessive esteeming of the dead bodies of the Saints, Sozomenus shows Li. 7.
ca. 10. Pauli Constantinopolitani Episcopi corpus in Ecclesia repositum est, id
quod and multos veritatis ignaros, praesertim mulieres, ac plures e plebe, in
eam opinionem induxit, vt Apostolum Paulum ibi conditum esse putent. The body
of Paul, Bishop of Constantinople, was buried in the Church, which thing
brought many ignorant of the truth, especially women, and many of the common
people into this opinion, that they think the Apostle Paul to be buried there.
But whereas in the end he would have us restore so many holy relics of Abbeyes
and Churches, as have been spoiled and profaned, it is needless, seeing the
Papists can make as many when they list. Even by the same cunning that they
make some of the Apostles to have two or three bodies a piece, beside heads,
arms, ribs, and other parts in infinite places, whereof he that will hear
more, let him read Caluines book of relics, and credit him but as a
reporter of that, which all the world is able to reprove him of, if he would
wilfully feign any thing.

The 24. difference is Alters, for proof whereof he brings Chrysostom, and
Augustine, which speak of Alters, whom also he confesses to call the same
tables, but that neither in matter nor form, they were like Popish Alters,
but tables in deed made of boordes, and remoueable, and standing in the
midst of the Church, I have showed sufficiently in mine answer to Doctor
Heskins, lib. 3. cap. 31. by which it is proved, that the Papists and not we,
differ from the primitive Church in this point.

The 25. difference is Latin service, which he would prove out of Bid by the
books that Gregory sent to Augustine, which could be none other but Latin.
But how prove you that those books were service books? or that if they were
service books, they were not translated into the vulgar tongue? As for the
fortification of this piece, by the elder times he refers us to Doctor
Hardings proof against Master Jewels challenge. And to the same Bishops
learned reply, do I refer the reader for overthrow of the same feeble
fortress of Harding.

The 26. difference is of Alter clothes, Church vestments, etc. Such Alter
clothes and such vestments as Christ used in the celebration of the holy
sacrament, we think not only to be sufficient, but also most convenient, for
the administration of the same. Nevertheless, if any other vestments, without
superstition, be appointed by lawful authority, we think no strife or
contention is to be raised for so small matters.

But let us see, of what antiquity he will make the holy vestments. First
Tertullian Lib. de Monogam, makes mention of Infulas, the upper garment of the
Priest. But he might understand Tertullian (if he were disposed) to use that
term but in derision of them, that when they would be proud against the
Clergy, they alleged, that we are all Priests, etc. but when we are called
(said he) to the same severity of discipline with the Clergy, deponimus
infulas and pares sumus, we put off our Rochets, and we be private men. This
infula was the apparel of the Heathen Priests, to which he alludeth, when he
scoffeth at them, that in dignity would be Priests, but in discipline Lay
men. The Albe which is spoken of Con. Carthag. 4. Can. 41. was nothing like
your Popish Albe, but a white garment, which was used in sign of dignity, and
was forbidden of the Deacons to be worn, but only in time of the oblation and
reading Saint John's Petalum, if he could tell what to make of it, he would not
call it generally a pontifical vestment. Saint John was a poor Pontifex, to
go in pontificalibus. The rich garment which Constantine gave to the Church of
Jerusalem, if it had been a cope, (as he says) it had been an unhandsome
garment to dance in, as the story says, it came into the hands of one that
daunced in it. The admonition that he gives to such as sleep in Church
goods, meaning belike, such as have their beds garnished with old copes,
were more meet to be made to some of his benefactours, that sleep in Abbeyes,
and yet will not awake out of them.

To conclude, although there is some mention of garments, applied specially
for the use of divine service, yet the Popish tragical trumperie of this time,
differs as much from them in form and use, as they do in time and age.

The 27. difference is of holy vessels: such vessels as are comely and decent
for the ministration of the sacraments, we have without superstition, which
beginning to grow in the ancient times, the Fathers did rather reprove then
foster. Gregory Nazianzen, whom he cites in his Oration aduers. Arrianos,
and de se ipso, speaking of the ministering vessels that might not be touched of
many, means Allegorically of profaning the mysteries of Christian religion,
alluding to the profanation of the vessels of the Jewish temple by Nabuzardan
and Balthazar, as his words do plainly show. (...) etc. What ministering
vessels not be touched of many, have I delivered to the hands of the wicked,
either to Nabuzardan, or to Balthazar, which rioted wickedly in holy things,
and suffered punishment worthy of his madness.

Chrysostom reproved the preposterous superstition of the people, which durst
not touch the holy vessels, but yet feared not to defile them selves with
sin, In ep. ad Ephesians. H. 14. Non vides, etc. Do thou not see, those holy
vessels? Be they not always used to one purpose? Dare any man use them to any
other purpose? Now art thou thy self more holy then these vessels, and that
by much. Why then do thou pollute and defile thy self? He has forgotten
Exuperius Bishop of Tholosse, which carried the Lords body in a wicker basket,
and his blood in a glass, when he makes so much ado about holy vessels.
Hier. ad Rusticum, Acacius Bishop of Amida is commended for melting the vessels
of the Church of gold and silver, to redeem prisoners from the Persians.

The 28. difference, is the shaven crown^ of Priests, for antiquity whereof,
he cites Eusebius in Panegyric. Vos amici Dei sacerdotes lo^gae talari vest
and corona insignes. Ye friends of God, ye Priests seemly by your long side
garment and crown. Verily he is worthy to be shorn on his poll, with a number
of crowns, that understands this of a shaven crown. If nothing else could
have driven him from this dream, at least he should have remembered the solemn
disputation whereof he spoke immediately before in Beda, li. 5. ca. 22. by
which it appears, that y^ Greeks were shorn square, and not round, and
therefore Eusebius speaking to Greek Priests, would never have called their
square tonsure a crown. But the words of Eusebius put all out of doubt. (...)
etc. O ye friends and Priests of God, which are clothed with the holy long
garment, and the heavenly crown of glory, and with the divine unction and the
priestly robe of the holy Ghost, etc. Is there any block so senseless, to
think that he called a shaven head the heavenly crown of glory? Who sees
not, that in commendation of the spiritual dignity of the Ministers of the
Church, he alludeth to the Aaronicall attire of the Priests of the law?

The next testimony is out of the tripartite history, that Julian the
Apostata to counterfeit religion, shore him self to the hard ears, therefore
religious men were then shorn There is no doubt, but the Clergy, and such as
professed sobriety and modesty, used to poll their heads, whereas the
licentious multitude delighted in long hairs, which shearing or polling after
grew to a ceremony, and from a ceremony to a superstition: but small mention
of the ceremony there is, within the 600. years, and that toward the latter
end of them. But where he compares the scoffing that the Turk might make at
the blessed passion of Christ, with such pleasant railing as Protestants use
against their Friars coules, and shaven crowns, he shows in what blasphemous
estimation he has such vile dung of men's invention, to compare it with the
only price of our salvation.

The 29. difference is holy water, for antiquity whereof he alleges two
miracles, the one out of Bid, li. 1. cap. 17. of Germanus, which with casting
a few sprinkles of water into the sea, in the name of the Trinity, assuaged a
tempest. The other of Marcellus Bishop of Apamea, which when the temple of
Jupiter could not be burned with fire, after prayers made, commanded water
signed with the cross, to be sprinkled on the Alter, which done, the devils
departed, and the temple was set on fire, and burned. But these miracles
wrought by water, prove not an ordinary use of holy water in the Church, in
those times, as for the counterfeit decree of Alexander the fifth Bishop of Rome,
is a worthy witness of such a worshipful ceremony. In the end of this
chapter, he inueigheth against a new trick, which he says, y^ preachers have
to make their audience cry, Amen. Co^paring it with the applause and clapping
of hands, used in the old time, but misliked of godly fathers, Chrysostom
and Hierome. So that for the preacher to pray to God, an^ to give God thanks,
whereto the people answers ^^en, it is counted of Stapleton a new trick,
and yet it is an ancient, as S. Paul 1. Cor. 14. verse. 16. But to make such a
loud lie, that Satan him self the father of lies (I suppose) for his
credites sake would be ashamed to make, in his own person. Videlicet, that To
tears, to lamenting or to bewayling of their sins, no Protestant yet moves
his audience. It is an old tricks of a cankared stomaked Papist.

CAP. VIII.
Differences between the former faith of Catholics, Stapleton.
and the late news of Protestants, concerning the government and rulers of
the Church.

The 30. difference is Synodes of the Clergy, Fulke.
which is a lewd and impudent slander, for we allow them, and use them, as
all the world knows: but (says he) no conclusion is made in them, but such
as pleases the Parleament. This is a false lie, for although no constitution
made in the convocation, has the force of a law, except it be confirmed by
Parleament, yet many constitutions and Canons have been made, that were never
confirmed by Parleament.

The 31. difference is imposition of hands, which is a mere slander, for
that cerimonie is used of us in ordeining of Ministers, likewise where he
says, that when all the Popish Bishops were deposed, there was none to lay
hands on the Bishops that should be newely consecrated, it is utterly false.
For there was one of the Popish Bishops that continued in his place, there were
also diverse that were consecrated Bishops in King Edwardes time, and although
there had been but one in that time of reformation, it had been sufficient by
his own Gregory's resolution, Bed. lib. 1. cap. 27. An other example is Lib.
3. cap. 28. of Ceadda Archbishop of York, consecrated by Wini Bishop of the
West Saxons assisted by two Bryton Bishops, that were not subject to the sea of
Rome: Because at that time, there was never a Bishop of the Romish faction in
England but this Wini, who was also a Simoniake, and bought the Bishoprike of
London for money. I speak not this, as though in planting of the Church, where
it has been long time exiled, an extraordinary form of ordaining were not
sufficient, but to show that the Papists do pick quarrels, contrary to
their own pretended records of antiquity, and Catholic religion.

Where he inueigheth against the insufficiency of a number of our Ministers,
which are come out of the shop into the Clergy, without gifts sufficient for
that calling, as I can not excuse them, nor their ordeiners, so I dare be bold
to affirm, they are no worse either in knowledge or conversation, then the
huge rabble of hedge Priests of Popery.

The 32. difference, that such Bishops as were created by the Archbishops of
Canterbury and York, were created by the appointment of the Pope. This is a
shameless lie, for which he can bring no color, either out of the first six
hundredth years, or out of Bedes history. Where he says, If it can be showed
by any history, that at any time by the mere temporal authority ever any
Catholic Bishops were created, he d^re yield and grant that ours are lawful
Bishops. For answer, that Catholic Bishops of old by as mere temporal
authority were created, as any are created among us, I refer him to Bid
lib. 3. cap. 7. and 29. lib. 4. cap. 23. of Agilbert and Wini by authority of
Sonwalch, Wighard nominated by authority of Oswine and Egbert, Ostfor
consecrated at the commandment of king Edilred, beside Wini made Bishop of
London for money by Wulfher king of Mercia, which authority he could not have
abused, except it had been in him lawfully to use.

The 33. difference is, that Princes had not the supreme government in
ecclesiastical causes. For proof whereof, he alleges Gregory Nazianzen, and
Saint Ambrose, both which speak not of chief authority, but of knowledge of
spiritual matters, which is not to be sought ordinarily in Princes, but in the
Clergy. Secondly, he cites Calvin and Illyricus, which do write against
such civil Magistrates, as think by their supremacy, they have absolute
authority to decree what they will in ye Church, whereas we in England never
attribute so much to the Princes authority, but that we always acknowledge it
to be subject to God and his word. The Papists right well understand this
distinction, but it pleases them to use this ambiguitie of supreme authority,
to abuse the ignorance of the simple.

The 34. difference is, that the Bishops and godly men in matters of doubt
counseled with the Pope of Rome, so did the Pope of Rome with them, while
there was any modesty in him, so did Pope Sergius ask counsel of poor Beda.
Math. West. Nay, but Saint Hierome so well learned, consulted with Pope
Damasus, which entered his See with the slaughter of sixty persons. I might
answer, that Damasus also asked counsel of Saint Hierome. So that in him
which is consulted, there is rather opinion of knowledge, then of authority.
But Hierome confesses, that he will not separate him self from the Church of
Rome, etc. Ep. ad. Dam. 2. So long as the Church of Rome was the Church of
Christ, there was great cause he should join with it. But now is it ceased to
be the spouse of Christ, and is become an adulteress, as the prophet says of
Jerusalem, yea it is become Babylon, the mother of all abominations, and
therefore that heavenly voice commands all Christians to depart out of her.
But concerning the Popes authority, I have answered at large to D. Sanders
rock of the Popish Church.

The 35. difference, but I know not how it differs, is the Popes authority
abolished, by whom Christianity was first in this land received. It is well
known, that there was Christianity before Gregory sent Augustine, not of
Popelike authority, but of godly zeal as it seems to win the English
nation to Christ. After follows a large complaint, for abolishing the Popes
authority, a Canon inuectiue against discentions among us, and slight
fortification of the Popes authority, for unities sake, out of Hierome Cont.
Iouinian. and Cyprian de simpl. prael. answered at large in the discovery of
D. Sanders Rock.

The 36. difference, Augustine came first in presence of the king, with a
cross of silver, and an image of Christ painted in a table. The Protestants
began with taking away the cross, and altering the Letanie. But this part is
left unfortified, except it be with a marginall note, that Chrysostom used in
Letanies, crosses of silver, and burning tapers. In deed I read Chrysostom
had certain candlestickes or cressets of silver, made in form of a cross,
to carry lights upon them, in the night season, but not of any tapers burning
by day, and carried before the crucifixe after the Popish manner. Socr li. 6. ca.
8. but hereof ye may see more in mine answer to Martials reply. Articl. 7.

The 37. difference Augustine and his company to the number of forty were
Monks. The first preachers of this no faith were runagate Monks and Apostate
Friars. Their learning, godliness, and just cause of departing out of those
Cloisters of unclean birds, is sufficiently testified to the world.

The 38. difference, the preachers which were traded up by them, were of a
virtuous, lowly, simple, poor, and meek conversation. Then were they very
unlike your Popish prelates. But Luther complains, that his scholars were
more wicked, then under the pope. If some were so, it follows not that all
are so. Again, Beza sold his benefice to two men, if he had no confessed it
him self, Stapleton might never have known of it. Afterward he raised
rebellion for a sign of his vocation, and persuaded Poltrot to murder the
Duke of Guise, or else Stapleton belyeth him. What Mallot and Pieroreli were I
know not, I doubt not, but they were honester then many Popes have been.
Knokes was a Galley slave three years. The more wicked those Papists which
betrayed him into the Galley. The master whereof was glad to be rid of him,
because he never had good success, so long as he kept that holy man in
slavery, whom also in danger of tempest, though an errant Papist, he would
desire to commend him and his Galley to God in his prayers. The eiection of the
Nobles from Zuicherland, is as truly imputed to the Zuinglians by your author
Staphylus, as all the rest of his slanders and monstrous lies are to be
credited, which was done by the Papists in that country, almost two hundredth
years before Zuinglius was borne. Christerne King of Denmark, was expelled
his realm for his tyranny, by all the states, before they received the
Gospel. How dutiful the doing of the Protestants in France has been, let
the kings own acts of Pacification testify, which always discharges them
of rebellion, and acknowledges all that they have done, to have been done in
his service.

The 39. difference, voluntary poverty in Augustine not found in the first
planters of this new trim tram. A matter worthy to be answered with a whim
wham. It were easy to show how many have forsaken great dignities and
livings among the Papists, to become poor preachers of the Gospel.

CAP. X.
Differences concerning the consequences and effects of the first faith
planted among us, Stapleton.
and of the pretensed faith of Protestants.

The 40. difference, they that were converted, Fulke.
builded Churches and Monasteries, Protestants pull down Monasteries,
Churches, Chapels, Hospitals, and Alms houses, In the table of differences, I
have showed, how much those Monasteries then builded, differed from Popish
Abbeyes: and where he charge Protestants with pulling down all Monasteries,
he forgets that Cardinal Wolsee by the Popes authority pulled down the
first in our time that were suppressed, and that the Popish Clergy consented
to the act of suppression, which were ye devil rather then Protestants. For
Hospitals and Alms houses, it is a slander, except some private person of
covetousness has overthrown any. As for Churches and Chapels builded by us,
so many as are necessary, it is apparent to the world. Alms houses and
Hospitalls by us are erected, such as are none in Popery. The Universities
also are augmented, both in buildings and revenues, since the pulling down of
Abbeyes.

The 41. difference, in Monasteries, God God was served day and might with
external prayer at midnight. Although rising at midnight ordinarily be an
inconvenient hour in many respects, and therefore we have no ordinary prayer
at that time, yet have we early in the morning before it be day, in many
places, exercise of prayer and preaching, neither was it at midnight that the
nuns of Berking sung their Lawdes and Hymns. lib. 4. cap. 7. for it was
after Matutines, which could not be but in the morning, although early, and
before day.

The 42. the devotion of those christians brought in voluntary oblations, which
are now ceased, and due tithes grudged as.

The voluntary oblations of the godly, are not now wanting, where need is.

The 43. the Princes and higher power endewed the bishopriks with lands, now
they take them away. It was necessary when they had none before, but were newly
erected. If any be now taken away, and sufficient left, it is not the matter we
regard, but good proceeding of the Gospel: if covetousness of any man
procure from the Church, where it wants, they shall answer it and not we.

The 44. Ethelbert established Christianity by laws. Making special statutes
and decrees for the indemnitie and quiet possession of the Church goods and
of the Clergy. Now no state is more open to the oppression then the Clergy.
If Ethelbert established Christianity, by laws, he did more then Papists
would have Princes to do now. But if the Clergy be now oppressed, it is
not for want of good laws, or good will in the prince and higher powers to
defend it, but by occasion of a number of dissembling Papists, to whom
execution of justice in some places is committed.

The 45. difference is unity them, where is discention now. God be praised, we
consent in all articles necessary to eternal salvation, and if the Scotts by
our example are come to the same unity of faith with us, it is the Lords
work, for whom we give him hearty thanks.

The conclusion of this fantastical Fortress is an exhortation to Papists,
not to dissemble their Papistry, nor to communicate with us, dissuading them by
many examples of such as yielded not to the persecution of the Arrian heretics.

But seeing by the word God, we can not be convinced of heresy, those
examples make nothing aagainst us.

And yet I wish the Papists (if it be not Gods will to open their eyes that
they may see the truth) yet to give over their dissembling, and openly to show
them selves as they are. For whether their religion be good or badde,
dissembling and counterfetting can not be but evil.

God be praised.
A REIOYNDER TO John Martials reply against the answer of Master Calfhill, to
the blasphemous treatise of the Cross.
By W. Fulke D. in divinity.
To the Reader.
OF all the treatises sent over within these twenty years from the Papists,
there is none in which appears less learning and modesty, nor greater
arrogance and impudency, then in this one Book of Martial. Who, as he
terms him self a Bacheler of Law, so more like a wrangling petty fogger in
the Law, then a sober Student in Divinity, does in a manner nothing else, but
cauil, quarrel, and scolde. Which as it were an easy matter to wype away with a
sharp answer, for him that would bestow his time therein: so I think it for
my part neither needful nor profitable. The memory of that godly learned man
Master Doctor Calfhill whom he abuses, is written in the Book of the
righteous, and shall not be afraid of any slaunderers report. Omitting
therefore all frivolous quarrels, I will only endeavor to answer that which
has in it any show of reason or argument to defend the idolatry of the
Papists.

In which matter also, as many things are the same which are already satisfied
in my confutation of Doctor Sanders Book of Images: so I will refer the
reader to those Chapters of that treatise, where he shall find y^ which I hope
shall suffice, for the overthrow of Idolatry. This reply, as the first
treatise, is divided into ten articles, all which in order I will set down,
with such titles, as he gives unto them. But first I must say a few words
concerning his request made to the Bishop of London, and the rest of the
superintendentes of the new Church, as it pleases him to call them, and his
preface to the reader. His request is, that the Bishops should certify him by
some pamphlete in printe, whether 61. articles which he has gathered out of
Master Calfhils book, be the received and approved doctrine of the new
Church of England, able to be justified by the word of God, and the Fathers,
and Councels within six hundredth years after Christ? How wise a man he is, in
making this request, I leave to reasonable men to judge.

And touching the articles themselves, I answer, that some of them be such,
as the Church of England does hold and openly profess, as that Latin
service, Monkish vows, the communion in one kind, etc. are contrary to Gods
word, the other be particular affirmatio^s of Master Calfhil, which in such
sense as he uttered them, may be justified for true, and yet perteyne not to
the whole Church to maintain and defend, as whether Helaena were
superstitious in seeking ye cross at Jerusalem, whether Dionyse and Fabian
were the one suspected, the other infamed, etc. beside that a great number of
them be so rent from the whole sentences whereof they were parts, that they
reteyne not the meaning of the author, but serve to show the impudency of the
cauiller. As that the counsels of Christ in his Gospel, be ordinances of the
Devil, the prayers of Christians a sacrifice of the devil, the council of
Elibeus was a general council, etc. Wherefore I will leave this fond request,
with all the railing that follows there upon, and come to the preface, to
the Reader. First he finds himself greatly grieved, that not only ancient
fathers are by M. Calfhil discredited, but also the holy cross is likened to a
gallows, etc. which moved him to follow Salomons counsel, and to answer a
fool according to his folly. After this he takes upon him to confute M.
Calfhils preface, in which he proves, yt no images should be in churches to
any use of religion, because God forbids them, Exo. 20. and Leuit. 19 in ye
first table of religion. His reply stands only upon those common foolish
distinctions of Idols and Images, of Latria and Doulia, which are handled more
at large and with greater show of learning by D Sander in his book of Images.
Cap. 5. 6. 7. 8. whither I refer ye reader for answer. Likewise, yt discourse
which he makes, to prove yt an image of Christ is not a lying image, is
answered in ye same book, Cap. 7. The authority of Epiphanius, he deferreth
to answer, unto ye 5. article. To Irenaeus he answers, yt he only reports,
yt the Gnostike heretics had ye image of Jesus, but reproves not yt fact. But
he reproved them only because they placed the image of Christ with the images of
Plato, Pithagoras, etc. used them as ye Gentyles do. This were in deed a pretty
exception for a brabling lawyer to take: but a student in divinity should
understand that Irenaeus in yt book and Chapter li. 1. Ca. 24. declares no
fact of ye heretics yt was good, but his declaration is a reproof. And so it is
throughout that whole book containing 35. Chapters.

But he charge M. Calfhill for falsifying Augustine, in sayng, that he
allows M. Varro affirming that religion is most pure without images, first
quarreling at the quotation, which by error of the Printer is de ciuitate Dei,
lib. 4. Cap. 3. where it should be Cap. 31. a meet quarrel for such a lawyer:
secondly showing that the Latin is Castius obseruari sine simulachris
religionem, that religion would have been more purely kept without Idols or
feigned Images: as though there be any Images but feigned, and the word Imago,
even in their own Latin translation of the Bible, is indifferently taken for
Idolum and simulachrum, and that in many places, Deuteronomy. 4. ver. 16. 4. Reg. 11.
ver. 18, Sapient Cap. 13. and 14. Esai. 40. ver. 18. and 44. ver. 13. Ezec. 7.
verse. 20 where imagines and simulachra are both placed together Ezech. 16. Ca.
17. Amos. 5. ver. 23. where he says, Imaginem idolorum, the image of your
Idols: and many other places declare, that this counterfeit distinction was not
observed, no not of the Latin interpreter. As for his other logical quiddity,
wherein he pleases him self not a little, that religio non suscipit magis and
minus, shows that either his law is better then his Logike, or else both are
not worth a straw.

Further he charge M. Calfehill for adding words which are not found in
Augustine, where images are placed in temples, in honorable sublimitie, etc.
These words are found in the Ep. 49 ad Deogratias: Cum hiis locantur sedibus,
honorabili sublimitate, vt a praecantibus atque immolantibus attendantur, when
they are placed in these seats, in honorable sublimitie, that they are looked
upon by them that pray and offer, etc. But Martial looked only to the
quotation, Ps. 36. and113. Yet does not M. Calfhill rehearse the words, but
the judgment of Augustine, from which he does nothing vary, except Martial
will cavil at the words, images in temples, where Augustine says: Idola
hiis sedibus, Idols in these seats, speaking of temples, in which images were
placed. But he speaks (says Martial) in the Psalms, against the images of
the heathen, and not of the Christians. Then read what he writes De moribus
ecclesiae Catholicae, lib. 1. Cap. 34. and de consensu Evangelist. lib. 1. Cap.
10. where you shall find his judgment of such images, as were made of
Christians, to be all one with those of the Gentiles. The judgment of other
doctors, whom he names, you shall find answered in the 14. or 13. Chapter
of Master Sanders book of Images. That the Jews had no images in their
temple, he says, it is a Jewish and Turkish reason, to prove that we should
have none. Much like ye priest that would not believe in Christ, if he knew
that he were a Jew. So wise he is, to compare the superstition of the wicked
Turks, with the observation of the law by the godly Jews. Nay, he is yet
more eloquent, and shows that the Protestants are like the Turks, in
condemning of images, in allowing marriage after deuorce, etc. as though we
might not acknowledge one God, lest we should be like the Turks and Jews, nor
honor virtue, nor dispraise vice, because they do so, nor obey magistrates,
nor eat and drink, because the Turks and Jews do so. O deep learning of a
lawyer divine.

That Images do not teach, he says it is a position more boldly aduouched,
then wisely proved, and then quoteth Gregory, Ep. 9. lib. 9. etc. but he is
deceived, if he think we hold, that images teach not: for we affirm with the
Prophet Abacuc, that they teach lies, Cap. 2. ver. 18. and vanity, Ier. 10.
ver. 8.

As for the story of Amadis the Goldsmith, and the Epistle of Eleutherius
fetched out of the guild hall in London, as M. Calfhill makes no great account
of them, so I pass them over, although Martial would have men think, they be
the strongest arguments the Protestants have, against the superstition of the
cross and the usurped tyranny of the Pope.

Finally, the excuse he makes of his railing, by M. Calfhils example, how
honest it is, I refer to wise men to consider. If M. Calfhill had passed the
bonds of modesty, it were small praise in Martial to follow him, yea, to
pass him. But if M. Calfhill (as indifferent men^ ^ay think) has not greatly
exceeded in terms of ^eate against Martials person, whatsoever he has spoken
against his heresies, the continual scorning, both of M. Calfhils name and his
person, used so often in every leaf of his reply, in the judgment of all
reasonable persons, will cause Martial to be taken for a lawless wrangler,
rather then a sober and Christian lawyer.

The first Article.
This article has no title, and in effect it has no matter. Fulke.
For 13. leaves are spent about a needelesse and impertinent controversy, of
the Authority of ye holy Scriptures, and of the Church of God, whereof the one
is the rule of faith, the other is the thing ruled and directed thereby. Now
whether ought to be ye Judge, the rule, or the thing ruled, is the question.
The rule say we, as the law: the Church, says he, as the Iusticier. And
then we are at as great controversy, what or where the Church is. In effect,
the controversy comes to this issue, whether he be a Iusticier, or an
iniusticier, which pronounces sentence contrary to the law. I would think
that common reason might decide these questions. That he which gives sentence
against the law, may have the name, and occupy the place of a Iusticier, but a
true Iusticier he cannot be in deed. Right so, the Popish Church, which
condemns the truth for heresy, has usurped as the Judge, but in deed is a
cruel tyrant. But the controversy is not of the word, but of the meaning,
and where shall that be found but in the mouth of the Judge (says he?) if
this were true, I would never be a Bachiler of law, if I were as Martial,
nor yet a doctor thereof, except it were to deceive poor clyantes for their
money: if there were not a sense or meaning of the law, which other men might
understand as well as he that occupyeth the place of the Judge, that I might
appeal when I saw he gave wrong sentence. But let us briefly run over his
Achillean arguments.

The Eunomians, Arrians, Eutychians, and Maximus the heretic, rejected the
testimonies of the fathers, and the authority of the Church, and appealed to
Scriptures. So does many ^ wrangling lawyer, to continue his fee from his
clyant, appeal when he has no cause, but received right sentence according to
the law, ergo no appeal is to be admitted. This is Martials law, or logyke,
I know not whether. But what was this Maximus you name so often, Master
Martial, that S. Augustine writ against Could you read your note book no
better. Against Maximinus the Arrian he writes that neither of them both was
to be holden by the authority of Councels, the Nicen, or the Ariminense, but
by the authorities of the Scripture, lib. 3. Cap. 4.

But Tertullian would have heretics convinced by the authority of the Church,
and not of the Scriptures. Yea verily, but such heretics as denied certain
scriptures, and peruerteth the rest by their false interpretations. Such are
the Protestants, says Martial: for Luther denies the Epistle to the
Hebrews, the Apocalipse, the Epistle of S. James, and S. Jude. But Luther is
not all Protestants, neither did Luther always or altogether deny them.
Neither do the Protestants affirm any thing in matters of controversy, in
their interpretations, but the same is affirmed by writers of the most ancient
and pure Church. Martial obiecteth, that Christ sent not his disciples
always to the Scriptures: but sometimes to the fig tree, to the flowers of
the field, to the fowls of the air etc. Paul alleges the heathen Poet,
also customs and tradition. And we also use similitudes of Gods creatures, and
allege custom and condition, but so that the scripture be the only rule of
truth, whereto whatsoever in the world agrees, is true: whatsoever
disagreeth from it, is false. The traditions of the Apostles, 2. Th. 2. Luke
10. 1. Io. 4. Mat. 18.
which by their writings we know to be theirs, we reverently receive, not as
men's traditions, but as the doctrine of God, for we hear them even as God.
Also we hear the voice of the Church admonishing us, if we give offense.

Finally, ye Patriarks, Prophets, Apostles, Eua^gelists, Pastors, Ex^. 10.
Joel. 1. Ephesians. 4.
and doctors, we all reverence and hear, as the messengers of God, but so that
they approve unto us their sayings out of the word of God, and doctrine of
Christ. Likewise, we admit the writings of the fathers, so far as they agree
with the writings of God, and further to be credited they them selves required
not. The sayings of the doctors, that Martial cites, for the credit of old
writers, you shall find satisfied in mine answer to Hoskins, almost in order
as they be here set down: for one Papist boroweth of another, and few of them
have any thing of their own reading. The saying of Clemens is answered lib.
1. Cap. 8. Eusebius concerning P^^ and Gregory, and Hieronime, Cap. 7. The
say^^^ of Irenaeus and Athanasius, that we ought to hau^ ^course to the
Apostolic Churches, which retain the doctrine of the Apostles, against new
heresies, as also of Tertullian, to the like effect, we acknowledge to be true,
but seeing the Church of Rome reteineth not the Apostolic doctrine, at this
day, we deny it to be an Apostolic Church. Therefore as many as build upon
it, or upon any ancient writers words, which has not the holy scriptures for
his warrant, as M. Call. said, buyldeth upon an evil ground. For if an Angel
from heaven teach otherwise then the Apostles have preached unto us, be he
accursed. Here the quarreling lawyer finds fault with his translation,
because Euangelizauimus may be referred, as well to the Disciples, as to ye
Apostles, so that ye Disciples preachings are to be credited as well as ye
Apostles, No doubt, if they preach the doctrine of the Apostles, of which the
controversy is, and not of the persons that preach it. But these quarrels, sir
Bacheler, are more meet for the bomme courts, where perhaps you are a prating
proctor, then for the schools of divinity. We are gone out, you say, and
that we confess in our apology. Yea, we are gone out of Babylon, but not out
of the church of God, but abide in the doctrine of Christ. And you are gone out
of the Church of God, which remain in the synke of Rome, that is departed from
that which was heard from the beginning, and was sacrosanctum apud Apostolorum
Ecclesias, most holy in the Apostles Churches. Tert. li. 4. cont. Mart. Math.
15.
You cannot abide to be charged with the saying of Christ. They worship me in
vain, that teach the doctrine and precepts of men. First you say, the
Apostles were men, whose traditions the Church must receive: yea sir, but they
delivered no doctrine of their own. Secondly, Christ speaks of the Scribes
and Pharisees, and their fond traditions, and not of the Church and her
Catholic traditions and customs. And they be Scribes and Pharisees, which
even in the Church, teach a false worshipping of God, according to the
doctrines and traditions of men, disanulling the commandments of God, as the
Popish teachers in their doctrine of Images, communion in one kind, private
Mass, etc.

That Augustine framing a perfect preacher, wills him to confer the places
of Scripture together: you say, it is a profounde conclusion, to infer, that
he sends him not to doctors distinctions, censure of the Church, Canons of
the Popes, nor traditions of the fathers: but only to quiet and content him
self with the word of God. And these last words you say, are not found in
Augustine, de doct. Chr. Cap. 9. and sequentibus, as though Master Calfhil
recited the words, and not the sense, for which he refers you, not only to
that Chapter, but to the rest following, in all which there is no mention of
doctors distinctions, Popes Canons, etc. But this is an argument ab authoritate
negative. Make as much and as little as you will of Augustines authority,
Master Calfhill has rightly inferred upon Augustines judgment, that if
conference of Scriptures will make a perfect preacher, which you grant, he
needs neither doctors distinctions, nor Church censures, etc. but may quiet
and content him self with the only word of God.

But it would make an horse to break his halter, to see how Martial proves
out of Augustine, that God teaches us by men and not by Angels, and that
knowledge of the tongues and instructions of men, is profitable for a preacher:
yea, the consent of most of the Catholic Churches, and the interpretations of
learned men: as though all those were not to be referred to the dew conference
of scriptures, where only rests the substance of doctrine, and the
authority of faith, and not in doctors distinctions, Church censures, Popes
Canons etc. which have no ground in the Scriptures, or else be contrary to
them. Where Master Calfhill shows that as before the new testament was
written, all things were examined according to the words and Sermons of the
Apostles, so after the new testament was written, all things ought to be
examined according to their writings, because there is none other testimony of
credit extant of their sermons and writings. Martial replyeth out of Saint
Augustine, that we have many things by tradition, which are not written, which
being universally observed, it were madness to break, Ep. 118. But Augustine
speaks not of doctrine, but of ceremonies or observations. Out of Hierom ad
Pam. he obiecteth that our Creed is not written in the Scriptures, which is
utterly false, although the form of the symbol be not set down, as we
rehearse it.

Thirdly, out of Epiphanius contra Apostolic. li. 2. Here Is. 61. that we must
use tradition, because all things cannot be taken out of the holy Scriptures.
Therefore the holy Apostles delivered certain things in writing, and certain
things in tradition, etc. But they delivered nothing in tradition contrary to
their writings, neither omitted they to write any thing that was necessary
for our salvation. The matter whereof Epiphanius speaks, is that it is a
tradition of the Apostles, that it is sin to marry after virginity decreed,
and yet he holds, that it is better to marrye after virginity decreed, then
to burn, contrary to the doctrine of the Papists. But Martial frankely
grants, that no doctor is to be credited against the Scripture and the
content of the whole Church. Yet where Master Calfhill said, that no man in
any age was so perfect, that a certain truth was to be builded on him,
bringing examples of Aaron and Peter, the one the high Priest of the Jews, the
other affirmed by the Papists to be the same of the Christians.

He quarreleth at his induction, because he says not: and sic de singulis,
where as his argument follows not of the form of induction, but of the
place a maiore ad minus.

After this, (as he does nothing but cavil) he charge Master Calfhill for
corrupting Saint Augustine saying: Truth me not, nor credit my writings, etc.
Proem. lib. 3. de Trinit. For Saint Augustine says not: trust me not. But he
confesses that he says: Do not addict thy self to my writings, as to the
Canonical Scriptures. See what a corruption here is, when Master Calfhill
rendereth not the words, but the meaning of Augustine.

Again, saint Basil (he says) is vilely abused, because Master Calfhill
says, Saint Basil sets forth by a proper similitude, with what judgment
the fathers of the Church should be read. Conc. ad Adol. whereas Basil speaks
of profane writers. As though Basils similitude may not serve to show how
both should be read, because he speaks but of one sort.

Likewise he cries out that Saint Hierome is not truly alleged, because the
Printer in the English translation of Hieroms words has omitted this word not,
which he has set down in the Latin. The 4. pretty persons he puts upon
Master Calfhill, as foolish and childishe I omit, only the slaunderers
persons I will touch: In saying, that the fathers declyned all from the
simplicity of the Gospel in ceremonies. He charge M. Calfhill to be a
slaunderer. Because God has not suffered all the fathers to declyne, lest hell
gates should have prevailed against his Church. Although M. Calfhill speak of
those fathers only, whose writings are extant, yet the gates of hell in idle
ceremonies, did but assault, they did not prevail against the Church. And
these fathers departed not from the Gospel, but declined from the simplicity
thereof. But you Papists have departed from the Gospel and doctrine of
salvation, in setting up a new sacrifice, in seeking justification by works,
in overthrowing the true and spiritual worship of God. As for the two Judges,
the word and the spirit, he denies them, finding many defectes in the
word: As that it is senseless, dombe, deaf, not able to prove it self to
be the word of God, having no more power to be Judge and decide controversies,
then the book of statutes to put on my lord chief Justices robes, and to
come to the Kings bench, and give sentence. I think there is no Christian man,
but abhors to read these blasphemies. But let us see, whether the book of
statutes (although it put on no robes) is not judge, even over my lord chief
Justice him self, who is a minister serving to pronounce the law, not a King
to alter the law: for he him self must be obedient to the law. Now in all
controversies that be de iure, either the law is plain to be understood, or
it is obscure: If it be plane, as that a felone must be hanged, or the son
must inherit his father, etc. the Judge pronouncing the law with authority,
and execution following his sentence, brydleth the obstinate person that will
not obey the law, which he knows as well as the Judge. If the law be hard
to be understood, the Judge must seek the interpretation thereof, according
to the mind of the lawmakers, and not according to the his own fantasy. So
that in all cases, the Judge has no authority over the law, but under the
law: so that if the give wrong sentence, both he and his sentence are to be
judged by law. Or else why do you Martial in your civil law courts, so
often cry out, sit liber iudex, let the book be Judge? If you will not allow
the book of Gods law to be Judge, even over them which have authority as
Justices have in the common law, to pronounce it, and to declare it.

The Spirit he refuses to be Judge, because it is invisible, secreate,
unknown, unable to be gone to, but in the Church: therefore the Church is the
Judge, and neither the word nor the Spirit. But the Spirit by his own
substance incomprehensible, is by his effects in the holy Scriptures visible,
revealed, known, and able to be gone unto, therefore a sufficient Judge,
taking witness of the Scriptures, and bearing witness unto them. For that
majesty of truth, that power of working, that uniform consent which is in
all the Scriptures inspired of God, makes a wonderful difference of them from
all writings of men of all sorts.

But let us see Martials arguments against the Spirit of God, to be judge of
the interpretation of the Scriptures. Paul and Barnabas in the controversy of
circumcision, went not to the word and Spirit, but to the Apostles and Elders
at Jerusalem. O blocke-head and shameless ass. Paul and Barnabas doubted not
of the question, but sought the generally quiet of the whole Church by consent
of Council. But whether went the Apostles and Elders for decision of the
question? but to the word and Spirit. Read Act. 15.

Again, he cites Deuteronom. 17. that the people in controversies should
resort to the priests for judgment: but where should they fetch their
judgment, but of the law of God? as it is in the same place.

Again, Christ has appointed Apostles, Evangelists, etc. therefore it is not
a general precept, for all men to try, all men to judge what doctrine they
receive, because all be not Apostles, Evangelists, etc. Then in vain said
Christ to all men, James 5. 1. John 4. Acts 17.
search the scriptures, in vain the Apostles try the spirits, neither did
the Boerheans well, that daily sought the Scriptures, to see, if those things
were so as the Apostles taught.

Martial is to be pitied if he know no difference between authority of
public teaching, and the trial and examination of doctrine, whereof this
pertains to all men, the other to such only as are called thereto. But
Martial proceeds to show, that as GOD appointed one high Priest to the
Jews, to avoid schisms, so he appointed Peter among the Christians: and for
this purpose he cites diverse sentences of the ancient Fathers, which all in
order almost, the reader shall find cited and satisfied in mine answer to
Doctor Sanders book of the rock of the Church Cap. 5. except one place of
Tertullian De pudicitia, which I marvel this Popish Lawyer would allege,
being so contrary to his purpose, but that the poor man understood it not.
Qualis es etc. What art thou overthrowing and changing the intention of our
Lord, giving this personally to Peter: Upon thee (said he) I will build my
Church. If it were personally said to Peter, (Sir Bacheler) counsel with
Baldus and Bertholdus, whether it go by succession to the Pope or no? Which
Tertullian denies to pertain to every Elder of the Church, because it was
spoken personally to Peter.

And now at the length begins he to come to the argument of his book, the
sign of the cross. Which he said was the fourth signification of the word
(Cross) in Scripture, and calls it the material and mystical sign of the
cross, which Master Calfhill denies to be once mentioned in Scripture, in
that sense that Martial takes it. Martial repeateth that which he had said
before, that Esaye cap. 49. says: I will set out mine sign on high to the
people, which Hierome upon that place expounds to be the standard of the
cross, that it may be fulfilled which is written, the earth is full of his
praise. Et iterum etc. And again. In all the earth his name is wonderful.
Which words following immediately, Martial craftily suppresseth, and falls
into a brabbling matter, that preaching which Master Calfhill said was this
standard, is not the only standard or sign lifted up by GOD for conversion of
the Gentiles, but miracles and good examples of life, etc. Whereas the question
is, whether the Popish sign of the cross, be the sign spoken by Esaias and
Hierome. And the exposition added by Hierome, shows plainly, that he means
not a red or blue cross banner, but the preaching of Christ crucified,
whereby the earth is filled with the praise of GOD, and his name is wonderful
in all the earth. But Martial in the end concludes, that it has pleased the
ancient Fathers to appoint and ordeine the sign of the cross, to he one
mean among many, by which the praise of GOD is set forth. Where he should
have proved, that the sign of the cross (as he takes it) is mentioned in the
scriptures. Other cauils and slanders not more false then foolish, I will
clearly omit, as I purposed in the beginning, and follow only such matter as
is proper to the question in controversy, namely the sign of the cross.

The second text, to prove that the sign of the cross is mentioned in the
scripture, he cites out of Iere. 4. Lift up a sign in Sion which; Hierome
likewise expounds, Lift up the standard of the cross in an high tower, that
is, in the height of the Church. Concerning this interpretation of Hierome, how
apt it is for the place, I will spend no time with Master Martial: only this
is sufficient for the purpose, that Saint Hierome means not the cross on the
top of the steeple, but the passion of Christ: whereto he exhorts the
people to run for aid as to a standard of comfort, against the enemy that
was coming upon them.

The third text is Matthew. 24. The sign of the son of man shall appear in
the clouds: which diverse of the old writers expound to be the sign of the
cross. Some to be Christ him self, as Chrysostom in Matt. 24. Hom. 49. Some
to be the cross it self on which he dyed, as Chrysostom in Matt. Hom. 77. and
Theophilact. in 24. Matthew. Some other the passion or sign of the cross, as
Hierome upon that place: so that the Doctors being in diverse opinions, and
speaking doutfully, there is no certainty of ye matter. That the sign of the
son of man is Christ him self, as Chrysostom rehearses some to have
thought in his time, is the most probable opinion, because both Mark cap. 13.
and Luke 21. do seem so to expound that sign of the son of man in Matthewe.
But Martial is such a perilous Logician, that he will admit nothing but
necessary consequences, which we must be bold to urge and require of him, for
the mention of the sign of the cross in such variety of Doctors opinions,
and a matter so obscure.

The fourth text is Ezechiel 9. the sign Thau set on the foreheads of them
that should be preserved from destruction. But what argument or authority has
he to prove, that this mark was the sign of the cross? None at all, only he
quarelleth after his manner, against M. Calfhils reasons, which show it was
not the sign of the cross, but an inward spiritual mark. And least he
should flee to the figure of the Samaritane letter Thau, which Hierome says in
his time, was somwat like a cross. Hierome himself shows that the
Septuagintes, Aquila, and Symmachus translate Thaua mark, as the word
signifies: only Theodotion, left the Hebrew word untranslated, which because
it is the name of the last Hebrew letter, diverse thought to signify Thorah,
the law, whereof they were obseruers that were so marked. Cyprian also takes
it for a mark, without naming the letter Thau. Contra demetrianum. Wherefore
seeing here is nothing, whereby the fashion of the mark may be gathered,
fondly does Martial gather, that it was the sign of the cross.

The fifth text, is the mark commanded to be set upon all Gods servants in the
Apoc. 7. which Martial out of Thomas Aquinas concludes to be the sign of of
the cross, but that is disproued by M. Calfhils three reasons, which Martial
like an impudent wrangler, will understand only of the place of Ezechiel. 1.
The spirit of life and faith is not given with the sign of the cross. 2.
Which is not sufficient to discern the good from the badde. 3. But is received
of all sorts, therefore the seal spoken of in those places is not the sign
of the cross.

Martials cross not being found in the holy Scriptures, has yet often
remembrance among the ancient Fathers, whom M. Calfhill does justly reprove
in this behalf, so highly to extol that sign, which has no ground in the
word of God, either in contention against the Gentiles that disdained it, or in
aemulation of the heretics that first used it. For if all records of
ecclesiastical antiquity be sought, that are authentical, and not manifestly
counterfeted, there shall no mention be found of Martials cross in the fourth
signification, before the superstition of the Valentinian heretics, which
called the cross, Horon, confirmatiuam crucem, which Iraeneus lib. 1. ca. 1.
does speak of. So does Epiphanius Contra Valent. Haer. 31. But against this
reproof of the old writers, Martial has a plausible common place to sport
him self, in which notwithstanding every wise man can see, how fondly he
behaueth him self, to be patron to them, which either need not his defense,
where they write well, or can not be justified by him where they write amiss.
I will therefore pass over all such fruitless controversies, and keep me
only to the argument. That Chrysostom was immoderate sometimes in extolling
the sign of the cross, and such like matters, either Martial must confess,
or else excuse it by a rethorical hyperbole: as where he says of Saint Paul's
chain: Si quis me coelo condonet omni, vel ea qua Pauli manus vinciebatur
catena illam ego honor praeponerem: If any man could reward me with all heaven,
or else with yt chain wherewith Paul's hands were bound, I would prefer that
chain in honor. Such are many excessive speeches in Chrysostom, both of the
sign of the cross, of the Lords Supper, of Baptism, and other things. In
Tertullians time the sign of the cross was used among Christians, to show
them selves to be Christians, against the Gentiles, if it were not a piece of
Montanus superstition.

But whereas Martial cites Constantinus, for the commendation of his cross,
he shows him self an egregious ignorant person, both in antiquity and in
the history. For the sign which Constantine commended, to be a healthful
sign and true token of virtue, by which he delivered the city from tyrants,
was not the sign of the cross, but the character of the name of Christ,
which was showed to him from heaven, with this inscription, (...), in this GOD,
not in this sign, thou shall overcome.

And least Martial should cavil at the sign of the cross, named by
Eusebius, De Vit. Constable. lib. 1. you shall understand, that he describes the
standard of Constantine to have been a long spear, in the top whereof a bar
went overthwart like a cross to hang the banner upon, which even the Heathen
Emperors used. But in the banner was set forth in gold and precious stones
that sign which Constantine did see, which was the Greek letter P, with the
letter X, in the midst thereof, after this manner, which is to be seen in
many hundrethes of ancient coins, both of Constantine, and other Christian
Emperors which is the Caracter of the name of Christ. Agreeing with the words
of Eusebius (...). By which you may see how ridiculously Martial and the
Papists look only to the cross staff upon which the banner hanged, and
see not the very wholesome sign in deed, which was described in the banner,
namely in the name of Christ, by whom Constantine had so glorious victories.

But Martial omitting to speak of the cross used among the Heathen Priests
of Serapis, will discuss Master Calfhils two rules. The one: that whatsoever
is brought in under the cloak of good intent, is not straightway allowable.

To this he says, that some things are brought in by private men, without
authority of the Pope, and for private men he counts the bishops of
Spain, and France, in their prouincial councels: these bind not generally,
except the Pope allow them: some things are received by tradition and custom
generally received vnaltred, such is the cross: some are brought in by
tradition and custom, but not generally received, as that infantes should
receive the communion, etc: such the cross is not. But seeing he has not
concluded the contradiction of Master Calfhils sixte rule, it stands still
immovable. That some things are brought in of a good intent, which are not
allowable.

The second rule is: what so ever has been upon good occasion received once,
must not necessarily be retained still, but by advice of Stephanus bishop of
Rome, if it be turned to superstition, be altered by them that come after.
These afterco^mers, says Martial, are none other but the bishops of Rome his
successors, who as they made the law, so they must repeal it. But Stephanus
says. Si nonnulli ex praedecessoribus and maioribus nostris fecerunt aliqua,
Naming not only his praedecessours, but also his Elders, wherefore he means
yt not only his successors, but also his after comers in every particular
Church, as well as his successors in the Church of Rome, ought to abolish with
good authority such abused customs. But Martial will not acknowledge that
crossing has bred such inconveniences, yt the inward faith has been untaught,
and that the virtue has been given to yt sign, which only proceeds from him
which is signified. For crossing was not the cause, but the negligence of the
Clergy. As though there may not be many causes of one thing. And if crossing
were but an occasion of such inconveniences, there were good cause to take it
away. Also he denies that they attribute the virtue of the sign, without
relation to the merits of Christ's passion: whereas M. Calfhil speaks not of
such shifts as crafty Lawiers can make for their excuses, but of the opinion
of the ignorant people, who have thought without any further relation, that the
sign of the cross was an holy, blessed, and wholesome thing. And what do they
that use the example of Julian, who crossing himself of custom, and not with
any relation to Christ whom he despised, prove what virtue the sign of the
cross has, when the devils immediately avoided, do they not manifestly
ascribe virtue, to the sign without relation of the maker? Yea, says Martial,
but Christ gave such virtue to that sign by his death and passion. Show that
out of the Scriptures, and the controversy is at an end.

But Martial the Lawier, for the virtue of the cross cites Martial the
Apostle, for so he will be called, and was as his cousin Martial the Lawier
affirms, one of of the 72. Disciples of Christ. But seeing he and his
epistles have slept seven or eight hundredth years in a corner, yt they were
never heard of by Eusebius, Hierome, Gennadius nor any other of those times, he
comes to late now to challenge the name of an Apostle or Disciple of
Christ, whose name or writings in so many hundredth years no man has
registered. But this argument is of authority negative, quod Martial. But what
argument have you so good to prove him authentical, as this is probable to
prove him counterfeit? Nay if we believe Martial, Master Calfhil has falsified
the Scripture, in saying, that no man dare come near, nor resist Leuiathan,
and Behemoth the devils, for beside the quotation is false cap. 40. for 41. The
Popish translation has not so, and Christ his Apostles and faithful do
resist the Devil. Yea sir but not with sword nor spear, whereof he speaks,
nor with your cross, but with spiritual armor. As for the error of the
quotation and your translation, every child may see how fond a quarrel it is.

The excuse that Master Calfhill makes for Damascen, seeing Martial does not
allow, let him make a better himself: for some of Damascens errors were such
as Martial himself and the Papists will not allow.

But Lactantius makes the blood of the pascal Lamb sprinkled on the door
post, a figure of the cross on men's foreheads. That is false in your sense
Master Martial, for he speaks allegorically of the spiritual impression of
of the blood of Christ by faith, and that his words declare, where he says:
that Christ is salvation To all which have written, Lib. 4. cap. 26. De ver^
sap.
the sign of blood, that is the sign of the cross, upon which he shed his
blood on their foreheades. But Christ is not salvation to all that have your
sign of the cross on their bodily foreheades. But whereas Lactantius in the
next Chapter says, that devils are chased away both by the name of Christ, and
by the sign of his passion: if it pleased God in those times, by such outward
signs to confound his adversaries, what is that to defend the superstitious
and erroneous abuse of those signs at this time?

And here Martial falls into another brabble, for mistaking his argument,
which is not worth a straw: the end is, the cross is like a sacrament,
although that it be not as good as a sacrament. But wherein it is like? it has
neither institution nor element, nor promise, nor effect, of a sacrament, then
it is as like as an apple is like an oyster. You say it is instituted by
tradition. Prove yt tradition to have come from Christ, and his Apostles. I
have showed, it came from heretics. Again God said to Costantine In hoc signo
vince. I have showed, that God spoke neither of a cross, nor of a sign. And
yet if he had, it was but a particular vision authorizing no general
observation. You say it may be a sacrament as well as bread and wine which
has no promise: you lie like an arrogant hypocrite. For bread and wine in the
use of the Lords Supper, has as good promise, as water in baptism.
Concerning the effect of the sacraments, and how they be causes of grace, not
as principal efficients, but as instrumental means, by which God uses to
work in the faithful, it were to begin a new matter, to stand in argument
with you, which do nothing but wrangle, scoff, and rail in this argument, as
you do in all the rest.

Wherefore to return to the cross, Master Calfhil says, that if there were
such necessity in the cross to fight against Satan, the Apostles dealt not
wisely to omit such a necessary weapon.

Martial answers, that neither he nor the Fathers defend it as necessary.
Well then, we have gained thus much, that the cross is a needelesse weapon
against the devil. But if it had been necessary, he says, it had been none
oversight in the Apostles, which have in some epistles omitted more needful
matters.

As though they were bound to speak of all matters in every Epistle. But of
the use of the cross, they never speak, no not where they instruct a
Christian man to fight against the Devil, against whom it is needful to use
all weapons that be of any force. The quarrel of altering Saint Peter's words
I omit, as childish. Master Calfhill rehearses his meaning, and not his
words.

The other argument that follows of heretics resembling Antichrist in
denying, you shall find answered in my confutation of D. Sanders Rock Cap.
18. in the eleventh mark of an Antichristian. But Martial is not content that
his error in citing the 39. question for the 38. of Athanasius Ad Antiochum
should be noted. In deed the error of number is a small matter, but when a man
will follow wilfully a corruption for a truth, it cannot be excused. That
devils fly when they see the cross, is question 15. in the best reformed
printes, whatsoever Martial does follow. But to the purpose, except Martial
can declare unto us, with what eyes the diuelles behold the cross, he shall
have much a do to persuade us, that this author speaks of his sign of the
cross in this place. Otherwise I doubt not but when devils consider the
conquest of of Christ upon the cross they tremble and flee away, and are
miserably tormented, as Athanasius says: but not when so ever they see the
cross borne in procession, or set up in the market place, or pointed in the
air, either by a superstitious Papist, or by a devilish coniurer. Saint
Antonies council, as great and as good as you make him, may well be suspected,
seeing it has no ground in the holy scriptures. That Chrysostom aloweth
signing with ye cross in the body, is confessed: but that he accounts it an
idle ceremony, where faith in the crucified is not, Martial can not deny. Nor
yet yt faith in the death of Christ is sufficient without the sign of the
cross in the body: yet will he not grant it to be superfluous, but resembles
it to the incarnation and passion of Christ, without which we might be saved
by the absolute power of God, to the use of ministers, good works, etc.
Whereas we ought to say yt all these things are necessary, because God has so
ordained them, but the crossing of the body is no ordinance of God, but of men.

That Origin in cap. 6. Ad Romans li. 6. speaks not of Martials cross, but of
the passion of Christ, the whole co^text of his words proves, as M. Calfhil
shows. But Martial replyeth that he says: So great is the virtue of the
cross of Christ, that if it be set before our eyes, and faithfully retained in
our mind, so that we look still upon the death of Christ, with the eyes of
our mind, no concupiscence, etc. can overcome us. These words (says he) prove
two crosses, one before the eyes, the other before the mind, but if he would
shore up his eyes he might see, that Origin speaks not of the eyes of the
body, but of the eyes of the mind. As for the tantologie that he would avoid,
it may please his wisdom to understand, that the explaning of a Metaphore, is
not tantologie, or vain repetition.

That Cassiodorus, and Lactantius speak of the sign of the cross it is
granted, but because they speak of it beside the Book of God, Master Calfhill
does well to disprooue their reasons, as where Cassiodore compares that sign
of the cross upon the faithful, to the Princes stamp on the coin, the
comparison is naught, for the sign of the cross which is upon hypocrites,
shows them not to be Christ's servant. Neither did Christ give any such
outward sign, by which they should be known, that would profess to be his
servants, but baptism. How good Christians the Friars that are the greatest
crossers be, I will not stand to discuss, their hypocrisy is too well known
in the world.

Again where Lactantius joins the sign of the cross with the name of
Christ, to be of force to drive away devils, he does as if a man should join a
straw with a spear to run at tilt withal. For the name of Christ is
sufficient, and needs none assistance of the sign of the cross to cast out
devils, where Christ has given that power and faith. Yet Martial obiecteth,
that the name of Christ was not sufficient to cast out some kind of devils, as
in example of the man's son. Matt, 17. But it was not for want of the sign of
the cross, but for want of faith, which must be obtained at the hands of God
by prayer and fasting. He would have scripture, whereby the sign of the cross
is forbidden to be used, as though every indifferent thing that may be abused,
is expressed by name. To make a sign or figure of the cross, is an
indifferent thing, to make it for a defense against devils, is a superstitious
thing, and forbidden by all such textes of Scripture forbid superstition, and
confidence reposed in any thing, saving in God only, by such means as he has
appointed.

That young nouices in the faith were crossed, before they were baptized in
Augustines time, it need to be no question: and yet it follows not: that
those words of Augustine, which Martial cites, De Symb. ad Catech. lib. 2.
cap. 1. were spoken of the signing, but of that which was signified by the
sign, as Master Calfhil answers. The rest of this article is spent in
frivolous quarrels, in which is no argument to uphold the superstitious use of
the cross, but that devils are afraid of it, as in the story of Julian, and a
Jew, in which God declared, what force it had Ex opere operato, of the work
wrought even without faith, but this he makes extraordinary. A simple force
that the Devil should seem to fly from them, in whose hearts he dwelled
still. But Martial would know, how Master Calfhill is assured that the Devil
did counterfeit fear, and was not afraid in deed. Verily I think there need
to be no better reason given, then that in outward appearance he pretended to
fly from their bodily presence, from whose hearts he departed not at all, or
rather for their wicked coniuring entired with greater force. How little the
devil is afraid of the sign of the cross, where faith is not, the story of
the seven sons of Sceua declares Act. 19. where the Devil being coniured by
the name of Jesus, whom Paul preached, fell upon the coniurers and tormented
them: unless Martial think it was because they lacked the sign of the
cross, which would have made them fly away when the name of Jesus and Paul
prevailed not against the^. To conclude it cannot be denied, but diverse of ye
ancient fathers affirm more of ye sign of ye cross, then they can justify by
the holy Scripture, and yet they are abused oftentimes by Martial and such as
he is, as though they spoke of the sign, when they had respect only to the
death and passion of Christ, as before is showed, and more remains afterward
to be showed.

The second Article.
That the cross of Christ was prefigured in the law of nature, Martial.
foreshewen by the figures of Moses law, denounced by the prophets, and
showed from heaven in the time of grace.

Master Calfhil said, Fulke.
that the sign of the cross was neither prefigured in the law of nature, nor
foreshewed by the figures of Moses law, nor denounced by the prophets, nor
showed from heaven in the time of grace, but the passion of Christ and manner
of his death. Against whom comes forth Martial and offers to prove, that
the cross whereon Christ died, was prefigured, etc. which is no contradiction
of M. Calfhils assertion. Although the fathers rather dally in trifling
allegories, then soundly to prove that the cross was prefigured in those
places which he alleges: as August. Contra Faust. lib. 12. cap. 34. that the
two sticks which the widow of Sarepta gathered, did prefigure the cross
whereon Christ died, not only by the name of wood, but by the number of the
sticks, Et de 5. here is. ad quod vult de. cap. 2. that Moses lifting up his
hands to heaven, did prefigure the cross whereby Christ should redeem the
world: So says Tertullian and Augustine in diverse places. All which prove not
that the image or sign of the cross, but that ye cross it self, whereon
Christ died, was prefigured, whereof we make no question, but it might be,
seeing it was in Gods determination that Christ should die on the cross:
although we would wish sounder proofs then these, for such prefiguration. Here
would Martial excuse his ridiculous argument, because it is not in mode and
figure, but in deed it fails both in form and matter, for his minor is
false, yt the sign of ye cross was prefigured by ye hands of Moses. As though
there were no difference between the cross on which Christ suffered, and a
superstitious sign of the cross yt a Papist makes: Concerning the sign Thau
in Ezechiel cap. 9. I have spoken sufficiently in the first article, that it
was not the figure of any letter like a cross, but a mark unnamed, or
described as Apo. 7. And whereas Hierome says, that the Samaritanes had a
letter somewhat like a cross, it is not to be throught yt the Samaritanes had
the true form of letters, and the Jews lost it. Chrysostom draws it to the
Greek letter, and trifleth of the number which the letter Tau signifies:
Tertullia^ is indifferent between the Latin latter and ye Greek, and sets
this T for the mark of his forehead, differing somewhat from our Popish, In
Mark. H 14. adver. Mar. li. 30.
for which cause Martial calls the character of the Latin letter, Tau
saying Our Tau is a sign of the cross. But of this mark more. Art. 1. and in
my answer to D. Sanders book of Images Cap. 13. or 12. Concerning the figure
of ye cross, that was in the old time in the idol Serapis, whereunto he
thinks scorn to be sent for the antiquity of that sign, he answers out of
Socrates, that it was there set by the providence of God, as the inscription of
the altar in Athens, and among the Hyeroglyphical letters of the Egyptian
priests, signified life to come. But this proves no more ye superstitious use
thereof, then ye alter in Athens proves, that we should set up such altars, and
dedicate them to the unknown God. Next follows the brawle about the story of
Constantines cross, which should be the figure of the cross showed from
heaven in the time of grace, wherein Martial notes no less then six
contradictions and four lies in, in M. Calfhil, but of them let the reader
judge.

The sign showed, I have proved before, not to have been Martials cross, but
the Character of the name of Christ, and so does Constantinus himself call it,
speaking to Christ, (...), etc. Holding forth thy Character I have overcome,
etc. meaning the standerd in which that Character was imbrodered. But of this I
have spoken sufficient Art. 1. and against D. Sanders book of images cap. 13.
Ar. or after the error of his print. After much wrangling and brabbling about
M. Calfhils principles, wherein it were easy to displaye Martials folly, but
that I have professed to omit such by matters, he comes to the sign of the
cross showed to Julian, and marked in his soldiers apparel: which if it were
true, as Sozomenus reports it, yet proves it not yt the sign of the cross
was showed from heaven that it should be used of Christians: and the less,
because it was showed to none but Jews, and forsakers of Christian religion,
as Master Calfhill notes: which might probably be thought to be the mark of
persecuters, rather then of Christians. But seeing the Sign of the cross has
very often times appeared not only in clouds, but also on men's apparel,
with diverse other sightes, as Conradus Lycosthenes in his book De Prodigijs
observes, whether the cause of those apparitions be natural, or
supernatural, or sometime perhaps artificial, the appearing of that sign
from heaven does no more argue an allowance of the Popish ceremony of
crossing in religion, then the appearing of other shapes and sightes in heaven,
do teach us to frame ceremonies of armor, of horsemen, of beasts, of trees,
of pillars, of circles, and such like, because the figures of them have been
showed from heaven. So that hitherto the sign of the cross has not been
proved to have been prefigured in the law of nature, nor of Moses, neither
denounced by the prophets, nor used by the Apostles, nor showed from heaven to
be a pattern of ye allowance of superstitious crossing among ye Papists.

The third Article.
That every Church, Chapel, and Oratorie erected to the honor and service of
God, Martial.
should have the sign of the cross.

First it is to be remembered, Fulke.
that for this position he has no show of the authority of the holy
scriptures, nor yet the testimony of any ancient writer, that any Church,
Chapel, or Oratory should have any cross graven or painted within it or upon
it for 500. years after Christ. Eusebius describing diverse Churches builded
in his time, shows no such necessary furniture of a Christian Church,
although, he set forth even the fashion of the stalles or stools where the
ministers should sit lib. 10. cap. 4.

But Martial to have show of antiquity, begins with a new found old
doctor, called Abdias, whose authority, seeing Master Calfhill rejects as
a mere countefet, Martial spends certain leaves in quarrelling at some of
his reasons, and the rest he passes over because he can say nothing against
them. But touching the credit of this Abdias, if any man be not satisfied with
M. Calfhils reasons. I refer him further to the Bishop of Sarums book
against Harding. Art 1. Diu. 5. p. 8.

To speak of the vow of virginity supposed to be made by the virgin Marie,
it is impertinent to the cause. It comes somewhat nearer, that he defends
building of Churches in the honor of Saints, because some Churches of old
have had the name of Saints. But Augustine says of the Saints. Quare
honoramus eos charitate, non seruitute, nec eis Templa construimus, nolunt enim
se sic honorari a nobis, quia nos ipsos cum boni simus, templa summi Deiesse
nouerunt. Wherefore we honor them with love, not with service: Neither do we
build Churches to them, for they will not be so honored of us, because they
know that we our selves when we are good, are ye temples of the highest God:
De vera religion. Ca. 55. Also Ep. 174. Pascentio He proves the holy ghost to
be God, because he has a temple. Also Euch. ad Laurent. Cap. 56. The like
judgment he has de ciuis. Dei. li. 8. Cap. 27. and li. 22. Ca. 10. showing
that it is a divine honor proper to God, to have temples erected to his honor,
and declaring that ye Martyrs churches were places set up in their memory, not
temples in their honor.

But Martial fynding nothing for the space of 500 years after Christ for his
purpose, at length stumbleth upon a Canon of the provincial Council of
Orleans in France: that No man should buyld a Church before the Bishop came
and set up a cross. This canno made in those days, shows yt churches before
the making thereof were builded without a cross, neither binds it any, but
such as build churches within the province of Orleans. Beside that it may be
doubted of the antiquity of the Canon, seeing it is not found in the records
of yt council, but taken out of the Popes Canon law, where is most
counterfeit stuff. Beside that it is not observed among the Papists
themselves, that before any chuch, chapel, or Oratorie be builded, the bishop
of the diocese should come and make a cross there. The next Canon he cites
our of ye Council of Toures the 2. Vt corpus domini in altari, non in armario,
sed sub crucis titulo componatur, that the Lords body be laid on the altar,
not in a chest or almery, but under the title of the cross. But Martial does
english it thus: That the body of our Lord consecrated upon The Altar, be not
reposed and set in the reuestry, but under the roode. He braggeth y^ when he
was Usher of Winchester school, he taught his Scholars ye true signification
of the Latin words. Pro Clu.
But beside that he translateth Armarium a reuestrie, Pro Cel.
which Tully uses for a place wherein money was kept, In Ant.
which could not well be an open house, and also makes a manifest difference
between Armarium and Sacrar^^^, beside also that he calls titulum crucis
the roode, where finds he in this sentence the Latin word for his English
word, consecrated? But to the purpose of the cross, this Canon shows, that
in old time they used to lay it otherwise then under the title of the cross,
whether they meant thereby the sign of the cross, or these words, Jesus Naz.
rex Iudaeorum, which was the title of the cross, as they had in those days
many ceremonies grown out of use, and therefore not understood of us.

The third Council is a Canon of the sixth general Council at Constantinople
in Trullo, which in the margent he calls the Council of Chalcedon in Trullo.
Can. 73. which M. Calfhil could not find in yt Council, because it is
certain, and confessed by Geranza, Martials author, that the sixth Council of
Constantinople in Trullo made no ceremonies but of ye faith, and that these
which he sets forth, were made privately by them long after in the days of
Justinian, therefore they have neither the authority of Canons, nor be free
from suspicion of forgery. And yet the Canon alleged, proves not this
article, for it only comma^deth crosses that were made in the pauement to be
put out. Nay, says Martial, the prohibition of the cross to be made on the
ground, permits it to be made in all other places. For a prohibition
restrictiue of a thing to be done in one place, is a lawful permission for all
other places, which are not namely included in that prohibition. And for this
he refers him self to ye judgment of the lawyers. But I think his law
deceives him in this point, as much as his divinity almost in every point.
For if ye kings edict forbid swearing, fighting, brawling in his court, I
suppose he does not permit these things as lawful in all other places. The
last Canon which forbad ye laying of ye lords body in ye vestri, does not
lawfully permit it to be laid in the belfry. The captains prohibition, yt no
man shall discharge his belly within ye precinct of ye camp, is not a lawful
permission yt a soldiar may defile a church without ye camp.

The law that forbids the Princes image to be made on the pauement, is not
a lawful permission that the same may be set upon the high altar, what
Martials law is in these cases, I know not, but my reason serves me not to
allow of those prohibitions for lawful permission. And where these Canon
makers say: They did reverence the lively cross with mind, tongue, and
sense. Martial infers, that this word sense, declares that they had a
sensible cross, to which they might show their reverence with their external
senser: Which senses Martial? their sight, their hearing, their smelling,
their tasting, or their feeling. Did you teach your scholars at Winchester
thus to interpret? was it the image of the cross, or the lively cross that
showed them that saving health, which they profess to reverence in word and
mind? And were you went to conster Cum seeing, viuifica crux the living
cross, ostenderit does show. For thus you give me example to play with you.
And if one of your boys that learned Terence, had so construed, would you not
have straight way asked him, Cuius modi and temporis oftenderit, if he had
annswered, the Preterperfect tense: you would have demanded, whether does, be
the sign of that temps, or have. If have, then have not you rightly translated
Cum crux viuifica illud sab^^ are nobis ostenderit: Seeing the living cross
does show unto us that healthful thing. Wherefore to leave this trifling,
the Canon is this: Seeing the living cross (that is to say the passion of
Christ) has showed unto us that saving health, it behooves us to employ all
our study, that we may give unto it, by which we are saved from our old fall,
that honor which is convenient. Wherefore, giving reverence unto it with
mind, speech, and understanding. we command that the figures of the cross
which are made of some in the ground and pauement, be utterly taken away, lest
the trophee of our victory be iniuried by treading of those that pass over it.

It is not without fraud, yt beside your false translation, you have omitted
per quam ab antiquo lapsu seruati sumus, lest every popish woman might see,
that the Canon speaks not of honor given to the image of the cross, whereby
we are not saved, but to the passion of Christ.

But Martial rejects the Council of Constantinople condemning images, as M.
Calfhill does the 2. of Nice, allowing them. The best way then as Augustine
conncelleth ye heretic Maximinus, were to give over the hold of Councels on
both sides, and try ye matter by the word of God.

It is a fond quarrel yt he picketh to M. Calfhill, of ye time when ye
Eliberine council was kept, if it be auncienter then he supposes, it is of
greater credit, for ye latter times were more corrupt. And whereas he gi^deth
at ye marriage of ministers, because in the 27. Canon of yt Council, the bishop
or priest was forbidden to have any woman to dwell with him, but either his
sister or his daughter being a virgin and professed to God, he shows both
his falshod and his folly: his falshod, for yt he translateth extraneam which
is a strange woman, no other woman. His folly, in seeing ye priests daughter,
he cannot see his wife but the 33. Canon commands them abstinence as from
their wives, and begetting of children. I answer, if ye Canon were not to be
understood of a temporal abstinence, the general Council of Nice decreed
against it, as appears in Socrat. lib. 1. Cap. 11.

But touching the Canon against Images: Placuit, we decree, that pictures ought
not to be in the Church, lest that which is worshipped and adored, should be
painted on the walls. First he repeteth his principle of law, before set down
for prohibition, y^ pictures are only forbidden, and not other images: as
though he y^ forbids wounding permits murdering, beside that, they should
be simple images in which were no picture or painting. Secondly, he says, that
pictures on walls only are forbidden, but therein he lies, for they are
generally forbidden in ye church, ergo not in walls only. Thirdly he says,
here is an evident proof, that pictures were then worshipped. For this
argument follows necessarily upon these words. That was worshipped, that was
forbidden to be painted in the walls: but pictures were forbidden to be
painted upon walls, ergo, pictures were worshipped. Answer M. Calfhill. Who
would have thought y^ an Usher of Winchester and student in Louaine, that
teaches us an old lawyers point, would also teach us a new Logike point, to
conclude affirmatively in ye second figure, and yt all upon particulers?
Answer M. Calf. quod Martial. Nay, answer goose to such an argument. And
reason who will any longer with such an ass about this matter, for I will
harken to his law, seeing his Logike is no better. For the better understanding
of a statute or a Canon diverse circumstances are to be considered. This was
law enough to make him a bachiler. Well the circumstances are these. The
authors of this Canon were Catholic and wise bishops, the place Granata a
city in Spain, which had then many infidels, that thought Christians to commit
idolatry by having of Images. The time when they feared persecution, as
appears by the 59 and 60. Canon. But if we believe Garanza, your author, it
was about ye time of ye Nicene council, when no persecution could be feared;
and therefore your cause which you make ye fourth circumstance, is forged, yt
they feared lest those images should have been despitefully abused by ye Pagans,
when they were fled: neither are you able to prove it, and therefore in ye end
you conclude, it was but a synod of 19. Bishops, whose decre was undone by ye
second Nicen general council, ye Council at Frankford. etc. That ye council of
Frankfort yt condemned ye council of Nice, he only denies yt it did so, but
answers not ye authority cited by M. Calfhill. The book of Carolus Magnus
against images he conde^neth for a forged tale, although ancient writers make
mention of it, and the style of the book does argue ye it was written in that
time, if not by the Emperor, yet by his appointment. But seeing he refers
us to the confutation of the Apology fol. 328. I will refer the readers to
the defense of the Apology for the same matter.

After this, he spends certain leaves, in defending the credit of Irenee
the idolatrous Empress, and in defacing those Emperors that were enemies to
images, wherein he has the idolatrous historians favorable, not sparing to
report what so ever their malicious enemies could invent, to slander them. But
hereof I have written somewhat in mine answer to D. Sanders book of images
cap. 4. or 3. and cap. 15. or. 14.

Now comes in S. Ambrose extolling the cross: Ser. 56. As a Church cannot
stand without a cross, so a ship is weak without a mast. For by and by the
devil does disquiet it, and the wind does squat it, but when ye sign of the
cross is set up, by and by both the iniquity of the devil is beaten back,
and the tempest of wind is appeased. Here Martial triumphs against M.
Calfhil, that the author speaks not of a cross beam in the Church, but of
the sign of the cross. But he lies shamefully, for this writer speaks not
of a material Church, Chapel, or Oratorie, but of the congregation of
Christ, in which the cross and passion of Christ has ye same force that the
mast in a ship, which is made after the figure of the cross, and the plough
beam in tillage etc. His other sentence Sermon. 55. is yet more plain against
him, Arbor enim quaedam in naui est crux in ecclesia, quae inter totius saeculi
bla^da and perniciosa naufragia incolumis sola seruatur. In hac ergo naui
quisquis aut arbori crucis se religauerie, aut aures suas scripturit diuinis
clauserit, dulcem procellam luxuriae non timebit. For the cross in the Church
is as it were a certain tree in a ship, which among ye flattring and
pernicious shipwracks of ye whole world alone is preserved in safety. In this
ship therefore who so ever shall either bind him self to y^ tree of the cross,
or stop his ears with the holy Scriptures, he shall not fear the sweet
storm of luxuriousness, etc. He alludeth to the fable of Ulysses which tied
him self to the mast, and stopped his ears with wax, that he might not hear
the song of the Mermaydes. This sentence (whereof Martial durst cite but three
or four words) declares that his author makes nothing for the title of
this Article of erecting the cross in Churches, Chapels etc. And yet when all
is done, I must confess with the learned, that these Sermons were not written
by S. Ambrose, but by one Maximus of latter time, Bishop either of Taurinum or
of Millain.

Concerning the tale that you father upon sir Ambrose Cave, of an Island by
Rhodes, and a rode there where no anchor nor cable will hold the ship, unless
the mariner make the sign of the cross over ye place where he casts anchor:
It may be, he reported it as a fond persuasion of superstitious people, but I
think no that he gave any credit to it. Popery is full of such tales. But why
do you charge M. Calfhil with a lie, for saying that in the Popish catholic
time, the church of Paul's was twice burned within 50. years space. Marie,
because it was not on Corpus Christie eve, nor the Communion table was burned
with all the four yles within the compass of three or four hours, therefore
it was no the like plague. But how often has the sacrament of the alter,
(your God) been burned, when Churches were fiered? More things, in which there
is any diversity, shall be like, by Martials logike or law, I can not tell
whether it is, by which he condemns M. Calfhil for a liar.

Touching Lactantius, he reasons to and fro of his authority him self, and
yet charge M. Calfhil for so doing. Our judgment of Lactantius, as of all
old writers is this, that what so ever they speak contrary to the truth of
the holy Scriptures, we may boldly reject it; what so ever they say agreeable
unto them, we do willingly admit it. The chief matter touching this article,
is this, that certain verses are ascribed to Lactantius, exhorting men to
worship the cross, which verses M. Calfhil denies to have been written by
Lactantius. First because S. Hierome in the Catalogue of his works, makes no
mention of them: but they might be unknown to Hierome, says Martial. It is
not like they could be unknown to Hierome, and known to Martial. Secondly,
because he speaks of Churches, that were scarsly builded in Lactantius time,
but Martial proves, that Christians had churches even in the Apostles time,
and ever since, as though any man does doubt of yt, but of such churches as
this versifier speaks of. Thirdly, because the doctrine of these verses,
concerning images, is contrary to yt Lactantius taught, and was generally
received in his days. Martial replyeth, that all which Lactantius did write
against images, was against the false images of the heathen, and not against
the holy images of the Christians. But Christians in his time had no images as
holy, in any use of religion, and his arguments are general against all images
in religion. Finally, it is also manifest, that his versifier making a
Poetical prosopopeia, induces Christ hanging upon the cross, and speaking
to him that comes into the Church, and therefore no argument of cross or
image may be rightly gathered out of the poem, who so ever was the author. For
immediately after this verse, Flecte genu, lignumque crucis venerabile adora,
follows: Flebilis innocuo terramque cruore madentem, Ore petens humilis,
lachrymis suffunde subortis. Bow thy knee, worship the venerable wood of ye
cross, And lamentably kissing with humble mouth the earth which is moist with
mine innocent blood, wash it over with tears flowing out. By these verses then
Martial may as well prove, that the Church floor was moist with the blood of
Christ, as that there was a cross in the Church.

To Lactantius he ioineth Augustine, De Sanctis Hom. 19. saying. that Churches
are dedicated with the sign of the cross, where he not only changed the
word charactere into mysterio, but also translated the word mysterio, by the
sign: where he confesses his fault, he may be pardoned, but where he
justifies mysterio and sign^ to be all one, he shows him self as he is. But
how will he persuade us, that those Homilies de tempore and de Sanctis, of
which some one is ascribed to so many authors, were either written by
Augustine, or by any of those times, the style is so dissonant, that any man
learned, and of indifferent judgment, will confess. Although it is not to be
denied, but the sign of the cross was superstitiously abused, even in the
days of Augustine, and long before Whereas Augustine reports of a woman
called Innocentia, which had a canker healed in her breast by the sign of the
cross, if it were a miracle, it proves not, that every Church, Chapel, and
Oratorie, should have a cross. Great miracles were done by imposition of
hands, yet it follows not therefore, that every Church must have imposition
of hands. Again, not only Cankers, but also Fistulaes, tooth ache, and many
other diseases have been healed by charms. And yet these charms are not
justifiable thereby, much less to be brought into the Church, as wholesome
ceremonies and prayers.

But albeit the cross be no ordinary mean, whereby God uses to conserve
health (says Martial) yet may you not conclude, that he has not ordained it
to remain in the Church, for any remembrance of his death and passion. For
think you (says he) he has left no more means but the preaching of his
word, which every one can hear? Yes, it has pleased his majesty to ordain
by general Councels the sign of the cross, and images to be a mean to put us
in remembrance of Christ's death etc. But seeing ye Church flourished 300.
years without a general Council, and neither that general Council which was
first holden, not three other which followed, make mention of any such matter,
where was the ordinance of God by general Councels for the cross? He will say
it had the appointment of the prelates of the Church. Which? and when? every
idle ceremony and ungodly heresy that prevailed had ye prelates of the Church
either for the authors or for the approuers. But Christ committed to the
prelates (says Martial) the charge and government of his Church. Yea sir, to
feed them with his word, and not with dombe signs and dead images, which
things he has forbidden.

Now come we to Paulinus Bish. of Nola, by whom it appears that ye sign of
the cross was set up 1100. years ago, in some churches: but the title of the
Article is, that it should be set up in all Churches. But Martial will prove,
that it was well done by Paulinus, to set up the sign of the cross in his
Church, because he was an holy and learned Bishop, and no Catholic Bishop or
general council did find fault with him: for whatsoever any holy and learned
father did at any time, and was not controlled of any Catholic father for his
doing, was well done, and must be so taken. I deny this mayor, For Augustine
was an holy and learned Bishop, which did give the Communion to infants, and
thought it necessary for their everlasting salvation: neither was he
controlled therefore, yet did he not well, neither was his opinion true. And
where Martial takes upon him the defense of Paulinus, in commending a woman
that separated her self from her husband under pretense of religion, he
plays the prattling proctor, picking of quarrels against M. Calfhil, without
all honesty or shame, For he feigneth that the fault is alleged, for want of
consent of her husband, whereas such separation as he commends without consent,
is directly contrary to the doctrine of ye holy Ghost, 1. Cor. 7. v. 5.
Likewise where M. Calfhil names a book that the Apostles wrote, Martial says
it was but of Paul's Epistles: where he says it was laid unto diseases, M.
Martial says it saved a man from drowning, but of these quarrels too much.
Martial confesses, that were a Doctor swarueth from scripture, no man ought
to follow him. But if Paulinus swerued not from Scripture, when he brought
images into the Church, we need not doubt that any man swerued from Scripture,
seeing nothing is more plain in all the Scriptures, then forbidding of images
and similitudes of any thing to be made or had in any use of religion.

Where M. Chlfhil answers to the decree of Justinian (that no Church should
be builded before the place were consecrated, and a cross set up by the
Bishop) that this was a constitution of the external policy, Martial
labors to prove that it was religious, and yet at length grants that it
was a matter of external policy, whereupon I infer, that it was not of
necessity, and so the article is not proved thereby, that every church should
etc. But it comes of great wisdom, that he will defend the time of Justinian
from ignorance and barbaritie, because the civil law was then gathered, and a
few learned men were found in the whole world. All this notwithstanding, the
Barbarians had overcome a great part of the Empire, and filled the world with
ignorance and barbarousnesse. Against the decree of Valentinian and Theodosius
cited out of Crinitus, he has many quarells. First against Petrus Crinitus,
who was as good a cleark as Martial, Then at the Homily against images, where
the Printer calls him Petrus Erinilus, yet again ye Valentinian not being
written at large, is mistake^ for Valens, where it should be Valentinianus. And
if Valens and Theodosius had made such a l^^e, what an oversight was it of
Eusebius to suppress it? When Eusebius was dead before any of them were
borne, it was a great ouerfight in Martials judgment, to suppress in his
story a law made by them, which lived near an hundredth year after him, so
that belike he would have Eusebius to write stories of things to come. But
concerning that law of Valentinianus and Theodosius, you shall see more in
mine answer to D. Sanders book of images. cap. 13. or 12. The rest of this
chapter is spent in commending the Church of Rome, whose custom it has been
(says Martial) these twelve hundredth years, to set the sign of the cross in
the Church, and Pope Pius the fourth did it him self of late etc. Concerning
the Church of Rome, so long as she continued in true religion, and so far
forth as she maintained the truth, as she was greatly commended of ancient
writers, whom Martial names: so now it is to her greater reproach and shame,
earum laudum and gloriae degenerem esse, that she is grown out of kind and
desert of all such praises: as the Clergy of Rome writing to Cyprian, lib. 2.
Epist. 7. To conclude, therefore, there is nothing showed to prove that every
Church, Chapel, or Oratorie should have a cross, although in the latter and
more corrupt times of the Church, it is declared, that some Churches had a
cross, and at length grew to a custom in those parts of the world, that
every church had one, and was thought necessary that it should have one.

The fourth Article.
That the sign of the cross was used in all sacraments etc. Martial.


That it has been used in the later declining times, Fulke.
we will not stand with Martial, but that in the best and purest age of the
Church, by the Apostles and their imediate successors it was used, or allowed
before the Valentinian heretics, I affirm, that Martial can not prove by any
ancient authentical writer, between the Apostles and Irenaeus. Wherefore
Master Calfhil answers well, that the ceremony once taken up of good
intent, being grown into so horrible abuse, is justly refused of us. Martial
will know what our vocation is, as though we were not able to prove our
calling both before God and men. Our Synodes he refuses, because no Council
can be kept without the consent of the Bishop of Rome, in which point as many
of Papists are against him, which hold that even a general Council may be
kept to depose an evil Pope, against his will: so he mistaketh the Tripartite
history and Julian Bishop of Rome, where they speak of general Councels and
Synodes, to determine of matters of faith, from which the Bishop of Rome while
he was a Bishop, was not to be excluded, because those cases touch all Bishops,
dreaming that they speak of all Councels. But long after their times, it was
practiced as lawful, for Kings and Bishops of several provinces, to gather
and hold prouincial synods, for the state of their several Churches, without
the consent or knowledge of the Bishop of Rome. In which some things have been
determined against the will of the Bishop of Rome, as in the councels of
Carthage and Affrike, and in general Councels also, as in that of Calcedon,
Constantinople the 5. and 6. the Councels of Constans and Basil. But signing
with the cross is a tradition of the Apostles, and so accounted by S. Basil,
therefore we ought not to forsake it for any abuse (says Martial. But how
will S. Basil persuade us of that, when we find it not in their writings: it
is more safe therefore, to follow his counsel in his short definitio^s q. 1.
where he affirms, yt it is not lawful for any man to permit him self to do
or say any thing without the testimony of the holy scriptures. And this we
will hold even with Basils good leave, against all pretended traditions of the
Apostles what so ever. We Know the Apostle wills us to hold the traditions,
either learned by his Epistles, or by his Sermons. But what he delivered in his
sermons, we can not tell, but by his Epistles. Yes, says Martial, the church
tells you of ye sign of the cross, but seeing ye church tells us of other
things, which are left and forsaken, auouching them likewise to be traditions
of the Apostles, which ought not to have been so given over, if they had been
Apostolic traditions in deed, we see no cause why we may not refuse these,
as well as those, having no ground of certainty for apostolic traditions, but
only ye Apostolic writings. Tertullian cou^teth ye tasting of milk and honey
after baptism, for an Apostolic tradition, because it was a ceremony in his
time, as well as crossing, ye one was left long ago, why may not ye other be
forsaken yt has no better ground, and has been worse abused? Concerning the
tale of Probianus, which follows next after this discourse, I will referr the
reader to mine answer to D. Sand. book against images, c1. 13. or 12. after
ye error of his print, where Calfhil thinks it not meet, yt should be
restrained to that whereof there is no precept in scripture, nor they them
selves yield lawful cause, Marti. tells him, yt he must be restrained, if he
will be good Christian. For there is no precept in express scripture to believe
three persons and one God in ye blessed Trinity, ye equality of substance of
Christ with his father in his godhead etc. The pertual virginity of Marie, ye
keeping of ye Sunday, ye sacrament receiving fasting, ye baptism of infants
etc. you see what an Atheist he is, yt can find no more certainty in ye
scriptures, for ye blessed Trinity, then for S. Mary's virginity: for the
godhed of Christ, then for receiving ye Communion before other meats. If
Papists have no ground to their faith out of the scriptures, yet we can prove
what so ever is necessary for us to believe. It he dalie upon ye word express
scripture, either he answers not to ye same thing whereof he is demanded, or
else he knows not yt an argument rightly concluded out of holy scripture, is
as good as ye very words of ye scripture, as when I say, if Peter believed and
was baptized ergo, he was saved, is as true, as these words, whosoever believes
and is baptized, shall be saved. To ye second demand, whether ye ancient
fathers did attribute such virtue to the wagging of a finger, yt the holy Ghost
could be called down, and ye devil driven away by it. Mart. answers: it is
most evident, that as soon as prayer is duly made, and the sign of the cross
made, the holy Ghost according to the promise of Christ, comes down and
sanctifies etc. and the devil is driven away. This is Mart. evidence, other
reason he brings If he refer the promise and coming of the holy Ghost to
prayer, he plays the palterer, that being demanded of the cross, answers
of prayer. Otherwise, let him show what promise Christ has made to the sign
of the cross, or to prayer with the sign of the cross, more then without it.
If he can not, you may easily see his poverty. To the third, whether they
would have refused the Church and sacraments for want of a cross, He believes
verily they would not: for the sacraments lacks not the virtue if the sign
of the cross be omitted: yet the fault is great when the tradition of the
Apostles is wilfully rejected. Whether it be like they delivered any needless
or unprofitable ceremony, let wise men judge. After this, follows a long and
foolish dialogisme, about the interpretation of Cyprians words. What so ever
the ministers of the sacraments be, what so ever the hands are that dippe
those that come to baptism, what so ever the breast is, out of which the holy
words proceed, the authority of operation gives effect to all sacraments in
the figure of the cross, and the name which is above all names, being called
upon, by dispensers of the sacraments does all. Martial so scanneth these
words, as though M. Calfhil knew not the difference between the power of
God, and the ministry of man in the sacraments, which Cyprian does plainly
distinguish in these words. But to the purpose, Cyprian seems to make the
figure of the cross a mean by which God works in the sacraments. But in
deed he means, that all sacraments take their effect of the passion of
Christ, as a bare sign and token whereof they used the figure of the cross,
and not as a mean whereby God works, seeing it is confessed by Martial, that
the sacraments if the sign of the cross be omitted lack not their virtue. An
other foolish brable and vsherlike construing, he makes of Cyprians words, de
baptismo Verborum solemnitas and sacri inuocatio nominis, and signa attributa
institutionibus Apostolicis sacerdotum ministerijs visibile sacramentum
celebrant. For reproving Master Calfhil for translating signa attributa
institutionibus apostolicis, signs attributed to the institutions of the
Apostles, he teaches him to conster signs attributed by the Apostolical
institutions, through the ministry of the priests. Wherein I marvel that
such an ancient student, will now suffer the word attributa, to go without a
dative case, which I think he would not have done in his pettite school at
Winchester. But if I might be bold under ye correction of such a grounded
grammarian, to conster the lesson over again, I would give the Latin this
English. The solemnity of words and invocation of the holy name, and the
signs appointed by the institutions of the Apostles, for the ministry of the
priests, does make the visible sacrament. And what be those signs? By M.
Martials leave, the elements, as water, bread and wine. But then M. Grindal
(whom I laugh to see this wise Dialogue maker, to bring in swearing, once or
twice in this devised talk, as though out Bishops used that vein, as commonly
as Popish prelates) M. Grindal I say, must send me to Saint Anthonies school,
because the elements of the sacraments be of Christ's own institution, and not
of his Apostles, wherefore those signs must be other goodly ceremonies, and the
sign of the cross must not be lest. But if Martial ever were a scholar in
that school, or any other of any value, he might have learned long ago, that
institutio signifies not only the first beginning of an ordinance, but also a
teaching or doctrine: and so does Cyprian mean, that by the doctrine of the
Apostles, ye Priests are appointed to use those signs, which if Martials
Vshership will not admit, Cyprian in telling what makes ye visible sacrament,
has left out the principal part thereof, namely the element, and that which in
deed in it is only visible, for the solemnity of words and invocation are
audible rather then visible. But in this foolish Dialogue is cited Justinius
Apol. 2. to prove that the old Fathers used the sign of the cross, in all
sacraments. Justinius Martyr (says he in the place of M. Grindal) talking of
the cross, bids us view in our minds, and consider with reason, all
things that are in the world, and see whether sine haec figura
administrentur, they may be done without this sign. How like it is that M. G.
should say, Justinius bids us, when he bids ye Gentiles, I leave to speak
of. But that he speaks of our sacraments, how will Martial prove? When
both he speaks to the Heathen, and of Heathenishe customs and ceremonies, or
else civil and natural matters. As of sailing, plowing, digging and all handie
crafts, whose tools had some figure of the cross, in which the Gentiles did
so fondely abhor and despise Christ for it. Whereas it was to be found even
in the shape of man, in the trophies and standerdes of their Emperor, in the
consecration of their dead Emperors images, whom they worshipped as Gods. For
which causes Justinius thought it unreasonable, that they should contemn Christ
for his crosses sake. But of using the sign of the cross in all sacraments
there is no mention in Justinius. That in Chrysostomes time and other more
ancient fathers, ye sign of ye cross was used at the celebration of the
sacraments, M. Calfhil grants as a ceremony, and you confess, It is but a
ceremony, and that our sacraments lacking the sign of the cross, and that
usual ceremony be perfect notwithstanding. And yet you exclaim against us for
omitting a needelesse ceremony, where we see it has been turned from that
indifferent usage of the forefathers, into an idolatrous custom and opinion of
necessity. The credit of Dionysius for so ancient a scholar of S. Paul as
you would make him, it too much cracked by Erasmus to be cured by Martial.
Where M. Calfhil truly faith, and you can not deny, but he has as good
authority, for honey, mike, wine, to be restored in baptism, and the
communion to be given to children, as you have for the cross: you answer,
these were altered by the Church of Rome, which has authority so to do, ye
cross still remains: but mark what you say, were these traditions of the
Apostles? if you say no, ye like will I say of the cross, for ye same
authority commends the^ al a like, for traditions of the Apostles. Well if
they were traditions of ye Apostles by the holy Ghost, which you hold to be of
equal authority with yt scriptures, and ye Church of Rome has abolished the
one, why may she not abolish the other? so yt your answer contains manifest
blasphemy. To fortify your traditions, you allege yt Jesus did many things
which are not written, etc. but you leave of yt which follows, but these are
written, yt you might be leeue, and in believing have eternal life. Io. 20. and
yet S. John speaks of miracles, not of ceremonies to be used in baptism,
whereunto you apply it. But Jesus himself says, he has many things to say that
ye apostles could not then bear, etc. Joan. 16. And you would know in what
work of the Apostles those things are written, yea you would have the Chapter
noted. Pleases it you to look your self in the Acts of the Apostles, and in
their Epistles, etc. And you shall find, that the scriptures will instruct the
man of God unto all good works, and make him wise unto salvation, if these will
not serve your turn, seek where you will, and find ye devil and eternal
damnation. But I pray you, could not ye apostles bear yt hearing of the sign
of the cross, of salt, oil, spittle in baptism, were these such hard
lessons to learn, or heavy to bear? if you think they were, I envy not unto
you so wise a thought. But you will teach us how we shall know, yt these are
traditions of ye apostles, to this inquire you answer, even as we know ye
gospels and epistles to be ye Canonical scriptures, by authority of ye church,
which you think sufficient for yt purpose. But so do not we, for although we
receive the testimony of ye Church, yet we have greater authority out of ye
scriptures of ye old Testament, and yt spirit by which they were written, being
alwais ye same by which we are persuaded yt ye gospels and epistles are the
holy scriptures. Again ye universal Church of all times and places gives
witness to those writings, so does it not to these traditions.

Therefore we are never the near to know Apostolical traditions, by
authority of the Popish church, which ascribes things manifestly contrary
to the word of God and writings of the Apostles, to Apostolic traditions, as
Images, half communion, private Mass, etc. After this brabbling of
traditions, follows a long brawle about numbers, which the Papists do
superstitiously observe, and of the authority of the seventy interpreters,
whose translation if it were extant, no doubt but it were worthy of great
reverence, but seeing these questions are fruitelesse, and impertinent unto the
article, I will clearly omit them: Martial returning to prove that the sign of
the cross was used in consecrating the body and blood of Christ, finds
himself greatly grieved, that M. Calfhil calls the Mass the sacrifice of
the devil, wherein be so many good things, as the Collets, Gospel, epistle,
Gloria in Excelsis, etc. by which reason I might prove a devilish coniuration
in which be so many names of God, and good words, to be an holy piece of work.
Therefore it is not many good parts abused to make a wicked thing good, that can
justify the Mass, which is an hurrible blasphemy against the death and only
sacrifice of Christ. But M. Calfhil does not satisfy him, where he citing out
of Albertus Magnus, That Christ did bless the sacrament with a certain sign
of his hand, as Jacob laid his hands on Joseph's sons, and Christ laid his
hands upon the children, and lifted up his hands, and blessed his Apostles,
etc. asks why we might not say Christ made a sign of ye cross, considering
that Chrysostom, Augustine, and Euthymus testify, that in their time, the
sign of ye cross was used in consecration, this question (he says) is not
soluted. This is sone answered, because laying on of hands, and lifting up of
hands, which be sometime used in blessing, does not prove a crossing with the
finger: of ones hand, as the Papists use, and because the Evangelists which
describe all that he then said or did for us to follow, make no mention of
any such sign of hand made by him in blessing. The long discourse that
follows of blessing and giving of thanks, is needelesse, for we know and
confess, that as they sometimes signify all one thing, so they differ
sometimes: and we confess that the bread and wine in the Lords supper were
blessed, that is to say sanctified and consecrated but not with any sign of
hand, which is the matter in question, but with the word of God, and with
prayer: not only as bodily meats, but as heavenly and spiritual mysteries,
to feed the soul. But it is a sport to see, how Martial when he has proved
that which was not in question, that the bread and wine were blessed and
sanctified by Christ, and that they must now be so consecrated by the Church,
he runs away with the sign of the Cross, whereof he has brought no proof
of the use by Christ: saying, There must be consecration by honoring the
words of Christ, and calling upon his name, and making the sign of the
cross, which manner of consecration the Church learned of Christ, and has
continued ever since: so that we may boldly say with Albertus. He blessed it with
a certain sign of his hand. But I pray you sir, where learned you this sign
used by Christ? How prove you that it has been used ever since? It is enough
for Martial to say, that all the learning in English Doctors will never be
able to prove this assertion of his to be frivolous.

But seeing he is so Greekish, to teach M. Calfhil to conster Saint Paul's
words? (...), etc. and finds fault with him for giving the aoristes the
signification of the present temps, let him look in his lexicon, where I ween
al his Greek is, how he will abide* by this saying: (...) in Saint Matthew,
(...) in Saint Luke, (...) in Saint Paul, have relation to the bread and wine,
and answer to the question whom or what* seeing (...) is no verb transitiue,
although the Christian writers, as Justinius Martyr, has feigned a passive unto
it.

Again in the saying of Chrysostom Ho. 24. in 1. Cor. Cap. 10. where Martial
will have us mark that the body of Christ is seeene upon the altar, let him
and his fellows mark, that if it be none otherwise there, then as it is seen,
it is present only to the faith, by whose eye it is seen.

After this tedious treatise of bleassing and thanksgiving, he comes to his
old petition or principle, that the signing with the cross is a tradition of
the Apostles: and angry he is, that he should be called on to prove yt it is a
tradition of the Apostles, whereof he can find no mention in Ecclesiastical
writers before ye Valentinian heretics. And whereas Cyprian Ad Panpeium calls
all traditions to the writings and commandment of the Apostles, he cries out
yt Cyprian is slandered, because he him self alleges the tradition of Christ
for mingling of water with ye wine. If Cyprian break his own rule, who can
excuse him? But if he had been urged as much for the necessity of water, as he
was for the necessity of wine in ye sacrament, he would have better considered
of the matter. From this matter he descends to prove the number of
sacraments to be seven, because matrimony is of some old writers called a
sacrament, when they mean not a sacrament in yt sense that baptism is a
sacrament, but generally a mystery. And because M. Calfhil says, that
sacraments were signs ordained of God to confirm our faith, he will prove yt
we have no sacraments at all, because baptism if it be ministered to men of
years, confirms not their faith, for they must have their faith confirmed
before they be baptized, and so must they that receive ye communion. But when
infantes be baptized they have no faith but the faith of the Church, and
therefore their faith can not be confirmed. Did you ever hear such a filthy
hog grunt so beastly of the holy sacraments, that they should be no helps of
our father. We believe yt infants, although they have no faith when they are
baptized, yet have their faith confirmed by their baptism eue^ to their lives
end. And yt they which come to ye Lords ^able with a true faith in Gods
promises, have ye same confirmed by the seal of his word which is that holy
sacrament. Martial calls for scriptures. Among a thousand texts, this one
shall serve: Abraham received yt sign of circumcision, a seal of the
righteousness of faith, which he had being uncircumcised, Romans 4. v. 11. Tell us
Martial by thy law, wherefore a seal serves, if not for confirmation? But
what should I talk with them of faith, which as they have none in the promises
of God, so they know not what in means.

To that reason of Master Calfhill, that Matrimony bath no promise of
forgiveness of sins, he answers, denying that every sacrament has a
promise of forgiveness of sins annexed, and afterward he asks where has
the supper of our Lord a promise of remission of sins? for sins are
forgiven before the sacrament be received. Is this ye divinity of Louaine? is
the holy supper auayleable neither for confirmation of faith, nor to
forgiveness of sins?

Wherefore says Christ of the cupp? This is my blood of the new Testament
which is shed for many unto forgiveness of sins. Nay (says Martial) if
there be a remission of sines, then is it a sacrament propitiatory, contrary
to your own doctrine. Nothing the sooner, so long as remission of sins be
not tied to the work wrought, according to your heresy, but sealed unto the
faith of the worthy receiver. Likewise he quarrelleth against that reason,
that Matrimony conferreth no grace, which is easily proved by this, that
Matrimony is good being contracted among Gentyles and heathen persons. And
whereas he brings in the blessing of God to married persons, either they be
such as pertein to all men in general, and so prove no grace of marriage in ye
church, or else to ye faithful only, and so pertain to faith and not to
marriage: as yt the faithful woman shall be saved by bringing forth of
children. The question of marriage after deuorcement, because it pertains not
to ye Cross I will not meddle with it, M. Calfhill has said more then Martial
can answer.

Touching the popish sacrament of penance, which Martial and not S. Hierome
calls the second table after shipwreck. M. Calfhil has likewise proved
effectually, that it is no sacrament of Christ's Church: Against which, Martial
brings nothing but certain sentences of scripture, to prove how necessary
repentance is after men have sinned, to obtain remission of sins. Whereof S.
Hierome speaks, and not of Popish penance, consisting of contrition,
confession, and satisfaction, with their blasphemous absolution.

Concerning extreme unction, that it is no perpetual sacrament of the Church,
it is plain by scripture because the gift of healing which was annexed unto ye
annoynting of oil, spoken of in S. James, has long ago ceased: Wherefore it
follows, that the same ceremony of annoynting was temporal, even as the
promise of bodily health that was joined to it, was temporal. Finally,
touching the Council of Trent, that has allowed all these for sacraments, how
lawful it was, when he that was accused for heresy, should be the only
Judge, I think Martial by his law could discuss if he list. And as for the
saueconduit granted to the Protestants, they have learned by the case of I.
Hus and Hierom of Prage, to trust the faith of Papists, as much as they like
their religion. To conclude, there is nothing proved in this article, which
pretended, that the cross was always used in the sacraments. And it is
confessed, that when it is used, it is but a ceremony, and such as the want
thereof takes not away the effect of the sacraments, wherefore seeing the
sacraments are perfect without it, they are not to be condemned, which upon
good ground and sufficient authority have refused it.

The fifth Article.
That the Apostles and fathers of the primitive Church blessed them selves with
the sign of the cross, Martial.
and councelled all Christian men to do the same, and that in those days a
cross was set up in every place convenient for it.

The first controversy is of the signification of this word benedicere, Fulke.
which with Martial is all one with signare. For although he find not in the
old writers, benedicebant se signo crucis, they did bless them selves with
the sign of the cross, yet he finds signabant se signo crucis, they marked
them selves with the sign of the cross, which is all one with him. But not so
with us: for there was another use of marking at the first, then for blessing.
The Christians among the Pagans, marked them selves with the sign of the
cross, in token that they professed him that was crucified. Afterward to put
them selves in mind of the death of Christ. These were tolerable uses of an
indifferent ceremony. The opinion of blessing with the cross, as M. Calfhil
says, was taken (as the term) from superstitious old women. And Martial
cannot deny, but the term of blessing in that sense, is a new signification
of the word, and therefore not used of the ancient fathers, which that he
might obscure with brabling, as his custom is, he repeateth his former
iangling of the significations of this word benedicere, and how it sometime
signifies to bless with the hands, as when Christ blessed his Apostles and
the children. As though to use a ceremony of lifting up, or laying on of
hands, when he blesses, is to bless with a bare ceremony of the hands, as
they do with their cross. Nay, he says, to bless with the cross is as old
as Jacob, who with his hands acrosse blessed Joseph's children. The Papists
are wise in their generation, when they would not have unlearned me^ to read
the scriptures. For every child of seven years age, reading the story of
Jacobs blessing, will easily perceive, yt his laying of his hands overthwart,
was not for any blessing with the cross, but because he was to lay his right
hand upon the younger, and his left upon the elder, contrary to their fathers
placing of them, which would have had his elder son preferred. But seeing
Martial makes himself so cunning in the significations of benedicere, to
bless, which he will not have to say well, or pray for only, etc. but to
sanctify. Let him remember, that in his own sense, the Apostle says to the
Hebrews, cap. 7. ver. 7. yt which is less or inferior is blessed of the
superior, by which argument, he proves Melchisedech to be greater then
Abraham. If then the Apostles and fathers did bless them selves with the sign
of the cross to sanctify themselves, I demand, whether the sign of ye
cross was greater then the Apostles. For no man will say that the Apostles
were greater then themselves. If it were not greater, then surely they were not
blessed by it Wherein also the fable of Abdias is convinced, which says of S.
Paul: muniens se signo crucis, arming himself with the sign of the cross.
was the sign of the cross stronger then S. Paul? for men arm them selves with
harness of defense, which is stronger then them selves. Was not that (...),
that universal armor or complete harnes, which he exhorts other men to put
on as sufficient to withstand all the assaults of the devil, Ephesians. 6.
sufficient for him self without the sign of the cross But seeing ye Apostle
there describes ye whole armor of God, whereof the sign of ye cross is not
piece. It is certain, that it is no armor meet for the defense of a
Christian man: wherefore your fabling Abdias, and counterfeit Clement can carry
no credit with wise and learned Christians. Nor yet the examples of Antony,
Martin, Donatus, and Paula reported of credible writers, yet no Evangelists,
which armed themselves with the sign of the cross, does either force or move
us to imitatio^, further then they had warrant for their doing out of the holy
scriptures.

Where M. Calfhill says, that the devil delighted in the sign of the cross,
and feigned him self to be afraid of it, that the heremit might run to that
sorry succor, and men put more affiance in it. He means that the devil
delighted in the superstitious opinion of it: for otherwise he does neither
fear nor love the sign of the cross of it self: for if it had been so
terrible to the devil as Martial and others do think, Saint Paul would not
have left it out of the complet harnes of God, whereby all the deceites and
fiery darts of the devil are withstood.

And although the elder and better age used and received that sign tolerably,
yet considering the shamfull abuse thereof, it ought now of right and
conscience to be condemned, as M. Calfhill says. But Martial will none of
that, for things good of their own nature, must not be taken away not condemned
for ye abuse. Very true, but who will grant him, that the sign of the cross
is good of it self? It is as much as may be borne, to grant it to be a thing
indifferent. And whereas Martial will acknowledge none abuse of that sign, what
else should we say, but who is so blind as he yt will not see? Concerning the
authority of the Epistle of Epiphanius translated by S. Hierome, and his fact
in rending a veil wherein was painted an image, as it were of Christ, or some
saint, etc. I will refer ye reader to mine answer to D. Sanders book of
images, Cap. 4. or according to the error of his print, Cap. 3. where he shall
see all Martials cauils shaken of, except one, which I think no man ever
espied before this wylye lawyer, and that is of the words, quasi, having an
image as it were of Christ or some saint, but not an image of Christ or of some
saint in deed, for then he would not have rent it, but perhaps in was an
image of Jupiter, or Hercules, etc. But under correction of Master Usher, this
is but a quasy argument that is grounded upon quasi, as though it should
signify always a thing yt is not true, but as it were so and yet not so. For
Cicero yt knew ye nature of ye word quasi as well as Martial, uses it
otherwise, Illos qui oi^a incer^^ dicunt, quasi desperatos aliquos relinquamus.
As for them that say: all things are uncertain let us leave, as me^ past
hope. Will Martial say they were not past hope in deed? S. Mark says, that
Christ did teach quasi potestatem habens, Mar. 1.
as one that had authority, will he say he had not authority in deed. John. 1.
S. John says of Christ, who have seen his glory, quasi vnigeniti, as the
glory of the only begotten son of God. Let Martial say with the Arrians,
he was but quasi vnigenitus, as it were the only begotten son of God, and
not he in deed.

Again, he says, Cum fecisset quasi flagellum, when he had made as it were a
scourge, master Usher will conster it so, that was not a scourge in deed,
because he says, as it were a scourge. But Martial will still urge the fact
of Paula in worshipping the cross of Christ, until it be showed out of
Epiphanius by better evidence then yet is showed, that he would have no
cross, no crucifixe, nor image in the Church. A man would think this were
sufficient evidence, when he says: Cum ergo hoc vidissem in ecclesia
Christi, contra authoritatem scripturarum hominis pendere imaginem, etc.
Wherefore, when I saw this, that in the Church of Christ did hang an image of
a man, contrary to the authority of the scriptures, I rent it, etc. Further
evidence out of Epiphanius you may see in the place before cited.

Martial would have us make a Calendar of Christian men, that refused to
bless them selves with the cross, which were (...) infinite matter, seeing
from the Apostles unto the Valentinian heretics it is not read, that any such
estimation was of the cross, yt it should be any blessing or confirmation.
Master Calfhils rule, that we must live not after examples but after laws,
meaning, not follow what soever has been done by good men, but whatsoever
was well done, according to the law of God, Martial rejects upon vain,
foolish, and frivolous reasons, as that some examples are to be followed, that
the law serves not for a just man, that custom must be followed where law
fails, etc. Beside that he slaundereth Luther, as one that would have all
laws and orders of Princes put away. Again, whereas M. Calfhill shows that
the fathers taught other things more often and more earnestly then the use of the
cross. As that it was a wickedness to fast on Sunday, or to pray on our
knees, beside the oblations on birthdayes, milk, and honey, with the communion
given to infants, etc. Martial answers, these are abrogated by the church:
this is not. But seeing none of them has been in worse abuse then this custom
of crossing, this ought to be abrogated of every church, as well as those. But
whereas Martial compares the doctrine of S. Paul. 1. Cor. 11. for covering or
uncovering of men and women's heads, and the decree of ye Apostles for blood and
strangled, Act. 15. with those abrogated customs, he does very lewdly, for
beside yt the authority of ye one is certain, the other uncertain, and of
some forged: the doctrine of S. Paul as he there delivers it, is perpetual,
and the decree of the Apostles was never meant of them, but to be temporal, for
avoiding offense of the Jews. As touching the credit of the old writers who
had all their errors, we like well ye council of Vincentius Lyrinensis, yt we
should still have recourse for trial, to ye most ancient, in which we must
needs account ye writings of the Apostles, both of most antiquity and of
greatest authority. Wherefore seeing the manner of blessing with the cross is
not found either in the writings of the Apostles, or in the most ancient
fathers, Justinius, Irenaeus, Clemens Alexandrinus, by Vincentius council, we
may justly account it for a corrupt custom, crept into the church, either by
aemulation of heretics, or in contention against the Paganes. But Martial
slaundereth us, and the Apollogie of the church of England, that the chief
cause of our separation from the Church of Rome, was the evil life of the
governors thereof, and vainly spends time to prove out of Ciprian,
Augustine, and Calvin, that for that cause we ought not to separate our
selves, whereas we are departed out of Babylon, not so much for the abominable
life thereof, as for the corrupt and false doctrine taught therein, by which it
is showed to be ye Synagogue of satan, and not the church of Christ. And here
Martial hudleth up a number of quotations for the authority of the Pope and
of the church of Rome, which seeing they have been all often times answered,
and by me also in answer to D. Saunders rock, it were folly here to stand
upon the^.

But he will not be counted a falsifier of Tertullian, when of diverse copyes
and impressions he wilfully chooses the worst, that he might wring it to his
purpose, although the matter be not worth the strife about it. For Tertullians
judgment of tradition without scripture, in that place is corrupt: for
Martial him self confesses, that a tradition unwritten should be reasonable
and agreeable to the scriptures, and so he says, the tradition of blessing with
ye cross is, because the Apostles by the holy ghost delivered it. But who
shall assure us thereof? Tertullian and Basil are not sufficient warrant for so
worthy a matter, seeing S. Paul leaves it out of the universal armor of
God. But where M. Calfhill distinguishes traditions into some necessary, as
necessarily inferred of the scripture, some contrary to the word, and some
indifferent, Martial like an impudent Ass, calls on him to show in what
scripture, doctor, or council he finds this distinction of traditions. As
though a man might not make a true distinction in disputation, but the same
must be found in so many words, in scripture, doctor, or council, when he
him self cannot deny, but ye distinction is true, and every part to be found
in ye scriptures, doctors and councels. But the examples please him not, for
the covering of women, and their silence in the church are taught in express
words of scripture, and therefore are not necessarily inferred of scripture.
Therefore there is one lie, quod Martial. Who would think such a block worthy
of answer? which thinks a truth may not be inferred of the express words
of scripture, when of nothing it can be better in ferred. Again, he calls it
another lie, yt S. Paul proves his tradition by ye scripture, for he brings
no text nor sentence of scripture to prove yt women should be covered in the
church. But Martial does not only belie M. Calfhill, but also slander S.
Paul, seeing he alleges out of Genesis, both yt the man is the image and
glory of God, and yt the woman was made for man.

The examples of the second sort, as Latin service, worshipping of images etc.
Martial will not allow, but the scripture is plain, to them that have eyes,
and be not like the images whom they worship.

Again he likes not that there should be any limitation in observing
traditions of the church in things indifferent, as if cases of necessity and
of offense might not make a limitation without contempt of the churches
authority. But he will learn, in which kind of traditions we place the
signing with ye cross, and ye rest named by Basil. I answer, yt marking with
the cross in some respect, as it was first used of ye old fathers, is of the
third kind, but as it is used of you Papists, for a blessing and sanctifying,
of ye second kind. If it be told him, yt the fathers builded some straw and
wood as well as gold and silver, he says those words were meant of manners and
not of doctrine, wherein he shows himself a profound student in S. Paul's
Epistles. Yet if ye fathers have any private opinions, or yt some bastard
books be entitled to them, yet will he follow ye rule of S. Basil, Hom. con.
Sabel. Dominus, etc. Our Lord has so taught, the Apostl^^ have preached, the
fathers have observed, the martirs have confirmed, It shall suffice to say, I
have been so taught? I would he would or could follow this council, but he
leaves out al ye rest, and takes but the tail: We have been so taught.

But if he will have us to allow blessing with ye cross, let him begin with
the head, and show where our Lord has taught it, the Apostles preached it,
and so forth continue his gradation to the end. But hitherto he has been
hammering of tags to his two taglesse points, as M. Calfhil names them, and
now he comes to work upon his third point: that a cross was set up in every
place. And first he goes to work with the authority of Martialis, one of
the seventy two disciples of Christ, which was as surely a disciple of Christ,
as a kinsman of his. Of whose credit I have spoken before, and therefore will
not here repeat it.

Whereas he is accused of falsifying of Athanasius, he colors the matter by
following two or three corrupt prints, wilfully refusing the true edition and
best reformed according to ye most ancient written coppies. His leaving out
of words material, which he cannot excuse by the print, he defends by his
written coppie, and lays the fault on the printer. Better a badd excuse then
none at all, lawyers have many such shifts.

But the place is Quaestion. 16. ad Antioch. Quare credentes omnes ad crucis
imaginem cruces facimus, lanceae vero sanctae, aut arundinis, aut spongiae
figuras nullas conficimus; cum tamen haec tam sint sancta quam ipsa crux?
Responsio. Figuram quidem Crucis ex duobus lignis compingentes conficimus, vt
si quis infidelium id in nobis reprehendat, quod veneremur lignum, possimus
duobus inter se disiunctis lignis, and crucis dirempta forma, ea tanquam
in^ilia ligna reputare, and infideli persuadere* quod non colamus lignum, sed
quod crucis typum veneremur: in lancea vero aut spongia vel arundine nec facere
hoc, nec ostendere possumus. Why do all we believers make crosses after the
image of the cross, but we make no figures of the holy spear, or of the
reed, or of the sponge, whereas yet these are as holy as the cross it self?
The answer. We make in deed the figure of the cross by putting two pieces
of wood together, that if any of the infidels reprehende that in us that we
worship wood, we may by seperating the two pieces of wood and breaking the
form of the cross, account them as unprofitable pieces of wood, and persuade
the infidel, that we worship not wood, but that we worship the type of the
cross: but in the spear, or sponge, or reed, we can neither do not show
this.

Here Martial observes, that all Christian men made crosses, yet can he not
prove that they did set these crosses in the church: but that they used them in
other places, it appears by that they were made so, as the infidels seeing
them, they might be taken asunder. But I will observe, that seeing they made no
images of the reed, sponge, spear, etc. they made no images of Christ's
passion, which the Papists account so profitable.

Secondly, Martial urges, that they worshipped the type of the cross, which
Master Calfhill says is not the figure, but the thing represented by ye
cross. And verily the Gentyles should have as great cause to reprehend them
for worshipping the shape of a creature* as for worshipping the creature it
self. Wherefore, except Martial will say, the Christians made a fond
excuse, let him not play the fool so magnifically, in cauilling upon Master
Calfhils interpretation, when he cannot otherwise reasonably defend the
authors meaning.

Finally, let Martial remember that the spear, sponge, and reed, be as holy
as the cross it self, and therefore in respect of no holiness thereof the
cross was made rather then the rest, but because the form thereof being
easily broken in two sticks, the Gentyles might acknowledge, that the
Christians made ye cross neither for the wood, nor for ye fashion, but for a
remembrance of Christ crucified, who^ they worshipped.

From the cross he digres^eth a while to ye marriage of vowed priests,
complaining that Innocentius and Siricius, popes of Rome are slandered, where
they are said to take marriage for a satisfying of lusts of the flesh, where
they speak only of the marriage of Priests that had vowed to live unmarried,
which is false, for they speak of Priests that were married, lying with their
own wives. Plurimos enim sacerdotes atque Leuitas post longa consecrationis
suae tempora tam de coniugibus proprijs quam etiam de ^urpi coitu sobolem
didicimus procreasse. For we have learned that many Priests of Christ and
Levites long time after their consecration have begotten children, as well of
their own wives, as of filthy copulation. Thus do they account both faults
alike. Again, the reasons they bring, are such as concern marriage generally:
That they which be in the flesh can not please God etc. read the Epistle of
Syricius ad Himeriu^ Tarraconen* and Innocentius ad Victricium, which are all
one word for word, concerning this matter. But where Martial takes upon him
to charge us with a statute in force against the marriage of Priests in
England, unrepealed, he is misco^ceiued. For we have a clause of a statute in
force, that all marriages lawful by the laws of God, shall be accounted
lawful by the laws of the realm. So long therefore as the marriage of
Priests may be approved by the law of God, there is no danger in the law of
the realm. Concerning the filthy lives of the Popish Clergy, it is
needless to speak, being so well known in the world, and yet it is not their
wicked life that separateth us from their Synagogue, but their heretical
doctrine. But returning again to the cross, he burdeneth M. Calfhil with a
lie, because he said, that Martial having named houses, markets, wildernesses,
highwayes, seas, ships, Garments, parlors, walls, windows, armor, etc. where
the cross should be, names not the Church, whereas a little before, he cited
out of Chrysostom, that it was used in the holy table at ye holy mysteries.
But Chrysostom says not, that the cross was erected, and set up or painted
in any Church, although he say, the figure thereof was used. Wherefore here is
no lie proved. Touching the saying cited out of Augustine Sermon. 130. de
tempore, although the authority is not greatly to be regarded of those
Sermons, yet admit it were Augustines in deed, M. Calfhil says truly, that he
speaks neither of Martials material nor mystical cross, but of the death
of Christ, and the cross whereon he suffered, as all the discourse of that
Sermon declares: Before the cross was a name of condemnation, now it is made
a matter of honor: before is stood in damnation of a curse, now it is set up
in occasion of salvation. This now Martial would either craftily or
impudently refer to Augustines time, which is spoken of the time of Christ's
passion, when the cross was set up in occasion of salvation, and not an idol
thereof in Augustines time.

He complains, that to an other place of Augustine, wherein mention is made
of the sign of ye cross, nothing is said, where nothing needs, when it is
confessed, that the sign of the cross was used in his time. And concerning
Constantines cross, we have spoken already sufficiently. To conclude
therefore, here is nothing replied in this article, to prove that the Apostles
and Fathers of the first Church did bless them selves with the sign of the
cross, although the Fathers of latter time used to mark them selves with that
sign, and counseled others so to do. Neither is there any thing but the
forged new found Martiales Epistle, which is worse then nothing, to prove that
the sign of the cross in the first age of the Church was used by the
Apostles, or their immediate successors before the days of Valentinus the
heretic.

The sixth Article.
That diverse holy men and women got them little pieces of the cross, Martial.
and enclosed them in gold, etc.

It is confessed, Fulke.
that diverse made great account to have little pieces of the cross, to enclose
them in gold, and hang them about them, but their superstition is reproved both
by Hieronyme and Chrysostom. To Hierome Martial answers, that he reproved
not the having of those pieces, but the confidence put in them, as the
Pharisees did in their Phylacteries hanged upon their bodies, and not printing
the law in their hearts. Be it so, but what accounts he the having of them?
even the strayning of a Gnat, Culicem liquantes and camelu^ deglu^ientes lib.
4. cap. 23. But in other places (says Martial) he wishes him self to kiss
the wood of the cross. Apol. 3. cont. Ruff. This was a small matter, and yet
it was more then having a little piece of the cross, for he speaks of his
visiting the places of the death, burial, and birth of Christ, in which he
might take more occasion of meditation upon the mysteries of our redemption. To
Chrysostom, which counted it impiety in certain priests, that hanged
Gospells about them, and pieces of the coat and hair of Christ, he makes like
answer, alleging out of his Demostr. ad Gentiles, that all the world desired
to have ye cross, and every man coueted to have a little piece of it, and to
enclose it in gold, etc. and whereas M. Calfhil answers, that this was no
praise of the parties, but a practice of the time* Martial replyeth, that it
was a praise of the parties, repeating what Chrysostom does write in
commendation of the sign of the cross etc. whereas in deed Chrysostom
speaking of the matter in question, only shows what was the affection of
Christians to the cross, which was sometime the wood of condemnation. Which
affection, although in some it were immoderate, yet Chrysostomes reason against
ye Gentiles, should not turn him to perpetual shame, (as Martial says) for
he proves that Christ was God, in that he had wrought so great a conversion
unto the faith, that no man was now ashamed of the sign of the cross, which
before was a token of condemnation. To conclude, where Martial abuses the
words of Christ: Haec oportet facere etc. These things ought to be done, the
other not omtted, to prove that the fact of having these pieces of the cross,
and enclosing them in gold, was good, he must either bring the law of God, as
the Pharisees did for tything of Mynt and Anise, or else we can not be
persuaded that such estimation of pieces of wood is good and godly.

The seventh Article.
That a cross was borne at the singing or saying of the Letanie, etc. Martial.


That processions came not from Gentilitie to Christians, Fulke.
Martial will prove, because processions came from tradition of ye Apostles,
and that he proves by a saying of Leo, What so ever is retained of the Church
into custom of devotion, comes of the tradition of the Apostles, and
doctrine of the holy Ghost. So is procession etc. but the minor is false, for
the Church of Christ, for many hundredth years after Christ, knew no
processions. But if processions came from the Gentiles, says Martial, shall we
therefore condemn them? Have we not ye liberal sciences, and many politic
laws from the Gentiles? as though there were one reason of religion, and
politic laws or liberal arts: the one we are forbidden to learn of the
Gentiles, Deuteronomy. 12.
the other being the gifts of God, we may take them even from the Gentiles.
Neither does Augustine against the Manichees, whom Martial cites lib. 20.
cap. 23. Con. Faust. speak of any heathenish ceremonies received in Christian
religion, but of such things* as we must have common with them, like the sun
and the air, as meat, drink, apparel, houses, etc.

Whether processions came from the Montanistes or Arrians, certain it is, they
came not from Christ nor his Apostles. Tertullian a Montanist makes mention
of certain stations, but I suppose they were no processions but standings. The
miracle of water turned into oil, to serve for light in the Church, reported
by Eusebius, I marvel to what end Martial brings forth, and counts that
it was an hundredth years before the heresy of Arrius. The Letanie or
supplication prescribed by the Council of Ments, Martial says the Papists do
observe, for they ride not in the Rogationweeke, nor wear their copes. But how
observe they, that the Canon commands them, to go barefooted in sackcloth
and ashes? The Council of Orleans anno. 515. calls these Letanies rogations,
but of processio^ or going abroad, it speaks nothing. S. Ambrose in deed is
ancienter then this Council, but whether that Commentary upon the Epistles,
that goes under his name, were of his writing, it is not agreed among learned
men, at least wise, there be diverse additions, and the written copies vary.
Besides that the word whereupon he builds dies pr^cessi^nis both in written
and printed copies, is dies purgationis, the days of a woman's purification, or
if algates he will have it processionis, as some printed books have, yet the
very circumstance of the place will prove that it is the days of a woman's going
forth after her childbirth, and therefore no procession after the cross.

And if Agapetus did not devise processions first, as M. Calfhil says; your
own Canon law lies, and not he, de cond. d. 1. Agapitus, as your author
Garanza cites it. But to come near unto the article. Sozomenus lib. ^. ca. 8.
shows, yt the Arrians at Constantinople began a kind of processio^, with
singing of Psalms by course, which John Chrysostom, fearing least any godly
men should be seduced by them, took up the same fashion, and so pasted the
Arrians in number and processu and going forward. For silver standards of the
cross, with burning wax (...) went before them. This place shows, how godly
men took vpfond ceremonies in emulation of heretics. But now concerning
these silver standards in form of ye cross, which Socrates li. 6. ca. 8.
shows, did serve to carry wax candles or torches, burning upon them, to give
the people light in the night season, for then their processions were in the
night, Martial is as mad as a march hare, that they should be counted no
better then candlestickes or cresset staves: and yet when he has prated what
he can, for that principal use they served, although it may be that
Chrysostom had some superstitious fantasy in the fourmes also of the cross,
which he devised to be as ye standerds for the Catholic army to follow: so
the same cross staves, served both for candlestickes and standerdes: how
soever it was, this procession differed much from our Popish processions, in
which idols are carried about, and not as candlestickes, but candlesticks
before them, with candels light in the day time, and not in the night.

His surmise, that the silver crosses were set in the Church, because no place
is mentioned where they left them when they came home, is foolish. They had
common theaters and meeting places more meet for seting up of such
candlebearing crosses, then ye Churches. The quarrel of the four lies I pass
over, let the Reader compare both their Books, and judge whether Martial have
handeled that story with sincerity.

The council Elibertine forbadde candels to be lighted in the day time in the
Churchyards, Ergo they forbadde them not on the Lords table, quod Martial. But
why then go you with torches and tapers into the Churchyard, both in
procession and at burialles. And seeing it was an Heathenishe custom to light
them in Churches, as well as in Churchyardes, they which forbad the one would
not have allowed the other. But you light them not as Heathen men, of whom
Lactantius speaks, thinking God to be in darkness, and to have need of
light. But Ad signu^ latriae demonstrandum to declare a sign of the high
service that you owe to God, If it be so, why light you them to saints? yea to
images? the Gentiles had as good excuses as you. Never thelesse you are
determined to keep your lights still, as you have record and witness out of
Eusebius, Athanasius, etc. In deed there is great reason, because they had
candels light in the night you will have them in ye day: but of light I wish the
reader to look more in my refutation of Rastals confutation, to ye 33. leaf of
his book. After this follows a vain discourse, to prove yt we are heretics,
because we have departed from the unity of the Church, from the Clergy, from
the bishop of Rome, etc. Al which is false, for we have not departed from the
church of Christ, which is ruled by his word, nor from the Christian Clergy,
nor from any godly Bishop of Rome, in any point in which he departed not from
the truth: but we are gone out of Babylon, we have forsaken Antichriste, and
all his merchantes, that made sale of men's souls: our prayer in a known
tongue, our communion in both kinds, our reverent administration of the Lords
supper, have the Scripture for their warrant, and the primitive Church for
their witness.

His railing upon Luther, I will not deal withal, God has advanced Luther as
his poor witness above the Pope, the proud antichrist, which makes all
Papists to spighte him. Concerning Justinians constitution, for crosses to be
born at the singing of the Letanie, it favors of the corruption of his time.
Such godly constitutions as he made, as well in Ecclesiastical as politic
matters, we esteem as the good laws of a forreyne prince are to be regarded.

And at length we come to Augustine the Monk, which coming from Rome, did
more hurt in corrupting true religion, then good in planting any religion: And
whereas Martial says, if our religion came from Eleutherius, it came from
Rome: although it were no shame to confess it came from Rome in those purer
times, yet Christian religion came to us even from the Apostles, as witnesses
Gildas the Britain, being planted here in the reign of Tiberius the
Emperor. And as for Augustine, although the king Ethelbert and the people were
well prepared before his coming, by the Queen and the bishop that attended
upon her, yet according to his zeal, he took some pains to make the people
receive the doctrine of Christ, although in behavior he was proud, as
Galfride writes, and Beda not altogether denies, but that he seemed so, and
in ceremonies superstitious. So that the doctrine of Christ which he taught,
came from Jerusalem, from whence the Gospel was first preached, his errors and
superstition came from Rome. That the bishops of the Britains refused, both
his authority and ceremonies, it argues that Christianity was in this land
not subject to the sea of Rome. If they refused to join with Augustine in
teaching the Saxons, it might be not for that they envied their salvation which
were their enemies, but because they would not consent to join in y^ work
with him, which sought to bring them into subjection. Concerning the cruel
murder of the Monks of Bangor in Augustines quarrel, Galfride a Britain
imputes no small part of the fault to Augustine. Bid a Saxon would have him
clear of it. But seeing the threatening of Augustine is agreed upon, and the
slaughter followed, it is shrewde evidence against him. That Augustines cross,
and painted table differs from that the Papists now use in procession,
Martial counts it not material, seeing afterward they received other kind of
images from Rome: and other kind of Images were then used in Churches, which
yet were hard for him to prove, for the Grecians to this day, receive none but
painted Images.

The pretense that Master Calfhil says, Augustine might have to excuse him to
feed the eyes of them that never heard of Christ, with ye image of his death,
that lending their ears he might enstruct their hearts: Martial will not
admit, or if he did admit it, that it follows not, that they which have not
like pretense may not use like example. Whereas Master Calfhil does neither
absolutely affirm the pretense, nor allow it to be good.

From this pretense he passes into a defense of praiing to Saints, to
justify the Popish Letanie, Virgin Marie pray for us, which he denies to be
idolatrous, because some steps, or show of invocation of Saints are found in
some old writers. And calls for Scripture to prove it to be idolatrous, yet
refuses what soever Luther, Calvin, or the Magdeburges have said against it.
But by his favor I will use one or two reasons out of scripture to prove it to
be idolatrous, to call upon the virgin Marie, or any creature. Saint Paul
says Romans 10. ver. 14. How shall they call upon him in whom they have not
believed. By which it is evident, that none ought, nor can in true faith be
called upon, but he in whom we believe, and it is idolatry to believe in any
but in God only, wherefore it is idolatry to call upon Marie or any creature,
but upon God only.

Again the Apostle 1. Tim. 2. ver. 5. says there is but one God, and one
Mediator of God and men, the man Jesus Christ, where the Apostle speaks not
only of redemption, but of prayers, supplications, intercessions etc. which
overthrows your blind distinction of mediator, of intercession, and
redemption.

For keeping the memory of the dead, which Lactantius counts superstition,
you think your selves clear of it, because Matthew, Peter, and Paul etc. are
alive in heaven. But you must remember, that Christ says: Abraham, Isaak, and
Jacob, were alive to God, but in respect of men they are dead, and therefore
those memories are not excused of superstition, according to Lactantius
judgment. Further you say, the note, that the material cross is no ensign
of CHRIST, has simple proof. But in deed your assertion, that it should be
an ensign of Christ, has no proof at all. The book of Carolus magnus
against images, you imagine to have been written by Calvin, or Illiricus, or
some other late protestant: but of the credit and antiquity thereof, I have
written against Doctor Sanders book of Images Cap. vltimo. Also concerning
the second council of Nice which Martial cites for procession with the
cross. Cap 15. or 14.

That God would not suffer the bones of Moses to be translated, least they
should have been matter of idolatry, he says it is no cause, why translating
of other Saints bodies should not be permitted. Because God will have mercy,
upon whom he will have mercy, and be gentle to whom it pleases him. Has
not the pottemaker power to make one vessel to honor, and another for reproach?
May he not transfer Peter's bones, and let Moses alone? May he not make Paul's
body to be honored, and Iosephes obscured, Saint Stephans shrined, and Samuels
interred, I think you will not deny?

These reasons to rehearse, it is a sufficient confutation of them: But for the
high estimation of relics, Hierome is of his side, against Vigilantius,
whom he calls a famous heretic. And yet no man condemned him for an
heretic but Hierome, who rather rayleth on him then reasons against him. As
for Eusebius, although he speak honorably of the bones of Polycarpus, which
the Christians gathered and buried, as the parts of an holy martyrs body, yet
he names not any worshipping of them, such as the Papists use. But Martial
makes much a do that Master Calfhil allows the excuse which the Heathen men
made, that they would not deliver the body of Policarpus, least the Christians
should leave Christ, and begin to worship him: saying, it was the instinct
of the devil, to deny his body etc. and so to say.

What then? Although they meant cruelly and slanderously against the true
Christians, which could neither forsake Christ nor worship any other. Yet the
same answer might be well made to superstitious Papists, who have forsaken
Christ and worship men, yea dead bones, and them often not of godly men, nor
always of men. That Chrysostom was a great admirer of relics, I showed
before, in so much that he would change the kingdom of heaven, for the chain
that Saint Paul was bound withal, wherein if he spoke not excessiuely, let
Martial follow him. We esteem the kingdom of heaven more then all the relics
that ever were. And yet we allow a reverent laying up of the bodies and bones
of the Saints, so it be without superstition and idolatry, as was meant by the
ancient fathers, although the contrary followed of their too much zeal and
carfulness of such small matters.

To conclude, you have heard what can be said for the antiquity of
processions, and bearing of the cross before them: whether it be an Apostolic
tradition, that was first devised by Chrysostom in emulation of heretics, let
the readers judge.

The eight Article.
That many strange and wonderful miracles were wrought by the sign of the
cross. Martial.


If this article were granted in manner and form as it is set down and meant
by the author: Fulke.
namely, that God by the sign of the cross has wrought miracles, yet does
it not follow, that the sign of the cross is now to be used of us, nor that
we should repose any confidence therein. By the rod of Moses great miracles
were wrought, yet was neither the sign of that rod to be esteemed, nor hope of
health to be placed in it, nor the rod it self to be worshipped.

The Apostles by anointing with oil, Mark. 6.
did work great miracles, yet neither the sign of that anointing is of us to
be used, nor the oil to be worshipped: wherefore if God to show the virtue of
him that was crucified, has wrought miracles, by the cross, or sign thereof,
it follows not, that the sign is still to be used, or the cross honored,
but he that was crucified. Whereas M. Calfhil said, that miracles are done by
the devil and his ministers, although Martial cannot deny it, yet he says it
follows not that all miracles, or those of the cross were done by the devil.
Whereas M. Calfhils meaning is plain, that we ought not to believe all things
that are commended to us by miracles, but to examine all doctrine by the word
of God, against which we must believe no miracles, no prophets, no Angels, Gal.
1. But whereas Martial laboboureth to prove, that miracles done by sign of the
cross, were done by God, he should first have proved substantially, that
miracles were done in deed by the cross, and after proved, by what power
they were done. For we may not believe every report of miracles, especially
when they are alleged to confirm false doctrine. Let us therefore consider
the first miracle which he rehearses of the cross of Christ, that Helena
found: if she found any, for Eusebius that knew Helena, and speaks much of
her commendation, and of her doing at Jerusalem, as I take it, would not have
concealed such a notable invention, if any such had been, in his story, and
therefore the note in his Chronology seems to be a late addition. But to
the miracle, that the cross was discerned from the other two by a sick
Gentlewoman upon whom it was laid, whereupon as soon as it touched her,
she recovered. This report of Rustinus seems to be uncertain, first because
Ambrose says, the cross was known by the title, without speaking of any
miracle: secondly, because the report of other writers is, that the miracle
was of a dead woman, and some of two dead persons, whereof to see more I refer
the reader to mine answer to D. Sanders book of Images cap. 13. or 12.
Concerning the rest of the Miracles, reported by Paulinus, Epiphanius,
Augustine and others, let the^ have such credit as their authors deserve,
which is not to build faith or doctrine upon them, or their writings, let it
be that some were true and wrought by God, yet follows it not, that all that
have been since reported in the Popish Legendes were either true or not
wrought by the devil: whereabout Martial makes much wrangling, but neither
affirms nor concludes any thing universally. None use more crossing then
witches and coniurers, the devil seems to be afraid to come near them,
certain strange works are brought to pass by them Let Martial affirm any
virtue included in the cross, or sign thereof absolutely, and then we may
deal with him accordingly For while he tells us what may be done by faith
and ye sign of ye cross, and what God has done by good men with that sign,
it is nothing to the authorizing of that sign, seeing the devil by credulity
in wicked men has don the like by the same sign.

And this is a true position of M. Calfhil, though Martial will not understand
it. That it is not a sufficient proof to make a thing good, or to show it to
be good, (because he cauilleth like a calfe a^ the word of making*) to say
that miracles were wrought by it. Martial asks first, whether the miracles of
Christ were not a sufficient proof of his divine power? Where he flies from
the position, which speaks not of the principal efficient cause, out of a
ceremony, a mean, or instrument. More pertinently he asks of the hemme of
Christ's coat. Saint Paul's napkins, whether they had not a virtue by his body.
I answer no. No more then Judas lips that kissed Christ, and Peter's
shadow, which could neither be holy, nor efficient of any thing, because it
was nothing but the privation of the light by coming between of his body. So
I say of coats, napkins, ashes of Martyrs, and sign of the cross, if any
miracles were done by means of them, they are not thereby holy, neither have
they any virtue in them. The Lord has given us a general rule to examine all
miracles, and miracle workers, by the doctrine they teach. Deuteronomy. 13.

If there arise among you a prophet or dreamer of dreams (and give thee a
sign or wonder, and y^ sign, and the wonder which he has told thee, come to
pass) if he say let us go after other Gods which thou have not known, and
let us serve them: thou shall not hearken unto the words of that prophet, or
unto that dreamer of dreams: for the Lord your God proves you, to know
whether you love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul.
Ye shall walk after the Lord your God and fear him, and keep his commandments,
and hearken unto his voice, and ye shall serve him, and cleave unto him. By
this scripture we are taught to examine all miracles, whether they tend to the
honor of the only true God and the maintenance of his true worship according
to his word: which Martial him self in a manner confesses: saying, that
miracles done by heretics are not able to commend a thing. But he finds
great fault with Master Calfhil for coupling the generation of a child in
adultery or feeding by stolen bread, to be miracles, because they be not
extraordinarily miracles and yet he can not deny but they be great wonders, and
the reason of the means is all one in both.

Now let us see how he answers those three reasons of Master Calfhils,
why miracles make not for the cross. And first he answers to a question,
Why the dirt in the street by which Christ wrought a miracle, should not be
honored as well as the cross on the altar? He answers because the cross
was an instrument by which all the world was saved. So was Judas, so was
Pilate. The second, He says the cross is a lively representation of Christ's
death. Nay a dombe and dead idol which is good for nothing. Abacuc. 2. The
third The cross is effectuous ever since. A deed efficient.

The cross is commanded of God to be made and used by diverse Revelations from
heaven. Nay by the devil from hell, and yet if Angels from heaven had taught
the cross to be made and used as another Gospel, as it is accounted of the
Papists, as great as circumcision was of ye Jews, not preached by the
Apostles, not contained in the Scriptures, we might safely accurse them.

But now to the reasons: the first is: Why should not such external means as
Christ and his Apostles used, and scripture mentions, be had in
administration, rather then the idle device of man, of which there is no
lawful president. Martial answers, the cross is no idle devise, but a
tradition of the Apostles, whereof they have lawful presidentes. But seeing no
president is lawful to build our faith upon, but the holy scriptures, which
the Papists have not for their cross, the reason stands untouched.

The second reason, If miracles were done by the sign of the cross, yet not
only by it, therefore the cross should not only be magnified without the
rest. Martial affirms that he would not have the cross magnified without
the rest, as prayer and faith. How does he then magnify the cross in Iulians
story, which was without prayer and faith?

The third reason. If miracles were done by the cross, yet it should not be
had in estimation, except all other things by which miracles were wrought, as
the he^ of Christ's garment, the spitle and clay, the shadow of Peter and
napkins of Paul, were likewise honored and esteemed. Martial answers, this
is but his assertion, for which he has neither scripture, council, nor Doctor.
As though an argument A paribus, were not good except the conclusion were
expressed in Scriptur, doctor, or council. Yet he replieth, that the cross is
the principal mean, by which miracles have been wrought. But the Scripture is
against that, for Christ wrought no miracle by the sign of y^ cross. Nay I
slander him, for he reasons not ad idem, but the cross is the chief and
principal instrumente of our redemption, yet not holier then the spear, the
reed, and the sponge, as Athanasius affirms Ad Antioch. que. 16. But even
the hemme, the spettle, and clay, if he had them, Martial would honor, worship
and esteem for his sake whose precious body they touched. Then let him worship
the sun that touched him with his beams of light, or if that be too far of,
let him worship Judas lips that kissed him, if he can come by them.
Concerning the person of Helena, I would wish nothing to be spoken of her, but
to her honor, except in case where her honor should be an hinderance of the
honor of Christ. Martial to justify her in all things, raileth upon M. Calfhil,
for charging her with superstition as though he had been the first yt had so
written of her, when it is reported of her that she was vsque ad superstitionem
pia, devout even to superstition. And yet her superstition, appears not so
great in any thing, as in this supposed invention of the cross.

The variety in time that is in the witnesses of the invention of the cross,
the blasphemous beast is not ashamed to compare with the appearance of variety
which is in the Evangelists, where in deed there is none, whereas this discord
can not be reconciled. Yet will he not have the tale discredited for the
discord in time, as though there were none other discord. The manifest
contradiction that is between Ruffinus, saying, Titulus non satis evident^r
dominici prodeba^ signa patibuli, The title did not show evidently the sign
of our Lords gibbet. And Ambrose saying, Titulo crux salutaris patuit, by the
title the healthful cross was manifestly known. This contradiction I say, he
denies to be any, affirming that a simple Logitian would prove it to be none.
Thinking that s^tis euidenter evidently enough, would excuse the matter, as
though we knew not what patet does signify, as well as Master usher of
Winchester. That a ship would not carry the pieces of the cross that are
showed in so many places, he counts it an impudent lie of Calvin, whom he
rayleth upon like a ruffian, and slaundereth like a devil. Yet Erasmus
affirms the same in his Peregrinat. relig. erg. And he that will believe
neither of them both, let him consider beside so many whole crosses as are
showed in steed of that one, and of great boardes yt are kept in many places
as part of it, so many thousand churches and Abbeys as either now show or have
showed chips and pieces of it, and he shall not think their report to be in
credible. The talk of the nails which were but three at ye first, and al
bestowed at the time of ye invention, yet are now multiplied to 13. or 14.
which bewrays an horrible impudency in the Popish idolaters. Martial
refuses as impertinent, yet will he not confess ye forgerie, which is a token
of a wicked and devilish conscience. Where M. Calfhill says that miracles
were not done by the cross to establish a worshipping or having of it,
Martial requires proof by scriptures, Councels or Doctors. I reason thus a
paribus out of the scripture, miracles were done by oil, shadow, and other
things, not to establish a worshipping or having of them: the like reason is of
miracles done by the cross. Beside that y^ scripture is plentiful in
challenging all honor and worship to the author, and not to the means or
instruments. Peter and John, means of the healing of the lame man refused all
honor and worship in respect of his healing, Act. 3. verse. 12. yet were they
other manner of means then ye cross ever was in doing of miracles.

That M. Calfhill says, miracles teach us not to do the like, but to believe
the like. Martial says, they teach us to do the like if we may: and he
proves it by him that teaches that alms covers sin, who thereby teaches
to do alms, etc. Thus the wise man compares miracles and men together, facts
and doctrine; act and possibility, even as right as a rams horn. But how
shall we come by this power to work miracles by the sign of ye cross? for to
assay without assurance of Gods power, is to tempt God. Therefore we may no
more cross us against devils, because God has sometime chased the^ away by y^
sign, then we may annoint blind men's eyes with clay, to prove if they will
see after it, because Christ wrought a miracle by y^ mean, which as Martial
says, teaches us to do the like if we may. What estimation Paulinus a
superstitious man had in his piece of the cross, which was perhaps a piece of
another tree, then ever came in Iewry. We have not to follow him in his
follye. That miracles wrought of holy men by the sign of the cross, etc. is
not a sufficient reason to prove that ye figne of the cross should be had,
kept, set up, and honored, I have already proved out of the scripture by ye
like or equal, and yet it is against reason, when we deny your arguments whose
consequence you ought to prove, y^ we should be driven to prove that they
follow not. Where M. Calfhill says, y^ miracles only ought not, or may not
commend a thing, you pick quarrels to him without cause, obiecting the miracles
of Christ, who took witness not only of his miracles, but also of ye holy
scriptures. When you have urged the miracle done by ye sign of ye cross out
of Epiphanius, as much as you can, yet proves it not ye honoring and setting
up of ye sign of ye cross in these days, as M. Calfhill tells you, seeing y^
we live not among Turks or Sarazens, y^ we need to have any such sign whereby
we might be known to be worshippers of Christ. But you would feign learn,
what if a Portingal or one of ye new converted Ila^ds of India, coming by
chance into England, of which he never heard before, and seeing neither images
nor crosses in church nor streate, how he should know in whom we believe.
And I would learn of you, what skilleth it, if such a man as never came here,
nor ever by any likelihood shall come hither, yet supposed to be driven on a
boarde out of India into England, what skilleth it I say, if he know not in
whom we believe, and so depart as wise as he came? What remedy but we must have
al places filled with images and crosses, for such a man to know what we hold
of, who shall be never the better thereby, nor the worse if he know not. But you
think that happily strangers of Greece, Constantinople, Iewry, and India, may
come to our coasts, and therefore we ought to have the sign of the cross in
churches, chapels, and high ways, to signify of whom we hold. We have not
many such strangers, but when they arryue we have books of the holy scripture
in Greek, Hebrew, Chaldee, Syrian, Arabike, Sclauonian tongues, in which they
may be instructed that are desirous to understand what religion we profess.
The Lord God thought it sufficient to have his law written upon great
stones, at the entrance into the holy land, to let all strangers know, both
whom, and after what manner the people of Israel did honor and serve their
God. Deuteronomy. 27. 3. But as for images and pillars he utterly forbad them to set
up any for any use of religion, Deuteronomy. 12. 1. and 16. ver. 2.

The ninth Article.
What commodity every Christian man has or may have by the sign of the
Cross. Martial.


Whereas M. Calfhil detesteth the Idolatrous council of Nice the Fulke.
. 2. by the example of Ambrose, who abhorred the heretical council of
Ariminum. Martial willing to justify yt rabble of Idolators assembled at Nice,
would show great difference, not only between the councels, but also between him
and Ambrose, saying yt he was a catholic bishop acknowledging obedience and
subjection to the Popes holiness. As though the bishop of Rome in his time,
either required such obedience and subjection, or y^ Ambrose acknowledged any.
But concerning that assembly of Nice, and ye authority thereof, how they
determined contrary to the word of God, not only in the matter of having and
worshipping of images, but also in other things, I refer ye reader to mine
answer unto M. Sanders book of images, Cap. 15. or 14. Of all yt M. Calfhill
says against that council of Nice, Martial chooses but one saying of Germanus
to defend, wherein he picketh two quarrels against M. Calfhil, one yt he should
misunderstand the saying of Germanus, as though he meant yt grace were
dispensed by Images, where he says: an image is a figuring of holy virtue and
dispensation of grace* But if grace be not dispensed by images, whether
Germanus said so or no, I pray you, to what purpose are they set up in the
churches? or what profit may a Christian man have by the sign of the cross?
when Martial denies yt any grace is dispensed by images. The second quarrel he
picketh is, yt M. Calfhill denies y^ the virtues of saints can be seen in
their images, which could not be seen in their persons. Martial says: this
reason condemns the scripture as well as images, for the ynke and paper has
no mind or sense to hold the power of Christ, and virtue of the Apostles, more
then images have. As though the scripture were nothing but ynke and paper, or
as though yt all things y^ may be learned and understood by hearing, may be
discerned by the eye, which conceiueth only bodily shapes of things, and cannot
attain to see faith, holiness, virtue, etc. whereof no images can be made. When
M. Calfhill says: that the image of Mars, or S. George, Venus, or the mother
of Christ cannot be discerned asunder. Martial has nothing to reply, but that
we must not suppose to find any images among the Christians, but of Christ and
his saints, so that images be wise books, which cannot teach their scholars
what or whereof they are, but they must learn of the common opinion how to
esteem of them. That images be teachers of pride, avarice, wantonness, etc.
as the Prophet says: they are the doctrine of vanity and lies, Abac. 2.
Martial says blasphemously, yt images give no more occasion of vices, then
the holy scriptures, of which some wicked men take occasion of dronkennes,
whoredom, usury, etc.

But seeing the scripture directly and plainly conde^neth al these and other
vices as occasion is given by the^, howsoever any is taken by ungodly persons,
whereas images which teach no goodness, but being gorgeously and whorishly
decked with gold and precious stones, otherwise then the saints delighted,
even as in holy scripture they are counted as stumbling blocks, so they teach
men vainly affected, to delight in such things, as they see to please the
saints. But Martial says, that gylded images make men think of the joys of
heaven. O ridiculous fantasy. They may sooner make men think of the vanity
of the world, to delight in it. But when the holy ghost by ye mouth of his
Prophets has determined that images are the doctrine of lying and vanity, it
were lost labor to dispute any longer what good things they can teach, Ier.
10. ver. 8. Abac. 2. ver. 18.

The examples of Ezechias, Josias, and Solomon, he says are brought to no
purpose against images amongst Christians. As though it were more lawful for
Christians, then for Israelites to commit idolatry. But y^ Christians (says
he) direct their hearts, and offer their prayers to God, and therefore there is
no mistrust of idolatry amongst them. Why Martial? have not ye Papists in
England made and do they not yet still in other places make vows to the images
that are in such a place and such a place. Do they not travail thither, and
offer up both prayers and sacrifice of candels, money, Jewels and other things
unto the Images? Have not your idols given answer? have they not wagged their
heads and lips, etc. O shameless dogs and blasphemous idolaters. The Lord
so deal with you as you know in your own consciences y^ the ignorant people
have made their prayers even to the stocks and stones, thinking them to have a
life and divinity in them: and yet you say, there is no mistrust of idolatry,
lest you should be driven by example of Ezechias, to destroy and break your
images, although otherwise they were not against Gods commandment, but even
made by his appointment, as ye brazen Serpent was. That fond quarrel of yours,
that Solomon was not abused by images, but by women, I leave to women to laugh
at your vanity, when they read, that by women he was brought to be an
idolater, and worshipper of images.

And every child that reads Chrysostom Hom. 54. in 8. Tom. can understand,
that although occasioned by obstinate Jews, yet he speaks generally of al
obstinat minds, whether they be professors of Christianity, or no. Animo
desperato etc. There is nothing worse the^ a desperate mind, although he see
signs, although miracles be wrought, yet he stands still in the self same
frowardness. For an obstinate sinner that has professed Christianity, is no
more moved with miracles, and the sign of the cross, then a Jew or Pharao
was. It has more color, but not more truth, that Athanasius ascribes not
all effects of conversion of wicked men, etc. wholly and solie to the faith of
Christ, when he says, who has done this, etc. but the faith of Christ, and
sign of the cross? Martial confesses, that faith is able to do it without the
cross, but y^ God would have y^ sign of the cross common with faith: if ye
ask in what scripture God has revealed this will, he has nothing to say.
Only he denies, M. Calfhils exposition of Athanasius, that the sign of ye
cross was joined to faith, not as a fellow worker, but as a witness and sign
of y^ faith against the Gentiles, because he has neither scripture, Doctor,
nor Council for it. Wherein he lies shamefully, for ye scripture showing, Romans
3. (...) 28.
y^ faith only as ye instrument by which we apprehend Gods mercy and our
justification, by which God purifieth our hearts, sufficiently proves, Act. 15.
v. 9
that the sign of the cross is no worker in these cases.

Chrysostom speaking of our conversion, etc. says: Hom. 14. in Ep. ad Romans
Vnum hoc etc. We have offered this one only gift of GOD, that we give credit
to him, promising us things to come, and by this only way we are saved. This
Doctor ascribes all to faith, therefore nothing to the sign of the cross.
Whether the Parisiens approve Erasmus his censure it is not material, the
censure is true, and approved by as wise and well learned as they.

Touching the next quarrel, that Cyrillus acknowledges it no fault of the
Christians, to make the sign of the cross at their doors, it is very
foolish, as all the rest be, for although he defend it as a good deed, and in
his time tolerable, yet if any did worship the wood of the cross, as Julian
charged them, it was a fault, which Cyrillus does excuse and seek to cover,
but of that matter you may read more in mine answer to D. Sanders book of
images, cap. 4. or 3. after the error of his print.

That S. Basil allows images in Churches, he cites his sermon upon Barlaa^,
where he exhorts painters to set forth the valiant conflictes of the martyr
by their art, but of setting up those tables in Churches there is no word.
Neither do I perceive he speaks of other Painters then eloquent Rhetoricians.
For immediately before he says. Quin magnificentioribus (...) ipsius ling^is
Ced^^us. Sonantiores doctorum tubas ad illius praeconia aduocemus. Exurgite
nunc o praeclari athleticor^m gestorum pictores etc. But let us give place to
more magnificent tongues, vtterers of his praises. Let us call hither the
louder sounding trumpets of learned men. Arise now o ye noble Painters of the
valiant acts of champions etc. And it is usual among learned men, to compare
good Orators to cunning Painters.

The counterfeit oration of Athanasius, brought in the idolatrous Council of
Nice, we reject as a matter forged by heretics and idolaters. The other
Doctors places, whom he quoteth, are all considered and answered in several
places of mine answer to Doctor Sanders book of images before mentioned.

Whether an image may be made of Christ, which is both God and man, you shall
find it more at large entreated, in my said answer cap. 7. or 6.

That the cross in the time of Cyrillus had none image upon it, it is to be
proved by this reason, (...) Julian would not have omitted to object the
worshipping of images unto Christians, which they condemned in the Heathens, if
any images had been upon their crosses, which he charged them to have
worshipped. Concerning the calling of Churches by the name of Saints, we have
spoken already.

That S. Paul joins not pictures with scriptures, to be our instruction and
comfort, it is an argument of better force then Martial has wit to answer.
For if any such instruction, comfort, or commodity had any ways come to
Christians by pictures, he would not have written, that the scriptures are able
to make the man of God perfect, prepared to all good works, 2. Tim. 3. verse.
17. Articl. 3.

The tenth Article.
The adoration and worship of the cross allowed by the ancient Fathers.
Martial.


Martial thinks it not reason, Fulke.
that he should prove the adoration of the cross by some testimony of
scripture, because God has not so tied him self to the written letter of the
scripture, that nothing can be taken for truth, which is not written in
scripture. But God has so tied us to the written letter of the scripture, that
we are bound to believe nothing but that which may be proved thereby. The
baptism by heretics, the baptism of infants, the authority of the Epistle
to the Hebrews, of Saint James and Jude, and of all the canonical scriptures,
have proof and approbation out of the holy scriputres, and are not received of
us by the only tradition and authority of the church, which yet we do not
refuse, when it is warranted by the holy scriptures inspired of God.

The ancient Fathers, Athanasius, Chrysostom, etc. were not exempted from the
infirmity of men, that they could so order their terms, as no heretics should
take occasion of error by them, when even the terms of holy scripture are
often times abused by the^, clean contrary to the meaning of the spirit, by
which they were written.

But Martial like a proud fool, disdaineth to be called to define adoration,
because every term is not necessary to be defined. And yet I suppose he would
claw his poll twice, or ever he could make a true definition of it, or a
description either. At the least wise, seeing the word of adoration is taken so
many ways: but that he would walk under a cloud of ambiguitie, he should have
expressed what manner of adoration he does speak of. But he is content to
take adoration for bowing down, prostrating, putting off the cap, etc. which
he thinks may be done to a sensllesse image, as well as to the Queens cloth
of estate, her privy seal, etc. as though there were no difference between
civil reverence, and religious worship and yet I ween no man does this honor
to those senseless things, although he show reverence to the Prince at the
sight of them. The second commandment, Exodus 20 he says touches not Popish
images, more then politic images, of Dragons, Eagles, Owls, etc, in arms or
other pictures. So good a lawyer he is, that he can not interpret the law
according to the matter whereupon it is made, namely religion, but fantasieth,
that because images out of the use of religion be not forbidden to be made by a
law of religion, therefore they be not forbidden to be made, no not in the use
of religion.

The Prophets, he says, cry out against the images of Gentiles, and by his
leave, against the images of the Israelites also. The image of the brazen
Serpent was a figure of Christ, and yet the Prophets condemned, and Ezechias
destroyed the worship of the brazen Serpent.

For the examination of the sentence of Ambrose de ^bitu Theodosij, I refer
the reader, to mine answer to D. Sander of images. cap. 13. or 12.

Augustine in Joan. T. 36. shows, how reverently ye cross was esteemed of
the Romans, that now malefactors were no more punished upon it, least it
should be thought, they were honored, if they s^ffered that kind of death,
which our savior Christ died. As among us, if rascal thieves should be
beheaded at the Tower hill, where only honorable perso^ages use to suffer, it
might be said, they were honoued with that kind of execution. Hereupon
Martial both foolishly and lewdly dreameth, that if thieves had been put to
death upon the cross, the people were likely to have honored them for the
crosses sake.

Hierome says, that Paula worshipped lying before ye cross, as though she had
seen Christ hanging upon ye cross, yet says he not, that she worshipped the
cross. Ambrose says of Helena, that when she found ye cross she worshipped
the king, and not the tree, for that is an heathenish error, De obis,
and a vanity of ungodly persons. wherefore if Hierome, or any other father
should teach us to worship the cross as an idol, Theod.
we might well say to him, avoid Satan. But Martial, least he should seem
weary of wrangling, scoffeth at M. Call. for talking of a wodden tree, as
though the matter of a thing, might not be named, but where there is difference
of matter. Why say we then an earthly or fleshly man, if we may not say a
wooden tree? by Martials philosophy, least men should think we talk of
watrie and fishy men. I had not thought to have named Martials term of
Gentlemen's recognisances, of Dragon, Eagles, etc. used in this Article, but
that he is so captious, to take exceptions to M. Call. terms, himself being a
lawier, to trip in a term of law. That service and worship do so concur
together, that the one can not be without the other, Martial grants, although
he think M. Call. can bring no scripture, Doctor, nor Council for it, when he
brings the saying of Christ. Matt ^. 4. But when he infers that we must
serve God only, therefore we must worship God only. Mart. bringetl^ insta^ce of
civil service, and worship of parents. when our savior Christ speaks only
of religious worship, which the devil required to be given him, not as God,
but as the distributer of all the kingdoms of the world, under God.

That Angels are inferior to Christ, which worship him, Heb. 1.
and are not worshipped again, Martial says, it is an addition unto S. Paul,
because in all that Epistle we are not forbidden to worship Angels, but where
he proved before, that God only is to be worshipped, and the Angel refuses to
be worshipped of John. Apoc. 19. verse. 10. 22. verse. 8. who was not so madd to
worship him as God, but as an excellent creature: what addition can this be to
the sense and meaning of the Apostle, especially when he adds immediately,
that they are all ministering spirits, appointed to minister for them that
shall inherit salvation. They are appointed of God to serve, they are not set
up to be served and worshipped. Their honor and delight is, that God only
may be served and honored.

Out of Damascen, he excuses their worshipping of the cross, for that they
worship not ye matter, as wood, copper, etc. but the figure, as if it were
lesle idolatry to worship an accident, then a substance.

The honor which Peter refused to receive of Cornelius, was not such as became
the minister of God, and therefore was reproved by Peter, without
counterfetting of humility, the other examples that Martial brings of
civil worship done unto David by Abigail, and Nathan, be clean out of the
purpose.

Concerning the worship of Angels, I have spoken immediately before. Martial
slaundereth S. John, that he would have worshipped the Angles as God. The
conclusion of this argument he thinks worthy to be hissed at, Angels may not
be worshipped, ergo, much lesle the cross.

What shall we say to such a Chrysippus, as allows not the argument a
maioribus? The objection of the Cherubims, ye brazen serpent, ye oxen, and
other images in the Temple, you shall find answered, cap. 5. or. 4. of my
confutation of D. Sanders book of images.

The seventeen authorities brought by M. Calfhil, against the worshipping of
images, Martial will answer if he can, and first he denies, that Clemens
speaks of crosses, crucifixe, etc. but of the images of the Gentiles. In
deed in his days the true Christians had no such images, that he should
speak of them. But consider his reasons, that he makes against the
worshipping of heathenish images, and they serve also to condemn the worship
of Popish images. The fables of the image of Christ's face, that he gave to
Veronica, and sent to Algarus, is good draffe for such swine, as delight in
idolatry. But Martial thinks, that as our ears call upon us to bow our
knees at the name of Jesus, so do the eyes at the sight of the crucifixe: but
he must understand, that we worship not the sound of the name of Jesus,
rebounding in the air, but the power, the majesty and authority of Jesus, we
acknowledge and honor, not called upon by the sound of the name of Jesus, but
by the voyc^ of the Gospel, to which the idol of the crucifixe has no
resemblance, neither is it a lawful mean, to strirre up our remembrance,
because it is forbidden of God.

Where Saint Paul says, that Christ was described or painted unto the
Galathians, we must either say, that the passion of Christ was painted in a
table, or else they carried the image of the cross of Christ rent and torn in
their minds. If they might carry an image in their minds, why might they not
have it fair painted in a table, speak Master Calfe? answer if you can? O
mighty Martial, withdraw your grimme countenance a while, and give him leave
to gather his wits together. First he says, that Saint Paul speaks of
neither of both your images, but of the effect and fruit of the death of
Christ, which was so lively described before them, that they ought not to have
sought any thing more to the sufficiency of his redemption, and their
salvation. Secondly, although the sense of hearing be appointed of God, Romans
10. to instruct faith, yet he finds not the sense of seeing, and especially
of images, which God has forbidden, admitted to be a mouer to Christian
devotion or worship of God: and therefore there is no like reason, that as the
story may be carried in remembrance, so the image may be painted and set up in
the Church to be worshipped.

The iniunction of kneeling at the communion, intends no worship of the
bread and wine, more then of the table, the cup, the book, the deske, the
wall, etc. before which the people kneel, and therefore it has nothing like
to your kneeling before the cross, which is not only before it, but also to
it, to worship it.

But you think you have an argument to choke us, of the ceremony of swearing
upon a book, seeing swearing is a kind of adoration. But sir, we swear not
by the book, as you Papists do, we call God only to witness, the book is
but an external indifferent ceremony, and that rather civil then
ecclesiastical, whereas adoration of GOD by images, is prohibited by Gods
law. Again, we give no honor at all to the book, as you do to your images.

That Clemens allows the honor given to man, as to the image of GOD, we
allow very well, because man is a true image of GOD, your blocks and stocks
be all false and counterfeit images.

To Clemens Alexandrinus, Irenaeus and Tertullian he makes the same answer,
that they speak only of heathenish images. The like he might say, where they
speak against adulteries, that they speak of the adulteries of the Heathen,
and not of Christians. And the same to Cyprian, Origin, Arnobius, Lactantius,
and Athanasius, bringing instance of the civil reverence done to the Princes
seat, and to the Prince him self. And whereas Arnobius says expressly, and
absolutely we worship no crosses, he expounds it, we worship them not as
Gods. Such expositions may avoid all authorities. The Gentiles which knew the
Christians worshipped but one God, did not obiuct worshipping of crosses unto
them as Gods.

Against the authority of Lactar tius, he brings in a verse falsely ascribed
unto him: Flecte genu lignumque crucis venerabile adora, Bow the knee, and
adore the venerable wood of the cross. If Martial allow this verse for
authentical authority, how will he justify that he said before, they
worshipped not the wood, stone, metal of the cross, but the figure or sign of
it? Against Athanasius he obtrudeth that counterfeit sermon of the image of
Christ in Berisus, and once again urges his forged question 39. ad
Antiochu^, which is quest. 16. as we have set it down at large Articl. 5.
having in it no such words as he c^teth: Crucis figuram ex duobus lignis
componentes adoramus. We making a figure of the cross of two pieces of wood,
do ador^ it. To Epiphanius, he answers, that he speaks only against
women, which offered sacrifice to ye vi^gine Marie, whereas neither it was
lawful that women should offer sacrifice, nor that Marie should be made a God.
But in deed Epiphanius speaks against the adoration of dead men, by images.
Et mortui qui lem sunt qui adorantur etc. And they truly which are worshipped
are dead, but they bring in their images to be worshipped which never lived,
for they can not be dead which never lived. He would have Marie to be honored,
but not with worshipping her image, for that were idolattie. Martial has two
strong collections: if a woman may not sacrifice, ergo, she may not be head of
the Church, as though it were necessary, that the chief governor of ye
church should do sacrifice. The other, that women may not offer external
sacrifice, ergo, there is an external sacrifice that men may offer. As good as
this, a woman may not circumcise, therefore circumcision is in use to be done
by men.

To be short, Epiphanius calls the heresy of ye Collyridiaus that sacrificed
to the virgin Marie Haeresis si^^lachrifica an image making heresy. But least
Martial should seem to be beaten clean away from Epiphanius, he cites him De
vitis prophet, alleging a prophecy of Hieremie of the second coming of
Christ, which should be Quando gentes vniuersae ligno supplicabunt, when all
nations shall make their supplications to wood. Here is either Martials sign
of the cross, or an Heathenish error commanded by the prophets, he says.
But if he will boaste of the authority of the ancient Epiphanius, he must
bring better stuff then this fragment De vita and inter. Proph. Which
following so many Jewish fables, argues the later Epiphanius the patron of
Images to be ye author, rather then ye elder of Cyprus. For this prophecy of
Hieremie, even as the fable of the Arc swallowed of a stone, etc. sauoureth of
Jewish vanity: And yet if we should admit it as authentical and true, the
sense should rather be, yt Christ shall come when al nations shall be idolaters
or wood-worshippers, then when al nations should worship the sign of the
cross, as Martial supposes. For Christ at his second coming shall scarce
find faith. Therefore infidelity possessing the greatest part of ye world, it
is more like all nations should worship wooden idols, then Christ by honoring
the sign of his cross.

To Ambrose, denying that Helena worshipped the wodde of the cross, he
opposes a forged saying of Ambrose, cited in the second council of Nice,
where lying, forging, and false worshipping, did bear all the sway. Concerning
the true testimony of Ambrose, read more in mine answer to D. Sanders book
of images Cap. 13. or 12.

To Hierome, not admitting ye civil honor used to be given to the pillars and
images of the Emperors, much less adoration of images in religion, he
oppeseth his saying in Psalm. 98. affirming that adoration of the cross is
allowed by him, whereas that commentary by learned and indifferent judges,
Erasmus and Amerbachius, is proved by many arguments to be none of Hieronymes
writing, but of one of much later time.

Thus has Martial against the true testimonies of the fathers, nothing to
oppose, but their counterfetted authorities, and false inscribed writings.
Concerning Hieronymes adoration of the mangar and incunabula the cradle of
Christ, which Martial so often called the swathling clothes, I have answered
before, yt he means no such adoration, as the Papists give unto their
images, but a reverent estimation, as of an ancient, holy monument, wherein yet
I will not altogether excuse Hierome of superstitious affection, as I will not
charge him with idolatry. For Chrysostomes judgment of worshipping ye cross, I
refer the reader as before, to Cap. 13. or 12. of mine answer to D. Sand.
book of images. To Claudius bishop of Taurino, that in all his Dioces forbad
the worship of the cross, he answers, Alphonsus de Cactro counts him for
an heretic, and Jonas bishop of Orleans writes against him. In deed Jonas
writes against his overthrowing of Images, but he writes al so against ye
adoration of Images. His words are these: Lib. 1. De cultu imagine. Claudius
praesul Ecclesiae Taurinensis, etc. Claudius bishop of the Church of Taurine
saw his flock (among other things which it did worthy of reformation) to be
given to the superstitious, yea the pernicious worshipping of images, of which
disease, some of those parts are sick of an old rooted custom, etc. So that
not only Claudius, but also Jonas, was directly contrary to this tenth article.

Touching the brabling distinction of Latria and Daulia, I refer the reader
to mine answer to Doctor Sanders book of images, Cap. 6. or 5. as also for
that noble argument that follows, whereby he would prove that Papists
cannot commit idolatry.

That M. Calfhill affirms outward profession to be necessary for every
Christian man. Martial says, he condemns his doctrine of only faith
justifying. Ver^ly, a clubb is more mere then an argument, to beat it into
such an Asses head, that when we teach that only faith does justify, we say
not, that God requires nothing of a Christian man but faith only. Again, who
would vouch safe to answer his quarreling of true faith, without confession?
The ruler^ believed, but did not confess, John. 12. here was faith (quod
Martial) but no confession. But who will grant that here was a true
justifying faith? Likewise this argument: There is a corporal service of
outward gesture due to God, therefore it is no idolatry to kneel before an
image. And again: Protestants kneel before images in glass windows, and
hold up their hands at Paul's cross, therefore they defile their bodies with
sacrilege. And if they excuse themselves by their good intent, the same will
serve the Papists which adore the image for that it represents Christ or his
saints.

But protestants adore no images, with any intent, thou foolish advocate of
Idolaters, no more then Martial does reverence to a dog, when he puts of
his cap, or makes courtesy in any house, where a dog is before him. And
verily he says, a man may as well be suspected for idolatry, if he bow
before any visible creature, as if he kneel before an image. But not so
probably, as Martial may be suspected to be out of his wits, when he makes
such comparisons. The Jews were not only suspected, but also affirmed by the
Gentyles to worship the clouds and the power of heaven, because in prayer they
looked up to heaven: Qui puras nubes, and Coeli ^^men adorant, says the Poet
of them. Wherefore by Martials comparison, they might as well have prayed before
images. And where he says, that Protestants condemn outward things except
hattes, beardes, barrel breeches, etc. he shows his vanity. Our judgment
concerning outward things that serve for order and comeliness (being not
defiled with idolatry and superstition) is sufficiently known. What we teach
of fasting and praying, vowing, etc. it were superfluous here to repeat, when
public testimonies of our doctrine are daily given, both in preaching and
writing. And surely I am to blame y^ vouchsaue such vain calumniating of any
mention. That not to bow their knee to Baal is not a peculiar note of Gods
servants, because other things are required in Gods servants, then to be free
from idolatry, it is a foolish and more then childish quarrel. For in the
days of Elyas, that was a peculiar note to discern them from idolaters, whom
God had preserved both from yelding to idolatry in heart, and also from
d^ssembling with outward gesture. But Martial would learn whether M.
Calfhill kneeling down before his father to ask him blessing, did not commit
idolatry. How often shall I tell him: he is an Ass that cannot make a
difference between civil honor and religious worship. And once again he
must be answered, why the people are suffered to swear upon a book, with their
cappes in their hands, rather then to kneel before the cross in doing of
their adoration to God. If he will be answered, I will tell him again, partly
because it is against civil honesty that the people should stand covered
before the Judge, partly because they swear by the name of God, whom they
ought to reverence. But kneeling before a cross to worship it, is manifest
idolatry, and expressly forbidden by the law of God. Thou sh^lt not bow
down to them nor worship them. The people are not allowed to put off their
cappes to the book, neither yet to swear by the book.

When Martial can prove, that it is lawful for Christians to worship images,
then we will grant, it is uncharitable to judge them idolaters that kneel
before them.

But he will not grant the cross to be nothing in that sense that Saint Paul
says, an Idol is nothing, because it is a representation of a thing that
was, by this reason the image of Jupiter, Hercules, Romulus, which were men
sometime, were no idols. The image of the Sun, of an Ox, an Ape, a Catt,
etc. worshipped of the Egyptians, were no Idols, neither was the worshipping of
them idolatry. The questions to be propounded in the Chauncery, I leave to
Martial to propounde him self. But where he says, that no evidence of any
idolatrous fact in worshipping the cross can be showed in true Christians, I
agree with him: but in Papists, if he mean them, great evidence. Who went a
Pilgrimage to the roodes of Bostone, Douercourt and Chester, were they not
Papists? who made the roodes to sweat, to bleed, and to smell sweet as D.
Read did with his roode of Becclys, were they not Papists? Finally, who
says and sings to the Crucifix? Aue rex noster, etc. All hail our King:
All hail, O cross our only hope, etc. I doubt not but the country of
Christian men, will judge this as good evidence for pulling down the cross, as
Ezechias had for destroying the brazen Serpent.

It is Martials poor judgment, when you see men praying, they be Christian
men: therefore they serve God in spirit and truth: but afterward, he
restrayneth it to men that were baptized in Christ. Yet may they be heretics,
and therefore no true worshippers of God. But y^ which he spoke in way of
humility, he will now say stoutly: Sir when you see men, that is to say men
that are baptized, men that believe in God, praying yea before an image, and
holding up their hands, and knocking their breasts, it is a good consequent
to say they be Christian men. Ergo they serve God in spirit and truth: and we
may not judge the contrary. This argument holds of the place of stoutnesse.
For other consequence there is none in it, nor yet witty conueyance. For first
when I see men, I must say, they be men that are baptized, and believe in God.
Whereas by sight I can not perceive that they are baptized, and yet if I know
that they be baptized, I can not tell whether they believe in God, as
Christians, or as heretics, or whether they be hipocrites without faith. How
shall I then judge them to be Christian men? Finally when I see them do an open
act, contrary to Christian profession, yet by Martials divinity, I may not
judge, but that they be good Christians, and worship God in spirit and truth.
Even as by his Canon law, I am taught, that if I see a priest embrasing of a
woman, I must judge he does it for no harm, but to bless her. To be short.
Martials good consequent, will make him confess, that all the protestants that
hold up their hands at Paul's cross, and say Amen when the preacher her
says, God confound the Papists, (whereat he scoffeth) be Christian men, and
worship God in spirit and truth. As for their adoration of the cross, he
says stands as well with the glory of God, as our kneeling at the
communion, putting off our cappes to the cloth of estate, to the Princes
letters, bowing to the Princes person, kissing of the book, etc. So that with
him things by God expressly forbidden, stand as well with his glory, as
things by him commanded and permitted. In the end, complaining that Master
Calfhill has not answered him to thirty places out of the ancient writers,
whereof let the Readers when they have compared, judge, he glories that his
railing and slanderous conclusion, is not dealt withal, but by silence, which
silence he takes for a confession: but in deed it is a sufficient confutation
of such lies and slanders as have no color of truth in them. Our Savior
Christ being called a Samaritan made none answer to it. Socrates an Heathen
man, kept silence when a varlet railed on him, wherefore silence in such case as
this, is neither a confession, nor a conviction. To conclude, I will not
altogether refuse, as Master Calfhil does, to deal with So ^ewde an
adversary as Martial is, but I would wish that the Papists for their
credites sake, would henceforward set forth a better champion for their causes,
or else help him with better weapons to fight in their quarrel. For in this
reply he does nothing in a manner, but either conster like an Usher, or quarrel
like a dogbolt Lawier.

FINIS.

