AN ANSWER TO VVITHERS MOTTO.

Without a Frontispice. WHEREIN, Nec HABEO, Nec CAREO, Nec CVRO, are neither
approved, nor confuted: but modestly controuled, or qualified.

QVAESTIO.
-- Quid dignum tanto feret hic promissor hiatu?
RESPONSIO.
-- Sic invat indulgere fugacibus horis.
OXFORD, Printed by JOHN LICHFIELD, and WILLIAM TVRNER. 1625.

The Book to the Reader.
WEll may you muse why I came no sooner to light, but lay obscure so long;
understand therefore that I have in time past sought to come under the press,
to show my self to public view, but by Mr. Wither's means, who sought to
smoother me in my birth, have lain sometime hid, but now having got strength
to come forth to declare my self to the world, I leave thee to censure the
rest.

Virgilius de litera Pythagorea.
LItera Pythagorae discrimine secta bicorni
Humanae vitae speciem praeferre videtur. (...)

Nam via virtutis dextrum petit ardua callem,
Difficilemque aditum primu^ spectantibus offert,
Sed requiem praebet fessis in vertice summo:
Molle ostendat iter via lata, sed vltima meta
Praecipitat captos, voluitque per ardua saxa:
Quisquis enim duros casus virtutis amore
Vicerit, ille sibi laudemque decusque parabit:
At quidedsiam, luxumque sequetur inertem,
Dum fugit oppositos incauta mente labores,
Turpis inopsque simul miserabile transiget aevum.
To Master Wither himself.
MAster Wither; When I first took up your Book to read, (which I confess I
did not out of curiosity, Criticisme, or any desire to be your Antagonist) I
thought to make the same use of it for Collections and observations, as I have
accustomed out of other men's endeauours: but when I found a certain confusion
in the same, besides many repetitions, I compared it to Protogenes pencill,
that thrown away in a rage, effected that work, which with all his cunning
he knew not how to contriue; and so in my conscience, you writ this in anger,
(...)
(I will not say in fury) and fortune has given way to your good spirit, which
though (if men were as angry as your self) might be called presumption, yet
out of judgment consonant to to you: non recte dixisti, nec habeo, nec careo,
nec curo: How I proved that, it is so many years ago, I cannot tell: but how
I shall prove yours, it is so few days ago, since I attempted it, that I can
almost say it without book: yet because a man's memory may fail, I have here
sent it you written, if not p^inted: now if the worst come, we shall do no
worse then Lawyers, who fall out with one another at the Bar, and are friends
when they meet at the Temple Hall at dinner: For I can assure you, I pray that
your Muse may have a Plautus plaudite, -- and though I am so unfortunate a man
in these compositions, that I may still exclaim, Nemesis in tergo --, yet does
my heart leap at the thriuings of other men, and I wish you, the reward of your
worth, remaining to you, to others, to my self, to all, honest:-

T. G. Esquire.
To the Reader.
REader- And you mark it, all men are more afraid of you then of thunders:
For a Garland wreathed about the head of Laurel, is a preservative against
lightning: but there was never any Antidotle for the Aconite of a malicious
tongue, except you could do as Iuvenall says (and yet corrupt times have
prevented that to) but you shall have it:

Vivendum est recte, Satyr.^
cum propter plurima, tum his Praecipue causis, vt linguas mancipiorum
Contemnas: nam lingua mali pars pessima serui: and therefore there is a kind
of inclination used toward you with many facetious attributes, or Epithetons of
gentle, courteous, judicious, learned, noble, worthy, and such like; all which
I disclaim, only I desire you to be honest, which I do both for your self,
and my self. For your self, that you may have the reward of an immaculate
soul: for my self, that if you do me no good, I hope you will do me no
harm.

-- Here I believe you will not find such mirth as you expect, for there is
no beare-baiting toward, where the boys clap their hands to set the dogs
together: but a fiery zeal against sin, Vanity, and the corruption of men's
manners, where in if any of you be transported with the vulgar multit^de, you
need no other punishment then your own confusions, and the various changes of
a ridiculous violence: if impostured with the Sirens song of private respects,
except you tie your selves to the mast of Religion and Piety, ^ct and ^om^ions
^ed so ^irces.
be sure to be transhapt into Lions, Bears, Wolves, Tigers, Goats, and what
not: -- if ouer-heated with the favor of Princes, take heed of catching cold,
according to the Italian proverb- non discoprir animalato, quando suda: For
envy and malice have snatching hands to pull away the mantle of your
greatness, and then your deformity will quickly appear, -- if resolute, out
of a covetous ambition to make money your guide, whereby at last you may come
to places of honor and office (which indeed is a kind of Cannon shot through
a stand of Pikes) take heed of ouercharging your selves, lest like some crased
new cast piece in the trial and discharging, you fly in pieces. -- If subject
to a woman's imperiousness, or flattered by her wantonness, take heed of the
forbidden fruit, she will bring it, praise it, deceive you, and make you eat
it: -- If catched in the net of the world, Epi^^ defor^ Dem^^derid^^
Hera^^deflet^
and so resolved against singularity, or other nicke-name, by being religious:
Remember the Philosophers banquet, where Epicte^us put a Coxcombe upon the
Globe of the world, and the strange prohibitions in the word of truth, where
the world and the fashions of the same are no more reputed of then dirt and
dross, or any vilder thing, which must be purged by fire: If any thing else
divert you to transpasse the limits of your own Spheres and Orbs, take heed
of proving Meteors and Exhalations, whereby you will quickly vanish to
nothing; and so I leave you to the fair regard of your selves, for if you be
honest, you will love virtue for virtues sake, and wipe away all aspersions
with a gentle hand, which may be laid upon man's infirmities: -- if otherwise;
neither vice nor virtues will serve your turns, but as your own humors, make
them savery to your pallats, wherein because I am no Empiricke of this kind, I
pray you be your own Physicians, and make the trials your selves: for I that
never was a friend to my self, am not worthy to be yours so much as in
particular application.

T. G. Esquire.
THE INTRODVCTION.
What Is here? what is here? A peremptory man?
That cares not who his books and labors scan:
But if men storm, will make the Muses storm,
With thundering tempests to procure more harm:
As if the power's Divine were at his beck,
Inferior fury for to countercheke;
Much like Maedeas charms, Flecte neque^^ supero^ cheron^ moueb^
who then durst tell
If heaven did fail, she would command all Hell.
-- Why man? what needs this quoile? fret not thy soul
About thy freeborn lines? who does control
Thy worthy labors? or traduce thy name?
Or who befooles themselves at thy fair fame
To fume, or knit the brow? -- Nay? who will vex
Their conscience, of any age or sex,
About thy poor ^^uectiues, when thy have
That sacred Word, which does all sin deprave,
Nor Prince, nor Pesant sparing in their kind,
Nor rich, nor poor, nor proud, nor humbled mind,
Nor Atheist, Hypocrite, nor any other
That will their sins, or hide, or falsely smother
From those all-seeing eyes, which vengeance take
Upon delinquents, who a sport can make
At Gods high Justice, or sweet Mercy: when
He opens either treasure-house to men:
-- Now if the Gospel tell the rich man thus,
He that believes no Scripture, 6. 29
would discuss
Upon the Prophets: or the holy writ
Deride, deny, or in some frantic fit,
Make doubt of either, sure will never believe
One raised from the dead, or seem to grieve,
Be his discourse more harsh then hellish groans
Or Hecats charms, breaking the marble stones:
-- Then do think thou they care for thy best ^imes,
Which only aim at foul enormous crimes
Of present sway, or once will startled be,
Although they do thy heart transparent see:
What do thou then of resolution tell,
Of Libels, Satyrs? -- Do thou never so well
To scourge the Ages villainy, they say
It is their work to sin, to sport, to play:
-- But when thou talkest of making the world mad
They laugh and wonder, (...)
whence that term is had:
As for the guilty times, that all torment,
Why should men's fashions so thee discontent?
Was it not thus when that the Prophets saw
The world on mischief set, did they not draw
In several models, that deformed face,
Which vice looked out with all without disgrace?
-- One does the Women for apparel chide, (...)

Another great men, for great cost deride:
Another tells the Judge of taking fees,
Another his false servant ouer-sees,
Another checks the Swain for selling Corn, Amos ^

And grieves the poor man is so ouer-borne:
Another talks of Usury and wrong, Ezekiel. ^

Another to the Sabbath does belong, Isai. 58.

Another dares do more, then thou dare do,
Reuiles the pompous Priests, Ezec. 3.
adding thereto
Their riots, vomits, lies and filthiness, Hosh. 4.

Their avarice, Mal. 1. 1
their lust and greediness:
Yea, Mal. 1. 1
in the end thou there shall this out find,
Their Orizons came not at all behind
Their fowlest sins: -- For Priest and people then
Did God deceive, Mal. 2.
as well as simple men
By offering the lean beasts, selling the best,
And yet supposing to sit down in rest:
-- Thus was it full two thousand year ago,
Yet now forsooth you would not have it so,
Nor will you be a slave to times, or sin:
But call them Critics, who dare once begin
To censure thy fair Muse, or tax thy pen
As if thou could do more then other men,
For to divert us from outragiousnesse:
Alas? alas? though that I should confess
Thy worth were great, and that thou had a charm
For that foul Gorgons head: -- It would thee harm,
Either to vex thy soul,- thou could not speed,
Or fret thee more to laugh at thee indeed:
-- As for thy scorning of the poor and base?
They would out-raile thee to thy very face.
As for the better sort in honors sear?
They do thy betters in this sort entreat,
With fool or madman, if they once transcend
Their callings to find fault: and in the end
They turn thee off with busybodies name,
Using these speeches Virtue to defame:-
-- A poor man's tale's soon told, who low does lie
Still enuies others that do sit on high,
Come, give him living; he will hold his tongue,
And term that right, which now he counts wrong:
The Tyrants hand, that rais'de him up shall be
The gentle hand of fairest charity:-
The villains tongue, that fumbles in his throat
Shall then a diapason make his note, (...)

Yea all transhap't will honor work that man,
Who in his poor estate does curse and ban:
With such like speeches are good men put off,
And many tawnts endure, with vilder scoff:
-- Then talk not of a Iaile, or wrongs of State,
When our own hands do open foul mischiefs gate,
When we presume to tell the rest of sin,
And are our selves as faulty still therein, ^^o laedi^isi a ^.

When private ends affect us with delight,
Then we complain of other men's despite:
Come, come; It may be, he that writes this
Can tell the world, what a close prison is,
And justly does himself thus far consute,
He seldom thriues that does with Lords dispute:
Whom Princes will have wise, are wise indeed,
And among the Polliticks, it is agreed,
They that do specious attributes transfer;
And yet find fault with government, may err:
Therefore be ruled by me, threaten no more,
That either you have foreign news good store,
Or could from rumor tell is of such things,
As unto Europe this disturbance brings:
But cause it may offend or France or Spain,
You leave it of, and come to us again,
With Furies tied in chaires, and whips of steel
As though Briareus hands could turn the wheel
Of Fortune quite about: and your fierce strains,
Well seasoned could control, or tame the brains
Of frantic men: Oh that it were your fate
To work conversion even quite through the state:
As for your dogs; that dare on Monsters fly,
By baiting Bulls and bears, the boldest dye.
Therefore desist, and let your temprature
The sweet content which we expect, procure.
-- Be better pleased, who spits against the wind
Shall soon his face all to be smeered find,
And he that will assume more then his own,
Shall either for presumptuous be known,
Or an intruder: then thank God for this,
Thou have a great deal more then common is:
But give no milk with a repining hand,
Nor look thou spill it, as it there does stand,
AN ANSWER TO WITHER'S NEC HABEO.
-- HEre you begin with a calm humbled mind,
As if all Vaunting you were far behind,
Confessing such defects, as make men see,
In weak infirmities how poor they be.
-- You have no grace, but by infused power,
No strentgh at all to write another hour,
No f^ee-borne goodness, nor a cleansing hand
To wipe away corruptions of the land,
Or purge your sins by your own purity:
Yet you confess you have a charity
With sweeter currents of an honest mind
To bear with some, and be to others kind:
Nay? I Will go further, if the truth were known,
You somethings have, which I do call your own,
Affection, passion, ing^ny, delight,
Fear, sadness, joy: For sure you are not quite
Exempt from those things with which man was borne,
Though age in time youths franticknesse does scorue,
But more then this above the rest you know
From judgment to condemn the world, that so
We may the passages of goodness learn,
And Vice and Virtue different discern,
And can all this be done? except you had
Those faculties, which make the heart full glad.
-- Then you confess a power to do ill,
And many times a perverse haire-brain'd will
To ouer-beare the motives of your soul,
Whereby your frailties do the rest control,
Of such ^le not dispute; It is a point
Far from my reach, and may full soon disioint
The frame I would erect. For in each state
Free Will confusion suffers and debate;
-- But now take heed: if in this humbled scene
You go not far beyond the golden mean,
Catching at glory, as you wish to thrive,
Or for some higher reputation strive,
O^ hope to match your meant with reward,
As other men your labors do regard,
Or work for private ends: then sure you have
Some portion in the world, and know to save
Your self from vexing wants, or foul annoy,
And so on earth possess, wherein you joy. --
-- You have no Lordships, nor high reaching Piler,
Nor mocking structures, nor deceitful wiles,
Nor large demeanes, nor titular renown,
Nor any hope which may your virtue crown
With place of honor: -- Yet you have a mind
To have all those, and do corruption find
In stranger wishes, that you had more living:
Then to depend on any others giving.
For though Concupiscence be writ a sin, (...)

Yet either men may so the world begin
To come to seeled houses in the end,
By their own industry, or have a friend
Bestow a Leg^cie, or native right
May them establish^n some formal might,
Or from the custom of each mor^ll nation
The Prince may men enrich with some donation,
Wherein untouched, vnfoild, the soul may see,
How she may somethings have, and yet be free:-
-- Nay more; if wealth increase, it lawful is
(So in the same we practice naught amiss)
To purchase land, or office, as we find
The Patriackes remembered in this kind:
Yea, the wise man pleades, as I do conceive,
Better it is to give, then to receive,
Which cannot well be done, except our store
Augmented be more then it was before:
Oh say not then; you have none of these things,
If you would have them; For a w^sh so stings
The conscience, that as swelling blisters rise
Upon the face to blemish both our eyes:
So sins creep on us, by our foul desires,
And sends in fuel to augment the fires,
Which by degrees active employment make,
Until to custom we our selves betake,
-- As for the spirits freedom, which you boast,
Take heed you reckon not without your host.
For mischief lies like rocks in seas unseen,
Splitting the greatest ships that come between:
Yea, the proud head which lifts it self on high
Through small displeasure does disgraced dye:
But sure afflicting wants distract us more,
Then our own patience can endure: therefore
Let none presume to say, they can abide
In poverty, when all the world beside
Abounds in wealth: For David bids us pray
Against these extremes; Oh do not then say na^,
For as the rich, the poor man he does sin,
And with more terror frets himself therein.
-- You have no suites in Law, nor need once sweat
After your plodding Councellor to treat
Of bills, procurements, titles, and such like,
Which in discussing much amazement strike;
This sure is want of means, (...)
or wealth, or state,
Or that on earth you are not fortunate
But from this want you have a busy mind
To tamper with the Courts some fault to find,
Checking the pride, or avarice of men,
Laughing at follies and corruptions, when
Greatness does ouer-sway the meaner side,
Or quicker wits simplicity deride,
Or prolongations do a cause defer,
Or groser sins traduce men, that so err:
Thus we do smile when others faults are known,
Yet cast up worser recknings of our own,
The soul we free from shifts, the tongue from tales
Defacing right, contriuing cunning sales,
And if we can escape the Law in sinning,
We then are safe, when from the first beginning
We pride of heart possess, with envy swell,
Repine at others, living passing well,
Prove factious in our thoughts, strive with our wits,
Till they burst out into some madding fits
Against good order of the government,
And so we run away in meriment,
That we have hit it home: but what say they
That would not so their modesty betray,
Either we have some singular conceit,
Bewitching us with holiness deceit,
Or itching ears to hear each Sirens song
Of things, which no way do to us belong:
Or itching h^nds to reach the fruit on high,
Until the Dragon do it us deny:
Or itching feet to gad, where none should go
That know not how themselves for to bestow:
Or itching hearts forbidden things that crave:
Thus wise men see, that still we somethings have.
-- You have no foppish tricks, nor apish to^es
Nor complementall congees fit for boys,
And not reposed men: -- You say it is pity,
That either travelers of Court, or City
Bring home such follies out of France or Spain,
Or Italy: and yet you do again
Commend good manners, and good fashions to,
Well I perceive we shall have much ado
To please you in these things:*But now take heed
The same impostume do not in you breed,
That either you dissemble must this guise,
Or forced be with men to temporise;
Why; why good Sir: if thou do this at all;
Whom can thou praise, or so right worthy call;
Or whom can thou traduce for such extremes,
But others glowing heates have the like beams;
As for the heart, descrie it if you can,
It has and will deceive an honest man. --
-- But now I see you have a trick in this
To tell us, (...)
what is in Poesy amiss,
Because you would have ignorants to know,
How variously a learned man may grow
Deformed in his wits: -- But if again
I tell you when necessities constrain;
We are excused; what needs this partial vaunting
Of scorn or ^lattery, we still are granting
The selfsame thing: that virtue should not make
A false account, but patiently betake
Her self to her own Items, whether poor
Or rich she live: yet men from door to door
Are loath to beg, yet by your rule they must,
If to reward of virtue they do trust: --
Then cease a while, and let me here conclude,
That gains and profit do the best delude:
-- You have no partiality, nor love
That man, which must your observation move,
From his own greatness, or augment your scorn
As in the world neglected, and forlorn
He lies: but mean goodness for to respect,
Who e're the same condemn, or yet neglect.
-- You have no soothing humor to make good
The jests of men, or warm them in their blood,
When they would have applauses: but you take
One even course, and all for virtues sake* --
^ay, if he gentry boast you would pull down
That ostentation with an angry frown,
Except his actions do proportion keep
With their great fame, which in their graves do sleep --
-- What greater partiality can be (...)

Then this wherein you so much disagree
With common sense, as though one selfsame st^ne
Obscured in base lead, or horn were one
With that, which is embellished by Art,
^et out in gold, as workman plays his part,
By adding luster to the same: -- So men
^oe grace their native virtues far more, when
They noble are, or comely to the eye.
-- Thus in the Sun we do a glory spy,
When he does show his fullest radiance,
and not when through a cloud we see him glan^^,
-- As for the rest, I know not what you call
Applauding of great men, but this is all
We shoot at her, for to augment our state,
And higher rise, though it be nere so late; --
How shall such ones then be fairelie entreated,
that are already so transcendent seated?
^r would you be transported in this kind,
Not to afford respect, although you find
^ome things to cross your humors, Cyni^ke fits;
^re therefore men the worse for our fond wits?
-- Now come to dignity, and outward show?
You feign would men by their own actions know,
And for because you think it ill or well,
You would a lesson to their Lordships tell,
As though you had some workman been of old
In honors Palace; as though times do hold
One selfsame course, and not admit of change
Even in men's manners, when a Country grange
Does from her owners wealth scorn base to lie,
But Pallace-like her Turrets reares up high:
What think you then? dare not men go astray,
Because you look at high designs, a way
Which must confine them to the glorious deeds
Of David's Worthies: this prescription breeds
Such grudging among them all, All tim^s ^re not for ^mployment.
and to say truth
We have no such employment for our youth,
And if we had, rewards are not so rife,
Therefore do Lords act out another life
Of peace and plenty, welcomming with all
The Vices which attend the same, and call
Them what you will, this phrase I use
(Not that I would impiety excuse)
It is the times fault, and the fruit of ease
That meaner men then Lords themselves do please
With barren pleasure, (...)
gaming, lust, and smoke,
Which blacks their brains, as they their senses choa^
Swelling their bodies with rank humors up,
As they carowse of Bacchus wanton cup,
To fill their veins with strange lascivious blood,
Working at last no other end or good
Then soul diseases: For as hot rank ground
Does ouer-choake the corn with ranker weeds:
So in men's bodies such corruption breeds
(For want of martial exercise) that harm
Which neither Physic, nor Elixars charm:
I Will name no more, but let them ^ere alone,
Nor g^ieue not you, or make so great a moan
For their unworthiness: because the Law
(Which keeps the lauishnes of tongues in aw)
Intends that Princes favors do bestow,
For that in peace men do more virtuous grow,
And though thou fret, others do yield a reason,
When any great offender out of season
Has life afforded: this they learn of God,
Who out of mercy spares, or sends a rod,
And as God from men's questions does surmount:
So Princes of their actions yield no count: --
-- You have no friends, but such, as shall be so
Endeer'd at all times, whether weal or woe,
Nor do you prise men's loves by out-ward state,
Whether afflicted, or made fortunate:
Nor do you care for such, as mean to love
For their own ends. -- How friends may be forsake
Whence comes it, that you move
Such Paradoxes? what always alike?
The Smith you see does not his iron strike
When it is cold -- Nor can the Sun prevent
The Moons Eclipse: -- Therefore be thou content
To look at friendship, as it looks on thee
With Virtues rays: for if thou do agree
To Passion, it will make thee passionate,
And with encombrances confound thy state.
-- But if again thou will be so precise,
All friendship under virtue to comprise,
And so condemn distinction by a name,
Which looks not after char^^ie, but fame;
Which shuts out*nature, and would seem divine
Then look about for several Suns to shine,
Or else go from the earth. For if thou live,
Thou must observe some method, and so give
Reason her due, and not contented be
With every friend, 'cause he was friend to thee.
-- For in plain terms, say that he slack his hand,
Do not thou slack thy love? Say that he stand
A Leper in thy sight, will thou embrace
Or cling unto the kisses of his face?
Say that Religion kept him once in awe,
Will thou keep still to him against the Law?
Say that he froward prove with grief, or age,
And turn sweet blessings into furious rage;
What still thy friend? -- Sure though thou did so say,
I know thou know the safe, and better way,
Not that I would have honest men be left
In their extremes, when they are quite bereft
Of worldly succor; but to be content
If vicious life bring vices punishment.
-- As for revealing secrets, or discover
The doting frenzy of a sodden lover;
I well believe, thou have no mind to do it,
Except a riualship may put thee to it,
Or some cross courtship to prevent a son,
Or other chance hindering what is well begun.
But say thou come to argue with fair reason,
What will thou do about concealing treason?
Or other terrors, shaming thee to be
A secret friend to such necessity.
-- You have no d^ting humor, love sick vai^e,
To follow that, which runs away amain,
Nay you do scorn a mela^ cholly sit,
Or angry passion, to be moved with it;
As though you could confine infirmity
Within the compass of sweet modesty;
And trust your own strength in these sinful days
To wrestle with corrupt on, which always
Has fon'd your betters? -- Nay you have no cause,
No private cause against the public laws,
No enu^e, malice, or a wretched mind
To be distasting, froward, or unkind
Through filthy luc^e, and abortiue gain,
Which the fair lives of greater men do stain.
-- And yet you know that God has thus proclaimed,
These be the latter times for sin defamed:
And yet your Satyrs have you famous made
For speaking freely against every trade;
And scourging vanity, though great ones strive
By power, by right, by wrong, to make it thrive:
And yet you know, because you were so hardy
To pass your bounds, the State did take you tardie.
-- You have no mind advancement to entreat
For your admission into honors seat,
Nor with a Favorite your state to change,
Though nere so fortunate. -- Why this is strange;
Say that the wise sit wringing of her hands,
Because she wants the iointure of her lands,
The children cry for bread, and in the dirt
Trot bare foot by her side, or other hurt
Affront thee; be it scorn, or harsh disgrace,
Or quipping at thy follies to thy face;
With exprobration of improuidence,
Where Is now thy bravery, and confidence? --
-- I ouerpasse natures Antipathy,
Or by a contrary fond sympathy,
They secrets are, and 'twill be out of season
Of either side to yield a hansome reason: --
-- Why Nations are affected, (...)
I let go,
Or why abhor^'d, I say, nor yea, nor no;
As for the English, A pish in each kind,
Fant^sticke, foolish, wavering as the wind:
I could as well as you find faul^ withal,
If finding fault may them from faults recall:
But in these things experience teaches thus,
And I with you the matter so discuss,
That exprobration of a custom'd sin
Hardens the heart, and sets them fast therein:
As in revenge in Irel^nd we chase
The Wolf^ for slaughtering sheep in every place,
The following night we look for further spoil:
So wise men less do gain the more they toil^,
A prison is a punishment to mend
Such refractarie sinners, who offend;
But who can say, that any man was better
By living in a iaile a wretched debtor:
So Iuuenal complains, and so may we
The like effect of Poets, ^atyres see;
For if that God in^use not inward grace,
I see no man give to your charming place.
-- You do not fear, who your religion know,
Nor mean to make thereof a better show,
Then is in proof. You will wear truth in grain,
And such a mind possess, as all in vain
Devices shall attempt: Nay, you have not
Presumption to find fault with a small spot,
And blurre the paper worse your self, and so
From step to step you to high seats do go,
Where quick you (...) upon the Magistrate;
Who mean and poor offenders exprobrate, (...)

Searching the unswept corners of their lives,
And rating them, as they lie chaind in gives,
When their own souls all maculate appear
Unto that (...), which sees so clear:
For this you angry grow, and fiet, and ^ume,
And could inuectiue-like some vain assume.
-- Sure this is well, if that it wo^ld thus last,
But say the State another reckning cast,
And cross your zeal, either you alter now,
Or must perforce to stronger bendings bow:
Yea in religious case, whether you (...)
At home, or do your self to travail give,
There is you know, but one prepared right,
Now if imploiment bring you to a plight;
Where Inquisition binds you to a post,
What will you presently as Martyr boast?
No hansome silence, but a hairebraind will:
The Scripture bids you rather save then kill,
And fly from town to town, not that I mean
You should Apostate prove, when that the scene
Of Christianity you act, and try
Your faith indeed: then do a Gods name die;
But with vaineglorious hardiness to run
Into each danger so to be undone,
Is not by God allowed, and thus you see
Wise men for rashness may condemned be.
-- As for fault finders, (...)
who be^meered are
With dirt and fi^th, and yet presume (...) far
To brush another dust: -- Sure it is a time,
In which the best are guilty of this crime: (...)

Our Savior it condemns, and says, its true
There shall be such: why may not one be you?
There Is no deceit like to deceit of heart,
And we are prone to play another part,
Either forgetting, that we hau^ a share
Within the Play, or willingly do spare
Our selves: -- Thus when we hear some smart reproof
We thrust our neighbors forward, but aloof
We stand our selves: -- As for the Magistrate,
If any such there be to move debate,
Present him now, or else traduce him not,
There Is nothing by diffused cunning got:
Christ did not glance at any sin in general,
But Hypocrite the Lawier did call,
The Pharisee he brought within his woe,
The Scribe was taught his guiltiness to know,
The devils were cast out by name: the king
Herod, the king was termed a Fox: to bring
The rest, it endless is. Therefore when that
At such a point your shaft is aimed at,
Either desist from shooting wide at all,
Or hit the man, that you so sinful call.
For he that dare say this, sure does not fear
Though of Magnatum scandalum he hear.
-- You have no good opinion of such men,
As with excuse of had I wist c^y, when
Their proiects sail, nor do you take delight
In scoffing at infirmities: you wr^te
Not against the Arts, nor worldly things embrace,
For which all men are troubled in the race.
You have no beauty, nor attracting form,
A Ladies eyes, or wanton love to charm.
You have no Sampsons strength, great weight to bear,
Nor would a Lions skin with Her^'les wear;
Why what a quoile is here? Yet for the first,
How do you know your deeds shall not be cursed? Fato pr^dent^a^nor.

Can humane wisdom be so provident
The end of things before hand to prevent? --
If you had thought so to displease the King,
You would have sure forborne such rimes to sing.
So that you see your self your self correct,
And may for many other things be checked.
You will not scoff at weak and slender rimes,
And yet inueigh against vanity of times.
You scorn what earth affoords, -- yet take in worth*
What so your wit and labors can bring forth:
Come, if you get it, purse the gold, and spare not
But run not forth so fast to say, you care not: --
As for your strength and beaut^e; they are gifts
Not in your power to take, or choose: no shifts
Can shun them, when God tends: but you must have
Even that, which in your heart you would not crave:
And why have you them not, as you do say,
Because you would the i^sting wanton play,
With Statesmen, Ladies, Milstones, Porters strong,
Or Packehorses; Come leave, it is a poor song. --
-- I ouerpasse your knowledge of such things,
As do belong to Commonwealths, or Kings,
I will not word your wisdom in this kind
That without Method many things I find
Smarting enough, and worthy of your name,
Which if they had been brought to one fair frame,
Would sure have made a far more glorious show,
Whereby their hearts must needs have longed to know
The owner of the place, that with their eyes
Had gazed upon the same; but now it lies
A little further of from envious reach,
Or shot of malice: nay, it fears no breach:
And let it lie; that none may find this out
Of your ^ood meaning, to raise any doubt.
-- You have no money, nor lands falsely got
From Churches, Orphans; Widows, and what not?
How can you tell? you sure receive some coin,
And do you know who did the same purloine?
But you will say, such act was none of yours,
And him you hate, that any such procures:
I like it well, but if it should be so,
W^^e should your sin your children overthrow:
The law is changed. For if you list to try,
Our God has said the soul that sins shall die.
-- You have no foul diseases, nor great debts,
Nor wife, nor child, nor many other ^ets,
Nor wealth enough for hospitality,
Nor free expenses out of ^olitie,
And yet in posse you may have all these.
For man is subject when his maker please,
To Petrachs fortunes, though he cannot find
Those saving remed^es he there assigned:
-- But then you buffle up your self and sa^e,
You have a wealth which none can get away,
And hope your wit a woman's may excel,
Though for her own ends she dee ner' so well.
Nay, as it seems, Riches without virtue.
I will not call it spleen,
Some wondrous heir has sure your rival been,
With whom you combat by comparison,
That as his years increase, vices grow on
His black corrupted soul, like wennes in trees,
Which bunch out with deformity: yet sees
He naught, but on a golden outside looks,
Turning the leaves of his ill cast up booke^:
But other men a better reckn^ng know,
That lust and riot will him overthrowe.
-- For as st^ffe claie is hardened in the Sun,
And yet with water easy made to run:
So riches rammed with a griping hand,
Or strange oppression, cannot safely stand
Without dispersing. For when once they fly,
Like water (...) upon the ground they lie,
And then such foolish owners cannot tell,
Which way to live, except they pawn or sell
Their patrim^nies: so they perish must,
Whereas you do to noble virtue trust,
Framing your life to wisdom, which is sure,
Like some strong rock, that can all storms endure:
-- Nay by this means you hope to get a wise,
Who shall judicious prove, making your life
Conformable to hers, and hers to you:
Oh that these things might come within my view!
-- For (as I hope for bliss) I wish you well,
Yet would another did the story tell, (...)

To add more luster to your fair renown,
Because a man venturing oto far may drown
Himself: but if a friendly helping hand
Support him up, he then may safely stand:
Thus praise and honor haunt men by degrees,
And follow worthiness, as wisdom ^ees
To whom her attributes belong: yet as again
The proverb is, who snatcheth, works in vain:
So he that will have glory fore his time
May fail with him, who does too hastly climb.
-- As for your wife, (...)*
which yet I do but name
Because within your scrowle I find the same:
You yet have none not, knowing what to have,
Unless you might in brass her manners grave,
And fashion up a piece of your own making:
Then peradventure she were worth the taking.
^hus have I read l'igmalion made a shrine
(...) marble so well shaped in every line,
that he did dote on that he had begun,
and fell in love er'it was fully done:
(...) you would have a wife, if she were fair,
^oung, comely, rich, religious, debonaire,
(...) stated in some large inheritage,
^^tracted from some worthy parentage,
^umbled at all times to obedience,
(...) man is made the head in conscience:
-- What need more words, or being further headie? S. Thomas O^erbury*

^e have a worthy knights good wife already,
(...) which I think you cannot add much more,
^hen with applause he has prescribed before.
-- Now in good truth, you would some wonder shoe
^our self on such a woman to bestow.
^ould not some one or two good qualities,
With other reasonable abilities,
(...) Catalogue your name with honest friends:
^ut you must needs contriue unheard of ends.
^ome. Come, what God appoints shall surely be,
^o which your pious heart does soon agree.
^or as our Merchants know not what may chance,
When they their longer votages advance,
But must endure the tempest of the Sea,
The furies of the wind, heavens thundering plea,
The rage of storms, shipwracks, and dangerous l^ kes,
The shallow sands, the rock which all things b^eak^^:
^ome fearful harbors, passages unknown,
And thousand pe^ills, which are ye^ vnshow^e,
For rage came on with reigning, and his power
Increased with his fury every hour:
Frailty had got of reason upper hand,
And greatness weaker, wisdom did withstand,
And when was this, even when he did disclaim
To have his virtue foiled with any maime.
-- And what are you? that may not have all this,
Although you now suppose naught is amiss,
You see what in your Catalogue I name,
If then you blot it, who shall read the same?
You do write mortal man, and I am sure
No constant goodness does in man endure,
But by a working grace to him unknown,
As by the passages of life is shown:
-- Then take you heed; presumption canker like
Eats on our flesh, aiming our soul to strike.
And so I end; yet neither rage nor rave:
For what we have not now, anon we have.
Sum faelix, Remember this Caution.
quis enim neget hoc? faelixque man^bo,
Hoc quoque quis dubitet, tutam me copiafecit,
Mayor sum, quam cuipossit fortuna nocere.
Ovid. Met. lib. 6. AN ANSWER TO WITHERS NEC CAREO.
-- YOu are not now so humble as you were,
But do your self more high, and prowdly bear:
Or else the Motto carries such a st^aine,
As that you must not of your wants complain:
Yet all you do is without complement
To bring it unto this, you live content,
And thus you want nothing which life does crave,
Or man against necessity would have,
And thus you want no quietness of mind^,
To take in worth what you at home do find:
And thus you want no government to season
Those tumors, which may swell beyond fair reason,
But gladly welcome, what God does bestow,
Whether your cup have ought or ouerflow:
-- Take heed, you want not now a temperature
Of moderation crosses to endure
Without insulting; for there is a pride,
Which God in poverty does still deride.
-- When Plato made a Feast unto the rest* (...)

Diogenes came in among the best,
Saluting none* but like a dogue did sit,
Snarling at gesture; and each want on fit,
Till rising in a rage he took his Plate,
His hangings, linen, carpets, robes of state,
And cast them under foot, saving beside,
Thus I doe^trample upon Plato^s p^^de.
-- All were amassed except the master, who
Did smile at that he did, o^ meant to do,
Replying with a pleasant modesty,
His imperfections he could not deny:
But Cynicke, Cynicke, to thee I appeal
This is not out of worth, or honest zeal,
But in m^iorif^stu, (...)
that I know*
I do not so offend with hansome show,
As thou with dogged heart, and ragged weeds,
Where under arrogance, and self-love breeds.
Therefore desist, and either be a man,
Or let men live according as they can.
-- Thus thus; when ^ou compare with Eastern king^
And make the world believe, that patience brings
An argument for outward poverty
To parallel a strong felicity,
And equal beggars with a r^ch man's state,
And the dejected with the fortunate.
-- The wiser sort do smile at this your fault,
Saying you would before a criple halt,
Nor do they think that mortal man can be
So moderate in harsh extremity,
Unless he stupid were, and numbed in sense,
Having nor spleen, nor gaul to breed offense.
-- For take the pattern of some worthy men* (...)

Was peerless Job no more distempred, when
Gods rod did lash his sides, and he did roar
With greiuous botches, wounds, and ^etters store,
Then when he was welcomb'd to double wealth,
To honor, riches, strength, and perfect health,
Besides you saw God made a difference
Between his blessings, as he did d^spence
With his extremes, say therefore what you will,
Or rich, or poor, do want something ^till:
And though you could not sleep, with some men's wealth
Amassed up by foul oppressions stealth^
Yet better's better, and it is a folly
To make the world believe you are so holy.
-- But what have other men to do with this,
That the composure of your body is
So strong, so iointed, healthful, and such like,
As if you would us with amasement strike
At the relating of some wonderment,
Or exhelation in the Firmament,
Or exposed meteor: thus you la^e about
You want nothing, though others go without.
-- Your self you answer, you are young, and strong,
Possessing all, that thereunto belong,
And so do thousands more, who yet complain
Of man^e wants, and that they cry in vain,
Whereas you God do praise, and daily bless
For your great comforts, and true happiness,
For life, for strength, for liberty and all,
Whereby you want nothing, nor ever shall*
-- And yet you want another to say so, ^^iendly ^^men ^on.

Pointing unto some Lady as you go
Along the street-see yond ^r Gentleman
(Besides the qualities, where with he can
Enrich the prowdest beauty) hansome is,
Young, comely, sound, possessing n^ught amisses
He neither lives distempered with disqu et,
Nor surfets in his riot, or his diet,
He makes not his house a dicing room,
Nor welcome gries to any pander groom,
His chamber smoakes not with Tobaccoes stench,
Nor are they spewing upon every bench,
No oaths prophaine the place where he does lie,
No time's consumed in sloth, and surquedrie,
No frantic iestures after fearful loss,
Nor execration upon every cross:
No bloody quarrels for a word let slip,
No wile, or c^^ning silliness to trip,
No Sabboths breach, nor mocks to such as go
To Church, and so with God their time bestow,
While others work for foul damnation,
Calling their vices recreation.
-- He welcomes not a strumpet which a slave
May stride if that he so much money have,
Nay many times the pander, who attends
Has that, which some brave prodigal dispends,
He takes not E^ixers for his lust,
Nor heats himself wi^h amber, nor does trust
His body with an Emprick: his hand
Knows not where any Surgeous box does stand,
But as you see he lives, and walks, and eats,
And fairly still the company entreats,
Where he frequents: -- Here were a husband now
To make your beauty blush, and pride to bow,
And though h^s means be small, and in his roof
The horn of Ach^lous hangs not aloof.
Yet is his mind a treasure-house of wealth,
Which cannot be purloind by any stealth.
-- This, or such like, if that some friend did say,
He surely might a great expense defraie,
Making you far more happy by report,
Then you your self can do in any sort:
Therefore desist from running ^orth so fast
With your own praises, but let others cast
The mantle of reward upon your head,
Till honor do your virtue ouerspread: --
-- You want no judgment difference to make
'Twixt man and man, and that for orders fake
You want to grief for your true friends misdeeds,
But his distress in you some passion breeds:
You want no love in^^rmities to spare:
Nor courage if the cause be good - you dare
Maintain your confidence, express your mind,
And say the multitude will prove unkind,
Whom yet you scorn, and may indeed compare
To rascal dear, that die upon the bare,
Or rot consumes. -- Nay I am sure they be
Like Crows on carrion, where they ^ll agree
To fill their cropps while the best flesh does last,
The bones for saking, when the hunger's past.
-- But here you want or memory or will
To mind what repetitions you use still. ^ is a (...) ^rder

For one self thing you do a subject make
In d^uer^ places and still undertake,
To dash the multitude, as with a blurre,
Spurning their tumults, and the wrangling stir
They do procure. -- Again, you first did say
You care for none for his great outward swaie,
And yet to keep decorum where you live,
You must unto the wicked honor give.
-- This sure you do of purpose to make good
That for this time all method you withstood,
And would not formerlie compile the book,
Least every one, who did it ouerlooke,
Your meaning might misconster when they saw,
Your muse resolved enormities to draw
Before the bar of virtue to reform,
What might and did the better for deforme,
Making the beauty of fair innocence
Adulterate by rapes and violence,
Oppression, bribes, revenge, stealth, and what not,
As sin of times the upper hand had got.
Thus still you aim at general misdeeds,
Because no wrangling hand shall sow the seeds
Of discord in your way, or throw a block
To hinder your smooth walk -- As for a mock,
You cast it slight lie off with noble storne,
As if you were to higher reaches borne. --
-- Why this is well, if it be taken so,
But yet you careless are, and onward go,
Saying, you want not knowledge to discover,
Who of true wisdom is a constant lover,
Then presentie you fall to this again,
That seeming honesty does leave a stain
Upon the conscience, and an outward show
Without a purer heart does overthrow
The large effect of sad devot on,
And soon diuerts from each good motion,
From whence religion is hypocrisy,
As ill, or worse then any heresy,
So you infer that wiser men begin
With civil courses which do end in sin.
-- W^ll though you want not now an honest heart
To act your self a worthy Christian; part, The (...) quan^

Yet cannot you descrie the foul decent
Of strange dissembling men, that from conceit,
Though not from malice, open both their arms,
As if they were bewitched with your charms,
And at next turn repine at arrogance,
Which puffed you thus your labors to advance:
-- Nay, you are not alone, I have men seen
Even in their graspings make a mock between,
Their curresies, and as they lay along
Upon their shoulders loll a scuruie tongue.
Another yields his friend his praises due
Unto his face, but meeting with a crew
He better likes, he tells them, he is weak,
And far from that, of which does rumor speak:
Another vaunts, wherein he have relieved
His friends distresses, but retracts as grieved
He has bestowed his cost in such a sott,
And then again puts all off with some sport* --
-- As for religion, I do fear to name it,
Or how so many false professors shame it, (...)

Thronging to Church for private ends, or look
With want on roling eyes quite off their book,
The rest I could recite, but this I say,
He that for form does come, were well away,
And he that serves not God meerelie for love,
I do his best devotion disapproue.
-- From whence I point it ^hus, you needs must lack
A cunning strength to lay men on the rack,
Or wrest from them confession of this treason
Against God, to serve him out of sensual reason.
For if salvation comes by our faith,
As in a many places Scripture says,
How shall we know the faith of any man,
Which does it not express do what you can,
These rules have passive contradiction,
And you and I shall be but lookers on.
-- As for those arts, and sciences you know, (...)

With whose s^^^ciencie away you go:
Both you and I want many secret things,
Which with great study men to learning brings.
For though we glance and some what by the way,
It Is like the dogs that running dare not stay
For fear of Crocadiles but water lap
A^ Nilus banks: (...) if that we perhap
May blesse^^ God for an infu^'d light
Sufficient to bring us to the right.
Yet is it far from that glorious sun shine,
Which shows both humane, and all things divine:
Then say not to thy soul, set down and rest,
Thou have enough of knowledge with the best,
Least others do that parable recite
Of him, that all his wealth lost in one night,
Because he boasted wha^ he had in store:
Few words are best, and so I say no more
But this what er' the heart possesse^h so:
More is unknown then any man can know: --
-- You want not sense their s^re downfall, Not (...) preiu^
which
Live in the heat of pride, and are so rich
With plenty, that they sw^ll like full grown grapes,
Until they burst, so none of them esca^es,
A vengeance due unto their riots lust,
Or high looking ambition, till the dust
Of Kings displeasure fly into their face
With some strange whire wind blowing up digrace
Upon their heads, until they sink so lo,
That those they scorned do oer their honors goe^
All which is but conjecture; for I find
The spirit say, no spirit in his kind
Can tell before hand, though it be begun,
What shall hereafter happen under Sun: --
-- We well may guess -- as from contagious heat,
That on some dunghill does reflect and beat
To pu^refie the air, a plague may breed,
With burnings; feauers, drought, to work some deed
Of terror in a land, -- Thus when we see
A man resolved to sursets, or to be
Strong to drink wine, and over liberal
To satisfy his lust, we may conclude,
These wanton courses will his health delude,
And so corrupt the body that the same
Diseases shall attend with pain, and shame, --
-- So fa^es i^ with the soul, and working mind,
If pride, revenge, or si^ne in any kind
Praedominant, do draw it by degrees
To open action: -- who is purblinde, sees,
Gods wr^th must fall more heavy then this frame
Of heaven and earth, as Poets call the same,
On Hercules and Atlas shoulders lights,
Who bear all up with strange unusual mights.
-- You come at last by way of negative,
Which in effect does prove affirmative,
For to the wants, as you apply a no,
We by the process have it nothing so: (...)

Bu^ rather for deficiencie we find
A sort of blessed graces in your mind:
-- Such as a iov to joy in hope of bliss, (...) me fecit.

A true cont^ition to mend all amiss,
A godly fear for shrinking under sin,
A care (...) keep the conscience clean within,
A constant heart to bear with penury,
A resolution againt m^serie,
A brave Heroic spirit to endure,
Wh^t pu^blinde Forrune ever could procure. --
-- Wounds though they smart are borne with cheerfulness,
The thoughts prepared are against heaviness,
The ^ies are vigelant, and so can wake,
An Ague or the palsy does not shake
You with distemperature: -- And whereas we
Hane heard brave Orators plead for a Fee,
Gracing their Clients with comparison
Of worthy Peers informer ages gone:
You challenge all the world for a strong heart
To brook, what ere despite from it impart.
-- In having these, thus sure you do not want,
Nor of Gods blessings is your portion scant,
Unless (as I have said) you temper lack
To bind up close into one handsome pack
These benefits of nature for more use,
Then in exposing them to men's abuse: --
For either they will wonder at your store,
Or verily suppose, you vaunt of more
Then ever man did, as one man possess;
Be therefore quit with them more or less.
-- You come at last to some affection,
Which you want not: so from conuection
Of the discourse we find, that this you have:
A hate of sin, be it in fool or knave,
A courteous hand for to salute another,
As when a loving brother greets abrother;
A free forgiving heart upon submission,
A Christian liberty, from a Commission
Which God has signed. -- Great comforts yo possess,
Which may as great afflictions soon redress,
To these you add a faith which cannot move,
But looks upright to heavenly things above:
A hope, which no adversity can wrong,
But all I have I carry to the grave
I mean a virtue flourishing about me
For I have naugh: of worldly wealth without me, ^^niamea ^^umpar.

And thus you scoff the proud ^onarkes of state,
With whom you do compare at highest rate: -- ^cat ^ast.

-- if they have guardes and no harm feel,
You innocence ^ioy, and coat; of armed steel,
-- If they be be Princes sons -- you are the child
Of God Almighty ever undefiled:
-- If they of followers boast untouched, vncast,
A troop of Angels follows you as fast:
-- If they in friends delight: Abram was called
The friend of God: -- so good men are enstall'd.
What other things you speak, I will not speak,
Because I purpose not order to break:
-- You want no office -- For a Christian life
Is well imploid, having both toil and strife:
You want no pleasures: -- For what God does please
Affords you all things with delight and ease:
You want no company -- For Christians find
Society enough of every kind:
You want no armor for a martial fight.
You have the arms of a spiritual Knight:
You want no scaling ladders against a wall,
By faith and prayer you to heaven call:
Nay in a word a thousand blessings more
The God of blessings adds to your store;
So you conclude, that if the King did know,
How rich you live, he would on you bestow
^his wish, that if he were not he
^e might desire then your self to be.
-- The selsfe same-word did Alexander say
unto Diogenes, A Dialogue between Alexand^^ and Diogenes.
when as he lay
Within his tub, as a fierce kenneld ^ur,
^corning the King, deriding all the stur
^is Army made, geeting at f^o^llies, which
^he world prepared against the poor, and rich,
^enying all things that might him control,
^xcept the immortality of soul --
-- The Monarch told him, he could to him give
honor and wealth: he answered he could live
without them both: he could bereave his life. --
that were a way to stint the wondrous strife
^etweene his soul and body: -- he could make
^he people him obey -- that were to take
^is own obedience from him to the gods,
and set his heart with better things at ods:
-- Well says the Cynick seeing you are so free,
that which y cannot give, take not from me
^e suns dear light: but stand beyond my Cell,
and I without you shall do passing well;
that quoth the King, I can command thee sterue,
^hen little will be left the worms of serve:
^y very word bereaues thee of thy sight,
^o shall I escape the dangers of delight:
^hy tongue I can pull out; Then shall not I
^laspheme the gods, no^ show a fear to die. --
^his and much more the king and he did chat,
^ea diverse times he from his Army gat.
To commune with him; -- when he saw him surt*
That no temptation could a change procure,
He turned about, and told Ephestion thus:
This man alone has cleare'y conquered us:
If I great Alexander were not now,
To be Diogenes I would know how.
-- Yet for all this be you more mild, then so
And think, that God on man did once bestow
This goodly world, and his brave furniture
To serve his turn, (...) ^utifull.
while he did there endure;
-- Yea for these sakes, whom you do boast so mu^
The free Elected: th^ugh we know none such
By outward show, all things were brought in frame,
Them to en^tich, and praise God for the same
-- Then use them freely, but be no man's judge,
Nor at their greatness either storm or grudge:
As for the blessings, which you glory in,
I like them well, if that it were no sin
Presumptuous so to be - For sure the best
Came short of that, wherein you safely rest:
King David lived in fear:- lob did mistrusts
Himself a greater sinner, when in dust
He lay -- Abram fell down, and would not look
Up unto God, vntel he mercy took,
The Prophets all disclaimed their worthiness,
The Patriarchs confessed their filthiness:
Peter wtll with his feet, wash head and hands,
Who shall deliver me from sins hard bands,
Paul himself; and yet you nothing want,
Except in one place, where your heart does pant
When that you say, -- you w^nt no faults indeed: --
O do so still; and we are soon agreed.
-- Denique teipsum
Concute, number tibi quid vitiorum inse^erit olim
Natura a aut etiam conswetudo mala. Namque
Neglectis vrenda silix innascitur agr^s.
Hor at lib. 1. Satyr. 3. -- Disciteque o miseri and causas cognoscite (...)
Quid sumus, aut quidnam victuri gignimur, or d^
Quis datus aut metae quam mollis flexus and vnde,
Quis modus argento, quid fas opture, quid asper
Vtile nummus habet patriae, charique propinquis
Quantum elargiri habet, decent, quem te Deus esse
Iussit, and humana quae part locutus es in redisce.
Persius: Satyr* prim. AN ANSWER TO WITHERS NEC CVRO.
What? worse and worse? and must it needs be so,
That now I do a careless Christian know:
And all because he does pretend a care,
Which God does take, why this is not so rare,
-- From all beginnings men did honor God, Pram^ Pana.

Both for his mercy and correcting rod:
-- The Indians where the Idol De^il sits,
Yet do allow in their true tempred ^its
A power far superior unto his: --
The Savages, where all things are amiss,
Pray unto God, -- America's vast land
One God adore, whether they kneel or stand:
The Negro's and Synegas people say
The soul's immort^ll, and to God they pray:
The Mahumetans think so well of God,
That not an Image has with then abode:
The Moors do punish blasphemy with death,
When against God they hear profaned breath:
The Jews yet tremble at Iehovahs Name,
And call his workmanship this wondrous frame,
-- But when our Savior did to Martha say, ^^all ^^ings.

One thing was only needful, as the way
Unto salvation: he did not exclude
All humane wisdom, learning, nor conclude
Against civil honesty, or hopeful arts,
Wherewith so many Worthies played their parts,
Nor against, Aegypts great library he spoke,
Nor other volu^^es bad he us forsake,
And therefore you need not so careless be,
Who are of all men of your knowledge free:
-- If you respect nothing but Gods dear word,
How comes it, that you to the world afford
These Verses, Poems, and high strains of wit,
Which I am sure were never found in it:
Therefore I know you do for somethings care,
Having in learnings treasure-house a share,
-- For presently you fall into a vain, (...) ult (...)

O^ selfe-commending Poesy, and strain
Your passion, to reprove and chide all such,
As will not with considerate judgment touch
Your well writ books: -- And thus them you divide
First into idle Guls, who do deride
You verses out of base and nasty breeding,
Or spoil them with some harsh and ragged reading^
Then into Critics, who the Tauern's haunt,
And out of some distemperature do taunt
Your well-composed Muse with tattered rimes,
According to their fits, and drunken times:
-- Lastly to Poetasters, who presume
On their own frothy stuff, and so assume^
A cunning unbefitting shallow brains,
Which naught but ballat sustinesse retains.
-- And why should these things ^tartle you in ought, Hon^^ profi^

As though in spleen you for reuengement sought?
If they be poor and base, let them alone;
If they be drunk with ^^ot, all is one; (...)

If by endeauours they do something get,
And so their minds to triuiall courses set^
It is but money, and Vespasians p^sse
Brought in a large reuenew; -- So it is,
With da^^tie Merchants, and their clothes of gold;
And such, by whom both pitch and tar are sold.
It is but money, and who difference makes
Twixt selling flesh, or fell: There Is none (...)
His profit, but as he himself applies
To homely courses; thus he lives and dies.
It is but money, and for toies of wit,
Rediculous devices fondly writ
Come often to the Printer with success,
When sollide labors will nere pass the Press:
Therefore desist, and let them to their vain,
For my part I do like such honest gain.
-- You careless are of the dispersed news,
Which either Paul's, (...) Trend Knigh^
or our exchange do use:
Nay, though the Court do justify the same,
You yet are careless of a Courtiers name;
Such Courtiers I do me^ne, as boast of wit,
And like some M^micks in a pleasant fit,
Penuriouslie frequent each good man's table,
And there befoole themselves, as they are able
To catch at ouershppings of m^ane men,
Triu^^phing so with ^oll^tie: but when
The snailes do meet with harder ob^ects, Oh
How poorly do they then their jests bestow,
Pul^ing their ho^^es in, putting all t^^ngs off
Either wit^ laughter, or some silly scoff.
-- These wits (^or (...) the term doha go) do hunt
Those Officers, that out of custom grant
Them certainment, where in impudence
The^ (...) unto their meat with great offense
Unto the Master. For he many times
(...) tell his guests, before their rimes
Come to his hearing. Then if numb^r hold
Proporti ^^n with the room, ^hese fli^s are bold
To s^cke (...) -- Thu^ as smooth as o^^e
They look again, or as great horses soil
The^^^^lues in their own dirt, they all besmeere
B^t (...) finger with this courtly cheer.
-- (...) full fed Mu^^cians they sit still
A (...) in silence, till some darling well
B^g^n the chat, and then they never cease,
N^y though the Master bids them hold their peace.
(...) are great with child with ^ests, and so
Must b^ing the bath ^orth, left it stifled grow.
L^^ke how ^ou see corruption swell the va^es,
And (...) both blood, sinews and brains,
Until so^e boiles and bot^hes do appear,
Whose rup^ures must the rotten carkase clear:
So ^ares it with our w^ts, till gibes and taunts
Burst sorth, and many times the presence daunts,
When men as hot, though not so quick, as they
Bid them befoole them^elues some other way;
And then let these their jests be nere so good,
They terror bring if they do end in blood.
-- But why should you thus careless be? when all
The earth for news a scrutime does call:
Besides, (...)
who ever mastred nature so,
But he was well content since to bestow
Upon fair rumor of the worlds designs,
Which either men, or their prepared assig^es
Hunt after with full greediness, till they
Do vnd^rstand what other men can say;
And so do rectify their ignorance, New^.

As ^ither custom, or some fai^er chance
The Commonwealths rich curtains draw aside,
That they may see, what therein does abi^e:
The Churches unswept corners do discover,
That they may kn^w who is Gods dearest lover:
The Courts high hangings do hold up full high,
That they may view who comes or passes by:
The City gates and State-house cleanely open,
To understand the Common-counsels scope:
The Countries carpet lay abroad, to view,
That they mistake not, what is false or true: --
-- And this is Nature, Custom, Preachers guise
To be to others and themselves so wise,
That they may well adopt each application
Unto the Auditors of every nation: --
Nay, it is no new thing to hark after news,
For the Athenians still the same did use,
Yea, those harsh Stoics, who were stricter men
Beyond our age or people, used it then:
And why should you so singular profess
Your self, your life, your liberty, unless
Some power diu^e, infused has a spir^t
Of Revelation for you to inherit
Beyond all other, that you may indeed
Tell, what is in Apoc^lyps agreed
Concerning Rome, or other rooms of Hell,
Or (as the best newe^) who in Heaven dwell.
-- You careless are of observation, (...)

Or any rules of health, or fashion,
Or whether manners, custom of a Table,
Dreams, prophesies, denices, and are able
To put off cleanelie frightings of the sense;
As if on earth you had no residence:
But could so manage frailty with your reason,
That it should never yield to any sea^on,
Grief, pain, or sickness, or seek out a cure,
Which should your strength maintain, or ease procure.
-- Why this is strange, that any man should cross
The order of our fate, with such a loss
Of physic books, of husbandry, of health,
(For which is still dispensed, so much wealth)
Of Arts, of moral rules, Astrology,
Of the abuses of Tautology,
With all the rest. -- Nay, very Scriptures tell,
The st^rres within the firmament excel
Both Sun and Moon, and are therein exposed
As signs to men: -- For God has so disclosed
His Counsel to our use: -- Thus comes the spring,
Where in the flowers sprout, and birds do sing.
Thus Summer does approach to ripen corn,
and country blessings to our barn; are borne:
^hus Autumn yields a vintage, and prepares
The plowing ground with other worldly cares:
Thus Winter keeps the sap within the root,
Hardens the ground with frost and snow to boot,
Hail, rain, and storm, the fields to oue^flow,
and yet this man cares not what winds do blow:
-- Thus Solomon sets down the Pissemires toil,
The plowmans labor to manure his soil,
The Merchants traffic with the Artisan,
and all the duties which belong to'man.
Thus you shall find Physics necessity,
With other sciences conformity,
What strength has bread, what mirth yeeldes bruised grapes,
What cheerfulness in Oil, yea nothing scapes
^he holy word, but it does show us all,
And yet this man cares not what ever fall:
-- I speak not of Antipathies, though he
^s careless whither any such there be,
But you shall further find, Christ tells us this,
That fiery mornings threaten storms 'ywis,
And by the sky, or troubled firmament,
Men guess at that which God has thereby meant,
And why may not coniectrall dreams accord
To some presage warranted in the word,
Why may not somethings be Prophetical,
Though the prevention does not rightly fall
Within man's reach: yet sure we are to know,
The course of times does alter all things so,
An^ we may well thereby our hearts prepare,
And yet this man for this does nothing care.
-- Then does he talk of welcome. ^e m^s of such ^ntleme^ (...)
and of d^et.
Wherein nothing shallon^e his mind disquiet,
Let Lords and Ladies sum, or chide him so,
He from the chamber to the hall does go,
Let Steward grudge his presence, what cares he,
He means as he was wont still there to be,
Let servants wh^sper curses in his ear,
He ^ests it out, and can the same forbear,
Let an inseriour be before him placed,
So he make on^, ^e says, he is not disgraced,
Nay though he ^is* upon some fret, or fume,
He suddenly new courage does assume,
What torment worse then this? and yet there be
Good men even chained to such necessity: --
-- What though he be condemned as he sits
And so affronted with some prowder fits
Of an old toothlesse Lady, or her g^oome,
Or scabbed children, he yet cares not whom:
All things are welcome to his open heart,
Nay though he see a pander play his part
Within the house, a frenzy jest he hear
To quip him to his teeth, he can forbear
All taunts and gibes; no scorns unto his face,
Nor surly looks can make him leave the place. --
-- Say that the young ones paint, or smoke the hair
With powders sweet to make them seem more fair,
^hat's this to him? the fond attires that be
^oth whorish and immodest he does see,
and never ca^es, nor how they sport and play,
^rophane, dance, revel, throw their souls away,
^ingling each word with a false hearted oath,
^e keeps his silence, and to check is loath.
^or if he once mention a matrones name,
^t him they geere, and do deride the same.
^f he a word of private prayers glance,
They think him mad, or else in some strange trance,
^f from their bias throw them to serve God,
And keep the Sabb^th, they their heads d^e nod,
^ol^ng their tongues, disclaming so to be
^epu^ed Puritans in leas^ degree: --
(...) this he sees and care^esse lets it pass.
^or so it will be, is, and ever was:
And yet this man writes man, has gifts good store,
As oncing ged to natures bounteous lore:
And yet this man proceeds from gentle blood,
And by his writings has the world with stood:
And yet this man write, Christian, honest, wise,
Though now he careless be of any guise,
And yet this man religious writes, and so
Lives better sure, then these his words do show --
-- The next step that you make is against the care
Of certain superfluities, which are (...)

Produced from Credit, pleasures, money, time,
Reputing every one a several crime,
Which do not give attendance on the soul,
As virtue may motives of sin control,
Or a pure heart resolve never to yield,
Though honesty be foiled in the feeld,
Nay as it seems, you rather sink and die,
Then be a slave to raging villainy:
Sure you do well if you could have it so,
But then you must out of this compass go,
And either not converse with men at all,
Or stumble at such things, as make them fall.
For this dishonestie you hate so much,
Has amongst worldlings such a common touch,
That it i^ used, though it do not thrive,
And o^t of passion does each man deprive
O^ understanding: But what shall be done?
When it the race of gain and profit run,
When it does sringe the skirts of great men's coats,
And glides as smooth as oil down in their throats,
Whereby a powerful tongue checks innocenee,
And by inuersion names it impudence;
And yet you care not, so your soul be pure,
How can a pure soul such outrage endure.
-- Nay in my soul, when that you see it so,
You grieve at heart. -- But now you onward go
With carelessenesse at statesmen raised by Kings, (...)

As if it danger were to reach at things
Beyond our strength: -- Yet shall we venture this
To cry alowd, that great men do amiss,
And not be gr^iued, how the government
Concussion suffers: -- When we know they meant,
Either to paint their coats with fuming fame,
As their ambition does bedawb the same,
And as their hearts are proud, their glorious eyes
Will look on nothing but the high^ built skies:
-- Or for some private ends to make such men,
As formerly distasted them: but when,
When they were taught winged Pegasus to stride,
And brave it, mounted in a pompous pride.
-- Or out of sordide, and obsceane delight
Of riches play the tyrants in despite.
-- Or out of care of fair posterity,
Do neither care for truth; or charity,
But to turn over a greatness to their stock,
Split their own barks upon the craggie rock
Of a bad conscience, which cause no man sees,
They do proceed in ^inne by all degrees,
Raising their bulwarks out of Princes powers,
Whose sacred titles stand like strong built towers.
-- Then who dare once contro^^e what they will have,
For Kings breath honor, life, and credit save.
-- But Kings may be abused, either from pass^on,
Or will, or some misled affection:
But worst of all from poisoning flattery,
Suggesting actiens against their dignity,
As if it treason were for to contest
For any cause against their high behest.
-- What shall a subject dare (say they) to find
A fault or scruple against the Princes mind?
Why are they called Gods, while that they li^e,
And all must stoop, and knee'e, and honor give,
(As reason is). -- But now i^ all this coile
Be to divert their fair aspects, and soil
Their first pure hearts with spots of others sin,
Better it were that such had never bin
To blister a sweet face: -- Oh this flattery
Is worse then Cannon shot in battery.
For open enemies may be withstood,
But bruses dangerous are, that draw no blood.
-- This vice as I remember is compared
To certain Asps, who when they are prepared
To po^son m^n, as they lie fast asleep,
Do softhe on their bellies to them creep,
Sword^ about until they get some bare,
Which sti^g they will not, but hauc greater care
To tickle, and to lick upon the place,
As they con^inue in their wanton race,
Until they bruise their gummes, and bladders break,
From whence a moisture does upon them reake,
Which at the first does itch: but by degree^,
Before the poisoned party knows, or sees,
It rankles worse then Deian ras shurt,
And end^th not without or death, or hurt.
-- Even thus good government may be abused
By ^ rinces favorites, who still have used
This cunning trick to keep the rest in awe
By such strong hands as countermaund the law.
-- But to the point, if that it should be thus,
Do you not care, that can so well discuss
Of virtue, goodness, piety, and truth,
Wherein you have brought up your fearful youth.
Come, come, you do, say what you will, you do;
And ^o, and more, does every good man too,
^ho cannot look upon enormities,
^ith such hard hearts, or stiffer dried up eyes,
^ut in religious sorrow send out tears,
^hen the good soul of such ill tiding hears: --
and say the Eagle lifts her young ones high
^o look against the Sun, that she might spy,
which are not bastards, weaklings against kind,
^ut if by proof she any such do find,
^he dasheth them to ground out of the nest,
Whereby they perish: -- Thus if Kings find out
Who bastards are to virtue making doubt
Of their true worth: -- Themselves most worthy when
^hey do discover such polluted men,
Casting them out like lepers from the c^mpe,
Or traitors, that abuse their money, stamp: --
-- Does not this move you, to see fortunes spi^ht
^y such exchange on ^railtie for to light,
-- Has not our common mother nature taught,
That men with men's afflictions are caught?
-- For though we truly may rejoice in heart,
When Princes act so good a Princes part
^o punish wicked men, though they be great,
As once Cambises did a Judge entreat: -- (...) flead ^ Judge.

-- Though we lament, when vicious men do rise
Within the Realm to rage and t^rannise:
Yet sure men moved are with those extr^ames,
As we look strangely at the Suns fair beams
Eclipsed by the moon: and though our faith
Be nere so strong: -- yet sure the Scripture says,
That we must fear and tremble, when we see
By Signs and meteors, that God angry be.
-- Here once again you of religion talk,
And many times do trace in one self walk
Of scorning still the rascal multitude, (...)

Of great men's errors, who themselves delude,
Of praising virtue, hating avarice,
Of self commending, as if none were wise,
But such as with you could be still content
With any fortune in her worst extent,
Of the sure secret in divinity
Man's free election h' against humanity,
And many such like, which you often repeat
I think of purpose, that the purer wheat
Banked up with the chafe might vndiscried,
Or vnsnatcht at safe in the heap abide: --
-- But what do you for your religion more,
Then Moors and Turks, who hate the worlds great sto^
Of books, except their holy Alcheron,
Which none but Priests and Doctors look upon:
Nay barbarous nations are beyond you far, ^usty.

That rather will maintain seditious war,
Then break a superstitious foolish rite,
Though all the world should other truth recite.
-- But how comes in this uncouth Paradox,
(To split your judgment on presumptious rocks,
That no man as an honest man is fit
Either in Church or Common wealth to sit,
That for his money does an office buie:
Sure this is harsh, and no man will rely
Upon your censure, but remain a loofe,
Though that you cunning had to make the proof.
For either out of Scripture you must frame
Your dangerous structure, or maintain the same
With strange confusion of all Countries fashions,
Who nere will yield unto such rules and passions:
Nay though you say, you meant Judicial seats,
Where equal tongue for the poor foul intreates:
For this distinction cannot you excuse,
Since many great men do all bribes refuse.
-- As for preferment purchased with wealth,
Which little better is (you say) then stealth:
Or honors fames for preseruations sake,
For which the world so great a stir does make,
Or Countries swetnesse, when a wiseman may
Make every Country a man's worth display: --
-- Yet what a world of men did dearly love
Their Countries above all, (...)
scorning to move
One forward step into another land,
But for imploiment as their case does stand:
Nay, though they sat in Kingly seat,
Yet home they must, and make a fair retreat;
Or courtly Office, which both good and bad
Do equal get, as favors may be had;
Or lordly love, which for some private end
Would entertain you for a welcome friend.
-- All these you care not for, yielding a proof
That mischiefs hang in honors glittering roof,
Ready to fall upon a poor man's back,
Worse then the tortures of a cruel rack,
And so in these you are but thus far gross,
To gain the ^ ore content by suc^ a l^sse:
But ^s I (...), have the same repeated,
Why is man in this earthly house so seated?
But to auo^de an idle carelessness,
And make his time a map of blessedness;
The Church and Common weal^h must have
The^^ several rulers, to maintain and save
Their fair estates, from the tumultuous hands
Of strange disordered men, who gazing stand
To take ad^antage of confusion;
If none were raised for preservation,
If all were quiet in their Countries rest,
Where were the state of Courts? If none addressed
Themselves to hear a Lawier plead his case,
What emptiness would be in every place?
If none unto the City did resort,
As now they do for business, wealth, or sport;
Morositie would grow as weeds, and men remain
More brutish then the ha^sh or dogged swain:
Then leave so to confine all men at home,
Nature, and course of times make some men rome.
-- As for offenses which be personal, (...)

Or policy which you dishonest call,
Or other crimes, hanging on all men's cloakes
Like shuffled dust, which blindes our e^es, or choak^s*
What can a Parliament reform, or be
The better to prevent necessity:
The world has custo^es which can nere be broke,
And men have manners, which (though you in^oke
The heavens to redress) will have no change,
Though that you chide, and with inuectiues range*
In washing of a Negro, (...) not true?
Your labou^ m^ke, not any other hue:
You may hold down a bough, but le^ it go,
And it will quickl^e spring, and vpwa^d grow:
So play men's faults with an offensive tong^e,
They let ^ou talk, and think y^u do them wrong,
And though you ca^elesse are, yet all their ca^e
Is for their pride of life, and be^ter fare;
Say you remove an^ d^e re^o^me some men,
What do you purify the places then?
Come, come, while men their lessons do repeat,
The Master hears the stammering in his seat:
Look on fair glistring gold, it does besmeare
The fingers, though you think it nere so clear:
As Curtezans to fiery co^les compared
(If men unto their wiles are once ensnared)
Which either burn, or make the fingers black,
So policy for profit works like wrack*
-- And th^nke you Lords will sit dull at their table, None mirth Iowab

If they for s^lace ^o provide are able?
Or Ladies want their Monkies, 'cause that you
Est^eme them foppish: -- They say, this is true,
All things were made for man him to obey,
And (as the best sort do) why should not they
Enjoy their pleasures? Nay they can recite
A place of Scripture to maintain delight,
From that same speech, or dialogue, choose whether,
When Barzillay and David met together. --
And thus in all things which you would deprave,
Though you be careless, they a great care have:
As for your soul, that cannot put the^ off,
They to their own must look, at yours do scoff.
-- You care not for a villains confidence,
Nor against virtue, vices impudence;
Nor any vpstart groom, who still does rise
As him his gracious Lord does Patronise,
Nor any gentry which of arms do brag,
When worth and virtue do so lamelie lag;
Nor to command a Province, though it be
A kind of honor due to sovereignty.
What of all this? You descant one true song,
Aiming at that which goodness brings along,
And you do well: -- But virtue tells this,
That all her trial from temptation is.
-- As women may be honest, who sit still,
Pend in a house against proud natures will,
Not brought abroad, or suffered once to see (...)

The hanging labels of dishonestie:
So may your virtue thrive. -- But swell with he^^
O^ pride and lust, let honor you entreat
To sit aloft, and lie on iuorie beds,
As noble Peers do rest their braine-sicke heads;
To drink in cups of gold, fat lambs to kill,
Then let me see how you your self could will?
We know not as you say, how your true soul
Is wrought upon, abuses to control?
So I do say, you know not how you may
Your resolutions alter in the day.
-- Here you annex a pretty argument,
In praise of valor, and with same intent,
Against dishonest cowardice complain, (...)

As a polluted wice goodness to stain. --
-- Yet none of both can either save or kill
That soul, For which did Christ the Law fulfill.
When among the Jews none were chose out to fight,
If anies heart did faint, return they might
Unto their houses, and the Gospel thus
Peter controules: still dealing so with us,
That we should humble be, bearing with wrong,
Leaving revenge to him it does belong:
If it be so, damnation does not fall
Upon his head that will not fight at all. --
-- I speak not this by way of send excuse,
But by degrees to come to the abuse,
For as in valor there may be a pride,
Which good and true reposed men deride;
So may a coward, whom the world mistakes,
Virtue possess, which braine-sicke ^urie shakes.
-- I hope you do not by this valor mean
Some furious Ajax in a Tragic Scene,
Who rauing runs to stricke, to kill, to stab,
For every word, or lie, or mock, or drab,
And when he finds not any so to kill,
With souler hands upon himself fall will: --
-- Nor such you mean, that after heated brains,
With furious eyes, and raging tongues complains
Upon the man, that durst abuse him so,
Without a pledge the health to ouergoe,
Although he see him spewing ripe already,
With ^taggering steps and rauings over headie:
-- Nor such you mean, who lo^king round about,
Discouers some weak man among the rout,
And either falls to flout him, or to ^corne,
Or with some brauing gesture ouerborne,
^^^umphs against him in an angry fit,
Because vnmo^'d, he does in silence fit: --
-- Nor su^e you will that man a coward call,
That for his God, religion, country shall
Power out his blood: Yea for his dear friends sake,
Or honest cause himself to arms betake;
Nay though the Law be dangerous in this kind,
When accidents do chance, lags not behind,
And this you do express, -- As for the rest,
Of traitor, villain, base, you are not pressed
For any thing I hear for them to care,
Therefore you may sull w^ll such speeches spare.
-- Now you co^ne in against a misery, (...)

Which does belong to Fortunes my sterie,
The pride of ^ise, arising out of wealth,
To which you do oppo^e content with health,
Boasting you^ self to be the only man,
That of content resound the (...) can,
An^ still you bring in virtue, of the mind,
W^^ch wordly greatness needs must come behind:
All this, moral Philosophy does teach,
But you from Scripture would the doctrine preach:
Sure, i^'t be so, you are a happy man,
And may say more then any other can.
For true content is worth a Monarchy,
And troubles with great mischiefs hit the high:
But as small fire suf^^ceth to small roast,
So who want more then they that such things boast:
As if a pleasure were, pleasure to scorn,
When yet to modest pleasures we are borne: --
-- For in d^light^ (as I have often said)
Man may rejoice, and God may be obaid:
Yea man may hauel is fancy in each thing.
Which does him ease, profi^, or pleasu^e bring, (...)

Whether it books, or hawks, or horses be,
Or shooting, hunting, or a pl^y to see:
I make no doubt a man may do all this
Without offense: -- So that his ai^e not miss,
And he which shall oppose his fair delight,
Censured will be (...) s^ight.
For how can man in virtue so exce^l,
That he is certain always to d^e we^l.
-- The next of note, (...)
you carelessly deny
Is kindred whom the State has raised on high:
Who in their pride vouchsafe not to look back
Upon their poor all^e, that all things lack:
Nay, now they scorn to justify their blood,
But will ^ome ancient Pedigree make good: --
-- And though a brothers son approach him near,
Yet will not he his cause by that name hear,
Sure, it is not well; if any such there be,
That are ashamed their poorest kin to see.
-- But if that God will mean men so advance,
Whether for virtue or some other chance;
What Is that to you; they care not for your care,
Nor ye^ regard, how that you careless are.
-- For if you stand to boast how you were borne,
As well as they, take heed of spite and scorn:
The better course is their good will to try,
And not by carelessness them to defy.
What do you know, as Mordichai did say,
Whether that God did bring them to this way
Even for your good: -- It may be that his p^ide
With other Vices, which in him reside:
Shall turn to all the profit of his kin,
For thus with God the former crimes have bin.
-- You follow then to hunt a Prodigal,
As he is glorious, and a fool withal:
Faith spare your labor, and you soon shall s^e,
How for the sa^e he punished will be:
-- If yet you will reform him without cost,
There is a while naught but your labor lost;
Until his frantic humor be out spent,
And the^ comes shame and wants incontinent:
Yea such as worshipped him unto his face,
Will, if they meet him, geere at his disgrace:
But if you would unto the world descrie,
Your careless resolution to deny
Such simple Guls, what cares the world for this;
They wish you were better emploide iwis.
-- Next thing you talk of is Opinions blast,
Which suddenly is spent and ouer-cast;
And so not to be cared for: -- Yet still
Your fingers itch at Virtue with a will
^o have the world regard your dearest love,
^o that which God and godly men approve.
-- You add^ withal, how no harsh discontent Disconttent.

Can weak your bow, that is so strongly bent,
^ut rather make you fit for such a trial,
^s shall maintain^y your faith without denial.
-- I little say, -- For twenty times at least
^ou have invited us to such a feast;
^esides; I many things do ouer-passe
^r fear of mischief, which must ne^ds alas
^icken a cloud of some displeasure, when
^nsorious searchers bring judicious men
(...) ouer-looke the fardell of your brain
^king it ill, that thus you dare maintain
^ch arrogant positions against reason,
^eing that wisdom may come out of season: --
-- For so a dangerous passage next you make,
^d do a slender bark to storms betake
(...) a stu^'d Ocean, bringing on a stage
^ur former fortunes, but in such a rage,
^at you spare none that in your Tragedy
^ere Actors to increase your misery:
-- But I will spare to talk of this at all,
^d grant the weakest be not thrust to wall:
I wish you Virtue thrive: but as I live.
(...) hot a zeal will many scandals give,
^sedome directs good Counsel to bestow,
(...) man must not proclaim all he does know.
^ For when the Frog did with the Bullock swell,
^dash't his brains out, and so dead he fell.
-- You draw at last to some conclusion,
But stronger then the whole confusion
You have failed in: -- No grief shall you amate
No sorrow, (...)
discontent, your mind rebate,
No poverty, distress, you^ friends despite,
As if in misery you took delight:
-- Su^e th^s is much: Job dealt not with us so,
He did with humbler steps and paces go,
He cride his flesh was not a chimney stock,
His bones of brass, his head a bea^ing block,
His sides of Adamant, his eyes of stone,
His heart of marble hard: -- Yet you alone
Dare challenge terror to fight hand to h^nd,
As in the Giants war: -- Where men did stand
To toss the rocks against the lightning (...),
And with Typhaeus, Jupiter defy: --
-- You do not care for Fortune in her glory,
To pull down prouder hearts: -- It is your story
To be recorded for a man of wonder,
That could as well live Atlas burden under,
As once endure such mischiefs you relate,
Or anxious sorrows appointed by Fate:
-- Why, what are you, that dare adventure thus,
Did ever man the matter so discuss:
-- The Prophets in times past did bear it out,
Yet of their frailties urged many a doubt:
The Jews who daily for their Law did ^ight
Allowed their errors, and the stronger might:
The blessed Apostles had as great a faith,
And yet they staggered, as the Scripture faith:
^he Martynes I con^esse did constant die,
^ut yet they were afraid in Gives to ^e,
^ther good Saint^ were glad of some relief,
(...) many times aff^o^t d at the^ grief.
-- If Jeremy were with you face to face,
^e tell you would the dungeon were a place
^f mire and death: and so I make no doubt,
^e was full glad, when he was helped out:
(...) Whales vast belly was another hell,
(...) Jonas, think you, merrily there dwell:
and yet you care not, if your case were such,
^ou could endure: -- Well, this is too too much,
and may with lesser smarts your virtue tire:
^hy man, you have but touched a smoking fir^:
^t take you heed of such a Monarchs rage,
^at shall an Oven heat, or you engage
^ fury of wild beasts: -- How then you fare,
cannot tell, but I believe you care: --
^ As for your Muse which you do boast so much
^d careless are who it pe^use, or touch:
^m your example I do ouerpasse,
^d gently leave it wi^h you, as it was:
^ur Epilogue, Postscript, and Epigram
^^ane not now in any sort to name.
^ I protest, if you do^ wish the same
^oke more after Charity, then Fame:
^d pray with all my heart, fair calmes may be
^spicious to your journey, that you see
^ blacker sky: -- For Ahabs little cloud
^d quickly raise the winds to speak aloud. --
And so farewell. -- Yet would you would prepar^
Another song, that you hereafter ^are*
(...) honor, and lauds, and laeto glori^ vultu,
^tdecus, and niue is victoria concolor alis.
(...) cunctus lauro perducit ad astra triumphus,
Castam^^^ d^mus, and celso stant colle penates.
Silius Ital. lib. 15. de bell: Punico. FINIS.

