A Dialogue between the Author and his Muse, as touching the dedication of
this book.
Author MY freendly Muse leave Parnas hill a while,
I crave thy aid and counsel now at need:
L end me thy laurel crown to gui^e my style,
DRED drives my mind to doubt of lucky speed
May I be bold this rude book to addres,
To her who is a Mirror of worthiness.

Musa. B lush not at all (thou dastard) in this case,
V nto the best, best welcome is goodwill,
R efrayne thy doubts, and hope for favors grace,
G iue me the charge to rule thy rusty quill:
LEY all thy care upon her courtesy:
Whose noble heart knows all humanity.

Author. Thy words (my Muse) some hope of hap does yield,
But yet I feel a conflict in my breast:
And whether part may win in me the feelde,
My staggering doubt uncertain yet does rest:
Before mine eyes a platform does appear,
Of all her worthynesse as thou shall hear.
If learning may lift up her fame to skies,
Her laud is sent unto the highest throne:
If virtue vaunt, a lofte her honor flies,
In godliness her like is rarely known,
For noble nature, and for courtesy,
What should I say, my pen cannot descry.
May I not then be over saucy deemd,
To make a match as this so far unfit.
May I have hope my book to be esteemd,
That shows not forth one dram of skill ne wit:
Nay, nay, my Muse, I am resolude in mind:
My vndeserts, shall slender favor find.

Mus^. Ah simple sot, I cannot choose but smile,
To see how thou do mask in follies not:
Thou seemst abashed of thy homely style,
Learn this of me, and do it not forget,
Where learned skill her golden gifts do place:
Good will unlearned shall find favors grace.
Where virtue keeps possession of the breast,
And godliness does harbor in the heart,
Scorn is exylde, she does disdain detest,
From noble nature, favor does not start.
Shun not to show the fruits of thy good will,
No shame ensues where meaning is not ill.
The simple beast that fears the Lious looks,
Is flesht at length by favor once obtaynde:
Though (as thou say) unskillful be thy books,
Yet thou ere this have favors freendship gainde.
Her noble spouse, thy book did not disdain,
While in thy breast like skirmish did remain.
Where Mild is first, Read then what does ensue,
Mild minds are always matched with courtesy:
Dread not at all, she will vouchsafe to view
Thy book if thou approach with modesty,
No trick of love or Venus wanton toys.
Are herein pend, to feed fond lovers joys.
If coy conceit of curious eloquence,
Had ^xed foot within her learned mind:
Then were it time for thee to fly from hence,
To hunt for terms that hardly thou may find.
But why do I, to thee this lesson tell,
She is none such, and that thou know full w^ll.
Then on I go, God send me lucky speed,
In humble wise, to crave her favors grace:
Adieu despair, on hope my heart shall feed,
With full assurance of her freendly face.
And this I vow, and shall perform the same,
In prayer to record her noble name.
While life does last.

To the Right noble and virtuous Lady, the Lady Mildred Burleigh, Wife unto
the right honorable Lord Treasorer of England, Vlpian Fulwell wishes perfect
Felicity.
WHen I had taken a view (right honorable and virtuous Lady) of the great and
grievous enormities, that issue from the filthy fountain of pestilent
flattery, the practitioners whereof (as it is said) are the most pernicious of
al tame Beasts, I was justly moved, or rather urged in conscience, to display
the wicked and impudent exercises of the flattering floake in these days: Not
that I think my self the meetest man to take this charge in hand (being very
rude both in phrase and also invention) but rather to call the fine sort of
writers that now swarm in England, to leave the current handling of Venus
Pageants (wherein they show their excellency) and prosecute this, so necessary
matter to be inueied at, as a pestilent weed in a pleasant Garden, most
necessary to be Irradicate.

I shall not need to fly to the Poet Homer for his aid in description of the
Sirens, seeinge that thus our unhappy age is furnished with Mermaydes, whose
luring songs yield such daynty and delicate tunes to the ears of ambitious
and vain glorious people, that while they seem to swim in the flood of
Fortune, they sink in the stinking puddle of folly: but the wiser sort follow
the example of Ulysses for the auoydinge of their sweet venomous
enchauntmentes. And as it is well known that your L. have stopte your ears
against their magical incantations, as a pattern of prudence and discretion,
for others, (both therein and in all other commendable virtues) to imitate: So I
am bold, humbly to desire your honor to be my Patroness in this my inuectiue
against that liberal science, which though I have (by a contrary) termed it
the E^ghth liberal Science, not that it contains in it any liberalitye of
virtue or honest knowledge, yet because benefits are so liberally contributed
unto it (as daily experience shows.) And if any Scycophant will captiously
turn upon me, the pyke of this edge tool, for any thing in this Epistle unto
your L contained, I doubt not but easily to avoid his assault, with a great
multitude of witnesses. For the abandoning of which filthy Art, I refrain to
write that which common knowledge and public report do of your L. worthiness
daily testify. And although I may seem very presumtuous, to aspire to so noble
a Patroness, with so slender a present to so learned a Lady, with so rude a
Treatise, yet the great courtesy that I have both seen and received at your L.
hands, has enforced me to express my du etifull gratuity, with this my very
simple and unpolished piece of work, in the acceptance whereof, I shall be most
bounden unto your honor, with my humble and hearty prayer unto almighty God,
both for you and my good Lord, whom God preserve to the inestimable comfort of
the common wealth of this Realm.

Your Honors most humble. Vlpian FulWell.

To the Freendly Reader, Ulpian FullWell.
I Doubt not at al (gentle Reader) but that I, for my industry in detecting
this eyghth liberal Science, shall be reputed with many sapientum octauus,
the eyghth wise man: that is as wise as Will Summer, but I shall content my
self with such reputacion, rather chosing to be truths drudge, then Fortunes
flattering dearling. And I can not but greatly lamente, that so many in these
days do so adict themselves to the filthy trade of flattery, whereby both
Noble men, Gentlemen, and good natured men are abused: and fools flatterers,
dissemblers and gesters, noseled in impudency, and nourished by petty theeuery,
like the waspe that lives upon the labor of the paynefull Be. And although
such Waspes will for this my labor do their endeavor to stinge me for my
pain: yet I will be so bold with them as to tell thee (gentle Reader) what
they are. Such they are as lie at receite for the fruits of other men's
deserts. They catch the birds, for the which other men beat the bush, and
such they are, as with their detestable practice of flattery, withdraw men
from the study of virtue.

And this their execrable science has so perverted the (...) of many in this
age, and has taken such habit in man's affections: that it is in most men
altera natura, and very difficile to be expelled: yea, the very sucking babes
has a kind of adulation toward their Nurses for the dugge, which (in my
judgment) comes unto them by corruption of nature: and as they grow in
reason, so they increase therein, until in time it is turned from green and
tender addulation, to ripe and perfect dissimulation, except by good education
the same be prevented. If I should generally condemn all men of this foul
crime, I might justly be blamed, yet may I bouldly say, that in comparison of
the multitude, very few there are, whose hearts and tongues are not stained
with the blemish of flattery and the branches thereof: namely dissimulatio^,
deceit, wicked perswations, with such other like sinisters practis. How common
a thing is it, to see one man embrace another with such freendly salutacions,
as though they were knit in the insoluble knot of perfect friend ship, and yet a
man may buy as much love at Byllingsgate for a box on the ear.

How shifte some men with goulden words to promise, and how slack to
perform: how easy to have a friend in words, and how hard to find one in
deeds: And certes, if I should particulerly descend to the very Beggar, I
should both be too tedious in this Epistle, and also publish the effect of my
second part of this matter, (as yet to come.) Desiringe thee not to wreste my
words unto a worse sense, then my plain meaning has pretended: and where
thou find this name Fortune, my meaning is the selfsame blind Ma^mon, that
the Poets speak of, under whose name and person, they comprehend earthly
prosperity, which we daily see to be vnegally, and indiscreetly distributed:
and her stately palace, is the wide world, whereunto all men have ingresse and
egresse: and thus doing, thou shall both gratify my desire, and hasten me
forth unto my second part: Until which time (gentle Reader,) I pray thee let
not this my beginning offend thee, except thou be one of them that is here
rubbed on the gall: but trustinge that thou art one of Lady Truethes retinue, I
submit my labor unto thy censure, wishing thee thy hearts desire in God. Vale.

Vlpian Fulwell

A description of the seven liberal Sciences, into whose company the eight
has intruded her self.
Grammar.
IF learning may delight thy youthful breast
If tender years to skillful lore be bent
Approach to me, voutchsafe to be my guest:
My entertaynement shall thy mind content.
My key in hand shall open the gate of skill,
My Book on breast shall teach thy tongue and quill.
Logic.
FRom Grammers School approach to me with speed,
Where thou may learn the rule to reason right,
I give the fruit, though Grammar sow the seed:
In me thou may decerne the dark from light.
My fastened fist much matter does import,
Coucht in few words fit for the learned sort.
Rethorick.
WHen Grammers grace, and Logickes learned lore,
Has decked thy mind, and mended nature well,
My golden study shall yield thee such store,
Of flowing words and phrases that excel.
Lo here with open hand I do display,
The flowing flood of eloquence always.
Music.
WHen mistie cloud of drouping dumpish head
Does drive thy mind to plunge in pensive poole,
The clog of care that soking sorrows bread,
Is clean shakte of, by entering to my School.
My dainty tunes do yield such sugared sap,
As draws each bliss, and drives each foul mishap.
Arrithmetick.
BY Sciphering Science, lo my sums I cast,
By wit and weight, I wondrous things contriue,
With bunch of keys, my counts are locked up fast:
In me thou may see how thy wealth does thrive.
My arms and breast, my legs eke naked be,
To show that truth and plainness rests in me.
Astronomy.
FRom earthly skill unto the lofty skies,
My globe and I, will show the lore of light
Thou shall foresee what tempest will arise,
To thee such secrets shall appear in sight.
That Stars and Planets shall thy matesremain,
And thou a fellow with celestial train.
Geometry.
Behold the Compass and the other tools,
Wherewith I work such wonders as seem strange,
My Rule and Quadrant, are no books for fools,
A learned scull must in my precepts range.
Now when thou have us Sisters seven obtainde.
A world of wealth and wisdom thou have gainde.
Adulatior, or flattery.
Behold the bragges that Sisters seven have made,
Suruiew their vaunts that seem to shine so bright
My glittering skill shall clips them in the shade:
In me appears the beams of perfect light.
My flattering tongue shall gain more then they all,
I give the trip and they shall take the fall.
Grammarians gain naught else but bread and cheese,
Per^hance dame Logic have a small reward,
Nete Eloquence will plead for slender fees:
Nice Music as a Minstrel men regard.
Arrithmatick obtaines but little thrift,
Astronomy serves for a simple shift.
Geometry may iog on barrels bun,
And drink the dregs when liquor al is spent,
My golden Art the game and gole has won:
To my sweet skill, each heart and ear is bent.
The Well of wealth my Science does contriue,
Then learn my lore all ye that mean to thrive.
To me does flow the flood of happy state,
In me is matched a mass of worldly bliss,
No sturdy storm my favor may abate:
For Princely ears my presence may not miss.
I spin the thread and weaue the web of hap,
And none but I may sit in Fortunes lap.
The first Dialogue between the Author and the Printer.
Author. FVll well I do find, that Fortune is blind, her wheel runs by
chance:
When she list to frown, the wise she throws down, and fools does advance.

Printer. SIr, I do not a little maruayle that you seem so to blame Fortune,
whose favor, I suppose, you have sufficiently enjoyed from time to time,
wherefore (me seems) you show your self very unthankful for her good gifts
on you bestowed.


Author. In deed, my old fellow and friend W. H. (I deem you are guided by
this Prouerbial reason,) Fortune favors fools, Ergo Fortune favors
Fulwell, but all old Proverbs are not always true, for then should I be very
fortunate, but I will render unto thee the cause that I am out of her grace and
favor.


Printer. Sir, I pray you let me crave that courtesy at your hands, so may I
happily learn the cause why she is my professed enemy also.


Author. First thou must understand, that I was servant a longtime unto Lady
Hope, who in fine, was minded to prefer me unto the service of Lady Fortune,
and when my said Maistres perceived that this blind Goddess was determined to
entertain certain men into her service, and bestow on them very liberally,
she sent me to Fortune, with her letter of co^mendacio^s, the tenure whereof
ensues


Most bountiful Lady and my good Cousin (Dame Fortune) your approved friendship
toward me at all times extended, emboldneth me to write unto you at this
present in the behalf of this bearer U. F. my servant, whom to prefer unto
your Ladyships service, is my desire, and earnest suite unto you, of whose
approved fidelity (utterly void of dissimulation and flattery) I give you
warrantize, and in entertaininge of him you shall do me a very acceptable good
turn. Thus with hearty salutacions, I wish you as unto my self, from my house
at N.

By your very louing^ Cousin Lady Hope.


Printer. Truly this was a very loving letter, and (in my judgment) you were
happy to have so freendly a Maistresse. I marvel that upon the delivery of
this letter unto Lady Fortune, she made not you chief ruler and orderer of
her house.


Author. Nay nay, one clause of this letter dashed all the rest, and made me
lose my golden service.


Printer. What clause was it I pray you?


Author. These are the words that marde all, (utterly void of flattery and
dissimulation.)


Printer. Why? then I perceive that slattery and dissimulation is the way to
win Fortunes favor, and certis now I see plainly the cause that I have been
always alienated Fortune favors none (...) ^atterers
from her favor, and a continual subject to her frowns. But I pray you, had
you a ^at denial at the first, or else by some pretty sleight of circumstance.


Author. I will disclose unto thee the order of my coming to b^r Court, and of
my entertainment there. At my first entry into her Court, I set aside
bashfulnes, knowing that boldness has more free passage into the Court gates.
The^ with y^ Courtlikest fashion that I could, (being indeed more cart^rlike
the^ Courtier like) I pressed my self into the Chamber of presence, my threedbare
cloak was marked of many, and y^ rest of my attire agreeable thereunto, was mocked
of most, but specially of them that swinged up and down in bravery of other
men's cost, and I was thought very saucy and malapert. And among the rest, one
lusty Courtiour (whose name as I understood afterward, was double Diligence)
Double (...).
asked of me how I durst presume to iussel my balde cloak by their brave
garments. Sir (said I) the baseness of mine does increase the beauty of yours.
This gentleman was so proud of his Pecocks plewms, that to ostend his bravery
by my contrary, was willinge to walk and talk with me in the Chamber of
presence, unto whom at last I brake my mind, and the cause of my coming to
the Court, and when he understood that I had letters to Dame Fortune from her
Cousin Lady Hope, he welcomed me very freendly, and with small entreaty became
my Soliciter unto his Maistresse the Lady Fortune: by means whereof I was
called into the presence of this blind Goddess, whom when I saw, I found the
Poets and painters true men and not liars, for she was muffled from her chin
to the top of her temples, and it so fell out that as I came in, she was
blindly in bestowing of her guiftes, in such sort, as I have seen the Priest
in time past, deal holy bread, she gave to much to very many, but enough to
none, Superfluity sat alofte, but Sacietie was shut in prison, and as did the
rest, so did I hold out my hand for her benevolence. I gaped wide, but other
snatched up the benefits before they fell to the ground, I stretched forth my
arm and opened my hand, but I could^ finger nothing, she crossed my hand with
many bare blessings, but the gifts fell on both sides of my fist and non^
right: it rayned pottage, but I wanted a dish: there might I see how some of
William Summers kynred had their hands full, Pierce Pickthanke filled his
purse, Fraunces the Flatterer flourished in wealth, Crispin the Counterfai^ was
compted a ioly fellow* Dauy Dissembler had wealth at will and in great
estimacion, but to resite y^ detestable crew of fools, flatterers, and
parasites, that received gifts o^ this blind Lady Fortune, would be to
tedious to discribe. At last I espide in a corner all solitarely, a beautiful
Lady of cumly feature, in very modest attire, and she noting my simplicity,
amongst such a sort of snatching companions, come hither thou simple fool F.
(quod she) for thou art very


(...) the second pride, the third ambition, and they so prevailed, that my
train became friends with her, and rebelled against me. Thus was she
advanced, and I thrown down, then was I compelled to seek my habitation
among temporal princes, and noble peers but my enemies were so mighty, that
they constrained many potentates, to have of me small regard, yet the divine
power so provided for me, that I was not, nor am not utterly freendles, and
beeinge advertised by a Sister of mine, named Lady Virtue, that I am had in
great veneration at this time within the realm of England, I am determined to
addres my iurney, as well for the singular good report that I hear of the most
renowned Queen of that realm, compar^ to the godly and virtuous Queen of
Saba (Elizabeth by name) as also for the good hope of welcome unto that famous
nation. And in this wandering pilgrimage, I chanced upon this Palace of blind
Fortune (as thou now see wherein I have noted great liberality with no less
parcialitie, wise men beat the bush and fools catch the birds, valiant men
crack the nuttes, but cowards eat the curnels. Thus as I sit, I see and smile
thereat. Among the rest, I saw when Homer came unto this Court, accompanied with
the nine Muses, unto whom I stepped (knowing^ hi^ intent) and like cool Prophet
uttered unto him these words.


(...). Friend Homer though you seem to come with guard of Muses nine,
Bring you naught else? nay then adewe, go feed among the swine.
AND full truly proved this prophecy, for while he was living, he was little
regard^d i^ this Court, but being dead, the great conqueror Alexander spoke of
him much worship. And so it fares (...), (...) men are not wanted, till they
are lodged in their graves. And although I know full well, that there rests
in thee no extraordinary wisdom, nor scant so much as should serve thy turn,
yet the experience that I have in this Court, and by the conjecture of thy
nature, I dare assure thee thou shall have a could suit, if thou have ought to
dooinge with Lady Fortune.

Madame (quod I) I have attentively harkened unto The Author exhorts Lady
Truth to come into England.
your tale even from the beginning, and am sorry for your misfortunes, which to
redress I would it in me rested. And if it be your Ladyships pleasure to
repair unto the Realm of England I will be your man, and I doubt not but
there you shall be entertained very noblye, both in the Court, City, and
Country. Notwithstanding (good Madame) I will be so saucy as to beshrew you
for your prophecy against me in this my suit unto Lady Fortune, because I
know that your words cannot be false, you beeinge as you are (Lady Truth)
notwithstanding void of all hope. I will approach unto her with my message,
and then will I keep my promise in waytinge on your good Ladyship. Now freende
Printer, if you list to hear how I speed, read this Dialogue followinge.


The second Dialogue between the Author, and Lady Fortune.
Author. Haphazard dame Fortune, your wheel runs to fast,
You lift up a fool, and a wiseman down cast.

FOrtune. What malapart jack is it that so saucely checketh my doings: it
were more fit for him to sit by the heels in the porters lodge ^linde Fortunes
coma ^on alms.
then so presumptuously to prate in our presence Althouhh I wink, yet am not I
so blind, but that I can perceive thy bold approaching above thy degree.


Author. Dear Lady Fortune, as I am sorry for that I have so suddenly offended
you, even so I am right ioyus for your sudden deprivation from your blindness,
trusting that your Ladyship will y^ rather vouchsafe to peruse these letters
that I bring unto you from my good Lady and Maistresse, the Lady Hope.


Fortune. If thou be servant unto my Cosine Lady Hope, thou art the better
welcome to my presence, and I pardon thy former saucines. But before I peruse
this letter, tell me what is thy name, and by what frendshippe thou were
admitted into this place, being clad in so simple attier?


Author. Dear Lady, the first letter of my first name begins with this
letter V. signifiyng unfortunate, and my surname is Fulwell, which beeinge
joined together, is Unfortunate Fulwell. And as touching my approaching into
your presence, so it is that I fulfilled the old proverb (who so bold as
blind Bayarde, but I came not to this place without a back burden of mockes
and tauntes.


Fortune. While thou have bin telling thy tale, I have (...) ^mon ex^se I would
you had cum (...).
perused the letter, and considered the contents thereof, and I wish thou had
come a little sooner, while I was in dealinge of my doale, that somewhat might
have fallen to thy share.


Author. In deed Madam, as somewhat has some savor, so nothing does no harm,
but I was present at your doale* and yet may carry away my gains in mine eye,
and not blemish my sight. I confess your hand blessed me very often, but I
feel no virtue to consist therein, so that I can make no great brags of my
gaynes at your hands.


Fortune. Right now thou made confession of thy boldness, what soddaine
bashfulnes possessed thee, that thou fearedst to snatch out of my hands, as
well as others.


Author. Truly Madam I was never instructed in the school of scamblinge, and
now I am to old to learn, but quietly to stand at receipt to take up nothing.


Fortune. Then art thou utterly unable to thrive in Many have not learned to
thrive.
these days, but now to the purpose, my Cousin Lady Hope has written unto me
very freendly in thy behalf, that I should take thee into my service, but one
clause therein contained makes me deem thee very unfit for my Court.


Author. May it please your Ladyship to show me wherein my inability consists.


Fortune. As thou say, thy name is Unfortunate Fulwell, so I perceive thy
destenies agree thereunto, for except All sauinge flatterers are unfit to serve
in Fortunes Court.
thou be skillful in the Eyghth liberal science, thou can not enjoy either
wealth or any special favor.


Author. Truly Madam, I have been a block bedly scholar all days of my
life, and not utterly ignorante in some of the seven liberal sciences,
although cunning in none of them al, but certes of the eighth I never heard un
till now, whereby I see the longer a man lives the more he may learn.
Wherefore I pray you Madam voutchsafe The eyghth liberal science the nature of
it, and vvherin it most con^steth.
to let me understand somewhat of this science at your hands.


Fortune. For thy Maistresse sake I will do so much for thee, it is called ars
adulandi, and well deserves to be reckoned among the liberal sciences and may
be called Sciencia liberalissima, because it has more liberality contributed
unto it then is to any other Art, and of it self liberally bestows her skill
on as many as are willing to study the same. It consists more in practices
then on precepts, and the first principle of it is this, q^i nesc^ si^lare
nesci^ viuere. He that knows not how t^ dissemble cannot (...) how to live.
Now that I have directed thee thus far in this science, go study the same
diligently, and practice it effectually, and then come unto my court again.


Author. But is there any university wherein this sci^e, is studied:


Fortune. It is both studied and practiced throughout the The world is full of
such Graduates.
world, and thou may have enstructers in every city, town, village, and
bamlet, yea, and almost in every private house, wherefore learn with speed, or
else live like a very fool, and so farewell, for I can no longer attend thee.


Fulwels farewell unto dame Fortune.
FArewell thou froward frowning dame, the fautor still of fools:
A list not learn thy fawning lo^re, I loath thy flattering schools:
For tract of time by tried truth, shall turn thy whirlinge wheel,
And throw him from thy ^ickle ^on, to tomble at thy heel.
My dreary date shall drive the line, to A^ops fatal blade,
E^ I unto thy ^lthy art, will frame my living trade:
Let greedy need make old wives ^rot, to ^ill their rusty (...):
Let Gnato feed his hungry pan^he, I list not to be such.
Let Aristippu^ cogging skill, the ytching e^res still r^:
And I with plain Diogenes, will tumble in a Tub.
Where we with roots will take repast, with conscience clear possessed*
Before ^ne ^are* with tongue in mouth, quite from the heart in breast.
^ew therefore thou doting dame, I da dis^ine thy skill:
And while I live against thy lore, I will direct my quill*
Thy fruit with ^lthy taste is fraught, yet fair to view of eyes:
Wherunder privy poison larkes, and secret ^enime lies.
The sap is sweet and pleasant ban^, yet feeds the foolish mind:
Such graffes so set on rotten stackes, such fruit must yield by kind,
I rather choose the homely dish that wholesome drink does hold:
Then sugared wine with poison saust, in cup of glittering gold^.
As thou have always scornd my state, so I do thee disdain:
That pleasure is to dearly bought, that purchased is with pain.
And glorious though thy gifts appear, yet tickle is the stay:
And hateful hearts pursues with grudge, thy golden gifts always.
And when thy wrinkled for^hed frowns upon the welthy wight:
What sot is he so s^ple then, that shows not forth his spite.
Then he poor wretch that erst was set full nicely in thy lap:
Lies prostrate at ethe Peasants foot, to wayle his woeful hap*
When flud of wealth is turned to ^b, what greater grief may be:
Two contraries extremely plaste, does ay full ill agree.
So he that has been ^nely fed with sweetenes of thy bower:
Most grievously sustaynes the change, when he castes of the sower.
The mean estate, that thee contemnes, in steadfast boat does row:
The Ship in safeguard most does pass, that bears her sails but low
And for my part, I force thee not, thy frowns I can sustain:
For if thou cause my sp^y fall. I fall but in the plain.
This vantage then I have by right, to vaunt where ever I go:
That I may ^it and smyle at thee, that have deceiud^ the so.
But most of all I must needs muse, that wis^n seek thy grace:
Since troubles so attend on them that have thy freendly face*
But some can use thee in thy kind, whom thou have ^uely (...)
And are not now to learn I trow to bring a babe to bed.
Let them that list that hazard try, and trust in thee repose:
As I by thee no ga^nes do seek, so nothing will I lose.
And thus farewell, I ^ll return to Lady Hope again:
And for a token I thee send, a dotinge Fig of Spayn^.
FINIS.
The third Dialogue, between the Author and a Friar.
Author. A Fox or a Friar, who fasting does meet:
Presageth ill Fortune to lie at his feet.

Friar. In very deed that old proverb is not to be disproued, for I dare
avouch the truth thereof, A gentle and true in terpre tation.
and yet (gentill s^rra) it is not as you understand it, for I know you
consture it as thus: if you meet with me or such as I am, or with a Fox in a
morning (you being fasting) that then it prognosticateth ill luck^ unto you
that day, but the true construction is clean contrary, and is thus to be
understood. If you meet with a Fox in a morninge that has not broken her
fast, or a Friar that goes from the place where he was harbored without
eating any thing, it may well protend some misfortune. For a Fox purloyneth all
the night, and returns to her Berry with a full paunch: And a Friar issues
not out of the doors without his brea^fast both in his belly and in his budget
for failyng.


Author. I am right joyous that I have met with so noble a Doctor this morning,
at whose hands I have already learned one lesson, and by whose company I hope
to attain more skill. I pray you Master Friar let me be your companion this
day, for I am already enflamed with the love of your company.


Friar. Is thy business so stender, that thou may intend to walk with me
at randon?


Author. My business is soon dispatched, for I have naught to dooynge this day
but to make loytringe pinnes.


Friar. In faith good fellow, then, then is thy occupacion and mine much alike,
and me seems by thy attire, thou thriuest but slowly with thy trade, or else
thou art one of them that cannot thrive for shame, howbeit (because thou
seem to he a good fellow) I will for good fellowships sake teach unto thee
the eighth liberal science, which is a very profitable art, wherein (I judge by
thy estate) thou art utterly ignorant.


Author. And are you master Friar, a studient in that Science?


Friar. Yea sir that am I, and in degree above a studient, A Doctor in knaucry.
for I am an ancient practicioner therein, and think my self sufficiency to
proceed Doctor in that faculty, so good an opinion I have of my self.


Author. It is like that you are very well seen in the old liberal Sciences,
and in other good studies, that you are so excellent in this new found Art.


Friar. Nay verily, I count him a fool that beats his brains about many
matters, and has no excellency in any one, wherefore I have set aside all other
studies to attain to the very perfection of this only Art, whereby I am
welcome whersoeuer I come. The name of it is, ar^ adulandi, The art of
Flattery. And there belongs unto it, glosinge, cogginge, doublenes,
dissimulation, iestinge and railinge, with many other branches as in practice
is very easy to be learned. But every man that weeneth to win credit by his
art, may not be rash in making his Some one to be follovved.
choice of these branches, least he be espied, and so discredit himself. I
will not mention unto thee of the courtiers practice, nor of the homely Country
man's handling of his matters, nor of any others, but I will reveal unto thee
which of these branches I have chosen, and how I use it.


Author. My ears are prepared to hear your discourse I pray you begin.


Friar. Thou know that it is my profession to wander as a pilgrim, from
place to place, and am an authorized beggar, my coule is my pasport, and my
shaven crown my credit. And when I first began to wander, I was utterly
unskillful in this art before mentioned, at what time my order was to give
wholesome and godly counsel unto my good Dames of the Country, and would
sumtimes check their wanton children, when I saw them rude and lassiuious,
insomuch that at the last, when I was espied coming into any Uillage, the
children, yea and their mothers also would shut their doors against me. I
(knowinge the A bold geste.
cause of their dislikinge me) was so sau^y as to draw the latch, and boldly
entered into the house, for I was as perfect of the way in, and also of every
corner in the house, as was the good wife her self. This was no poor man's
house but a good fat Farmer, and my Dame was a lusty wench and had a rolling
eye. And when I came into the Hall, there was she and her two daughters with
her, the elder of them being but twelve years of age, and the younger ten
years old, and her only son lyinge in the Cradle. God bless my good Dame
(quod I) and God be hear. etc. Let it not offend you (my good Dame) that I
rushe in so boldly unto you, for I was this night warned by God in A counter^
^ait revelation.
a vision, to bring you good tydinges, and the spirit that appeared unto me
revealed as I have already found, the words that he spoke were these. Friar
Frances, I charge thee that this day about ten of the clock in the forenoone,
thou repair to thy good ben^factor I. G. and will her steadfastly believe, that
whatsoever thou shall say unto her, is as true as the Gospel, and at thy first
coming, thou shall find her doors shut against thee, notwithstanding,
enter in boldly, and thou shall find her and her three children with her in
the Hall, but her husband shall be at Plowe in the field (which I new before I
came thither) and thou shall say unto her, set your servants that are about
your house, to such work as they may not come to hear the secrets that I
have to reveal, and also let your two daughters be ^ecluded from our
presence, and then (Friar Frances) I will send to thy mind what thou shall
say.


Author. Truly this is a proper ceremonial beginning, but was she not
doubtful least some body should come in and take you so suspiciously
together.


Friar. Nay, we Friars are at a good point for such matters we are not
suspected because we are accounted men mortified (...) fleshly lusts, and are
authorized to shreue both me^ and women.


Author. Latet anguis in Herb^, I doubt least under your cloak of simplicity,
lurketh a huge heap of subtilty, and I fear me least you be one of them that
Saint Paul mencioneth in the second Epistle to Timothi in the third Cha. who
with external holiness, and internal filthiness, devour the souls of the simple,
whose words are these There are some which creep into houses, and lead
captive simple women laden with sins and lead with diverse lusts etc. And
also unto Titus in the first Chapter, as thus. There are many disobedient and
vain talkers, and deceivers of minds, which subuerte whole houses, teachinge
things which they ought not, for filthy lukers sake. Notwithstanding (Master
Friar) I pray you proceed with your discourse, and we will set Saint Paul
aside till you have done.


Friar. Tush, tush, I was a preacher of Peter and Paul More profit in
flattering, then in preaching Gods word.
a great while, until the world was weary of me, but I find more profit in
this Science ten to one, as in the end thou shall perceive. And now to return
to my good dame G. again, when we were by our selves, then called I my wits
together, how I might set a face of honestye upon my pretensed Reu^lation,
affirming that I speak nothing of my self, but by divine inspiration. You are
(quoth I) at this present conceived with a son in your womb, which Hipocrisic
cloaked under Religion
child is predestinate to be a noble peer of this land, and shall advance
your whole lineage to great honor and dignities, and you shall live to see those
happy days. Your self shall have soueraignitie (the thing that women chiefly
desire.) Your two daughters shall be Ladies of great renown, and have many
suitors come unto the^ for to get their good wills in marriage, and that of no
mean persons, and I trust (as old as I am to see this little boy in the Cradle
(God bless him) be of great estimation in this Country.

This News so ravished the heart of my Dame, that she thought her self
immediately half way to Heaven, supposing that I had been the Angel Gabriell.
Then had I the best cheer in the house set before me, and who then but
Master Friar Frances?


Author. Me think this was a blind policy, and sounded in her ears
incredible. But to begin a little (with your license) was she then conceived
with child.


Friar. Yea sir that was she, for I had heard certain of her gossips
reasoning of that matter before. And least she should seem incredulous of my
words, I set in that Caveat at the beginning, whereby she might stand in fear
of incredulity, and if any thing should happen contrary to my words, I would
have ascribed it to her unbelief, and as for the chief effect of my
prophecy, I was certain that Sea crafty dissemblers conueyance.
in my life time it could not be expected, so that I forged this matter but to
serve for my life time.


Author. But was she not inquisitiue to know by what means this thing should
come to pass?


Friar. Yes, and I had a proper invention in a readynesse. I told her, that
when this child commineth to the age of xxii. years, there should be great
wars beetweene the Emperor, and the Turk, and it should fall to his lot to
atchiue many notable Steatagems, against the Machometicall Emperor, by means
whereof his glory should be advanced throughout all Christian Regions and
especially within this Nation. But to see how Fortune favored my proceedinges,
when I was once entered into the profession of this Art, it happened, that
while we were at our iolye good cheer, there came in a gossip of hers, (who
according to the courtesy of our Country) was invited to do as we did. And
when we had chatced a while together, I willed her to show me her left
hand, professing my self to be very cunninge in Palmestry (in which art I
have as much skill as a horse, and no more) I looked on her hand and would
sumtimes name Lineauite Knavery colored under a shadovv of learning.
sumtimes Lineanuptialis, but to conclude, I knew neither of them both, nor any
other line, but for a shadow to blear her eyes withal. And then I mused with
my self (as if I had been in a brown study) during which time, I considered
with my self what dangers are commonly incident unto men and women: and at
the last I told her that she had hardly escaped the danger of drowning, she
ratified my assertion with an oath, deeming me to be rather an Angel then a
mortal man: this so flesht me that I was now a gog.


Author. But what if she had denied that she ever escaped such danger?


Friar. Then would I have said that it was in her youth, before her
remembrance, but it fell out better. Then I blundred at other of her
misfortunes paste, and some I hit right, and on the rest that she remembered
not so well, I cast such a cloak of cullusion, that she rather ascribed to
it her oblyuion, then to any want of Art in me.


Author. But was she not as desirous to hear of her good fortunes to come, as
of her evil chances past?


Friar. Yes mary was she, and there begins the sport. I should have noted
unto thee before, that while we were in our merime^ts as we sat at our
dinner, this wife drank to all good husbands, and then (quod she) my busbands
part is least. I thought on these words, and I perceived also by more of her
talk, that there was but small good lykinge between her husband and her,
therefore to please her mind by tellinge of good news, I said that as she had
suffered care and sorrow by the frowardnes of an unloving man, so she should
(within short space) possess joy and solace by the entire love of a faithful
husband, with whom she should have her own will, and wealth at pleasure, and
she should see her desire upon her enemies, and bear the swing and sway of all the women of the Parish she should dwell in, with such like. Thus I was among
my good Dames esteemed as a very Prophet, because I spoke Fair vvorde^ makes
such fools fayce.
unto them pleasinge things, and by these means I was more sought unto then
any Dector of Physic, or Counsaylour of the Laws, and specially of Women.


Author. But could you please all that came unto you with these practices, or
had you other shifts in store?


Friar. Nay. I am not so simple but I can respect the person, for I met with
some women, that I knew loved their husbands full well, and for them I had
other devises. I will flatter some of them in their children saying, that as
they are of amiable counteuance, and of fair feature, so there are manifest
tokens in their faces of wisdom, towardlynes grace and good fortune, and what
Parent will not delight to hear this of their children, and for the Parents
themselves, I have a thousand pleasing inventions in this head of mine.


Author. But will not the foolish Parents perceive thy gross flattery, if
they see no such thing in their children in deed, as thou speak of?


Friar. Never a whit, for thou know the Fable in Esop, that the Oule thought
her own birds fairest, and in this respect parents for the more part are
blind, and specially mothers. And it is as feate a point in flattery to gloze
in that which is never like to come to pass, as to promise that which a man
never meant to give, or would do him no pleasure to whom it is offered. As I
read once in a profane story that at what time virtuous Deborah the
Prophetess indged Israel: in the City of Babel was dwelling a rich
Lieutenant named Ishewa who being presented by a Soldier, which fought under
Apollos Banner with a simple piece of work which he had framed in Mineruas
Shop: requited him only with a Bezeles manus and fed him with fair words,
promising him that which neither he could give, as he knew right well,
neither the Monstrous promises choke ^oles.
other regarded as did plainly appear. But as for any other reward the
devil a whitte he gave him for his pains.


Author. I am sure thou aboundest in such good examples, but what need so
far fet and of such antiquity? I think thou may have store in the
profounde Masters of your faculty and never travail to Babell for them. For
ye are all of one predicament, both he of whom thou spakell and all the rabble
of you, a company of cogging coistrels, howbeit I am sure thou have taken forth
a lesson before the^ all, and may well read a lecture in the art of
Adulation. For truly thou flattering Friar, I have heard so much of thee that
I am ashamed to he are any more. And that inuenting It was he o^ some like
godly Captain.
head of thine, lacks nothing but a halter in steed of a hoode, but yet I
pray thee (Friar) between earnest and ieste, was it not thou that preachedst of
late unto certain thieves by the hie ways side, and approuedst them worthy
members of a common wealth, comparing them in many points unto Christ?


Friar. No verily, it was not I, but certes I know him and commend him, for
he was a wise fellow and made a learned and profitable Sermon. He preached
not for six shillinges and eight pence, the ordinary price: but for ten pound
and more. And truly to gain half the money (although it stand not with my
profession to handle money) I will affirm that thieves ought to be rulers, and
not to be ruled, yea and are worthy to be canonised among the Saints, when
the year of Iubile comes.


Author. First I have noted thy apostacy, in fallinge from thy profession to
the filthye trade of Flattery for thy bellyes sake, whereby I condemn thee for
a belly god: and before I proceed any further, I will compare thee to that
wicked Julian Apostata, whose end may be a Mirror to the terrible example of
all Renegates, of which number thou art a Captain, most blasphemously belying
the holy spirit of God, with thy forged inspiration, not unlike that falie
seducinge Prophet Machomet who with his forged inspiracions unto this day
beguileth the Turks. So Machomet sedu^eth the Turks by a forged reave lation.
that thou have denied Christ our Savior who in the general judgment will
also deny thee, except (by his special grace) thou repent. Secondly, I
condemn thy impudent arrogance in arrogating to thy self cunninge skill in
Palmestry, thou having no more judgment the^ an Ass, wherein thou art one of
the deceivers of the world, foreprophesied by Saint Paul, to abuse the latter
Age. And also, whereas thou art utterly unlearned in any good art or faculty,
thou art not to be taken for a member, much less a Minist^r of Christ's
Church, but to be whipped out of the same, as one for whose cause the word of
God is evil spoken of, for thou and such as thou art, have been the ruin and
overthrow of many goodly houses, to the great annoyance o^ poverty, and of
such bussards as thou art, are to many in these days, that makes the world
in fear of a second subversion (which God forbid.) Thirdly, thy lyking, and
allowing (...) ^phemy.
of blas^hemous do^rine, comparinge Christ our Savior to wicked and
abominable thieves, is most stinking, and detestable. Thou know, or
ought to know, that Ihon the Baptist, although he were the Kings Chaplain,
namely King Herodes, fed not his Lord and Masters ears with slattering
doctrine for promotions sake, but reproved A comenda^on of S. Ihon the Bap^st.
his sin to his face, for the truths sake. He rather chose to live in
penury, with Locustes and wild Honey in the desert, then to fare delicately in
the wickedness of his Masters Court. He desired with the Psalmist, rather to
be a door keeper in the house of God, then to dwell in the Tents of
ungodliness. He might have been advanced, to be taken for the Messiah of
the world, but he put it from him, unto him who of right ought to have it.
He was neither covetous, nor proud, nor lascivious, he was no disse^bler,
but a true preacher, not protesting one thing and perfourming another: he was
no Simonist, he hunted neither for Bishoprike nor Benefice, but directed his
whole life to the setting forth of Gods glory. When the Pharasies and head
rulers came to his Baptism, he called them not gracious Lords, but
generation of ^pers, and bid them bring forth fruits of repentance, he was
altogether ignorant in thy ^lthy Art of Flattery.

When the Publicans came to him to learn their duties, he preached not
lyinge Palmestry but learned Divinity. He allowed not their polling and
pillinge, with a cloak of Custom, because they were receivers of custom for
the Prince, but sharply rebuked their extor^ions, and b^ them take no more of
any man then right required. But the professors of thy art will not stick to
persuade them, (by wresting the Scriptures clean out of ioynte) that all their
dealinges, what wicked and perverse means so ever they use, is tolerable.
Also when the roistinge Soldiers came unto him, he commended not their
^alyantnes, nor their courageous stomachs, but ^eckt and taunted their
injurious violence showed toward men, and exhorted them neither actually to
hurt any man under color of true service to their Prince, nor wrongfully to
accuse any man, which two ^aults they commonly used, and lastly persuaded them
to be content with their wages and stipend. Finally (as is before said) he
spared not the Majesty of the King his Master, in respect of the truth,
which if he would have done, no doubt but he might have been (if he
listed) Princeps sacerdotum, in st^ed whereof he was content rather to loose
his head then recant.

Thus (Friar) I have expressed unto thee part of my mind, defiynge both thee
and thy detestable Art of Adulation.


Friar. I am sorry that I conceived so good an opinion of thee, seeing thou art
so contrary to my disposicion, and where as thou say thou have expressed
part of thy mind unto me, I assure thee I think neither thou nor any man
can show any more then thou have rehearsed. And whereas thou have brought in
Saint John against me, I can allege for that one a number, that were as well
learned as ever was Saint John, who were studients and practisioners of my
art, and I pray you among the rest, what say you of Saint Peter as good a man
as Saint John in each point, did not he dissemble by denyinge his Master for
fear of his life, and I hold him the wiser of the twain.


Auchor. O thou Child of Perdicion, that so dissolutely, and desperately
^unnest hedlong to the pit of Hell. First because thou say I can s^yte no
more examples to make for my purpose, I will omit a great many that I might
name for the contentacion of my assertion, as well the Apostles of Christ, as a
multitude of other goodly Martirs, and note unto thee only Saint Peter. For
whereas thou say that Peter for sau^gard of his life dissembled, thou show
thy ignorance in the sacred truth, and thy exe^rable study in wrestinge the
same. Peter dissembled not, but the hope that he had to see his Masters
deliverance out of the han^es of his mal^cious enemies, through the entire love
that he bare unto his Master Christ, caused him to reiecte consideration of
any former matters, as well his stout promise, as otherwise, which in the end
he bitterly, with tears repented. He so much hated dissimulation that he
could not abide an old grandfather of thine, Simon Magus, to delude the world
with his cogging skill, dispiseinge Si^ Magus grandfather (...) (...).
and abhorringe both him and his money. And as touching his flattery, let the
whole course of his doctrine witness, wherein I think thee to be ignorant. Of
timerousnesse of death, his end can witness, for he suffered death for Christ's
sake.


Friar. Mary s^r there hangs the doubt, for I have heard that he never came
at Rome, where it is said that he was put to death under Nero, and was Pope
there, by old report.


Author. It is impertinente to our matter to prove whether Peter were at Rome
or not, but whosoever affirms that he never was at Rome, (in proof whereof
^es must condemn some good Authors) yet will he not say that Peter suffered
not death for Christ's sake: and it may well be old report, or rather old
wives tales, that Peter was Pope of Rome, for y^ name was ascribed many years
after Peter's death. Thus thou have abused that holy Apostle by challenginge him
to be of thy Art, which thou termest the Eyghth Liberal Science. And thus to
conclude with thee, I shall pray to God to illuminate thy heart with his holy
spirit, to expel that foul F^end of Flattery from thee until which time, I
shall detest and abhor thy company, as S. John ^d from Ce^inthius that wicked
her^tick.


The fourth Dialogue between the Author, and Fortunatus.
If Fortunes grace be perfect hap,
For worldling^ calls i^ ^o:
Then I at last do bath in bl^
That ^arst was wrapped in w^
AVthor. Sir I have heard many men complain of that Lady whom you so commend,
for the (...) and happiness on you bestowed, but I see that ec^e man speaks
as iust^ cause him moves. And since you are, by her benefits and bounty,
occas^oned to honor her: may I be so bold as to learn at your hands, what
ways and means you used to obtain so highly her favor and friendship, so
shall you bind me unto you, for I have been an vns^ilfull suter unto her
Ladyship, and therefore a slow^ ^peeder.


Fortunatus. Your reasonable request, which seems unto me to be tempered
with mere simplicity, shall be easily granted, attend therefore and mark well
the event so thou may, perhaps, be directed a more ready and perfect Little
(...) in simplici^
way to win her favor by diligent imitacion.

When I first came to the Court, I lived a bare and beggarly life* using
sundry simple shifts to rub out am^gst the rest. I cared not in whose debt I
became, so I might serve my present necessity. But at the last I perceived that
this trade could not long continue, for experience taught me that easily
won was lightly love, and evil gotten was ill spent. I applied my self to a
profitable trade, which was to learn the Eyghth liberal (...), and to
practice the same, by means whereof I have obta^ed Fortunes special favor, but
before I could bring this matter to perfect effect, I was constrained to use
pretty (...) ^or there are certain degrees ascendinge before a man (...) (...)
(...)*
may come to her grace and favor. I presumed not at the first to her own
presence, but observed diligently on whom she used most commonly to smile,
and when I perceived who was her minion, I also found out which of his
gentlemen wayters was greatest in his books, and having diligently serched
these premises, I framed my self to be very officious and serviceable unto
Lady Fortunes man, toward whom I behaved my self so pleasantly by skilful
insinuation, that (what with my cunninge adulation and deep Dissimulation) I
crepte To publish d^ued commendacions is no flattery, but above measure is
folly.
even into the very bowels of his secrets. Then began I to magnify and extol
the wisdom, prowes, fame, and renown of his noble Master, yea, (and I may
tell thee) far above his deserts, and doubtinge least my words in
commendinge him should not be brought to his ears, I compiled a pleasant
Pamphlet, and dedicated the same unto him, in the preface whereof I fed his
vain glorious humor with magnificent Tytles and terms. But before I would
presume to exhibit the same unto him, I thought it good to use the counsel
and advise of my young Master and new found friend, whom I knew to have
perfect experience of his Masters my patrons inclination. This my industry
joined with feigned fidelity liked him so well, that (to further my wished
success) he gave a very good report Flatteringe Epistels sum time find
favor, but wise men (...) at the folly of such and gene the^ small thanks for
their (...).
of me unto his Master, and by his counsel I waited opportunity to deliver my
said Pamphlet unto the Patron when I found him in a merry mood (which is a
thing specially to be regarded of all suitors) it pleased him so well to read
his own commendacions, that he vouchsaued to peruse the rest, and gave me
his reward and good countenance which was the thing for the which I fished,
and within short space I grew into greater favor then was my first Master,
his man before specified: so that I was not Lady Fortunes minions man's man, but
Lady Fortunes minions fellow. And not long after that, by my daily access
unto Lady Fortunes presence, and my cunning skill in Adulation, wherein I was an
absolute Scholar, I had the charge of her whirling wheel in my own hand, to
advance whom I liked, and throw down whom I listed.


Author. Then I doubt not but the Authors of your preferment were at your hands
right bountifully rewarded.


Fortunatus. Certes and so they were, for I not only deprived them from their
former dignities, but also banished them the Court. For think thou that I
would suffer any man to be in the Court that might justly vpbraide me with
these words? I was the causer of this thy preferment, or thou may thank my
father or friends for thy dignities? Nay, nay, I will none of that, I rather
commend the heroical mind of him that said, he would rather be a Prince to
rule and reign, yea though he had no possessions, then to be a vassal, or
subject with infinite wealth. What need I be ashamed of ambition, since to
hit the top of Dignitye is the mark whereat all shoot. Does not the young
Scholar covet to excel all others in learning, the Musition in Music, the
Artificer in his craft, and so of the rest.


Author. Yea sir, but (under your correction) I deem that these desires of
excellency, proceed from an honest emulation, but the other from a wicked
condition, and I think that neither the finest Scholar, the most cunning
Musicion, nor the excellentest Artificer, with the rest, think no scorn of
their first enstructors, though you of your first founders.


Fortunatus. Tush, tush, who so prefers honesty before honor shall prove
himself a fool.


Author. But experience teaches, that honor vpholde^ with honesty, stands
when honor without honesty falls to decay, and as nothing is more fickle
then Fortunes favor, so nothing may be more dangerous then an aspiring
mind, who having attained the top of Dignity, by the fawning face of
unconstant Fortune, is forced to sustain a most grievous and irrecuperable
fall, at whose overthrow, men rather rejoice then lament.

Wherefore I prefer the mean estate, who if he fall falls but in the plain,
which he may easily endure, and quickly rise again, before the great danger
of the lofty degree, when it likes froward Foreune to frown.


Fortunatus. I see full well the Fox will eat no Grapes because he cannot
reach them, so thou mislykest honor and dignity, because thou can not
attain unto it, which I have in thy former words observed, when thou saydest
that thou were a suter in vain unto Lady Fortune, and in good sooth, I do
partly remember thee since that time, as A better ^de to be applied.
well by thy face, as also by thy balde thread bare robes, as though thy
Wardrop were in the Castle of rags: but if thou will apply thy self to the
noble Science of Adulation, thou may soon come to good prefermente, and set
forth thy self after a more brave and costly fashion.


Author. Sir, if there be no mean to attain unto bravery without the exercise
of knavery (for I account flattery no better) I will rather content my self to
live beggarly. A thief is almost as ill as a usurer.
And as for your bravery and such as you are, it is maintained with double
Theeuery, which is almost as ill as vsery, for I may well join them both
together. I heard one say of late, that all worn in the Court, is not paid
in the City, but let the Merchant look to that, and as for the poor
Husbandman who toyleth for the living not Note this point.
only of himself and his own family, but also of the com mon wealth, finds
the cost of your bravery in his fines and rentes, but the best is, where as
he was wont to ingurgitace himself in your kitchen, by surfeiture, now he is
moderated, and may return from thence with a good appetite, for your Beef is
on your back, and the rest of your wonted victuals converted by strange
Metamorphosis into Breeches, and bravery. But as for my Maistresse your wife, I
will not say she wears in her Kirtle the poor man's Ox, nor in her Ueluet
gown the Bankrowtes stock. If these be the fruits of flattery, for Vincit
veritas.
Gods sake, sir, learn some new trade of fresher fashion, and study the art
of Truth, which God will prosper: for Truth in the end shall prevail, and
so shall God bles your store and increase, both in the field, and in the
Kitchen, in the House and in the Barn, when bravery shall be turned to beggary,
and beauty to baldenesse. And as touching your politic practice at your first
entry into Fortunes Court, I say no more, but wish that as many as All is well
that endowell.
love flatterers tales had Midas ears. Wherefore, gentle Master Philodoxus, I
bid you adieu, with this Motion, or Caveat: Respice finem.


The fifth Dialogue, between Pierce Pickthanke, drunken Dickon. Dame Annat the
Alewife, and the Author.
Dickon. Now fill the pot Ostesse, with liquor of life,
In steed of your payment, fair words shall be rife.

Annat. Fair words makes foles fain, the old Proverb does say,
Such guestes are best welcome when they go away.

PIerce Pickthanke. In faith Dickon, this goes very hard that we have rackt
and cracked our credit so long* until it is not worth one pot of Ale, and my
throat is so dry, that a man may grate ginger on my tongue.


Dickon. Well Pierce, as hard as the world goes, I trow we shall find some
shift or other to quench the scorching heat of our parched throtes, with the
best Nippitatum in this town, which is commonly called Hufcap, it will make a
man look as though ^ee had seen the Devil, and quickly move him to call his
own Father hoareson.


Pierce. This thy description of Dagger Ale, augmenteth my thirst until I
taste thereof, wherefore I pray thee make haste to flatter my Ostesse in the best
manner thou can, and yet I dare i^opard my Cap to forty shillinges, thou
shall have but a cold suite.


Dickon. I assure thee Pierce, our Ostesse Dame Anne^ is as freendly a wench as
any is in this land, and she loves a good fellow very well, and has helped
many a one in her days, that otherwise would have done full ill. I would all
weomen were of her nature and conditions, for ^hee is both honest and liberal
with great discretion.


Annat. Go^ to you drunken knave, that flatteringe face of thine shall cost me
a glass of dissembling water. Take heed (...) your oath.



Dickon. What Ostes, did you hear me? now I swear by my honesty I thought you
had been farther of. But my good sweet Ostes I pray you keep in store your
dissembling water for P. the Promoter, and C. the Counterfeit, with M. the
Makeshift, and other of your dainty guestes, for I poor Dickon will thank you
more for one pot of Ale of the right stamp, then for twenty your glasses of
water.


Annat. I see well Dickon thou art a good Ale orator, but I cannot pay the
brewer with fair words, and that thou know.


Pierce. Truly Ostes, I was doubtful at my first coming in, to call you by
the name of Ostesse, for I rather A shift t^ win some simple women.
supposed you to have been one of the maidens of the house, you look so young
and smooth.


Annat. Well honest man I will take your word for two or three pottes of
drink. But as for Dickon, I am to well acquainted with his conditions to give
him any credit.


Pierce. How say thou Dickon to this? whether of us two are better worthy of
commendacions for the Art of Flattery.


Dickon. Truly Pierce, I perceive that thou have a very good dexterity in
pleasing the humors of women, Some wom^ love to be counted young.
whose natures I see, are most affected with hearing commendacions of their
youth, beauty and comely feature, with other the like, in which subtilties it
appears thou haste perfect experience.


Pierce. Yea Dickon, thou and I are apt Scholars in the Eyghth liberal
Science. And if there be any Painter disposed to make a perfect protraiture
of two slatteringe knaves, he shall not need to seek any further for his
pattern then to us.


Dickon. In deed as thou say, but the best Artisan in Europ cannot depainte
thee in thy right kind better then my self can, but I will omit the
description of thy liniamentes, and display thy conditions.

And to begin withal, thou art an egregious flatterer, a deep dissembler, a
singular good bawd, a plain counterfaite, The perfect blasoning of a knau^ in
grain.
an archerakehell, a natural varlet, a knave incarnate, and to conclude, a
passing pickthanke. Thou have two faces under one bood, two hearts in one body,
two tongues in one head, and finally in all knavery thou art incomparable and
this is the right imblasure of thy conditions.


Pierce. Certes Dickon, thou make me right proud of my excellency in these
commendable qualities. Wherefore to requite thy courtesy, I will fulfill the
old proverb. Muli mutuum scabiunt, and I will show thee as in a glass A
description of a proper man.
both thy proportion and thy laudable conditions. And first I will begin at
the crown of thy head, which is so comely knauebalde as the like is hard to
be found whereunto is joined a beautiful browe, much like unto the forehead of
a fair Cow, very well adorned with Ox feathers of the right stamp, and a
little beneath that there sits as it were in a chair of estate, and most
rich precious and glorious nose tipped with a great bottell of brazile,
garnished with Rubies, Saphires, and Crincums, beautified with orient colors
much like unto Scarlet or Crimson Ueluet, indented with motheaten maladies,
which beautiful member of thine is circumuented with a flushing f^ery face,
whereat a man may warm his hands in the cold winter, and light a candell at
any time, with many other commodities contained in that good face of thine, and
therwithall has fixed thereon a terrible Tartarian bearde, a notable harbor
for the Crablouse. And to make speedy dispatch of the rest, thou art whole
chested in the breast like an Owl, an excellent back to carye my Lords Ape, a
graund liricumpanch like a Mare with foale, a bounsinge buttocke of a Carte
load, a pair of left legs with the thighs downwarde, and a goodly splay
foot just the length of the ^ouens last. And now to thy properties thy use is
to counterfaite thy self to be a mad merry companion, and wilt not blush to
place thy self in every man's company, and taste of every man's pot. And if thou
perceiuest Goodly c^ndicio^s I warrant you.
the company to be delighted with thy iestes, then art thou in thy ruff, but
if they be so wise as to mislike of thy saucines, then thou have this subtle
shifte, with old drunken Latin, which I have often times hard thee pronounce.
Potus lusorum meretrices Prespiterorum
Panis perfesus, cunctorum spectat ad vsus.
Also thou can prate like a pardoner, and for thy facility in lying, thou art
worthy to wear a whetstone in thy hat in steed of a brouch. Lo now have I
playde the paynter, by drawinge thy picture in their right colors.


Dickon. Well Pierce, let us now leave our painting and fall to drinking, for
when I have well swild my soul, then am I a mate for all companies and a
Master of our art.


Pierce. Thy counsel is good, wherefore let us toss the Can to and fro, with
hay iolye Ienkin I see a knave a drinkinge. etc.


Author. Although (gentle Reader) I may seem perhaps to offend thy modesty
with this drunken Dialogue, yet I pray thee let me be rather excused, because I
swerve not much herein from the vain of Erasmus of Rotrodame, (although far
beneath any comparion unto him) who used to place pleasant pamphletes in the
midest of serious, and grave matters, as well for the recreation of his reader,
as also to display and thereby to taunt the follyes and trifling fantasies of
all sorts of people. And now that these drunken drudges, that glory so much in
their iniquity are busy in their bibbing, I will play the painters part
indifferently for them both, desiringe thee that I may herein use thy Patience.
The one of them namely drunken Dickon, (under whom I comprehend all manner of
Roisters, rakehels, Such impudent cou^ fait^s are to well used a^ many me^
Tables.
and drunkardes) is a saucye and malaperte varlet, who uses very broad
jesting, as well with men of honor as with meaner sort, whom they term a
mad merry knave. He takes all floutes and bobs in good part, ^y means
whereof he bobbeth many others. Among the company of lusty swearers, he will
out swear them all. And sumtimes he will put on the habit of a fool, in
which garment he is received in, when wiser and honester men are put back,
and because he notes that wise men take sport to see fools in a rage, he
will counterfeit himself to be in a mad mood, when he is nothing at all
angry, he is a common cosoner, and a subtle shifter, the circumstances of
which mischeuous practices, I will hereafter note in my second part, and these
are the branches of his Adulation that brings forth most bitter fruit, of
which kind of dissemblers, let as many beware, as either fear God or regard
their own profit. Now as touching A religious dissembler.
the other, (namely) Pierce Pickthanke, his condition is to cloak his hollow
heart, with a holy pretense, and his dissimulation is cheefely in matters of
Religion, although in very deed, there is in him no more sincerity then in an
Ape. He will come sumtimes unto a Bishop, and sometimes to others that he
thinks to be zealous in Religion and has under his arm a new Testament, or
a Psalter, as though his special care, and only study were in the Scriptures,
under which pretexte he beguileth both the wise and the learned. He will in
their presence temper Such knaves would be better h^owe^.
his talk with such a show of godliness, as though he were rapt up into the
third Heaven. He is a Saint outwardly and a Devil inwardly. And he will
seem to be greatly grieved in conscience, that papistrie should bear such
sway in men's hearts, and that such papists (naming this man or that) are not
straightly seen unto and sharply punished, and will pray God to preserve such
good men as they are, unto whom he talks, as by whom Gods true religion is
advanced and error suppressed etc. With these and the like practices he
wins favor and benevolence among the Protestants.

Then he has an old Portas, or some such book in store, and therewith he
comes unto them that he knows to be of the old stamp, and frames his
tale to this effect.

A good sir (says he) the great anguish that I bear in my conscience,
enforces me to seek for the setlinge and satisfaction of the same at your
hands or some such godly learned man, as I know to be of upright judgment
in the Scriptures, the true interpretation whereof has been wrested and
perverted by the professors of this new Religion. I see and am sorry to think
unto what penury the world is brought since the overthrow of Abbeys, to the
great impouerishment of this Realm, and what a sort of skipiackes are now
crepte into the places of aunciente and grave Fathers, by whom the holy
Sacraments are nothing at all Sacramentally used, contrary to the institucions
of the Catholic Church of Rome, our holy Mother. With these and the like
words, he is a deep dissembler in Religion. And also to pick thanks and
profit at all men's hands, he can frame himself to feed all men's humors,
so cunning is he in this filthy Art of Flattery, from which kind of
dissemblers, and al others, God sheelde us, and send us his grace, that we
may embrace the honest and godly retinue of Lady Truth, and shake of all such
flatterers and dissemblers, as have hitherunto perverted the natures of men in
these our days.


The sixth Dialogue, between Diogenes, and Ulpianus. Wherein is expressed under
the person of the Author, the simplicity of such as think the Court to
prefer all that flock unto it, which after experience had thereof, is found
an unfit place for simple persons of gross education.
Diogenes. WH^t new delight has rapt thy mind: my tumbling tub to shun
H^th fronticke folly woue the web that foolish fancy spun?
Does careful Court accoy thy mind where dangers daily dwell
To loath the fleldish quiet life that whilom lykt thee well? Diogenes was an
old Cou^tier.

Express therefore the cause to me whom freendship drives to doubt
Least thou be causer of thy woe by seekinge Fortune out.
Whose coy conceits I saw full well while I in Court abode
Whereby my old delight renewde to live in feeldes abroad.
When Alexander mighty king, in Macedon did rain
He won me to Dame Fortunes Court by lure of pleasant train
Where I might view the vain delights that vaded every day
I saw and smilde how some still gapte for gain of golden pray.
Which was in deed a harmefull hook, with pleasant poisoned bayt:
For being had spite spurnd a pace, on his downfall to wait.
On favor always did attend with feigned freendly face
The flatterer with cap and knee to sue for Fortunes grace.
But secret spite stood still aloof, to hatch his hateful broo^,
And open malice kept a coil, with mad and ragyng mood. Envy pursues
promotion.

These and a thousand troubles more in Fortunes Court I viewde
I lothde to drink those pleasant dregs that danger daily brewde.
At last as I lay on my Couche a silly mouse I saw
That crept out of her homly neast to feed her hungry maw.
And having fed, thee tournd again with well contented mind
Which lesson was a lore to me, from courtlyke state to wind.
Then to my Tub I turn again, where I am lord and King,
A Castle m^te for such a Prince whereto I closely clinge.
My homly house no eye sore is, my lands none does desire Diogenes used a Tub
in steed of his house.

My fall no man seeks for my wealth I hang not by the bri^r.
And thus I dare be bold to speak, as truth shall offer cause:
And yet I live in safeties seat free from the tyrants jaws.
Wherefore friend Fulwell leave thy g^d and live with me in rest:
No life is like a quiet heart lodgde in contented breast.
No new delight of courtly joys has drawn me from thy love,

Vlp^. Ne sugared band of Fortunes toys may once my mind remove:
To learn experience was the cause that I from thee did wend,
Skill is a poole that's bottomless, and Wisdom has no end.
Insaciable knowledge is a burning quenchlesse fire:
The more experience geues me drink the more I still desire, Knowledge is
vnsacrable.

How often have thou with scornful tongue, Dame Fortunes name expressed:
Which made me long to se the wight, whom thou do so detest.
That I might say by sight of eye, as eke by hearesayes talk,
That Fortune is a v^nge flower, a withered fruitless stalk.
This, this I say sent me to Court where I might see and learn,
To know the dusty, chafe from corn, and good from ill discern.
There saw I wonders very strange, that asks time to tell,
They think there is no other Heaven that ay has been in Hell.
When thou an I in whelmed Tub, from storms in covert lay.
I thought no harbor like to that, for night and rainy day.
Our roots me se^de was sweet repast, and iunkets passinge ^ne:
For hunger is a noble sauce, and thirst makes water wine:
A wodden dish is worthy plate, where metals are unknown:
In steed of goblet, nature gave us hands that are our own.
But when I came to courtly train, then might my eyes behold:
Such buyldings brave, such costly robes, such plate of glittering gold ^er,
Such gems and jewels of great price, such fashions of atyre:
Such flaunting Dames whose beautye brave, would kindle Cupids
Such iustling to bear swing and sway, such clyming to the top, Note.

And some I saw did reap the corn, that never sowde the crop.

Diogenes. And might not these inflame thy mind, in courty troop to stay?

Vlpianus. No no, but lend thy ears a while and so shall I display.
The cause that, I am far unfit, to serve in Fortunes train:
Whereby my fates inforceth me to clownish flelde again.
As kind forbids the Lark to swim, and fish to fly in air:
So I in Court deuoyde of hope, may live in deep despair.
When first I came to Fortunes Court, with hope of happy speed;
I saw the fruit like Tantalus, but might not thereon feed. A hungrye plague
to see ^ate and drink and yet to starve.

I smeld the roast, but felt no taste, my hunger to augment:
I might behold the fragrant Wines, and follow by the sent.
I saw the Ladies gallant gowns with many a guard and dente,
And Courtiers for their Ladies sakes in costly colors went,
The fashion of my thread bare robes, no Courtier did desire:
But each one said a ragged Colte may serve a scabbed squire.
And thus I kilde a Courtier then for courting any more:
I saw the snare and scapte the train, and having learnd this lore,
I can exhort my compires now, that are for Court unapt,
To leave the life that's linkt in care, with troubles daily wrapped.

Diogenes. Then show I pray the what thou saw, and what thou did observe:
It Is long since I of Court had view, and courtly fashions swerue,
Declare to me how lusty lads Dame Fortunes grace does win:
Prepare thy tongue, my ears are bent to hear thy tale begin.

Vlpianus. To show of Robes the sundry suits and fashions very strange:
Would be to tedious to describe for why they daily change.
And what was used but last year past, is now so old and stale:
That country clownes do buy them now in Court they have no sale.
And that which now in Court is worn, grows daily out of ure: A merye world
for Tailors.

The Tailor that can make new guise, of current coin is sure,
But this I cheefely did observe, Frenchmen have framde such tools
That now french Nets are cast on necks to catch up English fools.
But let it pass I spurn it not, let each one use their vain:
These vanities I will omit, and turn my tale again. French Nets are to catch
English fools.

Unto the wonders that I saw, by practice put in use:
But first to honest Courtiers I will frame my just excuse.
Whom I do not in any point mean to offend at all:
Though galbackt Bayard winch when he is rubbed on the gall,
I saw where Aristippus stood, fast by a Lordinges side:
Who in his taunting tatlinge ^onge reposde a jolly pride. Aristippus was a
good Courtier.

He finely framde his fyled talk, the hearers to delight
Smooth words I see does ^eare great sway and are of mickle might.
Each man salutes him by his name, and he does them embrace:
Words are good cheap, and it is small cost to show a friendly face,
^s new found science in the Court, did truth of times betray:
And who but Aristippians might bear the bell away.
At last he me espyde by chance, and thus to me began say:
What? old acquaintance? what affairs has the to court now brought
What wind drive thee? and what is the cause? that thou the court have sought
Some men call this, holy water of the Court.

If any thing in me does rest, that may thy fancy feed:
Express thy mind, ask and receive, but speak and thou shall speed,
I gave him thanks, but yet I thought these go^dly golden words
Would prove but wind of slender weight, and bushes void of burds:
I calde to mind an old said saw, which I have not forgot:
It Is wisdom to take time in time, and strike while thyron is wh^t.
When Pig is proferd, open the poke, my Nurse taught me that trick:
My poke was open by and by, my hammer was very quick.
Fair sir (quod I) your freendly words emboldeneth me to crave
That I (through you) in Fortunes court some simple place may have.
Small entertaynment serves my turn, so it be ought at all:
Poor men are pleased with Potage aye, till better vittailes fall,
And you that erst was as I am, s^t now in Fortunes lap:
Make friends of Fortune while you may: men say she has a trap,
Wherein her darlings often times falls, when frowning cheer begins, Fortunes
gifts ^b (...) ^low.

First point of hawking is hold fast, he laughes they say that wins,
Tush tush (quod he) thou witles wight, thou spendest wind in waste:
First learn the skill to flatter fine, and then thou may be plaste.
Diogenes that dotinge drudge has drawn thee to his school,
His preignant wit is ill applyde, he proves himself a fool.
He calls me Dionisius dog, for fawning flattery fine,
But he like dog does snar and grinne at this wise trade of mine.
If ^ee would turn his taunts and quips, to pleasant merry jest,
He might in favors grace remain, and flaunt it with the best.
So thou that yet have not shakte of, that sottish kind of skill:
Must smooth thy tongue, and oil thy words, and finely ^le thy quille
Then come to Court, and I protest thou shall have my good will.
Ah s^r (quoth I) I see right well my suit grows very cold,
All promises are not perfourmde, all glistering is not gold.
And words of course have course effect, experience teaches so:
Deeds sink, and lie at lowest ebb, while golden words do slow.
And s^th no mean but flattery may save me from Fortunes scorns: As good
(...) foe ehat hurts not, (...) (...) s^ende that helps not.

I list not seek a pleasant rose, among so many thorns.
As good such friends were lost as found that helps not at need:
Of thousand losses it is the least, thus we were soon a greede.

Diogene^. Ah s^r, and saw thou Aristip, that spaniell of curres kind?
Who hunts each haunt where gayn^ does grow and turns with the wind
A smelfeast Gnato for his gut to ^ouch each Thraso^ brag:
Whose words are free to promise much, but bound up in his bag:
His ^lthy ^oule Philosophy more friendship has obtaynde,
Then truthfull tongue and trusty heart that never was distaynd.
Much like the false and wily Fox, that whilom has espide
A Raven with her pray in mouth, whereat the Fox enuide.
And cast within his crafty mind, how he might her beguile: The Foxes
flattering Oration to the Raven.

From top of tree where Raven s^te, at last he framde this wile.
O noble bird whose heavenly hue, with joyful eyes I see:
And muse that fame has forgd such tales, and foul untruths of thee:
For flying fame, nay, lying fame, reports thee to be black:
But sure I see thy stately corpse, no beauty brave does lack.
The lofty oak thou makste thy pertch, the hauty tower thy seat:
Thy mighty wings with princely pomp, the fleggy air does beat.
Thy port does pass the Eagles looks, I know full well thy kind:
Thy race is sure heroical, thou art of noble mind. A good O^ator.

And if thy song be like thy shape, the beasts would sure rejoice:
To see that comely corpse of thine, and hear so sweet a voice.
The Raven then puffed up with pride, her praises to augment:
Began to singe, the pray fell down, the Fox had his intent,
And laughed to scorn the foolish bird, that thought her self so brave:
Even so plays flatterers when they catch the thing that they would have
But now proceed, what saw thou else, it is no new found cast:
It Is common now for fools to feed, when wiser men do fast.

Vlpianus. If I should show what sleights I saw, dame Fortunes grace to gayn,
Would try my wits and, me procure, displeasure for my pain.

Diogenes Have thou such fear of Fortunes frowns or of her whirling wheel?
Who since thou were three horseloues high have tumbled at her heel?
Dread not at all except thou mean, to learn her fawning skill:
Whose flattering cup is (...) with wine that thirst enforces still.

Vlpi^nus. Nay, nay, it is time that we go in, to take some small repast
My limbs wax weak, my tongue is faint, Pigges are content with mast,
The Courtly fare has fed my eyes, but belly had no share:
Nothing at all no savor has, nothing is homly fare:
I know thy stor^house is not void, of roots or some such dish.
Sharp hunger is a noble sauce, for roots, for flesh or fish.

Diogenes. Yet tell I pray thee, foundst thou not one faithful freende at all:
Whereby some hope of better hap in time to thee might fall.
Ill is his chance, worse is that place where fre^ndship no^ is for.

Vlpianus. Yes verily one friend I had to whom I am much bound.

^iogenes. But was he of hability, by Fortunes sawning grace?

Vlpianus. Dame virtue gave him worships seat, in spite of Fortunes face.

Diogenes. Feign would I know that freendly wight. I ^onge to hear his name.

Vlpianus. Some men would deem I flatter him, if I should write his fame.

Diogenes. Truth may be blamd but never shamd, Truth needs not fear her f^
In truthfull praise a man may speak. Truth needs no glosing sho.
A lying flatterer ay is forste his forged tale to hyde,
With cloak of feigned eloquence, for fear he be espyde.
But why should thou refrain to speak: the truth that thou haste tried.
Wherefore thou may impart to me his name and worthiness:

Vlpian^. Then mark my words, and covertly the same I will express.
Ernest he is in zeal of sacred truth,
Debonaire eke, and friend to every wight: A faithful friend to the Author.

Modest and meek, a father unto youth,
Virtue to further is his whole delight.
No nigard of the wealth that God him sent,
Despising pride, and with his state content.
His heart does harbor gifts of heavenly grace,
Among the poor a patron of defense:
Right lovingly does learned wightes embrace,
Makes small account of curraunt quoyned pence.
A pacient man in suffering any wrong,
Not rendering ill again in deed nor tongue:

Dioge^. Full well I now perceive his name, and have obserude his praise:
Such friends in whom such virtues are be rare in th^se our days.

The seventh Dialogue, between Tom Tapster, Miles makeshift, VVat VVily, and
the Author.
Tom Tapster. You are welcome gentlemen will it please you to go near.

Author. Such welcome I like not that bought is to dear.

MIles Make shift. Sir I perceive right well that you have been accustomed
with the flattering entertainme^t of Tapsters, unto whom a man's purse is
always better welcome then his person.


Wat Wily. In good sooth Tapster, if thou knew how weak our purses are,
thou would give us but feeble entertainment.


Tom Tapster. I see you are merry gentlemen and disposed to jest, but if it be
as you say, you shall (notwithstanding) have so much credit at my hands as your
dinner and horse meat amounts unto, for you seem to be honest Gentlemen.


Miles make shifte. Of our honesty we will make no great vauntes, but that we
are Gentlemen, and clean gentlemen, we will not deny, for I suppose we
three cannot make a stock of two pence. But I pray thee whereby do thou
deem us to be Gentlemen.


Tom Tapster. Sir it is a gentle Tapsters courtesy, generally to salute all men
by that title, which lesson I The tapsters courtesy.
first learned in the School of Adulation, in which Art I have so profited
that I am now a public reader thereof, and by my absolute knowledge herein, I
can both prove A good guest (...) you.
you a gentleman, and also emblaze your arms.


Wat Wily. Thou art a gentleman like Tapster.


Miles make shifte. I warrant you he was never begotten without the consent of
a Gentleman.

But Tapster, set forwards our dinner, and if we lack money, I will promise
thee by the faith of a Gentleman, to pay thee when I come hither next.


Tom Tapster. I take your word, you shall lack no good cheer. Exit.


Author. Lo here is cretensis cum cretense, a cogginge knave with a foystinge
varlet well met: he with his herhaltry and you with your hemphaltry, I trust
anon will make a good medley.


Wat Wily. Hold thee content fond fellow, and give us leave, and so shall
thy charges be borne, for thou have often heard say, that Fallere fallentum non
est frans to deceive a deceiuer is no deceit. And he that with his flattery
deceives a thousand in a year, is now like to be mated with his matches,
hold thou thy tongue and observe the event.

No more words, for now he comes in.


Tom Tapster. Gentlemen, I pray you have patience yet a little while, and it will
not be long until your dinner be ready.


Wat Wily. No haste but good, better is a little tariance Tapsters ar^ masters
o^ nevves.
then a raw dinner. But in the mean season I pray thee tell us what news is
now stirring.


Tom Tapster. I have in my taphouse both stale and fresh news: yea, and if
need require, I have there a stamp to quoyne news at all times.


Miles make shifte. I pray thee tell us new news and true news.


Tom Tapster. Since you are so greedy of news I will tell you such as will
seem wonderful, and incredible. First I give you to weete, that there is
beetweene Sir Morpheus and me, very great and familiar acquayntance, by means
whereof, we confer together sometimes Tom Tapste^ dream.
at noone, as well as at midnight, and being this last night past in a deuont
dream, he led me up by the hand into a pleasant Paradise, where I might
behold wonderful visions: first I saw how Jupiter sat in his Throne of
Majesty calling all the other Gods to account of their offices and
Ministeries, before whose royal seat, the pety Gods and Goddesses endeavored
with all diligence to cury favor by sundry strange and unaccustomed sleights:
the terrible and wreckfull God Mars, whose heart was whilom bent^ altogether
to conquer whole Monarchies and Empires, as an infest enemy unto peace and
tranquillity, has now set aside his warlike instruments, and is become a suter
to Jove, to live at ease, preferringe quiet before conquest, and gold before
glory, he has shaken of his harness, and taken into his arms in stead of
armor, the beautiful Lady Venus, whereat the cunning Smith Vulcan taking
indignation (by his exquisite skill) enclosed them together in a net of Wier,
for the which, this noble craftsman was had in great admiration among the
Gods, and well commended of Jupiter him self. And when Vulcan had played this
pleasant Pageant, in came Appollo (as it were upon the Stage) to solace Jove
with some kind of Adulation, whereby I see full well that my science is
practiced even among the Gods. Then came in Sir Cupid like a carpet knight, and
with smiling countenance and smooth words, allured Appollo to resign the
Scepter of his prudence and his learned laurel crown unto Jove, whereby to
discharge himself of a great burden, and also to please Jupiter with his
excellent skill of Music, unto which fond request Appollo eftsoons applied,
to his perpetual obloqui. Howbeit his incomparable harmony found such favor
with the father of the Gods and the rest, that his change chanced to the
multiplication of his gain, though to the diminution of his credit. Thus
Appollo became a Minstrell, and many of the rest daunced after his Pipe. Then
came in Mercurius in the habit of a trauayler, and he told unto He that has
trau^yled so (...) as none, so far as h^e may ly^by authority.
Jove wonderful news and monstrous lies, namely English lies, French lies,
Spanish, Dutch, Italian, Irish, Welsh, Roman, Polonian, Muscouian,
Babylonian, and Turkish lies. And to conclude, he could set out all manner of
lies, with all manner of colors. But it is a world to see how acceptably his
news were received, and to consider how the ears of Gods are delighted with
vain fables, and forged fantasies. But here began the sport: There stood a
far of, a simple sot named V. F. and when he saw how Mercury was favored for
his Fables, and commended for his cogging: persuaded himself, that he by
speakinge the truth should be right well regarded. And even on the suddeine
rushed into the place, as though his quill was then to speak, with malapert
and sauey boldness, uttered these words following.

O mighty Jove since license thine to speak is now assignde,
And pardon free proclaimde, give leave for me to speak my mind.
Fools boltes (men say) are soonest shot yet often they hit the mark:
Blind Bayard is as sure of foot as Palfrey in the dark.
On Stage who stands to play his part each frown may not him daunt
Some play to please, some laugh, some weep, some flatter, some do ta^t
But he whose part tendes to this end, fond fancies toys to school
Best welcome is when he resines, the Scaffold to the fool.
Lo now the fool is come in place, though not with patcht pyde co^te,
To tell such news as carst he saw within Cocklorels bote.
The Rowers cryde, to Barge to Barge, the passengers make haste:
The tide is iurnde, and every fool in his degree is plast.
With lusty jail and laboring Oars the B^rge has won the Port
Where Jupiter does reign and rule, within a stately Forte,
Each one deuisde which way were best in favors grace to grow:
Some crake, some brag, some flaunt it out, some crouch and creep full low
With cap and knee some sue and serve, some gape for others ^alles
Some snatch the fruit before rebound, some gnaw on tastlesse shalles. grope
Some fish and catch a Frog at last yet feed on better hope:
Some sting their hands with nettles keen, while they for flowers
Some sing some dance, some ^ype, some pl^y, and al for favors grace:
Thus greedy gayn^ makes men believe, they run in endless race.
What desperate hazard is so hard, that makes the yonker doubt,
What way so wild where gain does grow, that worldling finds not out
What hole so small in wri^ings o^e, that cannot be now found:
But lucre and large conscience makes some holes where words be found
Ah, Conscience is a banished wight, with garment ^l to torn?
But though she sit in homly ^agges, she laughes some robes to scorn
She^ saules at tyranis that ^oyle to make their will (...) law:
Whose ^ing minds by right or wrong, would hold all men in aw.
Refusing same and (...) shame, by hunting Mammons chase:
A ^g (say the) for good report, let me have Fortunes grace.
Oh Jove, a^e th^se things h^d from thee, nay, nay, thou see them all:
But win^ing wisdom is not blind to t^rne the tossed ball.
Thou see that sundry sorts of ^n, by flattery do aspire:
To guerdon great, when trusty truth, has hatred for her hyre,
Thou see I know the subtle sleights that worldly wightes devise:
Who currieth favor currantly, is only counted wise.
Alas how is Religion used to serve the turn at need:
Whose cloak hides sundry hypocrites that many errors breed?
For why (...) now a common trade, when refuge all is past:
To take Religion for a shield, a shift to serve at last.
Oh Jove if thou will ransacke some that vaunt of her decrees
They will appear but flauntinge leaves of withered fruitless trees.
To flatter Princes many men, apply them to the time:
They force no whit Religions fall, so they aloft may clime.
Now mighty Jove, look well about all things are in thy sight:
The Touchstone tries, all is not gold, that glistereth fair and bright:
Lo, thus I have expressed my mind, and showed forth my intent.
My part is played, and I am pla^de so that I be not shent.

Miles make shifte. Mary sir this was a very saucy and presumpteous fool, for
not only his boldness in preasing himself to that place was worthy of
reproach: but the subtlety of his Metaphorical Phrases deserved just
punishment.


Wat Wily. Thus we may see what madness it is to permit fools freely to
speak their minds but much more to suborne them in their taunting talkatiue
veins, whose tongues are always bente to shoot their doltishe boltes at
other men's vices; and yet see not their own follies, but I hope to see the
day that such cocscomes shall be restrained, for they are infest enemies unto
the noble faculty of Flattery.


Tom Tapster. Uerely, if you had heard his words, and beheld his gestures, you
would have wondered at his impudency, for besides that his speech, which I
have recited unto you, he rayled and raged at the egregious flattery used
among the Gods and in Jupiters Court, not sparing any state or degree.


Miles make shifte. Well, well, gentle Tapster, let us now leave to talk any
more of that daw and of his doctrine, and supplye the time with more necessary
matter, wherefore sithe^s thou art a public reader in the science of Adulation,
I pray thee read a Lecture of that art for our instruction.


Tom Tapster. I grant your request, and for the better explication and
understanding of the matter, you must imagine your self to be the Lord, unto
whom I read this Lecture.


Miles make shifte. Be it as thou have said, now show forth thy learning to
me thy Lord and Master.


Tom Tapsters Lecture. AS flying fame with golden trompe, has sent thy brute
abroad:
So bounden duty by deserts bids me my mind unload.
Thy hauty port, thy heavenly gifts, thy line of noble race:
Thy passinge praise, thy happy state, makes all men joy thy case.
As one who for his countries wealth, by fate was first ordaynde:
Oh happy soil whose lucky lot so rare a gem has gaynd.
But whether are our joys more great, in having such a wight:
Or else our grief when sisters three, shall work their yreful spite.
And as both Heaven and earth are bent thy honor to procure,
So prudence thine (O noble Lord) must cause the same endure:
But by thy leave (O master mine,) I see and sighe withal:
That bounty should bear such asway, as to procure thy fall.
For thou (my Lord) with princely pomp thy table do maintain,
A friend to all save to thy self, but how may this remain.
Thy purse is open to the poor, their naked lymmes to cloak:
Like Lords thy tennants live at ease free from all seruill yoke.
If in the end thy state decay, each man bewayles the case,
Take time, in time, so feareles thou may spit in Fortunes face,
And to begin, first cut thy troop, and train of serving men,
Where two or three may serve the turn, what should thou do with tent
But ten times ten on you depend and by your purse maintaind:
Leave of my Lord, as good as you that pomp has now refraind.
Employ the Court with diligence in presence of the Prince:
Whence profit grows, and favor springs though mumbling lobcock wince.
Break up housekeeping and your troup, give pasportes to your train
In Court two wayters and a Page will serve while you remain.
Again in Court such cheats do chance as causes gain to grow:
What need I name the order how since you your self do know,
If need require that you appear in presence of the king:
when as it shall expected be, that you a train must bring.
Your tennants are good hansome hines, when badged blew cotes o^.
So may you muster lustely with Simkin, Hob and John
And he poor swad, will willingly, on cote bestow the cost: A warm (...)
(...) you

His best ca^t horse will make good shifte, to ride with you in post.
And were not these things better saved, then prodigally spent
Though you spend all, yet clownish crew, will never be content:
And when continuance in the Court do breed destre of change.
With Hawks and Spaniels then you may about the country range.
Now here, now there, among your friends how will you entertayne:
Plain cuntry houses sumtimes has in store, so y^ you bring no trayn:
Mas person sumtimes serves, a Capon or some such:
Pinch on the parsons side my Lord, the whorsons have to much. The Devil
sends such counsaylor^.

And when you list to lie at ease, go to some proper town:
So shall you not be charged often to feed Simswad the clown.
Your stable then your own turn serves, your stable may be small,
Few dishes fraught with littel meat, to fill thee bo^rde withal
I trow your tennants will provide, both Capon, Pig, and goose:
Bear them in hand their coppies naught and that the lease is loose.
So shall you have provision brought, to serve you all the year.
Yea sir, let tennants look to that for markets now be dear.
And though your noble auncetors were clean void of the skill:
That does belong to husbandry, the greedy barn to fill.
Yet shun not you the trade to know, that yields treble gain:
Nothing seems hard to prudent men, where gain requites the pain.
The more your knowledge does excel the grater is your praise:
Who knows of land to make the most, is wisest now adays.
When grave and prudent men are set, at table to their meat:
Their table talk tends to this end, of husbandry to treat.
By means whereof no toyling Hine, that plowes and tilles the field^
Can better tell then noble men, what gain a plough will yield,
What need the Grasler you beguile, in hyringe of your ground:
When you your self may plainly see what gain does thence redound
Why should the butcher gain the Hide, in dying of a bee^e:
This knowledge now in noble men does choose the farmers grief.
Lea^, learn (my Lord) of landlords now to let things to the best:
It Is well when tennants crouch and creep, to ^llthe landlordes chest.
Your shepeheard is a subtle knave, and breeds himself a stock:
By k^ping many sheep^ of his among your Lordships flock. The Tapster has a
^ge at C^l men.

A^o you have the Pa^adge and gift of goodly Tithes:
(...) fair globe lands in harvest time, that tryes the Mo^rs ^thes
Which to bestow on pra^ priests, for te^nge of a tale:
Is madness mere, but rather you may set them out to sale.
Sir Simon is a lusty ^ad and has good store of gold,
But s^ a price and dou^ (...) not the money is soon told.
And if he think it very much, to give so large a fine:
Then may you choose a simple sot? who easily will incline.
To be your drudge at all assayes? and feed among the s^ine.
Who will be glad with portion small although the fruits be (...).
Poor men with pottage are well pleased, such fellows will not gruic^.
What though he be no Preacher sir, have you no care for that:
He has a pretty skill to dig and delue a garden plat.
These precepts if your Lordship mark, and put the same in ure:
Then Fortune shall be at your beck and stoop unto your lure,
Lo thus (my Lord) I make an end and wish you happy days.
To bath in bliss, to s^im in joy, to win immortal praise.

Miles make shifte O egregious Schoolemaister worthy of immortal praise, whose
excellent cunning joined with Muli mu^um (...)
singular eloquence, meriteth equallitye with Virgill and Homer, verily Master
Tapster you are profoundly learned in this noble science of Adulation.


Wat Wily. I have heard many public readers in A song of three (...) in one,
where three flattering varl^ are s^ly matched.
sundry faculties, but the like to him I never heard, for he shows himself
a perfect Rethorician, his words are so cunningly cowched that they importe
much matter in few words, every word has his weight, each syllable his
perfect sense, he is pithy without prolixity, short, and yet substanciall.
Finally, his words, his countenance, his sweet pronounciation, his cumly
gesture, with all his other actions, show forth a grace (in my judgment)
incomparable, and therefore worthy of admiration. How think you friend Fulwell,
let us hear your judgment.


Author. My judgment is thus, that for his excellency The (...) judgment.
in his execrable Science, he shall be endued with a garland of Hemp, and
shall take his degree of Poetry at the university of Tiborne, for his presence
will become that place passing well. And because that lecture is very
unprofitable where out no necessary notes may be gathered, I will show you
what I have noted in the discourse of this Lecture. First that this fellow is
to be reputed a Master or Captain Parasite, which kind of people are the
peruertors of virtuous affections, and corrupters of noble na^re, as by his
detestable persuasions may appear. But let us see how these ungracious graffes
were trod under foot (as pernicious branches, or rather rotten and stinking
weeds) even among the Heathen wise men. Diogenes noting two of most noysom
beasts of the world terms a sclanderer the worst of wild beasts, and of
^ame beasts a flatterer. Also Plato accompteth him a freende in presence, and
a foe in absence, whereof daily experience is a perfect witness. For as a
flatterer will prosesse freendship to thee and thy friends, with like
protestation of hatred towarde^ thy enemies, even so will he (for his bellyes
sake) use the like dissimulation with thy adversaries, and in the end bewray
and betray you both, if any gain grow unto him thereby. Wherefore he is right
^oosin to a dog, whose property is to fawn with his tail on all men that will
reward him whether they be his Masters friends or foes. But what need I
stand upon the inuectiues of Philosophers against flatterers and flatterry,
seeing the canonical books of the Bible are furnished with examples and
documents, whereof I will of a multitude, set a few, for the further displaying
and just detestation of that wicked Science, whereof Satan himself was the
first Schoolemaister. Whereby I infer that the studientes, and practisioners
thereof, are fit Scholars for such a Master.

It appears that by the subtilty of this art, Doctor Devil Gen^. 3.
deluded our first parents in Paradise, with his flattering promises of much
more then he could perform, the effect whereof, the world feels, and
shall do until the consummation thereof. And now let us see what manner of
disciples this Doctor had, and for auoydinge of tediousness, I will pretermit
many examples of the old Testament, and come unto Christ his time

Herod with flattering words of dissembled intent, persuaded the Magians to
bring him news where he M^h. (...).
might find Christ and how his words agreede with his meaning, the text does
teach thee. In process of time (...).
when Christ wrought wonders and miracles among the people, he was chiefly
commended among them for filling their bellyes in the w^ldernesse, in which
slocke and multitude were many Pharasites and smelfeastes, that for their
bellyes sakes, would have proclaimed Christ to be John. (...)
their King, flattering him also with these words. This is of a truth, that
Prophet that should come into the world. And yet the self same flattering
varlets, when they saw no longer likelyhoode of good cheer, cried out on him
Crucifige. The sect of flattering Pharisees when they meant nothing less then
truth, came unto Christ with these glosing words. Master we know that thou
art true, and teach the way of God truly. etc. But their wielfed intent
Math. 2 (...).
was to entrap him with words of treason, whereby to condemn him, of whose
pharaseicall conditions are our Masters of flattery, and thus let these few
places serve for my first note. Secondly I have noted by his Lecture, the
unconstant and sond affections of them that bend their ears to the sugared
venim of flattery, whereby many do dishonor, disworship, and dishonest
themselves by putting in ure such wicked attempts as this tapster has
persuaded. Thirdly I have noted in you two a plain protrayture of a brace of
cogging knaves, from whom I will fly as from a Serpent, exhorting al my
friends to do the same and so fare you well.

Fallere te nullus vult, qui tibi dura minatur
Sed poti^s vt caueas turbidus ille mone^, Man^ (...).

Fallimur a placidis verbis, vultuque sereno,
Cum sapido capimus, sepe venena scipo,

A* short Dialogue, between the Author and his book, wherein is showed sundry
opinions that were uttered of the first Impression of this book, which the
Author him self heard in Paul's Church yeard. and else where.
Author. What loytring cause or lingering let,
Has held thee from my hands so long
Or elss have thou such check mates met,
As by some means has done thee wrong
Some news has chaunst, I know full well,
If good or bad? I pray thee tell.

Book. Such news perhaps, I have to show,
As uneath will thy mind content:
If talk may make men's ears to glow,
I muse if thine be not quite spent,
A thousand tongues do speak of thee,
Thou have so fondly framed me.
This is a new found art, say they,
Pickte out of late from idle brain:
But some against those words inuey,
And say thou tookst an honest pain,
By merry mean thus to detect:
The folly of the flattering sect.
Some like thy verse, but not thy proes,
Some praise thy mind, but not thy skill:
Some show them selves to be thy foes,
By mocking thee, and eke thy quill,
Some say thou have a little wit,
But do apply the same unfit.
Some say that in times pas^,
In Flatteries School thou have been trained:
And yet to thrive foundst not the cast,
For Fortune aye thy state disdaind:
And now thou takst as weapon strong,
Thy pen for to avenge that wrong.
And thus as I have raunged abroad,
I hear the verdictes of them all:
Some rage and rail, some lay on lode.
Belike they were rubde on the gall.
Some smyle to see so quaint a toy,
Some laugh right out, and some look coy*

Author. Ah sily book, that thus have past,
Amid thy friends, and through thy foes*
What writer ever found the cast,
To please all men? none I suppose,
For fancy comes to men by fittes,
So many heads, so many wits.
Since sundry men in sundry wise,
Do shoot their sentence at my name:
Go tell them all, that I despise,
The scoffs that taunting tongues do frame,
Thy humble duty do express,
To thy right noble patroness,
Then reverently thy self submit,
Unto the troop of learned train:
As for fools boltes, that would thee hitte,
Thou shall full well their shot sustain.
And say to them, that thee do blame,
My Author praise you mend the same.
So shall you answer his desire,
And have his thanks, a small reward,
Else let your tongue from taunts retire,
Ill tongues good matters, often has marde,
A fault is sooner found, then mended,
Few books by find fault is defended.
Farewell my book, God be thy speed,
I send thee forth to walk alone:
In homly style, a threede bare weed,
For robe of Rethorike I have none,
My VVaredrope has no filed phrase,
Whereon fine eyes delight to gase.

FINIS.
The eyghth Dialogue, between Si^ Simon the Parson of Poll Iobbam, and the
Author.
Sir Simon. Who lives to learn, and learnes to live
And list to come to thrist,
May see the skill, and find the way,
By my new sounded shrift.

AVthour. If your shrifte have such virtue as (...) teach men thrift, I pray
you Sir Simon take me under b^edicitie, who never as yet could find the way
to thrive, I think it be for want of absolution ab omne frugalitate.


Sir Simon. I neither use auri^uler confession, nor any kind of absolution,
but certain infallible precepts to be observed, by practice whereof, thrift is
obtained.


Author. And yet (Sir Simon) if the common saying be The (...) of poul (...)
ba^.
true, you have played an unthrifty part your self, for you are said to be be
that sold his benefice for a boale of new Al^ in corns, and what thrift call
you that*


Sir Simon. Better thrift then you are ware of, for the boale was spiced with a
hundred Ducats, which spice sunk to the bottom that all men could not see it.


Author. Then your name shall be converted from Sir Simon to Sir Simony, but
have you any other benefice left to live upon, and ^pe hospitality withal?


Sir Simon. I am not as yet unfurnished of my plurality, but if I had not one,
yet have I the feate to ^ishe an^ Sir Simon fisheth vvih a gold^ (...).
catch: so fine a bayte I have in store.


Author. How long have you been so cunning a ^sher? When I knew you first you
had no such skill, but ^ted your self to l^e as bar^ly as I, and other your
poor neighbors.


Sir Simon. That I lived barely I confess, but that it contented me I deny,
wherefore I direct my study to the Art of Fl^ttery: wherein I found such savor,
that I set aside al other studies, and dedicate my self wholly to that, in
which art I am now an absolute Schoolemaister, and if thou once tastedst the
sweetenes thereof, thou would reiecte thy stoi^all study and become a
Philosopher of our se^te.


Author. I pray you Sir Simon, for old acquaintance Honest studies ^cted in
respect.
tell me how you put this kind of Philosophy to so profitable use?


Sir Simon. I will rip it up unto thee even from the beginning. It is not
known unto thee how solitary a life I led when I first became a Clergy man,
and when I went any where abroad, my only arrant was to preach, in which my
sermons I could not cease to inuey against the abuses of these days, not
sparing Lord or Lady or any degree, in reproouinge of sin and wickedness, so
far forth, that I was counted (...) saucy knave among Gentiles. And specially
of patrons of benefices, whose foul disorders, in making merchandise of the
Church beeinge Gods part, would heap up wrath for them against the day of
vengeance, and that thereby the childrens bread was taken This (...) ty is
greatly to be (...).
away and cast unto dogs for not only they were depri^ed from the food of
the soul, by selling of the benefice to simple Sir John, utterly unlearned,
but also the patron must have the sweetest soppe of the tithe to maintain his
^oundes, greyhoundes, and Spaniels, for lack whereof the poor parson is unable
to keep hospitality: and as Christ whipped out the Merchants from the Temple at
Jerusalem, so these Church Marchantes must look for a grievous Let them
su^ely look (...) it.
s^ourge to come on them from God. For this and the like doctrine I was hated
of many, and loved of few. On the other side, I saw how some other Preachers
that were my near neighbors, could cunningly claw the ytching ears of vain
glorious men, and like Pro^heus convert themselves unto sundry shapes, by
means whereof lyuings were powered into their lappes. I set aside my satirical
^ous, and became a plausible preacher, I rejected seli^, and became a boon
companion: I left my books and ^ell to my bowls, (...) shut up my study, and
sought out the Ale house, and then who so good a fellow as Sir Simon with the
Papist I was a P^pist: with the Protestant, an earnest gospeller, (...) the
newfound Famely of Love, I was a long companion: among grave men, auncie^ A
Chaplay^ of trust.
with wild ^ates, youthful: among gamesters, a good ^low: and finally, a man
at all assaye^. Then began my credit to increase, and those that before spoke
evil of me, now gave me good rep^rte, and in short space I had more lyuings
(...) on me, then law would permit me to Scoggi^ do^le is (...) ge^ where
(...) is (...) (...) no^ d^ert.
receive, but I would refuse none: for I invented a proper policy both for
f^uour and profit. When soever any ^yuinge came unto me more then by law I was
capable of, I would either make marchandice of one, or else make over my
entangled living unto some man of such Authority as against whom no common
promoter durst presume, by means whereof, I was sure to have a good bucklar of
defense, Such mar^ chandi^ have mard a^
and a profitable gain without deserte, so that in short space I was taken up
among states, in whose presence, to win further favor, I could behave my self
^o pleasantly, that who so great a man as I among^ Lo^des and Ladies. I have
committed to my mind such store An vn^it thing for (...) P^ to be^ a lesse^.
of pleasant denise^ to ^eede their humors at the table, that I am called my
Lords merry greek, for the company is the merier that I am in. And on ^ee
attends simple Sir John, who is made a dou^te and dogbolt of every seruing^ A
Chap^ (...) (...) ^o (...) (...) The (...) ^o (...) (...).
man, because of his simplicity, but for all that, I with (...) subti^, and he
with his simplicity, and my Lorde^ men with their policy, keep in our hands
many good be^ices in the Country, if this be no thrifte now judge yo^.


Author. If such shifting thrift, and with good thriuing* I much ^aruel, but
this mean while, how do you discharge y^r cons^ence in preachi^ge according to
your function?


Sir Simon. (...) preach very often, and that with great co^mendations, for
when I am in Pulpit before Nobles (...) Sir Simon* preached (...) pro^.
peers of the Realm, I tend my inuectiues wholly against the insaciable
covetousness of the Country man, with the subtlety that is in them harbored
under the cloak of simplicity, and how they beat their brayues only about
worldly affairs, omitting first to seek the kingdom of God, and the
righteousness thereof, according to the commandment of our Master Christ.
etc. And like wise of the Lawyers that vnconsionably take fees, by whom
contrauersies are rather mayntayned then ended. And when I preach in the
City, and before Lawyers, I declayme against both the Courtier and the Cuntry
occupier, whose dealinges are so vnconcionable toward the Merchant, that he
causes many rich and wealthy Merchants to become bankrout. Again in the
Country, I preach that the pride of Landlords is the impouerishment of the
common wealth, whereby also vice is nourished and virtue decayed, and that
disguised attire of men and women, makes them seem more like monsters then
humayne creatures. Sir Simon preaches dog^kes in stead of Doctrine.
And in all my sermons, I have one pleasant dogtricke or other to delight my
auditory, which merry conceyt is committed to memory, when the rest of my
dectrine is neglected.


Author. But I pray you Sir Simon, is your life so confourmed to your doctrine
that it cannot justly be said unto you Medice cura te ipsum.


Sir Simon. Tush that is the least care that may encumber my mind, for I have
so bold a tongue, and such a brazen face, that if I be detected of any
notorious crime, I can so hide my wooluish carcas under a cloak of Lamskin,
that my deserved blame shall rebounde into the bosoms of my accusers.


Author. But I pray you (sir Simon) have you had free passage in these your
proceedinges without taking of some notable foil.


Sir Simon. Lo now thou dooste urge me either to accuse my self unto thee,
or else to deny thy request, but because I think that whatsoever I do r^ale
unto thee, shall be buried in the Sepu^chre of thy secrets, I will display
certain finester practices of late I put in ure, to the utter Shipwreck of my
fame, and greenous wound of my good report, which skarre lies so open unto
the eyes of the world, that it is shot at with the sharp arrows of many men's
tongues, and yet I hope to save it from festering by a plaster of new invention
as in the end of my tale thou shall hear.


Author. I covet first to hear your practices (the causes of your wound) and
then your chirurgicall policy.


Sir Simon. Thou know that when I was in the flower Bbelike Sir Simon wa^ a
long lubber
of my youth, I was well regarded of many men, as well for my prompe wit in
scoffing and taunting, as also for the comlynesse of my personage, beeinge of
very tall stature, and active in many things, by means whereof I became a
Seruitour, but I was soon weary of that trade, and took on me a habit of
holiness, namely a Friars coule, and was a painful Preacher. Shortly after I
cast of my coule and took on me the office of Preesthood. But within a
while, I lyked so ill of that function that I shakte of my square cap and my
tippet, and became a practicioner of yt civil Law, in the attire of a temporal
man, as though I had taken no orders at all more then the. 24. at which time I
traded many things and cheefely in mineralles. But it is a world to see how
promotion pricketh the mind Sir Simon a (...) (...) all kind of (...).
of man, as in (...) may appear a perfect pattern: for it so happened that a
certain Archedeacon in the Province of M. dyed while I was at N. a City of
the said Province, after whose death I took new orders, and became a new old
Priest again, then I labored so effectually and s^ed so finely, as well with my
golden hook, as my glosing tongue, that at last I got into my hands, not only
the said Archede^nry of N. but also certain fat benefices in that same
Province, whereat the world smyled and spoke of me much shame. But I bare out
that with a brazen ^ace, and d^ised means to win new credit, for the oldst was
so cracked and wormeaten rotten, that it was naught worth


Author. Truly Sir Simon, I deem it one of the most difficult matters in the
world for a man to win new credit in a place where the old is so far past as
you have described.


Sir Simon. Nay verily, I esteem it no difficult matter. For by this means
that I shall tell thee, I bear a greater countenance then ever I did. For I
keep jolly good cheer in my house, but not for each poor ^aue and every
rascal, or for the poor and impotent, but for Lords, Knights, Esquires, and
Gentlemen. And let them bring Sir Simons alms
with them whom they list, yea, even their very Dogs, Rug, Rig, and Risbie:
yea, cut and longtaile, they shall be welcome, and for this cause I am a companion
among estates.


Author. But I think those men of honor and worship, use you as men use their
waterspaniels: that is, they make you their instrument to fetch and bring unto
them Sir Simoni^ ^ruisable ^tniell.
such commodities, as you by the corrupting of your conscience may compass,
and for your labor they spitte in your mouth, and make you their mocking
stock behind your back, and if it be so what new credit do you win hereby?


Sir Simon. It may be as thou say, but I have not as yet perceived it. But
all this while I have not told thee of one of my practices which sticks more
in my stomach then all the rest, the wound whereof, though in time it may be
care^, yet I fear me the skarre will remain while I live. Wherefore, to
unload my stomach of that chorasie I will utter it unto thee as follows.

There is a very honest man dwellinge near unto a Town called D. in the
Country where my dignities are, which honest man was my very friend in time of
necessity who dwells on a living given unto him by an old Mai^er of his,
sometimes Are ^deacon of the place that I now possess, and by my dignity I am
now his Landlord, but oh how it grieved me to see so sweet a sop (as he
eni^yed) (...).
out of my dishe, wherefore I sommoned an assembly of my wits and wills
together, and so devised how to surprise him by the practis^ of my pro^ssed art
of Adulatio^, wherein (...) used also deep (...), which is a special branche of
this Art, and to begin, I wroat unto him a letter in effect following.


My old friend M
the sunory good turns that I have received at your hands enforces me to
study how I may requite the same. And sith Fortune has now advanced me to
be your Landlord, I assure you, (if your lyuinge were not already on you
bestowed) I would endewe you therewith in more ample manner, then did your old
Master, and persuade your self herein that you shall find me as fast a
friend unto you, as any you have in yt world, whereof you may make proof when
you will. And because I make the like account of you, I am bold to request the
use of your freendship at this time, which is, that you will lend me one
hundred powndes of money, toward the charges that has grown unto me by late
purchased promotions, I wish you well, from my house at N. etc.

By your etc.


Author. Truly Sir, your letter protendeth much Adulation, and yet
peradventure you performed your promise unto him, and in so doing your words
were freendly and not flattery.


Sir Simon. In deed I performed the same with shame enough unto my self, for
he (joining with another of my tennants) gratified my request, and I requited
it in this manner: I refused to receive my rent of him because the A man of
good con^ ence as by this practi^ appea^h.
forfaiture of his living, stood upon the non payment of his rent: willing him
not to regard the tenderinge thereof at the days and place limited, seeing
that not only I was his very friend, but also endetted unto him far beyond ye
value of my rent. But hereby I see how God stands with true meaning men, and
frustrateth the wicked policies of unconscionable dealers, to their shame, as
in me may appear a notable example, for I intending to circumuent him with my
subtilty, was my self caught in the snare of shameful obloqui. For when I
supposed y^ he had forfaited his said lease for want of tendering the rent,
whereas (in very deed) he (unknown to me) had lawfully tendered the same, I
came unto his house as Judas did unto his Master and friend God provides
(...) plain meaning (...).
Christ with a treacherous kiss of egregious dissimulation, and brought with
me a troop of my adherents. And at our coming, (albeit it was on a soddeine)
we found such cheer and freendly entertainment, as right well deserved great
thanks, in recompense whereof, I sent the good man out of the way by a train,
and in his absence gave possession of his house to another, which being
known, all the A good turn well ^ed.
Country cried against me Crucifige. And yet he (by his above specified
wisdom) prevented my pestilente wiliness. And this is the scarre that I
fear m^e I shall never cure.


Author. Certes of all knaueries, cogginges and dissimulations, I never heard
the like, but I pray you have you applied no plaster unto this so foul a
wound, which I think stinketh so that it offends the senses of as many as
know you or hear of you?


Sir Simon. Yes I have a little molified the same with A proper excuse to blear
the eyes of fools.
the ointment of smooth words, saying unto him, that my meaning was to take
it into my own hands, and so to bestow it again on him, that thereby he
might perceive how well I loved him, but all this cannot stop the mouths of the
people, and therefore (as I told thee before) I cleave fast unto the company of
worshipful, trusting that in time it will be a Scarf to shadow the scarre of
my knavery.


Author. Now to conclude with you Sir Simon, I pray you what is the price of a
good benefice in your Country? for I know that you are both a Merchant, and a
factor for other chapmen.


Sir Simon. Ah sir, that is such a secret as I list not reveal unto you for
doubt least I be shent. But if thou will study my ^te, I will be thy reader,
and then thou A ^ret ^ote ^o be publ^y (...)
shall both kn^w the order, and enjoy the fruits thereof.


Author. Uerely Sir Simon, I do so much detest and abborre the study and
practice of that filthy Science, that I will rather suffer any worldly penury,
the^ be a follower of thy sect. And now I cannot choose but declaime against
all thy practices, as thou have particularly recited them unto me. And first
to begin with. Whereas thou have acknowledged thy return from gravity to
knavery, from holiness to hollownesse, from light to darkness, from truth
to lyinge, and from sincerity to flattery, for this thy notable apostasy, thou
deseruost to be baffolde here on earth, and to be enstalled the Archdeacon,
or rather Archedeuill of Plutos infernal Court. Also where as thou have
confessed thy impudency, in committing of evil, and bearing A fit preferment
for such a Cl^ plain.
out the same with a blushles brazen countenance, I assure thee, the day will
come when thou shall stand before the tribunal Seat of Christ, and all thy
filthy factes shall be then laid before thy shameless face, and penetrate the
brass thereof (if any there be) when thy own conscience shall put thee in
mind of these words that thou have often times preached, out of the Psalm:
that is. And unto the ungodly said God, how dare thou take my laws in thy
mouth whereas thou hate to be reformed, for when thou saw a thief thou
consentedst unto him, and have laid down thy portion among the adulterers.

And also thou have read Saint Paul's rules unto Timothi, as touching the
framing of his life to his doctrine, and his works to his words, that in the
function of his ministry might be found no fault. Then will thou say, oh
that I had so directed my life by the line of Gods word, that I might boldly
and truly have said with our Savior Christ, Quis ex vobis potest me arguere de
peccato? But all to late shall it then be, except while thou have space thou
call for Man can not bleare the eyes of God.
grace, and without dissimulation turn unto God, whose eyes thou can not
bleare with all thy cunning in Adulation, because he is scrutator cordis, the
searcher of the very heart of man and will not be deceived by any art of
glosing words etc. Now where as thou have practiced to be bolstred up by the
countenance of worshipful Gentlemen, I must needs note, that many noble men
and gentlemen are by thee and thy sect vehemently abused. For thou have
acknowledged thy insinuation toward them, by means whereof they commit credit
unto thee, and such is thy wickedness, that whether they be inclined to to
virtue or to vice, all is one to thee: So that if they be covetous,
extorcioners, proud, voluptuous or blasphemers of Gods holy name, they are not
by thee rebuked, but such shall dye in their own sin, and their blood shall be
required at thy hands, and also (as I have heard of thee) thou haste honest
Ezekiel. 33.
terms to cloak these forenamed vices. First, covetousness is thrifte:
extorcion, good husbandry: pride is clenlinesse Clenly terms for filthy faults.
lechery, a spurt of youth: and swearing is lustiness etc.

And as for Simony, it is but honest consideration, whereby thou, and simple Sir
John, with Sir W. the Weauer, and Sir T. but lately a Tinker, with ^unce the
seruinge man, snatche up the benefices in the Country. But God be thanked
these disorders are like to be reformed by the Unmeet Ministers in the Church
of Christ.
providence of our Noble Queen and her Honorable counsel, with the Bishops
and Fathers of the Church: and then shall Sir Simon be shaked of from the
presence of Noble men, and men of aucthority, and true preachers placed in his
room. And now to conclude with thy sinister and execrable practice in the
Province of M. whereof thou say God grant this may be done with speed.
thou art ashamed. Consider the premises, and live hereafter like an honest
man (if thou can) and that shall be the best plaster to cure that scar, which
otherwise will never be healed, and being once whole and sound with
continuance of that salve, thou may then boldly show thy face, which is, as
yet so blemished, and always regard these words, veritas nonquerit angulos.
Truth seeks out no corners, nor searches for coulorable shifts.


FINIS.

