THE ARGUMENT OF MASTER NICHOLAS FVLLER, IN THE CASE OF THOMAS LAD, AND RICHARD
MAVNsell, his Clients. Wherein it is plainly proved, that the Ecclesiastical
Commissioners have no power, by virtue of their Commission, to Imprison, to put
to the Oath Ex Officio, or to fine any of his Majesty's Subjects.

Psalm. 2.10. Be wise now therefore ye Kings: be learned ye Judges of the earth.

2. Chron. 19.6. Take heed what ye do: for ye execute not the judgments of
man, but of the Lord; and he will be with you, in the cause and judgment.

Prove. 24.11.12. Deliver them that are drawn to death: and will thou not
preserve them that are led to be slain?

If thou say, Behold, we knew not of it: he that pondereth the hearts, does
not he understand it? and he that keeps thy soul, knows he it not? will
not he also recompense every man according to his works.

Imprinted. 1607.

THE PRINTER TO THE READER.
CHristian Reader, there came to my hands, by the good providence of God, this
Argument of M. Fullers, accompanied with some few lines, wherein, as it should
seem, it was sent enclosed to a Gentleman of good worth and worship on this
side the Seaes. Having read it over, and perceiving it to be of very necessary
use for my Countrymen (whose good I desire from my heart, and whose welfare I
take my self bound to procure, as I may, though now I be in a part far
remote from them) I have adventured to publish it to the view of the world: the
rather, because therein both the unjust usurpation of the Prelates over his
Majesty's Subjects is notably discovered, and the laws and liberties of the
land ( the high Inheritance of the subjects) are worthily stood for and
maintained, maugre the malice of the Prelates; who, as I hear study, and
strive, even with might and maine, to bear down all before them, to the ruin
of that sometime-flourishing Church and Commonwealth. How the publishing of it
will be liked I cannot tell; how ever, I send it abroad to thy view even as it
came to my hands: which I do (I profess in the presence of that great God)
altogether without the privitie either of the Gentleman himself (whose bands
I would be loath any manner of way to increase) or of the silenced Ministers, who
have felt the weight of these lawles proceedings too too long in the hands of
the Prelates. Read it, and consider well of it: and if thou reap any benefit
by it, give all the glory to God alone; who can, if it seem so good unto him,
by weak means bring great matters to pass. Farewell.

To my worshipful friend. W.W.
Worshipful Sir, I send you here-inclosed the thing which you sent for so long
since. What the drift of it is I understand in part, as having read it over.
How well it is performed, I am not able to judge, because it is out of my
Element. The Gentleman arguing the Case is known to many, but diversely both
thought and reported of, upon occasion of his present troubles. His person and
cause I leave to them, to whom it belongs justly to determine of such great
matters. But touching the point it self, I hope that as you (out of the depth
of your judgment and great experience) are able to speak much, both for the
matter and manner of it, so you will not be unwilling to declare your mind, as
occasion shall be offered, either in the like or dislike of it. And so having no
more at this time to trouble your Worship withal, but patiently waiting for
your opinion herein (if you so think it good) and wishing always all manner of
good unto you, I humbly take my leave.

Gentle Reader, because the French (quoted in this Argument) is somewhat
mis-printed, and the Latin (though it be not much) may yet notwithstanding
stumble the simple and such as be unlearned: I have thought it not amiss to
english both the one and the other; referring thee every where to the page, and
line, where either of them is.

Page 5. line 9. Because the Kings power ought not to be wanting to holy Church.

Ibid. line. 19. but by the lawful judgment of his Peers, or the law of the
land.

Page 7. line 7. as before, page 5. line 9.

ibidem line 27. etc. Supplication is made to the most excellent and gracious
Prince, our Lord the King, on the behalf of your humble Orators, the Prelates
and Clergy of your kingdom of England, that whereas the Catholic faith
founded upon Christ, and by his Apostles, and Church etc.

Which petitions of the Prelates and Clergy before expressed, our Lord the
King, with the consent of his Nobles and other Peers of his Realm assembled
in present Parliament, has granted: and in every of them according to the
form etc.

Page 8. line 8. Also the Commons pray, that since it is contained in the great
Charter, that none should be arrested, or imprisoned, without answer, or due
process of law, which Charter is confirmed in every Parliament, etc. And
besides they entreat, that if any be arrested or imprisoned contrary to the
form of the Charter aforesaid, that he may come and appear to his answer, and
take his judgment, even as the law requires: also that no such Arrest or
Imprisonment may be drawn into custom, to the destruction of the law of the
King.

Ibidem, line 16. Let the Statutes, and the common law be kept.

Ibid. line 20. etc. Also the commons beseech, that whereas a statute was made
in the last Parliament, in these words, It is ordained in this Parliament, that
the Kings Commissions be directed to the Sheriffs, and other officers of the
King, or to other sufficient persons, after and according as the certificates
of the Prelates were wont to be in the Chauncery, from time to time and that
such preachers, their favorers, abettours etc.

Which was never assented unto, nor granted by the commons, but that which was
done therein was done without their assent, and so the statute is of no force.
For it was never their meaning to justify it, nor to bind themselves, nor
their successors, to the Prelates any more then their Ancestors had done in
times past.

It pleases the King.

Page 10. line 31. Because no man is bound to betray himself.

Page 11. line 9. An Oath in a man's own cause is the devise of the Devil, to
throw the souls of poor men into Hell.

Page 12. line. 19. Nature is a preserver of it self.

Ibidem line. 27. Without a certain Author of the Bill exhibited no
accusations ought to have place, for it is both a thing of very evil example,
and not the manner of these times.

Page 14. line. 26. etc. The King can do nothing upon earth (seeing he is the
servant and lieuetenant of God) but that which he may lawfully do: because
that power belongs only to God, but the power of doing wrong belongs to
the Devil, and not to God, and the works of which so ever of these the King
shall do, his servant he is.

Page 15. line. 12. condemned for what cause so ever.

Page 18. line. 2. We will not have the laws of England to be changed.

Gentle Reader, in page 29. line 21. there is gone purused, for pursued, the
which I pray thee to amend.

THE ARGUMENT OF MASTER NICHOLAS FVLLER, IN THE CASE OF THOmas Lad, and Richard
Maunsell, his clients. Wherein it is plainly proved, that the Ecclesiastical
Commisioners have no power, by virtue of their Commission, to Imprison, to put
to the oath Ex Officio, or to fine any of his Majesty's Subjects.
THE CASE.
THomas Lad, a merchant of Yarmouth, in Norfolk, was brought before the
Chauncellor of Norwich, for a supposed Conventicle; because that he, on the
Sabbath days after the Sermons ended, sojourning in the house of M. Iackler in
Yarmouth, who was late Preacher of Yarmouth, joined with him in repeating of
the substance and heads of the sermons that day made in the Church, at which
Thomas Lad was usually present: and was forced upon his oath to answer certain
articles touching that meeting, which he could not see until he was sworn;
and having answered upon his oath twice before the Chauncelor there, he was
brought to Lambeth before the Ecclesiastical Commissioners, to make a further
answer, upon a new oath, touching the supposed Conventicle: which he refused
to do, without sight of his former answers (because he was charged with
perjury) and therefore was imprisoned by the Commissioners a long time, and
could not be bayled; whereupon the writ of Habeas Corpus was granted out of
the Kings bench, to bring the prisoner to the Bar.

Richard Maunsell, the other prisoner, being a Preacher, was charged to have
been a partaker in a Petition exhibited to the Nether house of the Parliament:
and for refusing to take the Oath ex officio, to answer to certain articles,
which he could not be permitted to see, he was imprisoned by the Commisioners
at Lambeth, where he remained very long, and could not be bayled, and was
brought to the bar, upon the writ of habeas Corpus.

These imprisonments of Thomas Lad, and Richard Maunsell by the Commisioners,
for the supposed contempts aforesaid, were unlawful (as the said Nicholas
Fuller said) and therefore he said that the prisoners ought to be discharged;
And, before he began his Argument, he the said Nicholas Fuller did confess,
that it was a blessed thing, in all kingdoms, to have the Church, and Common
wealth to agree together as Hippocrates twins: And the means to continue a
perfect agreement between them was (as he said) to give to Caesar that which
is Caesar's, and to God that which is Gods. Which right distribution of the
Jurisdiction of the Church in England, and Jurisdiction of the Common laws in
England, set forth and proved upon good grounds of the ancient laws and
statutes of the Realm, would (as he thought) continue a peace between the
Church and Common wealth of England for ever; which he desired from his heart,
and it was his labor to effect by this his Argument. Wherein, for the better
understanding of his purpose and drift of his Argument, he did devide the same
into 5. parts.

1 And (first because the Ecclesiastical Commission is grounded upon the
Statute of Anno 1. Eliz. cap. 1. the title and intent of which statute is, the
restoring to the Crown the ancient Jurisdiction over the Ecclisiasticall and
spiritual office, and the abolishing of all forreyne Jurisdiction repugnant to
the same) he declared what that ancient spiritual Jurisdiction was, which was
meant in that Act to be restored, and by the Commisioners to be executed; and
therein he proved, that the power to imprison subjects, to fine them, or to
force them to accuse themselves upon their own enforced oaths, there being no
accuser known, was no part of the ancient Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, nor
used in England by any spiritual Jurisdiction, before the Statute of 2. Hen.
4. cap. 15. which was procured by the Popish Prelates

2 That the Statute of 2. Hen. 4. cap. 15. which first gave Popish Prelates in
the time of darkness (if not without a full consent of the Commons, yet to their
great mislike) and that the said Statute, and every thing in the same
contained, is revoked, as being against the rule of equity and common justice,
and against the laws of the la^d, and very hateful to all the subjectes of
the Realm: and in that 2. part he proved, according to the words of the
statute, that the Oath ex officio was against the law of England, and against
the rule of equity and Justice.

3 That the laws of England are the high inheritance Act of Parliament.



5. That the Act of Parliament of Anno. 1. Elizab. cap. 1. Oath ex officio,
without an accuser, not warranted by law, but erroneous and void.

Touching the first part of the division, which was to prove, that, before the
statute of 2. Hen. 4. cap. 15. the Ordinaries had no power to imprison the
subjects, or to fine them, it appears both by the preamble of that Statute,
where it is declared, that, before that time, they could not by their
spiritual Jurisdiction, without aid of the Royal Majesty, sufficiently
correct perverse people, who did contemn their spiritual jurisdiction and
Keys of the Church (which was, at the uttermost, to lock them out of the
Church by Excomunication) and also by the book case of 10. Hen. 7. arguing
upon that point of the same statute, where it is set forth, that the
Ordinaries, before the Statute of 2. Hen. 4. had no power to imprison subjects,
but the Keys of the Church: and the like is also confessed by the Statute of
1. and 2. of Philip and Mary. which was made after the former Statute of 2.
Hen. 4. was revoked by 25. Hen. 8. cap. 14 which do show as much, viz. that
the Ordinaries had no power but the Keys.

And by the Common law it is apparent, that when the Ordinary or
Ecclesiastical Judge had proceeded so far as they could, by Excomunicating
the offender to lock him out of the Church, then the Common law, upon
significavit, did assist them by the writ of Exco^municato Capiendo: Quia
potestas reg^^ sacro sanctae Ecclesiae d^^sse non debet, as is said in the
Register. But in this case the Common law still retained power to discharge the
subjectes so imprisoned (upon an Exco^municato capiendo) without assent of the
Ordinary, Fitz H. f. 4^.
both by the writ of Cautione admittenda, and by the writ of scire facias,
upon an appeal; where a supersedeas was usually awarded, to discharge the
person imprisoned, against the will of the Ordinary. For the laws of England
did so much regard and preserve the liberty of the subjects, as that none
should be imprisoned, nisi per legale iudicium parium suorum aut legem terrae,
as it is said in Magna Charta cap. 29. which Charter, 4^ Edw. ^. cap. 3.
by diverse other statutes after, is confirmed, with such strong inforcements in
some of them, as to make void such statutes, as should be contrary to Magna
Charta.

And, in the 15. Ed. 3. the first article of the Commons Petition in
Parliament, was, In the Tower amongst the Parliament (...). 15 ^^. ^.
that the great Charter may in all points be observed, so as such persons as
are neither appealed, Indicted, nor followed at the suit of the party, and have
their goods, lands, or possessions taken away, may be restored thereunto
again.

Whereunto the King answered thus.

The King grants for him and his heirs that if any person commit an act
against the form of the great Charter, (...).
or any other good law, and he shall answer in Parliament or else where; he
ought to answer according to law. And therefore if any free subject were
wrongfully imprisoned, the Common law did not leave him to an action of false
imprisonment only, but provided the writ De homine replegiando, Fit^^. fo. 40
E^. ^. fo. 36.
to set him free of his imprisonment, unless he were imprisoned for such
particular cause, as is expressed in the same writ de homine replegiando:
which writ is part of the subjectes inheritance, and should not be denied
them. And this freedom of the subjectes did make Markham the Judge, in the 4.
Hen. 7. tit: prerog. 139. Brook: declare that the King could not arrest a
subject upon suspicion of felony, as a common person might do; because that
against the one an action of false imprisonment would lie, but not against the
King ( for the subjects liberty must be preserved) and by the Statute of Win:
1. cap. 15. whosoever shall deteyne subjects in prison, who are bayleable by
law, shall be grievously amerced.

And to show that it was thought an unmeete thing to leave power in the
Ordinaries to commit subjectes to prison, although they contemned their decrees
never so much, appears partly by the statutes of 27. Hen. 8. ca. 20. and 32.
Hen. 8. ca. 7. which were made after the revocation of the former statute of 2.
Hen. 4: by which latter statutes power is given to two Justices of peace, or to
some of the Honorable privy Counsel, upon certificate of the Ordinary, to
commit such offenders to prison, who should contemn the decrees of the
Ordinary: denying to the Ordinary, that made the decree, that he should have
any such power to commit the subjects to prison: and in 5. Eliz. ca. 23. which
statute, not allowing Excommunicate persons to be imprisoned by any
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, limits by very special manner, how they shall be
apprehended by the te^porall power. For although the Bishop of Rome uses two
swords, the spiritual and temporal; yet the common laws of England, and the
Parliament in diverse ages, thought not so meet, for the Bishopps or
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in England to use two swords, but according to
the Register, Regia potestas sacro-sanclae Ecclesiae d^^sse non deb^t.

2 Touching the second part (wherein he was, to prove that the statute of 2.
Hen. 4. cap: 15: which first gave authority to the Ordinaries to imprison
subjects, or to set fines on them, and force them to accuse themselves upon
their own oaths, was procured by the Popish Prelates in the time of darkness)
he said that the very Act it self did very plainly show it; it being thus;
And where it is showed to the King, on the behalf of the Prelates and Clergy
of England etc. And that the same was procured to suppress the gospel, which
then began to spring or revive, both the body of the Act, and the book of Acts
and Monuments written by M. Fox, and other Chronicles do show it plainly; for
that those persons, whom they termed heretics, preached in those days
against the Sacrament of the Church, which was their Mass. And that the said
Statute of 2. Hen: 4. cap. 15. was procured by the Prelates, with out assent of
the Commons, thus much appears by the Records of the Parliament, remaining in
the Tower.

Excellentissimo ac gratiosissimo Principi, Domino nostro Regi, Ex-rotulo
Parliamenti, de an. 2. H. 4. Petitio cleri c^ntra hereti^^s.

(...)


supplicatur, ex part v^stroru^ humilium oratorum, prelatorum et cleri regni
veslr^. Angliae, quod cu^ fides catholica super Christu^ sundata, et per
Apostolos suos, et Ecclesiam etc. rehearsing all the words of the Act. Qu^s
quidem petitiones prelatorum et cleri superius express^tas dominus u^ster Rex,
de cons^nsu magnatum, et alioru^ proceru^ r^gni sui in presenti perliamento
existe^tiu^ concessit, et in singulis iuxta forma etc: wherein the Commons are
not mentioned. And it is the more likely that the Commons gave no assent to
this statute of 2. Hen: 4. both for that in the Parliament rolls of the same
year of 2. Hen. 4. in the Tower, there is to be seen the Petition of the
Commons to the King, thus.

Item prient les comens, depuis q'uill est contenu en la grande chartre, The
Petition of the Commons.
quenul sera areste ne enprisone sans responce, ou due process de la ley,
quell chartre est conferme en charmi perlement, et ore ils supplient, que si
aucun soit areste ou enprisone encontre la form d^l charte avaunt dict q^ ill
veigne, et appierge a sa responce, et preigne son Judgment, sicome le ley
demand, anssi q^ null tiel areste ne imprisonement soit trait en^ custom, en^
destruction de la ley du Roy. Whereto the King answered.

Soient les statutes eila comen ley tenus; As also for that the Prelates had not
long before procured an other act against the Lolards, The answer of the King.
in Anno 5. Rich: 2. cap: 5. without assent of the Commons; as appears by the
Parliament Rolls, in the Tower, of anno 6. R. 2. which is thus. Item supplient
les comens, q^ come^ un estatute suit sait en darrein perlement, en ces
paroles: Ordone est en cest perlement, q^ Comissions du Roy soient directes a
viscountes et autres ministres du roy, ou autres suffisantz persons, apreset
selon que les certificates des prelates eut affair in chancellerie, du temps
en temp^s, touts tiels precheurs c^lour fautours mamtenours. etc.

La quel ne fuit unque assente, ne grante per les Comens, mes ce q^ fuit parle
de ce* fuit sans assent de lour q^ celi estatue soit an^a ati car il nestoit mi
lour intent iustisiez ne obliger lour ne lour successorers as Prelates plus q^
lour auncesstres nont este en temps passez.

Resp: Il plest au R^^.

And it is also reported by M. Fox in the said book of Acts and Monuments,
that the same Act of 2. Hen. 4. ca. 1^. was procured without assent of the
Commons; Act. and Mo fol 539.
and that the Commons did greatly repyne at it from time to time, many godly
men writing against it, some of them terming it a bloody law, and a cruel
law. And because the Prelates (out of the words of that law which gave them
power to imprison some suspected of heresy, until they should canonically
purg themselves) did streinedly force subjectes without any accuser to accuse
themselves, therefore the title of that Act is set down in the book of Acts
and Monuments, the statute Ex officio; Act. and Mo^. fol. 481.
at which time it was not commonly used to give titles to Acts of Parliament.

And, to show how much the subjectes misliked that kind of proceeding,
appears by several Petitions of the subjectes to the Kings of the Realm,
and to the house of Parliament, by the statute of 25. Hen. 8. cap. 14. by which
statute it is said, that the proceeding by the oath Ex officio, to force a man
to accuse himself, is contrary to the rule of right and good equity, and
contrary to the laws of England, and unreasonable that, upon suspicion
conceaved upon the fantasye of the Ordinaries, men should be forced to answer
etc. And therefore they then revoked, and made void the statute of 2. Hen. 4.
cap: 15.

And to prove, that, according to the opinion of that Parliament house, the
oath Ex officio is against the laws of England both Ecclesiastical and
temporal, and against the rule of Justice and good equity, he said, that by
the laws of England (if a subject had been cyted, by the Ordinary or
Ecclesiastical Judge, pro salute ai^ae, which is the oath Ex officio, to
accuse himself) a Prohibition did lie at the common law, and an attachment
against the Ordinary, if he did proceed in that case contrary to that
prohibition* as appears in Eliz. H. fol. 42. and the statute of 2. H. (...)
made soon after the said statute of 2. Hen. 4. (giving warrant to grant a
prohibition to the Ordinary for default of a libell) does cross the proceeding
by oath Ex offi^i^; where he is forced to a libell, as appears 4. ^d. 4. fol.
3^. and Fitz. H. fol. 43. etc.

And by the words of the statute of 42. Edw. 3. cap. 3. (which was made before
those statutes procured by the Prelates, when Ordinaries had no power to
imprison subjectes) it is expressed, in what manner the proceeding should be
against subjectes upon accusations, thus viz. It is assented and accorded, for
the good government of the Commons, that no man be put to answer, without
presentment before Justices, or thing of Record, by due process, and writ
original, according to the old law of the land; And if any thing be done from
henceforth to the contrary; it shall be void in law and holden for error; wherein
it is worthy the nothing, that it is said according to the old laws of England.

And to prove the old law of England to be so, the ordinary case of daily
experience, touching the challenge of Jurors, does sufficiently declare. For if
the Iuror be challenged for kindred to either of the parties, or for want of
freehould, the Iuror shall answer upon his oath, to clear that matter; because
it touches not the Iuror in loss or credit: but if the challenge do tend to
touch the Iuror any way in his credit, or his loss, he shall not be forced,
(...). Edw. 3. fol. 2.
upon his oath, to answer, although his answer might tend to further Justice;
quia nemo tenetur prodere s^ipsum, as is ruled 49. Edw. 3. fol. 2. And the case
of wager of law, which is allowed to the defendant in no criminal case, which
might bring imprisonment to the party by the course of the common law as in
trespass etc: but only in debt and detinewe: and the statute of Magna Charta
(...). 28. inacting, that no Bailife shall put a man to his open law, nor to an
oath, upon his own bare saying, without faithful witnesses brought in for the
same, to^doth to like effect: and S. Edward Cook, in his argument made in
Slades Case, said well, that in criminal causes ( iuramentu^ in propria causa
est inventio diaboli ad detrudendum animas miserorum in infernum) according to
whose saying it appears, that when those oaths were used by the parties
accused, by the border laws between England and Scotland, those oaths did
bring no furtherance to the truth, but manifest perjury every day; as was
confessed by all that knew the practice there: and therefore that manner of
trial was soon rejected.

And to prove it against Justice and good equity, he said that this oath Ex
officio, to force a man in a criminal cause to accuse himself, was (he
thought) directly against the rule of the law of God. For it is said in Deuteronomy.
cap. 19. 15. that one witness shall not arise against a man for any trespass, or
for any sin, or for any fault that he offe^deth in; but at the mouth of two
witnesses or.3. witnesses shall the matter be established. Which rule is
confirmed under the Gospel, as appears Math: 18.16. 2. Cor. 13.1. where it
is said, In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word stand; and
Christ said to the woman accused of adultery, where be thine accusers? etc. But
without any witness or accuser to establish the matter, upon the enforced oath
of the party, has no coherence with the rule of Gods law, which should be a
direction to all Christian Princes in making of their laws, we being now the
people of God the Jews being cut of; the Judgments being now the judgments of
God, and not of men alone.

But here may be objected, that by the laws of England one witness is
sufficient: to which he answered, that the Jurors being all sworn to try the
particular matter in fact, wherewith the party defendant is charged, may well
supply the want of one witness, being 12 persons in different, without any
affinity to either party, who better know the witnesses then the Judge, and
may perhaps know the cause in question, as well as the witness: which kind of
trial is so behouefull for the subjectes, as it may prevent much wrong and
oppression from high authority, if the Jurors be just and faithful persons,
as they ought to be; and their verdit also may be redressed by attaint, if they
should do wrong therein: which writts of attaint, and error, are part of the
subjectes inheritance.

Also this oath Ex officio has no coherence with the law of nature. For, as
Aristotle says, natura est conservatrix sui, as is said in 40. Edw, 3. fol. 2:
but this tends to a man's own overthrowe; and it has no coherence with the
laws of Nations, as he gathered by the writing of Traiane the Emperor, being
a very wise and just man; who writing to Pliny the second, his lieutenant of
some Provinces in Asia minor, for direction in his government, against those,
who at that time were opposite to his religion, says thus (Sine authore certo
propositi libelli nulli crimini locu^ habere debent; nam et pes^imi exempli,
nec nostri seculi est) According to which direction, Felix the governer of the
Jews under the Emperor, Acts 23.35.
when Paul the Apostle was brought before him, said to Paul; that he would
hear him, when his accusers were come; holding it as unjust, without an
accuser, to charge him.

And it is much worse then auricular confession; because that is voluntary,
this by constreint; that to be concealed, this to be revealed to the parties
shame; that to induce pardon, this to induce punishment to himself. And where
an oath should be the end of strife, this oath Ex officio is often times the
beginning of strife; yea it has been so hateful as some Martyrs have written
against it, as a bloody law; and therefore not without just cause, that the
whole estate assembled in Parliament in an. 25. Hen. 8. held it not to be
agreeing with the rule of right and equity, and to be contrary to the laws of
England, and therefore revoked the said statute of 2. Hen. 4. and did thereby
limitt another form of proceeding against persons accused or suspected, thus,
viz. upon Indictment or two witnesses at the least (according to Gods law) with
words of restreint, not to proceed otherwise: since which time, no custom, or
color of prescription in the Ecclesiastical Courts, can take place against
that law, to uphold the oath Ex officio in case of heresy.

And touching fines, by the statute of Articuli cleri cap. 1. by the Register
and by Fitzh. Natura brev. fo. 51. and 52. and by the statute of 15. Edw. 3.
cap. 6. it is so showed, that, by ancient Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, they
ought not to set fines of money upon subjectes, unles it were upon co^mutation
of penance; so as it need no further proof of that matter.

The third matter which he endeavored to prove, was, 10. Hen: 6. fo: 62. to be
the most high inheritance of the Kingdom, by which both King and subjects are
guided: Bra^^. fol. 5. cap. ^^.
and that without laws there would be nether King nor inheritance in England.
Which laws, by long continuance of time and good endeavor of many wise men,
are so fitted to this people, and this people to them, as it does make a sweet
harmony in the government; all things being as readily obeyed on the one part
which are agreeing to law, as they are willingly commanded on the other part
according to law: every officer, by the rule of the law, knowing the duties of
their places, as Sheriffs, Bayliffes, Stamf. fol. ^^.
Constables, Coroners, Eschetors; etc. the band of an oath, both for government
and obedience, being mutually made on each part.

For the laws in a common wealth are like the sinews in a natural body, by
which the hand, foot, and other parts of the body do readily move, by the
direction of the head; but if the hand, or foot, be forced above the strength
of the sinewe, it either takes away the use of that part, or else it makes it
a weak or halting member: so is it, if the laws be streyned against any part
of the common wealth, above it right, and natural strength, it will make that
part weak, or halting: and therefore it is excellently said in 8. Hen. 4.
fol. 19. in the com. fol. 236. and in the Case of Alton woods, 8. Hen. 4. fo.
19. com. fol. 236.
that the law admeasureth the Kings prerogative, so as it shall not extend to
hurt the inheritance of the subjectes on the on part: and as Bracton says,
nihil aliud potest rex in terris, cum sit Dei minister et vicarius, quam quod
de iure potest: quia illa potestas solius Dei est; potestas autem iniuriae
diaboli est, et non Dei; et cuius horum opera ^ecerit rex, eius minister est.

And the law does restrain the liberal words of the Kings grant, for the
benefit both of the King and the subjects, and to the great happiness of the
Realm; especially when the Judges are me^ of courage, fearing God; as is to be
proved by many Cases adjudged in these Courts of Kings Bench, and
Common Pleas; which Courts are the principal preservers of this high
inheritance of the law: whereof he rehearsed some few Cases on the part of the
King, and on the part of the subjectes diverse Cases; as in 45. Ass. p. 15.
where the King did grant to I.S. and his heirs, the manor of Dale, and all
the woods, and underwoods, and Mines within the said manor; yet Mines of gold
and silver did not pass: and in the 22. Ass 40. the King did grant to. I.S.
the goods and chattells of persons with* in Dale, qualitercunque damnatorum;
yet the goods of persons attainted of treason did not pass, for the benefit
of the King: because the same are so annexed to the crown, as by no general
words they may pass from the Crown, by the rule of law. And of late years
what great benefit has grown to the Kings and Queens of this Realm, upon
construction, according to the rules of law, of the Kings graunts, the case of
Alton woods, the statute lately made for confirmation of Charters granted to
the Citizens of London, and the many cases preferred by Tipper and his
fellows, do sufficiently prove.

And, on the other side, if any grant or Commission from the King does tend to
charge the body, lands, or goods of the subjects unlawfully, the Judges will
redress the same. For if the King grant the lands or goods of. I.S; that is
so manifestly against law, as it needs no proof.

But (he said) he would put such Cases as, being grounded upon prerogative,
have a show of good to the Common wealth, and yet are not allowable, because
the tend to charge the subject, without the assent of the subject: as the Case,
1^. Hen. 4. where the King did grant an office of measuring of cloth in
London to I. S. with a Fee to be received for the same measuring: and although
the office tend to further commutatiue Justice, whereof the power is in the
King for weight and measure; yet because this fee did tend to charge the
subject, without his assent, it was adjudged, by the learned Judges, upon long
debate, to be void: and the case of Protection, 39. Hen. 6. fol. 39. where the
King did grant a protection to A. B. his servant, quia prosecturus, for a
voyage to Rome, for service of the King and Common wealth for weighty causes,
to continue for three years; and yet it was disallowed by the Judges, because
it was for three years, where, by the rules of the law, it should be but for
one; and because there was no exception of dower, Assise, and quare impedit
which by law should have been excepted: and that protection did not bar the
subjects right, but only delayed his suite.

And in 3. Edw. 3: 14. Nort. Assise. 445. com. fol. 48. the King did pardon
I.S. the making of a bridge: and because the subjectes had interest in the
passage over that bridge: the Kings pardon was not sufficient, to discharge I.
S. from the making thereof. In the case of 42. Ass. 5. a Commission from the
King, under the great seal of England, was directed to A. and B. to take I. S.
and him imprison in the Castle of P. and to take his goods; which was done
accordingly by the Commisioners: and because it was done without any
inditment, or due course of law, the proceedings of the same Commissioners were
adjudged void.

The like case was 42. Ass. p. 12. Where, upon the Kings writ directed to the
Justices of laborers, I.S. was indicted for some thing not perteyning to the
Justices of laborers, and therefore adjudged void, they having no Commission so
to do. For although the Sheriff, or officer, cannot judge of the Kings writ,
but must execute it: yet the Judge may refuse to execute the same writ, when
it is against law, or impossible to be done, according to 1. Edw. 3. fol. 26.
and in the 1. and 2. Eliz. Scrogges his Case; 1. Ed. ^.^^.26.
where a Commission was awarded to some Judges, and persons of credit, to hear
the cause concerning the Office of exigent of London, which Scrogges did
challenge; and if Scrogges refused to submit himself to their order, to commit
him to prison: upon which Commission Scrogges was committed to prison; and he
was discharged, by the Judges, of his imprisonment, by writ of habeas corpus,
because his imprisonment was not lawful: which writs of habeas corpus are
usually granted in the said Courts of Kings bench, and Common pleas, thereby
to relieve the subjectes, which are many times in other Courts, and by some
Commissioners, unlawfully imprisoned: yea many times, although the Commissions
be grounded upon Acts of Parliament* as the Commission of Sewers, the
Commission of Banckrupts, and the Ecclessiasticall Commission: and many times
they grant Prohibitions to the Ecclesiastical Court, to the Admiral Court,
and to the Court of Requests, and other inferior Courts, when they exceed their
authority.

And many other Cases he would have put to prove those points, but that in a
former argument made by him in the court of Kings bench, against Monopoly
Patents of M. Darcie, Mich. 44. Eliz. all the Judges then seemed to yield the
same to the law, without any doubt, as he conceived; Fitz H.f. 31. H. 8. prohib.
which high inheritance of the law the Common wealth has always so preserved,
as without Act of Parliament it cannot be changed, as appears by the answer
of the Barons, when the Bishops sought to have the law changed, touching
children borne before marriage, although the marriage after ensued, to be held as
bastards: the LL. said, Nolumus leges Angliae mutari; and as is apparent by
book cases, where it is adjudged, that the King, by a non obstante may
dispense with a statute law, but not with the common law, nor alter the same as
is adjudged 49. Ass. p. 8. and Bosoms Case; nor put the subjectes from their
inheritance of the law, Bosoms Case Cook fol. 35.
as is 8. Hen. 4. fol. 19. which was always accounted one of the great
blessings of this land, to have the law the meat-yeard, and the Judges the
measurers. For, in all well governed Common wealths, Religion and Justice are
the two principal pillars, wherein the power of God appears; and many times
weak weomen do rule, and command many thousand strong men, touching their
lives, lands, and goods, without resistance; which the love and regard of
Justice procures.

verbatim the parts of the Ecclesiastical Commission, which he thought to be
against the laws of England, and liberties of the subjects; remembering first
to mark and consider, how, whereas the whole drift of the Act of Parliament.
1. Eliz cap. 1. was, to restore to the Crown the ancient jurisdiction over
the Ecclesiastical and spiritual estate, and, for that purpose, did give
power to the Ecclesiastical Commisioners, to execute the premises in the said
Act contained, for the correcting, and amending, and reforming of such
heresies, errors, schisms, contempts, and enormityes, as by the
Ecclesiastical laws might lawfully be reformed, according to the tenor and
effect of the said Letters Patents, this Commission is since enlarged, and how
it gives power to the Commissioners, to enquire not only of the permisses,
mentioned in the statute of 1. Eliz. cap. 1. but also of all offenses, and
contemps: against the statute of 1. Eliz. cap. 2. entitled, an Act for
uniformitie of Common prayer, and service of the Church, and administration of
the sacraments, and of all offenses, and contempts against these statuts
following, which were all made since anno 1. Eliz. viz. the statute of 5. Eliz:
ca: 1. entitled, an Act for the assurance of the Queens Majesty's power, over
all states and subjects, within her dominions; the statute of 13: Eliz: cap:
12. entitled, an Act to reform certain disorders, touching the Ministers of
the Church; the statute of 35. Eliz: cap: 1. entitled, an Act to reteyne her
majesty's subjects in their due obedience; the statute of 35 Eliz. cap: 2.
entitled, an Act to restreyne some Popish recusant to some certain places of
abode; the statute of anno. 1. Iacobi. entitled, an Act for the due execution
of the statutes against Jesuits, Seminaries, priests, recusants etc.

Also power is given to the Commisioners, or any three or more of them, not
only upon these penal laws, and upon every offense therein contained, but
also upon all seditious books, contempts, conspiracies, private conventicles,
false rumors or tales, seditious misbehaviours, and many other civil offenses
particulerly named in the letters pattens, to call before them all and every
offender in any of the premises, and all such, as, by them or any three or
more of them, shall seem to be suspected persons in any of the premises; and
every of them to examine, upon their corporal oaths, touching every or any of
the premises, which they shall object against them; and to proceed against
them and every of them, as the nature and quality of the offense or suspicion,
in that behalf, shall require; And to inquire of adulteries, fornications,
outrageous misbehaviours, and disorders in marriages, and of al other grievous
and great crimes, and offenses, within any part of the Realm, which are
punishable or reformable by the Ecclesiastical laws of this Realm, according
to the tenor of the laws on that behalf, or according to their wisdoms, and
discretions, or the discretions of any three of them.

The Commissioners, or any three of them, are further authorized, willed, and
commanded to use and devise all such good, lawful, reasonable, and convenient
ways, for the trial and searching out of all the premises and proceedings
therein, as by any three or more of them shall be thought most expedient, and
necessary.

They, or any.3. or more of them, have authority to order and award such
punishment to every such offender, by fine, imprisonment, censures of the
Church, or other lawful way, or by all or any of the said ways; and to take
such order for the redress of the same, as to the wisdoms and discretions of
any three or more of them shall be thought meet, and convenient.

For contempt in not appearance, or not obeying the decree of any three of
them, they have power to fine the^ at their discretio^s, and to commit them to
ward, there to remain, until, by any three of them, they shall be enlarged,
according to their discretions.

They have power to take recognizance of every offender; and suspected person,
as well for their personal appearance, as for the performance of such orders
and decrees, as to any three of them shall seem reasonable, and convenient in
that behelfe.

They have also power to command all and every sheriffs, Justices, and other
officers, and subjects within this Realm, in all places, as well exempt as not
exempt, by their letters and other process, to apprehend, or cause to be
apprehended, any person or persons, which they shall think meet to be
convented, and take such bonds for their appearance, as any three of them shall
prescribe, etc. or to committ them to prison.

They have power to execute the premises, notwithstanding any appellation,
provocation, privilege, or exemption; any laws, statutes, proclamations,
other grants, privileges, or other ordinances, which be or may seem contrary
to the premises, notwithstanding.

Upon which parts of the said Commission, being so indefinite without
limitation or restraynt, he noted, that if the Commission should be executed
according to the letter thereof; the subjects, notwithstanding any laws or
customs to the contrary, might be cited out of their own Dioces, yea from the
furthest part of the Realm, for any cause, or suspicion conceaved by the
Commissioners, or any three of them, and forced to attend the Commissioners,
where they will appoint, in time of harvest, or time of plague, with the danger
of a man's life: as he was forced to attend many weeks in danger of his life;
they refusing to delay the cause, until the term, upon any bail or bond. And
they may force any subject to appear, at what days and hours any three of
them shall appoint, for such matters sometimes, as are more proper to be heard
in other Courts.

And although the penalties of the statuts be never so great, as Praemunire,
Abiuration, forfeyture of lands and goods, whereof some offenses are by the
same statute limited to be tried only in the Kings bench, yet the party
suspected may be forced, by this Commission, to accuse himself upon his own
oath, upon such captious Interrogatories, as the wit of man can devise, when
there is neither accuser, nor libell of accusation: And that in many things
they may inflict what punishment any three of them shall think meet in their
discretions, and force men to perform such order as they shall make, by the
parties bond, before any order made: and that their judgments, or decrees
whatsoever, should not be subject to any writ of Error, attaint, or appeal:
and that they may devise means, at their own discretion, for the trial and
finding out of any the said offenses. Which kind of proceedinges how far they
do differ from the common laws of England, which is the inheritance of the
subjects, and what Iarres and harsh tunes they make in the sweet harmony
thereof, settled by so long continuance, with a most happy success, any wiseman
may see, without any inforcement from him; and how much of this they do daily
execute, he did leave to see it.

Only so much as came under his own view, he said, that, the last day of
Easter term, he moved at the Exchequer bar, for 20. persons, his Clients,
dwelling in Yorkeshyre; whereof some, as they told him, were very poor, who were
fined by the Ecclesiastical Commisioners for not appearing at their days
appointed, many of them to 30. pounds a piece, one only at ten, and all the
rest at twenty a piece, which was not salvo contenemento, according to the
statute of Magna Charta cap. 14. And one client, being an householder in
Fleetestreete, named William Goulder, prayed advise for his hard and close
imprisonment many days, with great Irons on him, by the Commissioners, upon
some suspicion conceaved by some of the Commissioners, that some person was hid
in his house; and was after freed without any conviction of his supposed
offense. And because the said Nicholas Fuller did except against the
Commissioners, as not competent Judges, in their own cause, of him and of his
argument, made against them at the Kings bench bar, they threatened to set
500. pounds fine on him, and to imprison him. And when (he finding their
proceeding by the oath Ex officio to vary from the Common laws, which he had
long time practiced) he said to them, it seemed to him, that he was in a new
world, or other Common wealth: thereupon they threatened to imprison him, if he
spoke one word more to the disgrace of the Commission.

Wherefore he held it strong, in his opinion (because his Majesty's Commission,
which they term High, is, by the true intent of the statute, only a Commission
executorie, but for so long time only as shall please the King, and is no
settled court for continuance for ever, as they would have it, comparing the
authority thereof with the Kings bench, and preferring it above it) that, in
all the parts and points above rehearsed, the Commission is not of force in
law, nor warranted by law, except some Act of Parliament do give it life.

And now touching the last and principal part of his division, viz, that no
Act of Parliament does give life Commission Ecclesiastical, in the parts above
mentioned, it is to be noted, that the Commission is founded only upon the
statute of an. 1. Eliz. cap. 1. and that this Act of an. 1. Eliz. neither does,
nor can give life to this Commission, by any right construction, in these
parts above rehearsed, but contrariwise does expressly abolish their
Jurisdiction to imprison subjectes, fine them, and force them to accuse
themselves, as repugnant to the Ancient Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, which,
by this Act, is restored to the Crown: and he hoped to make that point so
plain and apparent to all the hearers, that would attentively regard it, as
that they might be fully satisfied therein. For, besides the Book Cases, which
he meant to put, in that point, to prove his assertion, he said, that the title
in the Act of an. 1. Eliz. the preamble of the Act, and the matter preceding
the preamble in that Act, and the body of that Act, which gives power to the
Commissioners to execute the premises (by color whereof they challenge this
great power to imprison subjectes etc.) do all concur, by their being
rightly applied, to condemn and overthrowe these points of the Commission
Ecclesiastical, before spoken of and rehearsed by him, as unlawful, and
unjust.

The title is, an Act, restoring to the Crown the ancient Jurisdiction over
the Ecclesiastical and spiritual estate, and abolishing all foreign
Jurisdiction, repugnant to the same. What the ancient Jurisdiction over the
Ecclesiastical and spiritual estate is, he has sufficiently before declared,
and proved it to be that Ecclesiastical jurisdiction (viz. Keys or censures
of the Church) which was lawfully used in England, before the statute of 2.
Hen. 4. the uttermost whereof was, to lock men out of the Church by
excommunication, termed, the keys of the Church. Which statute first gave
power to the Ordinaries, to imprison subjects, to fine them, and force the^ to
accuse themselves by their own oaths, which was ever hateful to the subjects
of England.

And to prove plainly, that this Parliament of an. 1. Eliz. meant to abolish
that power to imprison subjectes, and force them to accuse themselves, the
matter precedent before the preamble does fully prove; for that, in this very
statute of an. 1. Eliz. the law makers, as wise framers of a Common wealth,
before they go about to annexe the ancient right Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
to the Crown, do by express words, at the request of the subjects, establish
and inact, that the statute of 5. Rich: 2 c^p. 5 and 2. H. 4. cap. 15. (which
did give authority to the Ordinaries to imprison, fine, and force the subjects
to accuse themselves, as above) and all and every branches, articles, clauses,
and sentences contained in the said several statutes, and every of the^,
should, from the last day of that Parliament, he utterly repealed, void, and of
none effect, any thing in the said several Acts, or any of them, contained, or
any other matter or cause to the contrary notwithstanding. So as the
imprisonment of the subjects, finyng of them, and forcing of them to accuse
themselves, being the matters, branches, and articles of those statuts,
howsoever they came into the power of the Clergy of England, by these statutes
or otherwise, being thought, by the Parliament, to be repugnant to the ancient
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical (as revera they are being a temporal sword) were
repealed, and made void by express words of this statute of anno 1. Eliz as
repugnant to the ancient Spiritual Jurisdiction.

And to make the meaning of the lawmakers more apparent, that they allowed
not, that any offenses should be tried by the parties own oath, but by
witnesses; as in the begi^ning of this statute of an. 1. Eliz. cap. 1. it does
abolish the oath Ex officio, by making void the statute of 2. H. 4. cap. 15.
which first gave life to that kind of proceeding; so in the end of the said
statute it adds this clause, And be it further inacted by the authority
aforesaid, that no person, or persons, shall be hereafter indicted, or arraigned
for any the offenses, made, ordained, revived, or adjudged by this Act, unless
there be two sufficient witnesses, or more, to testify and declare the said
offense, whereof he shall be indicted, etc. and the same witnesses, or so many of
the^ as shall be living, and within the Realm, at the time of the arraignement
of such persons so indicted, shall be brought forth in person, face to face,
before the party so arraigned, and there shall testify and declare what they
can, against the party so arraigned, if he require the same.

By which words since it is plain, that no offense, ordained or revived by that
statute, should receive trial, but by two witnesses brought face to face; that
they me^t not to give power, by any Commission grounded upon that statute, to
have the offenses of the subjectes (which touch so deep as Praemunire,
abiuration, and forfeiture of lands and goods) should be tried by the parties
own forced oath, against his will, without any witness or accuser, as this
Commission limitts; and yet it is pretended to be grounded upon this statute.
And therefore it were a most violent construction, and absurd, that the general
words in this statute, viz. to execute the premises according to the tenor and
effect of the letters patents, should reviue that by an intendment, which was,
by so plain words of all the assembly in Parliament, revoked and abolished,
as a most hateful thing to the subjectes of England, and of which they meant to
purge the Church and Ecclesiastical government. For that were to make one part
of the statute contrary to the other, and to construe the words of the law,
indefinitely set down, directly against the meaning of the law makers
plainly expressed by words; which Judges never did, nor, as he hoped, ever
would do.

And the title and preamble of the statute do further restrain the overlarge
construction of those general words, to execute the premises: because the
premises, being the ancient jurisdiction Ecclesiastical and spiritual,
purged from that temporal Jurisdiction, as above, is me^t to be restored only
over the Ecclesiastical and spiritual estate, and not over all the subjects
of the Realm; and because, in the preamble, the Commissioners, who are to be
named, are enabled, touching Ecclesiastical or spiritual Jurisdiction only,
to reform, correct, and amend all such heresies, errors, schisms, contempts,
etc: which by any spiritual or Ecclesiastical power, authority, or
Jurisdiction, might lawfully be reformed, and not all abuses of the common
wealth mentioned in their Commssion, or any abuse not proper to the
Ecclesiastical or spiritual Jurisdiction, whereof there are many named in
their Commission, which are temporal Jurisdictions, viz. to imprison and fine
subjects, and to execute laws upon the^; for that the spiritual law should
not meddle with that, for which there was remedy by common law, as is 22. Edw.
4. fol. 20. and the statute of 24. Edw. 1. cap: 1.

And to prove, that the titles and preambles of other statutes do many times,
in construction of statutes, restrain the general words of the same statuts
following, he put the case upon the statute of perjurie, anno. 5. Eliz. where
the words of the statute are, that every person and persons who shall commit
voluntary and corrupt perjury, shall forfeit twenty pounds. And because the
preamble and matter precedent touched witnesses only, therefore that penalty
is restreyned, by construction, to charge witnesses only therewith, and not
such persons as shall commit voluntary and corrupt perjury, in their own
cases. And so upon the statute of 7. Edward. 6. against Receivers, Bailiffs,
etc. although the words of that statute extend generally, to lay a penalty of
6. shillings 8. pence for every penny that receivours shall take unlawfully; yet
because the preamble of that statute touched only the Kings officers, It is, in
construction, restrained to take force against the Kings officers only, and
against none other receivers, or bayliffes.

And to conclude this point of the exposition of the words of the statute, he
did demand, why the exposition and construction of all statutes is left to the
Judges of the law, but for this cause, for that they are, and always have been
thought the most careful, judicious, and jelous preservers of the laws of
England? And is it not apparent, that, to uphold the right of the laws of
England, the Judges in ages past have advisedly construed some words of diverse
statutes contrary to the common sense of the words of the statute, to uphold
the meaning of the common laws of the Realm? as in the statute of 25. Ed. 3.
where it is said, that, non tenure of parcel shall abate the writ but for
parcel; yet if by the writ an entier manor be demanded, non tenure of
parcel shall abate the whole writ. And where, by the statute of Marlbridg ca.
4. it is prohibited, that no distress shall be driven out of the County where it
is taken, yet, if one manor extend into two Counties, there the distress may
be drive^ from one County into another County. And, upon the statute of
Prerogative, which touches the King, although the words be general, that the
King shall have the custody of all the lands of his tenant where part is
holden in Capite, yet if part of the lands of his tenant do descend to
several heirs, on the part of the Father, and on the part of the Mother,
there the King shall not have all the lands of his tenant, during the
minority of the heir; for that, in all these Cases, the great regard of the
rule and right of the common laws does control the general or common sense
of the words of those statutes.

And why then should this statute receive construction, by the Judges of the
law, contrary to the rule of all other statutes, to this effect, that by in
intendment gathered out of the general words of the Act, according to the
tenor of the say^ letters Pa^ents, there might be erected, in this common
wealth of England, a course of an arbitrarie government at the discretion of
the Commissioners, directly contrary to the happy long continued government and
course of the common laws of the Realm, and directly contrary to Magna
Charta: which if the statute of 24. Edw. 3. did so highly regard, as to make
void Acts of Parliament contrary to the same, it would, a fortiori, make void
all construction of statuts contrary to Magna Charta, which have no express
words, but an intendement or construction of words, with much violence to be
wrested to that end. And for such as would make such construction of the
statute, as that whatsoever should be contained in the letters Pattents should
be as a law; he would have them remember, that the King may make new letters
Patents for these matters (Ecclesiastical causes every day altering the same
in the penalties and manner of proceeding) and that, if the letter of the
statute should be purused, the King may change the Commissioners every day, and
make any persons Commissioners, being natural borne subjectes to the King,
although not borne in England: which were against the meaning of the Act; which
meaning of the Act is the life of the Act, and not the letter of the Act.

And, besides those former errors of the Commission before remembered, he said,
that he did not see, how, by color of the statute of 1. Eliz. which gave power
to the Commissioners to execute the premises contained in that Act, they
should enlarge their Patent to enquire of offenses contrary to other statuts,
made thirty or forty years, and more, after an. 1. Eliz. which then were not
dreamed of, nor meant to be any part of the premises contained in the said
statute of anno. 1. Eliz. and of other civil and temporal things, for which
if the Ecclesiastical court had held plea, a prohibition did lie at the common
law, according to the statute of 24. Edw. 1. cap: 1. and 22. Ed. 4. fol 20. and
in 13. Hen. 7: fol: 39. Brook and Fitzh. fol. 43. 22. Hen. 8. because, for the
same things, redress may be had at the common laws: and in 7. Hen. 8. fol.
181. the Bishops of the Convocation house, for meddling against Doctor Standish
for a temporal cause by him disputed before the LL. of the Council, were
adjudged, by all the Judges, to be in danger of Praemunire. But it will be
objected, that use is the best expositor of the statute: and then the
continuance of this Commission, since the statute of 1. Eliz. being above 40.
years, will prevail much; to which he answered, that long use, in a settled
court, makes it the law of the court; and the judgments in one Court are not
examinable in every other Court, or in any, but in the proper Court, by writ
of error, false judgment, or appeal: unless the inferior Court meddle with
that which is not within their power; and then in many cases their judgment is
coram non Iudice, and so void.

But this Ecclesiastical Commission is but a Commission executorie, by the
intent of the statute of 1. Eliz. to continue so long as should please the
Queen, or King, and no settled Court: and was mea^t at the first (as he
thought) to have continuance for a short time, to strengthen the authority of
the Bishops, against whose Ordination and installme^t the Papists did at the
first except. In which cases of things done by Co^missions, whatsoever the
Commisioners do, it is examinable in every Court where it shall come in
question, at any time after; whether that they have pursued their Commission or
authority, in due form or no. For their Decrees and sentences are not
pleadable in law, as Judgments in Courts of Record are: and the many years use
of the Commissioners, especially being Ecclesissticall men for the most part,
who know not the laws of the Realm, will give no enforcement to their
proceeding, if it be contrary to law.

But as in this Commission (touching causes of Praemunire, Abiuration, and other
Cases where the forfeiture of lands and goods do ensue) the Commissioners
Ecclesiastical say, they use not in these cases to force any subject to accuse
themselves, although the words of their Commission do extend so far; because
they see it apparently contrary to law and right: so the Judges may say the
like, that, in other cases of less penalty (to their knowledge) until of
late years, the Commissioners used not either to force any to accuse
themselves, or to imprison them for refusing so to do. And he did further
answer, according to the learning and difference which is taken in 44. Edw: 3.
fol: 17. that albeit the allowance in Oier of some Commssion may be of great
force to give strength unto the same Commission, yet the allowance, or
toleration in some other Court of such Commissions many times (if it after
appear to be contrary to law) binds neither the right of the King, nor
subjects, but that the Judges of the law may judge thereof according to law.

Upon all which matters he did conclude, that although the Commission be of
force to execute the ancient Jurisdiction over the Ecclesiastical and
spiritual estate; yet because this Commission, and the proceedings of the
Commissioners, did much vary from the course of (...) It is, in construction,
restrained to take force against the the old Common laws of England,
expressed in the statute of 42. Edw: 3. cap. 3. and from the ancient
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical; for that no pretended custom, against those
statutes which prohibit such kind of proceeding, can be of force; and
especially for that the Act of Parliament of 1. Eliz. did not give life or
strength to the said Commission, in those parts so varying, but the contrary:
therefore he did hold the proceeding of the Ecclesiastical Commissioners
against the subjectes, by force of the said Commission, in these points, to be
void, and erroneous, according to the words of the said statute 42. Edw. 3.
and did humbly pray, that his Clients may be discharged from their
Imprisonment, and the subjects freed from such erroneous proceedings, too too
heavy and burdensome to them.

FINIS.
Lev. 19.15. Ye shall not do uniustly in judgment. Thou shall not favor the
person of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty; but thou shall judge
thy neighbor justly.

Deuteronomy. 1.17. Ye shall have no respect of person in judgment, but shall hear
the small, as well as the great: ye shall not fear the face of man; for the
judgment is Gods.


