THE Famous History of Albions Queen.

Wherein is discoursed King Edwards Ielosie, Queen Katherines chastetie, the
Duke of Suffolkes loyalty, and the Barron of Buckinghams treachery.

blazon or coat of arms

Imprinted at London by VV. White for T. PAVIER, and are to be sold at his
shop in Corne-hill near to the Exchange at the sign of the Catte and
Parrettes. 1600.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL EDMUND MVILINEVX ESQVIER, health, happiness, and
prosperity.
THE general report (right Worshipful) of your gallant mind and noble
disposition, has imboldned me to pres^^^ this my worthless labor to the view
of your ingenious judgment: and the long desiers of my willing mind being now
set on fire with the fame of your bright renown, presageth my m^ses good
fortune; which although it be but barren, yet watered with the deaw of your
gracious acceptance, will hereafter be more fruitful. What the Story is, let
your wisdom conceit: my Subject is, The Virtues of a chaste Queen, and the
loyalty of a faithful Subject; the triumphs of an honorable mind, shrouded
under the habit of a ielous King. Accept it (sweet M^^^tialist) with a
favorable countenance, and my hopes are advanced. After the thundering alarums
of dreadful War, Soldiers will sometime recreate themselves with pleasant
discourses: be you then, I beseech you (right Worshipful) a kind Patron to an
unworthy wit, that I may say unto my muse, Happy is thy chance, and fortunate
thy proceedinges.

By your diuoted and humble welwiller till death. R. G.

THE Famous History of ALBIONS QVEENE.
CHAPTER. 1. How King Edward grew ielous of Queen Katherine, through the
flattery of the Barron of Buckingham.
ABout three hundred years before the royal name of great Plantaginet
possessed the imperial Diadem of this Maiden Land: in which golden age, there
reigned as then one Edward, surnamed the Senior, a Prince of most excellent
wisdom: but yet in the first entrance of his government, crossed with many
strange calamities through disloyal actions of false subjects.

This Edward was not any of those royal Edwardes, which lived since the
Normayne Conqueror made England happy by his lawful claim, but one linially
descended from the Roman Emperors, who in the spring time of his blooming
youth, took to wife a most wise and virtuous Queen, beautified with many
singular good guiftes of nature and princely qualeties, beseeming so worthy a
Lady: which Queen Katherine (for so was she called) altogether employed a
dutiful care to adorn and set forth her husbands Princely house and Scepter,
with surpassing glory and rich renown of virtue: and besides that, she so
worthily defended her own honor against a number of loose Loueres, which
daily practiced the conquest of her chastetie.

But now her betrothed husband King Edward, being troubled diverse ways with
the hurly burlies of his Kingdom, nothing at all solaced his mind in the
company of his virtuous Queen, by which he grew in mistrust of her chastety,
greatly fearing least others should love that, which himself liked: or that
she favored that, which he falsely suspected, his telous mind never rested
satisfied: partly of himself led with fond belief, but chiefly incensed
through the faythles falsehood of one George de Combria, surnamed the Barron of
Buckingam, being advanced from low and poor parentage to the kings Court, and
not only made one of his privy counsel, but placed in all digneties next
unto his person.

This proud Barron, envying the honor of Queen Katherine, closely stuffed
the Kings conseated head with false reports, and as it were coniured the
sperit of I closie into his mind, against the good and gracious Princess:
which unjust occations of grief being settled, and unkindness so deeply graued
in his heart, that never after it could be raced out by any means whatsoever.

King Edward being thus suncke into the bottom of despair, fetched many
grievous sighs, and often in great sorrow of heart would breath forth this, or
such like lamentations.

Oh my untrusty Wife and Lady! wherefore have thou wounded thus my hidden love,
and enforced me to complain of thy treacherous infidelity? Thou have engaged
my honor, discharged my person from renown, and possessed dishonor to my
Scepter. Oh! I lance forth into the gulf of dolorous distress. My marshall
staff of prowess is broken in pieces, and I am led into voluntary
servitude, deceitfully bereft from the freedom of my nuptial life, and
sacrefized a slave into the hands of traiterous varlets.

In this manner many a day King Edward fed his ielous mind with vain
immaginations, casting him self from the lofty mountain of passed joys, into
the bottomless pit of present woe. So on the other side, the Barron of
Buckingam, being hardoned in shameless audacities, incountred him with a new
onset, to diet his smell with a quicker scent: and so espying a time to play
with the sword of sedition, he in presence of many of King Edwardes Lords,
vomited out this wrongful accusation that follows.

If protesting of loyal duty to your worthy Majesty, or floods of incessant
tears distilling from the cundets of my sorrowful eyes, may make perfect show
of a Subjects honest mind, as yet never blemished with the breach of
dishonestie, or ever touched or found guyltie of traiterous crime: in regard of
which true obedience (most mighty Prince) account my speeches for a verity,
and nearely look into the wrongs of your Marriage bed, which ignorance has
heretofore coutched up in secrecy: For beit known, that the mighty Duke of
Suffolk, an ancient enemy unto your Crown and dignity, is familiarly crept
into secret favor with Queen Katherne your honorable Spouse, who under
shadow of serviceable duty, bereaueth your Majesty from the fruit of true
continency, and covers your nuptial bed with a strayned mantle of black
infamy: Oh what a grief is this unto the souls of us, which entirely love
your Majesty, whose lives be wholely consecrated to your good fortunes. It is
not spite that inforceth me to defame the reputation of your royal Queen,
unto whom I stand bound in all humble service: nor any hate, nor proffered
miuryes, does inflame my mind to blemish the good Duke of Suffolkes fame with
immortal ignobilletie, but love and duty to my Prince and country: wherefore
(most noble King) clear your understanding, and weed from your Court such
treacherous deceauers, that your life be not suddenly intrapped, and we
unfortunately deprived of a wise and puisant Prince. And to conclude, if I
George de Cambria Barron of Buckingam, be disproued or polluted with the breach
of dishonesty, an vtterer of false speeches, or be found a flatterer, or one
that hunteth after Princely favor, proudly aspiring after dignetyes and
promotions, then let me perish, and like a traitor be thrown out as an open
shame unto the world: otherwise, knit and bind me to your Majesty in the fast
bond of loyallty, and have the reward of a faithful subject.

When the Barron had thus inchaunted King Edwards ears, his head burned more
hotter with the heat of ielosie then before: a dissease so incurable, that
being once entered into the mind, never rests till it penitrateth into the
secret deapth of the heart. The King thus caught in a fools net, neclected
honest truth, and was choked with the sweet baight of flattery: and being
unable to discharge the boiling heat of his stomach, with exstreame outrage
called for the Lord high Marshall of England, and commanded him to take a
strong Garrison of best tried marshall Soldiers, and to apprehend the Queen,
and the Duke of Suffolk, and keep them both in safe custody, until he knew
his further pleasure: which sharp commandment was presently put in execution
by the Marshall, who in heart greatly lamented the dishonor of so virtuous a
Queen. But now the King like one being scandalizde by his wives infidelity,
departed into his chamber, where many a day he secluded him self from all
company, except the wicked Barron, which continually increased his Ielosie: in
which hell of life, we will leave him for a space, and speak of the Queens
extremity, being imprisoned under the Lord high Parshals guard.

CHAP. 2. How the three Earls, of Westmerland, Sommerset, and Durham, came to
visit Queen Katherine, being in Prison: and what passed betwixt them.
THe Duke of Suffolk seeing himself so wrongfully imprisned, and such false
accusations laid against the honor of his reputation, was stricken into such a
sudden amaze, that he could not outwardly bewray his sorrow, but as it were
inwardly bleed tears of blood, to clear his conscience before the immortal
Majesty of God for such a crime.

On the other side, the noble guiltless Queen, oppressed with like woe and
mortal mishappe, beholding her self a spectacle of dishonor to the world,
although before the supernall Judge most clear and perfect in conscience,
without either stain or spot of defamation: yet being perplexed plexed with
sundry thoughts of grief, procured by the furious frowns of her Husbands
hate, in the time of her imprisonment, writ these verses upon the walls with
the blood of her marriage finger.

The spightfull Barrons cursed flattery,
Has wronged Queen Katherines spotless chastetie:
And leueld out his darts of lasting shame,
Against the princely honors of her fame.
But Truth in time, shall conquer Enuies will,
Where Faith shall spring, and brightly floorish still:
Pack hence Despair, sweet Joy come ease my smart,
For constant Faith does harbor in my heart.
My Love is true, my spousall Promise just,
Not staind with any crime of lawles lust:
Then princely EDWARD, cease thy cruel hare,
For Falsehood wrongs my noble fame and state.
Dear Spouse, despise not thus thy constant Queen,
Whose loyalty does glister bright and green:
If ever you took pleasure in my youth,
Let sound belief be witness of my truth.
No sooner had the Queen finished these bloody lines, but there came into the
Prison to comfort her, three grave Counselors of King Edwards Court, whom she
did most lovingly entertain: and after some conference passed betwixt them,
she most kindly kissed her Husbands lively Picture, which as then hanged about
her neck by a fair chain or rundle of Gold, pouring out many bitter tears,
to the wonderful grief and admiration of all that beheld her: the which being
done, she humbly desired pardon of the Lords, to use some words in the defense
of her chastetie, so that she might not abuse their patience: and as she having
an innocent and guiltless heart, so she might freely discharge her conscience,
and clear her self from all those unjust accusations laid against her.

This her virtuous request so highly pleased the three Lords, that they
presently consented to give her free authority openly to honest her honorable
and ancient credit. The harmeles Queen in a most seueere and bold
countenance, with sundry taire amiable syrtes in her checkes, her brows beset
like the majesty of Diana, her white iuorte trembling hands like the driven
snow, her body even framed and fashioned of the virgin wax, spoke as follows.

If unmeasurable grief of heart (Right honorable Lords) or the noble blood of
my predecessors, may be sufficient to draw melting pity from your minds, I
do not doubt but your wisdoms will account the accusation of the wicked
Barron to be unjust, which he has oppressed me withal, who daily seeks by
flattery, to cut the sweet verdure, and tender greenesse of my young years:
therefore (most noble Lords) for pitties sake, arm me from his hurtes,
defend and guard me from his dreadful conspiracies, succor and support me
with honorable justice: for he does assault me with misery, he does usurp
tirannicall villainy against me, he seeks the overthrow of the Seigniorie of
our Kingdom, he sets a deuiston betwixt my Lord and me, and does prepare an
entrance for himself: But I wish a separation of soul, with a thousand
torments of body, if ever I ouerturned my spousall chastetie, the which I have
always carefully kept, and without violation preterued it to my dear Lord and
Husband. If then these my words may mollefie your hearts, to plead in my
behalf to Kind Edward that he may with discretion consider my ^nn^cencie,
(...) repute you merciful men, and sound searchers (...): wherefore, have
mercy upon me I say, have mercy upon a wronged Queen, traitorously abused.
And in speaking this, tears so abundantly flowed from the cundets of her eyes,
that she was forced to be silent.

These words of Queen Katherine, so grieved their hearts, that they were all
persuaded of her virtuous life, and that her honorable fame was injured
through the bengance of the aspyring Barron, who by flattery had perverted
King Edwards noble mind: therefore to comfort the grieved Queen, the worthy
Earl of Sommerset, in the name of all the rest, spoke as follows.

Your modesty (most noble Queen, quoth he) shall enforce us to prostrate our
selves before his Majesty, that he may favorably infranchize your lipertie,
and take you again to his good grace and well likeing, whose head (no doubt)
is fraughted with many fantasies against you: but yet since humility does
illustrate and advance your cause with open truth, resolve this a comfort to
your princely mind, that your enemy which has so mightily abused your
reputation, can never escape due punishment: and the Gods (I know) will never
forgive so vile a wickedness: As for example. Camera the Queen of Egypt,
having a hundred thousand sorrows lodged in her chaste mind, being by rigorous
justice condemned to be torn a sunder by wild Horses, and so made a dolorous
example unto the world: But now mark the judgments of God upon the vile
betrayers of this virtuous Queen: for even in the hour of her death, an host
or army of angry Waspes with the sharp stinges in their tails, in open view
destroyed and subverted her enemies: an exployte of worthy warning against all
false pertured accusers, and sudden severity against such as exercise by
tyrranic all fury, to flatter Princes ears.

Let not me forget the noble Egyptian Panteron, which made a law, that
whosoever vowed a false oath, should be led and slain as a Caulfe in the
shambles, his skin fleade of, his head set up as a sign of a murderer, a
rauisher of holy chastety, and his corpse thrown to the kings Hounds to be
devoured.

Infinite examples might be remembered, amongst the radiant flourishing Ladies,
that have been inspired with excellent guiftes of virtue. I could discourse
manifold warnings: but chiefly I will prefixe before your eyes the misery,
tears, and unmeasurable forrowes of Lady Aelana, a paragon and mirror of true
continency, whose portion was vexation and vnrestfulnesse, cruelly bereft from
chaste integrety, and renowned honor: but such was the proof of her rare and
exquesite virtue, by the favorable Gods, that greedy Bears (as Lieftenants of
Justice) deuowred her enemies.

Thus, if right were not mayntayned by immortal means, violence,
dissimulation, and deceitful flatterers, would flourish amongst mortal men, to
the subuertion of Kingdoms, inquiatations of Kings houses, tirrable cries in
judgment seats, destruction of Cities, and ouerturning of common wealths:
wherefore (most honorable Princess) if the righteous honesty of your cause be
builded upon a sure rock, mercy shall be gained, malice vanquished by modesty,
and thraldom deprived by liberty: thus resting our selves with this
resolution, till King Edwards mind and pleasure be further known herein.

After this kind promise pronounced by the good Earl of Sommerset, the Queen
pulled from her golden locks certain sumptious pearls, and rich jewels,
hanging in most beautiful brightness, and gave them to the Earl of Sommerset,
saying. I do not (right honortable Lord) impart these guyftes as a bribe
covertly to balance my cause, but as a proof of my good will, and a requital
of your pains, in visiting me thus in my miseries: which if they be graciously
accepted, I shall think my self most highly honored.

No sooner were these speeches finished, and thanks given for the Queens
gentle Rewards, but the Nobles departed the Prison, and conueiged them selves
into a secret Chamber, where every one delivered his opinion, measuring out a
direct means for her enlargment: all which proceeded of true love, and firm
belief of her chastetie. But after many consultations, with a general
consent, they concluded to write unto the King, not only to alter his
discontented mind, but to discover the falsehood and flattery of the wicked
Barron.

The Counsels Supplication to King Edward.
IF unfeigned affections which loyal Subjects bear to the Commonwealth of
England, or the true chastetie of your Queen unjustly wronged by flattery,
may move you (most excellent Prince) to remember the holy vow of Wedlock,
where your inseparable loves were joined together, and of two persons made but
one body; we assure our selves then, that your virtue and wisdom will lenefie
the honorable cause of your nuptial Spouse, and gather these vnioynied
members into right course again: For why should your Grace be dismembered,
having all the parts of natural proportion redefied in your person? Why
should you make your felfe a poynting stock of infamy to foreign enemies,
and a domestical contempt to your own Subjects? Let natural regard persuade
you, to drive out these pernicious poisons, which flattering Subjects have
lodged in your breast, inchaunting you with incurable Ielosie; which except you
speedely reform, your Royal estate may fall into present ruin. These dangers
considered, lies you upon speedily to frequent the company of your chaste
Queen, whose honorable undefiled foote-steppes we have made good trial of,
to the hope of your favor, her speedy delivery, and a just discharge of our
duties.

This Supplication received by the King, could nothing at all prevail to
enlarge her servitude: for a little before, the wicked Barron had presented to
King Edward a Gold-smithes daughter of London, named Casiope; a Damsel of a
lewd behavior, yet beautiful and passing amorous, who with her flattering
smiles so entangled his eyes, and bewitched his fancy in such sort, that he
delighted only in her company, wholly changing his ancient love from his
loyal Queen, thinking all times too long, till the tender thread of her life
were cut off, which Virtue before time, had so honorably spunne.

King Edwards mind being thus obscured with thick fogges of flattery, and
overwhelmed into a pernicious gulf of darkness, his disease of Ielosie
proved more incurable: which could neither be helped through the earnest love
of his Queen, nor persuaded through the long service of learned Counselors.

Oh, it is a world to behold, how flattering deceivers can temper deslicate
drinks for every man's appetite, stop wisdoms ears by false inchauntments,
and subvert true conscience by wrongful insinuation. The King on the other
side, mistrusted not vulgar reports of populer men, neither the overthrow of
his Kingdom by such a de^ision, nor regarded the patient mind of his virtuous
Queen, called for certain of his privy Counsel: who being comde before him,
he gave them this sharp ediet for the arraignement and sentence against Queen
Katherine and the Duke of Suffolk: the tenure of the Kings words were as
follows.

If wild Iuie (my noble Lords) ruinate the walls of my House, reaching
within the windows of my secret Chamber, were it not necessary to be plucked
up: If in pleasant Gardens one spreading Weed disorder all the other
odoriferous Flowers, is it not requisite to have it destroyed: And although the
rare beauty, and excellent orniamentes of my Queen might easily inflame
simple mind, to believe her feigned holiness: yet one filthy stayne
blemisheth all the rest. One wrintle in Apelles tinsell, blurred the costly
Tables of Bacchus. Does not one unsavory corner pester a whole House? One
lothfome odoure overcome many precious Oyntmentes? Why are you then my Lords,
so blinded with her deceitful practices, plagued with her desembling words,
and alured with her pestilent poisons? What, do you repute her a demie God? Do
you think her an Angel of heaven? Is she twice blessed, and my self a thousand
times accursed? I swear by the honor of my Scepter, to punish her lewd life
in such a manner, that never after the black clouds of her shame, may obscure
the glory of my Kingdom.

Let it not therefore (most noble Lords) be imagined, that I can be overcome
by any man's flattery, or my wits so lightly carried away, to be deceived
without good and due proof: all which great injuries to my person, impeachment
to my Kingdom, and wrong to my Subjects, shall be follows with seueere
judgment: therefore, I charge you upon your duties, as you hope to win the
garland of my favor, to prosecute my determination: which is, the desertfull
fall of my untrusty Queen, and the confusion of her proud minnion the Duke of
Suffolk. And in saying this, like one wholly bent to a resolute will, not
staying for any answer, he departed from his Lords, and left them every one
sodaynely surprysed with grief, ready to cast them selves headlong into the
desartes of despair: yet durst they not by any means seek to contradict his
will, but presently to perseuecre in this sinister judgment.

CHAP. 3. How the Queen and the Duke of Suffolk were arraigned and condemned
of adultrie, through false witnesses, and what after happened.
THe very next morning after King Edward had given charge for their
arraignment, were they called forth before certain of the honorable Lords of
the privy Counsel, and were tried upon the proof of their accusation: where,
the wicked Barron of Buckingam, with two other bace Gentlemen of the Kings
Court, did swear by the immortal powers of heaven, that the filthy fact of
adultrie was committed between Queen Katherine and the Duke of Suffolk,
against the honor of his Majesty's person.

After which detestable oath falsely protested, the good Earl of Sommerset
stood up in open audience, and with a dischearefull countenance, spoke as
follows.

Oh you wretched betrayers of Innocent blood (quoth he) although they taste the
bitter to^mentes in this world, yet I fear not but they will shortly wander
to that celestial Paradise, from whence will descend fiery vengance upon your
heads. Oh you Devils and Feendes of impiety, woe worth the time that ever you
attempted so vile a perjury: for you have taken a virtuous Queen from us, a
Queen that is the merrour of true continency, and only pattern of a
constant woman: the like clamor and pitiful lamentation was in the whole
Country round about. Then in the midst of which sorrowful moan, the Duke
of Suffolk desired the Counselors and Judges, that he might utter some
speeches in his own behalf, and likewise to discharge his conscience of the
vile act his accuser had laid against his life: his speeches were in this
manner delivered.

I am not ignorant (right Honorable assembly) that this my tender body clothed
with Innocence, must shortly be discharged from the prison of this world, and
must take my journey up to heaven for true protection, for this life is nothing
but a wandering pilgrimage of woe, a merciless sea, which often times vomiteth
us into the mouth of prying Pirates, dashing us upon many dangerous Shipwracks:
and now since my duty tyeth me to solemnize an honorable memory of this
aflicted Queen, deliver out a true discharge of her chastetie, and a
preservation of mine own honesty: For if ever I presumed such a deed against
the majesty of her worthy person, let this Ghost of mine be delivered a
pasture for infernal woormes to gnaw upon; or, if my senses had been so
arrogantly disposed, her virtues might have easily kilde my desiers, yea and
disclosed the same, to my utter ruin and confusion. But I see my proffered
diligence like a trusty Servant, proffered to her commandment, has brought
this woe upon us both: therefore, if her fame be brought in question through my
misusage, or if the proud Barron enuiously thirsting for my blood, has thus
wrongfully damnified my gracious Princess, let a doble death for her
deliverance, be laid upon my life: let my sorrows be twice imbrewed, to
deminish her pains: let the ransom of her pictie be laid upon my body, a
grave and pit to finish up her sorrows.

Now this I speak as a witness of my last will, having enjoyed this world
twenty six years, sufficiently proouing the vanities thereof, and now
willing to resign this life to a more better hope: and as my young forepassed
life is free from stain, so will I never blush nor hide my face, as one
suspected, or blotted with any such crime, of which I am now condemned of.

With these words (pronounced by the Duke of Suffolk) was the Earl of
Sommerset deprived of speech, and for the inward grief which swelled in his
breast, he could not utter any one word: humane sorrow powered down from his
eyes abundant streams of tears, manifesting the good will and true affection
he bore to truth and justice, his soul grecued that true honor nursed up to
ripe age, should in a short moment be delivered to a cruel and most untimely
death.

But the Earl of Westmerland (which as then presented the Kings person)
having somewhat a more cheerful heart, stood up in the Judgment seat, and
spoke as follows.

Most gracious Queen (quoth he) and you my honorable Lord the Duke of
Suffolk, know, that we in Justice cannot release, nor help your miseries, for
it behooves us to fulfill the Kings commandment, least we incur
displeasure to our selves, hindering us, and nothing furthering you: but yet
this remedy in my conceit stands with justice, that you my Lord of Suffolk
may reobtaine your honorable fame, challenging a combat of the wicked Barron,
and so reveal to the world your giltlesse perfection: for he in presence of
us all, has spit out most vile words of despite, blemishing and overthrowing
your credit: even so notea^e before the face of men, your true intencion and
respect to honor: and to the same effect, frameman humble Supplication to his
Majesty: and in doing so, we the estates of this land hear present, will
eternally crownacle your endeavors to after ages. And in speaking these words,
the whole Counsel brook up court for that day, and departed every one
severally to their lodginges: the Queen and the Duke, were conducted again to
their wonted captivity, whereas the Duke of Suffolk greatly comforted with
this counsel, thought every day a year, until he had given the challendge,
and that the Barron was provoked to the combat: so taking pen and incke, he
writ this knightly petition to his Majesty.

The Duke of Suffolkes challenge of combat, sent to King Edward.
IF your royal person (most mighty Prince) has bin wronged through my
counterfeite service, let me be attached with the scourge of penal judgment,
so that reasonable desiers be first favored: for now honor burning hot in the
closure of my heart, in trial of my honesty, does crave this permission at your
princely hands, that I may combat with the mischievous varlet, and false
flatterer, the proud Barron of Buckingham, in disproofe of his cloaked
falsehood. If my quarrel be unjust, the eternal powers of heaven will not
prosper it: If his groundwork be well laid, and have a sure foundation, his
intent will be expressed the better. For he that dares commit these wrongs
openly, will not be abashed to auow them openly. He that launcheth in the
puddle of discord, knows a clear passage how to escape: therefore (most
noble Prince) let the holy fountain of merciful pity strain out, that it
may move your Grace, to grant my requests: I end.

By me the sorrowful and dessolate Duke of Suffolk.


King Edward receiving this Supplication, in the manner of a Challenge, thought
it a deadly bane prepared against the Barron of Buckinghams life, yet he judged
the denial of it would greatly prejudice his dignity: so desembling an
outward respect to honor, though inwardly harboring fraudulent deceit, he
with a smiling countenance made motion of the combat to the Barron, as well for
expressing of fame, as publishing of faith. The Barron tendering his own
insufficiency, being loath to perform the Combat, was astonished at the Kings
request, and stricken into sudden dumpes, like one that had lost his speech:
but yet after a great pause, and long stay, he spoke in this manner.

I will not refuse (said he) the accomplishment of any thing commanded by your
Majesty, although your will and pleasure herein seems strange and unjust, in
that a true Subject should hazard his life with a false Traitor. The Barron
sometimes silent, sometimes over talcatiue: sometimes lusty, sometimes a
coward: so that standing between fraud and fear, he fayntly represented an
offer. Upon this, the King procured a day of Combat, and publyshed throughout
the whole land this proclamation that follows.

I EDWARD, by long sufferance of divine fortune, King, Prince, and chief Ruler
of all the parts of England. etc. Whereas the determined purpose of the noble
and hardy Gentleman the Lord Barron of Buckingam, is to defend himself
against the miserable and condemned catiue the Duke of Suffolk, a fable for
the world to gaze upon, an infamous wretch of notable dishonor, harboring in
his heart long Treasons against our Person, Subjects, and dominion: in excuse
of his lewd life, for his best advantage, challenges open war against my
good Subject the Lord Barron: unto whose request, in favor of ancient
prowess, I have yielded. But as touching the trespass of my Queen, no Combat
shall prevail to acquit her disgrace, nor no mortal benefits pardone her
offenses. Thus fare you well.

Edward of England.


Thus did the King think no pains ill bestowed that might bring her in hatred
of the common people, and also very much thirsted after her blood, through the
persuasion of his unchaste Curtizan fair Casiope, that every day sealed his
lips with so many kisses, as her suit could neitherbe frustrated, nor at no
time forgotten.

The Barron, and he likewise, roued in a vnetie of mischiefs, and did privily
hyer a kitchen drudge, named Trusty Thomas, a slave full of poverty, yet a
lusty tall fellow, glad to obtain the Kings favor by accomplyshyng of any
exployt for gayue: who in receipt of a thousand Crowns, took upon him the
name and person of the Barron of Buckingam, to fight the combat with the Duke
of Suffolk, being of equal proportion and stature. This Trusty Thomas had
free liberty to make choice in the Kings Armorie, fitting him self best for
his defense in the surest coat of Steel, and the like passage into the Kings
Stable for the choice of the most courageous Courser. Thus furnished in most
seemly order, for the gain of money, was content to commit himself to the
malice of fortunes hate.

The Duke of Suffolk on the other side, as well furnished in all respects,
nothing doubted the good success of his adventure, being borne of a Noble
famelie, valiant, and well exercised in the feats of Arms, reputed for the
goodlyest Gentleman in the universal country of England: so laying aside his
courtly delights used in the blooming time of his youth, and putting on
invincible firm and approved magnanimity of body, he came the night before
the Combat should be tried, to Queen Katherines chamber window, being both
prisoners in one Tower, nothing but a wall between their seberall lodginges,
where as the Duke of Suffolk sung thief verses following.

Revenge, ring out thy knell, let truth appear,
To change my bitter Springes to Waters clear:
Go pack Despair, thy sight I do disdain,
My Knightly deeds, bright Honor shall obtain.
Faint Fear, dislodge thee from my noble breast,
Thou art no friend of mine, nor wished guest:
For coward Captains wins no stately Fortes,
Nor rotten Bark arriues in pleasant Ports.
Assurance tells the secrets of my heart
That Falsehood shall receive his due desert:
Proud Envy then shall not obscure the light,
Of Honors brightness, with his hateful spite.
Oh sacred Heavens, accomplish my desire!
That I may quench the heat of enuies fire:
Whereby my sad and discontented mind,
May gentle solace and sweet comfort find.
This sorrowful Songue stroke such a passion to the Queens heart, like one
despising this vain life, that she desired doleful death hastily to finish
her callamities: but yet bearing a Princely mind, in some measure to requite
the Dukes courtesy, she answered hun with these Verses following.

Queen Katherines Song to the Duke of Suffolk.
Good luck conduckt thy mind unto content,
To conquer him, that is so lewdly bent,
To set division betwixt my Lord and me,
In spoiling of my blooming chastetie.
Stay stately Pride, climb up thy steps no higer,
But soon disgorge thy hot ambitious fire:
For if Queen Katherine ever lived so,
Let grauelled Grave be cradle for her woe.
Suspicion, leave to vex such worthy wightes,
Which spendes their days in virtues sweet delights.
Nor let the crucltie of spightfull foes
Plant up a Docke, vnroote a smelling Rose.
Victorious pome will shortly seek to crown,
Thy princely brows with garlandes of renown;
Which evermore shall spring and flourish green,
For thus defending of a wronged Queen.
In this, or such like manner, spent they the night away, to the exceeding
comfort of each other, until the radient beauty of the next morning began to
glifter in the eastern world, which caused them then to take leave of each
other: for at that same instant, the Lord high Marshall in sovereign justice,
called forth the Duke of Suffolk to auow his prize of Combat, having ten old
sage Fathers going before him in mourning Gowns, and white Wandes in their
hands, like one that went to fetch away the golden Garland of renown: and
coming to the place appointed, he met Trusty Thomas, as defendant, in stead
of the proud Barron: unto whom, with a boulde courage he spoke as follows.

Ah thou false Traitor, spoyler of true honor, thou unshamefast butcher of
innocent blood: Can nothing quench thy insatiate thirst of flattery, but the
guyltlesse blood of Queen Katherine and my life: I doubt not, but thou have
purchased a just revenge for thy infamous wickedness: thou at this present
seek after honorable fame, but the Gods, I hope, will cast thy corpse unto
the most vnworthyest vermin of the earth to pray upon. Thou feedest thy self
with false honor, but perpetual shame shall be thy best reward. Does not thy
heart throbbe at this enterprise? And does not thy conscience declare thy
impiety? It would be a most seemly thing before any blow pass betwixt us,
that thou with sharp penance reconcile thy self unto the Gods, to have a
comfortable joy after this life: for there is such inumcible manhood sealed in
my heart, that the revenge of thy blood shall acquit thy villainy.

The simple slave in hearing this knightly resolution, was so amazed, that with
more willingness he was ready to deliver up his Marshals staff, then defend
the enterprise taken in hand.

But the Duke with valtant magnanimity hastily bucklde on his enemy, blessing
him with sound blows, as if he should say, now is the time either of winning
or loosing honor: now, either the spot of dishonor shall blurre me, or the
shyning light of renown clear me for ever. Within six blows the Combat
ended, and Trusty Thomas hanged dead in his steel Saddle, grouelyng and
fooming, with his neck broken: whereat the people with wonderful admiration
shooted, and caused Drums and Trumpets to be sounded, in sign of victory.

But a little before the Combat began, the King gave the Lord Marshall this
charge, that if the Defendant took the foil, his Armor should not be
unbuckled, nor the dead coarse discovered, except it were in his presence. The
Marshall as well to accomplish the Kings pleasure, as a full discharge of his
office, caused the said dead body to be transported before the King: upon whose
commandment, certain Dominick Friars (sworn to the same effect) immediately
burned the Peasaunts filthy corpse, promysing them rich rewards, and great
promotions for their faithful service showed therein.

CHAP. 4. How the Duke of Suffolk was banished England, and Queen Katherine
condemned to die, with other things that happened.
ALthough the victorious Duke in plain troth thought his enemy dead and
vanquishe: and when that he expected releasement, he had his calamities the
more increased. For the King being sturred up with indignation against him, and
fearing least this bace enterprise should be bruted to the ears of the common
people, to his utter disgrace and infamy, he gave this requital to the
victorious Cumbitant, and committed by universal proclamation, that the good
Duke should within two days be banished not only the Court, but also the
bounds and territories of England, with all his Lordly possessions, lands,
revenues, rentes, fees, inheritaunces, but also from his kindred, friends,
and acquaintance. Which heavy and unprincely judgment, did not only trouble
his thoughts, but grieved the heart of gracious Queen Katherine: that although
she was not destitute of many singular good friends, yet bereft of her best
friend, the only staff of her life: the loss of whose company, stroke such
an extreme sorrow unto her heart, that she lived like one without a soul,
weary of the world, and all other pleasures, which as then did but smally
comforther.

The Duke of Suffolk an hour before the tune of his departure, came to the
Queens lodging to take his leave: who gave him a Hoope of gold, round fastened
to his neck: the Posie about the same was this.

What earthly place so ever harbors thee,
Till death depart (brave Lord) remember me.
The which being clasped about his neck with two silver claspes prepared for
the same purpose, whereon was very curiously ingraued two bloody Hearts bound
together with a True-loues-knot: with many interrupted sighs and panting
stomachs, departed they the one from the other, to the great grief of all the
beholders there pres^^^.

But within an hour after the Dukes departure, the King directed his letters
to the Lord high Marshall, that within two days following, the Queen should
be beheaded. Which heavy news, and tyrannical fury, displeased the minds
of the whole Country: for the Kings vicious life was manifested to every man;
besides, the common people of England cast their eyes to the multitude of false
flatterers, which continually haunted the Kings Court, every man serving his
own will, glutting in pride, ambition, and whoredom: reaching and rouing
after stately honor, seathering and warming their nesses, whistling merry
songs in the Kings ear, and feeding the world with pleasant delights:
besides that, many desperate Ruffines were harbored about the Kings person,
whereby every man became lawless to live as he lysted: yet many noble Lords,
virtuous, wise, and learned Judges, of his Majesty's privy Counsel, inwardly
mourned the state and time they lived in, by which means the commones loves
were drawn to the Queens saueguard, so that she wanted no prayers, good will,
nor earnest suit for her deliverance: the more her forrowes increased, the
greater was she fauaured.

The King hereby fell to extreme hatred, through his universal Dominion, and
every man redely held up his weapon to pull the Princely Scepter out of his
hands: And whilst he expected the Queens execution, a present message was
returned him, that she was with child, (all which being true) yet Ielosie
having so much power in his unruly senses, that he could neither alter his
present purpose, nor find a resting place for his unquiet thoughts, nor wholesome
counsel to eure the dissease of his mind: which tiranicall resolution being
wholly bent to the confusion of the gracious Queen, chiesly incensed through
his Concubines smiling beauty: on whose poisoned sweetness he now baighted and
sed upon, did rather apply with courtesy to her humor, then to repriue his
Queen from her appointed execution: which resolute purpose, when the good
Earl of Sommerset understood, as well to content sundry other Lords, being
partners in the cause, as the purchasing of ciuell tranquillety to the
Kingdom, made this oration to King Edward: the effect following.

The Earl of Sommersets Oration to King Edward, for the Queens repriue.
NO greater ornament of glory (most mighty King) may adorn your royal
Majesty, then to reuert to your Princely estate, magnificence, Justice, and
clemency, (the only standard of protection which all your Subjects must rest
upon) therefore let wisdom persuade you, to make a conquest of those vices,
which in the eyes of the word are apparent, for your Subjects in general,
repute your honorable dear spouse and virtuous Queen: but your Princely
opinion (by flatterers envy) is hardly persuaded: which if it be continued,
will in the end greedely vanquish and leave you a common ^^oty to the world.
And further more, your common people grudge that your worthy Queen, has bin
so nearely examined, wroungfully imprisoned, shamefully araigned, hatefully
handled, cruelly condemned, and without spark of favor adjudged to die. Also,
they report that the good Du^^ of Suffolk (being victor in the Combat) is
against law and justice, banished the land.

All these strange customs (most noble Prince) is re^iculous to your
government, and offensive to your people: and since your Queen is falsely
accused, misreported and belyed, it were a royal glory, only for hope of
posterity, that your virtuous Spouse were repriued. If you hacke down the
tree, first save the fruie: If you graspe up the gallant flowers, conserve the
seeds: hereby you regard your dessent, royallice your name and family:
otherwise you overthrow your princely Throne, Seat, and Scepter for ever. As I
protest (uttering my words before the supernall Judge of heaven) that the
chaste body of Queen Katherine is pure, untouched from all despite of
villainy. So (most noble Prince) take her again into your favor, adorn your
princely Throne with her beautiful countenance, recover your royal name,
weed from your Court these feigned flatterers, gaping ambitiously after gain:
discover the morninges light, and cut the lofty hills that ouershadow your
pleasant springs. Be not persuaded, but that the fruit which her body has
formed, from your Majesty's loins first issued, is rightly planted, and of a
perfect of spring, considering the Duke of Suffolk (upon weighty affairs)
was sent Ambassadoure into Normandy in the time of your Queens conception,
long before, and many weeks after.

Therefore I doubt not (most excellent Prince) but these my speeches may
^^llifie your heart, and procure present pity to appear; and in doing so,
humanetie, courtesy, and noble worthiness, shall illustrate your person, and
with pregnant pollecie odorne your high estate and Imnage: a rare blossom
sprouting out, to the exceeding comfort of all England.

The King being resolved (at this the Earl of Sommersets request, with the
persuasion of diverse other noble men) to grant her repriuement, until her
deliverance of childbirth were accomplished, so that his desire in putting her
to death, might not afterward be hindered.

This her repriuement did not so much rejoice the sorrowful hearts of the
English Lords, as it bred anger and coffeehouse in the Barron of Buckingames
breast, who imbouldned Casiope the Kings Concubine, to call for the Queens
secret destruction, greatly mistrusting that continual winds would at length
shake the Tower of their prosperiites. The beauty of this fair Casiope seemed
in the eyes of King Edward a little earthly Paradise, which changed his
inclinations to any way she pleased: for what soever he openly promised to his
Nobles, would he secretly deny before Casiope: and what soever was obtained
contrary to her good liking, was contiually crossed with a bad success.

This costly magnificent Lady, thus undermined high mountains, builded bridges
over mighty Seas, and stood as a sure Irone post in the defense and safe
conduct of the wicked Barron her professed friend, by art of words winding the
Kings mind to her ready bent bow, and with beautyfull countenance, indooting
his concupicence against the whole dominion of England: all which, as a
manifest truth on a time approuedly fell out, for after that sundrey of the
Queens friends ha^ ^eliuered many pitiful petitions for her enlargement,
Casiope secretly between them selves, taunted the King as follows.

To what solletary wilderness is the ripenes of your pollecy wandered? Shall
every bace Subject, having aspired some promosion, rather of your goodness, then
their own desartes, chaung your inclination as they list? For shame my Lord,
put on a princely mind, put off this bace relenting heart: let Subjects
penetrate your minds not as they lust, but as you please: let them evermore
seek, and never find the secret depth of your heart: let them rather grate
upon hard Irone, then soft melting wax: my counsel herein followed, and put
in practice, will bring speaciall welfare to your state, and worthy estimation
to all those which attend your person. Further, if Queen Katherine be the
pleasant flower that every one seeks to smell at, do but vnroote the stalk,
and all their delights will perish. And to conclude, her life will be your
death, and my dishonor.

King Edward harkening still to the voice of this night Raven, which daily
crooked for the sweetlife of the virtuous Queen, and spent much commumcation
with the King, as well for her dispatchance after her deliverance from
childbirth, as conuaying the state of the Kingdom to her isshue. The which
pricks and darts of mortal shot thrown out, so inwardly grieved the Lords of
the privy Counsel, that they departed the Kings court, resigned their offices
and rich fees, and sold their Patrimonies: so that the Kingdom and dominion
of Britain, which before abounded in prosperous felicity, with manyfould
orniaments of honor, was now ruinated with great poverty, wretchedness and
misery. The King neglected the care of his people: the people on the other
side, envied the person of the King and their martchandize and traffic
decayed, their husbandry foreslowed, ground became barron with out tillage, and
miserable famine over spread the whole Country: the which consumed breed of
cattle. The gold, silver, and treasures, was incroached among the wealthiest
subjects, who for their better saffety, betook both themselves and their
riches under foreign gouernmentes.

Presently upon this hurly burly, which happened throughout the whole
dominion, the heavens sent this good fortune to Queen Katherine, that in the
Lord high Marshals house, she was delivered in childbirth of two Twins, a Son
and a Daughter, being two children of an excellent beauty, which by the
Marshall was presented to King Edward: who although utterly despising the
Mother, yet not altogether choked in ill nature toward the infantes, speedely
celebrated a soliemne Christoning, and caused the man child to be called
Edmond, and the woman child by the name of Siluia: the which being performed by
official Priests, as the manner was in those days, but yet not in such a
royal sort as Princes childred ought to have been christoned: the which being
no sooner finished, but the King (kindled in fuery against the Infantes,
through the persuasion of fair Casiope) caused young Edmond to be conuayed
into the Dukedom of Normandy: in which dominion the young Infant in company of
his English nurses was most honorably received, both because that Duke Robert
(being the first of that name) was vnissued, as being a Kings child of royal
blood, thinking that the Infant being naturally brought up, would prove in
time, to be a loving Prince to his people, and a careful governor amongst them.

Further, King Edward in the dispoyle of lawful posterety from his dominion
and Kingdom, likewise transported fair Siluia with her English nurses into
Denmark, where very honorable intertaynement and comfort was given in the
Kings Court, who through age and time gained wonderful estimation: for as
nature had rewarded her with excellent beauty, so fortune forgot not to
replenish her with wealthy prosperety, who from her childhood in Princely
orniamentes proved the only Parragon of Denmark: where now we will leave her
for a time to her good fortunes: and likewise Prince Edmond in the Court of
Normandy, and discourse of the miseries that happened to Queen Katherine,
after her delivery of childbirth.

CHAP. 5.
How Queen Katherine was delivered from prison by the pollecy of the Earl of
London, being her own brother: and what happened to the Lord Marshall after
her departure.
KIng Edward not ending his Ielous fuery in the bannishment first of the Duke
of Suffolk, the young infant Edmond his ligitimate procreation, and fair
Siluia his natural daughter, but with a greater determination of mischeife,
presently sent letters to the high Marshall, giving him a spetiall charge for
the Queens beheading, protesting by the same letters, what peace and
tranquillety thereby might be purchased to his country.

After receipt of these news, the night before her death anpoynted, Lord
Marshall entered the Queens lodging, and made relation of his charge given by
the King for her execution: to whom she with a sober countenance answered in
this manner. My Lord Marshall (said the Queen) be not amazed, but accomplish
your duty herein: nor think me displeased either with these news from my
dear husband, or with you the messenger: for I am fully resolved that my death
more greeueth you, then my self: and as you have been ever careful in my
cause, so it is no little sorrow unto your heart I know, in that my blood
through your hands must be imbrued: but this is the day which long I have
looked for, the which being now come, I greatly rejoice that my miseries must
be finished, and the time of my sorrows expired: But yet a further comfort
relieueth my afflicted mind, in that young Edmond my Son, is transported
into the hands of the Normaine Duke, and my dear daughter Siluia, brought up
in the King of Denmarkes Court, a Prince of singular virtue and honorable
fame: their causes being thus solicited by strangers, helped of unknown men,
the vigilant eye of fortune cannot chose but be evermore cast upon them. And
now for you my Lord Marshall, I can but give thanks for all curtedes and
assuered friendshippes, approuedly showed to me in these my heavy woes: good my
Lord, to morrow in the morning, when death hastneth upon me by the execution of
your office, departing and shaking hands with this life, let it not be tedious
or ouersmartsome unto me, but rid me quickly from my miferies.

The Lord Marshall, and the virtuous Lady his wife being as then present with
the Queen, bathing their cheeks with floodes of tears, spoke to her, and
said in these words.

If that power were in us (fair Princess) your death should be deferred
until the appointment of the mighty powers, whose leisure your enemies should
weight upon: but we fearing the unhappy success and heavy burden thereof
would lodge upon our backs, and incur the Kings tyranicall fury and wrath.
No, no, my dear honorable friends (replied the Queen) I do joyfully
prostrate my life to death: Why should I hope after life, since my Lord and King
desires my dispatchance? If any such accedent take place, you my keepers shall
taste the sower, and feel the smart thereof. If I escape, some unjust lot will
fall upon you: if my life through your good means should be saved, my enemies
would flesh them selves upon you in contempt. Nay noble Queen (said the Lord
Marshall) we are not affrayd to advise our selves in defense of your virtues,
but shall in time to come rid and dispatch these bloody varlets from the
boosome of this land, which now is made unhappy by their cursed flattery. All
which could nothing chaung her virtuous intent, but was readely prepared in
mind to scale the immortal thrown of heaven. Her wroungfull imprisonment,
the false accusations laid against her, the unchaste life of the King her
husband, the infinite cares which she was well acquainted with: al which gave
full instruction, and persuaded her soul to prepare for a heavenly pilgrimage.

Oh (said the sorrowful Queen) this life is a wilderness of woe, I do abandon
my whole reputation, honors, children, friends, and worldly estimation, as
fading shadows. Oh said she, my enemies has charged me with adultry, but the
Gods know me a blameles innocent, as yet never staynd with the purple spot of
infamy.

The high Marshall and his wife passing all the whole night in these and such
like virtuous speeches, addressing and framing her mind to the everlasting
voyage, where she purposed to rest her unspotted consience, and to wear the
celestial crown of peace, prepared for all such chaste Ladies wrongfully
accused.

But now speak we again, of the wicked Barron of Buckingham, who early in the
morning came with a mighty band of warlike Soldiers, appointed to execute the
Kings commandment, besetting the Lord Marshals house round about, least the
condemned Queen should be reschewed from death: and being thus placed in the
streets, the Earl of London being the Queens own brother, accompanied with
sertayne other Gentlemen of worth: all which attired in Friars garments,
craved lisence of the common Soldiers, to go and talk with the Queen,
touching the estate of her conscience, belonging to their function and calling,
that through their good Counsel, she might at the hour of death be well
advised, lest either vanquished with impenitencie, or thrown down into
desperation, another life should be tedious and full of torments.

These good causes earnestly considered by the Barron and his Soldiers,
obtained them a free recourse to the condemned Queen, whom they presently
changed from Princely orniaments into a Friars weed, and so concucted her
through the whole garrison of Soldiers without examination or suspicion: and
being in this secret and disguysed manner transported to the end of the town,
the Earl of London had there prepared a Wagon, which speedely carried her only
in his company far from the danger of their enemies. This renowned possecie do
I repute for a virtuous deed, in delivering the guiltless Queen from the
hands of such tyrants: an action worthy to be registered in the golden book of
fame, to shine as a mirror to all ensuing ages.

Shortly after the Queens departure, thus succored by her beloved brother,
the wicked Barron called at the Marshals gate, commanding him to bring forth
his Prisoner, showing him self as though he were greatly displeased and
stirred up with impassible choler, chasing and fuming as though he would tear
her in pieces him self, saying. What, do you daslie with the Kings
commandment? Or, does it grieve her to leave this transitory world? Is this
the patient Queen, which with her feigned holiness has so craftily crept
into the favor of the common people? Bid her not fear to hoyst up sail
toward heaven, having a merry wind: bid her behold how Angels and
celestial troops stand here attending, safely to conduct her to the Gods
them selves.

These spightfull tauntes given against the Queen, bred such a fury in the
Lord Marshals wife, that she could not withhold her anger any longer, but
desperately stepped forth, and reviled the Barron in this manner, saying. Oh thou
incarnate Devil (quoth she) art not thou content to wreake thy villainous mind
by wrongful accusation against the good Queen, but thus rediculously to abuse
her miseries? (She uttered a thousand such dispightful words, enforced with
deadly fury and fiery choler, after the simple sex of woman kind, as if it
had consisted in her power to have punished the Barron: she yielded so much to
wrathful desires, that no law could have tamed her tongue, nor restrained the
rage of her irefull indiscretion:) Go seek the gilelesse Queen (says she)
it is unknown to my Lord and husband where, and to what place she has
attained. I verily suppose that she is gone down into the bottomless pit of
hell, to seek such a wicked varlet as thou art: for in heaven I know she can
not find thee forth.

Well (says the Barron) bring her forth according to the sentence of
judgment, or else the smart will fall upon your shoulders, as well for
violating the laws of our land, as contenming the Kings will and pleasure.

Upon these words, certain of his most trustiest Soldiers violently rushed
into the Lord Marshals house, and with diligent view left no corner unsearched:
and at last perceiving it a manifest truth, that the Queen was secretly
conveyed away, they brought present word back to the Barron: who in a rigorous
boldness, caused a bloody pursuit presently to be made: when the Lord
Marshall, his wife, children, and femelie, were put to sharp dint of sword,
and hot broils of consuming fire, save only one of his children, a proper
fair virgin, being as then absent from her father and mother, brought up with
the Earl of London, the Queens own brother; who after, was trained up in all
honorable education by Queen Katherine: whom we will leave traveling like
banished exiles, from their native Country.

The Barron after this murthersome conflict, returned safe to King Edwardes
presence: who not only rewarded his valiant service with gold and rich
treasures, but indewed him with great lauds and revenues: and besides all
which, by letter of Deputation, he constituted him to guide and govern his
whole dominions.

CHAP. 6. How King Edwardes Concubine the fair Casiope, was delivered of a
bastard Son: and of the secret favors between her and the Barron.
THE King after all these things were finished (as you heard discoursed in the
former Chapter) promised securety to him self, princely renown to his minion
Casiope, and royal advancement to his trusty counselor the Barron of
Buckingham: yet the love of Subjects, a guiltles conscience, and a good name
(being the chief groundworkes of peace) were wanting: besides which, the King
utterly deceived in his own imaginations, for that penal shame began every
hour to knock at his gates, stayning his glory with iufamie and dishonor.

Casiope his amorous Lady, being great with child, the which shame, heaven had
appointed for the common sort of people continually to talk upon: besides
which, the Kings vile affection possessed with leawd lust, never glutted, but
daily shyning in the sea of vain delectations, Casiope on her behalf, with
provident discretion prevented her sudden downfall: for, perceiving the
Kings head tossed with inconstant inclinations, his treadinges loose and
unsure (on whom she principally depended) she judged that she could not be so
safely embarked as her expectation desired, and therefore daily wished that she
had ended well, where she had so ill begun.

Thus tottering upon a broken bridge, by little and little cast her self into
the love and good liking of the Barron, who used many secret contemplations,
feeding each other with artificial favors, as opportunity happily ministered
occasion, and misspent no one hour in the day without yielding some amorous
fruits.

King Fdward being utterly unacquainted with these untrusty tricks, never
mistrusted the cunning conueyance of Casiopes leawd life, who passed forth her
time so warely without suspicion, until she was delivered: the which being
fully expired, was to the King a secret solace, but an open shame: a private
comfort to him self, but a public infamy to the land, a man child was
brought forth into the world: the which in process of time, approved the only
poison by which the King was choked, and a Caterpiller through whom the common
wealth was gnawne.

But alas, who would regard and esteem of an unnatural Bastard, borne in a
sower crab-stacke, and utterly reject the good Children of Queen Katherine,
bred and nourished in the sweet Apple juice, which was christoned in mourning
and sorrowful tears, without any pomp and glory? Where contrary wise this
Bastard, the child of a Harlot, was royally received into the Church, and
christoned by the name of Vallentinus, with such sumptuous magnificence, as no
King could surpass in such a case: for many were the triumphs, solemn
iustes, and costly banquetings that were kept in the English Court in the
honor of his name: the which for breueties sake, I here pass over, least I
should be a hinderaunce to our following discourses.

No small consolation took King Edward in the education and bringing up of
this filthy young venomous vermin Vallentinus, who being dazeled in dotage,
immagined winter storms ouerpast, and the pleasant ariuall of a fair summer
to be at hand: yet was he nipt and attached with a privy disease in his
brows, by means of the new enjoined love of the Barron and Casiope: whose
league of friendshyp, and falsehood of flattery, so blinded the Kings
conceits, that no mistrustfulnesse of their lewd sportes could arise. First,
sweetning his mouth with the brave beauty of Casiope. Secondly, reioyceing in
the pollecie of the Barron. And thirdly, allured with the hope and budding
forth of the bastardly blossom Vallentinus: the which I compare to three
broken Staves, whereon the King took his chiefest hold.

What a long relation could I make of the sport and dalliance begun between
the wicked Barron and proud Casiope, having bended the King to their bow,
commanding the whole dominion, and contr^wlyng what so ever seemed best to
them selves. And whereas in the days of virtuous Queen Katherine, the Kings
head was diseased and fraughted with the rhewme of ^elousie, so now his
Darling, and cunning Counceller, gave him a greater glister beneath, for his
headaking Kerchife above: for she yielded her body and love to the Barrons
pleasure. When the King was sleeping, they would be waking: when the King was
in his Chamber, they were handling pretty toys in the Closset: when the King
was in one place, they were in another, keeping company together, discoursing
upon lovers laws. In which pleasure, we will leave them solacing, and return
to Queen Katherine, and her brother the Earl of London.

CHAP. 7. Of Queen Katherines ariuall in Normandy, and of her entertainment
in Duke Roberts Court.
AFter the Queen (by the pollecie of her brother) had escaped the furious
intended tyrranie of her foes, accompanied with the Lord Marshalles Daughter
tending and waighting upon the Queens person, with great care and endeavor
took Ship, having a merry wind, hoysted up sail toward Normandy: into
which country, her young son Prince Edmond, was before conveyed and arrived.
The tediousness of this journey was not so much troublesome, as the dangerous
dashing upon craggie Rocks hazarded their lives: but yet Fortune in the middle
of their miseries favoring them, cast them happily upon a fruitful Island
bordering upon the confines of Normandy: in which place a right noble Knight
inhabited, governing the people with great wisdom: into whose presence being
no sooner come, but the Earl of London, in the name of the Queen and Lord
Marshals daughter, spoke to the Knight as follows.

Most worthy man (said he) we being strangers to thy people and Island, by
unhappy misaduentures are compelled hither to make our refuge, and to seek
friendshyp among you: for I am to let you understand, that here is the
renowned Queen Katherine of England, whose fame (I know) has full often
sounded in your ears: the which distressed Queen, long vexed with captivity,
arraigned, and condemned to die, but yet (by good fortune) escaping the subtle
snares of her enemies, has betook her self to banishment: and now hardly
avoiding shypwracke, commits her self to your mercy. She has not left her
native soil for any evil desert, leawd behavior, or misgouerning her life,
for she is a continent and chaste Matron, bearing the glory of virtue in her
countenance: but yet a cruel and unjust woe chanced unto her young days, to
become the nuptial Spouse of a voluptuous unchaste King, who more esteemed the
false desembling face of a Harlot, then the chaste beauty of this virtuous
Queen: and yielded more credit to the unjust accusation of a flattering
Peer, then to the pitiful tears of this honorable Person: whose life from
her infancy has hitherto continued without blemish: Therefore now we hope,
that mercy waighteth in the gates of the righteous, ever to relieve the
distressed travelers.

This being said, the Knight having a good lyking to the bright honor which
virtuously appeared in their faces, vouchsafed to give them a favorable
entertainment: and according to the worthiness of honorable strangers, he
reteiued them with great kindness: who not refusing his willing offer, with
great humility thanked his courtesy, esteeming themselves in adversity, as
pilgrims thrown upon strange rocks of hard fortune, were exceeding glad of
friends and friendship.

This bountiful Knight more to honor their estates, commanded the best and
wealthiest subjects within the Island to attend their persons, and to provide
all necessaries for their needful want: besides which, the most plesantest
buildings within the Island were appointed for their lodgings: who after long
recreation, refreshing their weary miseries with good ease, they craved
liberty to depart.

But at the time of their abode in the Island, the Knight was grieved with a
most strange disease, the which most cruelly tormented him through all the
parts of his body: but Queen Katherine taking a view of the same, said unto
him in these words. Your disease good Sir, is evidently known unto me, being
already partly acquainted with the nature thereof. I am no professed Physician,
nor Surgeon: but yet if it stand with your good pleasure to adventure your
self upon my simple skill, (although a stranger) yet will I show my
uttermost experience in the recovery of your health.

Most renowned Queen (replied the Knight) I can but thank you for your
courteous offered friendship: but if my health may be recovered by your
knowledge, I shall obtain a greater benefit from your good grace, then ever
yet could be ministered by any mortal creature. I have to my great cost and
charge, entertained many good and learned physicians and chirurgions, from
sundry famous places of the world: yea men of renowned credit have travailed
unto me, yet hitherto I never could, neither by wisdom, cunning, learning,
policy, nor practice, be remedied or eased.

But now such was the virtue and grace of this noble Queen, that although she
was of royal blood, yet the fulsomnesse of the disease neither was loathsome
unto her, neither the daintiness which her degree might require, did cause her
to refuse any pains for accomplishment of his health: but so she applied her
medicines within and without, of such virtue and effect, that in short time the
knight recovered not only his health, but lived long after a very perfect and
sound man.

The knight having thus made a trial of the incomparable virtue, wisdom,
learning, and modest chastertie of this noble Queen, caused her renown to be
published in many foreign nations, and rewarded her with great treasures:
likewise, appointing a sure ship, trusty Mariners, with great store of
provision, for her passage into Normandy: likewise, he writ a letter to Duke
Robert, touching her rare and excellent orniaments of nature: yea, what a
renowned woman his country was like to enjoy, wishing that his fortune had
been worthy of so blessed and good a creature to have dwelled amongst his
people. Thus this good Queen, her dear brother, with ye residue of her
honorable company, passed forth their journey toward Normandy; where, and
into which country, she was royally enterteined of Duke Robert, his Duchess,
and principal estates of that nation, and received favor of all other sorts
of people for her courteous behavior. In this country, her orniaments of skill,
wortinesse of virtue, and studious learning, so increased, flowed, and
abounded, whereby she was able to dispute, talk, and reason with the learned
physicion in the world: for she was so much guided by wisdoms lore, that many
foreign princes came to reverence her: besides, common people full of sundry
diseases, homaged to her person for remedy and ease, some for one grife, some
for another: and to conclude, there is no disease which this gracious Queen
took in hand, but her excellent knowledge gave health and soundness. Oh how
many Princes and great Monarks of the world were content to stoop (for health
of body) to this worthy woman. What wonderful treasures and rich jewels were
daily laid before her, sent from all the parts of the earth, in respect of her
magnificence, renowned same, and admirable credit, being universally spread
through all the dominions of the world.

CHAP. 8. How King Edward grew in misliking with his fair minion, and her
secret friend the wickked Barron: and how by their means he was deposed, and
constrained to forsake his native country.
THE fame of Queen Katherines glory, (obtained in the Dukedom of Normandy)
did more depresse and martyr her enemies in England, then if she had made a
conquest of them with forty thousand men of war: the which her good success
abroad (being favored in a foreign nation) did not a little fret the cankered
stomachs of her foes at home, as King Edward her husband, Casiope, and the
Barren of Buckinggam, which greatly repented themselves that better forecast
had not settled in their heads, in the prevention of such mischiefs, by the
Queens prosperous event like to ensue.

Casiope inioying the lour, pleasure, and faithful service of her dear friend
the Barron, begins now to fadome the deepest waters, and to blind the
kings eyes with the foggy mistes of her deceitful smiles: who as an
instrument of folly, was drawn to what purpose his Minion pleased, first framed
by the Barrons fraudulent devises, ceased not more and more to use their wits
in the best manner they could to maintain their unjust loves: and being in a
fear, least their leude lechery should come to the kings ears, the which not
a little tormented their thoughts, advised themselves by privy consultation
together, how they might best procure their own safety. So by subtle science
of wit, they inueigled the King to deliver up the title of his government and
dominion to young Valentinus his bastard son: all which being brought to
unhappy pass, Casiope and the Barren her lover, for recreation sake, might the
more safer use their pleasant delights in the Kings presence without
suspicion, as though no blemish were in beauty, nor lewdness in love.

The King being thus deposed, many times sitting like a dizard, desolately left
to himself, putting a by, receiving only by the year six thousand crowns,
and the wicked Barron appointed the lord Protector of young Valentinus: who was
brought up according to his wished desire.

King Edward now being discharged from the heavy burden of a crown, early in
a summers morning (to refresh his dulled wits) road forth into a fair green
Forest, forsaking his company and train, and prauncing his courser somewhat
aside, by chance he met with a poor country pesant, being a she apheard by
profession: whom he saluted on this manner. Good morrow fellow (said the King)
whether art thou traveling: Good sir (answered the shepherd) I am traveling
to London about necessary business. But tell me (quoth King Edward) do thou
know the King of this land? No by my troth (said he) I know him not, neither
do I care if I never do, except his manners were better, and his wits more
surer. What (said the King) does his manners indammage or hurt thee? No (said
the shepherd) but he hurts both himself, his subjects, and his whole country.
The King being in wardly chafed hereat, could hardly govern nature, or tie up
affection, to hear the poor country fellow reckon up his abominable life:
but yet dissembling a little longer, he asked him what reports the country
did give out of Lady Casiope. Marry (said the shepherd) some say that she is
a lewd Curtezan, and one that has almost undone this noble fruitful dominion,
which for many hundred years has been virtuously guided, now overthrown by
Casiope: whose wicked counsel first procured the banishment of Queen
Katherine and her children, and now has usurped the crown and scepter to
Valentinus her bastard son: besides which, the King is used as a fiddle to
play upon: for the Barron of Buckingham day and night gathers the choicest
flowers out of his Mafesties garden: the which is no small grief to his
subjects hearts. More would the shephearde have spoken, had not King Edward
interrupt him in this manner. Good fellow (quoth he) know, that I my self am
the king, charging and commanding thee upon pain of death, to give attendance
at the court, there to auow and utter at large the same words to Casiope, which
thou have here already discovered to me, I will be thy safeguard from al barmes,
and will richly reward thy pains therein taken.

Thus in a discontented humor, departed the King after his company: and being
returned back to the court, there he found the Shepherd according to his
commandment given, who seemed to play his part before king Edward, in the
presence of Casiope, counterfeiting the gesture of an Iddiot, pleasantly
conceited himself to expel fantastical imaginations from the kings brains.
My Lord (says the Shepherd) you have a fair pond, replenished with dainty
fish, preserved for your own taste, but yet deceitfully robbed by night, by one
which slattereth you by day. Your white Swan, swimming in a most pleasant
River, preserved by you, but is plucked by others. Your delicate Plumb-tree,
daintily kept for your own tooth, has her boughs broken by a privy practiser:
but such is your liberal and frank heart (I know) that if within your garden a
sweet posie be gathered, and sufficient smells left behind to refresh your
senses, it will be no grief at al: for things unseen of the eye, is not rewed
of the heart.

This biting talk of the Shepherd, so opened the kings blind senses, that he
began to have clear knowledge of Casiope and the Barrons violent villainies,
whereby he fell into witles fury, watching the gates while the City is on fire:
and thought to subdue Casiopes inclination, when he himself was slain before:
so great was his grief, that he began to curse and swear, wishing himself
dead: and reputed himself above all others, the most accursed, in giving
credit to false Curtezans, and dissembling Paracites.

Well (says Casiope) if my sight and company have glutted and pampered your
affections, I pray you make speedy deuoydance of me. I will not impair your
honor. I was never accounted a lewd liver, before I met with a violent
leacher: and if you so gladly desire to forsake my society, I must brook and
digest your hard nature in the same, as well as I may.

These furious storms ouerpassed, the Barron the next night following, enticed
the Sheapheard to a secret corner of the kings palace, where he thrust a
sharp sword through his heart, and buried the pesants carcass within a
stinking dunghill: the report whereof pierced the kings ears with extreme
grief: but seeing help preua^^ed not, as a man plagued in his head, and
diseased in his brows, he vpbraided Casiope of falsehood and ingratitude in
this manner.

If that wise and learned council in times past, could have reformed my
wilful follies, I had not now bin ouerturned. If I had been guided by the
example of the gentle Reed, bending with every wind hither and thither, I had
now like the proud stately Dake (over high in mine own conceit) been cast
up by the roots. The same shameful scorn now happens to me, as to the
simple Goat, who meeting with the crafty Fox, drinking both together in a
deep ditch, where the Fox by fair words procured the Goat with his horns
to lift him up to the high banks: the simple Goat bele^uing overmuch to ye
Foxes fair words, performed his request, and left himselle still in the ditch,
not knowing how to escape, wishing that he had better considered before hand,
what would follow after: so surely, if government in the beginning had
foreseen the end, I had not now been subject to your wicked, false, and
disguised dissimulations. Have I hatred in place of friendship? has
familiarity brought contempt? and has benevolence nursed ingratitude? I have
neglected all men's counsels, to prefer and advance your reputations. I have
banished wife and children, forsaken friends and subjects, stripped my self
from all honors, and resigned my crown and scepter into your hands, only to
satisfy your wills and pleasures in all points: yet for all this, brute
beasts, and fowls of the air, in all thankfulness and humanity, excel your
sauadge natures.

In this manner King Edward sought to reobtaine the wonted favor and good
lyking of Casiope and the Barron, who keeping still silence, in a great snuff
departed the Kings Palace to an other house, which they inioyed in the right
of Vallentinus the Bastard: and being there settled, the Barron writ this Letter
back to the King, as follows.

The Barron of Buckingams Letter sent to King Edward.
YOUR evil deserts, and frantic fashions, has so highly offended your
dearest friends, that they have refused at any time hereafter, to hazard
credit, life, and goods, in your behalf: And since you have forgot the right
rule of honest life, abandoning the spetiall care of the Commonwealth (which
inconveniences grow through your negligent slothfulness) our purpose is
therefore to have it reformed: And now since fortune has appointed me an
honorable Magistrate, in the right of virtuous Vallentinus, I am readely bent
to abridge and cut off your licentious mind and careless living: For as you
have dispossessed your self from princely government of the Realm, so we
must constrain you either to live as a private person, or else by banishment
enforce you to forsake the land, whereby we may the better appease homebred
mutenies, repress the practices of foreign foes, and prevent the pollecies
of Queen Katherine and her councillors: all which, concerns the
establishment of that famous young Prince Vallentinus. And whereas you, hoping
after the love of Casiope, whom you have long time wrongfully abused, and made
a poynting stock for the world to wonder at; but now, repenting of her former
amiss, she determines to retyer from infamy, and to match in honest marriage
with my person, being the only suer staff of her virtuous life: Therefore (to
be short) take this choice unto your self, either to depart quietly into some
foreign region, or else to live a private life in your own country, not
once coming within the sight of our royal Court: Therefore if wisdom may
rightly persuade you, I do not then doubt, but that you will accept that good
ordinary way, which shall bring you the best security: I end.

By me the Lord Protector of the young Prince Vallentinus.


AFter King Edward had perused these saucy and malapert letters, he stayed and
breathed upon the Barrons former flattery: and seeing this sudden change of
lovers, he often times sighed, remembering in what oversight he was led and
allured, injuriously defaming and banishing his dear beloved Queen, cruelly
murdering the Lord high Marshall, his wife and children, and himself utterly
dispoiled, over much trusting to the trifling pleasures of an harlot, and
leaning too much to the false allurements of a traitorous flatterer: thorough
whose wicked persuasions he sent his natural children to the adventures of
rouing fortune: so also having resigned the keys of his kingdom to a
bastardly miscreant, the son of a wicked strumpet: all which did not so much
grieve his tormented mind, as in that he was made a jesting stock to the
world, degenerated from ioyall blood: such was his distress, that his
Noblemen, grave Councellers, and valiant Captains forsook him, and (...) him
to his misery; and his poor and needy Subjects tried out for due vengeance
upon him.

Thus finding no consolation in his extremity, he thus conferred with
himself. Oh (said King Edward) if I stay within the territories of my
kingdom, every man will scorn my wretched plight: of whom (with reasonable
requests) it may neither crave mercy nor succor, having so unjustly wronged my
country with an everlasting plague: besides that, my mified life is offensive,
odious, and disdainful to the company of men. How may I expect safety amongst
my countrymen, being a King of royal blood, turned from my government, bereft
from dignities, honor and renown, and forced to take a stipend of six
thousand crowns toward my maintenance, paid by the discretion of flattering
traitors?

The King upon these inward piercing sorrows, departed his dominion and
native country, and without company like a Pilgrim, wandered to what place
fortune had appointed, and his own follies deserved: so traveling many days
through strange countries, it was his chance to ariue in the Dukedom of
Brouswick, where being destitute of money, he was forced to sell all the rings,
chains, iew^^s and other orniaments of gold, whereby in a short time he
consumed all that he had, and was compelled through penury and want, to crave
the good will of well disposed people: but every one beholding his gallant
coat upon his back his costly hat upon his head, and his embrodered hose upon
his legs, esteemed him some stout runnagate, which more delighted in wandering
wildness, then in good serture: or, one that was sent abroad as a Spy, to
view the commodities of their land and country, and therefore would no man
extend friendship nor relief toward his comfort.

Being thus a pretty while pinched with hunger and want, and consideting that
his just plague happened through the deserts of his former life, he thought
with himself what good way might be best taken in so extreme a misery; either
with shame to make known what he was, or else to live in hope of some better
chance in time to come: and being in a strange country, he was the less
ashamed of his foul reproach: and far from acquaintance, his calamities
became the more hardoned.

So early in a morning traveling on his way, in hope of a batter recovery, he
met by chance with an old poor wretched beggar, having a simple patcht cloak
upon his back, the which ye king desired to exchange for his costly vestures:
a covenant betwixt the^ both quickly concluded, and being both contented, they
stripped themselves to their naked skins: the King putting on ye beggars
poor patched orniaments, and contrariwise the poor beggar addressing himself
in the Kings costly apparel, and so departed one from the other, without any
further conference. Thus after leave being taken, the King in his simple
weeds laid him down upon the green grass, he opened the beg^ars budget or
scrip, and found such good store of brown bread, hard cheese, and bacon, that
he very well relieved his terrible hunger: after which good banquet, he arose
up and went unto a clear spring near adjoining, and drunk such an insatiable
drought as though it had been some Horse or Muse after dry prouender.

Thus after King Edward had well refreshed his hunger, and satisu^ed his greedy
guts, almost clunged together for lack of food and sustenance, he passed
further into the country, continuing still this course of life, and traveling
from place to place, he was at last, according to the straight laws of that
country, apprehended and taken for a vagarant runnagate: where, being brought
before the Maiestrates, he was imprisoned, whipped, and rigorously punished.

About some two months after these sharp conslicts, and grievous punishments,
a virtuous gentleman of that country, resorting by chance unto the common
prison, to relieve the wretched estate of miserable Captives, he by fortune
cast his eye upon the King, which as then lay fast fettered in chains, of whom
he demanded what country man he was? who answered, that he was an English man
borne, imprisoned neither for treason, murder, nor theft, but only because he
being a stranger, was enforced to crave relief of well disposed people.

The Gentleman perceiving King Edward well qualified in learning, and seeming
to be ready and perfect in the Latin and Greek tongues, he was content to
obtain his enlargement, and freely to set him at liberty, if he within his
house would become a Schoolemaister for the bringing up of his children.

The King being joyful of this offer, and hoping after some better days, he
yielded to the Gentleman's request: where, after long service in the trade of a
Schoolemaister, so painefully employing his diligence to the profit of his
scholars, that he obtained the well liking, and high favor of his Master and
Mistress, and was loved of the whole family: and in continuance of time, by
these good occasions offered, he made open confession to his master, that he
was the royal King of England; the which being understood by the Gentleman,
forthwith (as much as his ability would serve) he safely conveyed him in comely
apparel, jewels, money, and other provision to his daughter Siluia, brought up
as then in the Denmark Court: upon whose arrival there, news was sent unto
the King, that a stranger being an Englishman by birth, was desirous to speak
with his Majesty: who being full of friendly entertainment, received him in a
most royal manner: and being come before his presence, King Edward spoke as
follows.

The tempest^s of adversity (right excellent King) has brought me unto your
presence, not in any evil pretense against your country, but as one
traitorously deceived by ambitious Subjects. For, know (most noble Prince)
that I am the unhappy King of England, banished from my countries and
dominions, and bereft from Princely tytles, honor, and renown: And now, since
my dear Daughter and child, fair Siluia, here at your cost and charge is
brought up, nature and affection have drawn me hither to see her. This being
said, the Denmark King with right good grace rejoiced, and both courteously
received and reverenced him, profering him friendshyp, power, and assistance,
as well to maintain his present estate, as to restore him again unto his
Kingdom. Fair Siluia with great obedience, presented her self before King
Edward her father; who greatly commended her beauty, and divine gifts of
nature, condemning his own hard heart, in banyshing her so unnaturally from her
native Country: for I wish (said he) my grave had swallowed me alive, when
first my malicious mind committed her to banishment. Therefore in requital of
that injury, fair Siluia, if ever I recover again my right, refuse not to be
crowned the royal Queen of England. These, and many more like speeches past
berwixt King Edward and his daughter, duering the time of his aboade in the
Denmark Court: the which King, gave him such honorable mayntenance, as
belonged to his princely estate: the rather, because he esteemed fair Siluia a
meet wife for his son and heir young Essricke, both being of an equal age,
and nursed up together.

Thus the Denmark King revived with a gladsome hope of climbing the highest
top of these famous dignities, did make no spare of cost for the accomplishing
of his haughty expectation. Also, King Edward made a determined purpose with
more deliberation and riper judgment, to reobtaine his dominion and government.

CHAP. 9. How Vallentinus the bastard was crowned King, and how he through the
persuasions of Perce of Winchester, caused his own Mother with her paramour
the wicked Barron, to be most strangely put to death.
NOW must we speak again of the troubles that happened in England after the
Kings banishment, where the wicked Barron and his minion Casiope, many a day
practiced their wits, not only for ever to bar king Edward from his kingdom,
but used diligent watch, and examined the bottom of every attempt that might
practice his return: but at last, they concluded upon the coronation of young
Vallentinus, and resigned the Crown and Scepter into his hands, which before
time they had reserved to his use, for declaration of true obedience. Many of
the best Subjects did swear disloyalty to King Edward, and subjection to the
Bastard: who had no sooner falsely usurped the Crown, but by unkind behavior,
he altered the minds of the welthiest Subjects, who in security of their
lives, forsook their native Countries, whereby the Realm was left unpeopled,
without tillage, destitute of bread, bereft of money, treasures, and traffic
of merchandise from other dominions: for, their necessary trades decayed, and
all things grew out of frame and good order.

But now Vallentinus the Bastard, beginning to grow proud, ryetous, and wanton,
disdayned the wonted checkes, of the Barron and his Mother, who many times
sought to controwle his wretchles life, through which a great mis^iking and
dissension grew amongst them: and to make envy the more riper, there was one
Sir Perce of Winchester, a notable cunning youth, brought up with Vallentinus,
and wholly of his counsel, who knowing him to be no lawful Prince, but a
usurper: also viewing the woeful calamity and ruin the Country was brought
into, stirred sinders more hotter amongst them: for he so flattered ye young
King, feeding his humors, and advised him to reject the Barron and Casiope his
Mother, to make denial of their checkes, contemn their controulments, and to
bear sway of his own absolute authority.

Thus being incensed by Sir Perce, he began to rouse up his peacocks feathers,
and to bear a malicious hatred against the Barron and his mother, his best
friends and chief aduauncers. Sir Perce nothing failing in all manner of
deceites, playde likewise on the other side, and under the color of love that
he bore to the young Prince, he wished and exhorted them sharply to reprove
the unbridled life of Vallentinus. Thus ambodexter like, this young flatterer
Sir Perce of Winchester, under a cloak of true love, still feeding the
stubborn and uncivil natures of both parties, planted up most weighty
cannons, and battered the strongest walls of the Kingdom.

Casiope and the Barron, thinking themselves without hope of reclayming
Vallentinus, secretly departed his Court, and raised up an army of well
approved Soldiers, and attempted as well to ransacke his Palace, as the
apprehention of his person. Vallentinus (through the cunning of Sir Perce) was
admonished of this device and practice, and mustred into his service the most
courageous and valient Captains, and best approved Soldiers that could be
found. But now the Barron with his Army seeking to prevent them, fought such
an unlucky Battle, that two thousand of his brauest followers came to foil
and slaughter, and him self and Casiope taken prisoners: who by the furious
cruelty of the young Prince, was clapped up in prison, to abide a hard and
merciless captivity.

Having thus taken an occasion of the time and fortune, he consulted with Sir
Perce what was best to be done in such a business: who having a wily wit, and
a crafty capasetie, whispered privily in the Princes ears, and advised him to
judge them to a speedy execution: for doubt you not, (quoth he) but there is
just causes to be laid against them: as chiefly your mothers filthy adulterous
life with that bace and wicked Barron, whose traiterous mind has not only
moved this rebellion, but has been the cause of your dear fathers
banishment: And being now in safe custody, let no good fortune be neglected,
till you have expressed the duty of a loving child, by their dispatchance
out of this transitory world.

Vallentinus now wholly fastening his mind more upon prodigality, ambition,
and vain glory, then public profit to his Crown and Country, and was
ignorant what danger would ensue in cutting off the Barron and his Mother,
being his best friends, and surest proppes in all extremeties: therefore
without any further consideration, he erected, furnished, and sumptuously
builded a strong Tower, very splendant and admirable to behold, of wonderful
largeness, deapth, and hight. He also caused a Gibbet to be festened upon the
top thereof: the which being no sooner finished by the handy work of cunning
Artificers, but he commanded the Barron and his mother Casiope dispightfully
to be brought forth, as scorns of the world to jest upon: where, casting his
eyes to the Tower, he said: You think time sleeps, or that siouthfulnesse
wantonly walloweth in me: no, no, although to my great cost, yet have I settled
up a surer stay to this my Realm and Country, then ever did my predecessors
before me: For I have here established a Tower to hang traiterous Knaves and
Curtizans upon. The world shall not adiudge me partial in my Laws: for
subjects shall drink alike of one cup and licour. This being said, he
caused the Barron and Casiope, to be again carried to prison, and there to
remain till his further pleasure, every hour expecting the deadly stroke that
should separate their bodies from their souls.

All this while Sir Perce was not vnbusied, omitting no time that might further
his intent, but continually fillyng Vallentines ears with strong persuasions,
that their lives and spirits might be speedely deprived a sunder: which bloody
stratagem was not long a finishyng; for the young Prince, or rather unnatural
viper, in this manner powered down the tempestious showers of truell murder:
for early in the morning, he caused his Mother Casiope to be brought forth,
who the night before having intelligence by her keepers, that her days were at
an end, clothed her self in vestments of white silk: and coming before her
bastard son, she very humbly prostrated her self, and craved pity, mercy,
and forgiveness at his hands, and with a blushing countenance, as beautiful
as the new bloomed Rose, she spoke in this manner.

Oh son Valentinus (said she) remember that I am the Mother, thy self
fashioned of my womb and body, and by nature springing from the tree of my
life: yet thou like a most unnatural Homicide, seckest to shorten my days, and
to stop my breath, whereas thou ought in duty and obedience to uphold my
honor, and prolong my life. I do confess my vile offenses have deserved
punishment: but shall mine own child be the revenger thereof: The banishment
of good Queen Katherine, and the confusion of all her friends, through my
unjust means was accomplished, with many other miseries which I have
ouerburthened this land withal, only to advance an ungrateful dissembler,
which like ye Viper seeks to finish the life of his dearest pareuts. Many
more were the speeches which Casiope spoke, in hope to attract remorse from her
Iron hearted son: who nothing regarded her words, but rather the more
imboldened and stirred up into a greater fury, by a present commandment, he
caused her body to be cast upon a Table, and her hands and legs to be houlden
by the strength of men: the which being done, he with a sharp knife cut his
Mothers throat: and with the same butcherly instrument deseuered her lisly
neck from her shoulders, which! ad wont to be adorned with a glittering chain
of pure gold. After this, he caused the place which first conceived him to be
ripped up, and sild full of corny salt: where after her belly being thus closed
up, he gave commandment to have her dead carcass transported to the top of
the Tower, and there hung upon a Iibbet. Her dear friend the Barron, was used
in the same order: for he had his mouth stuffed full of burning Pepper, and hung
likewise upon the same Iibbet alive, as a just view of such vngeateful
flatterers, and adulterous traitors to behold.

This bloody action being finished, Valentinus spoke to the people many
reproachful words in the disgrace of the wicked Barron, and Casiope his
mother, calling her the She-deuouring Bear of England, and her dear friend,
the first causer of King Edwards dishonor: in which tyrannical course of
life, our story bids us now leave the bastard Valentinus with his new friend
Sir Perce, and speak of the accidents that happened in the Normaine court.

CHAP. 10. How Prince Edmond returned again into England, and was crowned
King: and how the bastard King was put to death after a strange manner.
QVEENE Katherine as you heard before, after her wrongful banishment from
England, was graciously entertained of the Normane Duke, where she daily had
intelligence of the woeful estate of England, by many of her distressed
countrymen which continually fled thither for succor: in the redress of whose
miseries, she made suite unto Duke Robert of Normandy, that her young son
Prince Edmund might return into Enland, not only to possess himself into
the rightful inheritance of his own dominions, but to repress the pride of
the miscreant bastard, whose tyrannize had made England the perfect merror of
calamity, and the wofullest nation under the cope of heaven.

In this manner every day Queen Katherine solicited Duke Robert with favorable
petitions for the furnishing of her son into his own Country with a band of
warlike Soldiers: unto whom the Normane Duke answered in this manner. Loath I am
fair Queen) that your princely son should forsake my dukedom and dominion,
being the only staff of my old age; and after my death, the hope of my
subjects: although not naturally borne amongst them, yet coming of a royal
blood, the son of a maiestical Prince, they will rather submit to his
obedience, then to the government of one of a simpler birth. No, no (said
Queen Katherine) there is no reason why a stranger should be Prince of
foreign subjects, through whom they should be either too much burdened, or
moved to disdain: and therefore (most noble Duke) I humbly crave, that
permission may be granted for his departure: and in regard of your princely
liberality, having brought him up to such ability, prowess, and warlike
perfection, he shall be bound to confess homage and loyalty to your kingdom
whilst he lives.

The Normane Duke being possessed with a mild nature, and ready in all actions
to satisfy Queen Katherines expectation, presently mustered a great multitude
as well of Normane soldiers, as exiled Englishmen, which zelously protested
all duetifull endeavors in the young Princes behalf, and in the accomplishment
of that honorable exployte. Queen Katherine having gathered great masses of
gold and silver, attained through her learned skill, and practice in Physic,
furnished her son Prince Edmond with such abundance, that nothing wanted
either to his adventure, or contentment: and so being furnished with Munition,
Ships, and Soldiers, he hoysted up sail, and with a merry wind, safely
arrived upon the confines of England: where presently he advanced his
Culloures, and planted his forces to the best advantage.

But now the bastard Prince Valentinus, being amazed at the sight hereof, with
a fearful troubled mind, greatly misdoubted that his kingly government was
at an end: yet having mustered up a slender army of English Soldiers,
nothing auayleable for his defense, he committed them under the leading of Sir
Perce of Winchester: who tendering his own safety, went to the enemy, where
both him self and his soldiers, swear true obedience to Prince Edmond. This
unexpected accident so daunted the bastard King, that he grew desperate of good
hap: and being left as a naked man, he secretly conveyed himself to the
Tower, and hid himself in an obscure den,

Thus Prince Edmond without any further disturbance, quietly entered the
Kingdom, where he took upon him the possession of the English crown, placing
the banished English men in honorable dignities, and most richly advanced the
Normane soldiers: the which being so luckely accomplyshed, he caused the
bastard to be searched forth, and his mouth likewise to be stuffed and closed
up with burning Pepper, and hanged alive in chains of Iron by the Barron and
Casiope, upon the top of the Tower, as you heard before so used.

Every thing brought thus to so good a pass, England in short time became well
unpeopled again, the Realm multiplied in gold and silver: noble Famelies
adorned with honorable possessions: Lords, Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen in
semblable degree endowed: Marchantes and Artificers well placed for traffic
from foreign regions: great vent and tillage, and breed of cattle increased:
learning and liberal arts maintained: Marshall prowess exercised, and all
things else in most decent manner placed: the which we will pass over, and
speak of King Edward, living in the King of Denmarks Court.

CHAP. 11. Of the Wars between King Edward and his own Son, and the
success thereof, with other things that happened.
THese affairs could not be so privately handled in England, but that King
Edward had intelligence thereof in Denmark: who with a resolute determination
desired to return into his native Country; not only that his old age might
be there comforted, but that his daughter Siluia might be joined in marriage
with Essricke the Prince of Denmark: whose father, in the redress of King
Edwards long offlictions, caused the second part of all his able men at arms
to be mustred up, and provided rich treasures for Soldiers pay, with warlike
weapons, armor, and store of ships necessary for such a dangerous exployte,
and published by Proclamation through all the Provinces of Denmark, that king
Edward was to reclaim his lawful right in England, unjustly usurped by his
own Son: with many other encouragements given out, to animate his Subjects,
to proceed with resolution.

This busy preparation in Denmark so pierced Sir Perce of Winchesters ears
in England, that he mistrusted his estate to be dangerous, and that his doble
dealing would be shortly espied: in the prevention whereof, the better to
protect and defend him self, he writ this privy Letter to King Edward, as
follows.

Sir Perce of Winchesters Letter, sent to king Edward.
NOTHING shall entice my heart (most Sovereign Lord) to prove disloyal to
your Matestie: nor nothing restrain the serviceable duty which I owe unto
your Excellence. And although I was in my cradle when first you left your
natural Country of England, but yet now being grown up to sufficient reason,
do assemble all my powers of nature, what pollecie chiefly may prevail, or
practice procure your recovery: For there is nothing that my drouping soul
wishes for more, then your happy return to your former possessions. I love
Prince Edmond, if he reverence your Majesty; and I wish him good success, if
he show the duty of a son unto his father: against whom if he lift but his
hand in wrath, the Gods will wreake just vengeance and destruction upon.
Therefore most noble Lord, think it not danger to return, for I will counsel
him to submission, showing what execrable vengeance is pottended to them which
draw the sword of tyrranie against their own Fathers. I will admonish him to
converse, least his own wilful conceit bring him to perdition. Thus may I
both defend and counsel him, without suspicion of the world: and also
thereupon show favor and reverence to your worthy Majesty.

Thus fare you well.


THIS Letter being transported to King Edward into Denmark, was receined as
sweet flowers, with promised requital, the which refreshed his drouping
senses, and changed despair into perfect assurance; and thinking now to
recover his former right by the means of Sir Perce, upon whose back the
common wealth of England depended: but fearing least his proffered affections
should alter, he sent this answer to his letters, as follows.

King Edwards answer to Sir Perce of Winchesters Letter.
I Never dispaired, but the Gods, (which hitherto has governed all my
attemptes) would at last send some comfort to my miseries, and bring me again
to the full perfection of my felicity; which through your wisdom and
pollecie must be attained. Therefore, in most humble sort I do accept your kind
proffer; and this your loyal enterprise shall in the highest degree, be blazed
amongst my best friends: and until my soul be divorced from my body, I shall
never forget the love of so faithful a Subject; henceforth vowing to put off
all feminine affection and vain delights, which haunt Princes Palaces, and
the Courts of mighty Kings.

Have not I just cause to render thanks to the immortal Gods, that in the
midst of my miseries I have found so prudent and worthy a friend as is your
noble self, whose loyal heart is wholly consecrated to my good fortunes. Every
day do I wash my face with tears for the tragical ruin of my Country; and
every day do I breath out sorrowful sighs from the closure of my soul, to
think how the light beams of my princely honors has been darkened by the
falsehood of Casiope, and the Barrons cunning craft, whereby my poor Subjects
have bin in ^ang^r^^, and my self plundged in careful calamities; all which,
greeueth not my soul so much, as that mine own child now, contrary to the
duetifull obedience of a Soune, does usurp my Crown, and holds up the sword
of sedition against his own Father: But yet I see the Gods will still preserve
both my life and honor, in that you are appoyuted to remedy my distress, and
correct the tr^yterous trespass of a wicked Son. Thus I end, assuring my
self, that my fortune shall amount to the lofty turrets of my desire, and
likewise tread ^owne disgrace, and quench the scorching flames of noisome
enemies: thus wishing you as my self, I bid you farewell.


YET for all this, King Edward regarded this person but as a prodigal and
climbing traitor, p^ou^ly aspyring after princely dignities, and therefore
entertained and placed in the rank of false friends, using him as a shadow
and image of a dead man, without either respecting his valloure, or trusting to
his feigned flatteries.

But now in the meaue space, whilst these things were a working, Prince Edmond
understood (by a private friend) of Winchesters pestiferous treasons: to the
reformation whereof, he sent forth a trusty band of Soldiers for his
apprehention: which news by Sir Perce was first understood, and therefore he
fled secretly into Denmark, and disclosed to King Edward all the pollecies
practiced in England: for which, he was richly recompensed and rewarded with
sumptuous entertainment. After whose departure, Prince Edmond felt the
toundation of his Kingdom to begin to shake, and thinking now to be cloaked
under his Mothers wing, he writes to her of the starting away of Winchester
his chief Counselor, who has not only stained the true duty of a subject,
but impaired the safeguard of his regiment, and disclosed the priuities of his
counsel.

Prince Edmonds letters to Queen Katherine, sent to her into Normandy.
DEAR and well-beloved Mother, I have seen, and known, and now at length found
the force of a flatterer: for the unconstant knight of Winchester with false
colors has bleared my eyes; He has sucked honey in England, and now spitteth
poison in Denmark; he has drawn out a vennomed sword to hacke a sunder my
rule and government: He that was wont to comfort me with counsels, now kills
me with deadly destruction. Therefore my beloved Mother, as you did safely
conduct me hither, so leave me not now in danger of confusion; for I am as one
wrapped in sundry extremeties, sold into the hands of enemies, either to
yield with repulse and shame, or have my young unexperienced age conquered with
death: wherefore sweet Mother, aid me with your strong hand, that these
dangers laid against me may be escaped. Rule me with reason, and with your
honorable wisdom counsel me, that I may ever hereafter govern my actions
with discretion, and never more be troubled with treasons of a flatterer, whose
villainies henceforth I will disdain, and no more regard them then the chafe
blown away with the wind. Dear Mother, speedely answer my distressed
desires, that my soul may not ever languish in distress. Thus ending at this
time, wishing the heavens to bless you with honorable and long life; fare you
well. From our English Court.


WHen Queen Katherine had received Prince Edmonds Letters, she in tenderness
of heart wept bitter tears: but yet being perfectly instructed in wisdoms
precepts, thought it against the laws of nature to strive against her
husband, therefore she poured forth these sage sentenses, the which in manner
of a Letter she returned back into England to Prince Edmond her son.

Queen Katherines Letters of confolation, sent to her son in England.
IT is well remembered (my princely Son) that flatterers undermining Kingdoms,
are Timber-wormes, which lurk in the secret celles of Princes consciences,
that counterfeites the complexions of all creatures, and filles their boosoms
up with the noble blood of honorable Houses: Why had not you then read and
turned over the ancient Chronicles of England, and seen into the fall of
Princes, practiced by the pride of flattering startups? The Lacedimonian
Kings, although preserved in walls of Iron, and in towers and castles of
brass, yet by the deceit of flattering traitors, were their princely gloryes
subverted to miserable infamy. The Grecian Princes continually placed in
Chariots and close Litters of gold, guarded with great armies and hoastes of
puissant Soldiers; yet through the sufferance of false flatterers, were they
daily diuerted to sudden confusion. I say my dear and honorable Son, look
into the government of our ancient Kings of England, who retaind none into
their counsels, but the sons of Noble families, borne to honorable gifts of
nature, wise, virtuous, and of a civil government: If any of a bace birth
were entertained into Princes favors, first were they tried, and then trusted:
deserved, then honored: well approved, and then credited. I say, if either
learning, wisdom, or experience, had in any point ruled thee, sweet flattery
had not thus ouerreacht thee, nor subtle dissembling so deceived thee: and to
conclud, King Edward my husband and thy father, in love equal unto us both,
may not be undermined by me, nor resisted by thee. I may well council, but not
defend thee, nor any way minister comfort to thy sorrowful afflictions,
especially against mine own dear husband, and thy father: and as I admonish
thee to reverence his person, so I charge thee to restrain thy stubborn will;
for although he has heaped manifold miseries upon my back, yet with all
honor to his person will I discarge my self. Thus fare you well, from the
Court of Normandy.

Your sorrowful Mother, unhappy Katherine.


Queen Katherine although she favored her son, yet would she not seek to
resist King Edward her husband, but with wisdom, obedience, and humility,
gave the world to understand, what glory and magnificence adorned her patience:
and although motherly nature willed her to seek the advancement of her son,
yet discretion did medigate the means that might scandolize the honor of her
husband. Whereas Queen Katherine rested in equal love indifferently between
them both, so the Earl of London being her brother, and Prince Edmonds Uncle,
matched in marriage with the Duchess of Britain, which honorable preferment
happened through his sisters credit, who understanding of his Cousins
distress, as well by King Edwards prepared ^^^a^^on, as Winchesters false
trecheries in denouncing his subjection, raised a great Army of soldiers, to
the number of thirty thousand able warriors, the which he conveyed into
England to be employed in Prince Edmonds service.

On the other side, the good Duke of Suffolk, after his banishment from
England, was highly graced with so tunes felicity, where through his
Knighthood and manly behavior, he got such good lyking of the Queen of
Portingale, into which cruntrey he traveled, that she received him into her
favor, and changed his wandering life into princely estimation, betrothing her
love and kingdom to his government whilst she lived: and after her death,
this noble Duke, by the general voice of the Portingals, was elected King and
ruler in her stead.

The Duke of Suffolk being thus crowned King of Portingale, not of compulsion,
but in courtesy, requested ten thousand able men to be pressed in his friend
Edmonds behalf: the which multitude being levied, and accepted into service,
were conducted into England, and there by Prince Edmond most courteously
entertained: who being now strengthened with the Duke of Suffolkes soldiers
from Portingale, with the Earl of Londons soldiers from Britain, and with
his own soldiers in England, being all conveyed into one main Battle, he
waighed in the balance of discretion, either an honorable winning of renown,
or a loosing of all his kingly dignities.

So upon a time, assembling all the whole Army of soldiers together, as well
Britains, Portingales, as Englishmen, who to inflame their undoubted minds
to honorable resolution, upon an open Theator he spoke this Oration following.

Prince Edmonds Oration to his Soldiers.
ALthough this our dominion of England (most noble Soldiers and worthy
Subjects) has of late been made a common spoil by sundry bace flatterers,
and impudent traitors, deeply digging and undermining our royal estate: The
fresh memory of which English miseries, through Casiopes filthy life, the
wicked Barrons cruel extortion, and the Bastards false usurpation, might
easily from your eyes constrain a fountain of tears: which grievous
calamities at length through my Mothers care was taken away, and my self being
young, and without experience, settled among you, am now in hazard to be
bereaved not only of life, but of rule and government: the which if it be
unfortunately brought to pass, what other hopes may you then expect, but to
be ransacked and dispoyled of all your possessions and wealth: your young men
put to violent sword, your wives ravished, and your daughters every one
defloured: surely then let troth be in your hearts, stir up your valors,
manifest your noble minds, and stretch forth the power and strength of men,
whereby that they which seek to win our joys, may first be drowned in a
sea of sorrows: and those that will be honored with crowns, must first in
marshal fields obtain a victory: therefore my loving soldiers, if you
steadfastly stand, I will sprinkle my heart blood upon our English ground, before
that cowardice shall enforce me to fly, or loose one iotte or little portion
of my kingdom. Be not amazed my friends and countrymen, either let us live to
maintain our states together at liberty, or else loose our lives with fame and
renown. Thus much I trust, suffices to witness the unfeigned affection the
which I bear toward you; from whose love, I will never depart, till death.


THis Knightly Oration, so rejoiced the soldiers hearts, that they almost
willingly offered their lives a sacrifice in Prince Edmonds service, and made
choice rather to fight in defense of their Country, then to be captiuated with
tyrannical slavery: for whereas the English forces were before separated in
their several opinions, so now were they with inseparable hearts knit fast
together, valiantly resolved to try the last event of this dangerous war.

Thus whilst Prince Edmond encouraged his followers in this Knightly manner, the
Denmark King, with King Edward, arrived on the coasts of England with a
mighty band of armed soldiers, intermingled with the aid of many foreign
Princes, who marched succesfully to a convenient place in Rent, whereas they
pitched their forces at the bottom of a high hill: in which place, the Danish
King being a perfect good soldier, and a man of a prudent judgment,
practiced many excellent pollicyes: for in the night time, he caused a thousand
wild horses with hollow rattls of iron fastened to their necks, to be sent
forth upon the English tents without return: this in-rode being so confusedly
entered, he ordained also an host of four thousand soldiers to pursue them
with wild fire and burning brimstone in their hands. In this manner entered
they upon the English soldiers as naked men, and dispoiled the whole multitude
of their lives: in which conflict, Prince Edmond was taken prisoner, who had
his head (by his own fathers commandment) stricken from his shoulders, and
pitched upon the top of a Pikes end.

The battle thus ceasing: news by a public report was spread throughout the
land of Prince Edmonds death: at which report the cities and principal houlds
in the country were yielded up, and the foreign soldiers being enforced to
shift for themselves, escaped away in the night: after whose departure, King
Edward although in utter hatred of the people, yet once again gloriously
entered into his kingdom, and became their governor: where, after he had
settled himself, and the Denmark King taken leave, and departed back into his
Eountrey: but King Edward reposses sing his former estate larde sharp
punishments and hard laws upon the English-mens backs, the which brought
him again into cankered contempt: for the people being unruly, with unbridled
will placed their former malice against him: upon which, the King for his
better fecuritie resigned his crown and government to his daughter Silina,
and unto Lord Essricke her husband, and so betook himself to private pleasure
and rest.

Lord Essricke and fair Silura with renowned honor thus took upon them the
government of the land, and because they were unacquainted with the manners and
conditions of the people, they retained Sir, Perce of Winchester to be
esperially of their council, and their only Secretary, who cunningly dehaued
himself, that he obtained the faudr and friendship of the common fort, winding
himself more and more into their priuities in such sort, that he persuaded the
people that Lord Essticke and Lady Siluia were unnatural Princes, and unfit to
govern so souing a people.

Sir Perce of Winchester thus got into the love of the common sort, winked
upon all transgressions, fa^^^^ed traitors, thieves, harlots, and such
dissolute persons, and many times having a company of simple then in his
presents, he would speak to them in this manner, saying Oh if I were your
governor, and the awful sword of Justice in my hands, what liberty the^ should
ouershadow your attions for without controusment or punishment then, should you
freely live, and have both honor, wealth, and pleasure, at your will.

This practice fecretly came to king Edwards ears, who being well acquainted
with the driftes of flatterers, trembling at the memory of his former
miseries, led Winchester by fair words up to the top of a high Tower, whereas
ouerlooking the same, King Edward, with other confederates, appointed for that
purpose, cast him hedlong over the wall, dashing his bones against the hard
ground, and so brake his neck: even as he craftily crept into the favor of
the common sort, so wretchedly with shame and dishonor ended he his life.

Now King Edward thinking the estate of his kingdom freed from all traitrous
complotters gave him self wholly to voluptuous desires: and having unchaste
lust harboring in his ^^est (against all nature) he desired incestious
concupisence with fair Siluia his own daughter: and being in a secret chamber
ready to enforce her to that filthy fact, she spoke to him in this manner.

Dear Father, remember the honor of your house, my alcadance and duty to my
husband, and the violating of my nuptial chastetie: all which (if you commit
your pretended sin) will bring a heavy judgment and grievous scourge from
God to punish our wicked deed, and evermore in this world we shall be made a
disdain and open contempt to be gaped at. All which persuasions nothing
prevailed, for the King being drowned in forgetfulness of former miseries,
enforced vehemently the rauishment and deflowring of his daughter Siluiaes
honorable chastety: the which being no sooner obtained, and shamefully
committed, but by the just judgment of God, he was suddenly stricken with
death: for in his daughters presence, a fearful flambe of burning fire
descended from the celestial throne of heaven, and bereaved him both of speech
and life in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye. Which strange vengeance was
no little vexation to the sorrowful heart of Lady Siluia; yet remembering the
duty of a daughter to her father, she caused a costly Monument of pure wrought
gold to be framed, wherein with her husbands consent) he was with great honor
intombed, as though he had left this transitory world naturally, without any
such violent end.

After king Edwards death thus strangely happened, Lord Essrick upon his own
absolute authority bore sway among the people, who was not able to govern the
country, except it were with merciless tyranny: for the natures of
Englishmen be evermore such, that they will not endure nor sustame the burdens
of any foreign Prince. In the reformation of which rule, they did not only
dispirse su^^y infamous slanders against him throughout the whole ^^untrey,
but also traitorously conspired the final destruction of his life: which
wilful treacheries might have easily bin prevented, had not Lord Essricke
misliked the sweet and pleasant marriage estate of virtuous Siluia his wife:
for after her company became loathsome to his good liking, the dominion could
not long continue vnhazarded.

Lord Essricke was not only now led with an ambitious and princely desire, but
also had his affections over mastered with witless cogitations, fervently
burning with the strange Just of the English Ladies: and being thus vainly
intended, he disdayned the comely beauty and honorable personage of fair
Siluia; whereby bright gold seemed dross, pure wine reputed stinking water:
and the pleasant flowers before smelling sweetly, were now esteemed stinking
weeds. Thus his wholesome senses being corrupted with lust, fair Siluias
virtues in his eyes seemed nothing delightsome: so loathsome he accounted her
presence to his company, that he daily practiced a mean whereby she might be
dispatched: but at last, after many devises touching her death, he consulted
about the same with a doctor of Physic, who although well qualletied, and
singulerly experienced, and deeply seen in that noble and reverent science,
yet a covetous gain, and a desire of estimation (as a lewd instrument to any
vile purpose) puffed him up, and made him consent to the overthrow and fatal
finishyng of the sweet and tender life of Lady Siluia: who having received an
earnest of a rich reward from Lord Essricke, he prepared a fatal potion to
cast her into her everlasting sleep. The which Potion, or rather deadly
Poison, being no sooner ministered by the Physician, and received by fair
Siluia, but presently she was drowned in a deadly and vnwakefull sleep,
wherein her vital senses were so mortified, that her sweet body loosing both
strength and operation, yielded up her dellicate life without hope of
^^^ouerie. The uncertainty of Siluias death being reported abroad, caused many
doubtful surmises to be made, some one way, some another of her tragical end:
but yet to salve this contagious sore, Lord Essricke her husband, by
proclamation published throughout the dominion of England her honorable and
liberal Funeral: the which was openly solemnized in the city of London, not
only to creep into the favors of the vulgar sort of people, but also to
cloak and bury the murder up in hidden secrecy; by which cunning means he
thought the more safer to climb to the highest top of the Kingdom, without
either stop or impedimented stay by any one whatsoever.

After the honorable funeral of Lady Siluia was finished, and her dellicate
body intombed in the grauelled earth, certain English Priests (by a general
speech daily given out by the common sort) heard reported, that Lady Siluia was
buried by her husbands appointment with great store of treasure about her: to
the attayning thereof, to the number of forty official Priests, in a night
secretly attempted to dig up the Ladies body, thereby to enrich themselves
with inestimable store of treasure, that all their lives afterward might be
stored with plenty of wealth. But now to put this exployet and vile enterprise
in practice, in the mddle hour of the night they met all together at Silu^^es
Tomb, where they speedely delued and dug up her sanctified body: the which
being taken up, they perceived their intentes to be frustrate; and missing the
gaiue of that which they most desired, they suddenly departed, and let the
coarse naked upon the bare ground, the which so openly was left to be seen of
every one, that all the beholders might easily perceuie, that she had her death
contrived by the violence of poison.

The body of S^^^ia being thus privily vntombed, present news of the same was
transported to he hearing of Lord Essricke, who fearing his unnatural
murdering of her dainty life would be brought in public question to the
world, therefore presently sending for the Physician, whose counsel he chiefly
re^uired in this cause, and diligently fadomed the deapth thereof how Lord
Essricke might best regard his own person, defend his credit, and possess
the Kingdom in the honor of the people. But now such was the frawdullem
attempts of these two secret murderers, by in^^^sition they found, that the
conspiracy and treason in digging up of Siluias body proceeded from the
English Prelacie: for which fact, most execrable crueitie was prepared for
them: for by the worthy and diligent search, and the Physicians pollecie, the
general number of those English priests which were at the fact doing were
found out, taken, and apprehended, and by order of law put to death. Thus were
the end of the said wicked Prelates, who at their dying hours inwardly
mourned, and grievously lamented their misspent lives, and their ill disguysed
manners in the religion which they professed before God; whose souls were
drawned in the lake of covetousness and extortion, in pride, letcherie, and
ambition: which Priests were the rather put to death, because the common sort
of people daily complained of their wicked conuersations, then their wilful
practices at fair Siluias Tomb.

Lord Essricke to throw him self into the favor of the vulgar sort, as well
to disguise his own leawd life, as to appease the peoples murmurations, he
made a resolute determination, utterly to displease the religious Prelates: all
which nothing prevailed to cover his wickedness, or make him the better liked
amongst the ruder people, whose natures always loatheth and mislyketh strange
and unnatural governments: yet this was the Physicians counsel, to tame and
chastise the manners of the people; which cannot be performed (said he) except
by cruelty, tirrany, inissgouernment, usurpation, taxes, heavy tributes, and
such like: all other gentle means helped not, but rather made them more
fircer, and in manners and conditions the more ruder.

But now discourse we again of the virtuous Queen Katherine, that in the
midst of there troubles in England, had her fame and renown made lorious in
foreign Nations: for during her abode in the Normaine Court, she preferred
the late Lord high Marshalls daughter of England to Duke Robert in marriage
estate, who not long before had buried his Duchess, and committed her
virtuous spirit, to the mighty and supernall majesty of heaven. This young Lady
which now the Normaine Duke had matched withal, by the motion and preferment
of Queen Katherine, was the Lord Marshals daughter, whose father spent the
best blood of his heart, and yielded his life with his famely, in the right and
defense of Queen Katherines chastery, (as you heard before discovered in the
beginning of the history:) in recompense whereof the Queen thus preferred and
advanced his only child and daughter, being of long time under her tuition
educated, and in honorable manner instructed.

But now by the appointment of the immortal powers of heaven, Queen Katherine,
to the accomplishment of all the tragical calamities that long had oppressed
her country England, whose happiness she inwardly in heart most entirely loved,
and long sighed after, with the aid of the Normaine Duke and other Princes of
Christendom, which tenderly affected her virtues, she returned with great
admiration, praise, and renown from her banishment: who being placed in a
Coach of pure gold, drawn with four milk white Palfries, with a rich
imperial Diadem upon her head, a Septer of bright silver in her hand, with
many other gorgeous ornaments which most gloriously adorned bit princely
person: in which sumptuous manner she entered upon the coast of her native
Country from whence she was unjustly banished: whereon, being no sooner come
on land, but there met her such multitudes of distressed English people that
the pleasant pastures where she travailed seemed to be ouerspread, who
entertained her with exceeding joy (saying aloude with a general voice) Oh
happy is the hour, and blessed is the day that our renowned Queen is returned
from banishment: the gods preserve and bliss her with everlasting peace, and
send her long to reign and govern us with joy and great tranquillity, in more
admired glory then did ever Queen in this happy Island. These, and such like
speeches was spoken both of young and old, not only to her great joy, but to
the excreding comfort of all the foreign Princes, her well willers.

But now Lord Essricke and his chief Counselor the Physician, perceiving the
whole Country to revolt from their subjection, and willingly yielded to the
wished government of Queen Katherine: which unexpected alteration caused them
both to submit themselves to her gracious favor: who remembering the death of
Prince Edmund and the murdering of Siluia her dear children, and also what
inconvenience and disturbance by prolonging their lives might happen to the
commonweal: Therefore in straight execution she commanded her will effectually
to be discharged, which was, to have Lord Essrick and his Councellers head
presently deseuered from their shoulders: the which was not so strictly
commanded, as speedely performed.

The great prosperity and wealth wherewith Queen Katherine by her return
from banishment, bewtified and enriched England, did so much rejoice the dying
spirits of the mournful people, that they were glorified in their own desires,
and every one deemed their fortunes lifted from long continued misery, to
everlasting felicity. But now the virtuous Queen, to make requital for the
good Duke of Soffolkes banishment, and heinous injuries besides, in times past
extended through the unbridled fury of her husbands wrath, much desired his
return into England to possess his own patrimonies, lands, and lofty
dignities so long witholden from him: Therefore to the same effect she sent
Ambassadors speedily into Porttingall, where she heard he remained and
governed in Princely estate: which knowledge was no sooner given to the Duke,
but with majesty, sumptuous renown, and abundant of treasures furnished on
every side, he hastened into England: who by the virtuous Queen was received
with surpassing glory and magnificence: long had not these two princely
personages remained in the English Court, but by the consent of the whole
Country, they were joined and matched together in the lawful estate of
marriage, by whose wise government the land of Egland in short time, not only
became populous, rich, honorable, and quiet: but replenished with all manner of
necessary things. And finally, Queen Katherine marrying the good Duke of
Suffolk, together with the consent and advice of the whole dominion, were
crowned legetimate governors of England: where they inioyed issue and
posterity between them, with long life, prosperous renown, eternal honor,
and everlasting felicity.

(*)

FINIS.
blazon or coat of arms

Imprinted at London by William White dwelling in Cow-lane. 1600.


