A declaration of the Frontispice.
BEfore you travel to the Holy land,
Behold a Page that in the front does stand
To give you aim and guidance in the way.
First Europe bids your observation stay
Upon a Purse of gold (wars surest nerve)
Whose every Cross is interess'd to serve
^'th' Holy war. The gain (alas!) no more
Then Crosses Gules in stead of Crosses Or.
But see the troops, see how they march along:
Where several ranks and orders make a throng
Promiscuously blended; sex and age,
Nation and language jointly do engage
Their devout forces to redress thy woes,
Jerusalem, ravished by barbarous foes.
Peter the Monk, leaving his sullen cell,
His Beads, and Offices, and every spell
Of his mysterious zeal, breaks forth at last
To kindle all the world with fat all blast.
First Kings proceed; and Captains follow them:
The helmet waits upon the diadem.
The next are Prelates; who stray far from home
To win the glorious name of Martyrdom.
Since all their mild persuasions could not work
Upon th'obdurate Antichristian Turk,
They will at length (if naught prevent their plot)
Confute his Alcoran with sword and shot.
After those reverend men, whose cloven mitres
Speak them not warriors so much as writers,
A bald-pate regiment of Friars comes;
Whose crowns might serve the army for their drums,
And give as full a sound, if you will confess
The greatest noise t'arise from emptiness.
Then moves the main Battalia, straightly knit
Into a steadie Phalanx, square, but fit
To spread, or lengthen, or with art to pare
The corners till the band grow circular
T'environ the enemy; briefly, to reduce
Their various postures unto every use.
These are the only Forces; all the rest
Impediments but specious at the best.
But oh amazement! what is that we see?
A troup of Ladies in the next degree.
Each one appears a Pallas to the field
Dropped newly from Jove's brain with spear and shield:
Or M^rs so long his Venus has possessed,
Courage is stol^n into her tender breast.
March on, brave Amazons: conquest and praise
Weave you a chaplet of immortal bays;
Which you, when Autumn-age shall pluck your hair,
In stead of costly perriwigs may wear.
March on: For the shrill trumpet and the fife,
Your tongues may serve; then to secure your life
You need no weapons, every face and eye
Carries sufficient artillery.
A slender company does next succeed:
Call it the Infantrie; it is so indeed.
As if the driving of the Turks away
From Christian cities, were but childrens play.
The last in this Religious army crawls
A band collected out of Hospitals
And Spittles. One would think this piteous sight
Did rather come from war then go to fight.
Their commendation's this, How-e're the day
Shall chance to prove, they will hardly run away.
This is the total muster. Let the book
Tell their achievements: Mean time as you look
Upon this Frontispice, you will plainly see
Their dismal end and sad Catastrophe.
The Incensed Angel with his flaming blade
Great slaughter of perfidious souls has made.
To teach us truth and justice, see how God
Scourges their falsehood with a fiery rod.
Then the grand Signor his proud fauchion stretches
With domineering hand over the wretches
Low prostrate at his foot. Can Christian eyes
Endure this figure! Let the captives rise,
Surly black Saracen; their bended knee
Has higher objects then to reverence thee:
They serve a Lord greater then Mahomet.
Though now their sun be darkened and beset
With clouds of disadvantage, time will be
When such poor things shall triumph over thee;
And their old prophecy shall be made good,
Thy Moon shall then be turned into blood.
The last of their destroyers that you see,
Is that same ghastly thing the Anatomy
Does represent; a naked cage of bone,
From whence the winged soul long since is flown:
They call it Death. He with his double band,
Sickness and casualty on either hand,
Met many stragglers, forcing them to yield:
And where the Turk before him got the field,
He took the gleanings. Thus our soldiers f^ll
By th'Angel, Turk, and Death; heaven, earth, and hell.
Those that escaped, came home as full of grief
As the poor Purse is empty of relief.
They Are turned, and so is it; but nothing in it,
Till new devotion shall repair the Mint.
Mean while read over the History: your brain
There you may fill, though not the Purse again.
J. C.

THE HISTORY of the HOLY WAR. By Tho Fuller, B.D. Prebendarie of Sarum, late
of Sidney-Coll. in Cambridge.

John. 4.21. The hour comes when ye shall neither in this mountain nor yet al
Jerusalem worship the Father.

Acts. 5.38. If this counsel be of men it will come to naught.



Printed by Thomas Buck one of the Printer^ to the University of Cambridge. and
are sold by John Williams at (...) in S. P. Churchyard.

THE HISTORY of the HOLY WAR; By THOMAS FVLLER, B. D. Prebendarie of Sarum,
late of Sidney College in CAMBRIDGE.

Printed by THOMAS BUCK, one of the Printers to the Universitie of CAMBRIDGE,
1639.

To the Honorable EDWARD MONTAGU, Sr JOHN POWLET,
Sons and Heirs to the Right Honorable EDWARD Lord MONTAGU of Boughton. JOHN
Lord POWLET of Hinton-St-George.

WHen I observe the several alterations in Nobility, I find four principal
actours on the theaters of great Families; the Beginner, Advancer, Continuer,
and Ruiner. The Beginner is he who by his virtues refineth himself from the
dross of the vulgar, and lays the foundation of his house: An excellent
workman indeed, as who not only brings his tools, but makes his materials.
The Advancer, who improveth the patrimony of Honor he receives; and what his
Father found glass and made crystal, he finds crystal and makes it pearl.
The Continuer, who keeps his Nobility alive, and passes it along neither
marring nor mending it; but sends it to his Son as he received it from his
Father. The Ruiner, who basely degenerateth from his Ancestors; so that in him
Nobility has run so far from its first starting, that it is tired: and
whilst he lives he is no better then his Grandfathers tomb; without, carved
over with honorable titles; within, full of emptiness, or what is worse,
corruption.

Now to apply. You cannot be Beginners of your Families; that care was cared
for before your nurses were chosen, or your cradles provided. Your Fathers,
though of late years fixed in a higher Sphere, were bright Stars long
before. None can go on in our English Chronicles, but they must meet with a
Montagu and a Powlet, either in peace in their gowns, or in war in their
armor. Yea, when I go backward by the streams of your Paternall Nobility,
(not to speak of the tributarie brooks of their matches) I can never find the
first fountain; and hope none shall ever find the last fall. For as for the
ruiners of houses, I should rend that thought out with my heart, if it should
conceive that of you. Nay, let me tell you; if you be but bare continuers of
your Honor, you deceive both the desires and hopes of your friends. Good is
not good when proceeding from them from whom far better is expected. Your
youthful virtues are so promising, that you cannot come off in your riper age
with credit without performing what may redound to the advancing of the honor
of your family, and without building your houses one story higher in the
English History.

Now know, next Religion, there is nothing accomplisheth a man more then
Learning. Learning in a Lord, is as a diamond in gold. And if you fear to hurt
your tender hands with thornie School-questions, there is no danger in meddling
with History, which is a velvet-study, and recreation-work. What a pity is it
to see a proper Gentleman to have such a crick in his neck that he cannot look
backward! yet no better is he who cannot see behind him the actions which long
since were performed. History makes a young man to be old, without either
wrinkles or gray hairs; priviledging him with the experience of age, without
either the infirmities or inconveniences thereof. Yea, it not only makes
things past, present; but inableth one to make a rational conjecture of things
to come. For this world affords no new accidents, but in the same sense
wherein we call it a new Moon, which is the old one in another shape, and yet
no other then what has been formerly. Old actions return again, furbished over
with some new and different circumstances.

Now amongst all particular histories (I may say) none is more general then
this of the Holy war, which now I present to your Honors. Some will condemn
me for an ill husband, in lavishing two Noble Patrones on one book, whereas one
of them might have served to have patronized many volumes. But first, I did it
in the weak expression of my thankfulness unto you, being deeply indebted to
you both; and I thought it dishonestie to pay all to one creditour and none to
another; and therefore conceived it best, to share my estate jointly betwixt
you, as far forth as it would extend. Secondly, considering the weakness of
this Work, now being to walk abroad in the world, I thought it must be led by
both arms, and needed a double supporter. And now I am sure this Holy war,
which was unhappie heretofore, when acted; will be happy hereafter, now
written and related, because dedicated to your Honors. So rests

Your Honors in all service THO. FULLER.
Broad-windsor, March 6. 1638.
To the Reader.
IN this work I can challenge nothing to my self, but the composing of it. The
materials were found to my hand: which if any Historian will make, let him not
be commended for wit, but shamed for falsehood. If everywhere I have not
charged the margin with the Authors names, it is either because the story is
author for it self (I mean, generally received) or to avoid the often citing
of the same place. Where I could not go abroad my self, there I have taken air
at the window, and have cited Authors on others citations; yet so that the
stream may direct to the fountain.

If the reader may reap in few hours what cost me more months, just cause
have I to rejoice, and he (I hope) none to complain. Thus may the faults of
this book redound to my self, the profit to others, the glory to God.

To his worthily dear friend, THOMAS FVLLER, B. D. upon his excellent work,
the HOLY WAR.
PEace is thy Calling, friend; thy Title, War:
What, does thy Title with thy Calling jarre?
The Holy war! this makes the wonder cease:
An holy war becomes a man of peace.
Tasso, be silent; my friend speaks: his Story
Has robbed thy poem of its long-lived glory.
So rich his vein, his lines of so high state,
Thou can not feign so well as he relate.
Godfrey first entered on this war, to free
His Saviors Tomb from Turks captivity:
And too-too meanly of himself he deems,
If thus he his Redeemer not redeems.
A glorious end! nor did he fear to err,
In losing life, to gain Christ's Sepulcher.
But I dare say, were Godfrey now alive,
( Godfrey, who by thy pen must needs survive)
He would again act over his noble toil,
Doing such deeds as should the former foil;
If for no other reason, yet to be
Delivered unto time and fame by thee:
Nor would he fear in such exploits to bleed;
Then to regain a Tomb, now not to need.
ROBERT GOMERSALL, Vicar of Thorncombe in Devon.

OF this our Authors book I Will say but this,
(For that is praise ample enough) It Is his:
Nor all the Muses nor Apollo's lays
Can sing his worth; be his own lines his bays.
ROBERT TYRLING.

On Mr FULLERS History of the HOLY WAR.
THen, Christians, rest secure: ye need not band
Henceforth in Holy leagues for the Holy land,
To conquer and recover't from the Turk:
It Is done already: FVLLERS learned work
And pen more honor to the cause does bring,
Then did Great Godfrey or our Lion-King.
Jerusalem with darkness long beset,
Captived to time more then to Mahomet,
Inthrall'd to silence and oblivion
(A bondage worse then that of Babylon)
Is now redeemed. Lo, by this sacred Story
How she revives into her ancient glory!
Look, how her buried pinnacles 'gin to peep
Out of their venerable dust and sleep!
See, how the Temple and the Sepulcher,
Waked with the trumpet of this Holy war
From their own grave and ruins, do resent
A resurrection by this monument!
Stay, Pilgrims, stay; wander not hence so far;
Set up your rest here in this Holy war.
Here you may visit and adore the Shrine
For which so many Saints in arms combine.
Behold the zealous squadrons, how they stand
Armed with devotion for the Holy land.
They Will take you, if not it: while ye admire
Their zeal, your love will kindle at this fire.
Thus learned FVLLER a full conquest makes,
Triumphs over time, and men's affections, takes
Captive both it and them; his history
Me thinks is not a War, but Victory:
Where every line does crown (such strength it bears)
The Author Laureate, and a trophey rears.
JAMES DUPORT, B. D. T. C.

To his worthy and learned friend Mr THO. FULLER, upon his excellently composed
History of the HOLY WAR.
CAptain of Arts, in this thy Holy war
My Muse desires to be thy Trumpeter,
In thy just praise to spend a blast or two:
For this is all that she (poor thing) can do.
Peter the Hermit, like an angry owl,
Would needs go fight all armed in his cowl.
What, had the Holy man naught else to do,
But thus to lose his blood and credit too?
Seeking to win Christ's Sepulcher, God wot,
He found his own: This was the ground he got.
Except he got more ground, when he one day
Besieging Antioch fiercely ran away.
Much wiser was the Pope: At home he stayed,
And made the world believe he wept and prayed.
Mean while (behold the fruit of feigned tears)
He sets the world together by the cares.
His head serves him, whilst others use their hands:
Whilst Princes lose their lives, he gets their lands.
To win the Holy land what need Kings roam?
The Pope can make an Holy land at home
By making it his own: Then for a fashion,
It Is said to come by Constantines donation.
For all this Fox-craft, I have leave (I hope)
To think my friend far wiser then the Pope
And Hermit both: He deals in Holy wars
Not as a stickler in those fruitless jarres,
But a composer rather. Hence this book;
Whereon whilst I with greedy eyes do look,
Me thinks I travel through the Holy land,
Viewing the sacred objects on each hand.
Here mounts (me thinks) like Olivet, brave sense;
There flows a Jordan of pure eloquence:
A Temple rich in ornament I find
Presented here to my admiring mind.
Strange force of Art! The ruined Holy city
Breeds admiration in me now, not pity.
To testify her liking, here my Muse
Makes solemn Vows, as Holy Pilgrims use.
I vow, dear friend, the Holy war is here
Far better writ then ever fought elsewhere.
Thousands have fought and died: But all this while,
I vow, there nothing triumphs but thy style.
Thy wit has vanquished Barbarism more
Then ever Godfrey's valor did before.
Might I but choose, I rather would be far
Be author of thy Book then of that War.
Let others fight; I vow to read thy works,
Prizing thy ink before the blood of Turks.
J. BOOTH, B. D. C. C. C.

On the Title of this book.
HOw comes stern War to be accounted holy,
By nature fierce, complexion melancholy?
I Will tell you how: She Has been at Rome of late,
And gained an indulgence to expiate
Her massacres; and by the Popes command
She Has bin a Pilgrim to the Holy land,
Where freeing Christians by a sacred plot,
She for her pains this Epithet has got.
HUGO ATKINS.

NOr need Jerusalem that holy mother
Envy old Troy; since she has found another
To write her battles, and her wars rehearse
In prose as elegant as Homers verse.
Let Sueton's name august as Cesars be;
Curtius more worlds then Alexander see;
Let Joseph in his countries siege survive,
And Phenix-like in his own ashes thrive:
Thy work, great FVLLER, will outlive their glory,
And make thy memory sacred as thy Story.
Thy style is clear and white: thy very name
Speaks pureness, and adds luster to the frame.
All men could wish, nay long, the world would jarre,
So thou would be pleased to write, compose the War.
H. HUTTON, M. A. C. Jes.

To my friend Mr THOMAS FULLER, on his book The Holy War.
WHile of thy book I speak, Friend, I Will t^ink on
Thy Jordan for my purest Helicon,
And for bifork'd Parnassus, I will set
My fancy on the sacred Olivet.
It Is holy ground which now my measured feet
Must tread on; then (as in due right it is meet)
Let them be bare and plain: for qu^inter art
May sacrifice to thee without a heart;
And while it praises this thy work, may preach
His glory, rather then thy merits reach.
Here, Reader, thou may judge and well compare
Who most in madness, Jew or Roman, share:
This not so blind, yet in the clearest day
Does stumble still on stocks, on stones, on clay;
The other will in bright and highest noon
Choose still to walk by glimmering light of the Moon.
Here thou may represented see the fight
Between our earthly Flesh and heavenly Sp'rit.
Lo, how the Turk does drive with flaming sword
Salvation from him and Gods holy word,
As once the angel did rebellious vice
With Adam force from blessed paradise.
And this in style diamond-like does shine,
Which firmest parts and clearest do combine,
And over the sad ground of the Jewish story
As light embroidrie explayes its glory.
The Temple rased and ruined seems more high
In his strong phrase, then when it kissed the sky;
And as the Viper by those precious tears
Which Phaeton bemon'd, of Amber wears
A rich (though fatal) coat; so here enclosed
With words so rare, so splendent, so composed
Even Mahomet has found a tomb, which shall
Last when the fainting Loadstone lets him fall.
HENRY VINTENER.

To his old friend Mr FULLER.
I Love no wars,
I love no jarres,
Nor strifes fire:
May discords cease;
Let Us live in peace;
This I desire.
If it must be
War we must see
(So Fates conspire)
May we not feel
The force of steel;
This I desire:
But in thy book
When I do look
And it admire;
Let War be there,
But Peace elsewhere;
This I desire.
Tho. Jackson.

To his worthy Friend Mr THOMAS FULLER on his book, The Holy War.
There Is not a story, Friend, in thy book told,
But is a jewel; each line a thread of gold:
Though War sound harsh, and does our minds affright,
Yet clothed in well-wrought language does delight;
Such is thy gilded phrase, I joy to read
In thee massacres, and to see men bleed.
Often have I seen in hangings on a wall
The ruins of great Troy, and Priams fall:
A story in it self so full of woe,
It Would make the Grecian weep that was the foe;
But being wrought in arras, and made gay
With rich embroydery makes th'beholder say,
I like it well; This flame, that scarre is good;
And then commends this wound, that stream of blood.
Things in themselves distasteful are by art
Made pleasant, and do much delight the heart:
Such is thy book: Though it of blood relate,
And horrid War whose very name we hate,
Yet clad in arras-language; and thy phrase
Does not affright, but with delight amaze,
And with such power upon our senses seize,
That makes War, dreadful in it self, to please.
WILLIAM JOHNSON, Q. Coll.

To his dear Friend Mr FULLER.
WE need not now those zealous vot'ries meet,
Or pilgrims turn; but on our verses feet.
Thy quill has winged the earth; the Holy land
Does visit us, commanded by thy hand.
If envy make thy labors prove thy loss,
No marvel, if a Croisade wear the Cross.
CLEMENT BRETTON, Sidn. Coll.

Errata.
Page
10 Sabell. Aen. Read Sabell. Enn. 12 Sabell. Aen. Read Sabell. Enn. 72 For
Paulinus, Read Pontius. 114 For Charatux, Read Characux. 155 For Noradine,
Read Coradine. 205 For Nanse, Read Nuise. 243 For Burbant, Read Bourbon. 264
For four Albergies, Read seven Albergies. 267 For necessary security, Read
necessary severity. 275 For offertures, Read offers. Last page of the
Chronol. For Peter Belius, Read Peter Belvise. In the Table For Charatux,
Read Characux.
The History of the HOLY WAR. Book I.
Chap. 1. The destruction of the city and temple of Jerusalem by the Romans
under the conduct of Titus.
Anno Dom. 34.
WHen the Jews had made the full measure of their sins run over by putting
to death the Lord of life, Gods judgments (as they deserved, and our Savior
foretold) quickly overtook them: for a mighty army of the Romans besieged and
sacked the city of Jerusalem, 72.
wherein by fire, famine, sword, civil discord, and foreign force Josephus,
lib. 7. belli Iud. Gr. c. 45. Lat. c. 17.
eleven hundred thousand were put to death. An incredible number it seems:
yet it comes within the compass of our belief, if we consider that the siege
began at the time of the Passover, when in a manner all Judea was enclosed in
Jerusalem, all private synagogues doing then their duties to the mother-temple;
so that the city then had more guests then inhabitants. Thus the Passover
first Exodus 12.13.
instituted by God in mercy to save the Israelites from death, was now used by
him in justice to hasten their destruction, and to gather the nation into a
bundle to be cast into the fire of his anger. Besides those who were slain,
ninety seven thousand were taken captives; and they who had bought our Savior
for thirty pence, Adricom. is Actis Apost. fol. 282. credo, ex Hegesipp^.
were themselves sold thirty for a penie. The General of the Romans in this
action was Titus, son to Vespasian the Emperor. A prince so good, that he
was styled the Suetonius, in Tit^.
Darling of mankind for his sweet and loving nature; (and pity it was so good
a stock had not been better grafted!) so virtuously disposed, that he may
justly be counted the glory of all Pagans, and shame of most Christians. He
labored what lay in his power to have saved the temple, and many therein; but
the Jews by their obstinacy and desperateness made themselves incapable of
any mercy. Then was the temple it self made a sacrifice, and burnt to ashes;
and of that stately structure which drew the Apostles admiration, not a stone
left upon a stone. The walls of the city (more shaken with the sins of the
Jews defending them, then with the battering rams of the Romans assaulting
them) were levelled to the ground; only three towers left standing to witness
the great strength of the place, and greater valor of the Romans who
conquered it. But whilst this storm fell on the unbeleeving Jews, it was calm
amongst the Christians; who warned by Christ's predictions, Eusebius. Eccl. hist.
lib. 3. cap. 5.
and many other prodigies, fled betimes out of the city to Pella (a private
place beyond Jordan) which served them in stead of a little Zoar to save them
from the imminent destruction.

Chap. 2. How Judea was dispeopled of Jews by Adrian the Emperor.
THreescore years after, 132.
Adrian the Emperor rebuilt the city of Jerusalem, changing the situation
somewhat westward, and the name thereof to Aelia. To despite the Christians, he
built a Hieron. tom. 1. page 104.
temple over our Saviors grave, with the images of Jupiter and Venus; another
at Bethlehem, to Adonis her minion: and to enrage the Jews, did engrave swine
over the gates of the city: Who storming at the profanation of their land,
brake into open rebellion, but were subdued by Julius Severus the Emperors
lieutenant, an experienced captain, and many thousands slain, with Bencochab
their counterfeit Messiah (for so he termed himself) that is, the fonne of a
star, usurping that prophecy, Number. 24.17.
Out of Jacob shall a star arise; though he proved but a fading comet, whose
blazing portended the ruin of that nation. The captives, by order from Adrian,
were transported into Spain; the country laid waste, which parted with her
people and fruitfulness both together. Indeed pilgrims to this day here and
there light on parcels of rich ground in Palestine: which God may seem to have
left, that men may taste the former sweetness of the land, before it was sowred
for the peoples sins; and that they may guess the goodness of the cloth by
the finenesse of the shreds. But it is barren for the generality: the streams
of milk and honey wherewith once it flowed, are now drained dry; and the Sand.
Trav. fol. 145.
whole face of the land looks sad, not so much for want of dressing, as
because God has frowned on it. Yet great was the oversight of Adrian, thus
totally to unpeople a province, and to bequeath it to foxes and leopards.
Though his memory was excellent, yet here he forgot the old Romans rule, who
to prevent desolations, where they rooted out the natives, planted in colonies
of their own people. And surely the country recovered not a competencie of
inhabitants for some hundred years after. For though many pilgrims came
thither in after-ages, yet they came rather to visit then to dwell: and such as
remained there, most embracing single lives, were no breeders for posterity. If
any say that Adrian did wilfully neglect this land, and prostitute it to ruin
for the rebellion of the people; yet all account it small policy in him, in
punishing the Jews to hurt his own empire, and by this vastation to leave fair
and clear footing for foreign enemies to fasten on this country, and from
thence to invade the neighboring dominions: as after the Persians and Saracens
easily overran and dispeopled Palestine; and no wonder if a thin meadow were
quickly mown. But to return to the Jews; Such stragglers of them, not
considerable in number, as escaped this banishment into Spain (for few hands
reap so clean as to leave no gleanings) were forbidden to enter into Jerusalem,
or so much as to behold it from any rise or advantage of ground. Hieron. tom.
6. page 256.
Yet they obtained of the after-Emperours, once a year (namely, on the tenth
of August, whereon their city was taken) to go in and bewail the destruction
of their temple and people, bargaining with the soldiers who waited on them,
to give so much for so long abiding there; and if they exceeded the time they
conditioned for, they must stretch their purses to a higher rate: So that (as
S. Hierome notes) they who bought Christ's blood, were then glad to buy their
own tears.

Chap. 3. Of the present woeful condition of the Jews; and of the small hope,
and great hindrances of their conversion.
THus the main body of the Jews was brought into Spain, and yet they stretched
their out-limbes into every country: so that it was as hard to find a populous
city without a common sink, as without a company of Jews. They grew fat on the
barest pasture, by usurie and brokage; though often squeezed by those
Christians amongst whom they lived, counting them dogs, and therefore easily
finding a stick to beat them. And always in any tumult, when the fense of
order was broken, the Jews lay next harms: as at the coronation of Richard the
first, when the English made great feasts, but the pillaged Jews paid the shot.
Munster, Cosmogr. p. 457.
At last for their many villainies (as falsifying of coin, poisoning of springs,
crucifying of Christian children) they were slain in some places, and finally
banished out of others: Out of England anno 1291 by Edward the first; Polyd.
Virg. page 327.
France 1307, by Philip the Fair; Spain 1492, by Ferdinand; Portugal 1497, by
Emmanuel. But had these two latter kings banished all Jewish blood out of their
countries, they must have emptied the veins of their best subjects, as
descended from them. Still they are found in great numbers in Turkey; chiefly
in Salonichi, where they enjoy the freest slavery: Sandys Trav. page 146.
and they who in our Saviors time so scorned Publicanes, are now most employed
in that office, to be the Turks toll-gatherers: Likewise in the Popish parts of
Germany; in Poland, the Pantheon of all religions: and Amsterdam may be
forfeited to the king of Spain, when she cannot show a pattern of this as of
all other sects. Lastly, they are thick in the Popes dominions, where they are
kept as a testimony of the truth of the Scriptures, and foyl to Christianity,
but chiefly in pretense to convert them. But his Holiness his converting
faculty works the strongest at the greatest distance: for the Indians he
turns to his religion, and these Jews he converteth to his profit. Some are
of opinion of the general calling of the Jews: and no doubt those who dissent
from them in their judgments, concur in their wishes and desires. Yet are
there three grand hindrances of their conversion: First, the offense taken and
given by the Papists amongst whom they live, by their worshipping of images,
the Jews being zelots in the second commandment: Secondly, because on their
conversion they must P. Heylin, Microcos. in Palestine, page 570.
renounce all their goods as ill gotten; and they will scarce enter in at the
door of our Church, when first they must climb over so high a threshold:
Lastly, they are debarred from the use of the New Testament, Sr Ed. Sandys
Survay of the West.
the means of their salvation. And thus we leave them in a state most pitiful,
and little pitied.

Chap. 4. Of the flourishing Church in Judea under Constantine: Julian his
success in building the temple.
ADrian his profanation of Jerusalem lasted Epist. ad Paulinum; tom. 1. p. 104.
180 years, as S. Hierome counts it: during which time, the Christians under
the ten persecutions had scarce a leap-yeare of peace and quiet, and yet bare
all with invincible patience; yea, some were too ambitious of martyrdom, and
rather wooed then waited for their own deaths. At last, Constantine (a Britan
by birth, as Camden, Brit. page 51.
all authors agree, save one or two late wrangling Grecians, who deserve to be
arraigned for felony, for robbing our land of that due honor) stanched the
issue of blood wherewith the Church had long been troubled, and brought her
into acquaintance with peace and prosperity. 326.
Then Helen his mother (no less famous amongst the Christians for her piety,
then the ancient Helen amongst Pagans for her beauty) traveled to Jerusalem;
zeal made her scarce sensible of her age, being 80 years old: and there she
purged mount Calvary and Bethlehem of idolatry; then built in the places of
Christ's birth, and burial, and elsewhere in Palestine, many most stately and
sumptuous churches. And because she visited the stable and manger of our
Saviors nativitie, Jews and Pagans slander her to have been Ambros. cont. in
Theod^sium.
stabularia, an Ostleresse or a she-stable-groom: The same nickname which since
impudent Papists (not for the same reason, but with as little truth) put on
reverend Fox, Martyrol. p. 1860.
Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury. But these dead flies were not able to
corrupt the sweet ointment of her name, fragrant to posterity; and as a Ambros.
ibid.
Father writes of her, Bona stabularia, quae maluit aestimari stercoraria ut
Christum lucrifaceret. To her is ascribed the finding out of the Cross, the
memory whereof is celebrated the third of May. And from that time the Church
flourished in Palestine, being as well provided of able Bishops, as they of
liberal maintenance.

363.
Afterward Julian going about to confute God, befooled himself, and many Jews.
This Apostate studied to invent engines to beat down Christianity: yet all the
vapors of his brain could not cloud so bright a sun. He gave the Jews
liberty (not so much out of love to them, as hatred to Christians) with money
and materials to build again their temple, hoping by raising it to ruin the
truth of Christ's prophecy. Ammian^^ Marcel. lib. 23. sub initio.
Hither flocked the Jews with spades and mattocks of silver to clear the
foundation; the women carried away the rubbish in their laps, and contributed
all their jewels and ornaments to advance the work. But a sudden Socrat. Hist.
Eccl. lib. 3. cap. 20.
tempest made them desist, which carried away their tools and materials, with
balls of fire which scorched the most adventurous of the builders. Theodoret,
lib 3. cap. 20.
Thus they who sought to put out the truth of Christ's words, by snuffing it
made it burn the brighter. Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 22.
But the wonder of this wonder was, that the hearts of the Jews, and of him who
set them on work, were hardened by obstinacy, to be so miracle-proof that all
this made no impression in them. Yet Adricom. Descript. terrae sanctae, page
158.
afterward, the Christians in the place where Solomon's temple was, built a
stately church: but not in opposition to God, or with intent to reestablish
Jewish rites, but in humility, and for the exercise of Christian religion:
which church was long after the seat of the Patriarch. But for fear to exceed
the commission of an Historian (who with the outward senses may only bring in
the species, and barely relate facts, not with the common sense pass verdict
or censure on them) I would say, they had better have built in some other
place, (especially having room enough besides) and left this floor where the
temple stood, alone to her desolations. Yea, God seems not so well contented
with this their act, the Christians being often beaten out of that church; and
at this day Sand. Trav. page 192.
whosoever (though casually) enters therein, must either forfeit his life, or
renounce his religion.

Chap. 5. Syria conquered by Chosroes; Chosroes, by Heraclius the Grecian
Emperor.
THe next remarkable alteration happened under Phocas the Emperor, who (says
Belli sacri lib. 23. cap. ^1
Tyrius) had a nature answering his name, which signifies a Seil, or Sea-calf:
for as that fish (little better then a monster) uses lazily to lie sleeping
and sunning it self on the shore, so this careless usurper minded nothing but
his own ease and pleasure, 610.
till at last he was slain by Heraclius his successor: as seldom tyrants
corpses have any other balm at their burial, then their own blood. Phocas his
negligence betrayed the Empire to foreign foes, 615.
and invited Chosroes the Persian to invade it, who with a great army subdued
Syria and Jerusalem. A conquest little honorable, as made against small
resistance, and used with less moderation: for besides many other cruelties,
Theophanes in Annal.
he sold many thousands of Christians to the Jews their old enemies, who in
revenge of their former grudge, put them not only to drudgery, but to torture.
Chosroes to grace his triump carried the Cross away with him, forced all the
Christians in Persia to turn Paulus Diaconus, Miscel. lib. 18.
Nestorians, and demanded of Heraclius the Grecian Emperor, that he should
renounce his religion, and worship the Cedrenus.
Sun. Thus we see how lightheaded this Pagan did talk, being stark drunk with
pride. But the Christian Emperor entering Persia with great forces quelled at
last this vaunting Sennacherib: for to him might he well be compared, for
pride, cruelty, blasphemous demands, and the manner of his death, 628.
being also slain by Siroes one of his sons. Heraclius returning took
Jerusalem in his way, and there restored Tyrius, bell. sacr. lib. 23. cap. 20.
the Cross (counted a precious jewel) to the temple of the Sepulcher, the
cabinet whence it had been violently taken away; and in memorial thereof,
instituted on the 14 of September the feast of the Exaltation of the Cross.
Yet Baronius, in Martyrolog. 14 Sept.
some make the celebration thereof of greater antiquity: and the Grecians
write, that Chrysostom (an hundred years before) died on the day called the
Exaltation of the Cross. This if it be true, and not antedated by a Prolepsis,
then Heraclius gave the luster (not first original) to this festival, and
scoured bright an old holy day with a new solemnity.

Chap. 6. Of the deluge of the Saracens in Syria, the causes of the far
spreading of Mahometanisme.
BUt the sins of the Eastern countries, and chiefly their damnable heresies,
hastened Gods judgments upon them. In these Western parts, heresies like an
angle caught single persons; which in Asia, like a drag-net, took whole
provinces* The stayed and settled wits of Europe were not easily removed out of
the old rode and tract of religion, whiles the active and nimble heads of the
East were more desirous of novelties, more cunning to invent distinctions to
cozen themselves with, more fluent in language to express their conceits, as
always errors grow the fastest in hot brains. Hence it came to pass, that
Melchites, Maronites, Nestorians, Eutycheans, Jacobites, overspread these
parts, maintaining their pestilent tenants with all obstinacy, which is that
dead flesh which makes the green wound of an error fester by degrees into the
old sore of an heresy. Then was it just with God to suffer them who would not
be convinced with Christian Councels, to be subdued by the Pagans sword: For
though Chosroes had not long a settled government in Palestine, but as a
land-floud came and went away quickly; yet the Saracens who shortly followed,
as standing water drowned all for a long continuance. 636.
Tyrius, bell. sacr. lib. 1. page 2.
These under Haumar Prince of Arabia, took Jerusalem, conquered Syria, and
propagated the doctrine of Mahomet round about.

It may justly seem admirable how that senseless religion should gain so much
ground on Christianity; especially having neither real substance in her
doctrine, nor winning behavior in her ceremonies to allure professors. For
what is it but the scumme of Judaisme and Paganism sod together, and here and
there strewed over with a spice of Christianity? As Mahomets tomb, so many
sentences in his Alcoran seem to hang by some secret loadstone, which draws
together their gaping independences with a mystical coherence, or otherwise
they are flat nonsense. Yet this wonder of the spreading of this leprosy is
lessened, if we consider that besides the general causes of the growing of all
errors (namely the gangrene-like nature of evil, and the justice of God to
deliver them over to believe lies who will not obey the truth) Mahometanisme
has raised it self to this height by some peculiar advantages: First, by
permitting much carnal liberty to the professors (as having many wives) and
no wonder if they get fish enough, that use that bait: Secondly, by promising a
paradise of sensual pleasure hereafter, wherewith flesh and blood is more
affected (as falling under her experience) then with hope of any spiritual
delights: Thirdly, by prohibiting of disputes, and suppressing of all learning;
and thus Mahomet made his shop dark on purpose, that he might vent any wares:
Lastly, this religion had never made her own passage so fast and so far, if
the sword had not cut the way before her, as commonly the conquered follow for
the most part the religion of the conquerours. By this means that cursed
doctrine has so improved it self, that it may outvie with professors the
Church of Rome, which boasts so much of her latitude and extent; though from
thence to infer that her faith is the best, is falsely to conclude the
finenesse of the cloth from the largeness of the measure.

Now the condition of the Christians under these Saracens was as uncertain as
April-weather. Sometimes they enjoyed the liberty and public exercise of
their religion: and to give the Mahometans their due, they are generally
good-fellows in this point, and Christians amongst them may keep their
consciences free, if their tongues be fettered not to oppose the doctrine of
Mahomet. Sometimes they were under fierce and cruel affliction, their Bishops
and Ministers forced to fly from their places were kept very poor, as always
the Clergy under persecution count the God gives them living enough, when he
gives them their lives. Tyrius Lib. 1. cap. 5.
mentions one memorable massacre, which they narrowly escaped. For a
spiteful and malicious Saracen had secretly defiled one of their Mosques in
Jerusalem; which deed being imputed to the poor Christians, they were all
presently dragged to the place of execution to be put to death, when behold a
young man, a zealous Christian, by an officious lie (the most lawful of all
unlawful things) confessed himself alone to be guilty of the fact, and so
being killed by exquisite torments, saved the lives of many innocents. In
memory of which act, the Christians in Jerusalem kept a constant solemnity,
and once a year triumphantly marched with palms in their hands into the city,
to perpetuate the remembrance of this deliverance. The longest vacation from
persecution they enjoyed, was when Tyrius, lib. 1. cap. 3.
Charles was Emperor of the West, 800.
surnamed the Great: a surname which he did not steal, but justly win and
deserve; not like Pompey, who got the title of the Great, Suetonius, in Caesare.
though as Caesar observed he gained his chief fame for martial feats, by
conquering the weak and cowardly Bithynians. But this Charles, loved of his
friends, feared of his foes, subdued the strong and lusty Lombards: yet did he
not Christianity more good by his war, then by his peace concluded with
Aaron Emperor of the Saracens, under whom the Christians in Palestine obtained
many privileges and much prosperity; though this weather was too fair to last
long.

Chap. 7. The original and increase of the Turks; their conquering the
Saracens, and taking of Jerusalem.
BUt the Christians in Palestine afterward changed their masters, though not
their condition, being subdued by the Turks. It will be worth our and the
Readers pains to enquire into the original of this nation, especially because
(as the river Nilus) they are famous and well known for their overflowing
stream, though hidden and obscure for their fountain. Whence they first came
authors only do agree in disagreeing: but most probable it is out Scythia,
Lib. 1. cap. ult.
Pomponius Mela reckoning them among the inhabitants of that country nigh the
river Tanais. This Scythia (since called Tartaria) was virgin-countrey, never
forced by foreign arms: for the Monarchs who counted themselves conquerours of
the world (by a large Synecdoche taking a sixth part for the whole) never
subdued it. Alexander sent some troops to assault Naura and Gabaza, two
out-counties thereof, as an earnest that the rest of his army should follow:
but hearing how these were wellcomed, willingly lost his earnest, and disposed
of his army otherwise. The Roman eagles flew not thus far, and though heard
of, were never seen here. The reasons that made the Turks leave their native
soil, was the barrenness thereof; and therefore the Ovid. 8. Metam.
Poet makes famine (which sometimes travelleth abroad into other countries)
here to have her constant habitation. And yet no doubt so vast a country would
maintain her people, if the wildness thereof were tamed with husbandry: But
the people (scorning that their ground should be better civilized then
themselves) never manure it; and had rather provide their bread with the sword
then with the plough. Other partial causes might share in these Turks
removal, but the cause of causes was the justice of God, to suffer this
unregarded people to grow into the terror of the world for the punishment of
Christians: and we may justly hope, that when the correction is done the rod
shall be burnt; especially finding already their force to abate, being at this
day stopped with the half-kingdome of Hungary, who formerly could not be stayed
by the whole Empire of Greece.

Sabell. Aen. 9. lib. 2.
The first step these Turks took out of their own country was into Turcomania,
844.
a northern part of Armenia, conquered and so called by them: where they lived
like the Scythian Nomades, always wandering yet always in their way, none
claiming a propriety in the land as his, all defending the common interest
therein as theirs.

The next step was into Persia, whither they were called to assist Mahomet the
Saracen Sultan against his enemies; where taking notice of their own strength,
the Saracens cowardice, and the pleasure of Persia, they under Tangrolipix
their first king overcame that large dominion. Knolles, Tur. hist. page 4.
1030
Then did the Turks take upon them the Mohammedan religion, and having conquered
the Saracens by their valor, were themselves subdued by the Saracen
superstition. An accident more memorable because not easily to be paralleled
(excepting king 2. Chron. 25.14.
Amaziah, who having taken Edom was took with the idolatry thereof) because
conquerours commonly bring their religion into the places they subdue, and not
take it thence.

Their third large stride was into Babylon, the Caliph whereof they overcame.
And shortly after under Cutlu-muses their second king, they wan Mesopotamia,
the greatest part of Syria, and the city of Tyrius, lib. 1 cap. 7.
Jerusalem. 1060
Mean time whilst these vultures (Turks and Saracens) pecked out each others
eyes, the Christians (if they had husbanded this occasion) might much have
advantaged themselves, and might have recovered their health by these contrary
poisons expelling each other. But the Grecian Emperors given over to pleasure
and covetousness, regarded not their own good, till at last the Turks devoured
them; as (God willing) shall be showed hereafter. As for those Christians who
lived in Palestine under the Turks, they had no lease of their safety, but
were tenants at will for their lives and goods to these tyrants: though it
rained not downright, yet the storm of persecution hung over their heads;
their minds were ever in torture, being on the rack of continual fear and
suspense; and Simon himself was no better then an honorable slave, though
Patriarch of Jerusalem, as appears by his Knolles Tur. hist. page 13.
letters of complaint.

Chap. 8. The character of Peter the Hermit; his soliciting the Holy war;
the Council at Clermont, and the success thereof.
IT happened there came a pilgrim to Jerusalem called Peter, an Hermit, born
at Amiens in France; one of a contemptible person: His silly looks carried in
them a despair of any worth; and yet (as commonly the richest mines lie under
the basest and barrenest surface of ground) he had a quick apprehension,
eloquent tongue, and what got him the greatest repute, was accounted very
religious. With him Simon the Patriarch of Jerusalem often treated, concerning
the present miseries of the Christians under the Turks; what hope of amendment;
and how the matter might secretly be contrived, that the Princes in Europe
might assist and relieve them. Peter moved with the Patriarchs persuasions, the
equity and honourablenesse of the cause, and chiefly with a vision (as they
say) from Tyrius, lib. 1. cap. 12.
heaven (wherein our Savior himself appointed him his Legate, with a
commission to negotiate the Christian cause) took the whole business upon him,
1094
and traveled to Rome to consult with Pope Urbane the second about the
advancing of so pious a design.

Now, though many cry up this Hermit to have been so precious a piece of
holiness, yet Vrsperg. Chron. page 227. Quem tamen postea multi hypocritam
fuisse dicebant.
some suspect him to be little better then a counterfeit, and a cloke-father
for a plot of the Popes begetting: because the Pope alone was the gainer by
this great adventure, and all other Princes of Europe, if they cast up their
audit, shall find themselves losers: This with some is a presumption, that this
cunning merchant first secretly employed this Hermit to be his factour, and to
go to Jerusalem to set on foot so beneficial a trade for the Romish Church. As
for the apparition of our Savior, one may wonder that the world should see
most visions when it was most blind; and that that age most barren in learning,
should be most fruitful in revelations. And surely had Peter been truly
inspired by God, and moved by his Spirit to begin this war, he would not have
apostated from his purpose: so mortified a man would not have feared death in a
good cause, as he did afterward, and basely ran away at Sabell. Enn. 9. lib.
3. col. 357.
Antioch. For when the siege grew hot, his devotion grew cold; Et Aemilius,
Digest. Franc. page 123. in Philipp^ 10.
he found a difference betwixt a voluntary fast in his cell, and a necessary
and undispensable famine in a camp: so that being well hunger-pincht, this
cunning companion who was the trumpet to sound a march to others, secretly
sounded a retreat to himself, ran away from the rest of the Christians, and was
shamefully brought back again for a Ut desertor signorum, fratrum
com^ilitonumque proditor.
fugitive.

But to return to Pope Urbane, who was zealous in the cause to further it, 1095
and called a Council at Clermont in France, where met many Princes and
Prelates to whom he made a long oration; Sabell. Aen. 9. lib. 3. Tyrius, lib.
1. cap. 15. Baron. Anno 1095. W. Malmsb. lib. 4. cap. 2. All have several set
orations.
Authors differ in the mould, but they agree in the metal, that it was to
this effect: First, he bemoned the miseries of the Christians in Asia, and the
vastation of those holy places. Jerusalem, which was once the joy of the whole
earth, was now become the grief of all good men: the Chapel of Christ's
conception, at Nazareth; birth, at Bethlehem; burial, on mount Calvarie;
ascension, on mount Olivet, once the fountains of piety, were now become the
sinks of all profaneness. Next, he encouraged the Princes in the Council, to
take arms against those infidels, and Baronius, in Anno 1095. col. 688.
to break their bonds in sunder, and to cast their cords far from them, and
(as it is written) to cast out the handmaid and her children. Otherwise, if
they would not help to quench their neighbors houses, they must expect the
speedy burning of their own, and that these barbarous nations would quickly
overrun all Europe. Now to set an edge on their courage, he promised to all
that went this voyage, a full remission of their sins and penance here, and
the enjoying heaven hereafter. Lastly, thus concluded, Baronius, in Anno 1096.
col. 691.
Gird your swords to your thighs, O ye men of might. It is our parts to pray,
yours to fight; ours with Moses to hold up unwearied hands to God, yours to
stretch forth the sword against these children of Amalek. Amen.

It is above belief with what cheerfulness this motion, meeting with an active
and religious world, was generally entertained; so that the whole assembly
cried out, Sabell. Aen. 9. lib. 3 page 354.
God wills it: A speech which was afterward used as a fortunate watchword
in their most dangerous designs. Then took many of them a cross of red cloth
on their right shoulder, as a badge of their devotion: And to gain the
favorable assistance of the Virgin Mary to make this war the more happy, her
Baronius, tom. 11. page 692.
Office was instituted, containing certain prayers, which at Canonical hours
were to be made unto her. If fame, which has told many a lie of others, be not
therein belyed her self, the things concluded in this Council, were the same
night reported at impossible distance in the utmost parts of Christendom. What
spiritual intelligencers there should be, or what echoes in the hollow arch of
this world should so quickly resound news from the one side thereof to the
other, belongs not to us to dispute. Yet we find the Livi^s, lib. 45.
overthrow of Perseus brought out of Macedon to Rome in four days; and fame
(mounted no doubt on some Pegasus) in Domitians time, brought a report 2500
miles in one day.

Chap. 9. Arguments for the lawfulness of the Holy war.
IT is stiffely canvased betwixt learned men, whether this war was lawful,
or not. The reasons for the affirmative are fetched either from piety or
policy: And of the former sort are these.

1. All the earth is Gods land let out to tenants; but Judea was properly his
demesnes, which he kept long in his own hands for himself and his children. Now
though the infidels had since violently usurped it, yet no prescription of time
could prejudice the title of the King of Heaven, but that now the Christians
might be Gods champions to recover his interest. 2. Religion binds men to
relieve their brethren in distress, especially when they implore their help,
as now the Tyrius, lib. 1. cap. 11.
Christians in Syria did; whose entreaties in this case, sounded commands in
the ears of such as were piously disposed. 3. The Turks by their blasphemies
and reproaches against God and our Savior, had disinherited and divested
themselves of all their right to their lands; and the Christians, as the next
undoubted heirs, might seize on the forfeiture. 4. This war would advance and
increase the patrimony of Religion, by propagating the Gospel, and converting
of infidels. If any object that Religion is not to be beaten into men with the
dint of sword; yet it may be lawful to open the way by force, for instruction,
catechizing, and such other gentle means to follow after. 5. The beholding of
those sacred places in Palestine would much heighten the adventurers devotion,
and make the most frozen heart to melt into pious meditations. 6. Bellarm. lib.
3. de Romans Pont. cap. 17.
This enterprise was furthered by the persuasions of sundry godly men, S.
Bernard, and others. Now though a lying spirit may delude the prophets of
Achab, yet none will be so uncharitable as to think God would suffer his own
Michaiah to be deceived. 7. Ibidem.
God set his hand to this war, and approved it by many miracles which he
wrought in this expedition, and which are so confidently and generally reported
by credit-worthy writers, that he himself is a miracle that will not believe
them.
Neither want there arguments derived from policy.

1. Palestine was a parcel of the Roman Empire, though since won by the
Saracens: and though the Emperor of Constantinople could not recover his
right, yet did he always continue his claim, and now (as Baronius, tom. 11.
page 687.
appeared by his letters read in the Placentine Council) Alexius requested
these Princes of the West to assist him in the recovery thereof. 2. A
preventive war grounded on a just fear of an invasion is lawful: But such
was this Holy war. And because most stresse is laid on this argument, as the
main supporter of the cause, we will examine and prove the parts thereof.
Though umbrages and light jealousies created by cowardly fancies be too narrow
to build a fair quarrel on; yet the lawfulness of a preventive war founded
on just fear, is warranted by reason and the practice of all wise nations. In
such a case it is folly to do as countrey-fellows in a fense-school, never ward
a blow till it be past: but it is best to be beforehand with the enemy, lest
the medicine come too late for the malady. In such dangers to play an
after-game, is rather a shift then a policy: especially seeing war is a
tragedy which always destroys the stage whereon it is acted; it is the most
advised way, not to wait for the enemy, but to seek him out in his own
country.

Now that the Mahometans (under whom the Turks and Saracens are comprehended,
differing in nation, agreeing in religion and spite against Christians) were
now justly to be feared, cannot be denied. So vast was the appetite of their
sword, that it had already devoured Asia, and now reserved Grecia for the
second course. The Bosporus was too narrow a ditch, and the Empire of Grecia
too low an hedge to fense the Pagans out of West-Christendome: yea, the
Saracens had lately wasted Sabell. Enn. 9. lib. 3. page 354.
Italy, pillaged and burned many churches near Rome it self, conquered Spain,
inroded Aquitain, and possessed some islands in the mid-land-sea. The cafe
therefore standing thus, this Holy war was both lawful and necessary: which
like unto a sharp pike in the bosse of a buckler, though it had a mixture of
offending, yet it was chiefly of a defensive nature, to which all preventive
wars are justly reduced.

Lastly, this war would be the sewer of Christendom, and drain all discords
out of it. For active men like millstones in motion, if they have no other
grist to grind, will set fire one on another. Europe at this time surfeted with
people, and many of them were of stirring natures, who counted themselves
undone, when they were out of doing; and therefore they employed themselves in
mutual jarres and contentions: But now this Holy war would make up all
breaches, and unite all their forces against the common foe of Christianity.

Chap 10. Reasons against the Holy war.
YEt all these reasons prevail not so forcibly, but that Ioh. Cammenus, De jure
Majest. These. 22. Et Albert. Aqu. Chro. Hierosol. lib. 4. cap. 28. Et
Reineccius in Praef. hist. Orient.
many are of the contrary opinion, and count this war both needless and
unlawful, induced thereunto with these or the like arguments.

1. When the Jews were no longer Gods people, Judea was no longer Gods land by
any peculiar appropriation; but on the other side, God stamped on that country
an indelible character of desolation, and so scorched it with his anger, that
it will never change color, though Christians should wash it with their blood.
It is labor in vain therefore for any to endeavor to reestablish a
flourishing kingdom in a blasted country: and let none ever look to reap any
harvest, who sow that land which God will have to lie fallow. 2. Grant the
Turks were no better then dogs, yet were they to be let alone in their own
kennel. They and the Saracens their predecessors, had now enjoyed Palestine
four hundred and sixty years: Prescription long enough to sodder the most
cracked title, and not only to corroborate but to create a right. Yea, God
himself may seem herein to allow their title, by suffering them so long
peaceably to enjoy it. 3. To visit those places in Jerusalem (the theater of so
many mysteries and miracles) was a useless as difficult; and might be
superstitious if any went (as it is to be feared too many did) with placing
transcendent holiness in the place, and with a wooden devotion to the
material Cross. The Matthew. 28.6
Angel sent the women away from looking into the sepulcher, with He is risen,
he is not here; and thereby did dehort them and us, from burying our affections
in Christ's grave, but rather to seek him where he was to be found. At this day
a gracious heart makes every place a Jerusalem, where God may as well and as
acceptably be worshipped. S. Hilarion Hieron. tom. 1. page 103. in Epist. ad
Paul^u^.
though he lived in Palestine saw Jerusalem but once, and then only because he
might not seem to neglect the holy places for their nearness and vicinitie.
And S. Hierome (though himself lived at Bethlehem) dissuaded Paulinus from
coming thither; for the pains would be above the profit. 4. Lastly, this war
was a quicksand to swallow treasure, and of a hot digestion to devour valiant
men: no good, much evil came thereby; and the Christians that went out to seek
an enemy in Asia, brought one thence, to the danger of all Europe, and the
loss of a fair part thereof. For though -- Careat successibus opto,
Quisquis ab eventu facta notanda putet:
-- may he never speed,
Who from the issue censures of the deed:
and though an argument fetched from the success is but a cyphre in it self,
yet it increases a number when joined with others.
These reasons have moved the most Vide Besoldum, De regibus Hieros. page 99.
and sequentibus.
moderate and refined Papists, and all Protestants generally in their
judgments to fight against this Holy war. But as for the opinion of
Bibliander (who therein stands without company) if Lib. 3. De Romans Pont. cap.
17.
Bellarmine has truly reported it, it is as far from reason, as charity;
namely, that these Christians that went to fight against the Saracens, were the
very army of Gog and Magog spoken of by the prophet Ezekiel. 38.3.
Ezekiel. Yet must we not here forget, that such as at this time went to
Jerusalem (whether ridiculously, or blasphemously, or both, let others judge)
did carry a Aventinus, lib. 5. Annal.
goose before them, pretending it to be the holy Ghost.

Chap. 11. The private ends and profits of the Pope, which he is charged by
authors to have had in this Holy war.
IT is enough with some to make it suspicious that there were some sinister
ends in this war, because Gregory the seventh, otherwise called Hildebrand
(and by Luther, In his Chronology.
Larva diaboli) the worst of all that sat in that chair, first began it: but
death preventing him, Urbane the second (whom Cardinal Benno called Balaeus,
in Romans Pont. in Urban. 2.
Turbane for troubling the whole world) effected it. And though the pretenses
were pious and plausible, yet no doubt the thoughts of his Holiness began
where other men's ended, and he had a privy project beyond the public design;

First, to reduce the Matt. Dress. De bello sacr. cited by Lampadius Mellific.
histor. part. 3. page 266.
Grecians into subjection to himself with their three Patriarchs of Jerusalem,
Antioch, and Constantinople, and to make the Eastern Church a Chapel of ease
to the Mother Church of Rome.

Secondly, this war was the Popes house of Correction, whither he sent his
sturdie and stubborn enemies to be tamed. Such high-spirited men whom he either
feared or suspected, he condemned to this employment, as to an honorable
banishment: and as Saul being afraid of David sent him to fight against the
Philistines, that so he might fall by their sword; so the Pope had this cleanly
and unsuspected conveyance to See Daniel, in Henry the third, page 141.
rid away those he hated, by sending them against infidels. This appeared most
plainly in the matter of the Emperor himself, whom he sent from home, that so
he might rob his house in his absence. At the beginning of this war, the
Popes temporal power in Italy was very slender, because the Emperors
dominions did gird him close and hard on all sides: but soon after he grew
within short time without all measure, and did lurch a castle here, gain a
city there from the Emperor, whiles he was employed in Palestine: So that by
the time that the Christians had lost all in Syria, the Emperor had lost all
in Italy; his dominions there being either swallowed up by Peter's patrimony, or
by private Princes and upstart free-states, which as so many splinters flew out
of the broken Empire.

Thirdly, hereby the Pope determined on his side the gainfullest controversy
that ever was in Christendom* This was about the investiture of Bishops,
whether the right lay in the Pope or in secular Princes. Now his Holiness
diverted this question out of Princes heads, by opening an issue an other way;
and gave vent to the activitie of their spirits in this martial employment,
and in the mean time quietly went away without any corrivall, concluding the
controversy for his own profit.

Lastly, he got a mass of money by it. He had the office to bear the bag, and
what was put into it, as contributed to this action from pious people, and
expended but some few drops of the showers he received. Guess the rest of his
griping tricks from this one which Hist. Angl. page 702, and 703. Diversis
muscipulis simplicem Dei populum substantia sua moliebatur Romana curia
privare, nihil petens nisi aurum and argentum.
Matthew. Paris reports. First, he prompted many people in England unfit for
arms, to take upon them a vow to go to the Holy war, and this was done by the
exhortation and preaching of the Friars. This done, he compelled and forced
those Votaries (whose purses were more useful for this service then their
persons) to commute their journey into money, the payment whereof should be as
meritorious as their pilgrimage. And thus scraped he a mass of coin from such
silly people as thought themselves cleansed of their sins when they were
wiped of their money, and who having made themselves slaves to the Pope by
their rash vow, were glad to buy their liberty at his price.

As the Pope, so most of the Clergy improved their estates by this war: for
the secular Princes who went this voyage, sold or morgaged most of their means
(selling for gold to purchase with steel and iron) and the Clergy were
generally their chapmen. For they advised these undertakers, seeing this action
was for Christ and his Church, rather to make over their estates to spiritual
men, of whom they might again redeem the same, and from whom they should be
sure to find the fairest dealing, then to laymen. Aemilius, De gest. Fran.
page 109.
Godfrey Duke of Bouillon sold that Dukedom to the Bishop of Liege; and the
castle of Sartensy and Monsa, to the Bishop of Verdune. Baldwine his brother
sold him the city of Verdune. Yea, by these sales the Daniel, in Henry first,
page 49.
third part of the best feoffs in France came to be possessed by the Clergy;
who made good bargains for themselves, and had the conscience to buy earth
cheap, and to sell heaven dear. Yea, this voyage laid the foundation of their
temporal greatness, till at last the daughter devoured the mother, and wealth
impaired religion.

Chap. 12. The quality and condition of those people who undertook the war.
IT is not to be expected that all should be fish which is caught in a
drag-net, neither that all should be good and religious people who were
adventurers in an action of so large a capacity as this war was. We must in
charity allow, that many of them were truly zealous and went with pious
intents. These were like to those of whom Bellarmine speaks, who had no fault
praeter nimiam sanctitatem, too much sanctity, which Whitaker De eccl. contr^.
2. cap. 11
a learned man interprets, too much superstition. But besides these
well-meaning people, there went also a rabble-rout, rather for company then
conscience. Albert. Aqu. in Chron. Hierosal. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Debtors took this voyage on them as an acquittance from their debts, to the
defrauding of their creditours: Servants counted the conditions of their
service cancelled by it, going away against their masters will: Thieves and
murderers took upon them the cross, to escape the gallows: Adulterers did
penance in their armor. A lamentable case that the devils black guard should
be Gods soldiers. And no wonder if the success was as bad as some of the
adventurers, especially seeing they retained their old conditions under a new
climate. Tyrius, lib. 1. cap. 16.
And (as if this voyage had been like to repentance, never too soon nor too
late for any to begin) not only green striplings unripe for war, but also
decayed men to whom age had given a writ of ease, became soldiers; and those
who at home should have waited on their own graves, went far to visit Christ's
sepulcher. And which was more, women (as if they would make the tale of the
Amazons truth) went with weapons in men's clothes* a behavior at the best
immodest, and modesty being the case of chastity, it is to be feared that
where the case is broken, the jewel is lost. This enterprise was also the
mother of much non-residence, many Prelates and Friars (fitter to handle a
penknife then a sword) left their covents and pastoral charges to follow this
business. The total sum of those pilgrime-souldiers amounted to three
hundred thousand; and Malmsb. lib. 4. page 133
some writers do double that number. No doubt the Christians army had been
greater, if it had been less: for the belly was too big for the head; and a
medley of nations did rather burden then strengthen it. Besides, the army was
like a cloth of many colors, and more seams* which seams though they were
curiously drawn up for the present, yet after long wearing began to be seen,
and at last brake out into open rents.

Chap. 13. The adventurers sorted according to their several nations.
THe French, Dutch, Italian, and English were the four elementall nations
whereof this army was compounded: of these the French were predominant; they
were the cape-merchants in this adventure. That nimble nation first apprehended
the project, and eagerly prosecuted it. As their language wants one proper
word to express Stand, so their natures mislike a settled, fixed posture, and
delight in motion and agitation of business: Yea, France (as being then best
at leisure) contributed more soldiers to this war then all Christendom
besides. The signal men were, Hugh surnamed le Grand brother to the King of
France, Godfrey Duke of Bouillon, Baldwine and Eustace his younger brethren,
Stephen Earl of Bloys father to Stephen afterward King of England, Reimund
Earl of Toulouse, Robert Earl of Flanders, Hugh Earl of Saint-Paul, Baldwine de
Burge, with many more; besides of the Clergy, Aimar Bishop of Puy and Legate
to the Pope, and William Bishop of Orange.

Germany is slandered to have sent none to this war at this first voyage;
and that other pilgrims passing through that country, were mocked by the
Dutch and called Centurist. ex Vrsperg. cent. 11. col. 416.
fools for their pains. It is true, the Germane adventurers in number answered
not the largeness and populousness of their country: for Henry the Emperor
(a Prince whom the Pope long hacked at, and hewed him off at last) Pantaleon,
De viris Ger. part. 2. page 139.
being desirous to go this voyage, was tied up at home with civil discords.
Yet we find a competencie of soldiers of that nation, besides those under
Godescalcus a Priest, Emmicho the Rhene-grave, and Count Herman their leaders.
But though Germany was backward at the first, yet afterward it proved the
main Atlas of the war: that nation like a heavy bell was long a raising, but
being got up made a loud sound.

Italy sent few out of her heart and middle provinces nigh Rome. The Pope was
loath to adventure his darlings into danger: those white-boyes were to stay at
home with his Holiness their tender father: Wherefore Daniel, in Will. the
second, page 49.
he dispensed with them for going, as knowing how to use their help nearer, and
to greater profit. Peter's patrimony must as well be looked to, as Christ's
sepulcher. But though the Pope would spend none of his own fuel, he burnt the
best stakes of the Emperors hedge, and furthered the Imperial party to
consume it self in this tedious war. Out of the furthermost parts of Italy,
Boemund Prince of Tarentum, and Tancred his nephew (both of the Normane seed,
though growing on the Apulian soil) led an army of twelve thousand men. And
Lombardy was also very liberal of her soldiers toward this expedition.

Daniel, ut prius.
England (the Popes pack-horse in that age, which seldom rested in the stable
when there was any work to be done) sent many brave men under Robert Duke of
Normandy, brother to William Rufus; as Beauchamp, and others, whose names are
lost. Neither surely did the Irish-mens feet stick in their bogs, though we
find no particular mention of their achievements.

Spain had other use for her swords against the Saracens at home, and therefore
sent none of her men abroad. As Aemilius, De gest. Fran. page 109.
one says, The Spaniards did follow their own Holy war; a work more
necessary, and no less honorable. Thus they acted the same part, though not
on the same stage with our Pilgrims, as being also employed in fight against
the infidels.

Poland had the same excuse for not much appearing clean through this war;
because she lies bordering on the Tartars in her appendant country of
Lituania, and therefore was busied in making good her frontiers. Besides, no
wonder if Prussia, Lituania, and Livonia were not up in this service; for it
was scarce break of day with them, and the sun of the Gospel was newly (if at
all) risen in those parts. Yea, Poland was so far from sending men hither,
that she fetched them from hence, Munster, Cosmogr.
and afterward implored the aid of the Teutonick order, who came out of
Palestine to assist her against her enemies.

Hungary might bring filling-stones to this building, but few foundation or
corner-stones, and at this time had no commander of note in this action.

Scotland also presents us not with any remarkable piece of service which her
men performed in all this war. It was not want of devotion, which was hot
enough in that cold country: rather we may impute it to want of shipping, that
country being little powerful at sea: or (which is most probable) the actions
of this nation are hidden, as wrapped up in the bundle with some others; I
should guess under the French, but the intimacie of those two people is of a
far later date.

Denmark and Norway neare-acquainted with the Arctick pole, though they lagged
the last, (and may therein be excused because of the length of the way) were
sharers in the honor of this employment, and performed good sea-service.

Sweden either acted not at all, or else had a very short part in this
business. That country being a separatist because of her remote situation,
had little communion with other parts of Europe. And indeed histories are mute
of Sweden, but that of late Gustavus his victory has put a tongue into them,
and has made that country famous to all posterity.

Chap. 14. The sad beginning of the war.
1096
THeir first setting forth was checked with bad success. For Walter Sensaver a
noble man (but what countryman it is unknown) Malmsb. lib. 4. page 133
who had more of the sail of valor then balast of judgment, Mar. 8
led forth an ill-grown and unproportioned army, with many thousand foot, and
Calvisius, page 893. in Anno 1096.
eight horsemen only. But we must not think that this fowl should fly far,
whose wings were so short, and train so long. His men were routed and slain by
the Bulgarians, and he himself through many miseries scarce recovered
Constantinople. Aemilius, De gest. Fran. page 111.
Peter the Hermit with his army went further to meet his own destruction. For
after many difficulties having crossed the Bosporus, they came into Asia, and
there found some cities forsaken by the Turks their inhabitants. This they
imputed to their enemies fear, which proceeded from their police: and therefore
being more greedy to pillage, then careful to fortify the places they took,
hunted after preys so long till they became one themselves. July
Hugh brother to the King of France, with his surname of the Great, had as
little success as the former; his army being quickly abridged by the furious
Bulgarians in their passage, and Malmsb. lib. 4. page 133
he brought prisoner to Constantinople. Besides these, one Gotescalcus a
Priest, a wolf in sheeps clothing, and Emmicho a tyrant-Prince near the Rhene,
led forth a rout of wicked people, who carried the badge of the Cross, and
served the devil under Christ's liverie, killing and pillaging the poor Jews
and other people in Germany as they went. Urspergens. page 227, and 228.
This made Coloman King of Hungary, not only deny them passage through his
country (and no wonder if he was loath to lodge those guests who were likely to
rob their host) but also put most of them to the sword. Some suspected these
beginnings to be but the bad breakfast to a worse dinner; and therefore
abandoning their resolutions, returned home: others little moved hereat,
conceived these first defeats to be but the clarifying of the Christian army
from the dregs of base and ruder people.

Chap. 15. The Pilgrims arrival at Constantinople, entertainment, and
departure.
BUt now (to speak in my Urspergens. page 233.
authors phrase) the chaff being winnowed with this fan out of Gods floor,
the good grain began to appear. Aug. 15.
Godfrey Duke of Bouillon set forth, and marched through Hungary with an army
of civil and wel-conditioned soldiers; so also did Boemund, Reimund, and
Robert the Normane, whose setting forth bare diverse dates: and they embraced
several courses through sundry countries; but the first Rendezvous where all
met was at Constantinople. Dec. 23.


This was no pleasant prospect to Alexius the Grecian Emperor, to see the sea
full of ships, the shore of soldiers. He had gotten the Empire by bad
practices (by deposing and cloistering Nicephorus his predecessor) and an ill
conscience needs no enemy but it self: for now he affrighteth himself with
the fancy, that these Pilgrims were so many pioners come to undermine him.
Yea, he seems to have entailed his jealousies on all his successors; who
never cordially affected this war, but suspected that these Western
Christians made but a false blow at Jerusalem, and meant to hit Constantinople.
But though he had a storm in his heart, yet he made all fair weather in his
face; and finding these his guests so strong that they could command their own
welcome, he entertained them rather for fear then love. At last it was M.
Paris, page 38.
covenanted betwixt them, that what countries or cities soever (Jerusalem alone
excepted) once belonging to this Grecian Empire, should be recovered by these
Latins, should all be restored to Alexius; in lieu whereof he was to furnish
them with armor, shipping, and all other warlike necessaries. Aemilius, De
gest. Fran. page 112.
Thus might that Emperor have much improved his estate by these adventures;
but he (like those who cannot see their own good for too steadfast looking on
it) by his over-carefulnesse and causeless suspicion, deprived himself of this
benefit, and implunged himself in much just hatred for his unjust just dealing
and treachery. Polybius (though a Grecian himself) yet thus painteth out his
countrymen amongst the Greeks; Lib. 6. Vide Erasmum in Adagio, Graeca fides.
If one should lend a talent, though he should have for it ten bonds, ten
seals, and twice as many witnesses, yet the borrower will not keep his credit.
It seems Alexius was one of this same faith, who though so solemnly engaged on
his honor to perform this agreement so advantageous to himself, most
unprincelike brake his word, and molested these Pilgrims afterward.

M. Paris, page 38.
Some question the discretion of these Princes in this agreement, to bargain to
purchase Alexius his profit with their blood, and conceive that they much
under-valued themselves in swearing homage unto him; which only Malmsb. page
137.
Robert Earl of Flanders (remembering that he was freeborn and bred) refused to
do: Yet they may herein be partly excused; for they apprehended it of absolute
necessity to gain this Emperors favor, on what price soever, because his
country was the highway through which they must pass. Besides, their zeal to
be at their journeys end made them insensible of any future disadvantages, so
be it they might have but present expedition to the place they were bound for.
And we may also think that Alexius his liberal gifts had great efficacy in
this matter, to win these Princes to his own desires.

Chap. 16. The estate of Asia; siege, and taking of Nice; Turks overthrown in
battle.
AT our last mentioning of the Turks and their victories, we left them possessed
of Jerusalem, and the greater part of Syria: but since they have thrived
better, and won the lesser Asia from the Grecian Emperor. Indeed those
Emperors with their own hands lifted up the Turks into their throne, and
caused them thus speedily to conquer. For giving themselves over to pleasure,
they gave little countenance, and less maintenance to men of service and
action: whereby the martial sparks in noble spirits were quenched; and no
wonder if virtue did wither where it was not watered with reward. Secondly, out
of covetousness the Emperors unfurnished their frontiers of garrisons, and
laid them open to invasions; a notorious solecisme in policy: for if doors in
private houses are to be locked, much more frontiers in kingdoms. Neither did
it a little advantage the Turks proceedings, that the Grecian Empire fell to
Eudoxia a woman, and her children in minority, too weak pilots to steer so
great a State in the tempest of war. And though after other changes it fell
to Alexius, one whose personal abilities were not to be excepted against; yet
he being totally busied at home, to maintain his title against homebred foes,
had no leisure to make any effectual resistance against foreign enemies. Nor
did the death of Cutlen-Muses their king any whit prejudice the Turkish
proceedings: for Solomon his son succeeded him, a Prince no less famous for
his clemency then his conquests; as victory to generous minds is only an
inducement to moderation. In this case under the tyranny of the Turks stood
Asia the less; and though there were many Christians in every city, yet these
being disarmed, had no other weapons then those of the Primitive Church, tears
and prayers.

But now these Western Pilgrims arriving there, 1097
besiege the city of Nice with an army as glorious as ever the sun beheld.
May 14.
This city was equally beholden to nature and art for her strength; and was
formerly famous for the first general Council, called there by Constantine
against Arius, wherein were assembled 318 Bishops. The Pilgrims had a Lombard
for their engineer; the neighboring wood afforded them materials, whereof they
made many warlike instruments, and hoped speedily to conquer the city. But
breathed deer are not so quickly caught. The Turks within being experienced
soldiers, defeated their enterprises. And here one might have seen art
promising her self the victory, and suddenly meeting with counter-art which
mastered her. The lake Ascanius whereon the city stood, having an outlet into
the sea, much advantaged the besieged, whereby they fetched victuals from the
country, till at last that passage was locked up by the Grecian fleet. Soon
after the city was surrendered, June 20.
on composition that the inhabitants lives and goods should be untouched;
whereat the soldiers who hitherto hoped for the spoil, now seeing themselves
spoiled of their hope, showed no small coffeehouse. Solymans wife and young
children were taken prisoners, and the city (according to the agreement) was
delivered to Tatinus the Grecian Admiral in behalf of Alexius his master.

From hence the Christians set forward to the vale of Dogorgan, when behold
Solomon with all his might fell upon them, and there followed a cruel battle,
fought with much courage and variety of success. A cloud of arrows darkened
the sky, which was quickly dissolved into a shower a blood. The Christians had
many disadvantages: For their enemies were three to one; and valor it self may
be pressed to death under the weight of multitude. The season was unseasonable;
the scorching of the sun much annoying these northern people, whilst the
Turks had bodies of proof against the heat. Besides, the Christians horses
affrighted with the barbarous sounds of the Turkish drums, were altogether
unserviceable. However, they bravely maintained their fight by the special
valor and wisdom of their leaders (amongst whom Boemund, and Hugh brother to
the King of France, deserved high commendations) till at last finding
themselves overmatched, they began to guard their heads with their heels, and
fairly ran away. When in came M. Paris, page 42. and H. Hunting. lib. 7. page
374
Robert the Normane in the very opportunity of opportunity. Much he encouraged
them with his words, more with his valor, slaying three principal Turks with
his own hands. This sight so inspirited the Christians, that coming in on
fresh, they obtained a most glorious victory. Two thousand on their side were
slain, whereof William the brother of Tancred, Godfrey de Mont, and Robert of
Paris were of special note. But far greater was the slaughter of their
enemies, especially after that Godfrey of Bouillon, who had been absent all the
battle, came in with his army: yet they wanted a hammer to drive the victory
home to the head, having W. Malm^b. page 138.
no horses to make the pursuit. Solomon flying away burned all as he went; and
to prop up his credit, gave it out that he had gotten the day, pleasing himself
to be a conqueror in report. This great battle was fought July the first; July
1.
though some make it many days after: Yea, so great is the variety of
Historians in their dates, that every one may seem to have a several clock of
time, which they set faster or slower at their own pleasure: but as long as
they agree in the main, we need not be much moved with their petty dissensions.

Chap. 17. The siege and taking of Antiochia; Corboran overcome in fight; of
Christ's spear, and of holy fraud.
FRom hence with invincible industry and patience, they bored a passage through
valleys, up mountains, over rivers, taking as they went the famous cities,
Iconium, Heraclea, Tarsus, and conquering all the country of Cilicia. This
good success much Vrspergens. page 233.
puffed them up; God therefore to cure them of the pleurisy of pride, did let
them blood with the long and costly siege of Antiochia. This city watered by
the river Orontes, and called Reblath of the Hebrews, was built by Seleucus
Nicanor, and enlarged by Antiochus. Compassed it was with a double wall, one of
square stone, the other of brick; strengthened with 460 towers, and had a
castle on the East rather to be admired then assaulted. Here the professors of
our faith were first named Acts 11.26
Christians: and here S. Peter first sat Bishop, whose fair church was a
Patriarchall seat for many hundred years after. Before this city the Pilgrims
army encamped, October. 21.
and strongly besieged it: but the Turks within manfully defending themselves
under Auxianus their captain, frustrated their hopes of taking it by force. The
siege grew long, and victuals short in the Christians camp: and now Sabell.
Enn. 9. lib. 5. page 357. Et Aemilius, in Philip the first, page 123.
Peter the Hermit being brought to the touchstone, discovered what base
metal he was of; ran away with some other of good note, and were fetched back
again, and bound with a new oath to prosecute the war. At last, one within
the city (though Authors agree neither of his name nor religion, some making
him a Turk, others a Christian; 1098
some calling him Pyrrhus, some Hemirpherrus, others Emipher) in the dead of
the night betrayed the city to Boemund. June 3.
The Christians issuing in, and exasperated with the length of the siege, so
remembered what they had suffered, that they forgot what they had to do, P.
Aemil. page 127.
killing promiscuously Christian citizens with Turks. Thus passions, like
heavy bodies down steep hills, once in motion move themselves, and know no
ground but the bottom.

Antiochia thus taken, was offered to Alexius the Emperor; but he refused it,
suspecting some deceit in the tender; as bad men measure other men's minds by
the crooked rule of their own. Hereupon it was bestowed on Boemund; though this
place dearly purchased was not long quietly possessed: For Corboran the Turkish
General came with a vast army of Persian forces, and besieged the Christians
in the city, so that they were brought into a great strait betwixt death and
death, hunger within and their foes without. Many secretly stole away, whereat
the rest were no whit discomfited, counting the loss of cowards to be gain to
an army. At last, they generally resolved rather to lose their lives by
wholesale on the point of the sword, then to retail them out by famine, which
is the worst of tyrants, and murdereth men in state, whilst they die in not
dying. It did not a little encourage them, that they found in the church of S.
Peter that Tyrius, lib. 6. cap. 14.
lance wherewith our Saviors body was pierced: They highly prized this
military relic of Christ, as if by wounding of him it had got virtue to
wound his enemies, and counted it a pawn of certain victory. Whether this
spear was truly found, or whether it was but invented to cozen men with, we
will not dispute: However, it wrought much with these Pilgrims; for conceit
oftentimes does things above conceit, especially when the imagination
apprehends something founded in religion. Marching forth in several armies
they manfully fell upon their enemies, and being armed with despair to escape,
June 28.
they sought to sell their lives at the dearest rate. Valor does swell when it
is crushed betwixt extremities; and then oftentimes goes beyond her self in
her achievements. This day by Gods blessing on their courage they got a noble
conquest. Some saw M. Pari^, in Gulielmo secundo, page 57.
S. George in the air with an army of white horses fighting for them; but
these no doubt did look through the spectacles of fancy. And yet though we
should reject this apparition, we need not play the Origens with the story of
S. George, and change all the literal sense into an allegory of Christ and
his Church: for it is improbable that our English nation, amongst so many
Saints that were, would choose one that was not, to be their patron;
especially seeing the world in that age had rather a glut then famine of Saints.

And here let me advertise the Reader once for all, not to expect that I should
set down those many Mundus senescens patitur phantasias falsorum miraculorum;
propterea sunt nunc habenda miracula valde suspecta, Gerson.
miracles wherewith Authors who write this war so lard their stories, that
it will choke the belief of any discreet man to swallow them. As the intent of
these writers was pious, to gain credit and converts to the Christian faith, so
the prosecuting of their project must be condemned, in thinking to grace the
Gospel in reporting such absurd falsities. But let us know that heaven has a
pillorie, whereon Fraus pia her self shall be punished: and rather let us leave
religion to her native plainness, then hang her ears with counterfeit pearls.

The pride of the Turks being abated in this battle, and an 100000 of them
being slain, the Christians grew mightily insolent, and forgot to return to God
the honor of the victory. Whereupon followed a great mortality, and 50000
died in few days; whether this proceeded from the climate (the bodies of
Europe not being friends with the air of Asia, til use by degrees reconcileth
them) or whether it was caused by their intemperance: for after long fasting
they would not measure their stomachs by the standard of physic* and dieting
themselves till nature by degrees could digest the meat; but by surfeting
dug their graves with their own teeth.

And now we are come to the skirts and borders of Palestine. Wherefore as
Heralds use to blazon the field before they meddle with the charge, so let us
describe the land before we relate the actions done therein. If in bowling they
must needs throw wide, which know not the green or alley whereon they play;
much more must they miss the truth in story, who are unacquainted with that
country whereon the discourse proceeds. Briefly therefore of the Holy land;
as not intending to make a large and wide description of so short and narrow a
country.

Chap. 18. A Pisgah-sight, or short survey of Palestine in general; and how it
might maintain 1300000 men.
PAlestine is bounded on the North with mount Libanus; West, with the
mid-land-sea; South, with the wilderness of Paran, parting it from Egypt; and
East, with the mountains of Gilead, and the river of Arnon. To give it the most
favorable dimensions; From the foot of Libanus to Beersheba, North and South,
may be allowed 210 miles: and from Ramoth-Gilead to Endor, East and West,
seventie; which is the constant breadth of the country. In which compass in
David's time were maintained 2. Sam. 24.9.
thirteen hundred thousand men, besides women, children, and impotent persons:
and yet the tribes of 1. Chron. 21.6.
Benjamin and Levi were not reckoned. True this must needs be, for Truth has
said it: Yet is it wonderful. For though the united Provinces in the
Low Countries maintain as many people in as little a plot of ground, yet they
feed not on homebred food; but have Poland for their granarie, the British
ocean for their fish pond, High-Germanie for their wine-cellar; and by the
benefit of their harbors unlock the storehouses of all other countries. It
fared not thus with the Jews, whose own country fed them all. And yet the
seeming impossibility of so many kept in so small a land will be abated, if we
consider these particulars; 1. People in those hot countries had not so hot
appetites for the quantity of the meat eaten, nor gluttonous palates for the
variety of it. 2. The country rising and falling into hills and vales, gained
many acres of ground: whereof no notice is taken in a map; for therein all
things presented are conceived to be in plan^: And so the land was far
roomthier then the scale of miles does make it. 3. They had pasturage to feed
their cattle in, in out-countreys beyond Palestine. Thus the tribe of 1. Chron.
5.9, 10.
Reuben grased their cattle eastward, even to the river Euphrates. 4. Lastly,
the soil was transcendently fruitful, as appears by that great Number. 13.23.
bunch of grapes carried by two men: For though many a man has not been able
to bear wine, it is much that one should be laden with one cluster of grapes.


If any object against the fruitfulness of this country; That there were many
wildernesses therein, as those of Maon, Ziph, Carmel, Gibeon, Judah, and these
must needs cut large thongs out of so narrow a hide: it is answered, That these
wildernesses took up no great space, as probably being no bigger then our least
forests in England. As for the greater deserts, we must not conceive them to
lie wholly waste, but that they were but thinly inhabited: for we find Josh.
15.61.
six cities with their villages in the wilderness of Judah.

Principal commodities of this country were, 1. Balm, which Munster, in Terra
sancta page 1017. and in Egypt. page 1135.
wholly failed not long after our Saviors passion; whether because the type
was to cease when the truth was come, or because that land was unworthy to have
so sovereigne bodily physic grow in her, where the Physician of the soul was
put to death. 2. Honey, and that either distilled by bees those little chemists
(and the pasture they fed on was never a whit the barer for their biting) or
else rained down from heaven, as that which 1. Sam. 14.27.
Jonathan tasted, when his sweet meat had like to have had sour sauce, and to
have cost him his life.


Besides these, milk, oil, nuts, almonds, dates, figs, olives: So that we may
boldly say, no country had better sauce and better meat, having fowl, fish, in
sea, lakes, and rivers; flesh of sheep, goats, bucks, and ki^e.

Mines of gold and silver^ with pearls and precious stones, Judea rather had
not then wanted; either because God would not have his people proud or
covetous; or because these are not essential to man's life; or because nature
bestows these commodities in recompense on barren countries.

Horses they had none but what they bought out of Egypt for service, using
asses for burden, oxen for drawing, and mules for travel. And for many hundred
years they used no horses in battle, till David took some from 2. Sam. 8.4.
Hadadezer. The greatest inconvenience of the land was that it had wild beasts;
and their sheep were not securely folded like ours in England, which stand more
in danger of men then wolves.

The chief river of the country was Jordan: over which the Israelites passed
on foot; afterward Elijah made a bridge over it with his cloak: and our
Savior washed the water hereof, by being baptized in it. This arises from the
springs of Jor and Dan; whence running south he enlarges himself first into
the waters of Merom, then into the lake of Genesareth or Tiberias; and hence
recovering his stream, as if sensible of his sad fate, and desirous to defer
what he cannot avoid, he fetches many turnings and windings, but all will not
excuse him from falling into the Dead sea. Authors are very fruitful on the
barrenness of this sea (where Sodom once stood) writing how on the banks
thereof grow those hypocrite apples and well-complexioned dust (the true
emblemes of the false pleasures of this world) which touched fall to ashes.

Chap. 19. Galilee described.
PAlestine contained four provinces: Galilee on the north, Trachonitis beyond
Jordan on the east, Judea on the south, and Samaria in the middle. Galilee was
divided into the upper and lower. The upper (called also Galilee of the
Gentiles, because it bordered on them) comprehended the tribes of Asher and
Nephthali.

Asher entertaineth us with these observables: 1. Josh. 11.8.
Misrephothmajim, the Nantwich of Palestine, where salt was boiled. 2. Sarepta,
where Elijah multiplied the widows oil. 3. Tire, anciently the Royall-Exchange
of the world; but of this (as of Sidon and Ptolemais) largely hereafter. 4.
Aphek, whose walls falling down gave both the death and grave-stones to 27000
of Benhadads soldiers. 5. Cana the great, whereof was that woman whose
daughter Christ dispossessed of a devil. 6. Belus, a rivulet famous for his
glassie sand. 7. Mount Libanus, whether so called (as our Albion) from his
snowy top, or from frankincense growing thereon.

Nephthali, with these: 1. Abel-beth-maacha: In this borough Sheba that vermin
earthed himself, till a woman's wisdom threw his head over the walls: And pity
it was those walls should have stood, if they had been too high to throw a
traitors head over them. 2. Harosheth, the city of Sisera, who for all his
commanding of 900 iron-chariots, was slain with one iron-nail. 3. Capernaum,
where Christ healed the Centurions servant; and not far off fed an army of
guests with five loaves and two fishes: so that if we consider what they ate,
we may wonder that they left any thing; if what they left, that they ate any
thing. 4. Kedesh, a city of refuge, whither they were to fly that killed men
unawares. As for those who formerly privileged Sanctuaries in England, where
the worst traitors and wilfullest murderers were secure from punishment, they
rather propounded Romulus then Moses for their president. 5. Riblah, where King
Zedekiah (more unhappy that he saw so long then that he was blind so soon) had
his eyes put out, after he had beheld the slaughter of his sons. 6.
Cesarea-Philippi, the chief city of Decapolis; which was a small territory on
both sides of Jordan, so called of ten cities it contained; though Authors
wonderfully differ in reckoning them up. 7. Christ's mount, so named because it
was his pulpit, as the whole Law was his text, when he made that famous sermon
in the mount. This Sun of righteousness, which had all Palestine for his
zodiac, the twelve tribes for his signs, stayed longest here and in Zabulon;
and as S. Hierome In 4. Matthew.
observes, as these two tribes were first carried into captivity, so
redemption was first preached in these countries.

Lower Galilee consisted of Zabulon and Issachar. Zabulon presents us with
Naim, where our Savior raised the widows son, so that she was twice a
mother, yet had but one child. 2. Cana the less, where he showed the
virginity of his miracles at a marriage, turning water into wine. 3. Bethulia,
where Judeth struck off Holofernes his head; though some since have struck off
that story, not only from canonical scripture, but from truth. 4. Bethsaida,
upbraided by Christ, famous for her great means, great ingratitude, great
punishment. 5. Nazareth, where our Savior had his conception and education. 6.
Tiberias, so called by Herod the Tetrarch in the honor of Tiberius. 7. Mount
Carmel, the Jewish Parnassus, where the Prophets were so conversant. 8. Tabor,
where our Savior was transfigured, the earnest of his future glory. 9. The
river Kishon, Gods besome to sweep away Sisera's great army.

In Issachar we find Tarichea, taken with great difficulty by Vespasian. 2.
Shunem, where Elisha was so often entertained by an honorable woman. And as if
this land had been thirsty of blood, here in this tribe were fought the battles
of Gideon against the Midianites, Jehu against Jehoram, Saul against the
Philistines upon mount Gilboa. David therefore cursed that mountain that
neither dew nor rain should fall on it. But of late some English travelers
climbing this mountain were well wetted, David not cursing it by a prophetical
spirit, but in a poetical rapture.

Chap. 20. The description of Samaria.
SAmaria contained half Manasses on this side Jordan, and the tribe of Ephraim.
In the former we meet with Bethshean, on the walls whereof the Philistines
hanged Saul's body. 2. Tirzah, where Zimri (whose only goodness was, that he
reigned but seven days) burned himself and the Kings palace. 3. Thebez, where
Abimelech, prodigal of his life, but niggardly of his reputation, not so
pained with his death, as angry with his killer (because a woman) would needs
be killed again by his armor-bearer. 4. Megiddo, where Josiah that bright
sun set in a cloud, engaging himself in a needless quarrel, wherein he was
slain. 5. Cesarea-Stratonis, where Herod was eaten up with worms. 6. Jezreel, a
royal city of the Kings of Israel, nigh which lay the vineyard or rather
bloud-yard of Naboth.

Ephraim was adorned with Samaria the chief city of Israel, which at this day
shows more ruins then Jerusalem. 2. Shiloh, where the Ark was long leiger;
and where Eli heart-broken with bad news, brake his neck with a fall. 3.
Sichem, where Dinah bought the satisfying of her curiosity with the loss of
her chastity. And as if the ground here were stained with perfidiousnesse,
here Simeon and Levi killed the Sichemites, Joseph was sold by his brethren,
Abimelech usurped the government, the ten tribes revolted from Rehoboam. 4.
Mount Ephraim, a ridge of hills crossing this country. 5. Gerizzim and Ebal,
two mountains: the blessings were pronounced on the one, and the curses on the
other.

Chap. 21. Judea surveyed.
JUdea comprised the tribes of Benjamin, Dan, Simeon, and Judah. Benjamin
flourished with Gilgal, where Joshua circumcised the Israelites. They hitherto
had been fellow-commoners with the Angels, feeding on manna, which here ceased;
God withdrawing miracles where he afforded means. 2. Gibeon, whose inhabitants
cozened Joshua with a pass of falsedated antiquity: Who would have thought
that clouted shoes could have covered so much subtilty? Here Joshua sent his
mandate to the sun to stand still, and to wait on him whilst he conquered
his enemies. 3. Nob, where Doeg, more cruel then the Kings cattle he kept, slew
eighty five Priests as innocent as their ephods were white. 4. Jericho, whose
walls were battered down with the sound of rams horns. 5. Bethel, where God
appeared to Jacob. 6. Ai, where the Israelites were slain for the sacrilege of
Achan.

Dan had these memorables. 1. Joppa a safe harbor, where Jonah fled from Gods
service. 2. Ashdod or Azotus, where Dagon did twice homage to the Ark, not
only falling bare, but putting off his head and hands. 3. Gath, a seminary of
giants, where Goliath was born. 4. Ekron, where Beelzebub the God of flies had
a nest or temple. 5. Timnath, where Judah committed incest with Tamar, but
betrayed himself by his own tokens, and beat himself with his own staff. Hence
Samson fetched his wife, whose epithalamium proved the dirge to so many
Philistines. 6. Modin, where the Maccabees were buried. 7. Sorek, the chief if
not only rivulet of this tribe.

Entering on the south-coasts of Simeon, we light on Askelon, where Herod was
born. 2. Gaza, chief of the five Satrapies of the Philistines, the gates
whereof Samson carried away; and hither being sent for to make sport in the
house of Dagon, acted such a tragedy that plucked down the stage, slew himself
and all the spectatours. 3. More inland; Ziklag, assigned by Achish to David.
4. Beersheba and Gerar, where Abraham and Isaac lived most constantly, near
unto the brook of Besor.

The tribe of Judah was the greatest of all, so that Simeon and Dan did feed on
the reversion thereof, and received those cities which originally belonged to
this royal tribe. Memorable herein were 1. Hebron, the land whereof was given
to Caleb, because he and Joshua consented not to the false verdict which the
jurie of spies brought in against the land of Canaan. 2. Nigh, in the cave of
Machpelah, the Patriarchs were buried; whose bodies took livery and seasin in
behalf of their posterity, which were to possess the whole land. 3.
Kirjath-sepher or Debir, an ancient Universitie of the Canaanites: for though
Parnassus was only in Greece, yet the Muses were not confined to that
country. 4. Tekoa, where Amos was born, fetched from the herdsmen, to feed Gods
sheep; and to dress his vine, from gathering wild-figs. 5. Zoar, Lots refuge;
near to which his wife for one farewell-glance at Sodom, was turned into a
pillar of salt, to season us to measure a sin by the infiniteness of God who
forbids it. Adjoining is Lots cave; where he affecting solitariness, had
too much company of his own daughters. 6. Carmel, where Nabal lived as rich as
foolish; but those grains of wisdom which were wanting in him, were found
over-weight in his wife. Here Uzziah pastured his cattle, a King, yet delighted
in husbandry; as thrift is the fuel of magnificence. 7. Bethlehem, where our
Savior was born. 8. Jerusalem, whereof afterward.

Chap. 22. Of Trachonitis.
WE want one adequate word of a country to express the tribes of Reuben, Gad,
and half-Manasses beyond Jordan. Trachonitis comes the nearest, so called
because it rises up in sharp hills, which are known to Ptolemie by the name of
Hippus; to Strabo, of Trachones; but in Scripture, of mount Hermon, or Gilead.

Reuben, though disinherited of the birthright, had this honor of an elder
brother, that he was first provided for. His chief places, Heshbon, and Medeba,
and Macherus, the strongest inland city in that part of the world. Mount
Abarim, a chain of hills, the highest whereof was Nebo; the top-cliff of Nebo,
Pisgah; whence Moses viewed the land: hereabouts the Angel buried him, and also
buried his grave, lest it should occasion idolatry. The river Arnon parts
this tribe from Moab.

In Gad, we find Peniel where Jacob wrestled with God; lost a sinew, but got a
blessing: Jabesh-gilead, where Saul was buried: Ramoth-gilead, where Ahab was
slain: Rogelim, the manor of Barzillai, superannuated to be a courtier:
Mahanaim, where the Angels appeared to Jacob: The forest of Ephraim, where
that execution was done by Jephthah on the Ephraimites, for not pronouncing
that heavy aspiration in Shibboleth: The river Jabbok.

In Manasses, Edrei the city of Og, on whose giant-like proportion the
Rabbines have more giant-like lies: Gadara, whose inhabitants loved their swine
better then their Savior. They that desire to be further informed of Canaan,
let them spare pains to strike fire, and light their candle at Sir Walter
Raleghs torch.

Chap. 23. The description of the city of Jerusalem; the observables within,
and about her.
JErusalem by the often change of her fortunes, has somewhat altered her
situation, having hitched her self more northwest-ward. For the mountain of
Calvarie, which formerly she shut out of her gates, as the infamous place of
execution, she now embraces within her walls as her most venerable monument.

On the south of Jerusalem (once part of her, now excluded) lies mount Sion,
famous anciently for the palace of David: On the east, mount Olivet, parted
with the vale of Jehoshaphat; which (some will have) shall be the hall for the
great Assizes of the world at the day of judgment, whilst others more
modestly conceive that the place as well as the time is concealed. On the west,
the hill of Gihon: And on the north it is indifferent plain.

The monuments which are still extant to be seen without or within the city,
are reduceable to one of these three ranks. 1. Certainly true; as the mountains
compassing it, which are standards too great and too heavy for either time or
war to remove: and such also are some eminent particulars of some places,
which constant tradition without rupture has entailed on posterity. 2. Of a
mixed nature; where the text is true, but superstition and fancy have commented
on it. 3. Stark lies, without a rag of probability to hide their shame; where
the believer is as foolish as the inventer impudent. We will bundle them
together, and let the Reader sort them at his discretion: for it is as hard to
fit the throats as to please the palates of men; and that will choke one man's
belief which another will swallow as easily credible. Neither let any censure
this discourse as a parenthesis to this history, seeing that to see these
relics was one principal motive with many to undertake this pilgrimage.

To begin without the city; On the south there remain the ruins of David's
palace, too near to which was Uriahs house; and the Morisons Trav. part. 1.
page 226.
fountain is still showed where Bathsheba's washing of her body occasioned the
fouling of her soul. Next, David's tomb is to be seen wherein he was buried:
his monument was enriched with a mass of treasure, says Josephus: out of
which Hircanus 850 years after took three thousand talents. But surely David
who despised riches in his life, was not covetous after his death: And I am
sure they are his own words, that Psalm. 49.17.
Man shall carry nothing away with him, neither shall his great pomp follow
him. Thirdly, Aceldama that burying-place for strangers: and the grave that
every where has a good stomach, has here a boulimia or greedy worm; for it
will devour the flesh of a corpse in 48 hours. Fourthly, Absaloms pillar,
which he built to continue his memory, though he might have saved that cost,
having eternized his infamy by his unnatural rebellion. Fifthly, the houses of
Annas and Caiaphas, to pass by others of inferior note.

On the east; First, mount Olivet, from whence our Savior took his rise into
heaven. The chapel of Ascension, of an eight-square round mounted on three
degrees, still challenges great reverence; and there the footsteps of our
Savior are still to be seen, which cannot be covered over. Secondly, the
fig tree which Christ cursed: for he who spoke many, here wrought a parable;
this whole tree being but the bark, and Christ under it cursing the fruitless
profession of the Jews. Thirdly, the place where S. Stephen was stoned; and the
stones thereabouts are overgrown with a red rust, which is (forsooth) the very
blood of that holy martyr. Fourthly, the place where Judas surprised our
Savior, and he fell down on a stone, in which the print of his elbows and feet
are still to be seen. Fifthly, the sepulcher of the blessed Virgin: whose body
after it had been three days buried, was carried up by the Angels into heaven;
and she let fall her Sandys, page 190.
girdle to S. Thomas, that his weak faith might be swaddled therewith:
otherwise he who in the point of Christ's resurrection would have no creed,
except he made his own articles, and put his finger into his side, would no
doubt hardly have believed the Virgins assumption. With this legend we may
couple another, which though distant in place will be believed both together:
They show at Bidulphs Trav. page 130 and Morisons, part. 1. page 227.
Bethlehem a little hole over the place where our Savior was born, through
which the star which conducted the wisemen fell down to the ground. But who
will not conclude but there was a vertigo in his head, who first made a star
subject to the falling sickness? Sixthly, the vale of Hinnom or Tophet, in
which wise Solomon befooled by his wives, built a temple to Moloch. Seventhly,
Cedron, a brook so often mentioned in Scripture.

The west and north-sides of Jerusalem were not so happily planted with sacred
monuments; and we find none thereon which grew to any eminency.

We will now lead the Reader into Jerusalem: Where first on mount Moriah (the
place where Isaac was offered, though not sacrificed) stood Solomon's temple,
destroyed by the Chaldeans, rebuilt by Zorobabel: Afterward Herod reedified it
so stately (says Josephus) that it exceeded Solomon's temple; if his words
exceed not the truth. But no wonder if he that never saw the sun, dare say
that the moon is the most glorious light in the heavens. Secondly, Solomon's
palace, which was 1. King. 7.1.
thirteen years in building, whereas the temple was finished in 1. King. 6.38.
seven: Not that he bestowed more cost and pains (because more time) on his own
then on Gods house: but rather he Vide Trem^l. in locum.
plied Gods work more thoroughly, and entertained then more builders; so that
contrary to the proverb, Church-work went on the most speedily. Thirdly, the
house of the forest of Lebanon, which was (as appears by comparing the text)
forty cubits longer, and thirty cubits broader then the temple it self. But
no doubt the holy Spirit speaking of holy buildings, means the great cubit of
the Sanctuary; but in other houses, the ordinary or common cubit. It was called
the house Lebanon, because hard by it Solomon planted a Adricom. ex Hieron.
page 153.
grove, the abridgement of the great forest; so that the pleasures of spacious
Lebanon were here written in a less character. Fourthly, Pilates palace, and
the Common hall, where the Judge of the world was condemned to death. Fifthly,
the pool of Bethesda, the waters whereof troubled by the Angel were a
Panpharmacon to him that first got into them. Here was a spittle built with
five porches, the mercy of God being seconded by the charity of man; God gave
the cure, men built the harbor for impotent persons. Sixthly, the house of
Dives the rich glutton: and therefore (says Theatr. Terr. sanct. 153.
Adricomius) it was no parable: But may we not retort his words? It was a
parable; and therefore this is none of Dives his house. Sure I am, Theophylact
is against the literal sense thereof, and says, They think (...), Comment. in
16. Luc.
foolishly that think otherwise.

But my discourse hastes to mount Calvarie; which at this day has almost
engrossed all reverence to it self. It is called Calvarie, Golgotha, or the
place of a scull, either because the hill is rolled and Illyricus, in 27. Matthew.
rounded up in the fashion of a man's head, (as Cambdens Brit. in
Buckinghamshire.
Pen in the British tongue signifies both an head, and a copped hill) or
because here the bodies of such as were executed were cast. As for the conceit,
that Adams scull should here be found, it is confuted by S. Hierome, who will
have him buried at Hebron. Neither is it likely, if the Jews had a tradition
that the father of mankind had here been interted, that they would have made
his sepulcher their Tiburn where malefactors were put to death, and the
charnel-house where their bones were scattered. Over our Saviors grave stood a
stately church, built say some by Helen, say others by Constantine: but we will
not set mother and son at variance; it might be she built it at his cost. In
this church are many monuments: As the pillar whereunto Christ was bound when
scourged; wherein red spots of dusky-veined marble Bridenb. De Domin. sepulcre.
usurped the honor to be counted Christ's blood. Secondly, a great cleft in the
rock which was rent in sunder at the Passion, whereby the bad thief was divided
from Christ (the sign of his spiritual separation) and they say it reaches
to the center of the earth: a thing hard to confute. Thirdly, certain pillars
which being in a dark place under ground, are said miraculously to weep for our
Saviors suffering. But I refer those who desire the criticismes of these
places without going thither, to read our English travelers: for in this case
as good wares and far cheaper peny-worths are bought at the second hand.

To conclude our description of Palestine, let none conceive that God forgot
the Levites in division of the land, because they had no entire country
allotted unto them. Their portion was as large as any, though paid in several
sums: They had 48 cities with their suburbs, tithes, first fruits,
free-offerings; being better provided for then many English ministers, who may
preach of hospitality to their people, but cannot go to the cost to practice
their own doctrine.

A table showing the variety of places names in Palestine.
In the old Testament. At Christ's time. In S. Hieromes time. At this day. 1
Azzah. Gaza. Constantia. Gazra. Sandys, page 149.
2 Japho. Joppa. Jaffa. Adricom. page 23.
3 Ramah. Arimathea. Ramma. Morison, page 216.
4 Shechem. Sychar. Neapolis. Pelosa. Ralegh, page 311.
5 Lydda. Diospolis. 6 Capharsalama Antipatris. Assure. Adricom. page 70.
7 Zarephath. Sarepta. Saphet. Ralegh, page 283.
8 Emmaus. Nicopolis. 9 Bethsan. Scythopolis. 10 Tzor. Tyrus. Sur. Sandys, page
216.
11 Laish. Dan. Cesarea-Philippi Paneas. Belina. Ralegh, page 291.
Leshem. 12 Jerusalem. Hierosolyma. Aelia. Cuds. Sandys, page 155.
13 Samaria. Samaria. Sebaste. 14 Cinnereth. Adricom. page 143.
Tiberias. Saffer. Sandys, page 212.
15 Accho. Ptolemais. Acre. 16 Gath. Dio-Cesarea Ybilin. Adricom. page 22.
17 Dammesek. Damascus. Sham. Bidulph, page 94.
18 Arnon. Areopolis. Petra. Adricom. page 32.
19 Rabbah. Philadelphia. 20 Waters of Merom. Semochonite lake. Houle. Sandys,
page 212.


Chap. 24. The siege and taking of Jerusalem.
BY this time cold weather (the best besome to sweep the chambers of the air)
had well cleared the Christians camp from infection: and now their devotion
moved the swifter, being come near to the center thereof, the city of
Jerusalem. Forward they set, and take the city of Marrha, and employ
themselves in securing the country about them, 1098
that so they might clear the way as they went. Dec. 11. 1099
Neither did the discords betwixt Reimund and Boemund much delay their
proceedings, being in some measure seasonably compounded; as was also the
seabattel betwixt the Pisans and Venetians. For the Venetians seeing on the
Pisans the Sabellicus, Enn. 9. lib. 3. page 357.
cognizance of the Cross, the uncounterfeited pasport that they wear for the
Holy war, suffered them safely to go on, though otherwise they were their
deadly enemies, yea, and set five thousand of them at liberty, whom they had
taken captive.

April 10.
The Pilgrims kept their Easter at Tripoli, Whitsuntide by Cesarea-Stratonis,
taking many places in their passage; and at last came to Jerusalem. May 29
Discovering the city afar off, it was a pretty sight to behold the
harmony in the difference of expressing their joy; how they clothed the same
passion with diverse gestures: some prostrate, some kneeling, some weeping* all
had much ado to manage so great a gladness. Then began they the siege of the
city on the north (being scarce assaultable on any other side by reason of
steep and broken rocks) and continued it with great valor. June 6.
June 10.
On the fourth day after, they had taken it but for want of scaling-ladders.
But a far greater want was the defect of water, the springs being either
stopped up or poisoned by the Turks; so that they fetched water Aemilius, page
135.
five miles off. As for the brook Cedron, it was dried up, as having no
subsistence of it self, but merely depending on the benevolence of
winter-waters, which mount Olivet bestows upon it. Admiral Coligni was wont
to say, He that will well paint the beast War, must first begin to shape the
belly; meaning that a good General must first provide victuals for an army:
Yea, let him remember the bladder in the beasts belly as well as the guts, and
take order for moisture more especially then for meat it self; thirst in
northern bodies being more unsupportable then famine: Quickly will their
courage be cooled, who have no moisture to cool their hearts. As for the
Christians want of ladders, that was quickly supplied: for the Genoans arriving
with a fleet in Palestine, brought most curious engineers, who framed a wooden
tower, and all other artificial instruments. For we must not think, that the
world was at a loss for warre-tools before the brood of guns was hatched: It
had the Plin. Not. hist. lib. 7. cap. 56.
battering ram, first found out by Epeus at the taking of Troy; the balista
to discharge great stones, invented by the Phenicians; the catapulta, being a
sling of mighty strength, whereof the Syrians were authors: and perchance King
2 Chronicles. 26.15.
Uzziah first made it; for we find him very dextrous and happy in devising such
things. And although these bear-whelps were but rude and unshaped at the first,
yet art did lick them afterward, and they got more teeth and sharper nails by
degrees; so that every age set them forth in a new edition, corrected and
amended. But these and many more voluminous engines (for the ram alone had an
hundred men to manage it) are now virtually epitomized in the cannon. And
though some may say, that the finding of gunnes has been the losing of many
men's lives, yet it will appear that battles now are fought with more
expedition, and victory stands not so long a neuter, before she express her
self on one side or other.

But these gunnes have shot my discourse from the siege of Jerusalem: To return
thither again. July 11.
By this time, in the space of a M. Paris, page 63.
month, the Genoans had finished their engines which they built P. Aemylius,
page 135. and Tyrius, lib. 8 cap. 6.
seven miles off: for nearer there grew no stick of bigness. I will not say,
that since our Savior was hanged on a tree, the land about that city has been
cursed with a barrennes of wood. And now for a preparative, that their courage
might work the better, July 12.
they began with a fast, and a solemn procession about mount Olivet.

Next day they gave a fierce assault; July 13.
yea, Tyrius, lib. 8 cap. 13.
women played the men, and fought most valiantly in armor. But they within
being forty thousand strong, well victualled and appointed, made stout
resistance, till the night (accounted but a foe for her friendship) umpired
betwixt them, and abruptly put an end to their fight in the midst of their
courage.

When the first light brought news of a morning, they on afresh; the rather,
because they had P. Aemylius, page 136.
intercepted a letter tied to the legs of a dove (it being the fashion of that
country both to write and send their letters with the wings of a The manner
set down at large, Bidulphs Trav. page 43.
fowl) wherein the Persian Emperor promised present succors to the besieged.
The Turks cased the outside of their walls with bags of chaff, straw, and such
like pliable matter, which conquered the engines of the Christians by yielding
unto them. As for one sturdie engine whose force would not be tamed, they
brought Tyrius, lib. 8. cap. 15.
two old witches on the walls to inchant it: but the spirit thereof was too
strong for their spells, so that both of them were miserably slain in the place.

The day following, July 15.
Duke Idem, lib. 8. cap. 18.
Godfrey fired much combustible matter, the smoke whereof (the light cause of
an heavy effect) driven with the wind, blinded the Turks eyes; and under the
protection thereof the Christians entered the city: Godfrey himself first
footing the walls, and then his brother Eustace. The Turks retired to Solomon's
temple (so called because built in the same place) there to take the farewell
of their lives. In a desperate conflict there, the foremost of the Christians
were miserably slain, thrust upon the weapons of their enemies by their fellows
that followed them. The pavement so swam, that none could go but either through
a rivulet of blood, or over a bridge of dead bodies. Valor was not wanting in
the Turks, but superlatively abundant in the Christians, till night made them
leave off. Next morning mercy was proclaimed to all those that would lay down
their weapons: For though blood be the best sauce for victory, yet must it not
be more then the meat. Thus was Jerusalem won by the Christians, and M.
Paris, page 65.
twenty thousand Turks therein slain, on the fifteenth of July being Friday,
about three of the clock in the afternoon. Lib. 8. cap. 18.
Tyrius finds a great mystery in the time; because Adam was created on a
Friday, and on the same day and hour our Savior suffered. But these
Synchronismes, as when they are natural they are pretty and pleasing; so when
violently wrested, nothing more poor and ridiculous.

Then many Christians, who all this while had lived in Jerusalem in most
lamentable slaverie, being glad to lurk in secret (as truth oftentimes seeks
corners as fearing her judge, though never as suspecting her cause) came forth
joyfully, wellcomed and embraced these the procurers of their liberty.

July 18.
Three days after it was concluded, as a necessary piece of Besoldus, De
regibus Hierosol. ex variis autoribus, page 119
severitie for their defense, to put all the Turks in Jerusalem to death; which
was accordingly performed without favor to age or sex. The pretense was for
fear of treason in them, if the Emperor of Persia should besiege the city.
And some slew them with the same zeal wherewith Saul slew the Gibeonites; and
thought it unfit that these goats should live in the sheeps pasture. But noble
Tancred was highly displeased hereat, because done in cold blood, it being no
slip of an extemporany passion, but a studied and premeditated act; and that
against pardon proclaimed, many of them having compounded and paid for their
lives and liberty. Besides, the execution was merciless, upon sucking
children, whose not-speaking spoke for them; and on women, whose weakness is a
shield to defend them against a valiant man. To conclude; Severitie hot in the
fourth degree, is little better then poison, and becomes cruelty it self: and
this act seems to be of the same nature.

The end of the first Book.
The History of the HOLY WAR. Book II.
Chap. 1. Robert the Normane refuses the kingdom of Jerusalem; Godfrey of
Bouillon chosen king; his parentage, education, and virtues.
Anno Dom. 1099
FIght days after Jerusalem was won, they proceeded to the election of a
King: but they had so much choice that they had no choice at all; so many
Princes there were, and so equally eminent, July 23.
that Justice her self must suspend her verdict, not knowing which of them best
deserved the Crown. Yet it was their pleasure to pitch on Robert the Normane as
on the man of highest descent, being son to a King: for great Hugh of France
was already returned home, pretending the colic; though some impute it to
cowardlinesse, and make the disease not in his bowels but his heart.

Robert refused this honorable profer; P. Aemylius, page 137.
whether because he had an eye to the kingdom of England now void by the death
of William Rufus, or because he accounted Jerusalem would be encumbered with
continual war. Henry Hunting. lib. 7. page 377.
But he who would not take the Crown with the Cross, was fain to take the
Cross without the Crown, and never thrived afterward in any thing he
undertook. Thus they who refuse what God fairly carveth for them, do never
after cut well for themselves. He lived to see much misery, and felt more,
having his eyes put out by king Henry his brother; and at last found rest (when
buried) in the now Cathedral church of Gloucester under a Cambden Brit. p. 255.
wooden monument, bearing better proportion to his low fortunes then high
birth. And since, in the same quire he has got the company of another Prince
as unfortunate as himself, King Edward the second.

They go on to a second choice; and that they may know the natures of the
Princes the better, their servants were examined on oath to confess their
masters faults. The Tyrius, lib. 9. cap. 2.
servants of Godfrey of Bouillon protested their masters only fault was this,
That when Mattens were done he would stay so long in the church to know of the
Priest the meaning of every image and picture, that dinner at home was spoiled
by his long tarrying. All admired hereat, that this man's worst vice should be
so great a virtue, and unanimously chose him their King. He accepted the place,
but refused the solemnity thereof; and would not wear a crown of gold there,
where the Savior of mankind had worn a crown of thorns.

He was son to Bustace Duke of Bouillon, and Ida his wife, daughter and heir
to Godfrey Duke of Lorein; born, says Lib. 9. cap. 5.
Tyrius, at Bologne a town in Champaigne on the English sea, which he mistaketh
for Bouillon up higher in the continent near the county of Lutzenburg. Such
slips are incident to the pens of the best authors: yea, we may see
Canterbury mistaken for Cambridge, not only in Lib. 2. Cosmog. page 50.
Munster, but even in all our own printed Statute-books in the 12. of Richard
the As Caius proves it plainly out of Walsingham.
second. He was brought up in that school of valor, the court of Henry the 4.
the Emperor. Whilst he lived there, there happened an intricate suit betwixt
him and another Prince about title of land; and because Judges could not untie
the knot, it was concluded the two Princes should cut it asunder with their
sword in a combat. Godfrey was very Quantum potuit renitebatur, Tyrius, lib. 9.
cap. 7.
unwilling to fight, not that he was the worse soldier, but the better
Christian: he made the demurre not in his courage, but in his conscience; as
conceiving any private title for land not ground enough for a duel: Yea, we
may observe generally, that they who long most to fight duells, are the first
that surfeit of them. Notwithstanding, he yielded to the tyranny of custom, and
after the fashion of the country entered the lists: when at the first encounter
his sword brake; but he struck his adversary down with the hilt, yet so that he
saved his life, and gained his own inheritance. Another parallel act of his
valor was when being standardbearer to the Emperor, he with the imperial
ensign killed Rodulphus the Duke of Saxony in single fight, and fed the Eagle
on the bowels of that arch-rebell. His soul was enriched with many virtues, but
the most orient of all was his humility, which took all men's affections without
resistance: And though one says, Take away ambition, and you take away the
spurs of a soldier; yet, Godfrey without those spurs rode on most
triumphantly.

Chap. 2. The establishing of Ecclesiastical affairs, and Patriarchs in
Antioch and Jerusalem; the numerosity of Palestine-Bishops.
BUt now let us leave the Helmets, and look on the Mitres, and consider the
ordering of Ecclesiastical affairs. For the Commonwealth is a Ring, the
Church the Diamond; both well set together, receive, and return luster each on
other. As soon as Antioch was taken, one Bernard (a reverend Prelate) was made
Patriarch there with general consent. But more stir was there about that
place in Jerusalem: For first Arnulphus, a worthless and vicious man, was by
Fatuo populo suffragia inconsulta ministrante, Tyrius, lib. 9. cap. 4.
popular faction lifted up into the Patriarchs chair; but with much ado was
avoided, and Dabert, Archbishop of Pisa, substituted in his room: one very wise
and politic, an excellent book-man in reading of men, and otherwise well
studied, especially as that age went, wherein a mediocrity was an eminency in
learning. But he was infected with the humor of the clergy of that age, who
counted themselves to want room except they justled with Princes. As for
Arnulphus, he never ceased to trouble and molest this Dabert; and as a
firebrand smoketh most when out of the chimney, so he after his displacing was
most turbulent and unquiet, ever sitting on his skirts that sat in the
Patriarchs chair, till after many changes he struggled himself again into the
place.

Under these Patriarchs many Archbishops and Bishops were appointed in the very
places (as near as might be) where they were before the Saracens overrunning
the country, and good maintenance assigned to most of them.

But at this time Bishops were set too thick for all to grow great; and
Palestine fed too many Cathedral churches to have them generally fat. Vide
tabulas Adricomii.
Lydda, Jamnia, and Joppa, three episcopal towns, were within four miles one
of another. Yea, Lib. 14. cap. 12.
Tyrius makes 14 Bishops under the Archbishop of Tire, 20 under the Archbishop
of Caesarea, under the Archbishop of Scythopolis 9, 12 under the Archbishop of
Rabbah, besides 25 suffragan churches, which it seems were immediately
depending on the Patriarch of Jerusalem, without subordination to any
Archbishop. Surely, many of these Bishops (to use Bishop In the Archbishops of
Cant. p. 143.
Langhams expression) had high racks but poor mangers. Neither let it stagger
the reader if in that catalogue of Tyrius he light on many Bishops seats which
are not to be found in Mercator, Ortelius, or any other Geographer; for some of
them were such poor places, that they were ashamed to appear in a map, and
fall so much under a Geographers notice, that they fall not under it. For in
that age Bishops had their Sees at poor and contemptible villages; (as here in
England before the Conquest, who would suspect Sunning in Barkshire, or
Dorchester near Oxford to have had Cathedral churches?) till in the days of
Fox Martyrolog. p. 173.
William the first, Bishops removed their seats to the principal towns in the
shire.

Chap. 3. The Saracens conquered at Askelon.
MAhomets tomb hung not so strong but now it began to shake, and was likely to
fall. These victories of the Christians gave a deadly wound to that religion.
Wherefore the Saracens combined themselves with the Turks to assist them, there
being betwixt these two nations, I will not say an unity, but a conspiracy in
the same superstition; so that therein they were like a nest of hornets, stir
one and anger all. Wherefore coming out of Egypt under Ammiravissus their
General, at Askelon they gave the Christians battle. Aug. 12.
But God sent such a qualm of cowardlinesse over the hearts of these Infidels,
that an hundred thousand of them were quickly slain; so that it was rather an
execution then a fight; and their rich tents which seemed to be the Tyrius,
lib. 9 cap. 12.
exchequer of the East-countrey, spoiled; so that the Pilgrims knew not how to
value the wealth they found in them.

This victory obtained, such Pilgrims as were disposed to return, addressed
themselves for their country; and these merchants for honor went home, having
made a gainful adventure. Those that remained were advanced to Signories in
the land; as Tancred was made governor of Galilee. Nor will it be amiss to
insert this story: Peter Bishop of Anagnia in Italy was purposed here to lead
his life without taking care for his charge; when behold S. Magnus Baronius out
of Brunus in anno 1099
patron of that church appeared to him in a vision, pretending himself to be a
young man who had left his wife at home, and was come to live in Jerusalem.
Fie, said Peter to him, go home again to your wife: Whom God has joined
together let no man put asunder. Why then, replied S. Magnus, have you left
your church a widow in Italy, and live here so far from her company? This
vision, though calculated for this one Bishop, did generally serve for all the
non-residents which posted hither, and who paid not the lawful debt to their
conscience, whilst by needless bonds they engaged themselves to their own
will worship. For though souls of men be light, because immateriall, yet they
may prove an heavy burden to these careless Pastors who were to answer for
them.

After the return of these Pilgrims, the heat of the Christians victories in
Syria were somewhat allayed: for Tyrius, lib. 9. cap. 20. Idem, lib. 9. cap. 19.
Boemund Prince of Antioch marching into Mesopotamia, was taken prisoner; and
Godfrey besieging the city of Antipatris, then called Assure, though hitherto he
had been always a conqueror, was fain to depart with disgrace. So small a
remora may stay that ship which fails with the fairest gale of success.

Chap. 4. The original and increase of the Hospitallers; their degenerating
through wealth into luxury.
Hospinian. De orig. Mon. fol. 165.
ABout this time under Gerard their first master, began the order of
Knights-hospitallers. Indeed more anciently there were Hospitallers in
Jerusalem* but these were no Knights: they had a kind of order, but no honor
annexed to it; but were pure Alms-men, whose house was founded and they
maintained by the charity of the merchants of Amalphia a city in Italy.

But now they had more stately buildings assigned unto them, their house
dedicated to S. John of Jerusalem; Knights-hospitallers and those of S. John of
Jerusalem being both the same; although learned In his View of civil law, page
159.
Dr. Ridley makes them two distinct orders, for which our Mr Seldom, in his
preface Of tithes, page 6.
great Antiquary does justly reprove him. But such an error is venial; and it
is a greater fault rigidly to censure, then to commit a small oversight. The
one shows himself man, in mistaking; the other no man, in not pardoning a
light mistake.

To make one capable of the highest order of this Knighthood (for their
Hospinian. De orig. M^n. fol. 165.
servitours and priests might be of an inferior rank) the party must thus be
qualified: Eighteen years old at the least; of an able body; not descended of
Jewish or Turkish parents; no bastard, except bastard to a Prince, there being
honor in that dishonor, as there is light in the very spots of the moon.
Descended he must be of worshipful parentage. They wore a red belt with a
white cross; and on a black cloak the white cross of Jerusalem, which is a
cross crossed, or five crosses together, in memory of our Saviors five
wounds. Yet was there some difference betwixt their habit in peace and in
war. Their profession was to fight against Infidels, and to secure Pilgrims
coming to the Sepulcher; and they vowed Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience.
Reimundus de Podio their second master made some additionalls to their
profession: as, They must receive the sacrament thrice a year; hear Mass
once a day if possible: They were to be no merchants, no usurers; to fight no
private duells; Hospinian. ut prius.
to stand neuters and to take no side, if the Princes in Christendom should
fall out.

But it is given to most religious orders, to be clear in the spring and mirie
in the stream. These Hospitallers afterward getting wealth, unlaced themselves
from the strictness of their first Institution, and grew loose into all
licentiousness. What was their obedience to their master but rebellion against
the Patriarch their first patron? as shall be showed hereafter. What was their
poverty but a couzenage of the world; whilst their order sued in forma
pauperis, and yet had Camb. Brit. page 311.
nineteen thousand mannours in Christendom belonging unto them? Neither will
it be scandalum magnatum to their lordships, to say what S. Cited by Volaterran.
Bernard speaks of their chastity, how they lived inter scorta and epulas,
betwixt bawds and banquets. And no wonder if their forced virginity was the
mother of much uncleanness: For commonly those who vow not to go the highway
of Gods ordinance, do haunt base and unwarrantable bypath.

I will not forestall the history, to show how these Hospitallers were
afterward Knights of Rhodes, and at this day of Malta; but will conclude with
the ceremonies used at their creation, because much material stuff no doubt
may be picked out of their formalities.

There is delivered them, 1. a Sand. Trav. page 229.
sword, in token that they must be valiant, 2. with a crosse-hilt; their valor
must defend religion: 3. With this sword they are struck three times over the
shoulders, to teach them patiently to suffer for Christ: 4. They must wipe the
sword; their life must be undefiled. 5. Gilt spurs are put on them, because
they are to scorn wealth at their heels: 6. And then they take a taper in their
hands, for they are to lighten others by their exemplary lives; 7. and so go to
hear Mass: where we leave them.

Sand. Trav. page 159.
At the same time Knights of the Sepulcher were also ordained, which for their
original and profession are like to these Knights-hospitallers. The order
continues to this day. The Padre Guardian of Jerusalem makes them of such as
have seen the Sepulcher. They should be Gentlemen by birth: but the Padre
carries a Chancerie in his bosom to mitigate the rigor of this Common law,
and will admit of him that brings fat enough, though no blood: as of late he
made an Apothecary of Aleppo of that honor: So that there the sword of
Knighthood is denied to none who bring a good sheath with them, and have a
purse to pay soundly for it.

Chap. 5. The scuffling betwixt the King and Patriarch about the city of
Jerusalem; the issue thereof.
NOt long after, there was started a controversy of great consequence betwixt
the King and Patriarch: the Patriarch claiming the cities of Jerusalem and
Joppa, with the appertenances; the King refusing to surrender them.

The Patriarch pleaded, That these places anciently belonged to his
predecessors: He set before the King the heinousness of sacrilege; how great
a sin it was when Princes, who should be nursing-fathers and suckle the
Church, shall suck from it: and showed how the Commonwealth may grow fat, but
never healthful, by feeding on the Churches goods.

On the other side the King alleged, That the Christian Princes had now
purchased Jerusalem with their blood, and bestowed it on him: that the
Patriarchs overgrown title was drowned in this late conquest; from which, as
from a new foundation, all must build their claims who challenge any right to
any part in the city. Secondly, he pleaded, it was unreasonable that the King
of Jerusalem should have nothing in Jerusalem (as at this day the Roman
Emperor is a very ciphre, without power or profit in Rome) and should live
rather as a sojourner then a Prince in his royal city, confined to an airy
title, whilst the Patriarch should have all the command.

To this the Patriarch answered, That the Christians new conquest could not
cancel his ancient right, which was enjoyed even under the Saracens; That this
voyage was principally undertaken for advancing the Church, and not to restore
her only to her liberty, and withhold from her her lands, so that in this
respect she should find better usage from her foes then from her children. If
we mistake not, the chief pinch of the cause lies on the Patriarchs proof,
that the lands he demanded formerly belonged to his predecessors: and we find
him to fail in the main issue of the matter. True it was, that for the last
thirty years the Patriarchs on condition they should repair and fortify the
walls of Jerusalem, were possessed of a fourth part of the city, even by grant
from Bomensor the Emperor of the Saracens, in the year of our Lord 1063. But
that ever he had the whole city, either by this or by any previous grant, it
appears not in Tyrius; who says moreover, Lib. 9. cap. 16.
We wonder for what reason the lord Patriarch should raise this controversy
against Duke Godfrey.

Let me add, that this our Author is above exception: for being both a
politic statesman and pious prelate, no doubt his pen strikes the true and
even stroke betwixt King and Patriarch. Besides, he might well see the truth of
this matter, writing in a well-proportioned distance of time from it. Those who
live too near the stories they write, oftentimes willingly mistake through
partiality; and those who live too far off, are mistaken by uncertainties,
the footsteps of truth being almost worn out with time.

But to return to Godfrey, who though unwilling at first, yet afterward not
only on Candlemasse-day restored to the Patriarch the fourth part of the
city, but also on the Easter following, gave him all Jerusalem, Joppa, and
whatsoever he demanded: conditionally that the King should hold it of the
Patriarch till such time as he could conquer Babylon, or some other royal
city fit for him to keep his court in. If in the mean time Godfrey died
without issue, the Patriarch was to have it presently delivered unto him.

We will be more charitable then those that say that the Patriarch herein did
Centuriatores, centur. 12. col. 490. De schismat.
bewitch and be mad Godfrey to make this large donation to him, by torturing
his conscience at the confession of his sins. Only we may question the
discretion of this Prince in giving a gift of so large a size: for Charities
eyes must be open as well as her hands; though she gives away her branches,
not to part with the root.

And let the reader observe, that Godfrey at the time of this his bountiful
grant lay on his deathbed, sick of that irrecoverable disease which ended him.
How easily may importunity stamp any impression on those whom desperate
sickness has softened! And if the sturdiest man nigh death may be affrighted
into good works for fear of Purgatory, no wonder if devout Godfrey were pliable
to any demand. In his Pass. 11.
Pierce Plowman makes a witty wonder, why Friars should covet rather to
confess and bury, then to christen children; intimating it proceeded from
covetousness, there being gain to be gotten by the one, none by the other. And
this was the age wherein the Covents got their best living by the dying: which
made them (contrary to all other people) most to worship the sun setting.

Chap. 6. Godfreys death and burial.
Authors differ on the death of this noble King: some making him to die of
that long-wasting sickness; others, of the P. Amylius, lib. 5.
plague: It may be the plague took him out of the hands of that lingering
disease, and quickly cut off what that had been long in fretting. He died July
18. having reigned one year wanting five days. A Prince valiant, pious,
bountiful to the Church: for besides what he gave to the Patriarch, he founded
Canons in the temple of the Sepulcher, and a monastery in the vale of
Jehoshaphat.

We would say his death was very unseasonable (leaving the orphane State not
only in its minority, but its infancy) but that that fruit which to man's
apprehension is blown down green and untimely, is gathered full-ripe in Gods
providence. He was buried in the temple of the Sepulcher, where his tomb is
unviolated at this day; whether out of a religion the Turks bear to the place,
or out of honor to his memory, or out of a valiant scorn to fight against dead
bones; or perchance the Turks are minded as John King of England was, who being
wished by a Courtier to untombe the bones of one who whilst he was living had
been his great enemy, Oh no, said King John, would all mine enemies were as
honorably buried.

Chap. 7. Baldwine chosen King. He keeps Jerusalem in despite of the
Patriarch.
1100
GOdfrey being dead, the Christians with a joint consent dispatched an embassy
to Baldwine his brother, Count of Edessa (a city in Plin. lib. 5. cap. 24.
Arabia, the lord whereof had adopted this Baldwine to be his heir) entreated
him to accept of the Kingdom: which honorable offer he courteously embraced.

A Prince whose body Nature cut of the largest size, being like Tyrius, lib.
10. cap. 2.
Saul, higher by the head then his subjects. And though the Goths had a law,
always to choose a Munst. Cosmog. lib. 3. page 264.
short thick man for their King; yet surely a goodly statu^e is most
majesticall. His hair and beard brown, face fair, with an eagles nose; which in
the Pantal. in vita Caroli. 5.
Persian Kings was anciently observed as a mark of magnanimity. Bred he was a
scholar, entered into Orders, and was Prebendary in the Tyrius, lib. 10. cap. 1.
churches of Rhems, Liege, and Cambray; but afterward turned secular Prince,
as our Fox, Martyrol. page 136.
Athelwulphus, who exchanged the mitre of Winchester for the crown of England.
Yet Baldwine put not off his scholarship with his habit, but made good use
thereof in his reign. For though bookishnesse may unactive, yet learning does
accomplish a Prince, and makes him sway his scepter the steadier.

He was properly the first King of Jerusalem (his brother Godfrey never
accounted more then a Duke) and was crowned on Christmasse-day. Dec. 25.
The reason that made him assume the name of a King, was thereby to strike the
greater Munst. Cosmog. p. 1008.
terror into the Pagans. Thus our Kings of England from the days of King John
were styled but Lords of Ireland, till Henry the 8. first entitled himself
King, because Cambden, Brit. page 732.
Lord was slighted by the seditious rebels. As for that religious scruple
which Godfrey made, to wear a crown of gold where Christ wore one of thorns,
Baldwine easily dispensed therewith. And surely in these things the mind is
all: A crown might be refused with pride, and worn with humility.

But before his Coronation there was a tough bickering about the city of
Jerusalem. Dabert the Patriarch, on the death of Godfrey, devoured Jerusalem
and the tower of David in his hope; but coming to take possession, found the
place too hot for him. For Garnier Earl of Gretz, in the behalf of King
Baldwine (who was not as yet returned from Edessa) manned it against him. But
so it happened, that this valiant Earl died three days after, which by Tyrius,
lib. 10. cap. 4.
Dabert was counted a just judgment of God upon him for his sacrilege. Now
though it be piety to impute all events to Gods hand, yet to say that this man's
death was for such a sin, shows too much presumption toward God, and too
little charity toward our neighbor. Indeed if sudden death had singled out
this Earl alone, it had somewhat favored their censure; but there was then a
general mortality in the city which swept away Vrsperg. page 236.
thousands: and, which is most material, what this Patriarch interpreted
sacrilege, others accounted loyalty to his Sovereigne. As for that donation of
the city of Jerusalem and tower of David which Godfrey gave to the Patriarch,
some thought that this gift overthrew it self with its own greatness, being so
immoderately large: others supposed it was but a personal act of Godfrey, and
therefore died with the giver; as conceiving his successors not obliged to
perform it, because it was unreasonable that a Prince should in such sort
fetter and restrain those which should come after him. Sure it is, that
Baldwine having both the stronger sword, and possession of the city, kept it
perforce, whilst the Patriarch took that leave which is allowed to loosers, to
talk, chafe, and complain; sending his bemoning letters to Tyrius, lib. 10.
Boemund Prince of Antioch, inviting him to take arms, and by violence to
recover the Churches right; but from him received the useless assistance of
his pity, and that was all.

Chap. 8. The Church-story during this Kings reign. A chain of successive
Patriarchs; Dabert, Ebremare, Gibelline, and Arnulphus: Their several
characters.
1102.
Afterward, this breach betwixt the King and Patriarch was made up by the
mediation of some friends: but the skin only was drawn over, not dead flesh
drawn out of the wound; and Arnulphus (whom we mentioned before) discontented
for his loss of the Patriarchs place, still kept the sore raw betwixt them. At
last Dabertus the Patriarch was fain to flee to Antioch, where he had
plentiful maintenance allowed him by Bernard Patriarch of that See. 1103.
But he was too high in the instep to wear another man's shoes, and conceived
himself to be but in a charitable prison whilst he lived on another
benevolence. Wherefore hence he hasted to Tyrius, lib. 11. cap. 4.
Rome, complained to the Pope, and received from his Holiness a command to
King Baldwine to be reestablished in the Patriarchs place; but returning home
died by the way at Messana in Sicily, being accounted seven years Patriarch,
four at home, and three in banishment.

1107.
Whilst Dabert was thrust out, one Ebremarus was made Patriarch against his
will by King Baldwine. An holy and devout man; but he had more of the dove then
the serpent, and was none of the deepest reach. He hearing that he was
complained of to the Pope for his irregular election, posted to Rome to excuse
himself, showing he was chosen against his will: and though preferment may not
be snatched, it needs not be thrust away. But all would not do; It was enough
to put him out, because the King put him in. Wherefore he was commanded to
return home, and to wait the definitive sentence, which Gibellinus Archbishop
of Arles and the Popes Legate should pronounce in the matter.

Gibellinus coming to Jerusalem, concluded the election of Ebremarus to be
illegal and void, and was himself chosen Patriarch in his place; and the other
in reverence of his piety made Archbishop of Cesarea. 1108.
And though Arnulphus (the firebrand of this Church) desired the Patriarchs
place for himself, yet was he better content with Gibellinus his election,
because he was a through-old man, and hoped that candle would quickly go out
that was in the socket.

Tyrius, lib. 11. cap. 28.
To this Gibellinus King Baldwine granted, that all places which he or his
successors should win, should be subject to his jurisdiction; and this also
was confirmed by Pope Paschall the 2. Baronius in anno 1108.
But Bernard Patriarch of Antioch found himself much aggrieved hereat; because
many of these cities by the ancient canon of the Council of Nice, were subject
to his Church. At last the Pope took the matter into his hand, and stroked the
angry Patriarch of Antioch into gentleness with good language. He showed, how
since the Council of Nice the country had got a new face; ancient mountains
were buried, rivers drowned in oblivion, and they new-christened with other
names: Yea, the deluge of the Saracens tyranny had washed away the bounds of
the Churches jurisdictions, that now they knew not their own severals, where
Mahometanisme so long had made all common and waste. He desired him therefore
to be contented with this new division of their jurisdictions: especially
because it was reasonable, that the King of Jerusalem and his successors
should dispose of those places which they should win with their own swords.
Bernard perceiving hereby how his Holiness stood affected in the business,
contented his conscience that he had set his title on foot, and then quietly
let it fall to the ground, as counting it no policy to show his teeth where he
durst not bite.

Gibellinus never laid claim to the city of Jerusalem, whether it was because
in thankfulness for this large ecclesiastical power which King Baldwine had
bestowed upon him, or that his old age was too weak to strive with so strong an
adversary. He sat four years in his chair, and Arnulphus thinking he went
too slow to the grave, is suspected to have given him something to have mended
his pace, and was himself substituted in his room by the especial favor of
King Baldwine.

This Arnulphus was called mala corona, 1112.
as if all vices met in him to dance a round. And no wonder if the King being
himself wantonly disposed, advanced such a man: for generally, loose Patrones
cannot abide to be pinched and pent with over-strict Chaplains. Besides, it was
policy in him to choose such a Patriarch as was liable to exceptions for his
vicious life; that so if he began to bark against the King, his mouth might be
quickly stopped. Arnulphus was as quiet as a lamb, and durst never challenge
his interest in Jerusalem from Godfreys donation; as fearing to wrestle with
the King, who had him on the hip, and could out him at pleasure for his bad
manners. Amongst other vices he was a great church-robber, who to make Emmelor
his niece a Princess, and to marry Eustace Prince of Sidon, gave her the city
of Jericho for her dowry, and lands belonging to his See worth five thousand
crowns yearly. And though Papists may pretend that marriage causes
covetousness in the Clergy, yet we shall find when the Prelacie were
constrained to a single life, that their nephews ate more church-bread then now
the children of married Ministers. Yea, some Popes not only fed their bastards
with church-milk, but even cut off the churches breasts for their pompous and
magnificent maintenance. And thus having dispatched the story of the Church in
this Kings reign, we come now to handle the business of the Commonwealth
entirely by it self.

Chap. 9. A mountain-like army of new adventurers after long and hard travail
delivered of a mouse; Alexius his treachery.
1101
THe fame of the good success in Palestine summoned a new supply of other
Pilgrims out of Christendom. Germany, and other places which were sparing at
the first voyage, made now amends with double liberality. The chief adventurers
were, Guelpho Duke of Bavaria, (who formerly had been a great champion of the
Popes against Henry the Emperor; and from him Pantal. De hist. Germ. part. 2.
page 151.
they of the Papal faction were denominated Guelphes, in distinction from the
Imperial party which were called Gibellines.) Hugh brother to the King of
France, and Stephen Earl of Bloys, (both which had much suffered in their
reputation for deserting their fellows in the former expedition, and therefore
they sought to unstain their credits by going again.) Stephen Earl of Burgundy,
William Duke of Aquitain, Frederick Count of Bogen, Hugh brother to the Earl of
Tholose: besides many great Prelates; Diemo Archbishop of Saltzburg, the
Ursperg. page 237.
Bishops of Millain and Pavie, which led 50000 out of Lombardy; the total
sum amounting to 250000. All stood on the tiptoes of expectation to see what
so great an army would atchieve; men commonly measuring victories by the
multitudes of the soldiers. But they did nothing memorable, save only that so
many went so far to do nothing. Their sufferings are more famous then their
deeds; being so consumed with plague, famine, and the sword, that In Chronico,
page 239.
Conrade Abbot of Urspurg, who went and wrote this voyage, believes that not a
thousand of all these came into Palestine, and those so poor that their bones
would scarce hold together: so that they were fitter to be sent into an
hospital then to march into the field; having nothing about them wherewith to
affright their enemies, except it were the ghost-like ghastlinesse of their
famished faces. The army that came out of Lombardy were so eaten up by the
swords of the Turks, that no fragments of them were left, nor news to be heard
what was become of them: And no wonder, being led by Prelates unexperienced in
martial affairs; which, though perchance great Clerks, were now to turn over a
new leaf, which they had no skill to read. Cited by Lampad. Mellis. histor.
part 3. page 268.
Luther was wont to say, that he would be unwilling to be a soldier in that
army where Priests were Captains; because the Church and not the Camp was their
proper place; whereas going to war, they willingly outed themselves of Gods
protection, being out of their vocation.

But the main matter which made this whole voyage miscarry in her travail, was
the treachery of the midwife through whose hands it was to pass. For Alexius
the Grecian Emperor feared, lest betwixt the Latins in the East in Palestine,
and West in Europe, as betwixt two milstones, his Empire lying in the midst
should be ground to powder. Whereupon, as these Pilgrims went through his
country, he did them all possible mischief, still under the pretense of
kindness, (What hinderer to a false helper?) calling the chief Captains of the
army his sons; but they found it true, The more courtesy, the more craft.
Yea, this deep dissembler would put off his visard in private, and profess to
his friends that he delighted as much to see the Turks and these Christians in
battle, as to see Besoldus.
mastiffdogs fight together; and that P. Aemyl. page 140.
which side soever lost, yet he himself would be a gainer.

But when they had passed Grecia, and had crossed the Bosporus (otherwise
called The arm of S. George) entering into the dominion of the Turks, they were
for thirty days exposed a mark to their arrows. And though this great
multitude was never stabbed with any mortal defeat in a set battle, yet they
consumed away by degrees, the cowardly Turks striking them when their hands
were pinnioned up in the straits of unknown passages. The Generals bestrawed
the country about with their corpses. Great Hugh of France was buried at
Tarsus in Cilicia; Duke Guelpho, at Paphos in Cyrpus; Munst. Cosmog. page 640.
Diemo the Archbishop of Saltzburg saw his own heart cut out, and was Ursperg.
page 238.
martyred by the Turks at Chorazin: And God (says my Author) manifested by
the event, that the war was not pleasing unto him.

Chap. 10. Antipatris and Cesarea won by the Christians. The variety of King
Baldwines success.
MEan time King Baldwine was employed with better success in Palestine: for
hitherto Joppa was the only port the Christians had; but now by the assistance
of the Genoan fleet (who for their pains were to have Tyrius, lib. 10. cap. 14.
a third part of the spoil, and a whole street to themselves of every city they
took) Baldwine won most considerable havens along the mid-land-sea. He began
with Antipatris, to ransom the Christian honor which was morgaged here,
because Godfrey was driven away from hence: And no wonder, having no Tyrius,
lib. 9. cap. 18.
shipping; whereas that Army which takes a strong harbor, otter-like must swim
at sea as well as go on ground.

Next he took Cesarea-Stratonis, built and so named in the honor of Caesar
Augustus, by Herod the great; who so Josephus.
politickly poised himself, that he sat upright whilst the wheel of Fortune
turned round under him. Let Antony win, let Augustus win, all one to him;
by contrary winds he sailed to his own ends. Cesarea taken, Baldwine at Rhamula
put the Turks to a great overthrow.

But see the chance of war; Few days after at the same place he received a
great defeat by the Infidels, wherein besides many others, the two Stephens,
Earls of Burgundy and Bloys, were slain. This was the first great overthrow the
Christians suffered in Palestine: and needs must blows be grievous to them who
were not used to be beaten. The King was reported slain, but fame deserved to
be pardoned for so good a lie; which for the present much disheartened the
Christians, a great part of the soldiers courage being wrapped up in the life
of the General.

Baronius (as bold as any 1. Sam. 6.
Bethshemite to pry into the ark of Gods secrets) In Annal. Eccles. anno 1100.
and rursus, anno 1104.
says, This was a just punishment on Baldwine for detaining the Churches
goods. But to leave hidden things to God, the apparent cause of his overthrow
was his own Tyrius, lib. 10. cap. 20.
rashness, being desirous to ingrosse all the credit alone, without sending
for succors and supplies from his neighbors. He assaulted his numerous
enemies with an handful of men; and so brake himself, with covetousness to
purchase more honor then he could pay for. And herein he discovered his want
of judgment, being indeed like an arrow well-feathered* but with a blunt pile;
he flew swift, but did not sink deep. Thus his credit lay bleeding, but he
quickly stanched it. The Pagans little suspecting to be re-incountred, gave
themselves over to mirth and jollity (as security oftentimes makes the sword
to fall out of their hands from whom no force could wrest it) when Baldwine
coming on them with fresh soldiers, struck them with the back-blows of an
unexpected enemy, which always pierce the deepest, routed them and put them to
the light. This his victory followed so suddenly after his overthrow, that some
mention not the overthrow at all, but the victory only; as that good horseman
is scarce perceived to be thrown, that quickly recovereth the saddle.

Chap. 11. The conquest of sundry fair havens by the Christians; Ptolemais, etc.
Whilst the King was thus busied in battle, 1102
Tancred Prince of Galilee was not idle, but enlarged the Christian dominions
with the taking of Apamea and Laodicea. These cities in Celosyria were built by
Tyrius, lib. 10. cap. 23. Idem, cap. 28.
Antiochus: and they agreed so well together, that they were called sisters;
and as in concord, so in condition they went hand in hand, being now both
conquered together.

Ptolemais next stooped to the Christian yoke; 1104
so named from Ptolemeus Philometor King of Egypt; a city on the
Mediterranean, of a triangular form, having two sides washed with the sea, the
third regarding the champian. The Genoan galleys being 70 in number, did the
main service in conquering, and had granted them for their reward large profits
from the harbor, a church to themselves, and jurisdiction over a fourth part
of the city. This Ptolemais was afterward the very seat of the Holy war.
Let me mind the Reader of a Latin proverb, Vide Erasm. Adag.
Lis Ptolemaica; that is, A long and constant strife; so called from Ptolemais,
a froward old woman who was never out of wrangling. But may not the proverb as
well be verified of this city, in which there was ninescore years fighting
against the Turks?

With Tyrius, lib. 10. cap. 30.
worse success did Baldwine Count of Edessa, and Earl Joceline besiege Charran
in Mesopotamia: for when it was ready to be surrendered, the Christian Captains
fell out amongst themselves, were defeated by the Pagans, and the two forenamed
Earls taken prisoners. This Charran is famous for Genesis 11.31.
Abraham's living, and his father Terahs dying there: And in the same place rich
Josephus.
Crassus the Roman vomited up the sacrilegious goods he had devoured of the
temple of Jerusalem, and had his army overthrown. Nor here may we overpasse,
how Boemund Prince of Antioch with a great navy spoiled the harbors of
Grecia, 1107
to be revenged of treacherous Alexius the Emperor. Voluntaries for this
service he had enough, all desiring to have a lash at the dog in the manger,
Tyrius, lib. 11 cap. 6.
and every man's hand itching to throw a cudgel at him; who like a nut-tree must
be manured by beating, or else would never bear fruit: yet on some conditions
an agreement at last was made betwixt them. Idem,


To return to Palestine. The next city that felt the victorious arms of the
Christians was Byblus; a good haven, and built by Heveus the sixth son of
Canaan. Here Adonis was anciently worshipped, whose untimely death by a bore
Venus so much bemoned: And the fable is moralized, when Lust lamenteth the
loss of Beauty consumed by age. Nor did Tripoli hold out long after; 1109
so called, because jointly built by the Tyrians, Sidonians, and Aradites. And
Berytus (since Barutus) accompanied her neighbor, and both of them were
yielded unto the Christians. The King created one Bertram, a well-deserving
Nobleman, Earl of Tripoli; who did homage to the King for his place, which was
accounted a title of great honor, as being one of the four Tetrarchies of the
kingdom of Jerusalem.

Chap. 12. The description of Sidon and Tire; the one taken, the other besieged
in vain by Baldwine.
1110
SIdon is the most ancient city of Phenicia. And though the proud Grecians
counted all Barbarians besides themselves, yet Phenicia was the schoolmistresse
of Grecia, and first taught her her alphabet. For Cadmus a Phenician born,
first invented and brought letters to Thebes. Sidon had her name from the
eldest son of Genesis 10.15.
Canaan, and was famous for the finest crystall-glasses, which here were made.
The glassie sand was fetched 40 miles off, from the river Belus: but it could
not be made Sand. Trav. page 210.
fusile till it was brought hither; whether for want of tools, or from some
secret sullen humor therein, we will not dispute. This city anciently was of
great renown: but her fortune being as brittle as her glasses, she was fain to
find neck for every one of the Monarchs yokes; Dec. 19. 1112
and now at last (by the assistance of the Tyrius, lib. 11. cap. 14.
Danish and Norvegian fleet) was subdued by the Christians.

Fleshed with this conquest, they next besieged Tire. Sea and land, nature and
art consented together to make this city strong: for it was seated in an
island, save that it was tacked to the continent with a small neck of land,
which was fortified with many walls and towers. It is questionable whether the
strength or wealth of this city was greater; but out of question that the pride
was greater then either. Here the best purples were died, a color even from
the beginning destined to Courts and Magistracy; and here the richest clothes
were imbroidered and curiously wrought. And though generally those who are best
with their fingers are worst with their arms, yet the Tyrians were also stout
men, able mariners, and the planters of the noblest colonies in the world. As
their city was the daughter of Zidon, so was it mother to Romes rival
Carthage, Leptis, Utica, Cadiz, and Nola. The most plentiful proof they gave
of their valor, was, when for three years they defended themselves against
Nebuchadnezzar; and afterward stopped the full career of Alexanders conquests;
so that his victorious army which did fly into other countries, was glad to
creep into this city. Yet after seven months siege (such is the omnipotency
of industry) he forced it, and stripped this lady of the sea naked beyond
modesty and mercy, putting all therein to the sword that resisted, and hanged
up 2000 of the prime citizens in a rank along the seashore.

Yet afterward Tire out-grew these her miseries, and attained, though not to
her first giant-like, yet to a competent proportion of greatness. At this time
wherein King Baldwine besieged it, it was of great strength and importance,
insomuch that finding it a weight too heavy for his shoulders, he was fain to
break off his siege and depart.

Tyrius, lib. 11. cap. 19.
With worse success he afterward did rashly give battle to the vast army of
the Persian General, 1113
wherein he lost many men, all his baggage, and escaped himself with great
difficulty.

Chap. 13. The pleasurable voyages of King Baldwine, and his death.
AFter the tempest of a long war a calm came at last, and King Baldwine had a
five years vacation of peace in his old age: In which time he disported
himself with many voyages for pleasure: 1116
as, one to the Red Sea, not so called from the redness of the water, or sand,
as some without any color have conceited; but from the neighboring Edomites,
whom the Grecians called Erythreans, or red men, truly translating the Hebrew
name of Edomites: they had their name of redness from their father Scalig. on
Festus, in Aegyptius. and Fuller, Miscell. lib. 4. cap. 20.
Edom. And here Baldwine surveyed the country, with the nature and strength
thereof. Another journey he took afterward into Tyrius, lib. 11. cap. 31.
Egypt, 1117
as conceiving himself engaged in honor to make one inrode into that country
in part of payment of those many excursions the Egyptians had made into his
Kingdom. He took the city of Calvisius makes it to be won at the former
voyage.
Pharamia, anciently called Rameses, and gave the spoil thereof to his
soldiers. This work being done, he began his play, and entertained the time
with viewing that riddle of Nature, the river of Nilus, whose stream is the
confluence of so many wonders: first, for its undiscovered fountain; though
some late Geographers, because they would be held more intelligent then others,
have found the head of Nilus in their own brains, and make it to flow from a
fountain they fancy in the mountains of the moon, in the south of Africa:
then, for the strange creatures bred therein; as river-bulls, horses, and
crocodiles: But the chiefest wonder is the yearly increasing thereof from the
Sand Trav. page 94.
17. of June to the midst of September, overflowing all Egypt, and the banks of
all humane judgment to give the true reason thereof.

Much time Baldwine spent in beholding this river, wherein he took many fishes,
and his death in eating them: for a new surfeit revived the grief of an old
wound, which he many years before received at the siege of Ptolemais. His
sickness put him in mind of his sins, conscience speaking loudest when men
begin to grow speechless: And especially he grieved, that having another wife
alive, he had married the Countess of Sicilie, the relict of Earl Roger: But
now heartily sorrowful for his fault, he sent away this his last wife; yet we
read not that he received his former again. Other faults he would have
amended, but was prevented by death. And no doubt where the deed could not be
present, the desire was a sufficient proxy. He died at Latis, a city in the
road from Egypt, and was brought to Jerusalem, and buried on Palm Sunday in the
temple of the Sepulcher, in the 18. year of his reign. 1118


A Prince superior to his brother Godfrey in learning, Mar. 26.
equal in valor, inferior in judgment; rash, precipitate, greedy of honor,
but swallowing more then he could digest, and undertaking what he was not able
to perform; little-affected to the Clergy, or rather to their temporal
greatness, especially when it came in competition with his own; much given to
women, (besides the three wives he had, first marrying Gutrera an
English-woman; after her death, Tafror an Armenian Lady; and whilst she yet
survived, the Countess of Sicilie) yet he had no child, God commonly punishing
wantonness with barrenness. For the rest, we refer the reader to the dull
Epitaph written on his tomb, which (like the verses of that age) runs in a
kind of rhythme, though it can scarce stand on true feet: Rex Baldwinus, Judas
alter Maccabaeus,
Spes patriae, vigor Ecclesiae, virtus utriusque;
Quem formidabant, cui dona tributa ferebant,
Aliter Caesar.
Cedar, Aegypti Dan, ac homicida Damascus;
Proh dolor! in modico clauditur hoc tumulo.
Baldwine another Maccabee for might;
Hope, help of State, of Church, and boths delight;
Cedar, with Egypts Dan of him afraid,
Bloody Damascus to him tribute paid:
Alas! here in this tomb is laid.
Let him who pleases play the critic on the diverse readings; and whether by
Dan be meant the Souldan, or whether it relates to the conceit that Antichrist
shall come of the tribe of Dan. But perchance the text is not worth a comment.

Chap. 14. Baldwine the second chosen King; Prince Eustace peaceably renounceth
his right.
IT happened the same day King Baldwine was buried, that Baldwine de Burgo his
kinsman and Count of Edessa came casually into the city, intending only there
to keep his Easter: when behold the Christian Princes met together for the
election of a new King. The greater part did center their suffrages on Prince
Eustace, brother to the two former Kings, but then absent in France. They
alleged, That it was not safe to break the chain of succession, where the
inversion of order brings all to confusion; and, That it was high ingratitude
to the memories of Godfrey and Baldwine, to exclude their brother from the
crown; especially he being fit in all points to be a King, wanting nothing but
that he wanted to be there; That in the mean time some might be deputed to lock
up all things safe, and to keep the keys of the State till he should arrive.

On the other side, some objected the dangers of an interregnum, how when a
State is headless, every malecontent would make head; inconveniences in other
countries would be mischiefs here, where they lived in the mouth of their
enemies: and therefore to stay for a King, was the way to lose the Kingdom.

Then Joceline Prince of Tiberias, a man of great authority, offered himself a
moderatour in this difference, and counseled both sides to this effect: To
proceed to a present election, and therein to be directed not confined by
succession; though they missed the next, let them take one of Godfreys kindred:
As the case now stood, he must be counted next in blood that was next at hand;
and this was Baldwine Count of Edessa, on whom he bestowed most superlative
praises. All were much affected with these his commendations; for they knew
that Joceline was his sworn adversary, and concluded that it must needs be a
mighty weight of worth in Baldwine, which pressed out praise from the mouth of
his enemy: though indeed private ends prompted him to make this speech, who
hoped himself to get the Earldome of Edessa when Baldwine should be translated
to Jerusalem. However, his words took effect, and Baldwine hereupon was chosen
King, 1118
and Tyrius, lib. 12. cap. 4.
crowned on Easter Day by Arnulphus the Patriarch. April 2.


Mean time some secretly were sent to Prince Eustace to come and challenge the
crown. But he hearing that another was already in possession, though he was on
his journey coming, quietly went back again. A large alms, to give away a
Kingdom out of his charity to the public cause.

Baldwine was of a proper personage, and able body, born nigh Rhems in France,
son to Hugh Count of Rorster and Millisent his wife. He was exceedingly
charitable to the poor, and pious toward God; witness the brawn on his hands
and knees made with continual praying: valiant also, and excellently well seen
in all martial affairs.

We had almost forgotten what happened in this year, the death of Alexius the
Grecian Emperor, that arch-hypocrite and grand enemy of this war. On whom we
may bestow this Epitaph: If he of men the best does know to live
Who best knows to dissemble, justly then
To thee, Alexius, we this praise must give,
That thou to live did know the best of men.
And this was it at last did stop thy breath,
Thou knew'st not how to counterfeit with death.
His son Calo-Johannes succeeded him in his Empire, of whom we shall have
much cause to speak hereafter.

Chap. 15. The ecclesiastical affairs in this Kings reign.
ACcording to our wonted method, let us first rid out of the way Church Matters
in this Kings reign, that so we may have the more room to follow the affairs
of the Commonwealth. We left Arnulphus the last Patriarch of Jerusalem; since
which time the bad savor of his life came to the Popes nose, who sent a Legate
to depose him. But Arnulphus hasted to Rome with much Tyrius, lib. 11. cap. 26.
money, and there bought himself to be innocent, so that he enjoyed his place
during his life.

Guarimund succeeded in his place, 1119.
a very religious man, by whom God gave the Christians many victories. He
called a Council at Neapolis or Sichem, wherein many wholesome things were
concluded for reformation of manners. Betwixt him and William Archbishop of
Tire (an Englishman) there arose a difference, because this Archbishop would
not receive his confirmation of him, (from whom by ancient right he should take
it) but from the Pope, counting it the most honor to hold of the highest
landlord. And indeed the Pope for gain confirmed him, though he should have
sent him to the Patriarch. But the court of Rome cares not though men steal
their corn, so be it they bring it to their mills to grind.

After Guarimunds death, 1128.
Stephen Abbot of S. John de Valia was chosen Patriarch; once a cavalleer, but
afterward laying down the sword, he took up the Word, and entered into Orders.
He awaked the Patriarchs title to Jerusalem, which had slept during his three
predecessors, and challenged it very imperiously of the King; for he was a man
of spirit and metal. And indeed he had too much life to live long. For the
King fearing what flame this spark might kindle, and finding him to be an
active man, gave him (as it is suspected) a little more active poison, which
cut him off in the midst of his age, and beginning of his projects.

The King coming to him when he lay on his deathbed, asked him how he did: To
whom he answered, My Tyrius, lib. 13. cap. 25.
Lord, for the present I am as you would have me. A cruel murder, if true: But
it is strange, 1130.
that he whose hands (as we have said) were hardened with frequent prayer,
should soften them again in innocent blood. Wherefore we will not condemn the
memory of a King on doubtful evidence. The Patriarchs place was filled with
William Prior of the Sepulcher, a Fleming; a man better beloved then learned.

Chap. 16. Knights-Templars, and Teutonicks instituted.
1119
ABout this time the two great orders of Templars and Teutonicks appeared in the
world. The former under Hugh de Paganis, and Ganfred of S. Omer their first
founders. They agreed in profession with the Hospitallers, and performed it
alike, vowing Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience, and to defend Pilgrims coming
to the Sepulcher. It is Baronius, in anno 1127.
falsely fathered on S. Bernard, that he appointed them their rule; who
prescribes not what they should do, but only Quarto and quinto cap. exhort.
describes what they did: namely, How they were never idle, mending their old
clothes when wanting other employment; never played at chesse or dice, never
hawked nor hunted, beheld no stageplayes; arming themselves with faith within,
with steel without; aiming more at strength then state; to be feared, not
admired; to strike terror with their valor, not stir covetousness with
their wealth in the heart of their enemies. Other sweet praises of them let him
who pleases fetch from the mouth of this mellifluous Doctor.

Indeed at first they were very poor; in token whereof they gave for their
Weaver, Fun. mon. page 71.
Seal, Two men riding on one horse. And hence it was, that if the Turks took
any of them prisoners, their constant ransom was a Hospin. De orig. mon.
Sword and a Belt; it being conceived that their poor state could stretch to
no higher price. But after their order was confirmed by Pope Honorius (by the
entreaty of Stephen the Patriarch of Jerusalem) who appointed them to wear a
White garment, to which Eugenius the third added a Red cross on their breast;
they grew wonderfully rich by the bounty of several Patrones: Yea, Tyrius,
lib. 12. cap. 7.
the King and Patriarch of Jerusalem dandled this infant-order so long in their
laps till it brake their knees, it grew so heavy at last; and these ungrateful
Templars did pluck out the feathers of those wings which hatched and brooded
them. From Alms-men they turned Lords; and though very valiant at first (for
they were sworn rather to die then to fly) afterward laziness withered their
arms, and swelled their bellies. They laughed at the rules of their first
Institution, as at the swaddling-clothes of their infancy; neglecting the
Patriarch, and counting themselves too old to be whipped with the rod of his
discipline; till partly their vitiousnesse, and partly their wealth caused
their final extirpation, as (God willing) shall be showed Lib. 5. cap. 1, 2, 3.
hereafter.

At the same time began the Teutonick order, consisting only of Dutchmen well
descended, living at Jerusalem in an house which one of that nation bequeathed
to his countrymen that came thither on pilgrimage. In the year 1190 their
order was honored with a great Master, whereof the first was Henry a-Walpot;
and they had an habit assigned them to wear, Black crosses on White robes: They
were to fight in the defense of Christianity against Pagans. But we shall meet
with them more largely in the following story.

Chap. 17. The Christians variety of success; Tire taken by the assistance of
the Venetians.
IT is worth the Readers marking, how this Kings reign was checquered with
variety of fortune: For first, Roger Prince of Antioch (or rather guardian in
the minority of young Boemund) went forth with greater courage then
discretion; Tyrius, lib. 12. cap. 10.
whereunto his success was answerable, being conquered and killed by the
Turks. But Baldwine on the 14 of August following, forced the Turks to a
restitution of their victory, and with a small army gave them a great
overthrow, in spite of Gazi their boasting General.

To qualify the Christians joy for this good success, 1122
Joceline unadvisedly fighting with Balak, a petty King of the Turks, was
conquered and taken prisoner: and King Baldwine coming to deliver him, was also
taken himself; for which he might thank his own rashness: For it had been his
best work to have done nothing for a while, till the Venetian succors which
were not far off, had come to him; and not presently to adventure all to the
hazard of a battle.

Yet the Christians hands were not bound in the Kings captivity: For Eustace
Grenier, chosen Viceroy whilst the King was in durance, stoutly defended the
country: and Count Joceline, which had escaped out of prison, fighting again
with Balak at Hircapolis, routed his army, and killed him with his own hands.
But the main piece of service was the taking of Tire, which was done under the
conduct of Guarimund the Patriarch of Jerusalem; but chiefly by the help of the
Venetian navy, which Michael their Duke brought, who for their pains were to
have a third part of the city to themselves. Tire had in it store of men and
munition; but famine increasing (against whose arrows there is no armor of
proof) it was yielded on honorable terms. And though perhaps hunger shortly
would have made the Turks digest courser conditions, yet the Christians were
loath to anger their enemies valor into desperateness.

June 29.
Next year the King returned home, having been eighteen months a prisoner,
being to pay for his ransom an hundred thousand Michaelets, and for security
he left his daughter in pawn. 1125
But he paid the Turks with their own money, or (which was as good coin) with
the money of the Saracens, vanquishing Barsequen their Captain at Antiochia:
1126
and not long after, he conquered Doldequin another great Commander of them at
Damascus.

1130
To correct the rankness of the Christians pride for this good success,
Damascus was afterward by them unfortunately besieged: Heaven discharged
against them thunder-ordinance, arrows of lightning, small-shot of hail,
whereby they being miserably wasted were forced to depart. And this affliction
was increased when Boemund the young Prince of Antioch, one of great hope and
much lamented, was defeated and slain. Authors impute these mishaps to the
Christians pride, 1131
and relying on their own strength, which never is more untrusty then when most
trusted. True it was, God often gave them great victories, when they defended
themselves in great straits: Hereupon they turned their thankfulness into
presumption, grew at last from defending themselves to dare their enemies on
disadvantages to their often overthrow: for God will not unmake his miracles by
making them common. And may not this also be counted some cause of their ill
success, That they always imputed their victories to the material Cross
which was carried before them? So that Christ his glory after his ascension
suffered again on the Cross by their superstition.

Chap. 18. The death of Baldwine the second.
KIng Baldwine a little before his death renounced the world, and took on him a
religious habit. This was the fashion of many Princes in that age; though they
did it for diverse ends. Some thought to make amends for their disordered lives
by entering into some holy order at their deaths: Others having surfeted of the
worlds vanity, fasted from it when they could eat no more because of the
impotency of their bodies: Others being crossed by the world by some
misfortune, sought to cross the world again in renouncing of it. These like
furious gamesters threw up their cards, not out of dislike of gaming but of
their game; and they were rather discontented to live then contented to die.
But we must believe that Baldwine did it out of true devotion, to ripen himself
for heaven, because he was piously affected from his youth; so that all his
life was religiously tuned, though it made the sweetest music in the close. He
died not long after, on the 22 of August, in the 13 year of his reign; and
was buried with his predecessors in the temple of the Sepulcher. By Morphe a
Grecian Lady his wife, he had four daughters: whereof Millesent was the
eldest; the second Alice, married to young Boemund Prince of Antioch; the third
Hodiern, wife to Reimund Prince of Tripoli; and Mete the youngest, Abbess of
Bethanie.

Chap. 19. Of Fulco, the fourth King of Jerusalem.
FUlco Earl of Tours, 1132
Mam, and Anjou, coming some three years before on pilgrimage to Jerusalem,
there took in marriage Millesent the Kings daughter. He had assigned to him the
city of Tire, and some other princely accommodations for his present
maintenance, and the Kingdom after the death of his father in law, which he
received accordingly. He was welnigh 60 years old: And by his first wife he
had a son, Geffrey Plantagenet Earl of Anjou to whom he left his lands in
France, and from whom our Kings of England are descended. This Fulco was a very
valiant man, able both of body and mind. His greatest defect was a weak memory
(though not so bad as that of Plin. lib. 7. cap. 24.
Messala Corvinus, who forgot his own name) insomuch that he knew not his own
servants; and those whom he even now preferred, were presently after strangers
unto him. Yet though he had a bad memory whilst he lived, he has a good one
now he is dead, and his virtues are famous to posterity.

Chap. 20. The Church-story during this Kings reign; The remarkable ruin of
Rodolphus Patriarch of Antioch.
THe Church of Jerusalem yielded no alterations in the reign of Fulco. But in
Antioch there was much stir who should succeed Bernard that peaceable
long-lived man, who sat 36 years, and survived eight Patriarchs of Jerusalem.
Now whilst the Clergy were tedious in their choice, the Laity was too nimble
for them, and they (thinking it equal to have an hand in making, who must have
their arms in defending a Patriarch) clapped one Tyrius, lib. 15.
Rodolphus of noble parentage into the chair. 1136.
He presently took his pall off from the altar of S. Peter, thereby sparing
both his purse and pains to go to Rome, and acknowledging no other superior
then that Apostle for his patron. This man was the darling of the Gentry, (and
no wonder if they loved him who was of their cloth and making) but hated of the
Clergy. Wherefore knowing himself to need strong arms who was to swim against
the stream, he wrought himself into the favor of the Princess of Antioch, the
widow of young Boemund, so that he commanded all her command, and beat down his
enemies with her strength. He promised to make a marriage betwixt her and
Reimund Earl of Poictou, (a Frenchman of great fame, who was coming into these
parts) but he deceived her, and caused the Earl to marry Constantia the
daughter of this Lady, by whom he had the principality of Antioch. Indeed this
Constantia was but a child for age; but they never want years to marry, who
have a Kingdom for their portion.

The Patriarch to make fur work, bound Prince Reimund by an oath to be true
to him: But friends unjustly gotten, are seldom comfortably enjoyed: Of his
sworn friend, he proved his sworn enemy, and forced him to go up to Rome, there
to answer many accusations laid to his charge; wherein the groundwork perchance
was true, though malice might set the varnish on it. The main matter was, that
he made odious comparisons betwixt Antioch and Rome, and counted himself equal
to his Holiness.

Rodolphus coming to Rome found the Popes doors shut against him, but he
opened them with a golden key. Money he sowed plentifully, and reaped it when
he came to be tried; for he found their hands very soft toward him whom
formerly he had greased in the fist. He also resigned his old pall, and took a
new one from the Pope. As for his other crimes, it was concluded that Albericus
Bishop of Ostia should be sent into Syria the Popes Legate, to examine matters,
and to proceed accordingly with the Patriarch as things there should be found
alleged and proved: Whereat his adversaries much stormed, who expected that he
should instantly have been deposed.

Yet afterward they prevailed mightily with Albericus the Legate, and bowed
him on their side. He coming to Antioch cited the Patriarch to appear; who
being thrice called, came not. On his absence all were present with their
conjectures what should cause it: Some imputing it to his guiltiness; others
to his contempt; others to his fear of his enemies potencie, or judges
partiality: for indeed the Legate came not with a virgin-judgement, but
ravished with prejudice; being prepossessed with this intent to dispossess him
of his place. Some thought he relied on his peace formerly made at Rome, where
the illegality of his election was rectified by his laying down his first pall,
and assuming a new one from the Pope.

Here was it worth the beholding in what several Baronius, in anno 1136.
streams men's affections ran. All wished that the tree might be felled, who had
hopes to gather chips by his fall; and especially one Arnulphus, and Dean
Lambert, the promoters against the Patriarch. Others pitied him, and though
perchance content that his roof might be taken down, were loath he should be
razed to the ground. Some reserved their affections till they were counseled
by the event which side to favor; and would not be engaged by any manifest
declaration, but so that they might fairly retreat if need required. Amongst
other Prelates which were present, Serlo Archbishop of Apamea was one, who
formerly had been a great enemy to the Patriarch, but had lately taken himself
off from that course. The Legate demanded of him why he proceeded not to accuse
the Patriarch as he was wont: To whom he answered, Tyrius, lib. 15. cap. 16.
What formerly I did, was done out of unadvised heat against the health of my
soul, discovering the nakedness of my father, like to cursed Cham; and now God
has recalled me from mine error: so that I will neither accuse, nor
presumptuously judge him, but am ready to die for his safety. Hereupon the
Legate immediately (such was the martial law in a Churchman) deposed him from
his Archbishopric. Little hope then had the Patriarch, who saw himself
condemned in his friend: Idem, lib. 15. cap. 17.
and he himself followed not long after, being thrust out by violence, cast
into prison, and there long kept in chains; till at last he made an escape to
Rome, intending there to traver^e his cause again, 1141.
had not death (occasioned by poison, as is thought) prevented him.

Chap. 21. Calo-Iohannes the Grecian Emperor demands Antiochia; Reimund the
Prince thereof does homage to him for it.
1136
CAlo-Johannes the Grecian Emperor came up with a Tyrius, lib. 14. cap. 24.
vast army of horse and foot, and demanded of Reimund Prince of Antioch, to
resign unto him that whole Signorie, according to the composition which the
Christian Princes made with Vide supra, book 1. chap. 15.
Alexius his father.

Hereat Reimund and all the Latins stormed out of measure: Had they purchased
the inheritance of the land with their own blood, now to turn tenants at will
to other? Some pleaded, That the ill usage of Alexius Ursperg. page 233. tortis
sacramentis.
extorted from Godfrey and the rest of the Pilgrims that agreement; and an
oath made by force, is of no force, but may freely be broken, because not
freely made. Others alleged, That when Antiochia was first won, it was
offered to Alexius, and Vide supra, book 1. chap. 15.
he refused it: so fair a tender was a payment. Others argued, That that
generation which made this contract was wholly dead, and that the debt
descended not on them to make it good. But most insisted on this, That Alexius
kept not his covenants, and assisted them not according to the agreement.
Indeed he called these Princes his sons; but he disinherited them of their
hopes, and all their portion was in promises never paid. No reason then, that
the knot of the agreement should hold them fast, and let him loose.

The worst of these answers had been good enough, if their swords had been as
strong as the Grecian Emperors. But he coming with a numerous army, in few
days overcame all Cilicia (which for forty years had belonged to the Prince
of Antioch) and then besieged the city of Antioch it self. Force is the body,
and resolution the soul of an action: both these were well tempered together in
the Emperors army; and the city brought to great distress. Whereupon Fulk
King of Jerusalem with some other Princes, fearing what woeful conclusion would
follow so violent premises, made a composition between them. So that Reimund
did homage to the Emperor, and held his principality as a vassal from him.
And though four years after the Emperor came again into these parts, 1146
yet he did not much harm; pillaging was all his conquest. Some years after he
died, being accidentally poisoned by one of his own arrows which he intended
for the wild boar. A Prince so much better to the Latins then his father
Alexius, as an honorable foe is above a treacherous friend. His Empire he
disposed to Emmanuel his son.

Chap. 22. The succession of the Turkish Kings, and the Saracen Caliphs: Of the
unlimited power of a Souldan; Some resemblance thereof anciently in the
kingdom of France.
NO great service of moment was performed in the reign of King Fulk, because
he was molested with domestical discords, and intestine wars against
Paulinus Count of Tripoli, and Hugh Earl of Joppa: Only Beersheba was
fortified, and some forts built about Askelon, as an introduction to besiege
it. Also skirmishes were now and then fought with variety of success, against
Sanguin one of the Turks great Princes.

And here let the reader take notice, that though we have mentioned many
Commanders, as Auxianus, Corboran, Ammiravissus, Tenduc, Gazi, Balak,
Dordequin, Borscquin, Sanguin, some Turkish, some Saracen, yet none of these
were absolute Kings (though perchance in courtesy sometimes so styled by
writers) but were only Generals and Lieutenants accountable to their
superiors, the Caliphs either of Babylon or Egypt: Who what they were, we
refer the reader to our Chronology.

Caliph was the Pope (as I may say) of the Saracens, a mixture of Priest and
Prince. But we need not now trouble our selves with curiosity in their
successions; these Caliphs being but obscure men, who confined themselves to
pleasures, making play their work, and having their constant diet on the sauce
of recreation. We are rather to take notice of their Generals and Captains,
which were the men of action. For a Souldan (which was but a Viceroy) with his
borrowed light shines brighter in history then the Caliph himself. Yet may we
justly wonder, that these slothful Caliphs should do nothing themselves, and
commit such unlimited power to their Souldans; especially seeing too much trust
is a strong tentation to make ambitious flesh and blood disloyal. Yet
something may be said for the Caliph of Egypt, Sr Walter Ralegh, part 1. book 2
chap. 26.
besides that the pleasures of that country were sufficient to invite him to a
voluptuous life: First, the awful regard which the Egyptians had of their
Princes, gave them security to trust their officers with ample commission.
Secondly, herein they followed an ancient custom practiced by the Pharaohs
anciently; who gave unto Joseph so large authority, as we may read in Genesis.
Genesis 41.40.
Some example also we have hereof in France about nine hundred years ago.
Childerick, Theodorick, Clovis, Childebert, Dagobert, etc. a chain of idle
Kings well linked together, gave themselves over to pleasures privately, never
coming abroad; but only on May Day they showed themselves to the people,
riding in a chariot, adorned with flowers, and drawn with oxen, (slow cattle,
but good enough for so lazy luggage) whilst Charles Martell and Pipin, Majors
of the palace, opened packets, gave audience to Ambassadors, made war or
peace, enacted and repealed laws at pleasure, till afterward from controllers
of the Kings household they became controllers of the Kings, and at last Kings
themselves.

To return to Egypt: Let none be troubled (pardon a charitable digression to
satisfy some scrupulous in a point of Chronology) if they find anciently more
Kings of the Egyptians, and longer reigning then the consent of times will
allow room for: for no doubt that which has swelled the number, is the
counting Deputies for Kings. Yea, we find the holy Spirit in the same breath,
1. Reg. 22.47. speak a Viceroy to be a King and no King; MELEK in both.
There was no King in Edom; a Deputy was King.

Chap. 23. The lamentable death of King Fulk.
WHen Fulco had now eleven years with much industry and care (though with
little enlarging of his dominions) governed the land, 1142
he was slain in earnest as following his sport in hunting, Tyrius, lib. 15.
cap. ult.
to the great grief of his subjects. And we may hear him thus speaking his
Epitaph: A hare I hunted, and death hunted me;
The more my speed was, was the worse my speed:
For as well-mounted I away did flee,
Death caught and killed me, falling from my steed.
Yet this mishap an happy miss I count,
That fell from horse that I to heaven might mount.
A Prince of a sweet nature; and though one would have read him to be very
furious by his high-colored countenance, yet his face was a good hypocrite;
and ( contra leges istius coloris, says Lib. 14. cap. 1.
Tyrius) he was affable, courteous, and pitiful to all in distress. He was
buried with his predecessors in the temple of the Sepulcher, leaving two
sons, Baldwine who was 13, and Almerick 7 years old.

Chap. 24. The disposition of Baldwine the third; The care of Queen Millesent
in her sons minority.
BAldwine succeeded his father, 1243
who quickly grew up, as to age, so in all royal accomplishments, and became a
most complete Prince; well learned, especially in history; liberal; very
witty, and very pleasant in discourse: He would often give a smart jest, which
would make the place both blush and bleed where it lighted: Yet this was the
better taken at his hands, because he cherished not a cowardly wit in himself,
to wound men behind their backs, but played on them freely to their faces; yea,
and never refused the coin he paid them in, but would be contented (though a
King) to be the subject of a good jest: and Tyrius, lib. 16. cap. 2.
sometimes he was well-favouredly met with as the best fencer in wits school
has now and then an unhappy blow dealt him. Some thought he descended beneath
himself in too much familiarity to his subjects; for he would commonly call and
salute mean persons by their names: But the vulgar sort, in whose judgments
the lowest stars are ever the greatest, conceived him to surpass all his
predecessors, because he was so fellow-like with them.

But whilst yet he was in minority, his mother Millesent made up his want of
age with her abundant care, being governor of all: A woman in sex, but of a
masculine spirit. She continued a widow: and as for childrens sake she married
once; so for her childrens sake she married no more. Epist. 206. col. 1569.
S. Bernard and she spoke often together by letters: He extolled her single
life, How it was more honor to live a widow, then to be a Queen: Illud tibi ex
genere, istud ex munere Dei; illud feliciter nara es, hoc viriliter nacta,
Epist. 289. col. 1622
This she had by birth, that by Gods bounty; This she was happily begotten,
that she had manfully gotten of her self. Yet we find not that she made a vow
never to marry again; wherein she did the wiser: For the chastest minds cannot
conclude from the present calm, that there will never after arise any lustful
storm in their souls. Besides, a Resolution is a free custody; but a Vow is a
kind of prison, which restrained nature has the more desire to break.

Chap. 25. Of Fulcher Patriarch of Jerusalem, and the insolency of the
Hospitallers against him.
WIlliam, who was last possessed of the Patriarchs chair in Jerusalem, was none
of the greatest clerks. But whatsoever he was for edifying of the Church, he
was excellent at building of Castles (one at Askelon, another at Ramula, a
third called Blank-guard for the securing of Pilgrims) till at last having sat
in his place fifteen years, he was translated to heaven, and on earth Fulcher
Archbishop of Tire succeeded him. 1145.
An honest old man, whose weak age was much molested with the pride and
rebellion of the Hospitallers, who lately had procured from the Pope a plenary
exemption from the Patriarch. This his Holiness did the more willingly grant,
because hereby he made himself absolute master of all orders, pinning them on
himself by an immediate dependence, and so bringing water to his mill by a
straighter and nearer stream. But hereby the entirenesse of Episcopal
jurisdiction was much maimed and mangled, and every Covent was a castle of
rebels, armed with privileges to fight against their lawful Diocesan.

Now as these Hospitallers wronged the power of the Bishops, so did they rob
the profit of poor Priests, refusing to pay any tithes of their Mannours,
which contained many parishes (so that the Pastors who fed the flocks, were
starved themselves; and having labored all day in the vineyard, were at night
sent supperlesse to bed) the Hospitallers pleading that the Pope had freed them
from these duties; as if an acquittance under the hand of his Holiness was
sufficient to discharge them from paying of tithes, a debt due to God. Other
foul crimes they also were guilty of: as, outbraving the temple of the
Sepulcher with their stately buildings; giving the Sacraments to, and receiving
of excommunicate persons; ringing their bells when their Patriarch preached,
that his voice might not be heard; shooting Tyrius, lib. 18. cap. 3.
arrows into the church to disturb him and the people in Divine service; A
bundle whereof were hung up as a monument of their impiety.

Fulcher the Patriarch crawled to Rome, 1156.
being 100 years old, to complain of these misdemeanors; carrying with him
the Archbishop of Tire, and five other Bishops. But he had sped better, if in
stead of every one of them he had carried a bag of gold. For the Hospitallers
prevented him, and had formerly been effectually present with their large
bribes; so that the Patriarchs suit was very cold: And no wonder, seeing he did
afford no feuel to heat it. The Cardinals eyes in the court of Rome were old
and dim; and therefore the glass wherein they see any thing must be
well-silvered. Indeed two of them, Octavian, and John of S. Martin, favored
Christ's cause and his Ministers; but Alii omnes abeuntes post munera, secuti
sunt vias Balaam filii Bosor, Tyrius, lib. 18. cap. 8.
all the rest followed gifts, and the way of Balaam the son of Bosor. But
here Annal. eccles. in anno 1155.
Baronius, who hitherto had leaned on Tyrius his authority, now starteth from
it: And no wonder, for his pen will seldom cast ink, when he meets with
the corruption of the Romish court. But sure it was, that the good Patriarch
wearied with delays, returned back with his grievances unredressed. Whereupon
the Hospitallers grew more insolent; and under pretense of being freed from
fetters, would wear no girdle; denying not only subjection, but any filial
obedience to a superior.

Chap. 26. Of Almericus Patriarch of Antioch his instituting of Carmelites;
Their differing from the pattern of Elias.
AFter the tragical life and death of Rodolphus Patriarch of Antioch, 1142.
who was twelve years Patriarch, counting his banishment, Haymericus by the
contrary faction and power of Prince Reimund succeeded him, with little quiet
and comfort of his place.

And here to our grief must we take our final farewell of the distinct
succession of the Patriarchs of Antioch, with the years that they sat; such is
the obscurity and confusion in it. Yet no doubt this Compare Baronius with
himself in these years, 1143, 1154, 1181, and we shall find Haymericus and
Almericus the same.
Haymericus was the same with Almericus, who about the year 1160 first
instituted the order of Carmelites. Indeed formerly they lived dispersed about
the mountain of Carmel: but he gathered them together into one house; because
solitariness is a trespass against the nature of man, and God when he had
made all things good, saw it was not good for man to be alone.

Surely from great antiquity in the Primitive Church, Polyd. Virg. lib. 7. cap.
3. Sabel. Enu. 9. ^ib. 5.
many retired themselves to solitary places (where they were always alone, and
always in the company of good thoughts) chiefly to shade themselves from the
heat of persecution. Haspin De orig. mon.
Whose example was in after-ages imitated by others, when there was no such
necessity: As here by these Carmelites* whose order was afterward perfected in
the year 1216, by Albert Patriarch of Jerusalem, with certain Canonical
observations imposed upon them. And in this next age, these bees which first
b^^d in the ground and hollow trees, got them hives in gardens; and leaving the
deserts, gained them princely houses in pleasant places. They pretended indeed
that they followed the pattern of Elias, though far enough from his example:
First, for their habit; they wore Antonius, lit. 20. cap. 5.
white coats guarded with red streaks: but they have no color in the Bible
that Elias ever wore such a livery; it suits rather with Joseph then with him.
Secondly, by their order they were to ride on he-asses; whereas we read that
Elias went on foot, and rode but once in a chariot of fire. Thirdly, they by
the constitution of Pope Nicolas the 5. had Balaeus in vita Nicol. 5.
sisters of their company living near unto them; we find Elias to have no such
feminine consorts. Fourthly, they lived in all lust and laziness; as Vide
Balaeum, centur. 4. cap. 42. in append. 2.
Nicolas Gallus their own General did complain, that they were Sodomites, and
compares them to the tail of the Dragon: so that their luxury differed from
Elias his austerity, as much as velvet from sackcloth. Wherefore that the
Carmelites came from mount Carmel cannot be denied: But on that mountain I find
that both Elias and Baals priests gathered together; and let the indifferent
reader judge which of them their lives do most resemble.

Afterward Pope Honorius 3. counting the party-colored coats these Carmelites
did wear to be too gaudy, caused them to wear only white, the color which
nature does die* simple, and therefore fittest for religion. But Melexala King
of Egypt, who formerly was very bountiful to the Carmelites, knew not his
Alms-men in their new coats, but changed his love, as they their livery, and
persecuted them out of all Egypt. It seems afterward, by the complaint of
Eclog. 2. immutarunt mutati vellera mores.
Mantuan, that they wore some black again over their white: For he plays on
them, as if their bad manners had blacked and altered their clothes.

Now though Palestine was their mother, England was their best nurse. Ralph
Fresburg, about the year 1240, first brought them hither; and they were first
seated at Newenden in Yet Camden says they were first seated in Northumberland.
Kent. An Pitsaeus, in indic^ Carm.
hundred and forty English writers have been of this order. And here they
flourished in great pomp, till at last King Henry the 8. as they came out of
the wilderness, so turned their houses into a wilderness; not only breaking
the necks of all Abbeys in England, but also scattering abroad their very
bones, past possibility of recouniting them.

Chap. 27. Edessa lost; The hopeful voyage of Conrade the Emperor and Lewis
King of France to the Holy land, blasted by the perfidiousnesse of Emmanuel the
Grecian Emperor.
EMpires have their set bounds, whither when they come, they stand still, go
back, fall down: This we may see in the kingdom of Jerusalem; which under
Godfrey and the two first Baldwines was a gainer, under Fulk a saver, under the
succeeding Kings a constant loser till all was gone. For now Sanguin Prince of
the Turks (as bloody as his name) wrested from the Christians the country and
city of Edessa, one of the four Tetrarchies of the kingdom of Jerusalem. And
though Sanguin shortly after was stabbed at a feast, yet Noradine his son
succeeded, and exceeded him in cruelty against the Christians.

The loss of Edessa (wherein Christiano nomini a temporibus Apostolorum
devota, T^rius, lib. 16. cap. 5.
our religion had flourished ever since the Apostles time) moved Conrade
Emperor of the West, 1147
and Lewis the 7. surnamed the Young King of France, to undertake a voyage to
the Holy land. Pope Eugenius the 3. bestirred himself in the matter, and made
S. Bernard his soliciter to advance the design. For never could so much steel
have been drawn into the east, had not this good man's persuasion been the
loadstone. The Emperors army contained two hundred thousand foot, besides
fifty thousand horse: Nor was the army of King Lewis much inferior in number.
In France they sent a P. Aemyl. in Lu^o^ 7.
distaff and a spindle to all those able men that went not with them, as
upbraiding their effeminatenesse: And no wonder, when women themselves went in
armor, (having a brave less like another Penthesilea for their leader, so
befringed with gold, that they called her Nicetas, in Emm. Comn. (...).
Golden-foot) riding astride like men; which I should count more strange, but
that I find all women in England in the same posture on their horses, till
Camd. Bri^an. in Surrey.
Anna, wife to King Richard the second, some 200 years since, taught them a
more modest behavior. The Turks did quake hearing of these preparations, which
to them were reported far greater then they were; fame (contrary to all other
painters) making those things the greatest which are presented the farthest off.

Conrade with his army took his way through Grecia: where Emmanuel the
Emperor, possessed with an hereditary fear of the Latins, fortified his
cities in the way, as knowing there needed strong banks where such a stream of
people was to pass. And suspecting that if these Pilgrims often made his
Empire their highway into Palestine, little grass would grow in so trodden a
path, and his country thereby be much endamaged; he used them most
treacherously, giving them bad welcome that he might no more have such guests.
To increase their miseries, as the Dutch encamped by the river Nicetas, ut
pri^s.
Melas (if that may be called a river which is all mud in summer, all sea in
winter) deserving his name from this black and dismal accident, it drowned
many with its sudden overflowings; as if it had conspired with the Grecians,
and learned treachery from them. They that survived this sudden mishap, were
reserved for lingering misery. For the Grecian Emperor did them all possible
mischief, by mingling lime with their meal, by killing of stragglers, by
holding intelligence with the Turks their enemies, by corrupting his coin,
making his silver as base as himself (so that the Dutch sold good wares for bad
money, and bought bad wares with good money) by giving them false Conductours
which trained them into danger; so that there was more fear of the guides then
of the way. All which his unfaithful dealings are recorded by that faithful
historian In vitae Manuel. Comn. lib. 1.. 5.
Nicetas Choniates* who though a Grecian born, affirms these things; the
truth of his love to his contrymen no whit prejudicing his love to the truth.

Chap. 28. The Turks conquered at Meander; The Dutch and French arrive in
Palestine.
SCarce had the Dutch escaped the treachery of the Greeks, when they were
encountered with the hostility of the Turks, who waited for them on the other
side of Meander. The river was not foordable, ship or bridge the Christians had
none: when behold Conrade the Emperor adventured on an action, which because
it was successful, shall be accounted valiant; otherwise we should term it
desperate. After an Knolls, Turk. hist. page 33.
exhortation to his army, he commanded them all at once to flownce into the
river. Meander was plunged by their plunging into it: his water stood Nicetas,
in Man. Comn. lib. 1.. 6.
amazed, as unresolved whether to retreat to the fountain, or proceed to the
sea, and in this ecstasy afforded them a dry passage over the stream. An act,
which like that of Horatius Cocles his leaping into Tiber, Live. lib. 2.
plus famae ad posteros habiturum quam fidei, will find more admirers then
believers with posterity. The affrighted Turks on the other side, thinking
there was no contending with them that did teach nature it self obedience,
offered their throats to the Christians swords, and were killed in such number,
that whole piles of dead bones remain there for a monument: like those heaps of
the Cimbrians slain by Marius near Marseils, where afterward the inhabitants
walled their vineyards with sculls, and guarded their Munst. Cosmog. lib. 2.
page 227.
grapes with dead men. Hence Conrade made forward to Iconium, now called Cogni,
which he besieged in vain, to the great loss of his army.

The King of France followed after with great multitudes, and drank of the same
cup at the Grecians hands, though not so deeply: till at last, finding that
those who marched through the continent met with an ocean of misery, he
thought better to trust the wind and sea then the Greeks; and taking shipping
safely arrived in Palestine, where he was highly welcomed by Reimund Prince of
Antioch. Some weeks were spent in complying, entertainments, and visiting holy
places; till at last, Elianor wife to the King of France, who accompanied her
husband, made religion her pander, and played Serres, (translated by Grimston)
in vita Ludov. 7. and P. Aemylius, in ejusdem vita.
bankrupt of her honor; under pretense of pilgrimage, keeping company with a
base Saracen jester, whom she preferred before a King. Thus love may blindfold
the eyes, but lust boreth them out. Yea, now she pleaded that she might be no
longer wife to the King, because she was too near unto him within the degrees
forbidden. This new-started scruple never troubled her before: but some have
sluices in their consciences, and can keep them open or shut them as occasion
requires.

Chap. 29. Damascus besieged in vain; The return of the Emperor and King; with
the censure on this voyage.
THe late-come Pilgrims having sufficiently recreated themselves, the Emperor
and the King of France concluded to besiege Damascus: for a small town was
conceived too narrow an object of their valor, whilst so eminent an action
was adequate to the undertakers. Damascus is so pleasant a city, that Mahomet
durst never enter into it, lest this deceiver should be deceived himself, and
be so ravished with the pleasures of the place, that he should forget to go on
in that great work he had in hand. Some make Eliezer Abraham's steward builder
of this city, because he is called Eliezer of Damascus; though that phrase
speaks him rather to have had his birth or dwelling there, then the city her
building from him. To pass this by, because as the foundations are hidden in
the ground, so the founders of most ancient places are forgotten. It was for
many years after the Metropolis of Syria, 1148
and was now straightly besieged by the Christians with great hope of success,
had they not afterward fallen out amongst themselves who should eat the
chickens before they were hatched. Conrade and King Lewis destined the city to
Theodorick Earl of Flanders, lately arrived in those parts; whilst other
Princes which had been long resident in Palestine, and born the heat of the
war, grudged hereat: and their stomachs could not digest the cruditie of a
raw upstart to be preferred before them. Yea, some of the Christians corrupted
with Turkish money (though when they received it, it proved but Theodor. a
Ni^in, De privilegiis Imperii, cap. de Conrado 4.
gilded brass; may all traitors be paid in such coin) persuaded the King of
France to remove his camp to a stronger part of the walls: which they long
besieged in vain, and returned home at last, leaving the city and their honors
behind them.

The French proverb was verified of this voyage, Much bruit and little fruit.
They not only did no good in the Holy land ( Sabellicus.
save that some think their coming advantaged King Baldwine for the taking of
the city of Askelon) but also did much harm. For now the Turks seeing one
city both bear the brunt and batter the strength of both armies, began to
conceive that their own fear was their greatest enemy; and those swords of
these new Pilgrims which they dreaded in the sheath, they slighted when they
saw them drawn; and shook off that aw which had formerly possessed them, of the
strength of the Western Emperor. Many thousand Christians perished in this
adventure, whose souls are pronounced by all the writers of this age to be
carried up into heaven on the wings of the holy cause they died for: Whose
blessed estate I will not disprove; nor will I listen to the unhappy Dutch
proverb, Cited by Luther, on Genesis 3.
He that brings himself into needless dangers, dies the devils martyr.

We must not forget how the French King coming homeward was taken prisoner by
the fleet of the Grecian Emperor, and rescued again by Gregory Admiral to
Roger King of Sicilie. When he was safely arrived in France, in open Parliament
his wife was divorced from him. Her nearness in blood was the only cause
specified; and the King took no notice of her inconstancy, accounting those but
foolish husbands who needlessely proclaim their wives dishonesty. He gave her
back again all the lands in France which he had received with her in portion;
scorning her wealth which neglected his love. Herein he did nobly, but not
politickly, to part with the Dukedomes of Poictou and Aquitain, which he
enjoyed in her right: for he brake his own garland by giving her her flowers
back again; mangled and dismembered his own kingdom, and gave a Serres, in
Ludov. 7.
torch into Henry King of England his hands (who afterward married her) to set
France on fire.

Chap. 30. An apology for S. Bernard, whom the vulgar sort condemned for the
murderer of those that went this voyage.
SLander (quicker then Martial law) arraigneth, condemns, and executes all
in an instant. This we may see in poor S. Bernard, who was the mark for every
man's tongue to shoot arrows against: and when this voyage had miscarried, many
Goffridus, in vita Bern. lib. 3. cap. 4.
condemned him, because his persuasion set this project not only on foot but
on wings; as if he had thrust so many men, as one morsel, into the jaws of
death.

But much may be alleged truly to excuse this good man:

First, he was but an instrument employed by Pope Eugenius and a Baron. annal.
Eccl. in anno 1140. Insistens operi sibi commisso ab Eugenio.
Provincial Council of French Bishops to forward the design. Rather then
should they have blamed his Holiness who set him on work: But the saddle
oftentimes is not set on the right horse, because his back is too high to be
reached; and we see commonly that the instruments are made skreens to save the
face of the principal from scorching.

Secondly, the true cause of the ill success was the vitiousnesse of the
undertakers. For Germany at this time surfeted of lewd people; and those grew
the fattest which lived on the highways. But this voyage robbed the whole
country of her Germania tunc latrocinus frequens purgabatur ^o genere hominum,
Krantz. 6. Sax. cap. 13
thieves; and then no wonder if they found their death in Asia, who deserved it
in Europe. Hear what In vita Fred. lib. 1. cap. 6. in fine.
Otho Frisingensis, who went this voyage, speaks impartially in the matter:
If we should say that Bernard that holy Abbot was inspired by Gods Spirit to
incite us to this war, but we through our pride and wantonness not observing
his holy commands deservedly brought on our selves the loss of our goods and
lives, we should say nothing but what is agreeable to reason, and to ancient
examples. However, it was an heavy affliction to S. Bernards aged back to bear
the reproach of many people: it being a great grief for one to be generally
condemned as guilty, for want of proof of his innocence. And though God set his
hand to S. Bernards testimonial by the many Goffrid. ut prius.
miracles which that Father wrought, yet still some challenged him for a
counterfeit.

And surely this humiliation was both wholesome and necessary for him. For the
people, who cannot love without doting, nor approve without admiring, were too
much transported with an high opinion of this man and his directions; as if
that arrow could not miss the mark which came out of S. Bernards bow.
Wherefore this miscarriage came very seasonably to abate their over-towring
conceits of him; and perchance his own of himself. And no doubt he made a good
use of this bad accident. The less his fame blazed, the more his devotion
burned; and the cutting off of his top, made him take deep root, and to be made
more truly humbled and sanctified. In his book of Lib. 2. cap. 1.
Consideration he makes a modest defense of himself; whither we refer the
reader. To conclude; The devotion of this man was out of question so neglecting
this world, that he even did spit out that preferment which was dropped into
his mouth: But as for his judgment, it was not always the best; which gave
occasion to the proverb, Bernardus non vidit omnia.

Chap. 31. Unseasonable discords betwixt King Baldwine and his mother; Her
strength in yielding to her son.
UPon the departure of Emperor Conrade and King Lewis, Noradine the Turk much
prevailed in Palestine. 1149
Nor was he little advantaged by the discords betwixt Millesent Queen Mother
and the Nobility; thus occasioned: There was a Nobleman called Manasses, whom
the Queen (governing all in her sons minority) made Constable of the
kingdom. This man unable to manage his own happiness, grew so insolent that
he could not go, but either spurning his equals, or trampling on his
inferiors. No wonder then, if envy the shadow of greatness waited upon him.
The Tyrius, lib. 17. cap. 13.
Nobility highly distasted him: but in all oppositions the Queens favor was
his sanctuary; who to show her own absoluteness, and that her affection should
not be controlled, nor that thrown down which she set up, still preserved the
creature she had made.

His enemies perceiving him so fast rooted in her favor, and seeing they could
not remove him from his foundation, sought to remove him with his foundation;
instigating young King Baldwine against his mother, and especially against her
favorite. They complained how the State groned under his insolency; He was the
bridge by which all offices must pass, and there pay toll; He alone sifted all
matters, and then no wonder if much bran passed; He under pretense of opening
the Queens eyes did lead her by the nose, captivating her judgment in stead of
directing it; He like a by-gulf devoured her affection, which should flow to
her children. They persuaded the King he was ripe for government, and needed
none to hold his hand to hold the scepter. Let him therefore either untie or
cut himself loose from this slavery, and not be in subjection to a subject.

Liberty needs no hard pressing on youth, a touch on that stamp makes an
impression on that waxen age. Young Baldwine is apprehensive of this motion,
and prosecuteth the matter so eagerly, that at length he coopeth up this
Manasses in a castle, and forces him to abjure the kingdom. Much stir
afterward was betwixt him and his mother; till at last to end divisions, the
kingdom was divided betwixt them: She had the city of Jerusalem, and the
land-locked part; he the maritime half of the land. But the widest throne is
too narrow for two to sit on together. He not content with this partition,
marches furiously to Jerusalem, there to besiege his mother, and to take all
from her. Out of the city comes Tyrius, lib. 17. cap. 14.
Fulcher the good Patriarch, (his age was a patent for his boldness) and
freely reproves the King: Why should he go on in such an action wherein every
step he stirred, his legs must needs grate and crash both against nature and
religion? Did he thus requite his mothers care in stewarding the State, thus to
affright her age, to take arms against her? Was it not her goodness to be
content with a moiety, when the whole kingdom in right belonged unto her?

But ambition had so enchanted Baldwine, that he was penetrable with no reasons
which crossed his designs: so that by the advice of her friends she was
content to resign up all, lest the Christian cause should suffer in these
dissensions. She retired her self to Idem, ibidem.
Sebaste, and abridged her train from State to necessity. And now the less
room she had to build upon, the higher she raised her soul with heavenly
meditations; and lived as more private, so more pious till the day of her death.

Chap. 32. Reimund Prince of Antioch overcome and killed; Askelon taken by the
Christians; The death of King Baldwine.
THese discords betwixt mother and son were harmony in the ears of Noradine
the Turk: Who coming with a great army wasted all about Antioch; and Prince
Reimund going out to bid him battle, was slain himself, and his army
overthrown: nor long after Joceline Count of Edessa was intercepted by the
Turks, and taken prisoner.

As for Constantia the relict of Reimund Prince of Antioch, she lived a good
while a widow, refusing the affections which many princely suitors proffered
unto her, till at last she descended beneath her self to marry a plain man, 1153
Reinold of Castile. Yet why should we say so, when as a Castilian Gentleman
(if that not a needless tautologie (as he makes the inventory of his own
worth, prizeth himself any Princes fellow: And the proverb is, Each layman of
Castile may make a King, each clergie-man a Pope? Yea, we had best take heed
how we speak against this match: for Almericus Patriarch of Antioch for
inveighing against it, was by this Prince Reinold set in the heat of the sun
with his Tyrius, lib. 18. cap. 1.
bare head besmeared with honey (a sweet-bitter torment) that so bees might
sting him to death. But King Baldwine mediated for him, and obtained his
liberty that he might come to Jerusalem: where he lived many years in good
esteem. And Gods judgments are said to have overtaken the Prince of Antioch:
for besides the famine which followed in his country, he himself afterward
fighting unfortunately with the Turks, was taken prisoner.

But let us step over to Jerusalem; where we shall find King Baldwine making
preparation for the siege of Askelon: Which city after it had long been
blocked up, had at last an assaultable breach made in the walls thereof. The
Templars (to whom the King promised the spoil if they took it) entered through
this breach into the city: and conceiving they had enough to wield the work and
master the place, set a guard at the breach, that no more of their
Fellow Christians should come in to be sharers with them in the booty. But
their Tyrius, lib. 17. cap. 27.
covetousness cost them their lives: for the Turks contemning their few number
put them every one to the sword. 1154
Yet at last the city was taken, though with much difficulty. Aug. 12.


Other considerable victories Baldwine got of the Turks; especially one at the
river Jordan, where he vanquished Noradine: And twice he relieved
Cesarea-Philippi, which the Turks had straightly besieged. But death at last put
a period to his earthly happiness, being poisoned (as it was supposed) by a
Jewish physician; for the rest of the potion killed a dog to whom it was given.
This Kings youth was stained with unnatural discords with his mother, and
other vices, which in his settled age he reformed. Let the witness of Noradine
his enemy be believed; who honorably refused to invade the kingdom whilst
the funeral solemnities of Baldwine were performing; and professed the
Christians had a just cause of sorrow, Tyrius, lib. 19. cap. 34.
having lost such a King, 1163
whose equal for justice and valor the world did not afford. He died without
issue, having reigned one and twenty years. So that sure it is the Printers
mistake in Tyrius, where he has four and twenty years assigned him, more
then the consent of time will allow.

Chap. 33. King Almerick his disposition.
ALmerick brother to King Baldwine, 1163
Earl of Joppa and Askelon, succeeded to the Crown. Febr. 18.
But before his coronation he was enjoined by the Popes Legate and by the
Patriarch of Jerusalem, to dismiss Agnes his wife, daughter to Joceline the
younger, Count of Edessa, because she was his cousin in the fourth degree; with
this reservation, that the two children he had by her, Baldwine and Sibyll,
should be accounted legitimate, and capable of their fathers possessions. A
Prince of excellent parts; of a most happy Tyrius, lib. 19. cap. 2.
memory, (wherein also his brother Baldwine was eminent, though Fulk their
father was wonderfully forgetful; so true is the maxim, Pure personalia non
propagantur, Parents entail neither their personal defects nor perfections on
their posterity) solid judgment, quick apprehension; but of a bad utterance,
which made him use words only as a shield when he was urged and pressed to
speak, otherwise he preferred to be silent, and declined popularity more then
his brother Baldwine affected it. Very thrifty he was; and though In Orat. pro
Deiotaro.
Tully says, Dici hominem frugi non multum habet laudis in rege, yet moderate
frugality is both laudable and necessary in a King. But our Almerick went
somewhat too far, and was a little poor in admiring of riches, laying great
taxations on the holy places to their utter impoverishing: Yet was he not
mastered by his purse, but made it his vassal, and spared no money on a just
occasion. He never received accusation against any of his officers, and never
reckoned with them (count it as you please, carelessness or noble confidence)
because he would not teach them to be dishonest by suspecting them. Nor is it
the last and least part of his praise, that William Archbishop of Tire (so
often mentioned) wrote the Holy war at his instance. Once he angered the good
Archbishop with this question, Tyrius, lib. 19. cap. 3.
How the resurrection of the body may be proved by reason? Hereat the good
Prelate was much displeased, as counting it a dangerous question wherewith one
removes a foundation-stone in Divinity, though with intent to lay it in the
place again. But the King presently protested, That he demanded it not out of
any dissidence in himself about that article, but in case one should meet with
a sturdy man, who (as too many nowa-dayes) would not trust faith on her single
bond, except he have reason joined for security with her. Hereupon the
Archbishop alleged many strong arguments to prove it, and both rested well
satisfied.

Chap. 34. Ecclesiastical business; A Sultan of Iconium, and the master of
the Assasines desired to be christened; The Commonwealth of the Assasines
described.
IN the Church of Jerusalem we find Amalrick still Patriarch: A Frenchman born,
but little fit for the place to which he was preferred by the favor of Sibyll,
Countess of Flanders, the Kings sister. Mean time the Church needed a Salick
law, to forbid distaffs to meddle with mitres; and neither to be, nor to make
Patriarchs.

But the most remarkable Church-matter in this Kings reign, was the
clandestine christening of a Sultan of Iconium. And more of his courtiers might
have followed him, Baron in anno 1169.
but that his Ambassadors being at Rome, were offended there with the
vitiousnesse of Christians lives; which made them to exclaim, M Paris, in anno
1169.
How can fresh and salt water flow from the same fountain? 1169.
This has made many Pagans step back, which had one foot in our Church, when
they have seen Christians believe so well, and live so ill; breaking the
Commandments against the Creed.

Not long after, the great master of the Assasines was really disposed to
receive our religion; and to this end sent an Ambassador to King Almerick,
which Ambassador was treacherously slain by one of the Templars. 1173.
The Tyrius, lib. 20. cap. 32.
King demanded this murderer of the master of the Templars, that justice might
pass upon him. But the master proudly answered, That he had already enjoined
him penance, and had directed to send him to the Pope, but stoutly refused to
surrender him to the King. This cruel murder embittered the Assasines more
desperately against the Christians.

These Assasines were a precise sect of Mahometans, and had in them the very
spirits of that poisonous superstition. They had some six cities, and were
about forty thousand in number, living near Antaradus in Syria. Over these
was a chief master, (Hell it self cannot subsist without a Beelzebub; so much
order there is in the place of confusion,) whom they called M. Paris, anno
1147. P. Aemyl. in Ludov. jun.
The Old man of the mountains. At his command they would refuse no pain or
peril, but stab any Prince whom he appointed out to death; scorning not to find
hands for his tongue, to perform what he enjoined. At this day there are none
of them extant, (except revived by the Jesuits; for sure Ignatius Loyola, the
lame father of blind obedience fetched his platform hence) being all, as it
seems, slain by the M. Paris, (aut ejus Continuator) in anno 1257
Tartarians, Anno 1257. But no tears need be shed at their funerals: yea, pity
it is that any pity should be lavished upon them, whose whole government was an
engine built against humane society, worthy to be fired by all men; the body of
their State being a very monstrosity, and a grievance of mankind.

Chap. 35. Dargan and Sanar two Egyptian Lords, contending about the Sultanie,
Sanar calls in the Turks to help him. Of the danger of mercenary soldiers;
yet how, well qualified, they may be serviceable.
EGypt was the stage whereon the most remarkable passages in the reign of King
Almerick were acted. It will be necessary therefore to premise somewhat
concerning the estate of that kingdom at this time. Whilst the Turks thus
lorded it in Syria and the lesser Asia, the Saracen Caliph commanded in Egypt;
under whom, two great Lords, Dargan and Sanar, fell out about the Sultanie or
Vice-royship of that land. But Sanar fearing he should be worsted by Dargan,
sued to Noradine King of the Turks at Damascus for aid: who sent him an army of
Turks, under the command of Syracon an experienced Captain, against Sultan
Dargan. 1165
So Dargan and Sanar met and fought. The victory was Dargans, but he enjoyed it
not long, being shortly after slain by treachery; whereby Sanar recovered the
Sultans place. Mean time how strange was the voluptuous lethargy of the Caliph
Elhadach, to pursue his private pleasures, whilst his Vice-royes thus fought
under his nose, and employed foreign succors, yet he never regarded it; as if
the tottering of his kingdom had rocked him fast asleep.

Nor was he moved with that which followed, and more nearly concerned him. For
Syracon the Turkish Captain, whom Sanar had gotten to come into Egypt, would
not be entreated to go home again; but seized on the city of Belbis, fortified
it, and there attended the arrival of more Turks from Damascus, for the
conquest of Egypt. Which afterward they performed, the land being never
completely cleared of them, till at last they conquered the whole kingdom,
partly under this Syracon, and wholly under Saladine his nephew.

And here my discourse (by the leave of the reader) must a little sally forth
to treat of the danger of entertaining mercenary soldiers. They may perchance
be called in with a whistle, but scarce cast out with a whip. If they be slugs,
they endanger a State by their slothfulness; if spirited men, by their
activity. Caesar Borgia, Machiavells idol, whose practice he makes the pattern
of policy, says, Match. Prince, cap. 9. Se malle vinci suis armis quam alienis
victorem esse.
That he had rather be conquered with his own men, then be conqueror with an
army of others; because he counted that conquest to be none at all.

Yet good physic may be made of poison well corrected: They may sometimes be
necessary evils; yea, good and serviceable to defend a land, if thus qualified:
First, if they have no command of castles, or place near about the Princes
person: for then they have a compendious way to treason, if they intend it.
Secondly, if they be not entertained in too great numbers, but in such
refracted degrees, that the natives may still have the predominancie: for a
surfeit of foreign supplies is a disease incurable. Thirdly, if the Prince who
imployeth them, has their wives, children, and estates in his own hands; which
will be both a caution and pawn for their fidelity, and will also interest
their affections more cordially in the cause. Lastly, if they be of the same
religion with them, and fight against the enemy of the religion of both: for
then they are not purely hirelings, but parties in part, and the cause does at
least mediately concern them. I believe that it will scarcely be shown, that
the Protestants have turned tails and betrayed them they came to assist.

We may observe, the Low Countries have best thrived by setting this trade of
journey-men-souldiers on work. Let them thank God and the good English: for if
Francis Duke of Anjou with his Frenchmen had well succeeded, no doubt he would
have spread his bread with their butter. Next them the Venetians have sped
best: for they have the trick, when they find it equally dangerous to casheer
their mercenary General or to entertain him any longer, fairly to kill him; as
they served Match. Prince, cap. 8.
Carmignola. England has best thrived without them: under Gods protection we
stand on our own legs. The last I find are an handful of Almains used against
Speed, Edward 6.
Kett in Norfolk in the days of King Edward the sixth. And let it be our
prayers, That as for those hirelings which are to be last tried and least
trusted, we never have want of their help, and never have too much of it.

Chap. 36. Sanar imploreth the aid of King Almerick; A solemn agreement made
betwixt them, and ratified by the magnificent Caliph.
1166
SUltan Sanar perceiving himself pressed and overlayed by these Turks, who with
Syracon their Captain refused to return, and of assistants turned invaders,
borrowed the help of Almerick King of Jerusalem to avoid them out of Egypt.
Whilst Almerick marched thither, Aug. 10.
an unfortunate battle was fought betwixt Boemund the third of that name Prince
of Antioch, Reimund Count of Tripoli, Calaman Grecian governor of Cilicia, and
Joceline the third the titular Count of Edessa, on the one side; and Noradine
King of the Turks, on the other. The Turks got the victory, and these four
Christian Princes were taken prisoners; and their army lost so much good blood
that day, that cast it into an irrecoverable consumption, and hastened the
ruin of this kingdom. Noradine following his blow, won Cesarea-Philippi.

Aug. 18.
Nevertheless Almerick went on effectually in Egypt, and for a time expulsed
the Turks out of this land. But Syracon would not so quickly quit the country;
but goes to the Caliph of Babylon (who was opposite to him of Egypt, each of
them claiming as heir to Mahomet that false prophet, the sovereignty over all
that were of the Saracen law) and offers him his means for the exstirpation
of this schismatic Caliph, and the reduction of all Egypt to the subjection
of the Babylonian. The motion was joyfully entertained, and Syracon with a
mighty power descends into Egypt.

Sanar affrighted hereat makes new and larger proffers to King Almerick to
stop this deluge of his enemies, and proffereth him a pension of forty
thousand ducats yearly for his behooffull assistance. But the King
understanding that the Sultan (how much soever he took upon him) was subject to
a higher Lord, would make no such bargain with him, but with the Caliph
himself; and therefore sent his Ambassadors, Tyrius, lib. 19. cap. 16.
Hugh Earl of Cesarea, and a Knight-Templar, along with the Sultan to Caliph
Elhadach then resident at Cairo. Arriving at his palace, they passed through
dark passages well guarded with armed Ethiopians. Hence they were conducted
into goodly open Idem, cap. 18.
courts of such beauty and riches, that they could not retain the gravity of
Ambassadors, but were enforced to admire the rarities they beheld. The farther
they went, the greater the state; till at last they were brought to the Caliphs
own lodging. Where entering the presence, the Sultan thrice prostrated himself
to the ground before the curtain behind which the Caliph sat. Presently the
traverse wrought with pearls was opened, and the Caliph himself discovered,
sitting with great majesty on a throne of gold, having few of his most inward
eunuchs about him.

The Sultan humbly kissed his masters feet, and briefly told him the cause of
their coming, the danger wherein the land stood, the proffers he had made to
King Almerick, desiring him now to ratify them, and in demonstration thereof
to give his hand to the Kings Ambassadors. The Caliph demurred hereat, as
counting such a gesture a diminution to his State; and at no hand would give
him his hand bare, but gave it in his glove. To whom the resolute Earl of Idem,
cap. 19.
Cesarea; Sir, said he, Truth seeks no holes to hide it self. Princes that
will hold covenant, must deal openly and nakedly: give us therefore your bare
hand; we will make no bargain with your glove. He was loath to do it; but
necessity (a more imperious Caliph then himself at this time) commanded it: and
he did it at last, dismissing the Christian Ambassadors with such gifts as
testified his greatness.

According to this agreement King Almerick cordially prosecuted his business,
improving his utmost might to expel Syracon with his Turks out of Egypt; whom
he bade battle, and got the day though he lost all his baggage: So that the
conquest in a manner was divided; the Turks gaining the wealth, the Christians
the honor of the victory. Following his blow, he pinned up the Turks
afterward in the city of Alexandria, and forced them to receive of him
conditions of peace, and then returned himself with honor to Askelon. 1167
Sept. 21.


Chap. 37. Almerick against his promise invadeth Egypt; His perjury punished
with the future ruin of the kingdom of Jerusalem; His death.
WHen a Crown is the prize of the game, we must never expect fair play of the
gamesters. 1168
King Almerick having looked on the beauty of the kingdom of Egypt, he longed
for it: and now no longer to drive out the relics of the Turks, but to get
Egypt to himself: And the next year, against the solemn league with the
Caliph, invaded it with a great army. He falsely pretended that the Caliph
would make a private peace with Noradine King of the Turks; and hence created
his quarrel. For he has a barren brain, who cannot fit himself with an
occasion if he has a desire to fall out. But Gilbert master of the
Hospitallers chiefly stirred up the King to this war, upon promise that the
city and country of Pelusium, if conquered, should be given to his order. The
Templars were much against the design (one of their order was Ambassador at
the ratifying of the peace) and with much zeal protested against it, as
undertaken against oath and fidelity.

An oath being the highest appeal, perjury must needs be an heinous sin,
whereby God is solemnly invited to be witness of his own dishonor. And as bad
is a God-mocking equivocation: For he that surpriseth truth with an ambush, is
as bad an enemy as he that fights against her with a flat lie in open field.
I know what is pleaded for King Almerick, namely, That Christians are not bound
to keep faith with idolaters, the worshippers of a false god, as the Egyptian
Caliph was on the matter. But open so wide a window, and it will be in vain to
shut any doors. All contracts with Pagans may easily be voided, if this
evasion be allowed. But what says S. Hierome, Non considerandum cui, sed per
quem jurave^^s, Comment. 17. Ezech.
It matters not to whom, but by whom we swear. And God to acquit himself,
knowing the Christians prosperity could not stand with his justice after their
perjury, frowned upon them. And from hence authors date the constant ill
success of the Holy war. For though this expedition sped well at the first,
and Almerick won the city of Belbis or Pelusium, yet see what a cloud of
miseries ensued.

First, Noradine in his absence wasted and won places near Antiochia at
pleasure.

Secondly, Centurist. Centur. 12. in Almerico.
Meller Prince of Armenia, a Christian, made a covenant with Noradine, and kept
it most constantly, to the inestimable disadvantage of the King of Jerusalem.
This act of Meller must be condemned, but withal Gods justice admired.
Christians break their covenant with Saracens in Egypt, whilst other
Christians, to punish them, make and keep covenant with Turks in Asia.

Thirdly, the Saracens grew good soldiers on a sudden: who were naked at
first, and only had bows; but now learned from the Christians to use all
offensive and defensive weapons. Thus rude nations always better themselves in
fighting with a skillful enemy. How good mark-men are the Irish now-a-dayes,
which some seventy years ago, at the beginning of their rebellions, had three
men to discharge a Morison, in the description of Ireland, anno 1598.
hand-gunne!

Fourthly, Almericks hopes of conquering Egypt were frustrated; for after some
victories he was driven out, and that whole kingdom conquered by Saladine
(nephew to Syracon) who killed the Caliph with his horse-mace as he came to do
him reverence, and made himself the absolutest Turkish King of Egypt. 1173
And presently after the death of Noradine, the kingdom of the Turks at
Damascus was by their consent bestowed upon him. May.
Indeed Noradine left a son, Melexala, who commanded in part of his fathers
dominions; but Saladine after his death got all for himself. Thus rising men
shall still meet with more stairs to raise them; as those of falling, with
stumbling blocks to ruin them.

Mean time Jerusalem was a poor weather-beaten kingdom, bleak and open to the
storm of enemies on all sides, having no covert or shelter of any good friend
near it, lying in the lions mouth betwixt his upper and nether jaw; Damascus
on the North, and Egypt on the South; two potent Turkish kingdoms, united
under a puissant Prince, Saladine. This made Almerick send for succors into
Europe: for now few voluntaries came to this service; soldiers must be pressed
with importunity. Our Western Princes were prodigal of their pity, but
niggardly of their help: The heat of the war in Palestine had cooled their
desires to go thither: which made these Ambassadors to return without
supplies, having gone far to fetch home nothing but discomfort and despair.

Lastly, King Almerick himself wearied with whole volleys of miseries, ended
his life of a bloody flux, having reigned eleven full years; and was buried
with his predecessors: Leaving two children, Baldwine and Sibyll, by Agnes his
first wife: and by Mary his second wife (daughter to John Proto-Sebastus, a
Grecian Prince) one daughter, Isabell; married Tyrius, lib. 22. cap. 5.
afterward to Hemphred the third, Prince of Thorone.

Chap. 38. Baldwine the fourth succeeds; His education under William the
reverend Archbishop of Tire.
BAldwine his son, 1174
the fourth of that name, succeeded his father: July 15.
so like unto him, that we report the reader to the character of King Almerick,
and will spare the repeating his description. Only he differed in the temper
of his body, being inclined to the leprosy called Elephantiasis, noisome to
the patient, but not infectious to the company: not like King Uzziahs, but
Naamans leprosy; which had it been contagious, no doubt the King of Assyria,
when he went into the house of Rimmon, would have chosen another supporter.
Mean time the kingdom was as sick as the King; he of a leprosy, that of an
incurable consumption.

This Baldwine had the benefit of excellent education under William Archbishop
of Tire, a pious man and excellent scholar, skilled in all the learned
Oriental tongues, besides the Dutch, and French his native language; a
moderate and faithful writer: For in the latter part of his history of the
Holy war, his eye guided his hand, till at last the taking of the city of
Jerusalem so shook his hand, that his pen fell out, and he wrote no more.
Treasurer he was of all the money contributed to the Holy war; Chancellor of
this kingdom; employed in several Embassies in the West; present at the
Lateran Council, the acts whereof he did record: Centurist. Centur. in
Episcopis.
Cardinal he might have been, but refused it: In a word, unhappy only that he
lived in that age, though that age was happy he lived in it.

Chap. 39. The vitiousnesse of Heraclius the Patriarch of Jerusalem; His
Embassy to Henry the second, King of England, with the success; The Maronites
reconciled to the Roman Church.
AFter the death of Almerick Patriarch of Jerusalem, Heraclius was by the
Queen Mother Mary, 1181.
second wife to King Almerick, for his handsomeness preferred to be Patriarch.
Besoldus, De reg. Hieros. page 282.
William Archbishop of Tire was violent against his election, because of a
prophecy, That as Heraclius King of Persia won, so an Heraclius should lose
the Cross. But others excepted, that this exception was nothing worth: For let
God give the man, and let the devil set the name. As for those blind
prophesies, they miss the truth ofter then hit it; so that no wise man will
lean his belief on so slender a prop. But Heraclius had a worse name then his
name, the bad report of his vicious life; keeping a Vintners wife, whom he
maintained in all state like an Empress, and owned the children he had by her:
Her name Besoldus, page 284.
Pascha de Rivera; and she was generally saluted, The Patriarchiss^, Marinus
San. lib. 3. part. 6. cap. 14.
Patriarchesse. His example infected the inferior clergy; whose corruption
was a sad presage of the ruin of the realm: For when Prelates the Seers, when
once those eye-strings begin to break, the heart strings hold not out long
after.

In his time the Maronites were reconciled to the Roman Church. Their main
error was the heresy of the Monothelites, touching one only will and action
in Christ. For after that the heresy of Nestorius about two persons in our
Savior was detested in the Eastern Churches, some thought not themselves safe
enough from the heresy of two persons, till they were fallen with the opposite
extremity of one nature in Christ: violence making men reel from one extreme to
another. The error once broched, found many embracers: As no opinion so
monstrous, but if it has had a mother, it will get a nurse. But now these
Maronites renouncing their tenants, 1182.
received the Catholic faith; though soon after, when Saladine had conquered
their country, they relapsed to their old errors: wherein they continued till
the late times of Pope Gregory the thirteenth, and Clement the eighth, when
they again renewed their communion with the Roman Church. They live at this
day on mount Libanus, not exceeding twelve thousand households, and pay to the
great Turk for every one above twelve years old, Posse^ine, A^par. sacr. in
Maron.
seventeen sultanines by the year; and for every space of ground sixteen
spanne square, one sultanine yearly; to keep themselves free from the mixture
of Mahometanes. A Brierwood, Enquiries, cap. 25.
sultanine is about seven shillings six pence of our money.

To return to Heraclius; 1185.
Soon after he was sent Ambassador to Henry the second, King of England, to
crave his personal assistance in the Holy war, delivering unto him the
Royal standard, with the keys of our Saviors sepulcher, the tower of David,
and the city of Jerusalem, sent him by King Baldwine. King Henry was singled
out for this service before other Princes, because the world justly reported
him valiant, wise, rich, powerful, and fortunate: And (which was the main)
hereby he might expiate his murder, and gather up again the innocent blood
which he had shed of Thomas Becket. Besides, Heraclius entitled our Henry to
the kingdom of Jerusalem, because Geoffrey Plantagenet his father was son
(some say, brother) to Fulk the fourth, King of Jerusalem. But King Henry was
too wise to bite at such a bait, wherein was only the husk of title, without
the kernel of profit. Yet he pretended he would go into Palestine; and got
hereby a mass of money toward his voyage: making every one, as well Clerk as
Lay (saving such as went) to pay that year the tenth of all their revenues,
movables, and chattells, as well in gold as in silver. Of every city in
England he chose the richest men; as in London two hundred, in York an hundred,
and so in proportion: and took the tenth of all their movables, by the Daniel,
in Henry 1.
estimation of credible men who knew their estates; imprisoning those which
refused to pay, sub eleemosynae titulo vitium rapacitatis includans, says
Walsingham. But now when he had filled his purse, all expected he should
fulfill his promise; when all his voyage into Palestine turned into a journey
into France.

Heraclius, whilst he stayed in England, consecrated the Temple-church in the
suburbs of London, and the house adjoining belonging to the Templars; since
turned to a better use, for the students of our municipall Law; these new
Templars defending one Christian from another, as the old ones Christians from
Pagans.

Chap. 40. Saladine fitteth himself with foreign forces. The original and
great power of the Mammalukes, with their first service.
IN the minority of King Baldwine, who was but thirteen years old, Milo de
Plancia Nobleman was Protector of the Realm: Whose pride and insolence could
not be brooked; and therefore he was stabbed at Ptolemais, and Reimund Count of
Tripoli chosen to succeed him.

Now Saladine seriously intends to set on the Kingdom of Jerusalem, and
seeks to furnish himself with soldiers for that service. But he perceived
that the ancient nation of the Egyptians had lasted so long, that now it ran
dregs; their spirits being as low as the country they lived in, and they
fitter to make merchants and mechanics then military men: For they were bred
in such soft employments, that they were presently foundred with any hard
labor. Wherefore he sent to the Circassians by the lake of Meotis, near
Taurica Chersonesus, and thence bought many slaves of able and active bodies.
For it was a people born in a hard country (no fuel for pleasure grew there
nor was brought thither) and bred harder; so that war was almost their
nature, with custom of continual skirmishing with the neighboring Tartars.

These slaves he trained up in military discipline, most of them being
Christians once baptized; but afterward untaught Christ, they learned Mahomet,
and so became the worse foes to religion for once being her friends. These
proved excellent soldiers and special horsemen, and are called Mammalukes.
And surely the greatness of Saladine and his successors stood not so much on
the legs of their native Egyptians, as it leaned on the staff of these
strangers. Saladine, and especially the Turkish Kings after him, gave great
power, and placed much trust in these Tyrius, lib. 21. cap. 23.
Mammalukes: Who lived a long time in ignorance of their own strength, till at
last they took notice of it, and scorning any longer to be factours for
another, they would set up for themselves, and got the sovereignty from the
Turkish Kings. Thus Princes who make their subjects overgreat, whet a knife
for their own throats. And posterity may chance to see the insolent Janissaries
give the grand Seignor such a trip on the heel as may tumble him on his back.
But more largely of these Mammalukes usurping the kingdom of Egypt (God
willing) in its proper place.

Thus Saladine having furnished himself with new soldiers, went to handsel
their valor upon the Christians; invaded the Holy land, burning all the
country before him, and raging in the blood of poor Christians, till he came
and encamped about Askelon.

Mean time whilst Reimund Count of Tripoli, Protector of the Kingdom, with
Philip Earl of Flanders, and the chief strength of the Kingdom were absent in
Celosyria, wasting the country about Emissa and Cesarea, young King Baldwine
lay close in Askelon, not daring to adventure on so strong an enemy. With whose
fear Saladine encouraged, dispersed his army, some one way, 1176
some another, to forage the country. King Baldwine courted with this
opportunity, Nov. 25.
marched out privately, not having past four hundred horse, with some few
footmen, and assaulted his secure enemies, being six and twenty thousand. But
victory stands as little in the number of soldiers, as verity in the
plurality of voices. The Christians got the conquest, and in great triumph
returned to Jerusalem.

This overthrow rather madded then daunted Saladine: Who therefore to recover
his credit, some months after with his Mammalukes fell like a mighty tempest
upon the Christians, as they were parting the spoil of a band of Turks, whom
they had vanquished; put many to the sword, the rest to flight. Otto grand
Master of the Templars, and Hugh son in law to the Count of Tripoli, were
taken prisoners; and the King himself had much ado to escape. And thus both
sides being well wearied with war, they were glad to refresh themselves with
a short slumber of a truce solemnly concluded; and their troubled estates
breathed almost for the space of two years. Which truce Saladine the more
willingly embraced, 1179
because of a famine in the kingdom of Damascus, where it had scarce
Centurist. Cent. 12. in Baldvino 4.
rained for five years together.

Chap. 41. The fatal jealousies betwixt the King and Reimund Earl of Tripoli.
1181
BUt this so welcome a calm was troubled with domestical discords. For the
Kings mother (a woman of a turbulent spirit) and her brother his steward,
accused Reimund Count of Tripoli, governor of the Realm in the Kings minority,
as if he affected the Crown for himself: which accusation this Earl could never
wholly wipe off. For slender and lean slanders quickly consume themselves; but
he that is branded with an heinous crime (though false) when the wound is
cured, his credit will be killed with the scarre. Before we go further, let us
view this Earl Reimunds disposition, and we shall find him marked to do
mischief, and to ruin this Realm. He was son to Reimund, grandchild to
Pontius Earl of Tripoli, by Cecilie the daughter of Tyrius, lib. 21. cap. 5.
Philip King of France, great-grandchild to Bertram first Earl of Tripoli,
great-great-grandchild to Reimund Earl of Tholose, one of special note amongst
the primitive adventurers in the Holy war. His mother was Hodiern, third
daughter of Baldwine the second, King of Jerusalem. A man whose stomach was as
high as his birth; and very serviceable to this State, whilst the sharpness
of his parts were used against the Turks; which at last turned edge against the
Christians: Proud, not able to digest the least wrong; and though long in
captivity amongst the Turks, yet a very treuant in the school of affliction,
who never learned the lesson of patience: So revengefull, that he would strike
his enemy, though it were through the sides of religion and the Christian
cause. For this present accusation of treason, good authors seem to be his
compurgatours for this at this time, though afterward he discovered his
treacherous intents. And because he could not rise by his service, he made his
service fall by him; and undid what he had done for the public good, because
thereby he could not attain his private ends. He commanded over the Earldome of
Tripoli, which was a territory of large extent, wherein he was absolute Lord.
And by the way we may take notice of this as one of the banes of the Kingdom
of Jerusalem, That the principalities of Antioch, Tripoli, and Edessa (whilst
it was Christian) were branches of this Kingdom, but too big for the body: For
the Princes thereof on each petty distaste would stand on their guard; as if
they had been subjects out of courtesy, not conscience: and though they
confessed they owed the King allegiance, yet they would pay no more then they
thought fitting themselves.

To return to King Baldwine; This suspicion of Earl Reimund, though at first
but a buzze, soon got a sting in the Kings head, and he violently apprehended
it. Whereupon Reimund coming to Jerusalem, was by the way commanded to stay, to
his great disgrace. But some of the Nobility foreseeing what danger this
discord might bring, reconciled them with much labor. However, Baldwine ever
after looked on this Earl with a jealous eye. Jealousy, if it be fire in
private persons, is wildfire in Princes, who seldom raze out their names whom
once they have written in their black bills. And as the Italian proverb is,
Suspicion gives a passe-port to faith to set it on packing; so this Earl
finding himself suspected, was never after cordially loyal, smothering his
treachery in this Kings life, which afterward broke forth into an open flame.

Chap. 42. Saladine is conquered by King Baldwine, and conquereth Mesopotamia;
Discords about the Protectourship of Jerusalem; The death, and praise of
Baldwine the fourth.
THe kingdom of Damascus being recovered of the famine, Saladine having gotten
his ends by the truce, would now have the truce to end; and breaking it (as not
standing with his haughty designs) marched with a great army out of Egypt
through Palestine to Damascus, much spoiling the country. And now having
joined the Egyptian with the Damascene forces, re-entred the Holy land. But
young King Baldwine meeting him, Centurist. Cent 12. in Baldvino 4.
though but with seven hundred to twenty thousand, at the village Frobolet,
overthrew him in a great battle; and Saladine himself was glad with speedy
flight to escape the danger, and by long marches to get him again to Damascus.
Afterward he besieged Berytus both by sea and land: but the vigilancie and
valor of King Baldwine defeated his taking of it.

Saladine finding such tough resistance in the Holy land, thought to make a
better purchase by laying out his time in Mesopotamia. Wherefore passing
Euphrates, he won Charran and diverse other cities: and then returning, in
Syria besieged Aleppo the strongest place the Christians had in that country;
so fortified by nature, that he had little hope to force it. But treason will
run up the steepest ascent, where valor it self can scarce creep: and
Saladine with the battery of bribes made such a breach in the loyalty of the
governor, that he betrayed it unto him.

Thus he comes again into the Holy land more formidable then ever before,
carrying an army of terror in the mentioning of his name, which drove the
poor Christians all into their fenced cities. As for King Baldwine, the
leprosy had arrested him prisoner, and kept him at home. Long had this Kings
spirit endured this infirmity, swallowing many a bitter pang with a smiling
face, and going upright with patient shoulders under the weight of his disease.
It made him put all his might to it, because when he yielded to his sickness,
he must leave off the managing of the State; and he was loath to put off his
royal robes before he went to bed, a Crown being too good a companion for one
to part with willingly. But at last he was made to stoop, 1183
and retired himself to a private life, appointing Baldwine his nephew (a child
of five years old) his successor; and Guy Earl of Joppa and Askelon, this
child's father in law, to be Protector of the Realm in his minority.

But soon after he revoked this latter act, and designed Reimund Earl of
Tripoli for the Protector. He displaced Guy, because he found him of no
over-weight worth, scarce passable without favorable allowance, little feared
of his foes, and as little loved of his friends. The more martial Christians
slighted him as a slug, and neglected so lazy a leader that could not keep
pace with those that were to follow him: Yea, they refused (whilst he was
Protector) at his command to fight with Saladine; and out of distaste to their
General, suffered their enemy freely to forage; which was never done before:
For the Christians never met any Turks wandering in the Holy land, but on even
terms they would examine their passe-port how sufficient it was, and bid them
battle.

Guy stormed at his displacing, and though little valiant, yet very ^ullen,
left the Court in discontent, went home, and fortified his cities of Joppa and
Askelon. What should King Baldwine do in this case? Whom should he make
Protector? Guy had too little, Reimund too much spirit for the place. He
feared Guy's cowardlinesse, lest he should lose the kingdom to the Turks; and
Reimunds treachery, lest he should get it for himself. Thus anguish of mind and
weakness of body (a doughtie conquest for their united strengths, which
single might suffice) ended this Kings days, dying young at five and twenty
years of age. But if by the morning we may guess at the day, he would have
been no whit inferior to any of his predecessors; especially if his body had
been able: but (alas!) it spoiled the music of his soul, that the instrument
was quite out of tune. He reigned twelve years, and was buried in the Temple
of the Sepulcher: 1185
a King happy in this, that he died before the death of his Kingdom. May 16.


Chap. 43. The short life, and woeful death of Baldwine the fifth an infant.
Guy his father in law succeeds him.
Camd. Brit. in the descript. of the county of Dublin.
IT is a rare happiness of the family of S. Laurence, 1185
Barons of Hoath in Ireland, that the heirs for 400 years together always
have been of age before the death of their fathers: For Minors have not only
baned families, but ruined realms. It is one of Gods threatenings; I will give
children to be their Princes, Isa. 3.4.
and babes shall rule over them. With this rod God struck the Kingdom of
Jerusalem thrice in 40 years; Baldwine the third, fourth, and fifth, being all
under age; and this last but five years old. He was the posthumus son of
William Marquess of Montferrat, by Sibyll his wife, sister to Baldwine the
fourth, daughter to King Almerick: She afterward was married to Guy Earl of
Joppa and Askelon.

Now Reimund Earl of Tripoli challenged to be Protector of this young King, by
the virtue of an Act of the former King so assigning him. But Sibyll mother to
this infant, to defeat Reimund, first murdered all natural affection in her
self, and then by poison murdered her son; that so the Crown in her right
might come to her husband Guy. This Baldwine reigned eight months, Cosmog.
lib. 5. in terra sancta.
eight days; says mistaken Munster: and some mistake more, who make him not
to reign at all; cruel to wrong his memory of his honor, whom his mother had
robbed both of his life and Kingdom.

His death was concealed, till Guy his father in law had obtained by large
bribes to the Templars and Heraclius the Patriarch, to be crowned King: One
more ennobled with his descent from the ancient family of the Lusignans in
Poictou, then for any Tyrius, lib. 22. cap. 25. and 27. calls him hom^nem
indiscretum and penitus inu^^lem.
eminency in himself: His gifts were better then his endowments. Yet had he
been more fortunate, he would have been accounted more virtuous; men commonly
censuring that the fault of the King, which is the fate of the kingdom. And
now the Christian affairs here posted to their woeful period, being spurred on
by the discords of the Princes.

Chap. 44. Church Affairs: Of Haymericus Patriarch of Antioch; Of the Grecian
Anti-patriarchs; and of the learned Theodorus Balsamon.
Whilst Heraclius did Patriarch it in Jerusalem, one Haymericus had the same
honor at Antioch. He wrote to Henry the second King of England, a bemoning
letter of the Christians in the East, and from him received another, fraught
with never-performed fair promises. This man must needs be different from that
Haymericus who began his Patriarchship in Antioch anno 1143, and sat but twelve
years, say the Centur. 12. in Episcop.
Centuriatours: But Annal. Eccl. in Haymerico.
Baronius, as different from them sometimes in Chronology as Divinity, makes
them the same. Then must he be a through-old man, enjoying his place above
forty years; being probably before he wore the style of Patriarch, well worn
in years himself. I must confess, it passes my Chymistrie to extract any
agreement herein out of the contrariety of writers. We must also take notice,
that besides the Latin Patriarchs in Jerusalem and Antioch, there were also
Grecian Anti-patriarchs appointed by the Emperor of Constantinople: who having
no temporal power nor profit by Church Lands, had only jurisdiction over
those of the Greek Church. We find not the chain of their succession, but here
and there light on a link* and at this time in Jerusalem on three successively:
1. Athanasius; whom though Baronius, in anno 1180.
one out of his abundant charity is pleased to style a Schismatic, yet was he
both pious and learned, as appears by his epistles. 2. Leontius, Nicet^^
Choniates, in Isa^cio Angelo, p. 438.
commended likewise to posterity for a good Clerk and an honest man. 3.
Dositheus, Idem ibidem.
inferior to the former in both respects: Isaac the Grecian Emperor sent to
make him Patriarch of Constantinople* and Dositheus catching at both, held
neither, but betwixt two Patriarchs chairs fell to the ground.

Antioch also had her Greek Patriarchs: As one Sotericus, displaced for
maintaining some unsound tenets about our Savior: After him Theodorus
Balsamon, the oracle of the learned Law in his age. He compiled and commented
on the ancient Canons; and principally set forth the privileges of
Constantinople; listening, say the Romanists, to the least noise that sounds
to the advancing of the Eastern Churches, and knocking down Rome wheresoever it
peepeth above Constantinople. This makes Bellarmine except against him as a
partial writer; because a true Historian should be neither party, advocate,
nor judge, but a bare witness.

By Nicetas Chon. in Isaacio, page 440.
Isaac the Grecian Emperor this Balsamon was also deceived: he pretended to
remove him to Constantinople, on condition he would prove the translation of
the Patriarch to be legal, which is forbidden by the Canons. Balsamon took
upon him to prove it: and a Lawyers brains will beat to purpose when his own
preferment is the fee. But herein he did but crack the nut for another to eat
the kernel: For the Emperor mutable in his mind, changing his favorites as
well as his clothes before they were old, when the legality of the translation
was avowed, bestowed the Patriarchship of Constantinople on another; and
Theodorus was still staked down at Antioch in a true spiritual preferment,
affording him little bodily maintenance.

Chap. 45. The revolt of the Earl of Tripoli; The Christians irrecoverably
overthrown, and their King taken prisoner.
THere was at this time a truce betwixt the Christians and Saladine, 1187
broken on this occasion: Saladines mother went from Egypt to Damascus, with
much treasure and a little train, as sufficiently guarded with the truce yet in
force: when Reinold of Castile surprised and robbed her. Saladine glad of this
occasion, gathers all his strength together, and besieges Ptolemais.

Now Reimund Earl of Tripoli appears in his colors, vexed at the loss of
the government. His great stomach has no room for patience: and his passions
boiled from a fever to a frenzy; so that blinded with anger at King Guy, he
mistaketh his enemy, and will be revenged on God and religion; revolting with
his Principality (a third part of the Kingdom of Jerusalem) to Saladine; and
in his own person under a visard, assisted him in this siege.

Out of the city marched the Templars and Hospitallers, May 1.
and falling on the Turks killed twenty thousand of them. Yet they gave
welnigh a valuable consideration for their victory, the master of the
Hospitallers being slain; and a brave General in battle never dies unattended.

Saladine hereupon raises his siege; and Reimund Earl of Tripoli, whether out
of fear the Christians might prevail, or remorse of conscience, or discontent,
not finding that respect he expected of Saladine (who had learned that politic
maxim, To give some honor, no trust to a fugitive) reconciled himself to King
Guy; and sorry for his former offense, returned to the Christians.

King Guy hereupon gathering the whole strength of his weak Kingdom to do
their last devoir, determined to bid Saladine battle; though having but fifteen
hundred horse and fifteen thousand foot, against an hundred and twenty thousand
horse and an hundred and sixty thousand foot. July 3.
Nigh Tiberias the battle was fought: They close in the afternoon; but night
moderating betwixt them, both sides drew their stakes till next morning: 4.
then on afresh. The Christians valor poised the number of their enemies; till
at last the distemper of the weather turned the scales to the Turks side. More
Christians (thirsty within and scalded without) were killed with the beams the
sun darted then with the arrows the enemies shot. Reinold of Castile was
slain, with most of the Templars and Hospitallers. Besoldus, in Guidone; ex
Crusio.
Gerard Master of the Templars, and Boniface Marquess of Montferrat were taken
prisoners; and also Guy the King, who saw the rest of his servants slain before
his eyes, only obtaining of Saladine the life of his schoolmaster. Yea, in
this battle the flower of the Christian chevalrie was cut down: and what was
most lamented, the Cross (says Matthew Paris) which freed men from the
captivity of their sins, was for men's sins taken captive. Most impute this
overthrow to the Earl of Tripoli, who that day commanded a great part of the
Christian army, and is said of some treacherously to have fled away. But when a
great action miscarrieth, the blame must be laid on some; and commonly it
lights on them who formerly have been found false, be it right or wrong: So
impossible is it for him who once has broken his credit by treason, ever to
have it perfectly joynted again. It increases the suspicion, because this
Earl, afterward found dead in his bed (as some say) was circumcised.

Victorious Saladine, as he had thrown a good cast, played it as well; in a
month conquering Berytus, Biblus, Ptolemais, and all the havens (Tire
excepted) from Sidon to Askelon. He used his conquest with much moderation,
giving lives and goods to all, and forcing no Christians to depart their
cities, save only the Latins. This his gentleness proceeded from policy,
well knowing that if the Christians could not buy their lives cheap, they would
sell them dear, and fight it out to the uttermost. Askelon was stout, and
would not surrender. Wherefore Saladine, loath with the hazard of so long a
siege to check his fortune in the full speed, left it, and went to Jerusalem,
as to a place of less difficulty and more honor to conquer.

Chap. 46. Jerusalem won by the Turk, with woeful remarkables thereat.
BEfore the beginning of the siege, the Sept. 4.
sun, as sympathizing with the Christians woes, was eclipsed. A sad presage
of the loss of Jerusalem. For though those within the city valiantly defended
it for a fortnight, yet they saw it was but the playing out of a desperate game
which must be lost: Their foes near, their friends far off; and those
willing to pity, unable to help. Why then should they prolong languishing,
where they could not preserve life? Octo. 2.
Concluding to lavish no more valor, they yielded up the city, on condition
all their lives might be redeemed, a man for ten, a woman for five, a child for
M. Paris, in anno 1187.
one besant: and fourteen thousand poor people not able to pay their ransom,
were kept in perpetual bondage. All Latins were cast out of the city; but
those of the Greek religion were permitted to stay therein: Only Saladine to
two Frenchmen gave liberty to abide there, and maintenance to live on, in
reverence to their age: Besoldus, in Guidone, page 285.
the one Robert of Corbie, a soldier to Godfrey of Bouillon when he wanne this
city; the other Fulk Fiole, the first child born in the city after the
Christians had conquered it.

Saladine possessed of Jerusalem, turned the churches into stables, sparing
only that of the Sepulcher for a great sum of money. Solomon's Temple he
converted to a Mosque, sprinkling it all over with rose water, as if he would
wash it from profaneness, whilst he profaned it with his washing.

Thus Jerusalem after it had fourscore and eight years been enjoyed by the
Christians, by Gods just judgment was taken again by the Turks. What else
could be expected? Sin reigned in every corner; there was scarce Besoldus, in
Guidone, page 284.
one honest woman in the whole city of Jerusalem. Heraclius the Patriarch, with
the Clergy, was desperately vicious: and no wonder if iron rust, when gold
does; and if the Laity followed their bad example.

This doleful news brought into Europe, filled all with sighs and sorrows.
Pope Urbane the third (as another Eli at the Arks captivity) died for grief:
The Cardinals lamented out of measure, vowing such reformation of manners;
Never more to take bribes, Never more to live so vitiously; yea, Never to ride
on an Roger Hoveden, in Henrico 2. anno 1187.
horse so long as the Holy land was under the feet of the Turks. But this their
passion spent it self with its own violence; and these mariners vows ended with
the tempest.

In this general grief of Christendom there was one woman found to rejoice,
and she a German Prophetess called S. Christian, a virgin. Who as she had
foretold the day of the defeat, so on the same she professed that she saw in a
vision Christ and his Angels rejoicing. For the loss of the earthly Canaan was
gain to the heavenly; peopling it with many inhabitants, who were conquerours
in their overthrow; whilst they Quandam morti Salvatoris vicem cum multa
devotione rependunt, Baronius, in anno 1187.
requited Christ's passion, and died for him who suffered for them. But for the
truth both of the doctrine and history hereof, none need burden their belief
farther then they please. We will conclude all with Roger Hovedens witty
descant on the time: Loco prius citato.
When Jerusalem was won by the Christians, and afterward when it was lost, an
Urbane was Pope of Rome, a Frederick Emperor of Germany, an Heraclius
Patriarch of Jerusalem. But by his leave, though the first of his observations
be true, the second is a flat falsitie, the third a foul mistake, and may thus
be mended: (It is charity to lend a crutch to a lame conceit) When the Cross
was taken from the Persians, Heraclius was Emperor; and when it was taken from
the Turks, Heraclius was Patriarch. Thus these curious observations (like
over-small watches) not one of a hundred goes true. Though it cannot be
denied, but the same name (as Henry of England, one the winne-all, another the
lose-all in France) has often been happy and unhappy in founding and
confounding of kingdoms. But such nominall toys are rags not worth a wise
man's stooping to take them up.

The end of the second Book.
The History of the HOLY WAR. Book III.
Chap. 1. Conrade of Montferrat valiantly defends Tire, and is chosen King.
Anno Dom. 1187
IN this woeful estate stood the Christian affairs in the Holy land, when
Conrade Marquess of Montferrat arrived there. His worth commands my pen to
wait on him from his own country till he came hither. Son he was to Boniface
Marquess of Montferrat, and had spent his youth in the service of Isaacius
Angelus the Grecian Emperor. This Isaacius, fitter for a Priest then a Prince,
was always bred in a private way; and the confining of his body feemeth to
have brought him to a pent and narrow soul. For he suffered rebels to affront
him to his face, never fending any army against them, but commending all his
cause to a company of barefooted Friars whom he kept in his Court, desiring
them to pray for him, and by their pious tears to quench the combustions in the
Empire. But our Conrade plainly told him, he must use as well the weapons of
the Nicetas, in Isaacio Angelo, lib. 1.. 7.
left hand as of the right; meaning the sword as well as prayers: And by the
advice of this his General, he quickly subdued all his enemies. Which his
great service found small reward: Nicetas, in Isaacio Angelo, lib. 2.. 1. (...)
only he was graced to wear his shoes of the Imperial fashion; a low matter,
but there (forsooth) accounted an high honor. But soon after Isaac was sick of
this Physician who had cured his Empire. If private debtors care not for the
company of their creditours, much less do Princes love to see them to whom
they ow themselves and their kingdom: so unwelcome are courtesies to them when
above their requital. Now it is an ancient policy, to rid away high spirits
by sending them on some plausible errand into remote parts, there to seek for
themselves an honorable grave. To this end Isaacius by the persuasions of some
spurred on Conrade (free enough of himself to any noble action) to go into
Palestine, there to support the ruinous affairs of the Christians. Conrade was
sensible of their plot, but suffered himself to be wrought on, being weary of
the Grecians baseness; and came into the Holy land with a brave company of
Gentlemen furnished on their own cost.

For a while we set him aside, and return to Saladine: Who by this time had
taken Askelon, on condition that King Guy, and Gerard master of the Templars
should be set at liberty. Nor long after was the castle of Antioch betrayed
unto him by the Sabell. Enn. 9. lib. 5. page 377.
Patriarch; and the city, scarce got with eleven months siege, was lost in an
instant, with five and twenty strong towns more which attended the fortune of
Antioch: and many provinces thereto belonging came into the possession of the
Turks. Must not the Christians needs be bankrupts if they continue this trade,
buying dear and selling cheap, gaining by inches and losing by else?

Hoveden.
With better success those in Tripoli (which city the wife of Earl Reimund
after his death delivered to the Christians) defended themselves against
Saladine. For shame they would not forgo their shirts, though they had parted
with their clothes. Stark-naked from shelter had the Christians been left, if
stripped out of Tripoli and Tire. Manfully therefore they defended themselves;
and Saladine having tasted of their valor in Tripoli, had no mind to mend his
draught, but marched away to Tire.

But Conrade of Montferrat, who was in Tire with his army, so used the matter,
that Saladine was fain to fly, and leave his tents behind him, which were
lined with much treasure: And the Christians had that happiness to squeeze
that sponge which formerly was filled with their spoil. They in Tire in token
of gratitude chose this Conrade King of Jerusalem; swearing themselves his
subjects who had kept them from being the Turks slaves. To strengthen his
title, he Besoldus, ex Ritio De reg. page 293.
married Elisa or Isabella (Authors christen her with either name) formerly
espoused to Humfred of Thoron, 1188
sister to Baldwine the fourth, daughter to Almerick King of Jerusalem.

By this time King Guy was delivered out of prison, having sworn never more to
bear arms against Saladine: which oath by the Clergy was adjudged void,
because forced from him when he was detained in prison unjustly against
promise. The worst was, now he had gained his liberty he could not get his
Kingdom. Coming to Tire, they shut the gates against him, owning no King but
Conrade. Thus to have two kings together, is the way to have neither king nor
kingdom.

But Guy following the affront as well as he might, and piecing up a cloth of
remnants with his broken army, besieged Ptolemais. Aug.
The Pisanes, Venetians, and Florentines, with their sea-succours came to
assist him. But this siege was Church-work, and therefore went on slowly; we
may easier perceive it to have moved then to move, especially if we return
hither a twelve-moneth hence.

Chap. 2. The Church-story in the Holy land to the end of the war; The use
and abuse of titular Bishops.
WE must now no longer look for a full face of a Church in the Holy land; it is
well if we find one cheek and an eye. Though Jerusalem and Antioch were won
by the Turks, the Pope ceased not to make Patriarchs of both. We will content
our selves with the names of those of Jerusalem, finding little else of them
remarkable.

After Heraclius, Thomas Agni was Patriarch, Centur. Cent. 13. cap. 9.
present in the Laterane Council under Innocent the third.

Geraldus succeeded him, who Matthew. Paris, in anno 1229.
sided with the Pope against Frederick the Emperor.

Albertus, Patriarch in Jerusalem when the Christians lost their land in Syria.
He prescribed some rules to the Centur. ut prius.
Carmelites.

After him, Antonie Beak Bishop of Duresme, the most triumphant Prelate of the
English militant Church except Cardinal Wolsey. He founded and endowed a
College for Prebends at Camden, Brit. page 601 Godwine, in Episc. Dunesm.
Chester in the Bishopric of Duresme: Yet no doubt he had done a deed more
acceptable to God, if in stead of sacrifice he had done justice, and not
defrauded the Lord Vessie's heir, to whom he was guardian. Let those who are
delighted with Sciographie, See this catalogue of Patriarchs altered and
perfected in the Chronology.
paint out (if they please) these shadow-Patriarchs, as also those of Antioch,
and deduce their succession to this day: For this custom still continues, and
I find the Suffraganes to several Archbishops and Bishops in Germany and
France, style themselves Bishops of Palestine: for example; Adricomius, in
Terra^^ncta.
The Suffraganes of 1 Tornay, 2 Munster, 3 Mentz, 4 Utrecht, 5 Sens, 6 Triers,
write themselves Bishops of 1 Sarepta, 2 Ptolemais, 3 Sidon, 4 Hebron, 5
Cesarea, 6 Azotus. But well did one in the Council of Trent give these titular
Bishops the title of figmenta humana, History of Trent, lib. 8. page 7.
man's devices; because they have as little ground in Gods word and the ancient
Canons for their making, as ground in Palestine for their maintenance: Yea, a
titular Bishop sounds a contradiction: for a Bishop and a Church or Diocese,
are relatives, as a husband and his wife. Besides, these Bishops by ascending
to so high an honor, were fain to descend to many indecencies and indignities
to support themselves, with many corruptions in selling of Orders they
conferred, the truest and basest Simonie.

However the Pope still continues in making of them: First, because it is
conceived to conduce to the state and amplitude of the Roman Church to have so
many Bishops in it, as it is the credit of the Apothecarie to have his shop
full, though many outside-painted pots be empty within. Secondly, hereby his
Holiness has a facile and cheap way both to gratify and engage ambitious
spirits, and such Chameleons as love to feed on air. Yea, the Pope is not
only free of spiritual dignities, but also of temporal titular honors; as
when in the days of Queen Elisabeth he made Thomas Stukely (a bankrupt in his
loyalty as well as in his estate) Marquess of Leinster, Camd. Brit. in his
descript. of Dublin.
Earl of Weifford and Caterlogh, Vicount Murrough, Baron Rosse and Hydron in
Ireland: The best is, these honors were not heavy nor long worn, he being
slain soon after in Barbary, else the number of them would have broken his
back. Lastly, there is a real use made of these nominall Bishops: for these
ciphres joined with figures will swell a number, and sway a side in a general
Council, as his Holiness pleases; so that he shall truly cogere concilium,
both gather and compel it. Of the four Archbishops which were at the first
session in the Council of Trent two were merely titular, History of Trent, lib.
2. page 140.
who never had their feet in those Churches whence they took their honor. But
enough hereof; Now to matters of the commonwealth.

Chap. 3. Frederick Barbarossa his setting forth to the Holy land; Of the
tyrannous Grecian Emperors.
MAtters going thus woefully in Palestine, the Christians sighs there were
alarms to stir up their brethren in Europe to go to help them, and chiefly
Frederick Barbarossa the Germane Emperor. Impute it not to the weakness of
his judgment, but the strength of his devotion, that at seventy years of age,
having one foot in his grave, he would set the other on Pilgrimage. We must
know that this Emperor had been long tied to the stake, and baited with seven
fresh successive Popes; till at last not conquered with the strength, but
wearied with the continuance of their malice, he gave himself up to be ordered
by them; and Pope Clement the third sent him on this voyage into the Holy land.

June 29.
Marching through Hungary with a great army of one hundred and fifty thousand
valiant soldiers, Arnoldus Lubecensis.
he was welcomed by King Bela. But changing his host, his entertainment was
changed; being basely used when he entered into the Grecian Empire.

Of the Emperors whereof we must speak somewhat. For though being to write the
Holy war I will climb no hedges, to trespass on any other story; yet will I
take leave to go the highway, and touch on the succession of those Princes
which lead to the present discourse.

When Conrade Emperor of Germany last passed this way, Emmanuel was Emperor
in Greece: Who having reigned thirty eight years, left his place to Alexius
his son: A youth, the depth of whose capacity only reached to understand
pleasure; governed by the factious nobility, till in his third year he was
strangled by Andronicus his cousin.

Andronicus succeeded him; a diligent reader and a great lover of Nicetas
Choniates, in fine vitae Andronici.
S. Paul's epistles, but a bad practiser of them: Who rather observing the
Devils rule, That it is the best way for those who have been bad, to be still
worse, fensing his former villainies by committing new ones, held by tyranny
what he had gotten by usurpation; till having lived in the blood of others, he
died in his own, tortured to death by the headless multitude; from whom he
received all the cruelties which might be expected from servile natures when
they command.

Then Isaacius Angelus, of the Imperial blood, was placed in his throne; of
whom partly In the first chapter of this book.
before. Nero-like, he began mildly, but soon fell to the trade of tyranny: no
personal, but the hereditarie sin of these Emperors. He succeeded also to
their suspicions against the Latins, as if they came through his country for
some sinister ends. This jealous Emperor reigned when Frederick with his army
passed this way; and many bad offices were done bewixt these two Emperors by
unfaithful Nicetas Choniates, in Isaacio, lib. 2. page 436.
Ambassadors, as such false mediums have often deceived the best eyes. But
Frederick finding perfidious dealing in the Greeks, was drawn to draw his
sword; taking as he went, Aug. 25.
Baronius, Annal.
Philippople, Adrianople, and many other cities; not so much to get their
spoil, as his own security. Isaac understanding hereof, and seeing these
Pilgrims would either find or make their passage, 1190
left all terms of enmity, and fell to a fair complying, accommodating them
with all necessaries for their transportation over the Bosporus, pretending to
hasten them away because the Christians exigencies in Palestine admitted of no
delay: Mar. 28.
doing it indeed for fear, the Grecians loving the Latins best when they are
furthest from them.

Chap. 4. The great victories and woeful death of Frederick the worthy Emperor.
FRederick entering into the territories of the Turkish Sultan of Iconium, found
great resistance, but vanquished his enemies in four several set battles. May
19.
Iconium he took by force, giving the spoil thereof to his soldiers, in
revenge of the injuries done to his uncle Conrade the Emperor by the Sultan of
that place. The city of Philomela he made to sing a doleful tune, rasing it
to the ground, and executing all the people therein as rebels against the law
of nations, for killing his Ambassadors: and so came with much difficulty and
honor into Syria.

Saladine shook for fear, hearing of his coming; and following the advice of
Aemylius, in Phil. Augusto, page 178, and 179.
Charatux his counselor (counted one of the wisest men in the world, though
his person was most contemptible; so true it is, none can guess the jewel by
the casket) dismantled all his cities in the Holy land save some
frontier-places, rasing their walls and forts, that they were not tenable with
an army. For he feared if the Dutch won these places, they would not easily
be driven out: whereas now being naked from shelter, he would weary them with
set battles, having men numberless, and those near at hand; and so he would
tame the Roman Eagle by watching him, giving him no rest nor respite from
continual fighting. It is therefore no Paradox to say, That in some case the
strength of a kingdom does consist in the weakness of it. And hence it is,
that our English Kings have suffered Time, without disturbing her meals, to
feed her belly full on their inland castles and citie-walls; which whilst
they were standing in their strength, were but the nurseries of rebellion. And
now, as Barklay, Bellum in Anglia non sen^scit.
one observes, because we have no strong cities, war in England waxes not
old (being quickly stabbed with set battles) which in the Low Countries has
already outlived the grand climactericall of threescore and ten years.

But Frederick the Emperor, being now entering into the Holy land, was to the
great grief of all Christians suddenly taken away, being drowned in the river
of Saleph; a river (such is the envy of Barbarism obscuring all places) which
cannot accurately be known at this day, because this new name is a stranger to
all ancient maps. If he went in to wash himself, as some write, he neither
consulted with his health nor honor: Some say, his horse foundred under him as
he passed the water; others, that he fell from him. But these several
relations, as variety of instruments, make a doleful consort in this, that
there he lost his life: and no wonder, if the cold water quickly quenched those
few sparks of natural heat left in him at seventie years of age. Lib. 4. cap.
13.
Neubrigensis conceives that this his sudden death was therefore inflicted on
him, because in his youth he fought against the Popes and Church of Rome: But I
wonder that he seeing an Emperor drowned in a ditch, durst adventure into the
bottomless depths of Gods counsels. Let it content us to know that oftentimes
heaven blasteth those hopes which bud first and fairest; and the feet of
mighty Monarchs do slip, when they want but one step to their enemies throne.

After his death Frederick Duke of Suevia, his second son, undertook the
conduct of the army. Now the Turks conceiving grief had steeped and moistened
these Pilgrims hearts, gave them a sudden charge, in hope to have overthrown
them. But the valiant Dutch, who though they had scarce wiped their eyes had
scoured their swords, quickly forced them to retire. June 21.
Then Frederick took the city of Antioch, which was easily delivered unto him,
and his hungry soldiers well refreshed by the citizens, being as yet for the
most part Christians. Marching from hence in set battle, he overthrew Dodequin
General of Saladines forces, slew four thousand, and took a thousand
prisoners with little loss of his own men: and so came to the city of Tire,
where he buried the corpse of his worthy father in the Cathedral Church next
the tomb of learned Origin; and Gulielmus Tyrius the worthy Archbishop
preached his funeral sermon. We may hear his sorrowful army speaking this
his Epitaph unto him; Earth scarce did yield ground enough for thy sword
To conquer, how then could a brook afford
Water to drown thee? brook, which since does fear
(O guilty conscience) in a map to appear.
Yet blame we not the brook, but rather think
The weight of our own sins did make thee sink.
Now since it is so, we will fetch a brackish main
Out of our eyes, and drown thee once again.


From hence by sea they were conveyed to the Christian army before Ptolemais,
where young Frederick died of the plague: and his great army which at first
consisted of an hundred and fifty thousand at their setting forth out of
Germany, had now no more left then Aemylius, in Phil. 2. page 175.
eighteen hundred armed men.

Chap. 5. The continuation of the famous siege of Ptolemais; The Dutch Knights
honored with a grand Master.
WE have now at our leisure overtaken the snail-like siege of Ptolemais, still
slowly creeping on. Before it the Christians had not only a National but an
Oecumenicall army; the abridgement of the Christian world: Scarce a state or
populous city in Europe but had here some competent number to represent it.

How many bloody blows were here lent on both sides, and repayed with
interest? what sallies? what assaults? what encounters? whilst the Christians
lay betwixt Saladine with his great army behind them and the city before them.
One memorable battle we must not omit. It was agreed betwixt Saladine and the
Christians to try their fortunes in a pitched field: and now the Christians
were in fair hope of a conquest, when an Fuga imaginario metu orta, Sabell.
Enn. 9. lib. 5. page 377.
imaginary causeless fear put them to a real flight; so ticklish are the
scales of victory, a very mote will turn them. Thus confusedly they ran away,
and boot would have been given to change a strong arm for a swift leg. But
behold, Geoffrey Lusignan King Guy's brother (left for the guarding of the
camp) marching out with his men, confuted the Christians in this their
groundless mistake, and reinforced them to fight; whereby they won the day,
though with the loss of two thousand men and Gerard Master of the Templars.

It was vainly hoped, that after this victory the city would be surrendered:
but the Turks still bravely defended it, though most of their houses were burnt
and beaten down, and the city reduced to a bare sceleton of walls and towers.
They fought as well with their wits as weapons, and both sides devised strange
defensive and offensive engines: so that Mars himself, had he been here
present, might have learned to fight, and have taken notes from their practice.
Mean time famine raged amongst the Christians; and though some provision was
now and then brought in from Italy (for so far they fetched it) yet these
small showers after great droughts parched the more, and rather raised then
abated their hunger.

Once more we will take our farewell of this siege for a twelve-moneth: But we
must not forget that at this time, before the walls of Ptolemais the Teutonick
order, or Munster, de Germania, lib. 3. page 778.
Dutch Knights (which since the days of Baldwine the second lived like private
pilgrims) had now their order honored with Henry of Walpot their first grand
Master, and they were enriched by the bounty of many Germane benefactours.
These though slow, were sure; they did hoc agere, ply their work; more cordial
to the Christian cause then the Templars, who sometimes to save their own
stakes would play booty with the Turks. Much good service did the Dutch
Knights in the Holy war; till at last (no wise Doctor will lavish physic on
him in whom he sees faciem cadaverosam, so that death has taken possession in
the sick man's countenance) finding this war to be desperate and dedecus
fortitudinis, they even fairly left the Holy land, and came into Europe,
meaning to lay out their valor on some thing that would quit cost. But hereof
hereafter.

Chap. 6. Richard of England and Philip of France set forward to the Holy land;
The danger of the interveiws of Princes.
THe miseries of the Christians in Syria being reported in Europe, made Richard
the first, King of England, and Philip the second surnamed Augustus, King of
France, to make up all private dissensions betwixt them, and to unite their
forces against the Turks.

Richard was well stored with men, the bones; and quickly got money, the sinews
of war; by a thousand Princely skills gathering so much coin as if he meant
not to return, because looking back would unbowe his resolution. To Hugh Bishop
of Duresme, for his life, he sold the County of Northumberland; Matthew Paris,
Rich. 1. page 207.
jesting he had made a new Earl of an old Bishop: He sold Barwick and Roxburgh
to the Scottish king for ten thousand pounds: Yea, he protested he would sell
his city of Martinus, in Richardo 1.
London (if any were able to buy it) rather then he would be burdensome to his
subjects for money. But take this as he spoke it, for a flourish: for
pretending he had lost his old, he made a new seal, wherewith he squeezed his
subjects, and left a deep impression in their purses; forcing them to have all
their Speed, in Richard the first.
instruments new-sealed, which any ways concerned the Crown.

Having now provided for himself, he forgot not his younger brother John Earl
of Morton, who was to stay behind him; an active man, who if he misliked the
maintenance was cut for him, would make bold to carve for himself: Lest
therefore straightened for means he should swell into discontent, King Richard
gave him many Earldomes and honors, to the yearly value of four thousand
marks. Thus he received the golden saddle, but none of the bridle of the
Commonwealth: honor and riches were heaped upon him, but no place of trust
and command. For the King deputed William Bishop of Ely his Viceroy; choosing
him for that place rather then any lay-Earl, because a Coronet perchance may
swell into a Crown, but never a Mitre: For a Clergie-mans calling made him
incapable of usurpation in his own person.

Thus having settled matters at home, he set forth with many of our nation;
which either ushered or followed him. Of these the prime were, Baldwine
Archbishop of Canterbury, Hubert Bishop of Salisburie, Robert Earl of
Leicester, Ralph de Glanvile late chief Justice of England, Richard de Clare,
Walter de Kime, etc. The Bishops of Duresme and Norwich, though they had vowed
this voyage, were dispensed with by the court of Rome ( Matthew Paris, in
Richardo 1o, page 207.
quae nulli deest pecuniam largienti) to stay at home. His navy he sent about
by Spain, and with a competent number took his own journey through France.

At Tours he took his Pilgrims scrip and staff from the Archbishop. His staff
at the same time Roger Hoveden, in Richardo 1o, page 666.
casually brake in pieces; which some (whose dexterity lay in sinister
interpreting all accidents) construed a token of ill success. Likewise, when
he and the French king with their trains passed over the bridge of Lions, Idem,
ibidem.
on the fall of the bridge this conceit was built, That there would be a
falling out betwixt these two Kings; which accordingly came to pass, their
intercourse and familiarity breeding hatred and discontent betwixt them.

Yea, the interviews of equal Princes have ever been observed dangerous. Now
Princes measure their equality not by the extent of their dominions, but by
the absoluteness of their power; so that he that is supreme and independent in
his own country, counts himself equal to any other Prince how great soever.
Perchance some youthful Kings may disport and solace themselves one in
another company, whilst as yet pleasure is all the elevation of their souls:
But when once they grow sensible of their own greatness, (a lesson they will
quickly learn, and shall never want teachers) then emulation will be betwixt
them: because at their meeting they cannot so go in equipage, but one will
still be the foremost: Either his person will be more proper, or carriage more
court-like, or attendance more accomplished, or attire more fashionable, or
some thing will either be or conceived to be more majesticall in one then the
other: And corrivalls in honor count themselves eclipsed by every beam of
state which shines from their competitour. Wherefore the best way to keep
great Princes together, is to keep them asunder, accommodating their business
by Ambassadors, lest the meeting of their own persons part their affections.

Chap. 7. King Richard conquereth Sicilie and Cyprus in his passage to the Holy
land.
AT Lions these two Kings parted their trains, and went several ways into
Sicilie. King Richard in his passage, though within fifteen miles of Rome,
wanting (forsooth) either devotion or manners, vouchsafed not to give his
Holiness a visit: yea, plainly told Hoveden, in Rich. 1o, page 668. and Matthew.
Paris. in codem, page 213.
Octavian Bishop of Ostia the Popes Confessor, that having better objects to
bestow his eyes on, he would not stir a step to see the Pope: Because lately
without mercy he had simoniacally extorted a mass of money from the Prelates
of England. At Messana in Sicilie these two Kings meet again: where to complete
King Richards joy, behold his Navy there safely arriving, which with much
difficulty and danger had fetched a compass about Spain.

And now King Richard by his own experience grew sensible of the miseries which
merchants and mariners at sea underwent, being always within few inches, often
within an hairs breadth of death. Wherefore now touched with remorse of their
pitiful case, he resolved to revoke the law of Wracks, as a law so just that
it was even unjust. For formerly both in England and Normandy, the Bracton,
lib. 2. cap. 5.
Crown was entitled to shipwrackt goods, and the King jure gentium made heir
unto them; which otherwise jure naturali were conceived to be in bonis nullius,
pertaining to no owner. But now our Richard refused to make advantage of such
pitiful accidents, and to strip poor mariners out of those rags of their
estates which the mercy and modesty of the waves and winds had left them. And
therefore on the month of October, at Messana, in the presence of many
Archbishops and Bishops, he for ever Quietum clamavit Wreck, etc. Roger
Hoveden, in Rich. 1o. page 678.
quitted the claim to Wracks: So that if any man out of the ship comes alive
to the shore, the property of the shipwrackt goods is still preserved to the
owner. Yea, this grant was so enlarged by our succeeding Kings, that Sr Ed
Coke, vol. 6. fol. 107.
if a dog or a cat escaped alive to land, the goods still remained the owners
if he claimed them within a year and a day.

Tankred at this time was King of Sicilie; a bastard born: and no wonder, if
climbing up to the throne the wrong way, he shaked when he sat down. Besides,
he was a Tyrant; both detaining the dowry and imprisoning the person of Joan
wife to William late King of Sicilie, and sister to King Richard. But in what a
case was he now, having two such mighty Monarchs come unto him! To keep them
out, was above his power; to let them in, against his will. Well he knew it was
woeful to lie in the rode where great armies were to pass: For power knows
no inferior friend; and the landlord commonly loses his rent, sometimes his
land, where the tenant is too potent for him.

At last he resolved (how wisely or honestly, let others judge) openly to poise
himself indifferent betwixt these two Kings, secretly applying himself to the
French: which King Richard quickly discovered; as dissembling goes not long
invisible before a judicious eye.

Mean time the citizens of Messana did the English much wrong, if not by the
command* with the consent of the King. For though it be unjust to father the
base actions of unrulie people on their Prince; yet Tankred not punishing his
people for injuring the English, when he might and was required thereunto, did
in effect justify their insolences, and adopt their deeds to be his.
Wherefore King Richard to avenge himself, took Messana by assault, seized on
most forts in the Island, demanding satisfaction for all wrongs done to him and
his sister. Tankred though dull at first, now pricked with the sword, came off
roundly with many thousand ounces of gold; and seeing, as the case stood, his
best thrift was to be prodigal, gave to our King what rich conditions soever
he demanded.

Worse discords daily increased betwixt the Kings of France and England; King
Richard slighting the King of France his sister, whom he had promised to
marry, and expressing more affection to Beringaria daughter to the King of
Navarre. Some Princes interposing themselves in this breach, rather assuaged
the pain then removed the malady: So dangerous are ruptures betwixt great
ones, whose affections perchance by the mediation of friends may be brought
again to meet, but never to unite and incorporate. King Philip thinking to
forestall the market of honor, and take up all for himself, hasted presently
to Ptolemais: Richard followed at his leisure, and took Cyprus in his way.
Isaac (or Cursac) reigned then in Cyprus; who, under Andronicus the Grecian
Emperor (when every factious Nobleman snatched a plank out of that
shipwracked Empire) seized on this Island, and there tyrannized as a reputed
King. Some falsely conceive him a Pagan: and his faith is suspected, because
his charity was so bad; killing the English that landed there, not having so
much man as to pity a woman, and to suffer the sea-sick Lady Beringaria to
come on shore. But King Richard speedily overran the Island, honored Isaac
with the magnificent captivity of silver fetters; yet giving his daughter
liberty and princely usage. The Island he pawned to the Templars for ready
money. And because Cyprus by antiquity was celebrated as the seat of Venus,
that so it might prove to him, in the joyous month of May he solemnly took to
wife his beloved Lady Beringaria.

Chap. 8. The taking of the city Ptolemais.
Whilst King Richard stayed in Cyprus, 1191
the siege of Ptolemais went on: and though the French King thought with a
running pull to bear the city away, yet he found it staked down too fast for
all his strength to stir.

Mean time, the plague and famine raged in the Christians camp; which the last
year swept away fifty Princes and Prelates of note: Who, no doubt, went hence
to a happy place; though it was before Pope Clement the sixth Chemnitius, ex
^eselo, Exam. Conc. Trid. tract. De Indulg.
commanded the angels (who durst not but obey him) presently to convey all
their souls into Paradise which should die in their Pilgrimage.

This mortality notwithstanding, the siege still continued. And now the
Christians and Turks, like two fensers long playing together, were so well
acquainted with the blows and guards each of other, that what advantage was
taken betwixt them was merely casual, never for want of skill, care, or valor
on either side. It helped the Christians not a little, that a concealed
Christian within the city, with letters unsubscribed with any name, gave them
constant and faithful intelligence of the remarkable passages amongst the
Turks.

No Prince in this siege deserved more then Leopoldus Duke of Austria; who
fought so long in assaulting this city, till his armor was all over gore
blood, save the place covered with his belt. Pantal. De illustribus Germaniae,
part. 2. page 201.
Whereupon he and his successors the Dukes of Austria, renouncing the six
Golden larks, their ancient arms, had assigned them by the Emperor a fesse
Argent in a field Gules, as the paternall coat of their family.

By this time King Richard was arrived (taking as he came a dromond, June 8.
or Saracen ship, wherein were fifteen hundred soldiers, and two hundred and
fifty Matthew. Paris. in anno 1191.
scorpions, which were to be employed in the poisoning of Christians) and now
the siege of Ptolemais more fiercely prosecuted. But all their engines made not
so wide a breach in that city walls, as envy made betwixt the French and
English Kings. Yet at last the Turks despairing of succor, July 13.
their victuals wholly spent, yielded up the city by Saladines consent, on
condition to be themselves safely guarded out of it: all Christian prisoners
Saladine had were to be set free, and the Cross to be again restored.

The houses which were left, with the spoil and prisoners, were equally divided
betwixt Philip and Richard. Whereat many Noblemen, partners in the pains, no
sharers in the gains, departed in Roger Hoveden, in Rich. 1o. page 696.
discontent. Some Turks for fear embraced the Christian faith, but quickly
returned to their Fox, Martyrol. page 245.
vomit: as religion died in fear, never long keeps color, but this days
converts will be to morrows apostates. Hereupon it was commanded that none
hereafter should be baptized against their wills.

Here the English cast down the ensigns of Leopoldus Duke of Austria, which he
had advanced in a principal tower in Ptolemais; and as some say, threw them
into the jakes. The Duke, though angry at heart, forgot this injury till he
could remember it with advantage; and afterward made King Richard pay soundly
for this affront. It is not good to exasperate any, though far inferior:
for, as the fable tells us, the beetle may annoy the eagle, and the mouse
befriend the lion.

When the city was taken, it grieved the Christians not a little that their
faithful Hoveden, in Rich. 1o. page 694.
correspondent, who advised them by his letters, could no where be found: Pity
it was that Rahabs red lace was not tied at his window. But indeed it was
probable that he was dead before the surrendering of the city. Greater was the
grief that the Cross did no where appear, either carelessely lost, or
enviously concealed by the Turks. Whilst the Christians stormed hereat,
Saladine required a longer respite for the performance of the conditions. But
King Richard would not enlarge him from the strictness of what was concluded;
conceiving this was in effect to forfeit the victory back again. Besides, he
knew he did it only to gain time to fetch new breath: and if he yielded to
him, his bounty had not been thanked, but his fear upbraided, as if he durst
not deny him. Yea, in anger King Richard commanded all the Turkish captives
which were in his hands, P. Aemylius, in Philippo Augusto, page 174. But
Matthew Paris says but 2600.
seven thousand in number, to be put to death (except some choice persons) on
that day whereon the articles should have been but were not performed. For
which fact he suffered much in his repute, branded with rashness and cruelty,
as the murderer of many Christians: For Saladine in revenge put as many of our
captives to death. On the other side the moderation of the French King was much
commended, who reserving his prisoners alive, exchanged them to ransom so many
Christians.

Chap. 9. The unseasonable return of the King of France.
MEan time the Christians were rent a sunder with faction: Philip the French
King, Odo Duke of Burgundy, Leopold Duke of Austria, most of the Dutch, all
the Genoans and Templars siding with King Conrade; King Richard, Henry Count of
Champaigne, the Hospitallers, Venetians, and Pisans taking part with King Guy.
But King Conrades side was much weakened with the sudden departure of the
French King; July 31.
who eighteen days after the taking of Ptolemais returned home, pretending
want of necessaries, indisposition of body, distemper of the climate, though
the greatest distemper was in his own passions. The true cause of his departure
was, partly envy, because the sound of King Richards fame was of so deep a
note that it drowned his; partly Matthew Paris, page 220.
covetousness, to seize on the dominions of the Earl of Flanders lately dead;
Flanders lying fitly to make a stable for the fair palace of France. If it be
true what Speed, out of Hoveden, in Richard the f^^st.
some report, that Saladine bribed him to return, let him for ever forfeit the
surname of Augustus, and the style of The most Christian Prince.

His own soldiers dissuaded him from returning, beseeching him not to stop in
so glorious a race, wherein he was newly started: Saladine was already on his
knees, and would probably be brought on his face, if pursued. If he played the
unthrift with this golden occasion, let him not hope for another to play the
good husband with. If poverty forced his departure, King Richard Matthew. Paris.
in Richardo 1o, page 219.
proffered him the half of all his provisions.

All would not do, Philip persisted in his old plea, How the life of him absent
would be more advantageous to the cause, then the death of him present; and by
importunity got leave to depart, solemnly swearing not to molest the King of
Englands dominions.

Thus the King of France returned in person, but remained still behind in his
instructions, which he left (with his army) to the Duke of Burgundy; to whom
he prescribed both his path and his pace, where and how he should go. And that
Duke moved slowly, having no desire to advance the work where King Richard
would carry all the honor. For in those actions wherein several undertakers
are compounded together, commonly the first figure for matter of credit makes
ciphres of all the rest. As for King Philip; being returned home, such was the
itch of his ambition, he must be fingering of the King of Englands territories,
though his hands were bound by oath to the contrary.

Chap. 10. Conrade King of Jerusalem slain: Guy exchangeth his Kingdom for the
Island of Cyprus.
Apr. 27.
ABout the time of the King of France his departure, Conrade King of Jerusalem
was murdered in the Roger Hoveden, in Richardo 1o, page 716. says, on the
Calends of May; but Sabellicus puts it sooner.
marketplace of Tire; and his death is variously reported. Some charged our
King Richard for procuring it: And though the beams of his innocence cleared
his own heart, yet could they not dispell the clouds of suspicions from other
men's eyes. Some say Humphred Prince of Thoron killed him, for taking Isabella
his wife away from him. But the general voice gives it out that two Assasines
stabbed him; whose quarrel to him was only this, That he was a Christian.
These murderers being instantly put to death, Aemylius, in Phil. Augusto, page
179.
gloried in the meritoriousnesse of their suffering: and surely were it the
punishment not the cause made martyrdom, we should be best stored with
Confessors from gaols, and Martyrs from the gallows.

Conrade reigned five years, and left one daughter, Maria Iole, on whom the
Knight-Templars bestowed princely education. And this may serve for his
Epitaph, The Crown I never did enjoy alone;
Of half a Kingdom I was half a King.
Scarce was I on, when I was off the throne;
Slain by two slaves me basely murdering.
And thus the best man's life at mercy lies
Of vilest varlets, that their own despise.


His faction survived after his death, affronting Guy the anti-King, and
striving to depose him. They pleaded that the Crown was tied on Guy's head with
a woman's fillet, which being broken by the death of his wife Queen Sibyll (who
deceased of the plague with her Roger Hoveden, in Richardo 1o, page 685.
children at the siege of Ptolemais) he had no longer right to the Kingdom;
they objected he was a worthless man, and unfortunate. On the other side, it
was alleged for him, that to measure a man's worth by his success, is a square
often false, always uncertain. Besides, the courtesy of the world would allow
him this favor, That a King should be semel and semper, once and ever.

Whilst Guy stood on these ticklish terms, King Richard made a seasonable
motion, which well rellished to the palate of this hungry Prince, To exchange
his Kingdom of Jerusalem for the Island of Cyprus; which he had redeemed from
the Templars, 1192
to whom he had pawned it: And this was done accordingly to the content of both
sides. Sept.
And King Richard with some of his succeeding English Kings wore the title of
Sabell. Enn. 9. lib. 5. page 378.
Jerusalem in their style for many years after. Calvisius.
We then dismiss King Guy, hearing him thus taking his farewell; I steered a
state warre-tost against my will:
Blame then the storm, not the Pilots want of skill,
That I the Kingdom lost, whose empty style
I sold to Englands King for Cyprus Isle.
I passed away the land I could not hold;
Good ground I bought, but only air I sold.
Then as a happy Merchant may I sing,
Though I must sigh as an unhappy King.


Soon after, Guy made a second change of this world for another. But the family
of the Lusignans have enjoyed Cyprus some hundred years: and since by some
transactions it fell to the state of Venice; and lately by conquest, to the
Turks.

Chap. 11. Henry of Champaigne chosen King; The noble achievements and
victories of King Richard.
COnrade being killed and Guy gone away, Henry Earl of Champaigne was chosen
King of Jerusalem by the especial procuring of King Richard his uncle. To
corroborate his election by some right of succession, he married Isabella, the
widow of King Conrade and daughter to Almerick King of Jerusalem. A Prince (as
writers report) having a sufficient stock of valor in himself, but little
happy in expressing it; whether for want of opportunity, or shortness of his
reign, being most spent in a truce. He more pleased himself in the style of
Prince of Tire then King of Jerusalem; as counting it more honor to be Prince
of what he had, then King of what he had not.

And now the Christians began every where to build: The Templars fortified
Gaza; King Richard repaired and walled Ptolemais, Porphyria, Joppa, and
Askelon. But alas! this short prosperity, like an Autumne-spring, came too late
and was gone too soon to bring any fruit to maturitie.

It was now determined they should march toward Jerusalem: for all this while
they had but hit the butt; that Holy city was the mark they shot at. Richard
led the vantguard of English; Duke Odo commanded in the main battle over his
French; James of Avergne brought on the Flemings and Brabanters in the rere.
Saladine, serpent-like biting the heel, assaulted the rere, not far from
Bethlehem; when the French and English wheeling about, charged the Turks most
furiously. Emulation, formerly poison, was here a cordial, each Christian
nation striving not only to conquer their enemies, but to overcome their
friends in the honor of the conquest. King Richard seeking to put his courage
out of doubt, brought his judgment into question, being more prodigal of his
person then beseemed a General. One P. Aemyl. in Phil. Augusto, page 180
wound he received, but by losing his blood he found his spirits, and laid
about him like a madman. The Christians got the victory, without the loss of
any of number or note, save James of Avergne, who here died in the bed of
honor: But more of the Turks wore slain then in any battle for forty years
before.

Had the Christians presently gone to Jerusalem, probably they might have
surprised it, whilst the Turks eyes were muffled and blindfolded in the
amazement of this great overthrow. But this opportunity was lost by the
backwardness and unwillingnesse of King Richard and the English, say the P.
Aemyl. ibidem.
French writers. To cry quits with them, our Matthew. Paris. in Richardo 1o,
page 216.
English authors impute it to the envi^ of the French; who would have so
glorious an action rather left undone, then done by the English. They complain
likewise of^ the treachery of Odo Duke of Burgundy, who more careful of his
credit then his conscience, was choked with the shame of the sin he had
swallowed, and died for grief, when his intelligence with the Turks was made
known. This cannot be denied, that Saladine sent (term them bribes or presents)
both to our King and the French Duke, and they received them: no wonder then if
neither of them herein had a good name, when they traded with such familiars.
But most hold King Richard attempted not Jerusalem, because as a wise
architect, he would build his victories so as they might stand, securing the
country as he went; it being senseless to besiege Jerusalem a straggling
city, whilst the Turks as yet were in possession of all the seaports and
strong forts thereabout.

About this time he intercepted many camels laden with rich commodity, those
Eastern wares containing much in a little. And yet of all this, and of all the
treasures of England, Sicilie, and Cyprus which he brought hither, King Richard
carried home nothing but one P. Amyl. page 181. Excepto ^oc (...) n^dus inops
que.
gold-ring: all the rest of his wealth melted away in this hot service. He
wintered in Askelon, intending next spring to have at Jerusalem.

Chap. 12. The little-honourable peace King Richard made with Saladine; Of the
value of Relics.
BUt bad news out of Europe shaked his steadiest resolutions, hearing how
William Bishop of Ely, his Viceroy in England, used unsufferable insolences
over his subjects: So hard it is for one of base parentage to personate a King
without overacting his part. Also he heard how the King of France and John Earl
of Morton his own brother, invaded his dominions; ambition, the Pope in their
belly, dispensing with their oath to the contrary. Besides, he saw this war
was not a subject capable of valor to any purpose; the Venetians, Genoans,
Pisans and Florentines being gone away with their fleets, wisely shrinking
themselves out of the collar, when they found their necks wrung with the hard
employment. Hereupon he was forced first to make the motion of (in plain terms,
to beg) peace of Saladine.

Let Saladine now alone to win, having all the game in his own hand. Well
knew he how to shoot at his own ends, and to take aim by the exigencies wherein
he knew King Richard was plunged. For he had those cunning gypsies about him,
who could read in King Richards face what grieved his heart; and by his
intelligencers was certified of every note-worthy passage in the English army.
Upon these terms therefore or none (beggars of peace shall never be choosers of
their conditions) a truce for three (some say, five) years might be concluded,
That the Christians should demolish all places they had walled since the taking
of Ptolemais; which was in effect to undo what with much charge they had done.
But such was the tyranny of King Richards occasions, forcing him to return,
that he was glad to embrace those conditions he hated at his heart.

Thus the voyage of these two Kings, begun with as great confidence of the
undertakers as expectation of the beholders, continued with as much courage as
interchangeablenesse of success, baned with mutual discord and emulation, was
ended with some honor to the undertakers, no P. Aemyl. page 181. Tanto duorum
regum comaru nihil actum.
profit either to them or the Christian cause. Some farre-fetched deare-bought
honor they got; especially King Richard, who eternized his memory in Asia:
whom if men forget, horses will remember; the Turks using to say to their
horses when they started for fear, Do thou think King Richard is here? Profit
they got none, losing both of them the hair of their heads in an acute disease;
which was more, says Daniel, page 100.
one, then both of them got by the voyage.

They left the Christians in Syria in worse case then they found them: as he
does the benighted traveller a discourtesie rather then a kindness, who
lends him a lantern to take it away, leaving him more masked then he was
before.

And now a little to solace my self and the reader with a merry digression,
after much sorrow and sad stories; King Richard did one thing in Palestine
which was worth all the cost and pains of his journey, namely, He redeemed from
the Turks a chest full of holy Relics (which they had gotten at the taking of
Jerusalem) so great, as Matthew. Paris. in Rich. 1. page 222.
four men could scarce carry any way. And though some know no more then Esops
cock how to prize these pearls, let them learn the true value of them from the
Roman jewellers. First, they must carefully distinguish between public and
private Relics: In private ones some forgery may be suspected, lest quid be
put for quo; which made S. In lib. De oper. Mon. cap. 28.
Augustine put in that wary parenthesis, Si tamen Martyrum, If so be they be
the Relics of Martyrs. But as for public ones approved by the Pope, and kept
in Churches (such no doubt as these of King Richards were) oh let no Christian
be such an infidel as to stagger at the truth thereof! If any object, That the
head of the same Saint is showed at several places; the whole answer is by a
Bellar^. De Reliq. cap. 4.
Synecdoche, That a part is put for the whole. As for the common exception
against the Cross, That so many several pieces thereof are shown, which put
together would break the back of Simon of Cyrene to bear them; it is answered,
Distrahitur, non diminuitur, and like the loaves in the Gospel, it is
miraculously multiplied in the dividing. If all these fail, Annal. Eccl. in
anno 226.
Baronius has a rasour shaveth all scruple clear away: For, says he, Quicquid
sit, fides purgat facinus; So that he worshippeth the false Relics of a true
Saint, God takes his good intention in good worth, though he adore the hand of
Esau for the hand of Jacob. But enough of these fooleries.

Chap. 13. King Richard taken prisoner in Austria; sold and sent to the
Emperor; dearly ransomed, returns home.
KIng Richard setting sail from Syria, Octo. 8.
the sea and wind favored him till he came into the Adriatic; and on the
coasts of Istria he suffered shipwreck: Wherefore he intended to pierce through
Germany by land, the next way home. But the nearness of the way is to be
measured not by the shortness but the safenesse of it.

He disguised himself to be one Hugo a merchant, whose only commodity was
himself, whereof he made but a bad bargain. For he was discovered in an inn in
Austria, because he disguised his person not his expenses; so that the very
policy of an hostess, finding his purse so far above his clothes, did
detect him: Dec. 20.
Yea, says mine Author, Facies orbi terrarum nota, ignorari non potuit. The
rude people flocking together, used him with insolences unworthy him, worthy
themselves: and they who would shake at the tail of this loose Lion, durst
laugh at his face now they saw him in a grate. Yet all the weight of their
cruelty did not bow him beneath a Princely carriage.

Leopoldus Duke of Austria hearing hereof, as being Lord of the soil, Dec. 20.
seized on this Royal stray; meaning now to get his peny-worths out of him,
for the affront done unto him in Palestine.

Not long after the Duke sold him to Henry the Emperor, for his harsh nature
surnamed Asper; and it might have been Savus, being but one degree from a
tyrant. He kept King Richard in bands, charging him with a thousand faults
committed by him in Sicilie, Cyprus, and Palestine. The proofs were as slender
as the crimes gross; and Richard having an eloquent tongue, innocent heart,
and bold spirit, acquitted himself in the judgment of all the hearers. At last
he was Matthew. Paris. in Rich. 1.
ransomed for an hundred and forty thousand marks, Collen weight. A sum so
vast in that age, before the Indies had overflowed all Europe with their gold
and silver, that to raise it in England they were forced to sell their
Church-plate to their very chalices. Whereupon out of most deep Divinity it was
concluded, That they should not celebrate the Sacrament in Lindwood, lib. 1. De
summa Tri. sol. 6.
glass, for the brittlenesse of it; nor in wood, for the sponginesse of it,
which would suck up the blood; nor in alchymie, because it was subject to
rusting; nor in copper, because that would provoke vomiting; but in chalices of
latten, which belike was a metal without exception. And such were used in
England for some Eulogium; a Chronicle cited by Fox, Martyrol. in Rich. 1.
hundred years after: until at last John Stafford Archbishop of Canterbury,
when the land was more replenished with silver, in knotteth that Priest in the
greater excommunication that should consecrate Poculum stanneum. After this
money Epist. 57.
Peter of Bloys (who had drunk as deep of Helicon as any of that age) sends
this good prayer; making an apostrophe to the Emperor, or to the Duke of
Austria, or to both together: Bibe nunc, avaritia,
Dum puteos argenteos
Larga diffundit Anglia.
Tua tecum pecunia
Sit in perditionem.
And now, thou basest avarice,
Drink till thy belly burst,
Whilst England poures large silver showers
To satiate thy thirst.
And this we pray, Thy money may
And thou be like accursed.


The ransom partly paid, the rest secured by hostages, King Richard much
befriended by the Dutch Prelacie, after eighteen months imprisonment returned
into England. The Archbishop of Cullen in the presence of King Richard, as he
passed by, brought in these words in saying mass, Now I know that God has
sent his angel, and has delivered thee out of the hand of Herod, and from the
expectation of the people, etc. But his soul was more healthful for this
bitter physic, and he amended his manners; better loving his Speed, in Rich. 1.
Queen Beringaria, whom he slighted before: As soldiers too often love women
better then wives.

Leave we him now in England, where his presence fixed the loyalty of many of
his unsettled subjects; whilst in Austria the Duke with his money built the
walls of Vienna: So that the best stones and mortar of that bulwark of
Christendom are beholden to the English coin. We must not forget how Gods
judgments overtook this Duke, punishing his dominions with fire and water,
which two elements cannot be Kings but they must be tyrants; by famine, the
ears of wheat turned into worms; by a gangrene, seizing on the Dukes body, who
cut off his leg with his own hand, and died thereof: Who by his testament (if
not by his will) caused some thousand crowns to be restored again to King
Richard.

Chap. 14. The death of Saladine; His commendation, even with truth, but almost
above belief.
SOon after, 1193
Saladine the terror of the East ended his life, having reigned sixteen
years. Febr. 16.
Consider him as a man, or a Prince, he was both ways admirable.

Many Historians (like some painters, which rather show their skill in drawing
a curious face then in making it like to him whom it should resemble) describe
Princes rather what they should be then what they were; not showing so much
their goodness as their own wits. But finding this Saladine so generally
commended of all writers, we have no cause to distrust this his true character.

His wisdom was great, in that he was able to advise; and greater, in that he
was willing to be advised: Never so wedded to his own resolves, but on good
ground he would be divorced from them. His valor was not over-free, but would
well answer the spur when need required. In his victories he was much
beholden to the advantage of season, place, and number; and seldom wrested the
garland of honor from an arm as strong as his own. He ever marched in person
into the field, remembering that his predecessors, the Caliphs of Egypt, brake
themselves by using Factours, and employing of Souldans. His temperance was
great, diet sparing, sleep moderate, not to pamper nature, but keep it in
repair. His greatest recreation was variety and exchange of work. Pleasures he
rather sipped then drank off; sometimes, more to content others then please
himself. Wives he might have kept sans number, but stinted himself to one or
two; using them rather for posterity then wantonness. His justice to his own
people was remarkable; his promise with his enemies generally well kept. Much
he did triumph in mercy: Fierce in fighting, mild in conquering; and having his
enemies in his hand, pleased himself more in the power then act of revenge. His
liberality would have drained his treasure, had it not had a great and quick
spring, those Eastern parts being very rich. Serviceable men he would purchase
on any rate; and sometimes his gifts bare better proportion to his own
greatness then the receivers deserts. Vast bribes he would give to have places
betrayed unto him, and often effected that with his gold which he could not do
with his steel. Zealous he was in his own religion, yet not violent against
Christians qua Christians. Scholarship cannot be expected in him who was a Turk
by his birth (amongst whom it is a sin to be learned) and a soldier by
breeding. His humility was admirable; as being neither ignorant of his
greatness, nor over-knowing it. He provided to have no solemnities at his
funerals; and ordered that before his corpse a black cloth should be carried on
the top of a spear, and this proclaimed, Sabell. Eun. 9. lib. 5. page 378.
Saladine Conqueror of the East had nothing left him but this black shirt to
attend him to the grave.

Some entitle him as descended from the Royal Turkish blood: Which flattering
Heralds he will little thank for their pains; counting it most honor, that he
being of mean parentage, was the first founder of his own Nobility. His stature
(for one of that nation) was tall. His person rather cut out to strike fear
then win love; yet could he put on amiablenesse when occasion required, and
make it beseem him. To conclude; I will not be so bold, to do with him as an
Eastern Joan. Euchaitensis, jampridem Etoniae Graece editus.
Bishop does with Plato and Plutarch, whom he commends in a Greek hymn to
Christ, as those that came nearest to holiness of all untaught Gentiles:
(Belike he would be our Saviors remembrancer, and put him in mind to take more
especial notice of them at the day of judgment.) But I will take my farewell
of Saladine with that commendation I find of him, Sabell. Eun. 9. lib. 5. page
378.
He wanted nothing to his eternal happiness, but the knowledge of Christ.

Chap. 15. Discords amongst the Turks; The miserable death of Henry King of
Jerusalem.
1194
SAladine left nine (some say, twelve) sons, making Saphradine his brother
overseer of his will: Who of a tutour turned a traitor, and murdered them all
excepting one, called also Saphradine, Sultan of Aleppo; who, not by his uncles
pity, but by the favor and support of his fathers good friends was preserved.
Hence arose much intestine discord amongst the Turks; all which time the
Christians enjoyed their truce with much quiet and security.

1196
Not long after, Henry King of Jerusalem, as he was Continuatur Ursp. in anno
1196. Et M. Paris. in eodem.
walking in his palace to solace himself, fell down out of a window, and brake
his neck. He reigned three years. But as for the particular time he died on, I
find it not specified in any Author.

Chap. 16. Almerick the second, King of Jerusalem; The great army of the Dutch
adventurers does little in Syria.
AFter his death, Almerick Lusignan, brother to King Guy, was in the right of
his wife crowned King of Jerusalem: For he married Isabella the Relict of Henry
the last King. This Lady was four times married: first, to Humphred Prince of
Thorone; then to the three successive Kings of Jerusalem, Conrade, Henry, and
this Almerick. He was also King of Cyprus; and the Christians in Syria promised
themselves much aid from the vicinity of that Island. But though he was near
to them, he was far from helping them, making pleasure all his work; being an
idle, lazy, worthless Prince. But I trespass on that politic rule, Of
Princes we must speak the best, or the least; if that be not intended, when the
truth is so late that danger is entailed upon it.

In his time, Henry Emperor of Germany, indicted by his conscience for his
cruelty against King Richard, seeking to perfume his name in the nostrils of
the world, which began to be unfavourie, set on foot another voyage to the Holy
land. Pope Celestine the third sent his Legates about to promote this service,
1197
showing how God himself had sounded the alarm by the dissension of the Turks:
Jerusalem now might be won with the blows of her enemies; only an army must
be sent, not so much to conquer as to receive it. General of the Pilgrims was
Henry Duke of Saxony; next him, Frederick Duke of Austria, Herman Landtgrave of
Thuringia, Henry Palatine of Rhene, Conrade Archbishop of Mentz, Conrade
Archbishop of Wirtzburg, the Bishops of Breme, Halberstadt, and Regenspurg,
with many more Prelates; so that here was an Episcopal army, which might have
served for a national Synod: Insomuch that one truly might here have seen the
Church Militant. We have no ambition, says Ursp. Chron. in anno 1197. page 304.
one of their contrymen, to reckon them up; for they were plurimi and nulli,
many in number, none in their actions.

Some of these soldiers were employed by Henry the Emperor (who knew well to
bake his cake with the Churches feuel) to subdue his rebels in Apulia. This
done, they passed through Grecia, and found there better entertainment then
some of their predecessors. Hence by shipping they were conveyed into Syria:
Here they brake the Ursp. ut prius.
truce made by King Richard, (it seems by this, it was the ^^st five years)
the Pope dispensing therewith; who can make a peace, nets to hold others, but a
cobweb for himself to break through. The city Berytus they quickly wanne, and
as quickly lost. For Henry the Emperor suddenly died, the root which nourished
this voyage, and then the branches withered. Henry also Duke of Saxony,
General of this army, was slain. And Conrade Archbishop of Mentz, one of the
Electours, would needs return home to the choice of a new Emperor; knowing he
could more profitably use his voice in Germany then his arms in Syria. Other
Captains secretly stole home; and when their soldiers would have fought, their
Baron. Annal. Eccl. in anno 1197.
Captains ran away. And whereas in other Expeditions we find vestigia pauc a
retrorsum, making such clean work that they left little or no reversions; of
this voyage many safely returned home with whole bodies and wounded credits.

The rest that remained fortified themselves in Joppa. And now the feast of S.
Martin was come, the Dutch their Arch-Saint. This man being a Germane by birth,
and Bishop of Tours in France, was eminent for his Pantal. De vir. illustr.
Germ. in vita S. Martini.
hospitality; and the Dutch badly imitating their countryman, turn his
charity to the poor into riot on themselves, keeping the eleventh of November
(I will not say holy day, but) feast day. At this time the springtide of their
mirth so drowned their souls, that the Knolls, Turk. Hist. page 74.
Turks coming in upon them, cut every one of their throats, to the number of
twenty thousand: and quickly they were stabbed with the sword that were
cup-shot before. A day which the Dutch may well write in their Kalendars in red
letters died with their own blood; when their camp was their shambles, the
Turks their butchers, and themselves the Martinmasse-beeves: from which the
beastly drunkards differ but a little.

The city of Joppa the Turks rased to the ground; and of this victory they
became so proud, that they had thought without stop to have driven the
Christians quite out of Syria. But by the coming of Magdeburgenses, Cent. 12.
cap. 16. sub finem.
Simon Count of Montford (a most valiant and expert Captain, 1198
sent thither by Philip the French King with a regiment of tall soldiers, at
the instance of Innocent the third, that succeeded Celestine in the Papacy) and
by civil discord then reigning amongst the Turks themselves for sovereignty,
their fury was repressed, and a peace betwixt them and the Christians concluded
for the space of Knolls, ut prius.
ten years: During which time the Turks promised not to molest the Christians
in Tire or Ptolemais. Which peace so concluded, the worthy Count returned with
his soldiers into France. 1199


Chap. 17. A Crusado for the Holy land diverted by the Pope to Constantinople;
1202
They conquer the Grecian Empire.
THis truce notwithstanding, another army of Pilgrims was presently provided
for Syria: The Tetrarchs whereof were Baldwine Earl of Flanders, Dandalo the
Venetian Duke, Theobald Earl of Champaigne, Boniface Marquess of Montferrat,
with many other Nobles.

Leave we them a while taking the city of Jadera in Istria for the Venetians.
Mean time if we look over into Greece, we shall find Isaac Angelus the Emperor
deposed, thrust into prison, his eyes put out (the punishment there in fashion)
so that he ended his days before he ended his life, by the cruelty of Alexius
Angelus his brother, who succeeded him.

But young Alexius, Isaac Angelus his son, with some Grecian Noblemen, came
to the courts of most Western Princes to beg assistance to free his father and
expel the tyrant. He so deported himself, that each gesture was a net to catch
men's good will; not seeking their favor by losing himself, but though he did
bow, he would not kneel: so that in his face one might read a pretty combat
betwixt the beams of majesty and cloud of adversity. To see a Prince in want,
would move a misers charity. Our Western Princes tendered his case, which they
counted might be their own; their best right lying at the mercy of any stronger
usurper. Young Alexius so dressed his meat, that he pleased every man's palate;
promising for their succors to disingage the French from their debts to the
Venetian; promising the Venetian satisfaction for the wrongs done them by the
Grecians; and bearing the Pope in hand he would reduce the Eastern Churches
into his subjection: things which he was little Nicetas.
able to perform. But well may the statute of Bankrupt be sued out against him
who cannot be rich in promises. These his fair proffers prevailed so far,
that the Pope commanded, and other Princes consented, that this army of
Pilgrims levied for the Holy land, should be employed against the usurping
Grecian Emperor. Many taxed his Holiness for an unjust steward of the
Christian forces, to expend them against the Grecians, which were to be laid
out against the Infidels: Especially now when Palestine, through the dissension
of the Turks, offered itself into the Christians arms to be regained. Others
thought the Pope took the right method; because he which should win Jerusalem
must begin at Constantinople: And by this war the Grecian Empire, which was
the bridge to Syria, would be made good, and secured for the passage of
Pilgrims. The soldiers generally rejoiced at the exchange of their service:
for the barren wars in Syria starved the undertakers; and a cook himself
cannot lick his fingers where no meat is dressed. There nothing but naked
honor was to be gotten, here honor clothed with spoil; the usurpers treasure
would make brave scrambling amongst them: And it was good plowing up of that
ground which had long lien fallow.

Setting sail from Jadera (which city they had subdued to the Venetian,
forcing them to pay three thousand Blo^dus, lib. 6. Decad. 2. page 270.
cony-skins yearly for tribute to that State) like good fensers they struck at
the head, and made for Constantinople: Which they quickly took, 1203
after some hot skirmishes. Alexius Angelus the usurper, with his wife, July 17.
whores, and treasure, fled away. Blind Isaac Angelus was fetched out of
prison; he and young Alexius his son saluted joint Emperors. Which brittle
honor of theirs was quickly broken: For soon after the father died, being
brought into an open place, kept before in a close pent dungeon; and having
long fasted from good air, he now got his death by surfeting on it. His son
was villainously strangled by Alexius Ducas, called from his beetle-brow
Mursiphlus: One of base parentage, who was tumultuously chosen Emperor by the
people. This Ducas offered some affronts to the Latins which lay before
Constantinople in their ships. Wherefore, and also because they were not paid
for their former service, they the second time assaulted the city, 1204
and took it by main force; Apr. 21.
killing none, but robbing all; ravishing women, and using a thousand
insolences. Some fled for their succor to the shrines of Saints: But the
Sanctuaries needed sanctuaries to protect themselves; the soldiers as little
respecting place, as formerly age or sex: not standing on any reverence to the
Saints, they stood upon them, making footstools of their images and statues.

Nicetas Choniates, hitherto an historian, now a plaintiff, (writing so full of
ohs and exclamations as if the while pinched by the arm) rather without measure
then cause bemoneth the outrages the Latins here committed. Poor man! all the
miseries our Savior speaks of in a siege, met in him: His flight from
Constantinople was in the winter, on the In libello cui titulus, Status
Constantinopolis,. 1 page 637.
Sabbathday, his wife being great with child. But when the object is too near
the eye, it seems greater then it is: and perchance he amplifieth and
aggravateth the cruelty of these Pilgrims, being nearly interessed therein
himself; especially when the rhetoric of grief is always in the Hyperbole.
Nor is it any news for soldiers to be so insolent when they take a city by
assault: which time is their Servorum hic dies est, Lips. lib. 1. Satur. cap. 2.
Saturnalia, when servants themselves do command, acknowledging no other leader
or captain then their own passions.

Within a twelve-moneth all Greece was subdued save only Adrianople: Apr. 24.
crowned May 16.
Baldwine Earl of Flanders chosen Emperor; Thomas Maurocenus elected first
Latin Patriarch in Constantinople; Boniface Marquess of Montferrat made King
of Thessalie; Geoffrey of Troy, a Frenchman, Prince of Achaia and Duke of
Athens: the Venetians got many rich Islands in the Egean and Ionian seas: So
that one could not now see the Grecian Empire for Empires. It was now expected
that they should have advanced hence into Palestine: But here having well
feathered their nests, they were loath to fly any further. And now no wonder if
the Christians affairs in Palestine were weak and lean, the Pope diverting the
meat that should feed them another way.

Chap. 18. The Pope sends an army of Croises against the Albingenses. Three
several opinions concerning that sect.
POpe Innocent the third having lately learned the trick of employing the army
of Pilgrims in by-services, 1206
began now to set up a trade thereof. For two years after he levied a great
number of them, whom he sent against the Albingenses in France. These were
reputed heretics, whom his Holiness intended to root out with all cruelty;
that good shepherd knowing no other way to bring home a wandering sheep then by
worrying him to death. He fully and freely promised the undertakers the
self-same Pardons and Indulgences as he did to those who went to conquer the
Holy land; and very conscionably requested their aid only for forty days,
hoping to chop up these Albingenses at a bit. Though herein he was deceived,
and they stuck in his and his successors teeth for fifty years together. The
place being nearer, the service shorter, the work less, the wages the same
with the voyage into Syria, many entered themselves in this employment, and
neglected the other.

We will trace this army by their footsteps, and our pen must wait on their
swords. And I hope that his Holiness, who absolved many of their vows from
Palestine, and commuted them into a journey into France, will also of his
goodness dispense with my venial digression herein, in prosecuting their
actions. Yea, indeed, I need not his dispensation, being still resident on my
own subject, this also being styled, The Holy war, The war for the
Crucifix, The army of the Church; the soldiers also bearing the badge of the
Cross on their coat armor.

But first let us thoroughly examine what these Albingenses were, and what they
held: a question that will quit the cost in studying it.

They were a younger house of the Waldenses, and branched from them; not
different in doctrine, but later in time, and distant in place: so called from
the country Albigeois in France, where they lived.

I find three grand different opinions of Authors concerning them: First, Some
make them to have been very monsters in life and doctrine; so that the heaviest
punishment was too light for them. And this is the general voice of most
writers in that age, and all Romanists in our days. Secondly, Others clean
contrary hold, That these Waldenses (for I make them and the Albingenses
synonyma, as Io. Paul. Perin. De Albing. lib. 1. cap. 1.
others have done) were only the true Church of God in that age, whilst all
others being corrupted with abominable superstition, were no true Church at
all. These alone were Gods Virgins, his Witnesses in sackcloth, his Woman in
the wilderness, his sealed ones, his seven thousand whose knees were not
suppled with the Baalisme of that age. This is the express opinion of some
strict Protestants; and of some who speak it not out, yet mutter it to
themselves. Thirdly, A third sort Dr Field, Of the Church, lib. 3. cap 8. We
acknowledge them ( viz. Wickliff, Husse, Hierome of Prague, etc.) to have been
the worthy servants of God, and holy Martyrs and Confessors, suffering in the
cause of Christ against Antichrist; yet do we not think that the Church of God
was found only in them.
explode this opinion, as trespassing on Divine providence; that God who
neither slumbereth nor sleeps, should be in so long a lethargy as to suffer
hell to eat up his heaven on earth for so many years together, leaving no true
Church but so small a company of such simple people. They conceive that the
maintainers hereof engage themselves in a labyrinth of difficulties, hanging
too great a weight on so slender a string, in making such an handful of men
the only Church for so long continuance. More moderately therefore they hold,
That these Albingenses were a purer part of the Church; and though guilty of
some errors (as there must be a dawning before the day) and charged with more,
yet they maintained the same Dr White, in his Reply to Fisher, page 104, 105.
The Waldenses maintained the same doctrine in substance with the modern
Protestants.
doctrine in ore, which since Luthers time was refined: So that the main body
of the Church visible at this time was much in dilapidations, whilst the
Albingenses, as an innermost chapel thereof, was best in repair.


Let the Reader choose the probablest opinion when he has perused the
evidences of all sides; which we will now produce, deducing the history of
these Albingenses from their first original.

Chap. 19. The beginning of the Albingenses; Their dispersion, persecution,
increase, names, and nicknames.
ABout the year 1160, Peter Waldo a merchant of Lions, rich in substance and
learning (for a layman) was walking and talking with his friends, when one of
them suddenly fell down dead. Which lively spectacle of man's mortality so
impressed the soul of this Waldo, that instantly he resolved on a strict
reformation of his life: Which to his power he performed; translating some
books of the Bible; instructing such as resorted to him in godliness of life;
teaching withal, That Purgatory, Masses, dedication of Temples, worshipping
of Saints, prayers for the dead, were inventions of the devil, and snares of
avarice; That Monkery was a stinking carrion, the Church of Rome the whore of
Babylon, the Pope that Antichrist Paramount: He sharply lanced the vicious
ulcers of Clergie-mens lives, reproving their pride and luxury. Soon got he
many followers, both because novelty is a forcible loadstone, and because he
plentifully relieved his poor disciples; and those that use that trade shall
never want custom.

The Archbishop of Lions hearing such doctrines broched as were high treason
against the Triple crown, ferreted Waldo and his sectaries out of Lions and the
country thereabouts. But persecution is the bellows of their Gospel, to blow
every spark into a flame. This their division proved their multiplication. Some
fled into the Alps, living there on so steep hills, and in so deep holes, that
their enemies were afraid to climb or dive after them. Here they had the
constant company of the snow: And as it by the height of the hills was
protected from the sunbeams, so they from the scorching of persecution, even
to Luthers time. Others fled into Picardy, Flanders, England, Alsatia, Bohemia,
Matthew. Paris. in Hen. 3. in anno 1213
Bulgaria, Croatia, Hungaria, and whither not? the perfume of the Popes
presence not keeping this supposed vermin out of Italy it self. Many of them
were cruelly massacred, five and thirty Burgesses of Mayence burned at Bingen
in one fire, eighteen at Mayence, fourscore at Strassburg at the instance of
the Bishop thereof. But Martyrs ashes are the best compost to manure the
Church: for others were won to their opinion, by beholding their constancy
and patience. Strange that any should fall in love with that profession, whose
professors were so miserable! But truth has always a good face, though often
but bad clothes.

They were called by sundry names; Sometimes from the places where they lived:
As from Albigeois, Tholose, Lions, Picardy, Bohemia; Albingenses, Tholousians,
Lyonists, Picards, Bohemians. Sometimes from their principal pastor: As from
Waldo, Joseph, Henry, Esperon, Arnold; Waldenses, Josephists, Henricians,
Esperonites, Arnoldists. In England they were termed Lolards, from Io. Paul.
Perin. Hist. Waldens. lib. 1. cap. 3.
Lolard their teacher; not as some Friar descanteth, quasi Lolium in area
Domini. It appears not whether they were thus called of others, or called
themselves. But grant the latter: and if any object, That they seemed ashamed
of Christ their first godfather, who gave them the name of Christians, thus to
denominate themselves from their teachers; I answer, It is the same the Papists
do, calling themselves Benedictines, Dominicanes, Franciscanes, etc. from the
founders of their Order.

They had also nicknames; called, First, Poor men of Lions: not because they
chose to be poor, but could not choose but be poor, being stripped out of all
their goods: And why should the Friars glory be this peoples shame? they
mocking at poverty in others, which they count meritorious in themselves.
Secondly, Patarenians; that is, Sufferers, whose backs were anvils for others
to beat on. Thirdly, Turlupins; that is, Dwellers with wolves, (and yet might
they be Gods sheep) being forced to flee into woods. Fourthly, likewise they
were called Sicars; that is, Cut-purses. Fifthly, Fraterculi; that is,
Shifters. Sixthly, Insabbatha; that is, Observers of no sabbath. Seventhly,
Pasagenes; that is, Wanderers. As also Arians, Manicheans, Adamites (how justly
will appear afterward.) Yea, scarce was there an arrow in all the quiver of
malice which was not shot at them.

Chap. 20. The Albingenses their answer, confessing some, denying most crimes
laid to their charge; Commendations their adversaries give them.
COme we now to the full and foul indictment wherewith these Albingenses are
charged: That they gave no reverence to Reinerius, fol. 22. art. 32.
holy places; rejected the baptism of infants; held that temporal power was
grounded in grace; that it was a meritorious work to persecute the Priests of
Rome and their subjects: With the Adamites they went naked (an affront to
nature;) with the Manicheans they made two first causes, God of good, the devil
of evil; held community of all things, even of wives amongst them; were
Claudius Rubis, History of Lions, page 269.
sorcerers and conjurers (pretending to command the devil, when they most
obeyed him) guilty of incest, buggery, and more unnatural sins, whereby men
(as it were) run backward to hell.

No whit affrighted with this terrible accusation, many late writers dare be
their advocates to defend them, though confessing them guilty of some of these,
but not in so high and heinous a manner as they are accused.

True it is, because most in that age ran riot in adoring of Churches (as if
some inherent sanctity was cieled to their roof, or plaistered to their walls;
yea, such as might more ingratiate with God the persons and prayers of people
there assembled) the Waldenses (out of that old error not yet worn out, That
the best way to straighten what is crooked, is to over-bow it) denied Churches
that relative holiness and fit reverence due unto them. Baptism of infants
they refused not (though In his 66. Homily on the Canticles.
S. Bernard, taking it rather from the rebound then first rise, charge them
therewith) but only deferred it till it might be administered by one of their
own Ministers; their tender consciences not digesting the Popish baptism,
where clear water by Gods ordinance, was by man's additions made a salve or
plaster. That dominion was founded in grace, seems to be their very opinion:
Yea, it hangs as yet in the Schools on the file, and is not taken off, as a
thing disputable, finding many favorers. But grant it a great error (for
wicked men shall be arraigned before God, not as usurpers, but as tyrants; not
for not having right, but not right using the creatures) yet herein they
proceeded not so far as the Papists now-a-dayes, to unthrone and depose
excommunicated Princes: So that they who do most, have least cause to accuse
them. That they spoke too homely and coursely of the Romish Priests, inveighing
too bitterly and uncharitably against them, condemning all for some, may
perchance be proved: And no wonder if they spoke ill of those from whom they
felt ill. But take their speeches herein, as the words of men upon the rack,
forced from them by the extremity of cruel usage.

In these errors the Albingenses hope to find favor, if men consider, First,
the ignorance of the age they lived in: It is no news to stumble in the dark.
Secondly, the frailty (that squire of the body) attending on man's nature; yea,
he shall be immortal who lives till he be stoned by one without fault.
Thirdly, the errors themselves, which are rather in the outlimbes then vitalls
of religion. And it may be conceived they might have been reclaimed, if used
with gentle means, not catechized with fire and faggot; it being a true rule,
That men's consciences are more moved with leading then dragging or drawing.

But the sting of the indictment is still behind in the tail or end thereof;
charging them with such heinous errors in doctrine, and vices in life: All
which the patrones for the defendants Bishop Jewel, Apol. part. 1. chap. 2.
divis. 1. Waldo and the rest, for ought we know, and I believe (setting malice
aside) for ought you know, were godly men. Their greatest error was that they
complained of the dissolute and virious lives of the Clergy.
deny and defy, as coined out of the mint of their enemies malice.

It will be objected, If denying the fact might serve the turn, we should have
no malefactors: This therefore is but a poor plea, barely to deny, when that
such clouds of witnesses are against them. And grant they have a few straggling
writers, or some sleeping records which may seem to acquit them, what are one
or two men (though suppose them giants) against a whole army?

To this I find it answered for the Albingenses, That it has been the constant
practice of the Romish writers, always to defame those that differ from them,
especially if they handle too roughly the Noli me tangere of the Popes
supremacy. In later times what aspersions, as false as foul, have In vita
Lutheri.
Cochleus and In vita Calvini.
Bolsecus laid on Luther and Calvine? Now how fearlesse will they be to steal
at midnight, who dare thus rob men of their good name at noonday? When such
Authors as these lie with a witness, yea, with many Solidly confuted by Dr
Whitaker, De notis Ecclesia, cap. 15. Out of Melanchthon, Sleidan, Gryneus,
Beza, eyewitnesses
witnesses, who could disprove them; no wonder if they take liberty falsely to
accuse the Albingenses, conceiving themselves out of the reach of confutation;
writing in such an age when all the Counsel is on their own side, being
plaintiffs, and none assigned for the defendants.

Secondly, I find they produce the authentical copies (such as are above their
enemies calumnies) of the Catechismes, Apologies, Remonstrances of these
Albingenses; wherein the distilled doctrine of the Protestants is delivered
free from Manicheisme, or any other heresy fathered upon them.

Thirdly, their enemies slanders plainly appear in some particulars; which
justly shakes the credit of the whole accusation. For whereas they are charged
with the Adamites willingly to have gone naked, we find them rather nudati then
nudi, forced thereunto by the Popes Legate: Who being about to take the city of
Carcassone in France, where these people most swarmed, he would not grant them
their lives but on this condition, That both males and females should go forth,
and pass by his army So witnesses Peter De valle Sarnensi, being himself a
Monk, and lately printed (anno 1615.) in Paris. See Rivet On Genesis, page 138.
stark-naked. Argued it not a very foul stomach in him who could feed his eyes
with contentment on such a sight, which otherwise would more deeply have
wounded the modesty of the beholder then of the doers, who did it by
compulsion? See now how justly these innocents are charged! As well may the
Israelites be blamed for cruelty to themselves, in putting out their own eyes,
when they were commanded to do it by the merciless Ammonite.

Lastly, they are cleared by the testimonies of their very enemies; and who
knows not, but such a witness is equivalent to a general consent? For
those, who, when bemadded with anger, most rave and rage against them, yet per
lucida intervalla, in their cold blood, when their words are indicted from
their judgments not passions, do most sufficiently acquit them from these
accusations.

Reinerius, a Jacobine Monk, and a cruel inquisitour of the Waldenses,
testified, Cited by Fox in his Maetyrol. page 232.
That they lived justly before men, and believed all things well of God, and
held all the articles contained in the Creed; only they blasphemed the Romish
Church, and hated it.

Claudius de Seissell Archbishop of Turin confesses, As touching their life
and manners they were sound and unreproveable, without scandal amongst men,
giving themselves (to their power) to the observation of the commandments of
God.

King Lewis the twelfth of France being thoroughly informed of the faith and
life of the Waldenses in his time, bound it with an oath, That they were better
men then he or his people. The same King having killed many of those poor
people, and having called the place where they lived, Vallis meretricia, for
their painted and dissembled piety, upon better instructions changed the name,
calling it from himself, Thuanus, tom. 2. lib. 27. page 15.
The vale of Lewis.

William de Belai Lieutenant of Piemont gave this commendation of the
Merindolites (a sprig which some hundred years after sprouted from the
Waldenses) Idem, tom. 10. lib. 6. page 188.
That they were a laborious people, averse from suits, bountiful to the poor,
duly paying their Princes tributes and Lords dues, serving God with daily
prayers, and showing forth much innocence in manners.

Thuanus, one that writes truth with a steadie hand, jogged neither by
Romanists nor Huguenots, thus charactereth the Tom. 2. lib. 27. page 16
Con-waldenses, a stem of that stock we speak of; They used raw pelts clapped
about them for their clothes, the four feet whereof served in stead of
buttons; all equal in poverty, having no beggars amongst them; their diet on
deer and milk: yet was there scarce any amongst them but could read and write
handsomely, understand the Bible, and sing psalms; scarce a boy, but could
presently and by heart give an account of his faith. Tribute they paid very
religiously, etc.

More might be added; but I end all with Gamaliels words, Acts 5.38, 39.
If this work be of men, it will come to naught; but if it be of God, ye cannot
overthrow it. It argues the goodness of their cause, in that all their
enemies cruelty (unwise to think to spoil the growth of chamomile by trampling
on it) could never suppress them; but they continued till the days of Luther,
when this morning-starre willingly surrendered his place to him a brighter
sun. But enough of their life and manners. And if and condemn me for
superfluity herein, I guard my self with In his preface to his Retractat.
S. Augustines shield, Non est multiloquium, quando necessaria dicuntur,
quantalibet sermonum multitudine ac prolixitate dicantur.

Chap. 21. The Holy army advance against the Albingenses; The cities of Besier
and Carcassone taken.
POpe Innocent the third having now gathered together an army of one hundred
thousand Pilgrims, set forwards for the final exstirpation of the poor
Albingenses. The best champions for his Holiness herein, were the Duke of
Burgundy, the Earls of Nevers, St* Paul, Auxerre, Geneva, Poictiers, with Simon
Earl of Montfort; Of the Clergy, Milo the Popes Legate, the Archbishops of
Sens, Rovan; the Bishops of Clermont, Nevers, Lysieux, Bayeux, Chartres, with
diverse others; every Bishop with the Pilgrims of his jurisdiction: To whom the
Pope promised Paradise in heaven, but not one penny on earth. Their work was to
destroy the Albingenses, which were in great numbers in Daulphine, Provence,
Narbonne, Tholose, and other parts of France. Their Commission also extended to
the rooting out of all their friends and favorers, whether detected, or only
suspected; such as were Reimund Earl of Tholose, Reimund Earl of Foyx, the
Vicecount of Besiers, Gaston Lord of Berne, the Earl of Bigorre, the Lady of la
Vaur, with diverse others. See here a new gate to heaven never opened before,
for men to cut their way thither through the throats of their innocent
brethren! Behold the holy Ghost, who once came down in the form of a Dove, now
counterfeited in the shape of a Vulture!

But we must not forget how just before the war began, the Pope pretended to
reclaim them by reasons to the Church of Rome: To which end he gave order for a
disputation with them. The parties, place, and time were agreed on; who, where,
when they should dispute: but in fine nothing was effected. Yea, who ever knew
conferences in so great oppositions to ripen kindly, and bring any fruit to
perfection? For many come rather for faction then satisfaction, resolving to
carry home the same opinions they brought with them: An upright moderatour will
scarce be found, who hangs not to one side: The place will be subject to
suspicion, and hinder liberty: Boldness and readiness of speech with the most
(though not most judicious) auditors will bear away the bell from solidity of
arguments: The passages in the disputing will be partially reported, and both
sides will brag of the conquest; so that the rent will be made worse, and more
spirits conjured up then allayed.

But now words ended in blows; the Pope only entertaining them in Io. Paul
Perin. De Albing, lib. 1. cap. 2.
conferences, that in the mean time he might prepare his great armies more
suddenly to suppress them.

The first piece of service his soldiers performed, was in sacking the city
of Besiers, and borough of Carcassone: In which many Catholics, steadfast in
the Romish faith, did dwell, and promiscuously were slain with the Albingenses;
yea, Priests themselves were cut in pieces in their priestly ornaments, and
under the banner of the Cross: So that the swallowing of their foes made their
friends also go down glib through their throats, without danger of choking. As
for the city of Carcassone, which was not far from the borough; to the
inhabitants thereof those immodest conditions were propounded, whereof
formerly: which they refused; and God better provided for them: For whilst the
city was besieged, they escaped out by the benefit of a vault under ground,
and so shifted abroad for themselves.

Chap. 22. Simon Earl of Montfort chosen Captain of the Holy war; He
conquereth the King of Aragon, prevails against the Albingenses, and at last
is killed by a woman.
HItherto this war was managed by the Popes Legate: See the substance of this
following slory, in Io. Paul Perin. lib. 1. cap. 6. and deinceps.
But now it was concluded that a secular captain should be adjoined to him, in
whose person the chief command should reside over Martial affairs; and for his
pains, by the Popes donation, he was to enjoy all countries that should be
conquered from the Albingenses or their favorers. The place was offered to the
Duke of Burgundy; who refused it, saying, He had lands and Lordships enough of
his own, without spoiling others of their goods. It was waved also by the Earls
of St-Paul, and Nevers, whether out of conscience or policy; because though
the Pope gave them the bears skin, they must first kill and slay him
themselves. 1210.
At last Simon of Montfort, nigh Paris, accepted of it, swearing to vex the
Lords enemies. And for a breakfast to begin with, he was seized of the
Vicecounty of Besiers, proceeding from hence to take many castles and cities.

One grand inconvenience attended on this army of Pilgrims: For when their
quarantine, or forty days service, was expired (the term the Pope set them to
merit Paradise in) they would not stay one whit longer: Like posthorses they
would run to their set stage, but could not be spurred one foot further;
contenting themselves they had already purchased heaven, and fearing they
should be put in possession thereof too soon, by losing their lives in that
service. And though the Bishops persuaded some few to stay, that so the
surplusage of their merits might make up the arrerages of their friends which
wanted them, yet could they not prevail to any purpose. Nor could they so cast
and contrive their matters, the tide of peoples devotion being uncertain, but
that betwixt the going out of the old and coming in of the new store of
Pilgrims, there would be a low ebb, wherein their army was almost wasted to
nothing: whereof the Albingenses made no small advantage.

However, the Earls of Tholose, Foyx, and Coming, and Prince of Berne, the
patrones of the Albingenses, finding they were too weak for this Holy army,
sheltered themselves under Peter King of Aragon; whose homagers they were,
receiving investiture from him, though their dominions lay on this side of the
Pyrenean hills. This King had the greatness of the Earl of Montfort in
suspicion; fearing lest these several Principalities, which now were single
arrows, should be bound in one sheaf, conquered and united under Earl Simon.
Wherefore he fomented a faction in them against the Holy army; publicly
protesting against the proceedings of Earl Simon; charging him to have turned
the bark of Gods Church into a pirates ship, robbing others and enriching
themselves under the pretense of Religion, seizing on the lands of good
Catholics for supposed heretics, using Gods cause as hunters do a stand, in
it the more covertly to shoot at what game they please: Otherwise, why was the
Vicecount of Beziers, who lived and died firm in the Romish faith, lately
trained into the Legates hand, and against oaths and promises of his safe
return, kept close prisoner till his death, and his lands seized on by Earl
Simon?

At last the King of Aragon taking the Earl of Montfort on the advantage
(shooting him as it were betwixt wind and water, the ending of the old and
beginning of new Pilgrims) forced him to a battle. The King had thirty
thousand foot and seven thousand horse; but the Earl, of both foot and horse
not above two thousand two hundred. They closed together near the castle of
Moret: And the King, whether out of zeal of conquest and thirst of honor, or
distrust of underofficers, or desire to animate others, or a mixture of all,
ran his curvets so openly, and made his turns and returns in the head of the
army, that so fair a mark invited his enemies arrows to hit him; by whom he was
wounded to death, and fell from his horse; to lesson all Generals to keep
themselves, like the heart, in the body of the army, whence they may have a
virtuall omnipresence in every part thereof; and not to expose their persons
(which, like crystal viols, contain the extracted spirits of their soldiers
spilled with their breaking) to places of imminent danger. With his body fell
the hearts of his men: 1212.
And though the Earls of Tholose, Foyx, and Coming, persuaded, entreated,
threatened them to stay, they used their oratorie so long till their audience
ran all away, and they were fain to follow them, reserving themselves by
flight to redeem their honor some other time.

Simon improving this victory, pursued them to the gates of Tholose, and
killed many thousands. The Friars imputed this victory to the Bishops
benediction, and adoring a piece of the Cross, together with the fervency of
the Clergies prayers, which remaining behind in the castle of Moret, battered
heaven with their importunity. On the other side, the Albingenses acknowledged
Gods justice in punishing the proud King of Aragon; who, as if his arm had been
strong and long enough to pluck down the victory out of heaven without Gods
reaching it to him, conceived that Earl Simon came rather to cast himself down
at his feet then to fight. But such reckonings without the host are ever
subject to a rere-account.

Yet within few years the face of this war began to alter: (With writers of
shorthand we must set a prick for a letter, a letter for a word, marking only
the most remarkables.) For young Reimund Earl of Tholose, exceeding his father
in valor and success, so bestirred himself, that in few months he regained
what Earl Simon was many years in getting: And at last Earl Simon besieging
Tholose, 1118
with a stone which a woman let fly out of an engine, had his head parted from
his body.

Men use not to be niggards of their censures on strange accidents: Some
paralleled his life with Abimelech that tyrant-Judge; who with the bramble
(fitter to make a fire then a King of) accepted of the wooden Monarchy, when
the vine, olive, fig tree declined it. They paired them also in their ends,
death disdaining to send his summons by a masculine hand, but arresting them
both by a woman. Some persuaded themselves they saw Gods finger in the woman's
hand; that because the greater part of his cruelty lighted on the weaker sex
(for he had buried the Lady of laVaur alive, respecting neither her sex nor
nobility) a woman was chosen out to be his executioner: though of himself he
was not so prone to cruelty, but had those at his elbow which prompted him to
it. The time of his death was a large field for the conceits of others to walk
in; because even then when the Pope and three Councels, of Vaur, Montpelier,
and Laterane, had pronounced him son, servant, favorite of the faith, the
invincible defender thereof: And must he not needs break, being swollen with so
many windy titles? Amongst other of his styles he was See Camd. in
Leicestershire.
Earl of Leicester in England, and father to Simon Montfort the Also in
Worcestershire.
Catiline of this Kingdom, who under pretense of curing this land of some
grievances, had killed it with his physic, had he not been killed himself in
the battle of Evesholm in the reign of Henry the third.

And here ended the storm of open war against the Albingenses, though some
great drops fell afterward. Yea, now the Pope grew sensible of many mischiefs
in prosecuting this people with the Holy war: First, the incongruity betwixt
the Word and the Sword; to confute heretics with armies in the field, opened
clamourous mouths. Secondly, Perin, Of the Albingenses, lib. 2. cap. 4.
three hundred thousand of these Croised Pilgrims lost their lives in this
expedition, within the space of fifteen years; so that there was neither city
nor village in France, but by reason hereof of had widows and orphans cursing
this expidition. And his Holiness, after he had made allowance for his loss
of time, blood, and credit, found his gain de claro very small. Besides, such
was the chance of war, 1206
and good Catholics were so intermingled with heretics, that in sacking of
cities they were slain together. Whereupon the Pope resolved of a privater way,
which made less noise in the world, attracted less envy, and was more
effectual; To prosecute them by way of Inquisition. Hereby he might single
them out by retail, rooting out the tares without hurting the corn, and
overthrowing them by piecemeal whom he could never stagger in gross.

Dominick a Spaniard was first author hereof. Well did his mother, being with
child of him, dream that she had a dog Martyrol. in vita Dominici.
vomiting fire in her womb. This ignivomous curre (sire of the litter of
Mendicant Friars called Dominicanes) did bark at and deeply bite the poor
Albingenses. After his death, Pope Honorius for his good service bestowed a
Saintship on him: For he dreamed he saw the Church of Rome falling, and
Dominick holding it up with his shoulders; wherefore he canonized this Atlas of
their religion. The proceedings of this Inquisition were the abridgement of all
cruelty, turning the sword of Justice into the butchers ax. But no doubt God,
when he makes Psalm. 9.12.
inquisition for blood, will one day remember this bloody Inquisition. And who
can but admire at the continuance of the doctrine of the Albingenses to this
day, maugre all their enemies? Let those privy-counsellers of Nature, who can
tell where swallows lie all winter, and how at the spring they have a
resurrection from their seeming deadness, let those, I say, also inform us in
what invisible sanctuaries this doctrine did lurk in spite of persecution, and
how it revived out of its ashes at the coming of Luther. To conclude; it is
observed, That in those parts of France where the Albingenses were most cruelly
handled, now the Protestants (heirs to most of their tenets) flourish most: as
in the countries of Gascongne, Daulphine, and Languedoc.

Chap. 23. King Almerick for his laziness deposed by the Pope.
WElcome the Holy land, welcome Ptolemais: How shallow and almost quite dry is
the stream of Pilgrims grown here, since the Pope has drained it with so
large a by-chanel into France!

As for Almerick the idle King of Jerusalem, we find him as we left him,
drowning his cares constantly in wine: his hands being lazier then those are
printed in the margent of a book, which point what others should read; whilst
he would neither do, nor order what should be done: So true was it of him, what
is said Of Chilperick King of France.
of another, Titularis non tutelaris Rex; defuit non praefuit Reipublicae.

And now the war betwixt Noradine Saladines son and Saphradine his uncle,
about the sovereignty, lasting nine years, ended with Saphradines death; and
Noradine contented himself with the government of Aleppo, whilst Saphradines
two sons shared his dominions, Coradine commanding in Damascus and Syria, and
Meladine in Egypt.

The former of these without any resistance built a fort in mount Tabor, to the
great annoyance of the Christians. To prevent farther mischief arising from
Almericks negligence, the Pope (who would have a finger in every Crown, and a
hand in this) deposed him from the Kingdom. This Almerick, grieved to lose
what he was never careful to keep, soon after died for sorrow. But how does
this agree with Marinus Sanutus, who makes him to die of a surfeit of A fish
called Aurata, or Aurella.
gilt-heads five years sooner, and says there was five years interregnum in
Palestine, wherein the Christians had no King at all?

Chap. 24. John Bren made King of Jerusalem. A most promising voyage into
Palestine of new Pilgrims; which remove the seat of the war into Egypt.
1209
IN the place of Almerick the Pope appointed John de Bren, a private French
Gentleman, to be King. Who, to twist his title with another string, married
Maria Iole the sole daughter of Conrade late King of Jerusalem. This John had
behaved himself right valiantly amongst other Latin Princes in the voyage
against the Greeks, and was a most martial man, as all do witness: Only one
calls him Theod. a Niein, De privileg. imper. cap. De Expedit. Hierosol.
imbellem hominem; why I know not, except he be of that humor to delight to be
one of the Antipodes, treading opposite to a world of writers besides. In the
beginning of his reign this accident (whether monstrous or miraculous) fell
out: 1213
In France, a boy (for his years) went about singing in his own tongue, Jesus
Lord, repair our loss;
Restore to us thy holy Cross.
Numberless children ran after him, and followed the same tune their captain
and chanter did set them. No bolts, no bars, no fear of fathers or love of
mothers could hold them back, but they would to the Holy land to work wonders
there; till their merry music had a sad close, all either perishing on land,
or drowned by sea. It was done (says my Matthew. Paris. in anno 1213. page 324.
Praestigio diabolico penitus infatuati.
author) by the instinct of the devil, who, as it were, desired a cordial of
childrens blood to comfort his weak stomach long cloyed with murdering of men.

Soon after began the Laterane Council under Innocent the third: 1215
Wherein many things were concluded for the recovery of the Holy land; as, That
the Cross should every where be preached with zeal and earnestness to procure
Pilgrims; That all Centuriat. Cent. 13. cap. 9.
tiltings in Christendom for three years should be forbidden, that so the
spears of Christians might only be broken against Infidels; That Clergymen
that went this voyage might (if need were) mortgage their Church Livings for
three years to provide themselves with present necessaries, That all debtors,
during their Pilgrimage (though bound by oath in conscience, the strongest
specialty) should be dispensed with to pay no use to their creditours; who if
Christians, by excommunications; if Jews, were to be forced by the secular
power to remit their interest; That all Priests should contribute the twentieth
part of their revenues for three years, to advance this design. And lest
(says his Holiness) we should seem to lay heavy burdens on others which we
will not touch with our least finger, we assign a ship at our own cost to
carry our Pilgrims of the city of Rome; and disburse for the present what can
be spared from our necessary expenses, to the sum of thirty thousand pounds,
to further the project: and for three years to come, we and our brethren the
Cardinals of Rome, will fully pay the tenth of our Church-profits.

Hereupon next spring a numerous army set forward to Palestine, 1216
conducted by Pelagius the Popes Legate, Andrew King of Hungary (who having
washed himself in the river of Jordan, would stay no longer, but instantly
returned home) the three Electorall Archbishops, with those of Liege,
Wirtzburg, Bamberg, Strassburg, Paris, etc. Lewis Duke of Bavaria, Leopold of
Austria, a navy of our English, besides Florentines, Genoans, and many other
nations. The autumn they spent in the fruitless besieging of the fort of
mount Tabor; whilst King John Bren won from the Turks the castle of
Pilgrims, Nov.
a piece of great consequence on the seaside.

Then was it debated on both sides of translating the war 1217
into Egypt. Which many advised to be done: For that country afforded the
Turks their victuals and munition; and the best way to draw them low, was to
stop them in the fountain. It was also most honor to rouse the Lion in his own
den. And Palestine was so forraged, that there was nothing to be gleaned in
the stubble; whereas Egypt was so rich and fruitful, it cared not for the
frowns of heaven, so it might have the favor of Nilus; and there was no fear
to want bread in that the granary of the world. That according to the rule,
Plus animi est inferenti periculum, quam propulsanti; the Christians would be
heartened, but the Egyptians discouraged in the invasion of Egypt. The sad
spectacle of their countries vastation would disturb their minds, make them
diffident of their own worth, and unsufficient to maintain their cause. Lastly,
the Christians might leave when they list, reserving at all times Ptolemais to
entertain them, in case fortune should cross their designs.

But the reasons to the contrary wanted not weight but weighing. They
considered not (what was objected) That to invade a strong entire country
without having a party within it to side with them, was to endeavor to cleave
a tree with a beetle without a wedge. Besides, Egypt was an exception from the
rules of all other countries, and had certain local maxims of leading of an
army appropriated to it-alone. That Valor must needs have the fall, when it
wrestleth with Nature it self, and fights against bogs, rivers, and
inundations. That it was more agreeable to reason, first to recover and defend
what once was their own, before they attempted other men's possessions. That
these their forces afforded little hope of victory in another Kingdom, which
were not able to clear their own country, and the forts in Syria, from so
dangerous an enemy. Lastly, That the Egyptians fighting for their fathers,
wives, and children, would raise their valor to the highest point of
resolution. These arguments notwithstanding, the watchword was given for
Egypt; whither all addressed themselves.

And here began the discords betwixt King John and the Popes Legate, who
challenged not only an influence but a predominancy in every thing, and would
dictate to the General what he should do in martial affairs: He presumed on
his book-learning to control the practice of experienced captains by his
military speculations. The King stormed hereat, showing there were some
mysteries in the Captain-craft not communicable to any which had not served the
trade, and which the heart of a Scholar was too narrow to contain; That though
Scholarship was a stock fit to graff any profession on, yet some good time is
requisite thereunto; and that they must not think to proceed military Masters
at their first admission in a camp; That though the Legate might conceive
himself to know the latitude of warlike principles, yet he knew not the use of
distinctions, exceptions, and cautions of application; and might easily be
misled by disproportion and dissimilitude of examples, the variation of
circumstances, the infiniteness of punctual occurrences: Wherefore he forbad
him to meddle with martial matters, challenging them to belong to his own
disposal. But Pelagius the Legate highly opinioned of his own sufficiency, as
if his place made him infallible in every thing, and loath to confess himself
besides the cushion whilst he sat in the chair, would have an oar in all
actions. He held this conclusion, That the general rules of war were easily
known; and as for the qualification of them pro exigentia hic and nunc, herein
reason was the key of the work, which scholars having most perfected by
learning, were thereby the most competent judges what should be done on all
occasions. How dearly the Christians paid for this his error, and how this
discord, smothered for a while, brake out, we shall see hereafter. Mean time,
hoising up sails, the Pilgrims navy safely arrived at Damiata.

Chap. 25. Damiata besieged and taken; The Christians unadvisedly refuse
honorable conditions.
DAmiata is a chief haven of Egypt* 1218
anciently Pelusium; seated on the Eastern-most stream of Nilus. Here the East
and West world met together to exchange their wares; she grudging for trade to
give the upper hand to Alexandria it self. At their landing Matthew. Paris. in
Joan. page 401.
the moon was almost totally eclipsed: July 9.
whence the Christians conceited (guess the frailnesse of the building by the
unconstancy of the foundation) that the overthrow of the Mahometanes (whose
ensign was the Munster.
Half Moon) was portended. But the calculatours of after-chances seldom hit
right. In the siege of this city they were to encounter with a fourefold
difficulty, besides Damiata it self:

First, with a great chain crossing the harbor: which with indefatigable
pains, and art mingled with labor, they brake asunder; industry in action
being as importunity in speech, by continual inculcation forcing a yielding
beyond the strength of reason.

Secondly, the river Nilus did much annoy them. This river (the height of whose
flowing is the Egyptian Almanac, whereby they prognosticate future plenty or
penury) now out of time and beyond measure drowned the country. Bold fishes
swamme into the Christians tents, who took them with their hands, Illis tamen
deliciis catere maluissent, Matthew. Paris. page 405.
though willingly they could have wanted such dainties; for the sauce was more
then the meat. Against this mischief they fensed themselves with prayer, and a
public fast enjoined by the Legate; whereby the water soon abated. And lest
Gods mercy herein, when gotten, should be forgotten, a public thanksgiving
was proclaimed, that this favor obtained by prayer might be kept by praises.

Thirdly, they were to grapple with the fort of Pharia, a seeming-impregnable
place, betwixt them and Damiata. To check this fort, the Christians built a
tower on ships: which suddenly falling, brained many, bruised more of their own
men; and all who felt not the blow, were stricken with the fright. King John
comforted his soldiers discouraged hereat, desiring them to apprehend actions
by their true causes; and as not to vaunt of blind victories, so not to be
dismayed at casual mishaps, so purely accidental, that there was no guard
against them in the schools of defense, either of wisdom or valor. By his
advice a more substantial tower was built, the rarest piece in that kind the
world ever saw; Aug. 24.
by the manning whereof, after many bloody assaults, they mastered the fort of
Pharia.

Fourthly, they had to do with Meladine King of Egypt, who lay besides them,
constantly furnishing the city with men and victuals, and exercising the
Christians with continual skirmishes. In one, with his wildfire he did them
much harm, and King John was dangerously scorched. But seeing that the
Christians hewed their way through the rocks of all difficulties, 1219
he propounded peace unto them by the mediation of Noradine his brother, Febr.
King of Damascus; profering them, if they would depart, to restore them the
true Cross, the city of Jerusalem, and all the land of Palestine.

P. Aemyl. page 201.
The English, French, and Italians would have embraced the conditions,
pleading, That honorable peace was the center of war, where it should rest;
That they could not satisfy their conscience to rob these Egyptians of their
lands without a special command from God; That it was good wisdom to take so
desperate a debt whenever the payment was tendered; otherwise, if they would
not be content with their arms full, they might perchance return with their
hands empty.

But the Legate would no ways consent, alleging this voyage was undertaken
not only for the recovery of Palestine, but for the exstirpation of the
Mahometane superstition. And herein no doubt he followed the instructions of
his master, whose end in this war was, That this war should have no end,
but be always in doing though never done. He knew it was dangerous to stop an
issue which had been long open; and would in no case close up this vent of
people by concluding a final peace. Besides, an old prophecy, Magdeburg.
Cent. 13. cap. 16. col. 692.
That a Spaniard should win Jerusalem, and work wonders in those parts, made
Pelagius that countryman more zealous herein. Coradine angry his profer was
refused, beat down the walls of Jerusalem and all the beautiful buildings
therein, save the tower of David and the temple of the Sepulcher. Nov. 5.
Not long after, Damiata having been basieged one year and seven months, was
taken without resistance; plague and famine had made such a vastation therein.
The Christians entered with an intent to kill all; but their anger soon melted
into pity, beholding the city all bestrawed with corpses. The sight was bad,
and the sent was worse; for the dead killed the living. Yea, Gods sword had
left their sword no work: Of P. Aemyl. page 203.
threescore and ten thousand but three thousand remained; who had their lives
pardoned on condition to cleanse the city: which employed them a quarter of a
year. Hence the Christians marched and took the city of Tanis; and soon after
the Pope substituted Magdeburg. page 693.
John de Columna, a Cardinal, Legate in the place of Pelagius.

Chap. 26. New discords betwixt the King and the Legate; They march up to
besiege Cairo.
GReat was the spoil they found in Damiata: 1220
wherein, as in strong barred chests, the merchants of Egypt and India had
locked up their treasure. A full year the Christians stayed here, contented to
make this inn their home. Here arose new discords betwixt the King and the new
Legate, who by virtue of his Legation challenged Damiata for his Holiness,
which by public agreement was formerly assigned to the King. Bren in anger
returned to Ptolemais, both to puff out his discontents in private, and to
teach the Christians his worth by wanting him: For presently they found
themselves at a loss; neither could they stand still without disgrace, nor go
on without danger. The Legate commanded them to march up; but they had too much
spirit to be ruled by a Spiritual man, and swore not to stir a step except
the King was with them. Messengers therefore were sent to Ptolemais to fetch
him. They found him of a steely nature; once through-hot, long in cooling: yet
by promising him he should have his own desires, they over-perswaded him not to
starve an army by feeding his own humors.

Scarce after eight months absence was he returned to Damiata, but new
divisions were betwixt them: The Legate persuaded the army to march up and
besiege Cairo; he promised, if they would obey him, they should quickly command
all Egypt, by present invading it. Let defendants lie at a close guard, and
offer no play. Delays are a safe shield to save, but celerity the best sword
to win a country. Thus Alexander conquered the world before it could bethink
it self to make resistance. And thus God now opened them a door of victory,
except they would bar it up by their own idleness.

But the King advised to return into Syria; That Cairo was difficult to take,
and impossible to keep; That the ground whereon they went, was as treacherous
as the people against whom they fought; That better now to retire with honor,
then hereafter fly with shame; That none but an empirick in war will deny,
but that more true valor is in an orderly well grounded retreat, then in a
furious rash invasion.

But the Legate used an inartificiall argument drawn from the authority of his
place, thundering excommunication against those that would not march forward:
And now needs must they go when he drives them.

The crafty Egyptians (of whom it is true, what is said of the Parthians, Their
flight is more to be feared then their fight) ran away, counterfeiting
cowardlinesse. The Christians triumphed hereat; as if the silly fish should
rejoice that he had caught the fisherman, when he had swallowed his bait. The
Legate hugged himself in his own happiness, that he had given so successful
advice. And now see how the garland of their victory proved the halter to
strangle them.

Chap. 27. The miserable case of the drowned Christians in Egypt. Damiata
surrendered in ransom of their lives.
EGypt is a low level country, except some few advantages which the Egyptians
had fortified for themselves. Through the midst of the land ran the river
Nilus; whose stream they had so bridled with banks and sluices, that they could
keep it to be their own servant, and make it their enemies master at pleasure.
The Christians confidently marched on; and the Turks perceiving the game was
come within the toil, pierced their banks, and unmuzzling the river, let it
run open mouth upon them; yet so, that at first they drowned them up but to
the middle, reserving their lives for a further purpose, thereby in exchange to
recover Damiata and their countries liberty.

See here the land of Egypt turned in an instant into the Egyptian sea! See an
army of sixty thousand, as the neck of one man, stretched on the block, and
waiting the fatal stroke! Many cursed the Legate, and their own rashness,
that they should follow the counsel of a gowned man (all whose experience was
clasped in a book) rather then the advice of experienced captains. But too late
repentance, because it sows not in season, reapeth nothing but unavoidable
misery.

Meladine King of Egypt seeing the constancy and patience of the Christians,
was moved with compassion toward them. He had of himself strong inclinations
to Christianity, weary of Mahometanisme, and willing to break that prison, but
for watchful jaylers about him. He proffered the Christians their lives, on
condition they would quit the country and restore Damiata. They accepted the
conditions, and sent messengers to Damiata to prepare them for the surrendering
of it. But they within the city, being themselves safe on shore, tyrannized on
their poor brethren in shipwreck; pretending, That this army of Pilgrims
deserved no pity, who had invited this misfortune on themselves by their own
rashness; That if they yielded up this city for nothing, which cost so many
lives, they should betray themselves to the derision of the whole world; That
if these perished, more men might be had, but no more Damiata's; being a place
of such importance, it would always be a snaffle in the mouth of the Egyptian
King. On the other side, the friends of the distressed Christians confessed,
That indeed their voyage was unadvised and justly to be blamed; yet worse and
more inconsiderate projects have armies often undertaken, which, if crowned with
success, have been above censure, yea, have passed not only without
questioning but with commendations: But this is the misery of misery, that
those who are most afflicted of God, shall be most condemned of men. Wherefore
they requested them to pity their brethren, and not to leave them in this
forlorn estate. How clamourous would their innocent blood be in the court of
Heaven, to sue for revenge on those who forsook them in this distress! And
grant Damiata a city of great consequence; yet cities in themselves were but
dead things, and men were the souls to enliven them: so that those soldiers
which won Damiata, if preserved alive, might happily recover as strong a city
afterward.

But finding their arguments not to prevail, they betook themselves to arms, by
force to compel the adverse party to resign the city. King John also
threatened, in case they denied to surrender it, to give up to Meladine
Ptolemais in Syria in exchange for Damiata. At last, according to the
agreement, Damiata was restored to the Turks, and the Christian army let out
of the trap wherein it was taken. Meladine out of his princely goodness
furnished them with P. Aemyl. page 205.
victuals, and with horses to carry their feeble persons upon. And thus the
Christians had the greatest blow given them without a blow given them; the
Egyptians obtaining their victory not by blood but by water.

Chap. 28. John Bren resigneth the Kingdom of Jerusalem to Frederick the
second, Germane Emperor.
THere was also concluded a peace with the Turks for eight years. And now
matters being settled as well as they might be in Syria, King John took a
journey to Rome; where he was bountifully feasted, and honorably entertained
by the Pope. Here it was agreed (whether at the first by his voluntary offer,
or working of others, it appears not) that he should resign the Kingdom of
Jerusalem to Frederick the second, Germane Emperor, who was to marry Iole the
sole daughter of King John by his first wife; though by a second he had
another, Martha, married to Robert Emperor of Constantinople: so that he was
father in law both to Emperor of East and West.

Some condemned his resignation as an unadvised act; as if he had first parted
from his wits, who would willingly part from a Kingdom; whilst others commend
his discretion: For first, his wife was dead, in whose right he held his
Kingdom, and thereby a door was opened for other litigious pretenders to the
Crown. Secondly, it was policy, fugere ne fugaretur: yea, this was no flight,
but an honorable departure. Well he knew the Turks power to invade, and his
own weakness to defend what was left in Syria: So that finding the weight too
heavy for himself, he did well to lay it on stronger shoulders. Thirdly, before
his resignation he had little more then a title: and after it he had nothing
less; men having so tuned their tongues to salute him King of Jerusalem, that
he was so called to the day of his death. Lastly, what he wanted in the
stateliness of his bed, he had in the soundness of his sleep; and though his
commons perchance were shorter, yet he battled better on them.

He got now more in a twelve-moneth then in seven years before, going from
country to country: And yet the farther this stone rolled, the more moss he
gathered. In France, besides rich gifts left to himself, he had the managing of
sixty thousand crowns; the legacy which Philip Augustus the King on his
deathbed P. Aemyl. in Phil. 2. page 205.
bequeathed to the Templars and the Holy war. In England he received from
Henry the third many great presents; though afterward he proved but Matthew.
Paris. page 627.
unthankful for them. In Spain he got a rich wife, Beringaria, the daughter of
the King of Castile. In Italy he tasted very largely of the Popes liberality,
and lived there in good esteem. But he went off the stage without an applause,
because he lost himself in his last act; perfidiously raising rebellions
against Frederick his son in law, at the instigation of his Holiness. Nor
recovered he his credit, though after he went to his son Robert to
Constantinople, and there did many good offices. He died anno 1237.

Chap. 29. The true character of Frederick; How the history of his life is
prejudiced by the partiality of Authors on both sides.
THe nuptial solemnities of Frederick with the Lady Iole were performed at
Rome, in the presence of the Pope, with all ceremonies of majesty; and
Frederick promised to prosecute in person his title in Palestine within two
years. Little hope have I to content the reader in this Kings life, who cannot
satisfy my self; writers of that age are so possessed with Blondus, Fazellus,
etc. for the Pope. Ursperg. Petrus de Vineis (till corrupted with bribes) etc.
for the Emperor. Matthew. Paris, a moderate man, whom we follow most.
partiality. The faction of the Guelfes and Gibellines discovers not it self
more plainly in the Camp then in the Chronicles: Yea, Historians turn Schoolmen
in matters of fact, arguing them pro and con. And as it is in the Fable of the
man that had two wives; whilst his old wife plucked out his black hairs, the
evidence of his youth, his young one ungray-haired him, that no standards of
antiquity might remain, they made him bald betwixt them: So amongst our late
writers; whilst Protestants cut off the authority from all Papized writers of
that age, and Romanists cast away the witness of all Imperialized authors
then living (such as Urspergensis is, and generally all Germans) counting them
testes domesticos, and therefore of no validity, betwixt them they draw all
history of that time very slender, and make it almost quite nothing. We will
not engage our selves in their quarrels; but may safely believe, that Frederick
was neither saint, nor devil, but man. Many virtues in him his foes must
commend, 1227
and some vices his friends must confess. He was Pantal. De viris illustr.
Germ. part. 2. page 121.
very learned, according to the rate of that age, especially for a Prince, who
only baiteth at learning, and makes it not his profession to lodge in. Wise
he was in projecting; nor were his thoughts ever so scattered with any sudden
accident, but he could instantly recollect himself. Valiant he was, and very
fortunate; though this tends more to Gods praise then his: Wondrous
bountiful to scholars and soldiers; whose good will he enjoyed, for he paid
for it.

But this Gold had its allay of Cruelty; though this was not so much bred in
him as he brought to it: Treasons against him were so frequent, he could not be
safe but must be severe, nor severe without incurring the aspersion of
cruelty. His Pride was excessive; and so was his Wantonness: A Nuns vail
was but a slender shield against his lust: This sin he was given to, Praeter
gentis morem, Egnatius.
which was besides the custom of the Dutch, says one, who though great
friends to Bacchus, are no favorites of Venus; which is strange, that they
should heap up so much fuel, and have no more fire.

In a word, he was a better Emperor then a man, his vices being personal,
most hurting himself; his virtues of a public nature, and accomplishing him
for government.

Chap. 30. Mines and countermines betwixt the Emperor and the Pope, seeking to
blow up, or at leastwise to stay the projects each of other.
IT is verily conceived that the Pope provided this match for Frederick to
employ him in Palestine, whilst he at home might play his game at pleasure.
For as provident Nature in marshalling the elements, assigned fire a place in
the verge and border of this lower world far from the rest, lest otherwise
the activity thereof might set the others in combustion: so the Pope disposed
this hot violent-spirited Emperor far off, and engaged him in a distant and
dangerous war out of the borders of Europe.

Frederick smelt the project of his Holiness, being also master in the art of
dissembling, though he must acknowledge the Pope his senior in that faculty:
Wherefore he deferred the performance of his promise and his voyage into
Palestine from month to month, and year to year, wisely gaining time by
losing it.

The truth was, he was not yet ripe for such an expedition. The Pope was afraid
of his valor, he of the Popes treachery, and more feared him behind his back
then the Turk before his face. He was loath to let go the Eagle he had in hand,
to catch the little bird that was in the bush. Wherefore as yet he refused to
go, pleading that the eight years truce which King Bren had made with the
Turks, was not yet expired; before which time to fight against them, was to
fight against God and conscience: and that it was no way to propagate the Faith
by breach of faith.

Pope Honorius continued still to put him in mind of his promise: Yea, he
rubbed his memory so roughly, he fetched off the skin, with his threats and
menaces. But before Fredericks journey began, Mar. 19.
Honorius his life ended, and Gregory the ninth succeeded him; who at the first
dash excommunicated the Emperor for his delay.

Know by the way, that his namesake Gregory the seventh (otherwise Hildebrand)
first hanselled his excommunication on Henry the fourth. Before his time the
Imperial majesty (what is observed of the Seal, that it is never hit with
thunder) was never fulminated against with excommunication: afterward nothing
more usual; till the commonnesse of those thunderbolts caused their contempt,
and the Emperors natures were so used to this physic it would not work with
them. Of late his Holiness is grown more advised, very sparingly using them,
especially against Protestant Princes; counting it policy to hold that weapon
within the scabbard which has no other edge but what is given it by the
opinion of those against whom it is used.

Frederick at last comes forth of Germany with his army, marches through
Italy, comes to Brindisi, where the plague seiseth on his men, whereof died
the Landtgrave of Thuringia, Sept. 13.
and others. Soon after he fell very desperately sick himself, which stayed his
journey many months.

It went near to the Pope, that the Emperor was so near to him: His case now
was worse then formerly: For he had rouzed the Lion out of his den, but could
not get him into the net. His sickness must either be more or less to do
good. And the Pope having no variety of weapons, excommunicated him afresh,
pretending Fredericks disease was only the cramp of laziness, and that he was
sick to do good, but swooned to do mischief; as appeared by his unjust seizing
on the goods of Lewis Landtgrave of Thuringia late deceased.

The Emperor protested his innocence, accused the Popes injustice, putting
himself on the trial of all Christian Princes; to whom he wrote letters. 1228
At last health came, and Frederick departed, Aug. 11.
bearing up with his navy for Palestine. The Pope hearing thereof, belibelled
him more foully then ever before, because like an undutifull son he departed
without his Fathers blessing, being not absolved and reconciled to his Mother
the Church.

Chap. 31. Frederick recovereth all Palestine and Jerusalem without expense of
time or blood.
SEe how Gods blessing goes along with the Popes curses! The fame of
Fredericks valor and maiden fortune, never as yet spotted with ill success,
like an harbinger hastening before, had provided victory to entertain him at
his arrival; yea, this Emperor, swifter then Caesar himself, overcame before
he came over into Palestine.

At this time the state of the Turks in Syria was very aguish, and Fredericks
coming put them into a shaking fit. Centuriat.
Coradine was dead, his children in minority, the Turkish Souldans factious,
boiling in enmity one against another. Whereupon the Sultan of Babylon, who was
of chiefest authority, and governed Syria, proffered Frederick so honorable
conditions as he might desire, but could never hope for: namely, To restore
unto him Jerusalem and all Palestine, in as full and ample a manner as it was
possessed by Baldwine the fourth, before Saladine subdued it; To set all
Christian captives at liberty; provided, that the Turks might have access to
the Sepulcher, (though not lodging in the city but suburbs, and that in small
numbers at a time) there to do their devotions, they also having a knowledge
of, and giving an honor to Christ, though no better then ignorance and
dishonor of him.

Frederick before he ratified any thing by oath, sent to have the Popes
approbation: Centuriat.
who ill entreated and imprisoned his messengers, denied them audience, and
contemptuously tore the Emperors letters. Wherefore Frederick without, yea,
against his Holiness consent, concluded a ten years truce with the Sultan;
and on Matthew. Paris. in anno 1229. page 480.
Easter Day triumphantly entering Jerusalem, crowned himself King with his own
hands. 1229
For Gerard Patriarch of Jerusalem, and Oliver master of the Templars, with all
the Clergy, absented themselves; neither was there any Matthew. Paris. in anno
1229. page 479.
mass sung in the city as long as the Emperor being excommunicated remained
there.

See that produced as it were in an instant which the succession of many years
could not perform, all the Holy land recovered! Some gallants perchance (whose
curious palates count all conquests dry meat which are not juyced with blood)
will dispraise this Emperors victory for the best praise thereof, because it
was so easily gotten without drawing his sword for it. But they deserve to go
naked who scorn to wear good clothes if they cost not dear.

The Templars were vexed at heart that they had no partnership in the glory of
this action; yea, this touched their copyhold: Had they lived lazy thus long
in Palestine, sucking the Idem, ibidem.
sweet of Christendom to no purpose? See, Frederick with few men, little
money, less time, as master of his craft, had finished that which these
bunglers had so long in vain been fumbling about!

Wherefore they wanting true merit to raise themselves to the pitch of
Fredericks honor, sought by false detraction to depresse him to the depth of
their own baseness; defaming him, as if he conspired with the Sultan to the
ruin of all Christianity. In the mean time the Christians every where built
and repaired the cities of Palestine, being now resigned into their hands.
Joppa and Nazareth they strongly fortified: the walls of Jerusalem were
repaired, the Churches therein adorned, and all public edifices either wholly
cast their skin with the snake, or at leastwise renewed their bill with the
eagle, having their fronts either built or beautified. But new tackling to an
old rotten keel will never make serviceable ship. Short were the smiles of this
city, which groaning under Gods old curse, little joyed her self in this her
new bravery.

The end of the third Book.
The History of the HOLY WAR. Book IIII.
Chap. 1. Frederick battered with the Popes force, and undermined with his
fraud, leaves Palestine, and returns into Italy.
Anno Dom. 1229
THus the Christian affairs in Palestine were in good case and possibility of
improvement. But the Pope knew he should catch no fish if the waters were thus
clear: Wherefore he stirred up John Bren, Fredericks father in law (guess
whether his plots ran not low when he used such dregs) to raise a rebellion in
Italy against him.

His Holiness spread a false report of purpose, that Frederick was dead. Who
would think there were so much substance in a shadow! This vain rumor wrought
real effects, strengthening Fredericks foes with hopes, and staggering his
friends with fear and uncertainties. Bren striking the iron whilst it was hot,
won many places from the Emperor: And though Time soon after was delivered
of her daughter Truth, yet the confutation came too late, to shut the door
when the steed was stolen; the Pope having attained his ends, and served his
turn already.

A jubilee of liberty was proclaimed to all the Emperors subjects, and they
dispensed with from the Pope for their allegiance to him. Milain, and many
other cities in Italy, formerly Imperial, danced at this music, made a
foot-cloth of their Masters livery, and from this time dated themselves
Free-States. Here was brave gleaning, where all ran away with whole sheaves;
where robbery was privileged for lawful purchase. And the Pope, wise enough
not so to give away the pie but to keep the best corner for himself, carved all
Apulia for his own part.

Whilst hostility in Italy, treason beset Frederick in Syria; the Templars
intimated to the Sultan his private project to wash himself in Jordan, that so
he might be surprised. But the Sultan (no doubt out of pity to see a Lion
catched in a Foxtrap, there being a consanguinity of all Princes, and the
royal blood which runs in their veins causing a sympathy of Majesty
betwixt them) scorned to advantage himself by treachery, and sent their letters
to Frederick: Who afterward used the Templars, and generally all the Clergy
in Palestine (counting them complies with the Pope) coursely, not to say
cruelly.

At last having confirmed his ten years truce, and having appointed Reinoldus
Duke of Bavaria his Lieutenant in Syria, without noise he comes into Europe:
For to return triumphantly in state, had been but an alarm to awaken envy, and
a warning-piece for his enemies to prepare against him. He outsailed fame it
self, landing in Italy in person before he arrived there in report. Then the
love of his loyal subjects, hitherto rather covered then quenched, appeared;
and though formerly forced to a contrary motion, returned now quickly to their
own Prince their proper center.

Within fifteen days, assisted with the Duke of Spoletum, Frederick recovered
all which was won from him, and unravelled the fair web of John Brens
victory, even to the very hemme thereof.

Then was all Italy (resembled by Geographers for the fashion thereof, to a
man's leg) troubled with the incurable gout of schism and faction: Not a city
of note in it which was not dichotomized into the sect of the Guelfes, which
favored the Pope, and Gibellines, which adhered to the Emperor.

Guelfes for the Pope. Gibellines for the Emperor. Vrsini in Rome Columnienses
in Rome Sabellii in Rome Frangepanes in Rome Caesarini in Rome Adimarii in
Florence Pazii in Florence Bondelmontii in Florence Uberti in Florence Amidei
in Florence Donati in Florence Cerchii in Florence Albic^i in Florence Riccii
in Florence Strozi in Florence Medicei in Florence Salviati in Florence Pactii
in Florence Interminelli in Lucca Obicii in Lucca Carrarii in Padua Flosci in
Genoa Spinola in Genoa These are collected out of Lampad. Mellif. Hist. part.
3. page 303.
Grimaldi in Genoa Adurnii in Genoa Fregosii in Genoa Dorii in Genoa Caneduli
in Bono^ia Bentivoli in Bono^ia Pepuli in Bono^ia Malvecii in Bono^ia
M^rescotti in Bono^ia Estenses in Ferrara Saliguerri in Ferrara Vicecomites in
Milain Turregiani in Milain Gonzagae in Mantua Bonacursii in Mantua
I will not quarrel with the tradition, Sr John Harington.
That Elves and Goblins in our English tongue had their first original from
the depravation of the names of Guelfes and Gibellines. If so, sure I am, what
now we make terriculamenta infantum, scarecrows to affright children, were then
true Harpyes to devour men.

I would farther prosecute these discords; and also show how Frederick was
forced to ask pardon of him who had most wronged him, and dearly to purchase
his absolution from the Pope; (For though this Emperors heart was as hard as
stone, yet was it furrowed, dinted, and hollowed at last with the Popes
constant dropping and incessant raining of curses upon him) But I dare wander
no farther in this subject, lest any should question my Pass; but return back
to the Holy land.

Chap. 2. The Tartars first appearing in the world affright both Christians and
Turks; Of their name and nature; Whether Turks or Tartars be easier convertible
to the true religion.
REinoldus Duke of Bavaria being lest Fredericks Lieutenant in Syria, wisely
discharged his office, and preserved the peace entire which was concluded with
the Sultan of Babylon. But the Templars sought by all means to bring this ten
years truce to an untimely end; which was as bad as a Lent to them, wherein
they must fast from fighting, the meat and drink of turbulent spirits. These
counting all lukewarm which were not scalding hot, condemned Reinoldus for
want of zeal in the Holy war, and gave him many a lift to heave him from his
place; but still he sat sure, poised with his own gravity. Nor did the enmity
of Henry King of Cyprus much trouble him, who challenged the Principality of
Antioch, as next of kin to the Prince deceased: 1232
For Reinold met and defeated him in battle, and bestowed Antioch on Magdeburg.
Cent. 13. cap. 16.
Frederick, base son to Frederick the Emperor.

But that which kept both Christians and Turks in aw, and made them willing
mutually to observe the truce, was the fear of the Tartars, a fierce nation,
which now had their first flight out of their own nest into the neighboring
countries.

These Tartarians, anciently called Scythians, inhabit the Northern part of
Asia, a country never conquered by any of the Monarchs, privileged from their
victorious arms chiefly by its own barrenness: For except soldiers were
ambitious of hunger and cold, here is nothing to countervail their pains of an
invasion; yea, no meat to maintain them. It is true, rhubarb the best of drugs
grows in this the worst of countries: But soldiers seek rather for food then
physic when they invade a country. A greater part of their land is
undiscovered, though map-makers, rather then they will have their maps naked
and bald, do periwig them with false hair, and fill up the vacuum (especially
toward the North) with imaginary places of See Mertators maps.
Vng, and Gog, and the plains of Bargu: So true it is what one says wittily in
the Comedy, That Phantastes the servant of Geographus traveled further beyond
the arctick circle then ever his master durst.

If it be surest to follow the most, the stream of writers make it called
Tartaria from the river Tartar: but Europe and Asia will by woeful experience
justify the etymology, if deduced from Tartarus, Hell. For when the
spring-tides of this nation overflowed the banks, hell might seem to have
broken loose, and to have sent so many devils abroad.

As for those that count them the offspring of the ten tribes of Israel, which
Salmanasar led away captive, because Tatari or Totari signifies in the Hebrew
and Syriack tongue, a residue or remnant, See Brierwoods Enquiries, chap. 13.
learned men have sufficiently confuted it. And surely it seems a forced and
overstrained deduction, to farrefetch the name of Tartars from an Hebrew word,
a language so far distant from them. But no more hereof: because perchance
herein the woman's reason has a masculine truth; and the Tartarians are called
so, because they are called so. It may be, curious Etymologists (let them lose
their wages who work in difficult trifles) seek to reap what was never sown,
whilst they study to make those words speak reason, which are only voces ad
placitum, imposed at pleasure.

Under their new name Tartarians, they keep their old nature of Scythians,
fierce, cruel; yea, sometimes in stead of other meat, making man their meat.
Sabell. Enn. 9. lib. 6. page 391.
One humor they have, much affecting the owl, a bird which other nations scorn
and hate, as the usher of ill luck. The occasion was this, A King of Tartary
sought for by his enemies, hid himself in a bush, whither his foes came to seek
him; when presently an owl flew out of the place: Whereupon they desisted from
further search, conceiving that that anchorite bird proclaimed nothing was
there but solitude and desolation. Hence in gratitude they never count
themselves more gay then when their helmets are hung with owls feathers.
Whereat I should strange more, but that I find this fowl dedicated to Vide
Erasm. Adag. in Noctua volat
Minerva the Goddess of wit, and that Athens (schoolmistresse of the world)
counted it a token of victory. The King of these Tartarians styleth himself,
The great Cham, and is monarch of a great part of the world in possession, of
the rest in imagination. He takes and his subjects give him little less then
divine honor; who in other things at this time were pure Pagans and Idolaters.
Now their country, which is like a poor man whose common is overstocked with
children, swarming with more bees then hives, sent their superfluous numbers to
seek their fortunes amongst the Christians. They needed no steel-armour who had
iron-bodies. Only with bows, cruelty, and multitude they overranne Lituania,
Podolia, Polonia, and those countries which are the East-boundanes of Europe.
Others took their way Southward into Asia, committing outrages as they went;
and sensible how incomparably their own country was surpassed for pleasure and
profit by these new lands (blame not their judgment if they preferred a palace
before a prison) they little cared to return home.

Their incursions into Europe were so far and frequent, that Pope Innocent
the fourth, about the year 1245, began to fear them in Italy. Wherefore he
sent Askelin, a Friar much admired in that age, with three other, into
Tartaria, to convert that nation to Christianity. Where Askelin in stead of
teaching them the elements of our religion, laid this foundation, to amplify
to them the power of the Pope, setting him out in his full dimensions; How he
was above all men in the Christian world. A good nurse, to feed infants, in
stead of milk, with such dry bones: enough almost to affright them from
entering into our Church, seeing such a giant as they painted the Pope, to stand
before the door.

But Baiothnoi chief Captain of the Tartarian army (for they were not admitted
to speak with the great Cham himself) cried quits with this Friar, outvying him
with the greatness and divinity of their Cham; and sent back by them a blunt
letter: Magdeburg. Cent. 13. cap. 2. Sedex Vincent. lib. 31. cap. 51
Pope, know this; Thy messengers came and brought letters to us: Thy messengers
spoke great words; we know not whether thou enjoynedst them, or whether they
spoke of themselves: and in thy letters thou writest thus, Many men you kill,
slay, and destroy -- At last he thus concluded; If thou will set upon our land,
water, and patrimony, it behooves that thou, Pope, in thy proper person come
unto us; and that thou come to him who contains the face of the whole earth;
meaning their great Cham.

Never did his Holiness so meet with his match before. He durst not meet the
great Cham of the East, his competitour in the imaginary monarchy of the
world, to try whose title was truest. Let others tear their skins, he would
sleep in a whole one. And indeed that Shepherd loved his flock of Christians
better, then by his absence in a long journey into Tartaria to expose them to
the wolves. And so the conversion of Tartarie at that time was disappointed.

It is a pretty quaere, Whether Turks of Tartars be easier convertible to
Christian religion: I mean ex part objecti; for otherwise all things are
equally easy to an infinite agent. Now it seems the Tartars are reducible
with most facility to our religion: For pure Paganism and native Infidelity,
like white cloth, will take the tincture of Christianity; whereas the Turks are
soiled and stained with the irreligious religion of Mahometanisme, which first
with much pains must be scoured out of them. And though they may seem to be in
some forwardness to conversion, because they have a kind of knowledge and
reverence of Christ, yet the best joint of their belief must be broken before
it can be well set, and every drop of their present religion pumped out before
true faith be infu^ed into them. And experience, the most competent witness
herein, has proved, That afterward more Tartars, both private men and
Princes, then Turks of either condition, have embraced Christianity. Enough at
this time; we shall have occasion too soon to speak more of the Tartars.

Chap. 3. The Greeks recover their Empire from the Latins; The Holy war
thereby much endamaged.
IT was conceived that it would be much beneficial to the Pilgrims in their
voyages to Palestine, that the Latins were lately possessed of the Grecian
Empire: For what is saved, is gained: And grant that the Latins in Greece
should not actually assist in the Holy war, yet it was a considerable
advantage what all justly expected, That Pilgrims should now have safe and
secure passage through Grecia, the pitfall which formerly had devoured so many.

But these fair hopes soon miscarried. For what through the celerity of
Theodorus Lascaris, and the gravity of John Ducas his son in law, who reigned
as Grecian Emperors in Nice, the Greeks recovered every foot of ground that
the Latins had won from them: Only the Venetians being good at holdfast,
kept their portion when all others had spent theirs, and enjoy Candie to this
day. This is imputed to their discretion in their choice, who in the sharing of
this Empire amongst the Western Princes, refused the continent countries
(though greater in extent, and richer in cities) and chose rather the Islands,
which being as little worlds in themselves, were most capable of entire
fortifications, especially in their way, who were most powerful at sea.

Sixty years almost did the Latins make a hard shift to hold Constantinople,
under five succeeding Emperors: 1. Baldwine the first, 1203.
Earl of Flanders; 2. Henry his brother; 3. Peter, 1205.
Count of Auxerre in France, Henrie's son in law; 1216.
1221.
4. Robert; 5. Baldwine the second, and last. An example which the observers of
the ominous circulation or return of names allege, 1238.
That as a Baldwine was the first, so a Baldwine was the last Latin Emperor
in Grecia.

Of these, the first Baldwine had his hands and feet cut off, and died in a
ditch; Peter invited to a feast, paid the shot with his life; the other three
died without any violence, but with much misery. And thus their conquest of
Grecia, like a little sprig stuck into the ground, did sprout at the first
whilst it had any sap in it, but then withered for want of a root.

Indeed it was impossible long to continue: For when the generation of the
primitive adventurers in this action were dead, there wanted another to succeed
them; and the countries whence they came were so far off that supplies of
Latin people came thither very slowly* Only Venice well peopled her parts
from the vicinity of her dominions. And that number of soldiers which is
sufficient by sudden conquest to overrunne a country, 1237
is incompetent without a second edition of new supplies, to make good, manage,
and maintain it: especially being to meddle with the Greeks, far exceeding
them in number, subject only out of fear, longing daily for their liberty and
opportunity to recover it.

Let never any Pilgrims hereafter make Greece their inn in their journey to
Palestine. Yea, also at this time the furnace of the Grecian jealousy was made
seven times hotter: For besides this Civil, an Ecclesiastical and Spiritual
breach happened betwixt them and the Latins; which we come now to describe.

Chap. 4. The uncurable breach betwixt the Eastern and Western Churches, with
the occasion thereof.
HItherto Grecians and Latins lived together in Palestine in some tolerable
correspondencie; differing in judgment, but complying in affections; as
counting themselves two several sides, yet both making up the body of
Christians. But now by an unhappy discord they were irreconcilably parted
asunder, to the great advantage of the Turks and prejudice of the Holy war.
We will fetch this flame from the first spark; and though we go far about,
the length of the journey will be recompensed by the goodness of the way.

Anciently in the primitive time the Church of Rome was esteemed the first and
chiefest of all others, but without any jurisdiction above them. Because that
was the Imperial city and Queen of the world, therefore the Church therein
was highest in account; as the candle which is in the fairest candlestick is
always set above the rest (though otherwise equal unto it in light) at the
upper end of the table.

It happened afterward that the Emperor removed his seat from Rome to
Constantinople: Whereupon orphane Rome suddenly decayed (for the Emperors
court carried day with it, and left night behind it) was chief mourner at the
funerals of her own greatness; and from a pleasant garden turned a
wilderness overgrown with Goths, Vandals, and other barbarous weeds: whilst
Constantinople tricked and tired her self, started up in an instant great,
rich, and stately; insomuch that John her Patriarch claimed to be universal
Bishop above all other. Gregory the Great, Bishop of Rome, stoutly withstood
him, protesting that he was the usher of Antichrist who assumed that swelling
title; wherein he ^eated the brand to mark his successor with: For Boniface
(save one, the next) Pope of Rome so dealt with Phocas the Emperor of
Constantinople, that he got himself confirmed universal Bishop over the whole
world. A Chaplain and a Patron well met, both usurpers, supporting one another
(like stones in an arch) with their reciprocal aid; Phocas held Boniface in
his chair, and Boniface kept Phocas in his throne. And thus was the Pope of
Rome first possessed of his Primacie both of dignity and authority, both of
precedencie and of power and jurisdiction over all other Churches. As for his
pretense, to challenge it by commission from Christ and succession from Peter,
this string to his bow is so full of gauls, frets, and knots, it cannot hold,
and is broken by many learned Divines.

However, Constantinople rather overborn then overcome, for want rather of
strength then stomach, ever rebelled, or rather resisted (for no rebellion
against usurpation) Romes supremacy (especially when she found her self
befriended with any advantage) for many hundred years after.

It happened (to come to the matter in hand) that a Grecian Matthew. Paris. in
anno 1237. page 622.
Archbishop went to Rome, there to have his confirmation. Where the Court
demanded for him such unreasonable fees (toll more then the grift) that the
Prelate perceived it would weaken him to be confirmed, and shake his estate to
settle him in his Bishopric. Home therefore he comes with a loud alarm
against the extortions of Rome, and mustereth together many of his
contrymen; who hereupon for ever withdrew their obedience from Rome, and
threw off that heavy yoke they could not bear, hereafter owning her for their
sister not mother.

It may seem strange that the Roman Court being here justly taxed for
extortion, would not amend it. But how often soever she be told of her dirty
face, she will never wash it: For reforming would argue a former fault; and
they feared, if they yielded themselves guilty in one point, it would shake the
whole fabric of their credit. Besides, if the Grecians had received
satisfaction and redress in this grievance, it would have given them pretense
to prepare more requests, and to think that they also were due. Lastly, no
strength of persuasion will draw men from those sins which are glued unto
them by their profit. Thus the avarice of the Romish officers (as of late the
shameful shameless covetousness of their Indulgencemongers occasioned
Luthers falling from them) caused the Grecians wholly to renounce their
subjection to that See: and Germanus Patriarch of Constantinople now grew
absolute of himself, without any dependencie on the Pope.

His Holiness despairing to reduce them by fair means, proclaimed war
against them. And as formerly against the Albingenses, so now against the
Grecians, resolved to send an army of Matthew. Paris. in anno 1237. page 622.
Croised soldiers: It being his custom to make the secular power little
better then an hangman to execute those he shall please to condemn: Yea, he
has turned the back of the sword toward Infidels, and the edge against
Christians dissenting from him in small matters. But few voluntaries were found
for this service, because of a pious horror and religious reluctancie against
so odious an employment: Only in Idem, page 614.
Cyprus (I believe in a private persecution rather then open war) some
Grecians were put to death; the Pope using the same severity against wolves and
wandering sheep, foes and prodigal children.

Chap. 5. Wherein the Greeks dissent from the Latins; What must charitably be
conceived of them.
BEsides their rejecting of the Popes both Ecclesiastical and Temporal
tyranny, the Greeks differ from the Latins in other matters of moment: For
they maintain the procession of the holy Spirit from the Father alone. As for
their other tenants, they stand in some middle terms of opinion betwixt Papists
and Protestants; yet so, that they approach nearer the Papists in more, to us in
more weighty and dominative points. With Rome they concur in
Transubstantiation, Sr Edw. Sand. Relig. of the West, page 233, and 234.
in the whole sacrifice of the Mass, in praying to Saints and for the dead, in
Auricular Confession, in worshipping of Pictures (only of Christ and our Lady)
but all Images they detest; a kind of Purgatory they hold, but not in hell or
the skirts thereof, nor by any outward torment. With us they consent in the
Sufficiency of the Scriptures to salvation, in denying the Infallibility of the
Church (much more of the Pope) the overplus of Merits, Service ununderstood,
Indulgences, Liberaties out of Purgatory, and the like.

Hereupon the Romanists condemn them all for heretics and castawayes, killing
more then a third of all Christians (as Cain did a quarter of mankind with a
blow) with this their uncharitable censure. But heaven-gate was not so easily
shut against multitudes when S. Peter himself wore the keys at his girdle. And
let us not with rash judging thrust all into the pit of hell whom we see
walking near the brink thereof. We shall think better of them if we consider,
That

First, their tenets wherein they dissent from the Romanists are sound enough,
save that of the holy Ghost. Concerning which it is an useful quaere, Whether,
granting the first authors and ringleaders of that error in a bad condition,
there be not some favor to be allowed to those who in simplicity succeed to
hereditary errors received from their ancestors, if they do not wilfully
bar nor bolt their eyes against the beams of the truth, but be willing (as we
charitably conceive of the Greeks) to receive and embrace better instruction.

Secondly, the Master of the Sentences (waited on herein with other B^navent.
1. Sent. did. 11. art. 1. quaest. 1. Scotus, 1. Sent did. 1. quaest. 1. Th.
Aquin. part. 1. quaest. 36. art. 2.
learned men) is of opinion, That in the sense of the Greek Church, A Filio and
Per Filium is no real difference, but a question in modo loquendi. Sure it
would have grated the foundation, if they had so denied the procession of the
holy Ghost from the Son as thereby to make an inequality betwixt the two
Persons: But since their form of speech is, That the holy Ghost proceeds from
the Father by the Son, and is the Spirit of the Son, without making any
difference in the consubstantiality of the Persons, their doctrine may pass
with a favorable interpretation.

Thirdly, our quickest sight in the matters of the Trinity is but one degree
above blindness. Wherefore, as concerning it, let our piety lodge there where
in other disputes the deceit of sophisters used to nestle it self, namely, in
universalibus, in large and general expressions, and not descend to curious
particulars. To search into the manner of the Spirits procession, is neither
manners nor religion, and rather falls under an awful adoration and belief
then an exact and curious inquiry.

Lastly, this their tenet does not infect any other point in Divinity with its
poisonous inferences. Some errors are worse in their train then in themselves,
which (as the Dragon in the Revelation drew down a third part of the stars
with his tail) by their bad consequences pervert other points of religion: But
this Grecian opinion (as learned men propound it) concerning the holy Ghost,
has this happiness, that it is barren, and begets no other bad tenets from
it, being entire in it self.

More may be alleged for the lessening of this error: But grant it in its
full extent, yet surely the moderate judgment of that learned In his third
book Of the Church, chap. 5.
Divine whose memory smells like a Field the Lord has blessed, will abide
trial; who in effect thus concludes, Their schisms are sinful, wicked, and
inexcusable; their doctrine dangerous, but not so damnable as excluding from
all possibility of salvation.

As for the observation of a Estiu^, did. 11.. 2.
Schoolman, That afterward the Turks won Constantinople on Whitsunday, the
day dedicated to the memorial of the holy Spirit, as if God herein pointed at
the sin of the Grecians in dishonouring the holy Ghost; we leave it to the
readers discretion, desiring rather to be scepticall then definitive in the
causes of Gods judgments.

Chap. 6. A comparative estimate of the extent of the Greek and Latin Church;
What hope of reconcilement betwixt them; The influence this breach had on the
Holy war.
IF that religion were surely the best which is of the greatest latitude and
extent, Surveyers of land were fitter then Divines to judge of the best
religion. Neither is it any matter of great moment to measure the greatness of
either Church: But because Rome makes her Universality such a masterpiece to
boast of, let us see if the Greek Church may not outshoot her in her own bow.

If we begin with the Grecian Church in Africa under the Patriarch of
Alexandria, thence proceeding into Asia, and fetch a compass about Syria,
Armenia, Asia the less, with Cyprus, Candie, and other Islands in the
mid-land-sea, and so come into Grecia; if hence we go into Russia and Muscovia
(who though differing in ceremonies, dissent not in doctrine; as a sundry
dialect makes not a several language) to take only entire Kingdoms, and
omit parcels: it is a larger quantity of ground then that the Romish religion
does stretch to, since Luther cut so large a collop out of it, and withdrew
North-Europe from obedience to his Holiness.

Perchance the Romanists may plead they have lately improved the patrimony of
their religion by new purchases in both Indies: But who knows not that those
people, rather watered then baptized, affrighted with cruelty into
Christianity, deserve not to be accounted settled and well-grounded professors
of their religion?

As for reconciliation betwixt the Grecians and Latins, it is utterly
improbable, except the Greeks submit to the Popes Primacie, which they will
never do. No hope then of their meeting together, when neither party will
stir step toward other.

True it is, some forty years since ( anno 1594) the Bishops of little Russia
(a country following the Eastern Church, but under the King of Poland) on
condition they would accept the Popes Possevin. in Apparatu sacro, in Rutheni.
See Brierwoods Enquiries, chap. 18.
supremacy, were dispensed with, and permitted in other matters to adhere to
the Greek Church, and keep union with it; the Pope manifesting herein, that he
aims not so much at the reduction of the Greeks to the truth as to his own
obedience.

Besides the hatred they have against the Popes pride, another great hindrance
of the union is the small intercourse the Eastern Christians have or desire to
have with the Western. They live amongst the Turks, and are grown to be
contented slaves; and having long since parted with their hopes, now almost
have lost their desire of liberty.

We must not forget, how some fifty years ago solemn news was reported in
Rome, that the Sr Edw. Sand. West. Relig. page 100.
Patriarch of Alexandria, with all the Greek Church in Africa, by their
Ambassadors had submitted and reconciled themselves to the Pope, and from him
received Absolution and Benediction: All which was a politic lie, perchance
therefore reported, that it might make impression in the minds, and raise and
confirm the spirits of the vulgar, who easily believe all that their betters
tell them. And though afterward this report was controlled to be false, yet
men's spirits then being cold, were not so sensible of it as before: and the
former news came to many men's ears who never heard afterward of the check and
confutation thereof. Nor is there any State in the world that makes such use
and advantage, as the Papal does, of false news. To conclude; As it is a
maxim in Philosophy, Ex quibus constamus, ex iisdem nutrimur: so a great part
of their religion consisting of errors and falsehoods, it is suitable that
accordingly it should be kept up and maintained with forgeries and deceits.

To return to Palestine; This rent (not in the seam but whole cloth) betwixt
these Churches was no mean hindrance to the Holy war. Formerly the Greeks in
Syria were not so clearly cut asunder from the Latins, but that they hung
together by one great sinew in the common cause, agreeing against the Turk the
enemy to both: But since this last breach, the Greeks did in their desires
propend and incline to the Turks, being better contented they should conquer,
from whom they should have fair quarter, free exercise of their religion, and
secure dwelling in any city, paying a set tribute; then the Latins, who they
feared would force their consciences, and bring their souls in subjection to
the Popes supremacy. Expect we then never hereafter, that either their hearts
or hands should afford any assistance to our Pilgrims in their designs.

Idem, page 242.
Some conceive, that at this day if the Western Christians should stoutly
invade Turkey with any likelihood to prevail, the Greeks therein would run to
aid them. But others are of a contrary judgment; considering, First, the
inveterate and inlaid hatred (not to be washed off) they bear the Latins:
Secondly, the jealousy they have that they will never keep promise with them,
who have always a warrant dormant from the Pope to break all contracts
prejudicial to the Romish Church: Thirdly, that custom and long continuance
in slavery have so hardened and brawned their shoulders, the yoke does not
wring them so much; yea, they had rather suffer the Turks, being old full
flies, to suck them, then to hazard their galled backs to new hungry ones;
finding by experience, That they themselves live on better terms of servitude
under the Turk, less grated and grinded with exactions, then some of their
contrymen do under the Latins; for instance, in Zante and Candie under the
Venetians.

Chap. 7. Theobald King of Navarre makes an unsuccessefull voyage into
Palestine.
THe ten years truce by this time was expired which Frederick made with the
Turks; 1238
and Reinold Viceroy of Palestine by instructions from him concluded another
truce of the Magdeburg. Cent. 13. cap. 16. Decennales inducias nuper denuo
confirmarat.
same term with them. He saw that this young Christian Kingdom of Jerusalem,
like an infant, would thrive best with sleeping, with peace and quietness: Nor
was it any policy for him to move at all, where there was more danger to hurt
then hope to help their present estate.

But though this peace was honorable and profitable, having no fault but that
Frederick made it; yet the Templars who did not relish the father, must needs
distaste the child: They complained that this peace was not used as a slumber to
refresh the soldiers spirits, but as a lethargy to benumme their valor; and
chiefly snarled at this indignity, That the Turks had access to the temple of
the Sepulcher, and that Goats had free commonage in the Sheeps pasture.
Wherefore Pope Gregory, to Iidem, ibidem.
despite the Emperor Frederick, caused the Dominicanes and Franciscanes his
trumpeters, to incite people to the Holy war. These were two twin-orders, but
the Dominicane the eldest; which now were no sooner hatched in the world, but
presently chirped in the pulpits. In that age Sermons were news, and meat for
Princes not common men: Yea, the Albingenses with their preaching had drowned
the voices of secular Priests, if these two Orders had not helped to out-noise
those supposed heretics. These amplified with their rhetoric the calamity of
the Christians, tyranny of the Turks, merit of the cause, probability of
success; performing their parts with such gravity, show of devotion, accents
of passion, not glued on for the present purpose but so natural as from true
affection, that many were wooed to undertake the voyage: 1239
Principally, Theobald King of Navarre, Almerick Earl of Montfort, Henry of
Champaigne, Peter Earl of Bretaigne, with many others of inferior rank.

Ships they had none; wherefore they were fain to shape their passage by land
through Grecia: where they were entertained with treachery, famine, and all the
miseries which wait on distressed armies. These came last that way, and (I may
say) shut the door: For no Christian army ever after went that tedious journey
by land.

Having passed the Bosporus, they marched into Bithynia: thence through Galatia
they came unto the mountain Taurus; where they were much damnified by the
Turks, who fell on and off upon them, as they were advised by their own
advantages. The Christians desired no other gift but that a set battle might be
given them; which the Turks would not grant, but played at distance and would
never close. But with much ado the Christians recovered to Antioch, having
scarce a third part of them left, their horses all dead, and themselves scarce
mounted on their legs, miserably weak; as what the mercy of sword, plague, and
famine had pleased to spare.

Hence the Templars conducted them to Gaza; where they fell on forraging the
country of the Sultan, assaulting no places which were of strength, or honor
to subdue, but only spoiled poor villages, which counted themselves walled
with the truce as yet in force. Abundance of wealth they got, and were now late
returning home, when after their plentiful supper a dear and sharp reckoning
was called for: Behold, the Turks in great numbers fell upon them near unto
Gaza; and the Christians down with their bundles of spoil, and out with their
swords, bravely defending themselves till such time as the night parted the
fray. Here they committed a great error, and (as one may say) a neglect in
over-diligence: for in stead of reposing themselves to rest, and appointing a
set watch, they all lay in a manner Perdues, no one slumbering all night, but
attending their enemies; contrary to the rules of an army, which with Argus
should never have all its eyes wake or sleep together. Next morning when the
Turks, whose numbers were much increased, set upon them, alas! they being but
few to many, faint to fresh, were not able to make any forcible resistance:
Yet, what they could not pay in present, they pawned their lives for; and their
arms being too weak for their hearts, they were rather killed then conquered.
Earl Henry was slain, Almerick taken prisoner, the King of Navarre escaped by
the swiftness of his Spanish gennet; which race, for their winged speed, the
Poets feigned to be begot of the wind.

Mean time the other Christians looked on, and saw their brethren slaughtered
before their eyes; and yet though they were able to help them, were not able to
help them, their hands being tied with the truce, and Reinoldus charging them
no way to infringe the peace concluded with the Sultan. Hereupon many cursed
him as the Christians cutthroat; he as fast condemned the King of Navarre and
his army for breaking the truce. And though the Papal faction pleaded that the
former peace concluded not these late adventurers, and that it was only made
with Frederick the Emperor; yet he representing the whole body of
Christianity, all the bundle of their shifts could not piece out a satisfactory
answer, but that they were guilty of faith-breaking.

Home hastened the King of Navarre with a small retinue, clouding himself in
privatenesse; as they actour who comes off with the dislike of the
spectatours, steals as invisibly as he may into the tiring-house.
Expectation, that friendly foe, did him much wrong; and his performance fell
the lower, because men heightened their looking for great matters from him.

Chap. 8. Richard Earl of Cornwall saileth to the Holy land; His performance
there, and the censure thereof.
Matthew. Paris, page 670.
FIfteen days after the departure of Theobald, 1240
Richard Earl of Cornwall, Octo. 11.
brother to Henry the third then King of England, landed at Ptolemais. This
Prince was our English Crassus, or Croesus; Cornwall was his Indies, where he
turned tin into gold and silver. So well-moneyed he was, that for ten years
together he might for every day expend an Camden, in Cornwall.
hundred marks: So that England never since had together a poorer King and a
richer Subject.

Before he began his voyage he craved a subsidy of prayers from the Monks of
S. Albanes: Yea, scarce was there any Covent appearing for piety, to whose
devotions he recommended not himself; counting that ship to sail the surest
which is driven with the breath of godly men's prayers. Theodoricus Lord Prior
of the English Hospitallers, with many other Barons and brave soldiers
attending him, passed through France, and was there honorably entertained by
King Lewis.

Being come to the Mediterranean sea, the Popes Legate brought him a flat
countermand, that he must go no further, but instantly return. Richard at first
was astonished hereat: but quickly his anger got the mastery of his amazement,
and he fell on fuming; Matthew. Paris. in Hen. 3. page 719.
Was this Christ's Vicar? Unlike was he to him, who was thus unlike to himself,
who would say and unsay, solemnly summon, then suddenly cashier his Holy
soldiers. This was deluding of peoples devotions with false alarms, to make
them put their armor on to put it off again. As for his own self, he had vowed
this voyage, his honor and treasure was engaged therein, and the Pope should
not blast his settled resolutions with a breath: his ships were manned,
victualled, and sailing forward; and in such great actions the setting forth is
more then half the journey.

All know his Holiness to be too wary an archer to shoot away his arrows at
nothing. He had a mark herein, a plot in this restraint, but that too deep for
others to fathom. It could not be this, To make this rich Earl (a fish worth
angling for) to commute his voyage into money, and to buy a dispensation of his
Holiness to stay at home, as formerly he had served many meaner Pilgrims.
Surely though the Popes covetousness might have prompted, his wisdom would
have dissuaded him from a project spunne with so course a thread.

On saileth Earl Richard, and safely arriveth at Ptolemais; where he is well
welcomed, especially by the Clergy, solemnly singing, Idem, page 729.
Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord. He proclaimed, No Christian
should depart for want of pay; for he would entertain any, and give them good
wages that would do work in this war. But he found the Christians there
shivered into several factions, and the two great Orders, Hospitallers and
Templars, two great confusions of the Holy cause. Of these the Hospitallers
were the seniors in standing, their original being dated eighteen years
before the Templars; and therefore challenged superiority. But that which made
the younger brother so brisk, was, that he was his fathers darling. The
Templars in all their broils had support from the Pope, because the others were
suspected to have a smack of the Imperial faction. This made them active,
daring, offering of affronts: And what contrymen soever the Templars were,
they were always Italians, that is, true to the Triple Crown. These being
madded with ambition, were the more outrageous for their ^igh fare (their great
revenues) and deserved to be dieted with a poorer pittance, except they would
have used their strength better. Our Earl knew, to please one side would
certainly displease the other, and to please both would probably please
neither. Wherefore he managed his matters entirely to himself, without relating
to either of the parties, taking no ground of their giving, but bowling at the
public good by the aim of his own eye.

The Sultans in Syria (for the Turkish power there was divided into several
Sultanies, as those of Damascus, Called anciently Arabia Petraea, Tyrius, lib.
21. cap. 5.
Cracci, Seisser, but Babylon the chiefest) hearing of Richards preparations,
proffered peace unto him. But whilst as yet the conditions were in suspense,
Richard fortified Askelon (in all the bunch there was not a better key, or
harbor of more importance) not only to strength but state, with marble
pillars and statues; though the silent ruins thereof at this day confess not
to the beholders that any such cost was ever bestowed there. He also caused the
corpses of the Christians killed at the late battle at Gaza, and hitherto
unburied, decently to be interred; and appointed an annual salarie to a Priest
to pray for their souls. Hereby he had the happiness with little cost to
purchase much credit; and the living being much taken with kindness to the
dead, this burying of those Christians, with pious persons won him as much
repute as if he killed so many Turks.

At last the truce for ten years was concluded with the Sultan; 1241
all Christian captives were discharged and set free, many forts of them
restored, and matters for the main reduced to the same estate they were at the
first peace with Frederick the Emperor: and Richard returning through Sicily
and by Rome, where he visited his Holiness, safely came home to England: Where
he was welcomed with bad news, that a discontented Cornish man, banished for
his misdemeanors, had found out tinne-mines in Matthew. Paris, page 765.
Bohemia; which afterward more assuaged the swelling of this Earls bags then
all his voyage to Palestine: For till that time that metal was only fetched
from England, which afforded meat to some foreign countries, and dishes to all.

His voyage was variously censured: The Templars which consented not to the
peace, flouted thereat, as if all this while he had labored about a difficult
nothing, and as good never a whit as never the better, for the agreement would
never hold long. Others thought he had abundantly satisfied any rational
expectation: For he Camden, in Cornwall.
compelled, says one, the Saracens to truce, (a strange compulsion without
violence, except the showing of a scabbard) he restored many to the life of
their life, their liberty; which alone was worth all his pains; the peace he
concluded was honorable; and a cheap Olive Branch is better then dear Bays.

Two of our English Richards were at Palestine; one famous for drawing his
sword, the other his purse. He was also remarkable herein, that he brought all
his men and ships safe home (next of kin to a miracle) and none will deny, but
that in such dangerous adventures a saver is a gainer. One good he got hereby,
This journey brought him into play amongst foreign Princes; henceforward the
beyond-sea-world took notice of him, and he of it. Never would he have had the
face to have courted the Crown Imperial, if these his travels had not put
boldness and audacity into him, which made him afterward a stiff rival to
bid for the Empire of Germany.

Chap. 9. The Corasines cruelly sack the city of Jerusalem, and kill the
Christians therein.
ABout this time (though we find not the punctual date thereof) happened the
death of Reinoldus Fredericks Lieutenant in Syria, who by his moderation had
been a good benefactour to the Holy war. But the Templars counted him to want
metal, because he would not be mad and causelessly break the truce with the
Sultan. In his grave was buried the happiness of the Christians in Palestine:
for now the lawless Templars observe no other rule but their own will.

And now the inundation of the Tartarians in spite of all dammes and banks
overranne the North of Asia, and many nations fled from their own countries for
fear of them. Amongst other the Corasines (called by some Choermines, and
Groissoms) a fierce and warlike people, were notwithstanding by the Tartarians
forced to forsake their land.

Being thus unkennelled, they had their recourse to the Sultan of Babylon, and
petitioned him to bestow some habitation upon them. Their suit he could neither
safely grant nor deny: A denial would egg their discontents into
desperateness; Matthew. Paris, page 851.
and such sturdy dangerous vagabonds might do much harm: to admit them to be
joynt-tenants in the same country with the Turks, was a present inconvenience,
and would be a future mischief. In stead therefore of giving them a house, he
sent them to a workhouse; yet so, that they apprehended it a great courtesy
done unto them: For he bestowed on them all the lands which the Christians held
in Palestine; liberal to give away what was none of his, and what the others
must purchase before they could enjoy. The Sultan encouraged them to invade
that country; whose people he pretended were weak and few, the land wealthy
and fruitful, so that the conquest would be easy, especially they having his
assistance in the present service, and perpetual patronage hereafter.

Animated herewith in come the Corasines with their wives and children
(bringing their households with them to win houses and lands for them) into
Syria, and march directly to Jerusalem; 1244
which being a weak and unfortified place, was taken without resistance. Weak
and unfortified! Strange! It is confessed on all sides, that Frederick the
Emperor and Reinoldus his Lieutenant spared no expense in strengthening this
city; since which time we find no solemn taking it by the Turks: Who then can
expect less then an impregnable place, where so much cost was sown? Which
drives us to conceive one of these three things; Either that the weakness of
this city was chiefly in the defenders hearts; Or else that formerly there
happened some blind and silent dispoiling of this place not mentioned by
Authors; Or lastly, that Jerusalem was a Jericho, I mean, a place cursed in
building; like Pharaohs lean kine, never a whit the fatter for devouring much
meat; and which still went in rags, though her friends bestowed change of
raiment upon her.

Thus this city, after that it had been possessed fifteen years by the
Christians, was won by this barbarous people, never since regained to our
religion. Sleep, Jerusalem, sleep in thy ruins, at this day of little beauty
and less strength, famous only for what thou have been.

The Christians flying out of Jerusalem with their families, took their course
toward Joppa; but looking back, beheld their own ensigns advanced on the
citie-walls, so done in policy by their enemies. Whereupon their credulity
thus commented, That their fellows had beaten the Corasines in Jerusalem, and
by these Matthew. Paris, page 835.
banners invited them to return: But going back, they found but cold (or rather
too hot) entertainment, being slain every mothers child of them. Dull nostrils!
not to sent so stale and rank a stratageme of their foes, so often used, so
easily defeated; not to send some spies to taste the bait before all swallowed
it. But men marked out for destruction, will run their own heads into the
halter.

Chap. 10. Robert Patriarch of Jerusalem, with the whole strength of the
Christians, conquered by the Corasines.
THe desperateness of the disease priviledgeth the taking of any Physic. The
Christians being now in deep distress, resolved on a dangerous course, but (as
their case stood) thought necessary: For they made peace with the Sultan of
Damascus and Seisser, and with the Sultan of Cracci; (These were Dynastes in
Syria of some good strength, and were at discord with the Sultan of Babylon)
and swearing them to be faithful, borrowed an army of their forces, with them
jointly to resist the Corasines; seeking, says In his letter to Richard of
Cornwall.
Frederick the Emperor, to find fidem in perfidia, trust in treachery. Many
suspected these auxiliary forces; thinking, though the forrest-wolves fell out
with the mountain ones, they would both agree against the sheep.

Robert Patriarch of Jerusalem was a most active commander over all. S. Lukes
day was the time agreed upon for the fatal battle; near Tiberias was the
place. As the Christians were ordering themselves in array, it was questioned in
what part of their army their new Turkish assistants should be disposed, and
concluded that they should be placed in the front, where if they did no other
good, they would dull the appetite of their enemies sword. This is thought to
have been a notorious error, and cause of their overthrow. For though those
soldiers who mean to be false, will never be made faithful in what place
soever they be bestowed, yet may they be made less dangerous if cast into the
body or main battle of the army, whence they have no such scope to fling out,
and to take advantage of place to do mischief, as they have either in the front
or wings thereof. Thus in Cesars time, Crassus an experienced General under
him being to bid the Gauls battle, Caes. lib. 3. De bello Gallico.
auxiliares copias, quibus ad pugnam non multum confidebat, in mediam aciem
collo^^vit; that so being hemmed in before and behind, they might be engaged to
fight manfully without starting away. And to instance in later times; our
Richard the third (who though he usurped the Crown, had, as none will deny, a
true title both to prowess and martial policy) marching to Bosworth, placed
Graft. in Rich. 3. fol. 102.
suspected persons (whose bodies were with him and hearts with Earl Henry) in
the midst; and those whom he most trusted, before, behind, and on every side.

The battle being joined, the Matthew. Paris, page 834.
Turks ran over to the other side; though some braved them only with
cowardlinesse not treachery, and that they fled from the battle but not fell to
the enemies. The Christians manfully stood to it, and though over-powerd in
number, made a great slaughter of their enemies, till at last they were quite
overthrown. Of the Teutonick Order escaped but three; of three hundred
Templars, but eighteen; of two hundred Hospitallers, but nineteen: The
Patriarch (to use his own words) whom God reputed unworthy of martyrdom, saved
himself by flight, with a few others. And this great overthrow, to omit less
partner-causes, is chiefly imputed to the Templars former so often breaking the
truce with the Sultan of Babylon.

Thus were the Christians conquered by the Corasines, and beaten by a beaten
nation; Palestine being won by those who could not keep their own country.
Improving this victory they left nothing to the Christians but Tire,
Ptolemais, and Antioch, with some few forts. Soon after, these Corasines elated
herewith fell out with the Sultan himself; who in anger rooted out their
nation, so that Matthew. Paris, page 475.
none of their name remained: Yea, Except any make them to be Chorasmii, a
people placed by Athenaeus in the East of Parthia.
all writers are silent of them both before this time and ever after: as if God
at this very instant had created this people to punish Christians; which
service performed, they were annihilated again.

Chap. 11. Lewis the ninth sets forward against the Turks; The occasion of
his journey, and his attendants.
SOme two years after, Lewis the ninth of that name, King of France, came to
assist the Christians. The occasion of his voyage, this; He had been visited
with a desperate sickness, insomuch that all art cried craven, as unable to
help him; and the Physicians resigned him to Divines, to begin with him where
they ended: They also gave him over; and for a while he lay in a trance, 1245
not the least breath brought news of any life left in him. Then Blanch the
Queen Mother (and Queen of mothers for her care of her son and his Kingdom)
Matthew. Paris, page 880. Et P. Aemyl. in D. Lud^^. page 214.
applied a piece of the Cross unto him. Thereat (whether thereby, let others
dispute) he revived and recovered; and thereupon was Croised, and in
thankfulness bound himself with a vow to sail to the Holy land. But his
Nobility dissuaded him from that design: The dangers were certain, the
success would be doubtful of so long a journey; his own Kingdom would be
left desolate, and many mischiefs unseen as yet, would appear in his absence:
Besides, his vow was made in his sickness, whilst reason was scarce as yet in
the peaceable possession of his mind, because of the remnant-dregs of his
disease: It might also be dispensed with by the Pope; yea, his deserts did
challenge so much from his Holiness. King Lewis, as persuaded hereat, laid
down the Cross to the great comfort and contentment of all the beholders: But
then Fox, Martyrolog. page 293.
altering his countenance, he required the Cross should be restored to him
again, and vowed to eat no bread until he was recognized with the Pilgrims
badge. And because his vow should suffer no diminution or abatement from his
disease* now no longer Lewis the sick, but Lewis the sound undertook the Holy
war. His Nobles seeing him too stiff to be unbent, and counting it a kind of
sacrilegious counsel to dissuade him from so pious a work, left him to his own
resolutions. There went along with him his two brothers, Charles Earl of Anjou,
Robert Earl of Artois, his own Queen, and their Ladies, O do the Popes Legate,
Hugh Duke of Burgundy, William Earl of Flanders, Hugh Earl of St. Paul, and
William Longspath Earl of Sarisbury with a band of valiant English men, who
went without license from Henry King of England: For in those days this
doctrine went current, That their Princes leave was rather of complement then
essential to their voyage; as if the band of this Holy war was an
acquittance from all others. Our Henry displeased at this Earls departure, for
his disobedience deprived him of his Earldome and castle of Sarisbury, not
suffering that sheep to grase in his pasture which would not own him for his
shepherd. William also son to this Camden, in Wiltshire.
Earl, smarting for his fathers fault, never enjoyed that honor. And though
King Henry himself being a Prince of more devotion then policy, did most
affectionately tender this Holy cause, yet he used this necessary severity
toward this Earl at this time; first, because it would weaken his land thus to
be dispeopled of martial men, secondly, his subjects forwardness might be
interpreted a secret check of his own backwardness in that war; thirdly, the
sucking in of foreign air did wean people from their natural Prince, and did
insensibly usher into their hearts an alienation from their own Sovereigne, and
a dependence on the King of France; lastly, he had some thoughts on that voyage
himself, and reserved such prime Peers to attend on his own person thither.

1246
The Pope gave to this King Lewis his charges, the tenth of the Clergies
revenues through France for three years; and the King employed the Popes
collectours to gather it, knowing those leaches were the best suckers. Hereupon
the states of the Clergy were shaved as bare as their crowns; and a poor
Priest who had but twenty shillings annual pension, was forced to pay two
yearly to the King: And this by my Matthew. Paris. in anno 1246. page 943.
Author is made the cause of his following ill success, there being much
extortion used by his underofficers. No wonder then if the wings of that army
did quickly flag, having so heavy a weight of curses hanging upon them. And
though money be the sinews of war, yet ill-gotten money, like gouty sinews,
rather paineth then strengthens. True it is, that this pious King was no way
guilty thereof, but such as were under him; and oftentimes the head does ach
for the ill vapors of the stomach. He himself most princely caused to be
proclaimed through his realm, If any merchant or other had been at any time
injured by the Kings exactours, Fox, Martyrolog. page 292.
either by oppression or borrowing of money, let him bring forth his bill,
showing how and wherein, and he should be recompensed. How this was performed
we find not; but it was a good lenitive plaster to assuage the peoples pain
for the present.

Having at Lions took his leave of the Pope, and a blessing from him, he
marched toward Avignon: Where some of the city wronged his soldiers,
especially with foul language. Wherefore his Nobles desired him that he would
besiege the city, the rather because it was suspected that therein his father
was poisoned. To whom Lewis most Christianly, I come not out of France to
Matthew. Paris. page 995.
revenge my own quarrels, 1248
or those of my father or mother, Aug. 25.
but injuries offered to Jesus Christ. Hence he went without delay to his
navy, and committed himself to the sea.

Chap. 12. Lewis arriveth in Cyprus; The conversion of the Tartarians hindered;
The treachery of the Templars.
SAiling forward with a prosperous wind, Sept. 20.
he safely arrived in Cyprus; where Alexius Lusignan King of the Island
entertained him according to the stateliest hospitality. Here the pestilence
(one of the ready attendants on great armies) began to rage: And though a
French P. Aemyl. in Ludov. 9. page 215.
writer says it was minax magis quam funesta, yet we find in others, that two
hundred and forty Gentlemen of note died by force of the infection.

Hither came the Ambassadors from a great Tartarian Prince (but surely not
from Cham himself) invited by the fame of King Lewis his piety, professing to
him, That he had renounced his Paganism, and embraced Christianity; and that
he intended to send messengers to Pope Innocent to be further instructed in his
religion. But some Christians which were in Tartary dissuaded him from so
doing, left the Tartarians coming to Rome should behold the dissoluteness of
men's lives there, and so refuse to suck the milk of sweet doctrine from so
sour and bitter nipples, besmeared about with bad and scandalous conversation.
Yea, never could the Christian religion be showed to P. Aemyl. ut pri^s.
Pagans at any time on more disadvantages: Grecians and Latins were at deadly
feud; amongst the Latins, Guelfes and Gibellines sought to ruin each other:
Humility was everywhere preached, and pride practiced: They persuaded others
to labor for heaven, and fell out about earth themselves: Their lives were
contrary to their doctrines, and their doctrines one to another.

1249
But as for these Ambassadors, King Lewis received them very courteously,
dismissing them with bounteous gifts. And by them he sent to their master a
Tent, wherein the history of the Bible was as richly as curiously depicted in
needle work; hoping thus to catch his soul in his eyes, and both in that
glorious present: Pictures being then accounted laymens books, though since of
many condemned as full of errata's, and never set forth by authority from the
King of heaven to be means or workers of faith.

Whilst Lewis stayed in Cyprus, the Templars in the Holy land began to have
his greatness in suspicion. This Order (as both the other, of Hospitallers and
Teutonicks) though mown down to the bare roots at the last unfortunate battle,
yet now in three years space sprung up as populous as ever before; their other
brethren which lived in their several Covents and Commandries over all Europe,
having now refurnished the houses in Palestine.

Now these Templars were loath King Lewis should come to Ptolemais, though they
counterfeited he should be very welcome there. They formerly there had
commanded in chief without control, and were unwilling, having long sat in the
saddle, now to dismount and hold the stirrup to another. Besides, they would
not have so neat and cleanly a guest see their sluttish houses, fearing Lewis
his piety would shame their dissoluteness (being one so godly in his
conversation, that by the preaching in his life he had converted many P. Aemyl.
page 216.
Saracens) yea, perchance he being a strict Disciplinarian would punish their
vicious manners. Wherefore they wrote to him out of Syria, to accept of a peace
with the Sultan of Egypt now offered, and to proceed no further in war
against him.

The French King, whose heart was ever open to any fair agreement, and shut
against any dishonorable suspicions, had entertained the motion, had not the
King of Cyprus, being more studied in the Templars treacheries, better
instructed him: For he told him, this was but a Knolls, Turk. bist. page 102.
trick of their great Master, who underhand had sent to the Sultan, and
procured him to profer this peace only for their own private ends, for to
divert the King from coming amongst them. Lewis, though the mildest and most
patient of Princes, yet not a drone which wanted the sting of anger, commanded
the Master of the Templars upon the price of his head thenceforward to receive
no Embassage, nor keep any intelligence with their enemy, and resolved with
himself to invade Egypt.

Chap. 13. The wise preparations of the Egyptians; The valor of the French at
their landing; Damiata won.
BUt he stood so long in aiming, that the bird saw him, and had leisure to fly
away, and Meladine the Egyptian King to provide himself to make resistance.
Last time (some thirty years before) when the Christians under John Bren
invaded Egypt, they were not impeached in their arrival, but suffered to land
without any opposition. But Meladine now was sensible of the discommodity in
permitting his foes safely to come on shore: For first, they wasted and spoiled
the country and the provision about them: Secondly, opportunity was given to
malcontents and ill-disposed persons to fly to the enemy: Lastly, he found
it most policy to keep the enemy off at arms end, and to close at the last;
and not to adventure his Kingdom on the single die of a battle, but rather to
set it on a chance, that so he might have the more play for it. Wherefore he
resolved to strengthen his maritime places, and not suffer them to land; though
also herein he met with many difficulties. For as nothing was more certain then
that Lewis would set on Egypt, so nothing more uncertain; and because it was
unknown at what time or place he would come, all times and places were provided
for. This exhausted a mass of treasure to keep in pay so many soldiers for
many months together. But it is no time to dispute about unnecessary thrift,
when a whole Kingdom is brought into question to be subdued.

And because the landing-places in Egypt are of great disadvantage to the
defendants, yielding them no shelter from the fury of their enemies artillery,
being all open places and plain (the shores there being not shod against the
sea with huge high rocks, as they are in some other countries, because the land
is low and level) Meladine was forced to fortify welnigh an hundred and eighty
miles along the seaside; and what Nature had left bare, Art put the more
clothes on; and by using of great industry (such as by Tully is fitly termed
horribilis industria) in short space all that part of Egypt was fenced which
respects the sea.

Winter being past, Robert Duke of Burgundy and Alphonse King Lewis his
brother arrived in Cyprus with a new army; and hereupon they concluded to set
forward for Egypt, and attempted to land near Damiata. June 4.
But the governor thereof with a band of valiant soldiers stoutly resisted
them. Here was a doubtful fight: The Egyptians standing on the firm ground,
were thereby enabled to improve and P. Aemyl. page 216.
enforce their darts to the utmost, whilst the French in their ticklish boats
durst not make the best of their own strength. Besides, those on land threw
their weapons downwards from the forts they had erected, so that the declivity
and downfall did naturally second the violent impression of their darts.
How-ever, the Infidels at last were here beaten with what commonly was their
own weapon, I mean multitude; so that they fled into the town, leaving behind
them their governor and five hundred of their best soldiers dead on the
shore. 5.


Damiata was a strong city, the taking whereof was accounted the good task of
an army for a year. But now the Egyptians within were presented afresh with
the memory of the miseries they endured in the last long siege by the
Christians; and fearing lest that tragedy should be acted over again, set fire
on their houses, and in the night saved themselves by flight. The French
issuing in quenched the fire, 9.
and rescued much corn and other rich spoil from the teeth of the flame.

Meladine much troubled with this loss, to purchase peace Matthew. Paris, page
1047.
offered the Christians all Jerusalem in as ample a manner as ever formerly
they had enjoyed it; all prisoners to be restored, with a great sum of money
to defray their charges, and many other good conditions: So that we may much
wonder at his profuseness in these profers, and more at the Christians
indiscretion in their refusal. For though some advised to make much of so
frank a chapman, and not through covetousness to outstand their market;
Knolls, Turk. Hist.
yet the Popes Legate and Robert Earl of Artois, heightened with pride that
they could not see their profit, and measuring their future victories by the
largeness of their first footing in Egypt, would make no bargain except
Alexandria the best port in Egypt were also cast in for vantage, to make the
conditions down-weight: And King Lewis, whose nature was only bad because it
was so good, would in no wise cross his brother in what he desired. Whereupon
the Turks seeing themselves in so desperate condition, their swords being
sharpened on extremity, provided to defend their country to the utmost.

Chap. 14. Discords betwixt the French and English; The death and disposition
of Meladine King of Egypt.
ABout this time brake out the dissensions betwixt the French and English. The
cause whereof (as some say) was, for that the Earl of Sarisbury in sacking a
fort got more spoil then the French. But surely the foundation of their
discontents lay much lower, being an old enmity betwixt the two nations; and
Robert Earl of Artois used Earl William and his men with much discourtesie.

This Robert stood much on the Royalty of his descent, being brother to King
Lewis, though nothing of kin in conditions being as bountiful to deal injuries
and affronts as the other alms and charitable deeds. The English Earl, though
he stood on the lower ground in point of birth, yet conceived himself to even
him in valor and martial knowledge. And though godly King Lewis used all his
holy water to quench these heart-burnings, his success answered not his pains,
much less his desires; only his cooling persuasions laid their enmities for
the present fairly asleep.

Amidst these broils died Meladine the Egyptian King. A worthy Prince he was;
though some write very coursely of him: as he must rise early, yea, not at all
go to bed, who will have every ones good word. Let Christians speak of him as
they found: whose courtesies to them when they were half-drowned in Egypt, if
they will not confess, they deserve to be wholly drowned for their
ingratitude. In the latter end of his age he quite lost the good will of his
subjects, and lived unloved, and died unlamented, though a deserving and
fortunate man, which oftentimes covers a multitude of faults. The chief
reason whereof was, because they suspected him to be unsound in his religion,
and offering to Christianity: Besides, having reigned above thirty years, his
government became stale; and good things, if of long continuance, grow tedious,
they being rather affected for their variety then true worth: Lastly, the
rising sun stole the adorers from the sun setting; and Melechsala his son
being an active and promising Prince, reigned before in men's desires over the
Kingdom. To him now they all applied themselves; and having more wisdom in
their generation then the Christians, instantly ceased their private
dissensions. And now the Sultans of Damascus, Aleppo, and Babylon twisted
themselves in a joint agreement with Melechsala to defend their Mahometane
religion.

Chap. 15. Robert Earl of Artois fighting with the Egyptians contrary to the
counsel of the Master of the Templars, is overthrown and drowned.
1250
FRom Damiata the French marched up toward Cairo; the governor whereof
offended with Melechsala, promised to deliver that regal city to the French.
With some danger and more difficulty they passed an arm of Nilus, being
conducted by a fugitive Saracen to a place where it was foordable. Hence Earl
Robert marched forward with a third part of the army, and suddenly assaulting
the Turks in their tents (whilst Melechsala was absent in solemnizing a feast)
put them to flight. Hereupon this Earl proclaimed himself in his hopes Monarch
of the world: This blow made his enemies reel, the next would fell them: Now
speed was more needful then strength: This late victory, though gotten, was
lost if not used: What though they were not many? the fewer the adventurers,
the greater the gain: Let them therefore forwards, and set on the whole power
of the Turks, which was encamped not far off.

But the Master of the Templars, Matthew. Paris. page 1049.
in whom the sap of youth was well dried up, advised the Earl to stay and
digest the honor he had gotten, expecting the arrival of the rest of their
army: for the work was weighty they undertook, and needed two shoulders, the
united strength of the Christians, effectually to manage it: His soldiers were
weary, and must be refreshed; and it was madness to starve them to day in hope
of a feast tomorrow: That they were to march through a strange country, and
their best instructours were behind: let them stay for their lantern, and not
go in the dark. He minded him that he overvalued his victory, not considering
the enemies strength, whose harvest was not spoiled by losing an handful of
men.

But the Earl, full of the emptiness of self-conceit, allowed no counsel for
current but that of his own stamp. He scorned to wait the leisure of another
opportunity, and opprobriously objected to the Matthew. Paris page 1050.
Templars the common fame, That the Holy land long since had been won, but
for the collusion of the false Templars and Hospitallers with the Infidels.

Here the Earl of Sarisbury interposed himself to make peace, and to persuade
Robert to listen to the wholesome counsel that was given him. But his good will
was rewarded with Coward, Dastard, English-tail, and such like contumelious
terms. Wherefore said our Earl, Well, General, on in Gods name; Erimus (credo)
hodie, ubi non audebis caudam equi mei attingere, Idem ibid.
I believe this day you shall not dare to come nigh my horses tail. And now the
touchstone must tell what is gold, what is brass.

Marching on, they assaulted the castle of Mauzar, and were notably repulsed;
and Melechsala coming in with his whole strength, hemmed them in on every side.
The Christians were but the third part of the army; and at the present, they
themselves were scarce the half of themselves, being faint for want of
refreshing. Yet never shall one read more valor in so little a volume: They
played their parts most stoutly. As for the French Earl who went on like
thunder, he went out like smoke, crying to the Earl of Sarisbury, Flee, flee,
for God fights against us. To whom our Earl, God forbid my fathers son
should flee from the face of a Saracen. The other seeking to save himself by
the swiftness of his horse, and crossing the river, had there water enough to
drown him, but too little to wash from him the stain of rashness and
cowardice. Thus died the Earl of Artois: who had in him the parts of a good
General, but inverted and in transposition, bold in counsel, fearful in
execution. He was one of that princely quaternion of brothers which came hither
at this voyage, and exceeded each other in some quality; Lewis the Holiest,
Alphonse the Subtillest, Charles the Stoutest, and this Robert the Proudest.

As for the Earl of Sarisbury, he resolved to sell his life at such a rate that
the buyer should little boast of his peny-worth, slaying many a Turk; and
though unhorsed and wounded in his legs, stood on his honor when he could not
stand on his feet; and refusing all quarter, upon his knees laid about him like
a desperate man. The longer he fought, the fewer wounds he had; and there at
last he breathed forth his soul in the midst of his enemies. Of all the
Christians there escaped no more then two Templars, one Hospitaller, and one
common soldier, the messengers of this heavy news.

The French writers, because they can say little good, say little of this
battle, and lessen the overthrow as much as may be; which Authors of other
nations have more fully reported. Thus sometimes unfortunate gamesters flatter
themselves, belie their own purses, and dissemble their losses, whereof the
standers by take more accurate notice. P. Aemylius (an Italian, born at Verona;
but by long writing the French history his pen is made free denison of
France) though with his hand he does hide the orifice of the wound, yet it is
too narrow to cover the whole sore round about: So that it plainly appears,
that a great and grievous and most mortal blow was here given to the
Christians.

Chap. 16. King Lewis almost in the same place has the same woeful success,
conquered and taken captive by Melechsala.
IT is easier to be conceived then expressed, what general grief this doleful
news brought to the French; who followed not far off, and who before had
cause enough to sorrow for themselves: For the plague began to rage furiously
amongst them, and daily swept away thousands. Mean time good King Lewis sent
many of the weakest and impotentest people down the river to Damiata, there to
enjoy the benefit of privacie, good attendance, and physic. Melechsala having
intelligence hereof, met them by the way; and setting upon them (having neither
arm to fight, nor legs to run away) either burned or drowned them all, save
one English man, Alexander Giffard (whose ancient and famous family flourishes
to this day at Chellington in Staffordshire) who wounded in five places of his
body, escaped to the French, and reported what had happened to the rest.

And by this time Melechsala understood of the correspondency betwixt King
Lewis and the governor of Cairo, for the betraying of the city: Whereupon he
caused him suddenly to be apprehended; whereby the French King lost all hopes
to obtain that place of importance. Yea, now full willingly would the
Christians have accepted the terms formerly offered them; and now their hungry
stomachs would make dainties of those conditions which before, when full of
pride, they threw away as fragments. But the Turks now slighted them as not
worth the treating with; and as knowing that these Frenchmen, who at their
first landing were more then men, would at last be less then women.

Then began the French Lords to persuade King Lewis to provide for the safety
of his own person, and to return to Damiata. They told him, That if he stayed
with them, there was no hope grounded on probability (and what was any other
but a wilful self-delusion?) of his escaping: If he were killed, his death
would be a living shame to their religion; if taken prisoner, how would Mahomet
insult over Christ! The captivity of the most Christian of the most Christian
Kings would be foundation enough for the Turks thereon to build tropheys of
eternal triumph. But Lewis would not leave them, that they might not leave
him, but resolved to be a commoner with them in weal and woe; disdaining to be
such a niggard of his life as not to spend it in a good cause in so good
company.

Forward they march, and come to the fatal place where the last battle was
fought. There behold the mangled, headless, handlesse, feetlesse corpses of
their fellow-countreymen. They knew in general they were all their friends;
none knew his particular friend. The cause of this unwonted cruelty to the
dead, was a proclamation which Melechsala made, assigning a great sum of
money to every one who would bring the head, hand, or foot of a Christian: And
this made many of his covetous cowards (who carried their valor in their
purses) to be courageous. Whilst the French were here bemoning their fellows,
Melechsala came upon them with an infinite multitude, Apr. 5.
and put them all (being few and feeble) to the sword; taking King Lewis, with
his two brethren, Alphonse and Charles, prisoners.

Instantly the Turks went up with French ensigns to Damiata, hoping so
suddenly to surprise it. Which project had it took effect, then farewell King
Lewis for ever. He must be sent a present to the Caliph of Babylon, from whom
never any returned alive; Melechsala being but Purgatory, whence there was
redemption; but the Babylonian Caliph Hell it self, from whence no hope of
release. But God defeated their design; for the Turks could not French it so
handsomely, but that they were discovered. The very language of their hands
made them suspected afar off, because they could not counterfeit the French
idiotismes in managing their bucklers, that nation being most punctual and
critical in their military postures: But being come near, it was plain for
any to read Turk in their beards and complexions; so that they departed without
having what they desired.

Chap. 17. The woeful impression which the ill success of the French wrought
on the Christians in Europe.
SOme made more have then good speed (bad news being the worst ware a ship can
be fraught with) to sail into France with the sad tidings of this overthrow.
These intelligencers Blanch, the Queen Mother and Regent of France, rewarded
with the gallows: and my Author doubts not to pronounce them all Quos
Martyrs credimus esse manifestos, Matthew. Paris. page 1059.
Martyrs. But let them be contented with the coronet of their own innocence,
though without the crown of Martyrdom; that honor belonging to such alone as
suffer death for fundamental points of religion. But so great an eclipse could
not long be kept from the eyes of the world; and this doleful and dismal news
was sounded and seconded from every side. Then was there a general lamentation
over all Christendom, chiefly in France, where all were so sorrowful, that
any mirth was counted profaneness. Many bounded not themselves within the
banks of grief, but brake out into blasphemy, both in France and elsewhere,
taxing Justice it self of being unjust; and not content to admire what they
could not conceive, condemned Gods proceedings herein to be against right,
because above their reason. Fools, because they could not conquer on earth, did
quarrel with heaven. This bad breath, though it came but from the teeth of
some, yet proceeded from the corrupted lungs of others: some spoke but out of
present passion, but others even out of inbred Atheism. Many who before were
but lukewarm in religion, now turned stark-cold. In Venice and some other
cities of Italy, the inhabitants whereof Vt prius.
Matthew Paris calls semi-christianos, but half-Christians (though this his
harsh appellation wants three parts of charity) began wholly to tend to
apostasy. And now for a crutch to stay their reeling faith, it was high time
for the Clergy to ply the pulpits. They persuaded those Rachels who in this
voyage had lost any children and would not be comforted, that their children
were in a most blessed condition: They emptied all their boxes of their colors
of rhetoric, therewith to paint out the happiness of their estate which they
enjoyed in heaven: They pieced out their Sermons with reporting of Miracles;
How William Earl of Sarisbury appeared to his Matthew. Paris. page 1051.
mother, and assured her that he reigned most glorious in heaven. She presently
forgot her grief for losing her son, for joy that she had found a Saint, yea,
a Martyr. This was their constant custom; When any in Europe wept for the
loss of their friends in this war, their tears were instantly dried up with
some hot miracle that was reported them: Wherewith the silly people were well
pleased; as babes of clouts are good enough to keep children from crying.

About this time many thousands of the English were resolved for the Holy
war, and would needs have been gone, had not the King strictly guarded his
ports, and kept his Kingdom from running away out of doors. The King promised
he would go with them, and hereupon got a mass of money from them for this
journey. Some say, that he never intended it; and that this only was a trick
to stroke the skittish cow to get down her milk. His stubborn subjects said,
that they would tarry for his company till midsummer, and no longer. Thus they
weighed out their obedience with their own scales, and the King stood to their
allowance. But hearing of this sorrowful accident, both Prince and people
altered their resolution; who had come too late to help the French in their
distress, and too soon to bring themselves into the same misery.

Chap. 18. King Lewis exchanged for Damiata, stays some years at Ptolemais.
BUt return to Egypt; where King Lewis was kept prisoner by Melechsala, who
often felt his disposition about the resigning of Damiata, but found that to
hear of death was more welcome music unto him.

But see here a sudden alteration: One Tarqueminus a sturdy Mamaluke, with
another of that society, killed Melechsala in the very height of his victorious
happiness, and succeeded him in the Egyptian Kingdom. This Tarquemine came in
with an intent to send Lewis the same way: Which poor Prince was only armed
with innocence and majesty, and yet his bare person defended his person from
that cruel attempt: such an awful impression did his very presence, says my
Author, strike into him who would have stricken him. But we may rather think
that the city of Damiata was King Lewis his corslet, and that all the towers
and walls of that place fensed him; Tarqueminus reserving his person as an
equivalent ransom, thereby to redeem that royal city.

Now Lewis had changed his Lord, but not his lamentable condition, continuing
still a prisoner. At last he was restored to his liberty, on condition, that
the Christians should surrender Damiata, and he also pay back to the Turks many
thousand pounds, both for ransom of Christian captives, and in satisfaction of
the vastations they had committed in Egypt. Lewis for security of this money,
pawned to the Turk the Pyx and Host (that is, the body of Christ
transsubstantiated in the Eucharist) as his chiefest jewel which he should be
most careful to redeem. Hence, in perpetual memory of this conquest, we may
see a Du Serres, in the life of Lewis the 9.
Wafer-cake and a Box always wrought in the borders of that tapestry which is
brought out of Egypt.

Note by the way, that the Turks were most unreasonable in their rates of
ransoming soldiers, and in all other their pecuniary demands. For their own
country being near to the fountain of gold and silver, they made as if it
flowed as plentifully in other places, measuring the wealth of other lands by
their own, and asking as much for a private man's ransom as would drain a
Princes purse in these Western parts.

Thus was Damiata restored again to the Turks, and the Christians punctually
performed their promises; though the false Miscreant on the other side set not
half the captives free, killed all the sick persons whom by promise he should
relieve, and (contrary to the agreement) suffered not any Christian to
transport any of his goods out of Egypt.

Hence Lewis sailed to Ptolemais: where he lived in a miserable case, being
forsaken of his brothers, subjects, friends, and the Pope himself. His
brothers, Alphonse and Charles, though sent into France to solicit his suit,
and to advance his ransom with speed, yet being arrived forgot the affliction
of Joseph; and the King was as far from their mind as their sight: Wherefore
God justly visited Alphonse with an incurable disease. His subjects, though
furious at first in bemoning him, yet the fit past, complained not so much for
him as on him; charging him for ill managing the matters in Egypt by his
cowardlinesse and indiscretion. His friends, the Pisans and Genoans, reviled
him as the marrer of their mart, Damiata being formerly their most gainful
port; but now their honey was spoiled by destroying the hive: For the Sultan
seeing the city taken twice of the Christians in short time, to prevent further
dispute about it, took away the subject of the question, and rased it to the
ground. The Pope forsook him: And though many entreated his Holiness not to
prosecute the Emperor Frederick any further, from whom Lewis expected all the
beams of his comfort, yet he would hear of no submission from him, but sought
finally to ruin him. Only Blanch, King Lewis his mother, was careful for her
son, and labored his cause day and night. But alas! her arms were too short
to bring all ends together. And having gathered a considerable sum of money,
and shipped it for Palestine, a tempest in a moment Matthew. Paris. page 1091.
cast that away which her care and thrift was many months in getting. All this
he bore with a soul not benumbed with Stoicall senselessenesse, but becalmed
with Christian patience: Matthew. Paris. page 1091.
a second Job; so that what pleased God, pleased him. It somewhat mitigated his
misery, that he had the company of his consort Margaret, a woman worthy so good
a husband. Here she bore him a child, which because another Benoni, or Son of
sorrow, was called Tristram. But that Sr Tristram a Knight long before. See
Carew, in Cornwall, fol. 61.
name is more ancient, nor had it its birth from the christening of this child.

Four years King Lewis lived (not to say, loitered) in Syria, daily expecting
in vain that some Prince of Europe should fetch him off with honor, being loath
to return till he could carry home his credit with him. And though he was out
of his Kingdom, yet was he in his kingdom, whilst surveying there the sacred
monuments wherewith he was so highly affected.

Chap. 19. The Commonwealth of the Mammalukes described, presenting us with
many unexampled remarkables.
NOw more largely of Tarqueminus, and his killing Melechsala, and of the
commonwealth of the Mammalukes begun by him. And because great is the merit of
this story, as very memorable, we will fetch it from its first original.

Saladine (as is touched Book 2. chap. 40.
before) was the first of the Turkish Kings who began the gainful trade of the
Mammalukes. These were Christian captives, brought out of Taurica Chersonesus,
and instructed as in Mahometanisme so in all military discipline; Saladine
disposing them in martial nurseries, and continuing a constant succession of
them one under another. It is above belief how much and speedily they were
improved in warlike exercises: Art doubled their strength by teaching them to
use it. And though they came rough out of their own country, they were quickly
hewn and polished by education: yea, their apprehensions prevented the
precepts, and their practice surpassed the presidents of those that instructed
them. As it is observed in fruits and flowers, that they are much bettered by
change to a fitter soil; so were these people by altering their climate: The
cold country wherein they were bred, gave them big and robustious bodies; and
the hot climate whereinto they were transplanted, ripened their wits, and
bestowed upon them craft and activity, the dowry of the Southern countries.
They attained to be expert in any service; especially they were excellent
horsemen: and at last they began to ride on the backs and necks of the Turkish
Kings themselves.

True it is, Saladine kept his distance over them, used them kindly, yet made
them not wantons; and so poised these Mammalukes with his native Egyptians,
that in all actions he still reserved the casting voice for himself. But
Meladine and Melechsala his successors, entertained them without number, and
instructed them beyond reason, so that under them in a manner they monopolized
all places of strength and command; till at last, the stem of these mercenary
soldiers being too great for the stock of the natives, the Turkish Kingdom in
Egypt, like a top-heavy tree, became a windfall. Indeed, the dastardness of
the Egyptians made these Mammalukes more daring and insolent. For the Egyptians
more loved profit then honor, and wealth then greatness; and though contented
to abide labor, would in no wise undergo danger. Merchandise they were wholly
employed in; and it seemed they used trading so long, till at last they made
sale of their own spirits. Yea, one could not now know Egypt to be Egypt, but
only by the overflowing of Nilus, not by any remaining ancient marks of valor
in the peoples disposition. Thus the genius of old Kingdoms in time grows
weaker, and doteth at the last.

But to come to Tarqueminus; He being one of these Mammalukes, and perceiving
how easy it was for those that did support, to supplant the Turkish Kings,
with another of his associates slew Melechsala, as it was said. And because it
was unfitting so great a Prince should go to the grave alone, he also sent his
children and intimate friends thither to attend him. Tarqueminus afterward
procured of his society to be chosen King of Egypt. He was the Solon or
Lycurgus of this slavish commonwealth; and by the consent of the rest of his
company he enacted many laws: Whereof these were those of the Grand Charter,
which admitted of no revocation: First, That the Knolls, Turk. Hist. page 107.
Sultan, or chief of this servile Empire, should be chosen always out of the
Mammalukes. Secondly, That none should be admitted to the Order of the
Mammalukes which were either Jews or Turks by birth, but only such as being
born Christians, were afterward taken captives, and then from the time of
their slavery had been instructed in the Mahometane religion. Thirdly, That
though the sons of the Mammalukes might enjoy their fathers lands and wealth,
yet they might not take upon them the name or honor of a Mammaluke. Fourthly,
That the native Egyptians should be permitted no use of weapons, but only such
as with which they fought against weeds, to till and manure the land.


In surveying this State, we can turn no way but must meet with wonders: First,
one would think that there was such an indelible character of slavery in these
captives, and such a laesum principium in them, that none of them ever should
make a good Prince, as knowing no more how to sway a scepter then a pure clown
to manage a sword; or else that they should over-state it, turn tyrants, and
only exchange their slavery, by becoming vassals to their own passions. Yet
many of them in their kinds were worthy Princes for government, no whit
inferior to those which are advantaged with royal birth and breeding.
Secondly, it is a wonder they should be so neglective of their own children.
How many make an idol of their posterity, and sacrifice themselves unto it,
stripping themselves out of necessaries to provide their heirs a wardrobe! yea,
it is a principle in most moderate minds, to advance their posterity; thinking
hereby in a manner they overcome death, and immortalize their memories, in
leaving their names and honors to their children: Whereas the contrary
appeared in these Mammalukes. Thirdly, it is admirable that they fell not out
in the election of their Prince, being in a manner all equal amongst
themselves. We see elective States in Christendom, though bound with the
straitest laws, often sagge aside into schisms and factions; whereas this
strange Empire in their choice had no dangerous discords, but such as were
quenched in the kindling. Lastly, who ever knew a wall that had no better
cement, to stand so sure and so long? Two hundred sixty and seven years this
State endured; and yet had it to do with strong and puissant enemies. Some
Kingdoms ow their greatness not so much to their own valor and wisdom as to
the weakness of their neighbors: but it fared not thus with the Mammalukes.
To omit Prester John, who neighboured them on the south; on all other sides
they were encompassed with potent opposers: From whom right valiantly they
defended themselves, till in the year 1517 they were overcome by Selimus the
great Turkish Emperor.


To conclude; As for the Amazons and their brave achievements, with much
valor and no manhood; they and their State had only being in the brains of
fabulous writers: As for the Assasines, or regiment of rogues; it never spread
to the breadth of any great country, nor grew to the height of a Kingdom; but
being the jakes of the world, was cast out in a place betwixt barren hills: But
this Empire of vassals was every way wonderful, stretching so far over all
Egypt and most of Syria, and lasting so long. A strange State! wherein slavery
was the first step to their throne, and apostasy the first article in their
religion.

Chap. 20. The manner of the death of Frederick King of Jerusalem; His Will,
and posterity after him. An interregnum both in Germany and the Kingdom of
Jerusalem.
1250
IN this same year Frederick King of Jerusalem and Emperor of Germany ended
his troublesome days. A Prince, who in the race of his life met with many
rubs, some stumbles, no dangerous falls. Besides the Turk, he had to do with
the Pope (the Pope immortal in his succession.) And though his Holiness was
unfit for war (as being always old, and never ripe for that place till
almost rotten) yet he used his own head, and commanded the hands of others;
whereby he kept Frederick in a continual war. Yet never could he have beaten
him with fair play, had he not used a weapon, if not against the law of Arms,
against the law of God, and against which no guard, Arming his subjects against
him, and Dispensing with the oath of allegiance.

But he gave Frederick the mortal wound, in setting himself against himself; I
mean, Henry his eldest son. And though Frederick easily conquered that
rebellious youth, and made him fast enough, keeping him in prison in Apulia,
where he died; yet he carried the grief hereof to his grave. For now he knew
not where or in whom to place any confidence; as suspecting the single cord of
Loyalty would not hold in others, which brake in his own son though twisted
with Natural affection.

The greatness of his spirit was a great hastening of his death; and being of
a keen, eager, and active nature, the sharpness of the sword cut the scabbard
the sooner asunder. Bow he could not, break he must. Whatever is reported, he
died of no other poison then sorrow (which ushered him into a wasting ague)
grief being a burden whereof the strongest shoulders can bear the least. As for
the fame, that Bzovius, anno 1250.. 14.
Maufred his base son should stifle him with a pillow: though I must confess
he might be taken on suspicion, as likely enough to play such a devilish prank;
yet it is unreasonable, that he who is acquitted by the Falsum ex ejus temporis
hominum testimonio esse convincitur, Pantal. in Fred. 2o.
Authors of the same time, should be condemned on the evidence of the writers
of after-ages.

He died at Florence in an obscure castle on S. Lucies day, having reigned King
of Jerusalem three and twenty years. Dec. 13. As others. 26.
By his Will he bequeathed many ounces of gold to the Knights Templars and
Hospitallers, in recompense of the wrongs they had received by him. He left a
great sum of money for the recovery of the Holy land, to be disposed at the
discretion of the foresaid Knights. He forbad any stately funeral for himself,
though in his life immoderately excessive in pomp; as if he would do penance
for his pride after death. A Prince, who had he not been hindered with
domestical discords, would have equalized Caesar himself: For if thus bravely
he laid about him, his hands being tied at home with continual dissensions,
what would he have done if at liberty? A scandal is raised since his death,
That he was but Others say, a falconers, or, a physicians. See Munster, De
Italia, lib. 2. page 235.
a millers son; but he would have ground them to powder who in his lifetime
durst have averred it. Indeed he was very happy in mechanical matters, such as
we may term Liberal handycrafts; as casting, founding, carving in iron and
brass: Neither did this argue a low soul, to dabble in such mean employments,
but rather proved the amplitude and largeness thereof; of so general
acquaintance, that no Art was a stranger to him. But the suspicion of his birth
rose from the almost miraculous manner of it; Constantia his mother bearing him
when wel^igh sixty years of age. But both in Scripture and other writers, we
may see the sons of long-barren mothers to have been fruitful in famous
achievements.

Pity it was that he had some faults: yea, pity it had been if he had not had
some. But his vices indeed were notorious and unexcusable. Many wives and
concubines he had, and by them many children.

Gathered out of Lampad. Mellif. hist. part. 3. page 306.
His wives. His legitimate children; Their preferment. 1. Constantia, Queen of
Aragon. Henry, who rebelled against him. King of the Romans. 2. Iole, daughter
to John Bren. Conrade. Duke of Suevia. 3. Agnes, daughter to the Marquess of
Moravia, childlesse divorced. 4. Rutina. 5. Isabella of Bavaria. Agnes. Married
to Conrade Landtgrave of Hessen. 6. Mawd, daughter to John King of England.
Constance. His ^^se sons. Wife to Lewis Land^grave of Hessen. His concubine
Blanch. 1. Henzius. King of Sardinia. 2. Maufred. Usurper of Sicily. 3.
Frederick. Prince of Antioch.

It is much, that succession adventured in so many several bottoms, should
miscarry: Yet these four sons dying, left no lasting issue; and in the third
generation Fredericks stock, and that whole race of Suevian Princes was
extinct: Which in the judgment of some men was a judgment of God on him for
his lasciviousness.

We must not forget a memorable passage which happened more then twenty years
after Fredericks death: Calvisius, anno 1285. ex Spang. Et Pantal. in Rodulpho
Caesare.
One Tylo Colupp, a notable juggler, sometime brought up at the Court,
cunningly sowing together all the old shreds of his Courtship, and stretching
them out with impudency, pretended to be Frederick the Emperor, long detained
in captivity in Palestine. The difference betwixt their aspects was easily
reconciled; for few Physiognomy-marks are so deeply fixed in any face, but that
age and misery will alter them. The credulity of the vulgar sort presently
betrayed them to be couzened by him: yea, some Princes took this brass for
gold without touching it. But the best engine which gave this puppet his
motion, was a bruit constantly buzzed, That Frederick was not dead. For
Princes, the manner of whose deaths has been private and obscure, fame
commonly conjureth again out of their graves, and they walk abroad in the
tongues and brains of many, who affirm and believe them to be still alive. But
the world soon surfeted of this cheaters forgerie; and this glowworm when
brought into the light, shined no more, but at Nanse was burnt to ashes by
Rodulphus the Emperor.

After Fredericks death there was an interregnum for three and twenty years in
the Empire of Germany. True it is, that of some, William Earl of Holland (one
without a beard, not valor) was nominated Emperor. The Spiritual electours
chose Richard, brother to our King Henry the third. And as in Cornwall he got
much coin, so Germany gave him a bottomless bag to put it in. A third party
named Alphonse King of Castile, an admirable Mathematician: But the ointment of
his name is marred with the dead fly of his Atheistical speech, That if he
had been in Gods stead, he could have framed the world better then now it is.
Notwithstanding, the best Dutch writers make an interregnum, as counting the
Empire still a widow, and all these rather her suitors then any her husband.

In like manner also in Palestine there was not any King for fourteen years
after Fredericks death. The right indeed lay in Conrade Duke of Suevi^,
Fredericks son by Iole daughter to John Bren King of Jerusalem: But he was so
employed in defending himself in Sicily against Maufred his base brother (who
soon after dispatched him out of the way) that he had no leisure to prosecute
his title to the fragments of the Kingdom of Jerusalem.

Chap. 21. The Pastorells killed in France; King Lewis returned home.
GO we back to King Lewis, who all this while stayed in Palestine, busying
himself partly in building and fensing of Sidon and Cesarea, partly in
composing discords betwixt the Pisans and Genoans, even proceeding to threaten
them into agreement: But these armed men little cared for his naked menacing.
He being also an excellent religious Antiquary and Critic on holy monuments,
much employed himself in redeeming of old sacred places from the tyranny of
time and oblivion.

Mean time, 1251
in his Kingdom of France happened this strange accident; Matthew. Paris. page
1094.
An Hungarian pesant, who is said to have been an apostate to Mahomet and well
learned, gathered together many thousands of people, pretending they had
intelligence from heaven to march to the Holy land. These took on them the name
and habit of Pastorelli, poor shepherds; in imitation belike (as the Devil is
Gods ape) of those in the Gospel, who were warned by Angels in a vision to go
to Bethlehem.

Being to shape their course into Palestine, they went into France; showing
they had a vertigo in their heads, mistaking the West for the East; or else,
that like vagabonds they were never out of their way.

The Holy Lamb was their ensign, but their actions neither holy nor
lambe-like. They pillaged and killed the poor Jews as they went (an unhappy
nation, whose heads lie pat for every ones hands to hit, and their legs so
stand in men's way that few can go by them without spurning at them:) Where they
wanted Jews, they made Jews of Christians, especially if they were rich, using
them with all cruelty. But at last near Bordeaux threescore thousand of them
were slain, and the rest dispersed. A rhymer of that age (or in courtesy call
him a Poet) made this Epitaph on them; Magdeburg. Cent. 13. cap. 16. col. 698.
M semel, and bis C, L I conjungere disce;
Duxit Pastorum saeva Megaera chorum.
Learn to put together well,
What M, C, C, L, I, do spell;
When some devilish fiend in France
Did teach the Shepherds how to dance.


By this time Lewis in Syria had stayed out the death and burial 1253
of all his hopes to receive succor from his own country. Long expecting in
vain that France should come to him, he at last returned to it. The greatness
of the burden he bore, made him go the faster; and being laden with debts to
his Italian creditours, Apr. 25.
he secretly hasted home: Where safely arriving, besides loyalty to their
Prince, love to a stranger was enough to make him welcome.

Chap. 22. The conversion of the Tartarians. Haalon conquereth Persia, and
extinguisheth the Caliphs of Babylon.
LEwis is gone, and left the Christians in Syria in a woeful condition, without
hope of amendment. Now, can any good come out of Tartary? Can the Northern wind
blow a comfortable warmth? Yea; see a strange vicissitude of things! Haito the
Christian King of Armenia had traveled to Mango the Cham of Tartary, Marinus
Sanutus. Magdeburg. Cent. 13. cap. 16. col. 699.
to communicate to him the present danger of the Turks, and to consult of a
remedy. He showed, how if order were not taken with them in time, they would
overrunne all Asia: Let him not count that he lay out of their rode, because of
his remote situation: For what is the way wanderers will not trace? He might
expect only this courtesy, to be last devoured. In conclusion, Haito
prevailed so far with this Pagan, that he not only promised his assistance,
but also was baptized, and took the Christian religion on him: So also did his
whole country by his example; 1254
and Christianity being the Court-fashion, none would be out of it. Never since
the time of Constantine the Great, did the devil at once lose a greater morsel,
or was there made a more hopeful accession to the Faith.

Understand we this conversion of Tartary (though Authors predicate it
universally of that whole country) only of Cathaia, the Eastern and most
refined part of that Empire: For Cannibals were still in the North, who needed
first to be converted to reason and to be made men, before they could become
Christians. Also at this same time we find a swarm of Western Tartarian
heathens forraging Calvisius, ex Hist. Pol. in anno 1259.
Poland. So it seems, so vast was the Empire, that it was still night in the
West, though it was day in the Eastern part thereof.

Now, whether the conversion of these Tartarians was solemnly, deliberately,
and methodically wrought by preaching, first those things wherein the light of
Nature concurreth with Faith; then, those wherein humane reason is no foe but
stands neuter; lastly, such as are merely of Faith, leaving the issue of all
to God, whose (...), Athanasius.
oratory alone can persuade souls: or whether (which is more probable) it was
but tumultuously done, many on a sudden rather snatching then embracing
religion, we will not dispute. 1255
Sure it is that Mango sent Haalon his brother (who is said to have married a
wife an excellent Christian, and Magdeburg. Cent. 13. cap. 2. page 5.
descended from the Wisemen who came to see our Savior) with a great army to
suppress the Turks and assist the Christians. It seems his army rid post;
for falling into Persia, he conquered it sooner then one can well travel it, So
Knolls, Turk. Hist. page 112. The Magdeburgenses say less, Semestri spatio,
Cent. 13. cap. 16. col. 699.
in half a year. It facilitated his victory, because that country had much
unfurnished her self to furnish her foreign colonies and garrisons in Syria: And
generally active nations are strongest abroad, and weakest at home; where they
are only strong with a conceit of their strength believed in other countries.
The city Samarchanda only resisted him. 1256
Haalon seeing it would not come at the first, let it stay; counting it beneath
a conqueror to tempt his fortune with a long siege, which perchance might
alter the whole course of the cards, and make him rise a loser. Wherefore he
himself only skimmed the cream of the conquest, and went away with what was
easy and smooth, deputing an inferior captain to hew this knotty service; who
after a long siege subdued it. For in respect of the age of this siege, that of
Troy was but a child, it lasting Magdeburg. and Knolls, ut prius.
seven and twenty years; and at last not taken but yielded up, the defendants
then wanting clothes to cover their nakedness.

From Persia Haalon marched to Babylon: 1258
The Caliph whereof called Musteazem, was so superstitious an idolater to his
wealth, that he would not provide necessaries for the defense of the city; and
therefore it was quickly subdued. The covetous Caliph he Calvisius, in anno
1158. ex Bizaro.
famished to death, and then filled his mouth with melted gold. Every where
Mosques went down and Churches up.

Hence into Mesopotamia: which he instantly conquered, with the cities of
Aleppo and Edessa. 1260
He won and restored many places to Conrade the Christian Prince of Antioch,
which the Turks formerly detained from him. Yea, this Tartarian army so awed
Melechem the Mammaluke Prince of Egypt, who succeeded Tarqueminus, that he
durst not budge. And many other good offices this Haalon did to the Christians
in Syria.

Chap. 23. The discord betwixt the Genoans and Venetians, who burn the Genoans
ships in Ptolemais.
BUt they were unworthy of this happiness, who would not be at leisure to make
use of it, but busied themselves in private dissensions, the Genoans against
the Pisans and Venetians. These States (as many other in Italy) at this time
were so proud in their Masters old clothes, they scarce knew themselves, grown
brave with the feathers the Eagle had moulted, and set up by the breaking of
the Emperor in Italy. The Venetians and Genoans were hardly matched: The
Pisans were not so strong, but as stomachfull as either of them, and then in
this point of policy superior to both; That first siding with the Genoans,
they whipped the Venetians; then when they were sufficiently humbled, taking
part with the Venetians, they stripped and lashed the Genoans: and the scales
being even before, Pisa made that weigh down by course wherein she cast her
grains.

Now not content to fall out at home within the doors of Italy, they must
fight in Syria in the open street, where the Turks looked on and laughed at
them; counting it in their apprehension as good sport as to see a spider poison
a toad. Besides their old grudges transported hither out of Italy, this green
wound was the cause of their dissension here: In Ptolemais these three States
had their several streets, several markets for trading, and courts for causes
both civil and criminal: but all three had one Church (that of S. Sabbas)
common unto them, by the ordering of the Pope himself; who counted the same
Church might serve the worshippers of the same God: But the So says Blondus,
Decad. 2 lib. 8. page 308. But if we consult with Tyrius, lib. 10. cap. 28. the
Genoans and not the Venetians won Ptolemais.
Venetians by the virtue of an ancient agreement betwixt them and King Baldwine
for their service in winning this city, challenged a peculiar interest therein.
Hereabout was there old bustling; and in a tumult, the Genoans at that time
surpassing for number, drove the Venetians out of the Church: Yea, Philip of
Montfort, a French Governor of Ptolemais in the time of the interregnum,
wanting not only policy for a Magistrate, but wit for a man (Blondus Loco
prius citato.
says he was half-mad, and his actions speak him no less) compelled the
Venetians generally to forsake the city.

Implacably incensed hereat, the Venetians arm thirteen galleys which they had
at Tire, and coming to Ptolemais forced asunder the chain which crossed the
haven, and burned five and twenty ships of the Genoans which lay there. For
alas! being straightened in the haven, they had no room (being entangled) to turn
and free themselves one from another. And though united force be most forcible,
yet not when so stifled and smothered that it cannot express and exercise it
self. Many brave soldiers in these ships lost their lives in a bundle, without
selling them, or ever opening their wares.

To avenge this loss, the State of Genoa sent from home a navy of fifty ships
of all sorts, which came to Tire. There meet they with Reinerius Zenus Duke of
Venice, with the united power of the Venetians and Pisans, counting no fewer
then seventy four vessels well provided. They would have fought in the very
haven of Tire, but the Governor of the city forbad it: It would be more
scandalous to Christianity; The roving fireballs might hurt the city, and
sinking ships hinder the harbor; Besides, the conquered party would probably
complain of the partiality of the place, that it more favored one side; They
should not fight under his nose; if they had a mind to it, let them out and try
their fortunes in the open sea.

Chap. 24. The Genoan navy beaten by the Venetian; Sea and land-service
compared, both in danger and honor.
ACcordingly it was performed; out they go and fall to their work. Their
galleys, like Ostriches, used their legs more then their wings, more running
with oars then flying with sails. At that time, before Ordinance was found out,
ships were both gunnes and bullets themselves, and furiously ran one against
another.

They began with this arietation: Herein strength was much but not all;
nimblenesse was also very advantageous to break and slent the downright
rushings of a stronger vessel. Then fell they to grappling: Here the steady
ship had the better of it; and those soldiers who best kept their legs could
best use their arms, the surest stander being always the soundest striker.
Much valor was showed on both sides, and at last the victory fell to the
Venetian. The Genoans losing five and twenty of their ships, fled, and saved
the rest in the haven of Tire, after a most cruel and desperate battle.

And surely, generally sea fights are more bloody then those on the land,
especially since gunnes came up, whose shot betwixt wind and water (like those
wounds so often mentioned in the Scripture under the fifth rib) is commonly
observed mortal. Yea, far harder it is for a ship, when arrested and engaged
in a battle, to clear it self, then for soldiers by land to save themselves by
flight. Here neither his own two nor his horses four legs can bestead any;
but like accidents they must perish with their subjects, and sink with their
ship.

And then why is a sea-victory less honor, being more danger, then one
achieved by land? Is it because sea-service is not so general, nor so full of
varieties, and the mysteries thereof sooner learned? or because in sea fights
fortune may seem to be a deeper sharer, and valor not so much interested?
Whatsoever it is, the laurel purchased on land has a more lively verdure then
that which is got at sea.

We return to the Venetians: Who using or rather abusing this conquest, enter
Ptolemais, cast out all Genoans thence, throw down their buildings both public
and private, demolish the fort which they had builded at S. Saba, rifle and
spoil their shops, warehouses and store houses: only the Pope prevailed so
far with them, that they set at liberty the prisoners they had taken.

Ten years did this war last betwixt these two States in Syria, composed at
last (says my Author) by the authority of Pope Clement the fourth, and by
famine (the bad cause of a good effect) which in Palestine starved them into
agreement. Longer these wars lasted betwixt them in Italy: their success
like the sea; they fought on ebbing and flowing. In this costly war Pisa was
first beggered; and for all her politic partaking, Genoa at last trod so
heavy upon her, that ever since she has drooped and hung the wing, and at this
day is maid to Florence, who formerly was mistress of a good part of Italy.
But I have no calling and less comfort to prosecute these bloody dissensions:
For wars of Christians against Infidels, are like the heat of exercise which
serves to keep the body of Christianity in health; but these civil wars
amongst themselves, like the heat of a fever, dangerous, and destructive of
religion.

Chap. 25. Charles made King of Sicily and Jerusalem by the Pope; Hugh King of
Cyprus pretends also to go to Jerusalem.
WE have now gotten Pantaleon, a Frechman, who succeeded Robert in the titular
Platina, in Urban. iv.
Patriarchship Jerusalem, to be Pope, by the name of Urbane the fourth. To
advance the Holy cause, after fourteen years interregnum in Syria, he
appointed Charles Duke of Anjou, younger brother to King Lewis of France, King
of Sicily and Jerusalem, and it was ratified by Clement the fourth his
successor.

This honor was first offered to Lewis himself; but piety had dried up in him
all ambitious humors: then to our Henry of England; but his warre-wasted purse
could not stretch to the Popes price: 1265
At last, this Charles accepted it. But it is not for any special favor to
the bush, if a man run under it in a storm: it was no love to Charles, but to
himself, to be sheltred from Maufred, that the Pope conferred this honor upon
him. And the wife of Charles, that she might go in equipage with her three
sisters, being Queens, sold all her Besoldus, De reg. Sicil. page 645, and 649.
jewels to furnish her husband with money to purchase these Kingdoms: that sex
loving bravery well, but greatness better.

Now the Pope (whose well-grounded and bounded bounty will never undo him; for
where he gives away the meat he sells the sauce) See these conditions at
large (five and twenty in number) out of Io. Anton. Summont. cited in Besoldus,
page 647.
conditioned with Charles on these terms: First, that he should conquer Maufred
then King of Sicily, who molested the Pope; and that he should finally subdue
all the remaining race of Frederick the second, Emperor, who claimed that
Kingdom. Secondly, in acknowledgement that he held these Kingdoms from the
Pope, he should pay him an annual pension of four (some say, forty) thousand
pounds. Provided, if this Charles should chance to be chosen Emperor of
Germany, that then he should either resign Sicily back again into the hands of
his Holiness, Platina, in Clem. iv. Neve Imperium Romanum, etiam ultro oblatum
acciperet.
or not accept the Empire. For he knew that all Emperors would be possessed
with an antipapall spirit; and that they would hold Sicily, not in homage from
the Church, but as a member of the Empire: Besides, the Pope would not dispense
that Princes should hold plurality of temporal Dominions in Italy;
especially, he was so ticklish he could not endure the same Prince should
embrace him on both sides.

Ever since, the twinne-titles of Sicily and Jerusalem have gone together, and
fit it is that the shadow should follow the substance. Charles subdued Maufred
and Conradine his nephew (the last of the Suevian race, and grandchild to
Emperor Frederick) and was possessed of Sicilie, and lived there; but as for
the gaining of Jerusalem, he little regarded it, nor came thither at all: A
watchful King, who never slept in his Kingdom.

His absence gave occasion to Calvisius, in anno 1269. ex Marino Sanuto.
Hugh King of Cyprus to furbish up new his old title to the Kingdom, as
lineally descended from Almerick the second. And coming to Ptolemais, he there
was crowned King of Jerusalem: 1269
But the extremity of the famine (all things being excessive dear) much abated
the solemnity and state of his Coronation. Sept. 27.


Chap. 26. The Tartarians alienated from the Christians; Bendocdar tyrannizeth
over them, and Lewis King of France sets forth again for to succor them.
BUt betwixt two Kings the Kingdom went to the ground: For Calvisius, ex
Marino Sanuto, in anno 1260.
Haalon the Tartarian Prince, 1261.
and late Christian convert, was returned home to succeed his brother Mango in
the Empire, leaving Abaga his son with competent forces in the city of
Damascus, which he had won from the Turks. Soon after, Abaga followed his
father, and substituted Guirboca his Lieutenant in Damascus.

This Guirboca, upon the occasion of his nephew rashly slain by the Christians
in a broil, 1262.
fell off wholly from Christianity, with all the Tartarians his countrymen.
The occasion this; The Dutch Christians return with great booty they had taken
from the Turks: Magdeburg. Cent. 13. cap. 16. col. ^99.
Guirboca's nephew meets them, demands it for himself; the Christians deny
him (as soldiers are very tender-conscienced in that point, counting it a
great sin to part with the spoil they are possessed of:) hence brawls, then
blows; Guirboca's nephew is slain: Hereat the Tartarians (who were very
humourous in their friendship; if not observed to an inch, lost for ever) in
discontent, all either reel aside to Mahomet, or fall back to Paganism.

Herein the Christians cannot be excused: Infant-converts must be well tended.
It had been discretion in them, even against discretion to have yielded a
little to these Tartarians, and so to continue their amity, which was so
advantageous to the Holy war. How-ever, one may question the truth of their
conversion, whether real at first: This spring was too forward to hold; and
the speedy withering of their religion argues it wanted root. And as tame
foxes, if they break loose and return wild, do ten times more mischief then
those which were wild from the beginning; so these renegadoes raged more
furiously then any Pagans against religion. Guirboca sacrificed many Christians
to the ghost of his nephew, destroyed Cesarea and burnt it, using all cruelty
against the inhabitants.

Nor less were the Christians plagued at the same time with Bendocdar the
Mammaluke Prince in Egypt; who succeeded Melechem, and every where raging
against them, either killed or forced them to forswear their religion. The city
of Joppa he took and burned; 1268.
and then won Antioch, slaying therein twenty thousand, and carrying away
captive an hundred thousand Christians. But it may justly be suspected that
these numbers were written first in figures, and therefore at too much length,
when the adding of nothing may increase many thousands.

These woeful tidings brought into Europe, so wrought on the good disposition
of Lewis King of France, that he resolved to make a second voyage into
Palestine to succor the Christians.

He so fixed his mind on the journeys end, that he saw not the dangers in the
way. His Counsel could not dissuade, though they did dissuade him. First, they
urged, That he was old; let younger men take their turns: They recounted to him
his former ill success; How lately had that hot country scorched the lilies
of France, not only to the blasting of the leaves, but almost withering of the
root? Besides, the sinews of the Christians in Syria were so shrunk, that
though lifted up, they could not stand; That Nature decayed, but not thus
wholly destroyed, was the subject of physic; That the Turks had got a habit of
conquering, and riveted themselves into the possession of the country; so that
this voyage would but fleet the cream of the Kingdom to cast it into the fire.

But as a vehement flame makes feuel of whatsoever it meets; so this Kings
earnest resolution turned bridles into spurs, and hindrances into motives to
his journey. Was he old? let him make the more speed, lest envious death should
prevent him of this occasion of honor. Had he sped ill formerly? he would seek
his credit where he lost it: Surely, Fortunes lottery had not all blanks, but
that after long drawing he should light on a prize at last. Were the Christians
in so low a case? the greater need they had of speedy help.

Thus was this good Kings judgment over-zealed. And surely though Devotion be
the natural heat, Discretion (which wanted in him) is the radical moisture of
an action, keeping it healthful, prosperous, and long-lived.

Well, King Lewis will go, and to this end provideth his navy; and is
accompanied with Philip and Tristram his sons, Theobald King of Navarre his
son in law, Alphonse his brother, and Guido Earl of Flandres. There went also
Edward eldest son to Henry King of England. It was a wonder he would now
adventure his head when he was to receive a Crown, his father being full-ripe
to drop down without gathering, having reigned longer then most men live, fifty
and five years. But thirsty was this Edward of honor: Longshanks was he
called; and as his strides were large, so vast and wide was the extent of his
desire. As for his good father, he was content to let go the staff of his age
for to be a prop to the Church. And though King Lewis was undiscreet in going
this journey, he was wise in choosing this his companion, to have this active
Prince along with him; it being good to eye a suspicious person, and not to
leave him behind.

With Edward went his brother Edmund Earl of Lancaster, surnamed Crouch-back;
not that he was crook-shouldered, or camel-backed: (From which our English Poet
most zealously does vindicate him; Harding, chap. 147.
Edmund like him the comeliest Prince alive,
Not crook-back'd, ne in no wise disfigured,
As some men write, the right line to deprive,
Though great falsehood made it to be scriptured.)
but from the Cross, anciently called a Crouch (whence Crouched Friars) which
now he wore in his voyage to Jerusalem. And yet it makes it somewhat
suspicious, that in Latin Vincents Discoveries of Brooks errors, Tit.
Lancaster.
records he is never read with any other epithet then Gibbosus. But be he
crooked or not, let us on straight with our story.

Chap. 27. King Lewis besieges the city of Tunis; His death and commendation.
1270
LEwis now having hoised up sail, it was concluded by the general consent of
his Counsel, That to secure and clear the Christians passage to Palestine from
pirates, they should first take the city of Carthage in Africa by the way.

This Carthage long wrestled with Rome for the sovereignty, and gave as many
foils as she took, till Scipio at last crushed out her bowels with one deadly
fall. Yet long after the city stood before wholly demolished, to be a spur
to put metal into the Romans, and to be a foreign mark for their arrows, lest
otherwise they should shoot against themselves. At last by the counsel of Cato
it was quite destroyed: who alleged, That it was not safe to have a knife so
near their throat; and though good use might be made of an enemy at arms end,
yet it was dangerous to have him too close to ones side; as Carthage was within
a days sail from Rome.

Out of the ruins of this famous city, Tunis arose; as often a stinking elder
grows out of the place where an oak has been felled. Theeving was their
trading: but then as yet they were Apprentises to piracie, whereof at this day
they are grown Masters. Yea, not considerable was Tunis then in bigness, great
only in mischief. But as a small scratch just upon the turning of a joint is
more troublesome then a bigger sore in another place; so this paltry town (the
refuge of rogues, and wanderers home) seated in the passage betwixt Europe,
Asia, and Africa, was a worse annoyance to Christian traffic then a whole
country of Saracens elsewhere. Wherefore both to revenge the blood of many
Christians, who passing this way to Palestine were either killed or taken
captive, as also to secure the way for the time to come, Lewis with his whole
fleet (augmented with the navy of Charles King of Sicilie and Jerusalem, his
brother) bent his course to besiege it.

It was concluded both unnecessary and unfitting, first in a fair way to summon
the city; because like pernicious vermin they were to be rooted out of the
world by any means: nor was it meet to lavish the solemn ceremonies of war on
a company of thieves and murderers.

The siege was no sooner begun but the plague seized on the Christian army:
whereof thousands died; amongst others, Tristram King Lewis his son: And he
himself of a flux followed after. This Lewis was the French Josiah, both for
the piety of his life and woefulness of his death, engaging himself in a
needless war. Many good laws he made for his Kingdom: that not the worst,
He first Sr Walter Ralegh, hist. part. 1. lib. 5. cap. 3.
retrenched his Barons power to suffer parties to try their intricate titles
to land by duells. He severely punished blasphemers, Alfonso Villeg in the life
of S. Lewis.
searing their lips with an hot iron. And because by his command it was
executed upon a great rich citizen of Paris, some said he was a tyrant: He
hearing it, said before many, I would to God that with searing my own lips I
could banish out of my realm all abuse of oaths. He loved more to hear
Sermons then to be present at Mass: whereas on the contrary our Con^inuat.
Matthew. Paris. in anno 1273.
Henry the third said, he had rather see his God then hear another speak of
him though never so well. His body was carried into France there to be buried,
and was most miserably tossed; it being observed, that the sea cannot digest
the crudity of a dead corpse, being a due debt to be interred where it dies;
and a ship cannot abide to be made a bier of. He was Sainted after his death by
Boniface the eighth, and the five and twentieth day of August (on which day in
his first voyage to Palestine he went on shipboard) is consecrated to his
memory. Herein he had better luck then as good a man, I mean our Henry the
sixth, who could not be canonized without a mighty sum of money; belike
Angels making Saints at Rome.

Chap. 28. Tunis taken; The French return home, whilst our Edward valiantly
sets forward for Palestine.
1271
BY this time Tunis was brought to great distress, and at last on these
conditions surrendered: That it should pay yearly to Charles King of Sicily and
Jerusalem forty thousand crowns; That it should receive Christian Ministers,
freely to exercise their religion; If any Saracen would be baptized, he should
be suffered; That all Christian captives should be set free; That they should
pay back so much money as should defray the Christians charges in this voyage.
Our Edward would needs have had the town beaten down, and all put to the sword;
thinking the foulest quarter too fair for them. Their goods (because got by
robbery) he would have sacrificed as an anathema to God, and burnt to ashes:
His own share he execrated, and caused it to be burnt, forbidding the English
to save any thing of it; because that coals stolen out of that fire, would
sooner burn their houses then warm their hands. It troubled not the consciences
of other Princes to enrich themselves herewith, but they glutted themselves
with the stolen honey which they found in this hive of drones: And which was
worse, now their bellies were full they would go to bed, return home, and go no
further. Yea, the young King of France, called Philip the Bold, was fearful to
prosecute his journey to Palestine; whereas Prince Edward struck his breast,
and swore, That though all his friends forsook him, yet he would enter
Ptolemais, though but only with Fowin his horse-keeper. By which speech he
incensed the English to go on with him.

The rest pleading the distemperature of the weather, went to Sicily, in hope
with change of air to recover their health: Where many of them found what they
sought to avoid, death: amongst other, Theobald King of Navarre, and Isabell
his wife, and William Earl of Flandres, who ended their days at Drepanum.
Besides, their navy was pursuivanted after with a horrible tempest, and a
curse (entailed either on their ill-gotten goods, or deserting Gods cause, or
both) arrested them in their return: so that of this great wealth little was
landed in Europe, their ships being wracked, and the goods therein cast into
the sea; with which the waves played a little, and then chopped them up at a
morsel. Whilst the weather frowning on them, smiled on the English, Prince
Edward no whit damnified either in his men or ships, with Elenor his tender
consort then young with child, safely arrived at Ptolemais, to the great solace
and comfort of the Christians there being in great distress.

Chap. 29. Prince Edwards performance in Palestine: He is dangerously wounded;
yet recovereth, and returns home safe.
AT his arrival the last stake of the Christians was on losing: For Bendocdar
the Mammaluke Prince of Egypt and Syria, had brought Ptolemais to so low an
ebb, that they therein resolved (if some unexpected succor reversed not their
intentions) within three days to resign the city unto him. Edward landing
stayed this precipitation, who arrived with his army there in the very
interim, in opportunity it self, which is the very quintessence of time; so
that all concluded his coming (thus hitting the mark) was guided by the hand of
an especial providence.

And now those who before in despair would have thrown up their cards, hope at
least to make a saving game; and the Christians taking comfort and courage,
both defy their enemies, and their own thoughts of surrendering the city.
Prince Edward having sufficiently manned and victualled Ptolemais, taking six
or seven thousand soldiers, marched to Nazareth; which he took, and slew those
he found there. After this, about midsummer, understanding the Turks were
gathered together at Cakhow forty miles off, very early in the morning he set
upon them, slew a thousand, and put the rest to flight.

In these skirmishes he gave evident testimonies of his personal valor: Yea,
in cold blood he would boldly challenge any Infidel to a duel. To speak truth,
this his conceived perfection was his greatest imperfection: For the world was
abundantly satisfied in the point of his valor; yet such was his confidence of
his strength, and eagerness of honor, that having merited the esteem of a
most stout man, he would still supererogate: yea, he would profer to fight with
any mean person, if cried up by the volge for a tall man: this daring being a
general fault in great spirits, and a great fault in a General, who staketh a
pearl against a piece of glass. The best was, in that age a man fighting with
sword and buckler, had in a manner many lives to lose; and duells were not
dangerous.

Whilst he stayed at Ptolemais, Elenor his Lady was delivered of a fair
daughter, called from her birthplace Joan of Acres: But fear of her husbands
death abated her joy at her daughters birth. The Turks not matching him in
valor, thought to master him with treachery, which was thus contrived: The
Admiral of Joppa, a Turk, pretended he would turn Christian, and employed one
Anzazim an Assasine in the business betwixt him and Prince Edward; who carried
himself so cunningly, that by often repairing to our Prince he got much credit
and esteem with him.

Continuat. Matthew. Paris. in anno 1272 page 1345.
Some write, this Anzazim was before always bred under ground (as men keep
hawks and warre-horses in the dark, to make them more fierce) that so coming
abroad, he should fear to venture on no man. But sure, so cunning a companion
had long conversed with light, and been acquainted with men, yea, Christians
and Princes, as appears by his complying carriage; else, if he had not been
well read in their company, he could not have been so perfect in his lesson.
But let him be bred any where, or in hell it self: For this was his religion,
To kill any he was commanded, or on the nonperformance willingly to forfeit
his life.

1272
The fifth time of his coming he brought Prince Edward letters from his Master,
which whilst he was reading alone and lying on his bed, he struck him into the
arm with an invenomed knife. Being about to fetch another stroke, the Prince
with his foot gave him such a blow that he felled him to the ground; and
wresting the knife from him, ran the Turk into the belly, and slew him; yet
so, that in struggling he hurt himself therewith in the forehead. At this noise
in sprang his servants, and one of them with a stool beat the brains out of the
dead Turks head, showing little wit in his own; and the Prince was highly
displeased, that the monument of his valor should be stained with another
cruelty.

It is storied, how Speed, in Edward the first.
Elenor his Lady sucked all the poison out of his wounds, without doing any
harm to her self: So sovereigne a medicine is a woman's tongue, anointed with
the virtue a loving affection. Pity it is so pretty a story should not be true
(with all the miracles in Loves Legends) and sure he shall get himself no
credit, who undertaketh to confute a passage so sounding to the honor of the
sex: Yet can it not stand with what See Fox Martyrolog. page 337.
others have written; How the Physician who was to dress his wounds, spoke to
the Lord Edmund and the Lord John Voysie to take away Lady Elenor out of the
Princes presence, lest her pity should be cruel toward him, in not suffering
his sores to be searched to the quick. And though she cried out and wrung her
hands, Madame, said they, be contented; it is better that one woman should weep
a little while then that all the realm of England should lament a great season:
And so they conducted her out of the place. And the Prince, by the benefit of
physic, good attendance, and an antidote the Master of the Templars gave him,
showed himself on horseback whole and well within fifteen days after.

The Admiral of Joppa hearing of his recovery, utterly disavowed that he had
any hand in the treachery: as none will willingly father unsucceeding villainy.
True it is, he was truly sorrowful; whether because Edward was so bad, or no
worse wounded, he knows that knows hearts. P. Aemyl. in D. Ludovico, page
227.
Some wholly acquit him herein, and conceive this mischief proceeded from Simon
Earl of Montforts hatred to our Prince, who bearing him and all his kindred an
old grudge for doing some conceived wrong to his father (in very deed, nothing
but justice to a rebel) hired, as they think, this Assasine to murder him; as
a little before for the same quarrel he had served Henry son to Richard King
of the Romans, and our Edwards cousin-germane, at Viterbo in Italy. It is much
this Simon living in France should contrive this Princes death in Palestine:
but malice has long arms, and can take men off at great distance. Yea, this
adds to the cunning of the engineer, to work unseen; and the further from him
the blow is given, the less is he himself suspected.

Whosoever plotted, God prevented it, and the Christians there would have
revenged it, but Edward would not suffer them. In all haste they would have
marched and fallen on the Turks, had not he Continuat. Matthew. Paris. in anno
1272 page 1347.
dissuaded them, because then many Christians unarmed, and in small companies,
were gone to visit the Sepulcher, all whose throats had then probably been cut
before their return.

Eighteen months he stayed at Ptolemais, and then came back through Italy,
without doing any extraordinary matter in Palestine. What music can one string
make when all the rest are broken? what could Edward do alone, when those
Princes fell back on whom the project most relied? Lewis and Charles were the
main undertakers; Edward entertained but as an adventurer and sharer: and so he
furnished himself accordingly, with competent forces to succor others, but not
to subsist of themselves. But as too often, where the principal miscarrieth,
the second and sureties must lie at the stake to make the debt good: so in
their default he valiantly went forward, though having in all but thirteen
ships and some thousands of men (too many for a plain Prince to visit with, and
too few for a great one to war with) and performed what lay within the
compass of his power. In a word, his coming to Ptolemais and assisting them
there, was like a cordial given to a dying man, which does piece out his life
(or death rather) a few groans and as many gasps the longer.

By this time Henry his aged father being dead (his lamp not quenched but going
out for want of oil) the English Nobility came as far as the Alps in Savoy to
wait on Edward in his return. Leave we him then to be attended home by them to
receive the Crown, to which no less his virtues then birth entitled him. Since
the Conquest he was the first King of his name, and the first that settled the
Law and State (deserving the style of Sr Robert Cotton, in his Henry iii.
Englands Justinian) and that freed this Kingdom from the wardship of the
Peers; showing himself in all his actions after, capable to command not the
realm only but the whole world.

Chap. 30. Rodulphus the Emperors voyage to Palestine hindered. The Duke of
Mechlenburg his captivity and enlargement.
BEfore Edwards departure, Hugh King of Jerusalem and Cyprus concluded a peace
(to our Marinus Sanutus.
Princes small liking) with the Mammaluke Sultan of Egypt, to hold only in and
near Ptolemais; whereby the Christians had some breathing-time. But that which
now possessed all men's thoughts and talk in Syria, was the expectation of
Rodulphus to come thither with a great army; who (after two and twenty years
interregnum) was chosen Emperor of Germany.

1273
This Rodulphus was a mean Earl of Haspurg (Frederick the last Emperor was his
Pantal. De illu^^^. Germ. part. 2. in vita Rodulphi.
godfather; who little thought, that having so many sons of his own, his
godsonne should next succeed him) and lived in a private way. But now the
Empire refusing her rich suitors, married this Earl without any portion, only
for pure love. A preferment beyond his expectation, not above his deserts: For
Germany had many bigger lights, none brighter. Pope Gregory the tenth would not
ratify his election, but on this condition, That he should in person march
with an army to Palestine. And though this was but an old policy, To send the
Emperors far away, that so he might command in chief in their absence; yet his
Holiness did so turn and dress this threed-bare plot with specious pretenses
of piety, that it passed for new and fresh, especially to those that beheld it
at distance* But Rodulphus could not be spared out of Germany, being there
employed in civil discords: The knees of the Dutch Princes were too stiff to do
him homage, till he softened them by degrees. And indeed he was not provided for
the Holy war, and wanted a stock of his own to drive so costly a trade,
having no paternall lands considerable, no bottom to begin on; though through
his thrift and providence he first laid the foundation of the Austrian family.

Yet somewhat to answer expectation, 1275
he sent Henry Duke of Mechlenburg with competent forces into Palestine: Who
coming to Ptolemais, made many notable incursions into the country about
Damasco, with fire and sword destroying all as he went, and carrying thence
many rich booties; till at last he was circumvented and taken prisoner by the
Mammalukes. Twenty six years he lived in captivity, keeping his conscience
free all the while: At last the Sultan of Egypt (a renegado Germane, who
formerly had been engineer to this Dukes father) set him at liberty, together
with Martine his servant; that he who so long had shared of his misery, might
also partake of his happiness. No sooner had this Duke put to sea, but he was
again taken by pirates; and the Sultan, out of pity to this distressed Prince,
and out of scorn that fortune should frustrate and defeat his real courtesy,
set him free again. At last he came safely home, and was there welcomed with as
much wonder as joy; his subjects conceiving his return a resurrection, having
buried him in their thoughts long before.

Here he found Pantal. De. illustr. Germ part. 2. page 245.
two counterfeits, who pretended themselves to be this Duke, and on that title
challenged lodging with Anastasia his Lady. But the one of them had a softer
bedfellow provided him, a pool of water, wherein he was drowned; the other was
made a bonefire of, to solemnize the joy of the Dukes return.

Chap. 31. Charles King of Jerusalem; His intentions in Syria stopped by the
Sicilian Vespers; His death, and sons succession.
BY this time Charles King of Jerusalem and Sicily had made great preparations
for the Holy war. And to make his claim to the Kingdom of Jerusalem the
stronger, he bought also the title of Maria Domicella Princess of Antioch,
which pretended a right to the same. He sent also Roger the Count of S.
Severine as his Viceroy to Ptolemais: where he was honorably received in
despite of Hugh King of Cyprus, by the especial favor of Albertine Morisine
the Venetian Consul there. And now his navy was reported to be ready, and
that by the way he had a project upon Michael Paleologus the Emperor of
Greece: When all his intentions were suddenly blasted; it so happening, that on
Easter day, as the bell tolled to Even-song, all the throats of the Frenchmen
in Sicily were cut in a moment by the natives thereof, and that Island won by
Peter King of Aragon. The grand contriver of this massacre was one Jacobus
Prochyta a Physician; and I dare say he killed more in an hour then he cured
all his lifetime.

Those that condemn the Sicilians herein, cannot excuse the French; such
formerly had been their pride, lust, covetousness, and cruelty to the people
of that Island, putting them causelessely to exquisite torture, so that an
ordinary hanging was counted an extraordinary favor. But the secrecy of
contriving this slaughter of the French was little less then miraculous; that
so many knowing it, none should discover it; like cunning dogs, barking in
triumph after they had bitten, not before, to give any warning. 1282
Hence grew the proverb of the Sicilian Vespers; though their Even-song was
nothing to the English Mattens intended in the Gunpowder-treason. Mean time
King Charles was at Rome, beholding the making of Cardinals, when this doleful
news was brought unto him, and struck him to the heart. He survived a year or
two longer, but dull and melancholic, living as it were without life, and died
at last, having reigned King of Jerusalem twenty years. A Prince which had
tasted of various success; fortune for a while smiling on him, and at last
laughing at him.

1284
His son Charles succeeded him in the Kingdom of Naples and in the title of
Jerusalem. He was surnamed Cunctator, Delayer; not in the same sense as Fabius
the Shield of Rome was so called: he only stayed till opportunity was come;
our Charles, till it was passed. I find nothing memorable of him except this,
That offended with the Templars in Palestine for taking part against him with
the King of Cyprus, he seized on their lands, and confiscated all their goods
they had in Naples or any other part of his dominions. How-ever, let him have
room in the catalogue of our Kings of Jerusalem. For as high hills near the
seaside, though otherwise never so base and barren ground, yet will serve to
be sea-marks for the direction of mariners: so this Charles, together with
Hugh, John, and Henry, Kings of Cyprus, pretending also to Jerusalem, though we
read nothing remarkable of them, will become the front of a page, and serve to
divide and distinguish times, and to parcel the history the better to our
apprehension. As for the bare anatomy of their reign (for we find it not
fleshed with any history) with the dates of their beginnings and endings, we
shall present it to the reader hereafter in our Chronology.

Chap. 32. The succession of the Mammaluke Princes in Egypt. Alphir takes
Tripoli and Tire; The woeful estate of Ptolemais.
BUt whilst these titular Kings slept, the Mammaluke Princes were vigilant to
infest the relics of the Christians in Palestine: Which Princes succession we
will adventure to set down; nor are we discouraged with the difficulties which
encounter us herein. The hardness in the story of the Mammalukes proceeds
(as we conceive) from one of these causes: First, the State is not written
directly, but by reflection; not storied by any constant writer of their own,
but in snaps and parcels, as the Chroniclers of neighboring Christian
countries have catched at them. Secondly, out of a popular error, their chief
Captains by reason of their large authority pass for absolute Kings. Thirdly,
the same King has many names, and the same name by translation in sundry
languages is strangely disguised. How-ever, we will use our best conjectures in
these uncertainties: and a dim candle is better then no light.

Bendocdar or Bandodacar, otherwise Melechdaer, was the last Egyptian Prince we
mentioned. A dangerous man to the Christians, but that Abaga the Tartarian took
him to task, and kept him in continual employment. This Abaga had a pretty
trick to make cowards valiant, causing them that ran away from the battle,
ever after to wear women's clothes. Bendocdar died at Damascus of a Vide
Calvisium in anno 1277. and Magdeburg. Cent. 13.
wound he received in Armenia; or, as some say, by cold in swimming over
Euphrates.

Elpis succeeded him, his Magdeburg. Cent. 13. cap. 16. col. 701.
son (say some;) but the Mammalukes laws forbid that, except his
extraordinary worth was his faculty, and dispensed with him ad succedendum
patri. But who knows not that the Eastern tongue speaks nephews and kinsmen
to be sons? Some wholly omit him; enough to make us suspect that he was only
some Deputy clapped in to stop up the vacancie till Melechsaites was chosen.

Melechsaites (called by Marinus, Melechmessor) won the strong castle of
Mergath from the Hospitallers. He much loved and was very bountiful to the
Carmelites, who lived dispersed in Syria: 1285
but afterward he banished them out of his country, because they altered
their habit, and wore white coats at the appointment of Pope Honorius; the
Turks being generally enemies to innovations, and loving constancy in old
customs. Nor was this any mishap but an advantage to the Carmelites, to lose
their dwellings in Syria, and gain better in Europe, where they planted
themselves in the fattest places: So that he who knows not to choose good
ground, let him find out an house of the Carmelites (a mark that fails not)
for his direction.

1289
Alphir was next to Melechsaites, otherwise called Elsi. He perceiving that now
or never was the time finally to expel the Christians out of Palestine,
whilst the Princes in Europe were in civil wars, besieged and won Tripoli,
Sidon, Berytus, and Tire, beating them down to the ground, but suffering the
inhabitants on some conditions to depart. Nothing now was left but Ptolemais:
which Alphir would not presently besiege, lest he should draw the Christians in
Europe upon him; but concluded a peace for five years with the Venetians, as
not willing wholly to exasperate them by winning all from them at once, and
thinking this bitter potion would be better swallowed by them at two several
draughts.

Mean time Ptolemais was in a woeful condition. In it were some of all
countries; so that he who had lost his nation, might find it here. Most of them
had several courts to decide their causes in; and the plenty of Judges caused
the scarcity of justice, malefactors appealing to a trial in the courts of
their own country. It was sufficient innocence for any offender in the
Venetian court, that he was a Venetian. Personal acts were entitled
national, and made the cause of the country. Outrages were everywhere
practiced, nowhere punished; as if to spare Divine revenge the pains of
overtaking them, they would go forth and meet it. At the same time, they were
in fitters about prosecuting their titles to this city, no fewer then the
Venetians, Genoans, Pisans, Florentines, the Kings of Cyprus and Sicily, the
Agents for the Kings of France and England, the Princes of Tripoli and Antioch,
the Patriarch of Jerusalem, the Masters of the Templars and Hospitallers, and
(whom I should have named first) the Legate of his Holiness, all at once with
much violence contending about the right of right nothing, the title to the
Kingdom of Jerusalem, and command of this city; like bees, making the greatest
humming and buzzing in the hive when now ready to leave it.

Chap. 33. Ptolemais besieged, and taken by Sultan Serapha.
WIthin the city were many voluntaries lately come over, five hundred whereof
were of the Popes furnishing. But belike he failed afterward in his payment to
them, the golden tide flowing not so fast out as into his Holiness coffers.
The soldiers being not paid, according to their blunt manners, would pay
themselves; and marching out, pillaged the country contrary to the truce:
Sultan Serapha (who succeeded Alphir) demanding restitution, is denied, and his
Ambassadors ill entreated.

Hereupon he sits down before the city with six hundred thousand men. 1290
But we are not bound to believe that Alexanders soldiers were so big as their
shields speak them which they left in India, nor Asian armies so numerous as
they are reported. Allow the Turks dominions spacious and populous, and that
they rather drained then chose soldiers; yet we had best credit the most
niggardly writers, which make them an hundred and fifty thousand. Serapha
resolves to take it, conceiving so convenient a purchase could not be
over-bought: The place, though not great, yet was a mote in the eye of the
Turkish Empire, and therefore pained them.

Peter Belvise Master of the Templars, a valiant Captain, had the command of
the city assigned him by general consent. He encouraged the Christians to be
valiant, not like prodigal heirs to lose this city for nothing which cost
their grandfathers so much blood; at least let them give one blaze of valor
ere their candle went out. How should they show their friends their faces, if
they showed their foes their backs! Let them fight it out manfully; that so, if
forced at last to surrender it, they might rather be pitied for want of fortune
then justly blamed for lack of valor.

And now Ptolemais being to wrestle her last fall, stripped her self of all
cumbersome clothes: women, children, aged persons, weak folks (all such
hindering help, and mouths without arms) were sent away; and twelve thousand
remained, conceived competent to make good the place.

Serapha marches up furiously; his men assault the city, with open jaws ready
to devour it, had not their mouths been stopped with the artillery the
Christians shot at them. Back they were beaten, and many a Turk slain. But
Serapha was no whit sensible thereof: who willingly would lose a thousand men
in a morning for a breakfast, double so many at a dinner, and continue this
costly ordinary for some days together; yea, in spite he would spend an ounce
of Turkish blood, to draw a drop of Christian.

In this conflict Peter Belvise was slain with a poisoned arrow: A loss above
grieving for. Many were strong in desiring the honor who were weak to
discharge the office. But the worst mischief was; the Christians were divided
amongst themselves, and neglected to defend the city, conceiving that though
that was taken, yet every particular nation could defend it self, having their
buildings severally fortified: And this dangerous fancy took off their
thoughts from the public good, and fixed them on their private ends. Mean
time, the Patriarch of Jerusalem, and others (some name with them Henry King of
Jerusalem and Cyprus) more seeking their safety then honor, secretly fled
(with their bodies after their hearts) out of the city; and some of them
shunning a noble death, fell on a base end, being drowned in the sea. Their
cowardlinesse is imputed by some Authors to all the rest; whereas it appears
on the contrary, they most valiantly behaved themselves.

1291
At last, the Turks entered the city by undermining the walls, and conceived
their work now done, when it was new begun. For they found Ptolemais not a
city, but a heap of cities thrown together: wherein the people of every
country so fensed themselves in their several forts, that they powdered the
Turks with their shot when they entered the streets. It is hardly to be
paralleled in any siege, that a taken city was so long before it was taken: for
it held out fifty days; and the Knights-Hospitallers made good their castle
for Lampad. Mellif. hist. part. 3. page 313.
two whole months together. But alas! as the several parts of Insecta being
cut asunder, may wriggle and stir a while, not live long; so these divided
limbs could not long subsist, and at last most of them were slain.

Yet was it a bloody victory to the Turks; most of them that entered the city
being either burned with fire, or killed with arrows, or smothered with the
fall of towers, the very ruins (as thirsty of revenge) killing those that
ruined them.

Serapha evened all to the ground, and (lest the Christians should ever after
land here) demolished all buildings; the Turks holding this position, That the
best way to be rid of such vermin, is to shave the hair clean off, and to
destroy all places wherein they may nestle themselves.

Some say, he plowed the ground whereon the city stood, and sowed it with corn:
but an Sand. Trav. page 204.
eyewitness affirms, that still there remain magnificent ruins, seeming
rather wholly to consist of diverse conjoined castles, then any way intermingled
with private dwellings.

No fewer then an hundred thousand Latin Christians (all that were left in
Syria) fled at this time into Cyprus. It is strange what is reported, Lampad.
page 312.
That above five hundred matrones and virgins of noble blood, standing upon the
shore of Ptolemais, and having all their richest jewels with them, cried out
with lamentable voice, and proffered to any mariner that would undertake safely
to land them any-where, all their wealth for his hire, and also that he should
choose any one of them for his wife. Then a certain mariner came, and
transporting them all freely, safely landed them in Cyprus; nor by any enquiry
could it after be known (when he was sought for to receive his hire) who this
mariner was, nor whither he went.

The Hospitallers for haste were fain to leave their treasure behind them, and
hide it in a vault; which being made known from time to time to their
successors, was fetched from thence by the Sand. Trav. page 204.
galleys of Malta about three hundred years afterward.

Henry King of Cyprus to his great cost and greater commendation, gave free
entertainment to all Pilgrims that fled hither, till such time as they could
be transported to their own countries; and thanks was all the shot expected of
these guests at their departure.

Thus after an hundred ninety and four years ended the Holy war; for
continuance the longest, for money spent the costliest, for bloodshed the
cruellest, for pretenses the most pious, for the true intent the most politic
the world ever saw. And at this day, the Turks to spare the Christians their
pains of coming so long a journey to Palestine, have done them the unwelcome
courtesy, to come more then half the way to give them a meeting.

The end of the fourth Book.
A Supplement of the History of the HOLY WAR. Book V.
Chap. 1. The executing of the Templars in France.
MY task is done. Whatsoever remains is voluntary and over-measure, only to
hemme the end of our history that it ravel not out: As to show, What became of
the Templars, the Teutonick Order, and the Hospitallers; What were the
hindrances of this war; What nation best deserved in it; What offers were
afterward made to recover Jerusalem; By how many challengers that title at
this day is claimed; What is the present strength of Jerusalem; What hope to
regain it; with some other passages which offer attendance on these principal
heads.

Know then, Some nineteen years after the Christians had lost all in
Palestine, the Templars, by the cruel deed of Pope Clement the fifth, and foul
fact of Philip the Fair King of France, 1310
were finally Sabellicus, Enn. 9. lib. 7. Platina, in vita Clem. V.
exstirpated out of all Christendom. The history thereof is but in twilight,
not clearly delivered, but darkened with many doubts and difficulties: We must
pick out letters and syllables here and there as well as we may; all which put
together spell thus much.

Pope Clement having long sojourned in France, had received many real
courtesies from Philip the King; yea, he owed little less then himself to him.
At last, Philip requested of him a boon, great enough for a King to ask and a
Pope to grant; namely, all the lands of the Knights Templars through France,
forfeited by reason of their horrible heresies and licentious living. The Pope
was willing to gratify him in some good proportion for his favors received
(as thankfulness is always the badge of a good nature) and therefore being
thus long the Kings guest, he gave him the Templars lands and goods to pay for
his entertainment.

On a sudden all the Templars in France they clapped into prison, wisely catching
those Lions in a net, which had they been fairly hunted to death, would have
made their part good with all the dogs in France. Damnable sins were laid to
their charge; as, sacrificing of men to an idol they worshipped, rosting of a
Templars bastard and drinking his blood, spitting upon the cross of Christ,
conspiring with Turks and Saracens against Christianity, Sodomie, bestialitie,
with many other villainies out of the rode of humane corruption, and as far
from man's nature as Gods law.

Well; the Templars thus shut in prison, their crimes were half-proved. The
sole witness against them was one of their own Order, a notorious malefactor;
who at the same time being in prison and to suffer for his own offenses,
condemned by the Master of their Order, sought to prove his own innocence by
charging all his own Order to be guilty. And his case standing thus, he must
either kill or be killed, die or put others to death, he would be sure to
provide water enough to drive the mill, and swore most heartily to whatsoever
was objected against the Order. Besides, the Templars being brought upon the
rack, confessed the accusations to be true wherewith they were charged.
Hereupon all the Templars through France were most cruelly burned to death at a
stake, with James the grand Master of their Order.

Chap. 2. Arguments produced on either side, both for the innocence and
guiltiness of the Templars.
THere is scarce a harder question in later history then this, Whether the
Templars justly or unjustly were condemned to suffer. On the one side, it is
dangerous to affirm they were innocent, because condemned by the Pope,
infallible in matters of such consequence. This bugbear affrighteth many, and
makes their hands shake when they write hereof. If they should say the
Templars were burned wrongfully, they may be fetched over the coals themselves
for charging his Holiness so deeply; yea, hereby they bring so much innocent
blood on the Popes head as is enough to drown him: Some therefore in this
matter know little, and dare speak less, for fear of afterclaps. Secondly,
some who suspect that one eye of the Church may be dim, yet hold that both
the eyes, the Pope and general Council together, cannot be deceived.

Now the Council of Vienne countenanced the exstirpation of the Templars,
determined the dissolution of their Order, and adjudged their lands to be
conferred on the Knights-Hospitallers. Men ought then to be well advised how
they condemn a general Council to be accessorie post factum to the murder of
so many men.

For all this, those who dare not hollow, do whisper on the other side,
accounting the Templars not malefactors but martyrs: First, because the
witness was unsufficient, a malefactor against his Judge; and secondly, they
bring tortured men against themselves. Yea, there want not those that maintain
that a confession extorted on the rack is of no validity. If they be weak men
and unable to endure torment, they will speak any thing; and in this case their
words are endited not from their heart but outward limbs that are in pain: and
a poor conquest it is, to make either the hand of a child to beat, or the
tongue of the tortured man to accuse himself. If they be sturdie and stubborn,
whose backs are paved against torments, such as bring brazen sides against
steely whips, they will confess nothing. And though these Templars were stout
and valiant men, yet it is to be commended to ones consideration, whether
slavish and servile souls will not better bear torment, then generous spirits,
who are for the enduring of honorable danger and speedy death, but not
provided for torment, which they are not acquainted with, neither is it the
proper object of valor.

Again, it is produced in their behalf, that being burned at the stake, they
denied it at their death, though formerly they had confessed it; and whose
charity, if not stark-blind, will not be so tender-eyed as to believe that
they would not breathe out their soul with a lie, and wilfully contract a new
guilt in that very instant wherein they were to be arraigned before the Judge
of heaven. A Templar being to be burned at Bordeaux, and seeing the Pope and
King Philip looking out at a window, cried unto them, Hospin. De orig. Mon.
cap. 18. fol. 193.
Clement thou cruel tyrant, seeing there is no higher amongst mortal men to
whom I should appeal for my unjust death, I cite thee together with King Philip
to the tribunal of Christ the just Judge who redeemed me, there both to appear
within one year and a day; where I will lay open my cause, and justice shall
be done without any by-respect. In like manner, P. Aemylius, in Philipp^
Pulchr^.
James grand Master of the Templars, though by piecemeal he was tortured to
death, craved pardon of God, and those of his Order, That forced by extremity
of pain on the rack, and allured with hope of life, he had accused them of such
damnable sins, whereof they were innocent.

Moreover, the people with their suffrage acquitted them: happy was he that
could get an handful of their ashes into his bosom, as the Relic of pious
martyrs, to preserve. Indeed little heed is to be given to peoples humors;
whose judgment is nothing but prejudice and passion, and commonly envy all in
prosperity, pity all in adversity, though often both undeservedly: And we
may believe that the beholding of the Templars torments when they were burned,
wrought in the people first a commiserating of their persons, and so by degrees
a justifying of their cause. However vulgus non semper errat, aliquando eligit:
and though it matters little for the gales of a private man's fancy, yet it is
something when the wind blows from all corners: And true it is, they were
generally cried up for innocents.

Lastly, Pope Clement and King Philip were within the time prefixed summoned by
death to answer to God for what they had done. And though it is bad to be busy
with Gods secrets; yet an argument drawn from the event, especially when it
goes in company with others, as it is not much to be depended on, so it is not
wholly to be neglected. Besides, King Philip missed of his expectation, and the
morsel fell besides his mouth; for the lands of the Templars, which were first
granted to him as a portion for his youngest son, were afterward by the
Council of Vienne bestowed on the Knights-Hospitallers.

Chap. 3. A moderate way what is to be conceived of the suppression of the
Templars.
BEtwixt the two extremities of those that count these Templars either
Malefactors or Martyrs, some find a middle way; whose verdict we will parcel
into these several particulars.

1. No doubt there were many novices and punies amongst them, newly admitted
into their Order; which if at all, were little guilty; for none can be fledge
in wickedness at their first hatching: To these much mercy belonged: The
punishing of others might have been an admonition to them; and cruelty it was,
where there were degrees of offenses, to inflict the same punishment, and to
put all of them to death. 2. Surely many of them were most heinous offenders.
Not to speak what they deserved from God (who needs not pick a quarrel with
man, but always has a just controversy with him) they are accounted
notorious transgressors of humane laws: yet perchance if the same candle had
been lighted to search, as much dust and dirt might have been found in other
Orders. 3. They are Urspergens. Paralip. fol. 368.
conceived in general to be guiltless and innocent from those damnable sins
wherewith they were charged: Antoninus, tit. 21. cap. 1.. 3.
Which heinous offenses were laid against them, either because men out of
modesty and holy horror should be ashamed and afraid to dive deep in
searching the groundwork and bottom of these accusations, but rather take
them to be true on the credit of the accusers; or that the world might the more
easily be induced to believe the crimes objected to be true, as conceiving
otherwise none would be so devilish as to lay such devilish offenses to their
charge; or lastly, if the crimes were not believed in the total sum, yet if
credited in some competent portion, the least particular should be enough to do
the deed, and to make them odious in the world. 4. The chief cause of their
ruin was their extraordinary wealth: They were feared of many, envied of more,
loved of none. As Naboths vineyard was the chiefest ground for his blasphemy;
and as in England, Cambdens Brit. in Bedfordshire.
Cornwall Lord Fanhop said merrily, That not he, but his stately house at
Ampthill in Bedfordshire, was guilty of high treason: so certainly their
wealth was the principal evidence against them, and cause of their overthrow.
It is quarrel and cause enough, to bring a sheep that is fat to the shambles.
We may believe King Philip would never have took away their lives if he might
have took their lands without putting them to death: but the mischief was, he
could not get the honey unless he burnt the bees.
Some will say, The Hospitallers had great, yea, greater revenues, nineteen
thousand Manors to the Templars nine thousand; yet none envied their wealth.
It is true: but then they busied themselves in defending of Christendom,
maintaining the Island of Rhodes against the Turks, as the Teutonick order
defended Spruce-land against the Tartarian; the world therefore never grudged
them great wages who did good work. These were accounted necessary members of
Christendom, the Templars esteemed but a superfluous wenne; they lay at rack
and manger and did nothing: who had they betook themselves to any honorable
employment, to take the Turks to task either in Europe or Asia, their
happiness had been less repined at, and their overthrow more lamented. And
certain it is, that this their idleness disposed them for other vices; as
standing waters are most subject to putrify.

I hear one Ioach. Stephanus, De jurisdictione, lib. ^. cap. 10. 18.
bird sing a different note from all the rest in the wood; namely, that what
specious shows soever were pretended, the true cause of their ruin was, that
they began to desert the Pope and adhere to the Emperor. If this was true, no
doubt they were deeply guilty, and deserved the hard measure they suffered.
Sure I am, how-ever at this time they might turn edge, they had formerly been
true blades for his Holiness.

All Europe followed the copy that France had set them. Here in England King
Edward the second of that name, suppressed the Order, and put them to death; So
by virtue of a writ sent from him to Sir John Wogan, Lord chief Justice in
Ireland, were they served there; and such was the secrecy of the contrivance
of the business, that the storm fell upon them before they saw it, and all
crannies were so closely stopped that none could steal a glimpse of the
mischief intended against them.

In Germany they found some mercy and milder dealing: 1311
for Hospin. De orig. Mon. cap. 18. fol. 193.
Hugh Wildgrave coming with twenty of his Order all in armor into a Council of
Dutch Bishops, who intended to execute the sentence of the Pope upon them,
there protested his innocence, and appealed to the next Pope who should
succeed Clement, as to his competent judge. Hereupon their lives were spared;
only they were forced to renounce the name of Templars, and to enter
themselves into other Orders; chiefly of Hospitallers and Teutonicks, on whom
their lands were bestowed. We will conclude all with that resolution of a
Hieronimo Romano, De la republica Christ. lib. 7. cap. 6. Et Pero Mexya, De la
silva de varia lici^n. lib. 2. cap. 5.
brace of Spanish writers, who make this epilogue to this woeful tragedy;
Concerning these Templars, whether they were guilty or not, let us suspend our
censure till the day of judgment; and then and no sooner shall we certainly be
informed therein.

Chap. 4. Of the Teutonick Order; When they left Palestine, and on what
conditions they were entertained in Prussia; Their Order at last dissolved.
FRequent mention has been formerly made of the Teutonick Order, or that of
Dutch Knights, who behaved themselves right valiantly clean through the Holy
war: And, which foundeth much to their honor, they cannot be touched either
for treason or faction, but were both loyal and peaceable in the whole service.

But at last they perceived, that by the course of the cards they must needs
rise losers if they continued the war in the Holy land, and even resolved to
abandon it. It happened at the same time, that Conrade Duke of Mazovia offered
them most honorable conditions; namely, the enjoying of Prussia, on condition
they would defend it against the Infidels which annoyed it. Indeed the fratres
gladiferi, or sword-bearing brothers, brave slashing lads, undertook that task:
but finding either their arms too weak, or swords too blunt to strike through
their enemies, they employed the aid of, and conjoined themselves to this
Teutonick Order. Hereupon, in the year of our Lord 1239, Hermannus de Saltza,
fourth Master of these Dutch Knights, came with most of his Order into Prussia;
yet so that he left a competent number of them still in Palestine, which
continued and did good service there even to the taking of Ptolemais.

But the greater number of these Dutch Knights, in Prussia did knight service
against the Tartarians, and were Christendomes best bank against the
inundations of those barbarous people. By their endeavors the Prussians, which
before were but heathen-Christians, were wholly converted; many a brave city
builded, specially Marienburg, where formerly a great oak stood; (who would
think so many beautiful buildings would spring out of the root of one tree?)
and those countries of Prussia and Livonia, which formerly were the course
list, are now become the rich fringe of Europe.

At last the Prussians grew weary of the tyrannous oppression of those Dutch
Knigh^^ (as appears by the grievances they presented) and applied themselves
to Casimire King of Poland. He took to task Lewis Erlinsufe the Master of their
Order; and so ordered him, that whereas before he pleaded himself to be a free
Prince of the Empire, hereafter he should acknowledge the King of Poland for
his Lord and Master. The successors to this Lewis fretted against this
agreement, as prejudicial to them: They could do no less then complain, and
could do little more; for the King of Poland in spite of their resistance held
them to their agreements.

Albert of the house of Brandenburg was the last grand Master of this Order,
and first Duke of Prussia. He brake the vow of their Order, losing his
virginity to keep his chastity, and married Dorothie daughter to the King of
Denmark. The other Teutonicks protested against him, and chose Gualther
Croneberg in his room: Yea, Albert was proscribed in a Diet in Germany, and
his goods confiscated, but the proscription never executed, the Emperor of
Germany being the same time employed in matters of greater moment which more
nearly concerned himself. And thus in this Albert, for ought we can find to the
contrary, the Teutonick Order had its end, and was quite dissolved.

Chap. 5. The several flittings of the Knights-Hospitallers, from Cyprus, by
Rhodes, Nice, Syracuse, to Malta.
WE must now wait on the Hospitallers to their lodgings, and we have done. We
left them driven from Ptolemais, and landed at Cyprus; where King Henry
courteously entertained them. But a friends house is no home: Hence therefore
they were conveyed to their several Alberges in Europe.

But such active spirits could not long be idle; such running streams would not
end in a standing pond. Wherefore they used all their own strength, and
improved their interest with all their benefactours, to furnish out a fleet:
Which done, under Fulk de Vilderet their grand Master they won the Island of
Rhodes from the Turks eighteen years after Ptolemais was lost, and there
seated themselves.

Besides Rhodes, they also enjoyed these five adjacent Islands, says my
Author, Nicoria, Episcopia, Iolli, Limonia, and Sirana; places so small, that
consulting with maps will not find them out: enough almost to make us think
with Tertullian of Delos, that once there were such Islands, which at this day
are quite vanished away.

Two hundred and fourteen years, to the terror of the Turks, comfort of the
Christians, and their own immortal fame, they maintained this Island, and
secured the seas for the passage of Pilgrims to Jerusalem: till at last in the
year 1523, after six months siege they surrendered the city to their own
honor, and shame of other Christians who sent them no succor in season.

Yet changing their place they kept their resolution to be honorably employed.
Hence they sailed to Nice in Piemont, a city lying opposite to Africa, from
whence the Moors and Saracens much infested Christendom. Wherefore Charles
Duke of Savoy bestowed that city upon them to defend it; counting the
courtesy rather done to him then by him, that they would accept it.

Afterward, they perceived it was more needful to stop the Turks invasions
then their pillagings: They had lately won Buda, and (as it was thought)
would quickly stride over the Adriatic sea, and have at Italy. Wherefore the
Hospitallers left Nice, and planted themselves at Syracuse in Sicilie: Where
they right valiantly behaved themselves in defending that country.

But Charles the fifth, a politic Prince, though he saw their help was
useful, yet desired not much to have them live in his own country. He liked
their neighborhood better then their presence, to have them rather near then
in his Kingdom. Wherefore he appointed them the Island of Malta to keep for
themselves, their grand Master only paying yearly to the King of Spain a
Hospin. De orig. Mon. cap. 17. fol. 190.
Falcon in acknowledgement they held it from him. Loath were the Hospitallers to
leave Sicilie, that Paradise of pleasure, and went very unwillingly from it.

Malta is an Island in the mid-land-sea, seated betwixt Europe and Africa, as
if it meant to escape out of both as being in neither. Here S. Paul suffered
shipwreck, when the viper stung him not, but the men did, Acts 28.4.
condemning him for a murderer. And here the Hospitallers seated themselves,
and are the bulwark of Christendom to this day, giving daily evident proof of
their courage. But their masterpiece was in the year 1565, when they
courageously defended the city of Malta besieged by Soliman: When he
discharged seventie eight thousand bullets (some of them seven spans in
compass) against it, big enough not only to overthrow walls but overturn
mountains; yet notwithstanding they held out valiantly five months, and at
last forced the Turk to depart.

These Knights of Malta are at this day a good bridle to Tunis and Algiers. I
am informed by a good M^ Gr. Gibs of S. Perr^t, Dorset.
friend (who has spent much yet lost no time in those parts) that these
Knights are bound by vow not to fly from the Turks, though one man or one
galley to four (half which ods Hercules himself durst not venture on;) but if
there be five to one, it is interpreted wisdom not cowardlinesse, to make away
from them: Also if a Christian ship wherein there is a Knight of Malta take a
Turkish ship, that Knight is bound by his Order first to go aboard to enter it.
The grand Master of this Order has a great command, and is highly esteemed of,
insomuch that the Cassanaeus, part. 9. considerat. 4.
author of the Catalogue of the glory of the world, believes he is to take
place next to absolute Kings, above all other temporal Princes, even above
Kings subject to the Empire. Sure he means, if they will give it him;
otherwise it seems improper that the alms-man should take place of his
benefactours. Yet the Lord Prior of the Hospitallers in England was chief Baron
of the Realm, and had precedencie of all other Lords: and here his Order
flourished with great pomp till their final period; which I now come to relate.

Chap. 6. The Hospitallers in England stoutly withstand three several
assaults, which overthrew all other Religious foundations.
THe suppression of the Hospitallers in England deserves especial notice,
because the manner thereof was different from the dissolving of other Religious
houses; for manfully they stood it out to the last, in despite of several
assaults.

1. Cardinal Wolsey, by leave from the Pope, suppressed certain small houses
of little value, therewithal to endow his Colleges in Oxford and Ipswich. He
first showed Religious places were mortal, which hitherto had flourished in a
seeming eternity. This leading case of Wolseys did pick the mortar out of all
the Abbey-walls in England, and made a breach in their strongest gate-houses,
teaching covetousness (an apt scholar) a ready way to assault them: (For it
is the dedication not the value of the thing dedicated, stampeth a character of
sacredness upon it.) And King Henry the eighth concluded, if the Cardinal
might eat up the lean Covents, he himself might feed on the fat ones, without
danger of a sacrilegious surfeit. True it is, Wolsey not wholly but in part
alienated the lands of these petty houses, reserving them still to the
general end of pious uses: But the King followed this pattern so far as it
was for his purpose, and neglected the rest. 2. For not long after, the Statut.
in 27o Henr. viii.
Parliament granted him all Religious houses of and under the value of two
hundred pounds yearly: and it was thought, that above ten thousand persons,
masters and servants, lost their livelihoods by the demolishing of them. And
for an introduction to the suppression of all the residue, he had a strait
watch set upon them, and the Regulars therein tied to a strict and punctual
observation of their orders without any relaxation of the least liberty;
insomuch that many did quickly un-nunne and disfriar themselves, whose sides
formerly used to go loose, were soon galled with strait lacing. 3.Then followed
the grand dissolution or judgement-day on the world of Abbeys remaining; which
of what value soever were seized into the Kings hands. The Lord Cromwell, one
of excellent parts but mean parentage, came from the forge to be the hammer to
maul all Abbeys. Whose magnificent ruins may lesson the beholders, That it is
not the firmness of the stone nor fastness of the mortar makes strong walls,
but the integrity of the inhabitants. For indeed foul matters were proved
against some of them, as Sodomie and much uncleanness: Whereupon unwillingly
willing, they resigned their goods and persons to the Kings mercy. But the
Knights-Hospitallers (whose chief mansion was at St-Johns, nigh London) being
Gentlemen and soldiers of ancient families and high spirits, would not be
brought to present the King such puling petitions and public recognitions of
their errors as other Orders had done. They complained it was a false
consequence, as far from charity as logic, from the induction of some
particular delinquents to infer the guiltiness of all Religious persons.
Wherefore like stout fellows they opposed any that thought to enrich themselves
with their ample revenues, and stood on their own defense and justification.
Chap. 7. The Hospitallers at last got on an advantage and suppressed.
BUt Barnabe's day it self has a night; and this long-lived Order, which in
England went over the graves of all others, came at last to its own.

They were suffered to have rope enough, till they had haltered themselves in a
Praemunire: For they still continued their obedience to the Parlam. Anno 32o.
Henr. viii.
Pope, contrary to their allegiance, whose usurped authority was banished out
of the land; and so (though their lives otherwise could not be impeached for
any vitiousnesse) they were brought within the compass of the law. The case
thus standing, their dear friends persuaded them to submit to the Kings
mercy, and not to capitulate with him on conditions, nor to stop his favor by
their own obstinacy, but yield whilst as yet terms honest and honorable
would be freely given them: That such was the irresistibleness of the Kings
spirit, that like a torrent it would bear down any thing which stood betwixt
him and his desires; If his anger were once inflamed, nothing but their blood
could quench it: Let them not flatter themselves into their own ruin, by
relying on the aid of their friends at home, who would not substitute their own
necks to save theirs from the ax; nor by hoping for help from foreign parts,
who could send them no seasonable succor.

This counsel harsh at first, grew tunable in the ears of the Hospitallers; so
that contented rather to exchange their clothes for worse then to be quite
stripped, they resigned all into the Kings hands. He allowed to Sr William Weston
Lord Prior of the Order, an annual pension of one thousand pounds: But he
received never a penny thereof, 1540
but dyed Weaver, M^n. page 114.
instantly, struck to the heart when he first heard of the dissolution of his
Priory: May 7.
and lies buried in the Chancell of Clarkenwell, with the portraiture of a
dead man lying on his shroud, the most artificially cut in stone (says my
Idem, page 430.
Author) that ever man beheld. Others had rent assigned them of 200l, 100l,
80l, 60l, 50l, 20l, 10l, according to their several qualities and deserts.

At the same time justs and tornaments were held at Westminster: Wherein the
challengers against all comers, were, Sr John Dudley, Sr Thomas Seymore, Sr
Thomas Poinings, Sr George Carew, Knights; Antonie Kingstone, and Richard
Cromwell, Esquires: To each of whom for reward of their valor, the King gave a
hundred marks of yearly revenues, and a house to dwell in, to them and their
heirs, out of the lands belonging to these Hospitallers. And at this time, many
had Danae's happiness, to have golden showers rained into their bosoms.

These Abbey-lands, though skittish mares to some, have given good milk to
others: Which is produced as an argument, That if they prove unsuccessefull to
any, it is the users default, no inherencie of a curse in the things
themselves. But let one keep an exact Register of lands, and mark their
motions, how they ebb and flow betwixt buyers and sellers, and surely he will
say with the Poet, (...). And this is most sure; Let land be held in never so
good a tenure, it will never be held by an unthrift.

The Hospitallers Priory-church was preserved from down-pulling all the days
of King Henry the eighth: but in the third year of King Edward the sixth, Stow.
with the bell-towre (a piece of curious workmanship, graven, gilt, and
enamelled) it was undermined and blown up with gunpowder, and the stone
employed in building the Lord Protectours house in the Strand.

Thus as surgeons in cutting off a gangrened leg, always cut it off above
the joint, even where the flesh is whole and sound: so (belike for fear of
further infection) to banish Monkerie for ever, they rased the structures and
harmless buildings of Priories, which otherwise in themselves were void of any
offense. They feared if Abbeys were only left in a swound, the Pope would soon
get hot water to recover them: To prevent which, they killed them and killed
them again, overturning the very foundations of the houses, infringing,
altering and transferring the lands, that they might never be reduced to their
old property. Some outrages were committed in the manner of these
dissolutions: Many manuscripts, guilty of no other superstition then red
letters in the front, were condemned to the fire: and here a principal key of
antiquity was lost, to the great prejudice of posterity. But in sudden
alterations it is not to be expected that all things be done by the square and
compass.

Chap. 8. Queen Mary sets up the Hospitallers again; They are again deposed
by Queen Elisabeth.
QUeen Mary (a Princess more zealous then politic) attempted to restore
Abbeys to their pristine estate and former glory: And though certain of her
counselors objected, that the state of her Kingdom and dignity thereof and
her Crown imperial could not honorably be furnished and maintained without
the possession of Abbey-land; yet she Parlam. Anno 2o and 3o Phil. and Mariae.
frankly restored, resigned, and confirmed by Parliament all ecclesiastical
revenues which by the authority of that high court in the days of her Father
were annexed to the Crown, protesting she set more by her salvation, then by
ten kingdoms.

But the Nobility followed not her example: They had eaten up the Abbey-lands,
and now after twenty years possession digested and turned them into good
blood in their estates: they were loath therefore to empty their veins again;
and the forwardest Romanist was backward enough in this costly piece of
devotion.

How-ever, out of her own liberality, she set up two or three bankrupt
Covents, as Sion and Westminster, and gave them stock to trade with. The
Knights also of S. John of Jerusalem she reseated in their place; and S^ Thomas
Tresham of Rushton in Northamptonshire was the first and last Lord Prior after
their restitution: For their nests were plucked down before they were warm in
them, by the coming in of Queen Elisabeth.

To conclude; In the founders of Religious houses were some good intents mixed
with superstitious ends; amongst the Religious persons themselves, some piety,
more looseness and laziness; in the confounders of those houses, some
detestation of the vices of Friars, more desire of the wealth of Friaries; in
God, all just, all righteous, in permitting the badnesse and causing the
destruction of these numerous Fraternities.

Chap. 9. Observations on the Holy war; The horrible superstition therein.
WE have finished the story of the Holy war: And now I conceive my indentures
are cancelled, and I discharged from the strict service and ties of an
Historian; so that it may be lawful for me to take more liberty, and to make
some observations on what has been past.

Before I go further, I must deplore the worlds loss of that worthy work which
the Lord Verulam left unfinished, concerning the Holy war; an excellent
piece, and alas! it is but a piece: so that in a pardonable discontent we may
almost wish that either it had been more, wholly to have satisfied our hunger,
or less, not at all to have raised our appetite. It was begun not in an
historical but in a politic way, not reporting the Holy war past with the
Turks but advising how to manage it in the future. And no doubt if he had
perfected the work, it would have proved worthy the Author: But since, any
have been deterred from finishing the same; as ashamed to add mud-walls and a
thatched roof to so fair a foundation of hewn and polished stone.

From that Author we may borrow this distinction, That three things are
necessary to make an invasive war lawful; the lawfulness of the
jurisdiction, the merit of the cause, and the orderly and lawful prosecution
of the cause. Let us apply to our present purpose in this Holy war: For the
first two, Whether the jurisdiction the Christians pretended over the Turks
dominions was lawful or not; and, Whether this war was not only operae but
vitae pretium, worth the losing so many lives; we refer the Reader to what
has been said in the Chap. 9, and 10.
first book. Only it will not be amiss, to add a story or two out of an
Froissard, lib. 4. cap. 18, 19.
Author of good account. When Charles the sixth was King of France, the Duke
of Burbant sailed over into Africa with a great army, there to fight against
the Saracens. The Saracen Prince sent an herald to know of him the cause of his
coming: The Duke answered, it was to revenge the death of Christ the Son of
God, and true Prophet, whom they had unjustly crucified. The Saracens sent back
their messenger again to demonstrate their innocence, how they were not
Saracens but Jews which put Christ to death, and therefore that the Christians
(if posterity should be punished for their predecessors fault) should rather
revenge themselves on the Jews which lived amongst them.

Monstrell. lib. 3. cap. 68.
Another relates, that in the year of our Lord 1453, the great Turk sent a
letter to the Pope, advertising him how he and his Turkish nation were not
descended from the Jews, but from the Trojans, from whom also the Italians
derive their pedigree, and so would prove himself a-kinne to his Holiness.
Moreover he added, that it was both his and their duty to repair the ruins of
Troy, and to revenge the death of their great grandfather Hector upon the
Grecians; to which end, the Turk said he had already conquered a great part of
Greece. As for Christ, he acknowledged him to have been a noble Prophet, and to
have been crucified of the Jews, against whom the Christians might seek their
remedy. These two stories I thought good to insert, because though of later
date, and since the Holy war in Palestine was ended, yet they have some
reference thereunto, because some make that our quarrel to the Turks.

But grant the Christians right to the Turks lands to be lawful, and the cause
in it self enough deserving to ground a war upon: yet in the prosecuting and
managing thereof, many not only venial errors but unexcusable faults were
committed; no doubt, the cause of the ill success.

To omit the book called the Office of our Lady, made at the beginning of this
war to procure her favorable assistance in it (a little manual, but full of
blasphemies in folio, thrusting her with importunate superstitions into Gods
throne, and forcing on her the glory of her Maker;) superstition not only
tainted the rind, but rotted the core of this whole action. Indeed most of the
pottage of that age tasted of that wild gourd. Yet far be it from us to
condemn all their works to be dross, because debased and allayed with
superstitious intents: No doubt there was a mixture of much good metal in
them, which God the good refiner knows how to sever, and then will crown and
reward. But here we must distinguish betwixt those deeds which have some
superstition in them, and those which in their nature are wholly superstitious,
such as this Voyage of people to Palestine was. For what opinion had they of
themselves herein, who thought that by dying in this war, they did make
Christ amends for his death? as one says: Which if but a rhetorical flourish,
yet does hyperbolize into blasphemy. Yea, it was their very judgment, that
hereby they did both merit and supererogate; and by dying for the Cross,
cross the score of their own sins and score up God for their debtour. But
this flies high, and therefore we leave it for others to follow. Let us look
upon Pilgrimages in general, and we shall find Pilgrims wandering not so far
from their own country as from the judgment of the ancient Fathers.

We will leave our army at home, and only bring forth our champion: Hear
what Epist. seu Orat. de iis qui adeunt Hierosol. Edit. Gr. Lat. Parisiis, 1615.
Gregory Nyssene says, who lived in the fourth Centurie, in which time
voluntary Pilgrimages first began; though before there were necessary
Pilgrims, forced to wander from their country by persecution. Where, says
he, our Lord pronounces men blessed, he reckons not going to Jerusalem to be
amongst those good deeds which direct to happiness. And afterward, speaking
of the going of single-women in those long travels; A woman; says he, cannot
go such long journeys without a man to conduct her; and then whatsoever we may
suppose, whether she hireth a stranger or has a friend to wait on her, on
neither side can she escape reproof, and keep the law of continency. Moreover;
If there were more Divine grace in the places of Jerusalem, sin would not be
so frequent and customarie amongst those that live there: Now there is no kind
of uncleanness which there they dare not commit; malice, adultery, thefts,
idolatry, poysonings, envies and slaughters. But you will say unto me, If it
be not worth the pains, why then did you go to Jerusalem? Let them hear
therefore how I defend my self: I was appointed to go into Arabia to an holy
Council, held for the reforming of that Church: and Arabia being near to
Jerusalem, I promised those that went with me, that I would go to Jerusalem to
discourse with them which were presidents of the churches there; where matters
were in a very troubled state, and they wanted one to be a mediator in their
discords. We knew that Christ was a man born of a Virgin, before we saw
Bethlehem; we believed his resurrection from death, before we saw his
sepulcher; we confessed his ascension into heaven, before we saw mount Olivet:
But we got so much profit by our journey, that by comparing them, we found
(...).
our own more holy then those outward things. Wherefore you that fear God,
praise him in what place you are. Change of place makes not God nearer unto
us: wheresoever thou art, God will come to thee, if the Inn of thy soul be
found such, as the Lord may dwell and walk in thee, etc.

A patron of Pilgrimages not able to void the blow yet willing to break the
stroke of so pregnant and plain a testimony, thus seeks to ward it; That
indeed Pilgrimages are unfitting for women, yet fitting for men. But sure God
never appointed such means to heighten devotion necessary thereunto, whereof
the half of mankind (all women) are by their very creation made incapable.

Secondly, he pleads, That it is lawful for secular and laymen to go on
Pilgrimages, but not for Friars, who lived recluse in their cells, out of which
they were not to come: and against such (says he) is Nyssens speech directed.
But then, I pray, what was Peter, the leader of this long dance, but an
Hermit? and (if I mistake not) his profession was the very dungeon of the
Monastical prison, the strictest and severest of all other Orders. And though
there were not so many cowls as helmets in this war, yet always was the Holy
army well stocked with such cattle: So that on all sides it is confessed that
the Pilgrimages of such persons were utterly unlawful.

Chap. 10. Of superstition in miracles in the Holy war, ranked into four
sorts.
BEsides superstition inherent in this Holy war, there was also superstition
appendant or annexed thereunto, in that it was the fruitful mother of many
feigned miracles. Hitherto we have refrained to scatter over our story with
them; it will not be amiss now to shovel up some of them in a heap.

M. Paris. in anno 1099.
One Peter (not the Hermit) found out the lance wherewith Christ was pierced:
and to approve the truth thereof against some who questioned him herein, on
Palm Sunday taking the lance in his hand, he walked through a mighty fire
without any harm: but it seems he was not his crafts-master, for he died soon
after.

Idem.
An image of our Lady brought from Jerusalem, but set up near Damascus, began
by degrees to be clothed with flesh, and to put forth breasts of flesh, out of
which a liquour did constantly flow: Which liquour the Templars carried home to
their houses, and distributed it to the Pilgrims which came to them, that they
might report the honor thereof through the whole world.

M. Paris.
A Sultan of Damascus who had but one eye, chanced to lose the other, and so
became stark-blind; when coming devoutly to this image, though he was a Pagan,
having faith in God, and confidence therein, he perfectly was restored to his
sight.

Infinite are the sholes of miracles done by Christ's Cross in Jerusalem;
insomuch that my Roger Hoveden, in anno 1187.
Author blamed the Bishop of Acon, who carried the Cross in that battle
wherein it was lost to the Turks, for wearing a corselet; and therefore (says
he) he was justly slain: because his weak faith relied on means, not on the
miraculous protection thereof.

When Conrade Landt-grave of Thuringia was enrolled in the Teutonick Order to
go to the Holy war, and received his benediction (as the fashion was) the
Nauclerus, Genesis 42.
Holy Ghost visibly descended upon him in the shape of fire. The said Conrade
received of God as a boon for his valor in this service, the rare faculty,
Chron. Pruten.
That by looking on any man he could tell whether or no he had committed a
mortal sin, yea, at first sight descrie their secret sins.

But the last miracle of our Lady in Palestine is the Lady of all miracles;
which was this: In the year 1291, when the Holy land was finally subdued by
the Turks, the chamber at Nazareth wherein the Angel Gabriel saluted her with
joyful tidings, was wonderfully Spondanus, in anno 1291.
transported into Sclavonia. That country being unworthy of her divine
presence, it was by the Angels carried over into Italy, anno 1294. That place
also being infested with thieves and pirates, the Angels removed it to the
little village of Loretto; where this Pilgrime-Chappel rests it self at this
day, and likes her entertainment so well, it will travel no further.

But enough: for fools meat is unsavourie to the taste of the wise. I have
transgressed already: two instances had been sufficient (as Noah preserved but
two of all unclean creatures) the rest might be lost without loss, and safely
be drowned in oblivion. How-ever, we may observe these millions of miracles are
reducible to one of these four ranks: 1. Falsely reported, never so much as
seemingly done. Asia the theater whereon they were acted, is at a great
distance, and the miracles as far from truth, as the place from us. And who
knows not, when a lie is once set on foot, besides the first founders, it
meets with many benefactours, who contribute their charity thereunto. 2.
Falsely done; insomuch as at this day, they are Miracula, si pia utilitate aut
necessitate careant, de facto suspecta sunt and rejicienda, Gerson.
sented amongst the Romanists. Who would not laugh to see the picture of a
Saint weep? Where one devout Catholic lifts up his eyes, ten of their wiser
sort wag their heads. 3. Truly done, but by the strength of nature. Suppose one
desperately sick, a piece of the Cross is applied to him, he recovereth; is
this a miracle? Nothing less; how many thousands have made an escape after
Death in a manner has arrested them? As therefore it is sacrilege, to father
Gods immediate works on natural causes; so it is superstition, to entitle
natural events to be miraculous. 4. Many miracles were ascribed to Saints
which were done by Satan. I know it will nonplus his power to work a true
miracle; but I take the word at large: and indeed vulgar (not to say, humane)
eyes are too dim to discern betwixt things wonderful and truly miraculous.
Now Satan, the master-juggler needs no wires or ginnes to work with, being
all ginnes himself; so transcendent is the activitie of a spirit. Nay, may not
God give the Devil leave to go beyond himself; it being just with him, that
those who will not have Truth their king and willingly obey it, should have
Falsehood their tyrant to whom their judgment should be captivated and inslaved.


Chap. 11. The second grand error in prosecuting the Holy war, being the
Christians notorious breaking their faith with Infidels.
NExt unto Superstition, which was deeply inlayed in the Holy war, we may
make the Christians Truce-breaking with the Infidels the second cause of their
ill success. Yet never but once did they break promise with the Turks; which
was (as I may say) a constant and continued faith-breaking, never keeping their
word. To omit several straining of the sinews and unjoynting the bones of many
a solemn peace, we will only instance where the neck thereof was clearly
broken a sunder.

1. When Godfrey first won Jerusalem, pardon was proclaimed to all the Turks
which yielded themselves; yet three days after in cold blood, they were all,
without difference of age or sex, put to the sword. 2. Almerick the first
swore, effectually to assist the Saracens in driving the Turks out of Egypt;
and soon after invaded Egypt, and warred upon the Turks against his promise. I
know something he pretended herein to defend himself, but of no validity; and
such plausible and curious witty evasions to avoid perjurie, are but the tying
of a most artificial knot in the halter, therewith to strangle ones own
conscience. 3. There was a peace concluded for some time betwixt King Guy and
Saladine; which non obstante, Reinold of Castile robbed Saladines own mother:
Whereupon followed the miserable overthrow of the Christians, and taking of
Jerusalem. 4. Our Richard, at his departure from Palestine, made a firm peace
for five years with Saladine, and it stood yet in force when Henry Duke of
Saxony coming with a great army of new adventurers invaded the Turkish
dominions. 5. Frederick the second, Emperor, made a truce of ten years with
the Sultan of Babylon; and yet in despite thereof, Theobald King of Navarre
forraged the country of Gaza, to the just overthrow of him and his army. 6.
Reinold Viceroy of Palestine, in the name of Frederick the Emperor, and after
him our Richard Earl of Cornwall, drew up a firm peace with the said Sultan;
which was instantly disturbed and interrupted by the turbulent Templars. 7.
Lastly, the Venetians, in the name of all Christian Princes, concluded a five
years peace with Alphir the Mammaluke Prince of Egypt; yet some voluntaries in
Ptolemais pillaged and robbed many Saracen merchants about the city. But
pardon them this last fault, we will promise they shall never do so any more in
Palestine, hereupon losing all they had left there.
And how could Safety it self save this people, and bless this project so
blackly blasted with perjury! As it is observed of tyrants, Where one goes,
ten are sent to the grave; so where one truce concluded with the Turks did
naturally expire and determine, many were violently broken off. A sin so
repugnant to all moral honesty, so injurious to the quiet and peace of the
world, so odious in it self, so scandalous to all men, To dissolve a league
when confirmed by Oath (the strongest bond of conscience, the end of particular
strife, the soulder of public peace, the sole assurance of amity betwixt
diverse nations, made here below, but enrolled in his high court whose glorious
name does sign it;) a sin, I say, so heinous, that God cannot but most
severely punish it. Psalm. 15.
David asks, Who shall rest upon thy holy hill? and answers himself, He
that swears to his neighbor, and disappointeth him not, though it were to
his own hindrance. No wonder then, though the Christians had no longer abidance
in the Holy hill of Palestine (though this, I confess, is but the bark of the
text) driving that trade wherewith none ever thrived, the breaking of promises:
Wherewith one may for a while fairly spread his train, but he will moult his
feathers soon after.

Chap. 12 Of the hindrances of the good success in the Holy war; whereof the
Popes, and Emperors of Greece, were the two principal.
SO much concerning those laesa principia in this Holy war, Superstition and
Perjurie, which struck at the root of it. Come we now to consider many other
hindrances, which abated the good success thereof. Amongst these we will not
be so heretical as to deny the Popes Primacie; but account him the first
cause of their ill success. Such wounds as we find in his credit, we will
neither widen nor close up; but even present them to the Reader as we found
them. In four respects he baned the Christians good speed in this war: 1. He
caused most of their truce-breaking with the Turks, urging men thereunto. Thus
Pope Celestine drove on the Christians against the Turks, whilst as yet the
peace our Richard concluded with them was not expired; and so many other times
also. For alas! this was nothing with his Holiness; who sitting in the temple
of God, so far advances himself above God, as to dispense with oaths made
sacred by the most holy and high name of God; and professing himself the sole
Umpire and Peacemaker of the world, does cut asunder those only sinews which
hold peace together. 2. In that twice the Kingdom of Jerusalem was offered to
the Christians, and the Popes Legates would not suffer them to accept it: (No
doubt, by instructions from their Master; this being to be presumed on, That
those his absolute creatures altered not a tittle, but went according to the
copy that was set them) Once anno 1219; when Pelagius the Legate refused the
free offer of Melechsala: And the second time, some thirty years after; when
the same bountiful profer weas refused by Odo the Popes Legate: For when the
same Melechsala again offered the free resignation of the whole Kingdom of
Jerusalem, whereby the same day great quietness had entered into all
Christendom, with the end of much bloodshed and misery; the Legate M. Paris.
page 1047. Huic pacis formae ex Papae mandato rebellis erat Legatus, and
frontose cont^adicens, etc.
frontose contradicens, would in no wise receive the conditions offered. 3.
Frederick the second, Emperor, was possessed of it; when the Pope molested
him, and stirred up the Templars against him, as so many needles to prick him
when he was to sit down on the throne. 4. By diverting the Pilgrims, and
over-titling his own quarrels to be Gods cause; nothing being more common with
him, then to employ those armies which were levied for the Holy war, in
subduing the Albingenses and many others of his private enemies.


By all these it plainly appears, That what fair shows soever his Holiness
made, calling Councels, appointing Legates, providing preachers, proclaiming
pardons, to advance this war; yet in very deed, he neither intended nor
desired that the Christians should make a final conquest of Palestine, but be
employed in continual conquering it. He would have this war go on cum
decente pausa; fair and softly: let the Christians now beat the Turks, and then
the Turks beat the Christians; and so let them take their turns, whilst his
private profit went on. For (as we touched before) to this war the Pope
condemned all dangerous persons (especially the Emperors of Germany) to be
there employed. As little children are often set to school, not so much to
learn, as to keep them out of harms way at home: so this careful Father sent
many of his children to the Holy war, not for any good he knew they would
either do or get there, but it would keep them from worse doing; which
otherwise would have been paddling in this puddle, raking in that channel,
stirring up questions and controversies unsavourie in the nostrils of his
Holiness, and perchance falling into the fire of discord and dissension
against their own Father. Indeed at last this war ended it self in despite of
the Pope: Who no doubt would have driven this web (weaving and unweaving it,
Penelope-like) much longer if he could: yet he digested more patiently the
ending thereof, because the net might be taken away when the fish was already
caught, and the war spared now the Germane Emperors strength thereby was
sufficiently abated in Italy.

Much also this war increased the intrado of the Popes revenues. Some say,
Purgatory-fire heateth his kitchen: they may add, the Holy war filled his
pot, if not paid for all his second course. It is land enough, to have the
office of collecting the contributions of all Christendom given to this war.
So much for his great receipts hereby. And as for what he expended, not too
far in the point. If the Pope (says Did. 40. can. Si Papa suae and
fraternae salutis negligens.
their law) thrusts thousands of souls into Hell, none may say to him, Why
do thou so? It is presumption then to make him answer for money, who is not
accountable for men.

With the Pope let the Emperors of Greece their Jealousy go, as the second
bane of the Christians success in this war. These Emperors tormented
themselves in seeking that they would have been loath to find, the treachery of
the Latins; and therefore to begin first, used them with all treachery:
Whereof, largely Book 2. chap. 9, 27.
formerly. And surely, though a cautious circumspection be commendable in
Princes; yet in such over-fear, they were no less injurious to themselves then
to the western Pilgrims. Yea generally, suspiciousnesse is as great an enemy
to wisdom, as too much credulity; it doing oftentimes as hurtful wrong to
friends, as the other does receive wrongful hurt from dissemblers.

Chap. 13. The third hindrance, the Equality of the undertakers; the fourth,
the Length of the journey.
THe next cause of their ill success was the discord arising from the paritie
of the Princes which undertook this voyage. Many of them could abide no equal;
all, no superior: so that they had no chief, or rather were all chiefs: The
swarm wanted a master-Bee, a supreme commander, who should aw them all into
obedience. The Germane Emperor (though above all) came but seldom, and was
not constant amongst them: The King of Jerusalem (especially in the declining
of the State) was rather slighted then feared: The Popes Legate usurped a
superiority, but was never willingly nor generally obeyed. Surely smaller
forces being united under one command would have been more effectual in proof
(though not so promising in opinion and fame) then these great armies variously
compounded by associations and leagues, and of the confluence of Princes
otherwise unconcurring in their several courses.

Livie writing of that great battle (the critical day of the worlds Empire)
betwixt Hannibal and Scipio, Lib. 30.
It is small, says he, to speak of, yet of much moment in the matter it self,
that when the armies joined, the shouting of the Romans was far more great
and terrible, as being all of one voice from the same nation; whilst Hannibals
soldiers voices were different and disagreeing, as consisting of several
languages. If such a toy be considerable, and differing in tongues lesseneth
the terriblenesse in an army; how does dissenting in hearts and affections
abate the force thereof? and what advantage had the united Turks against
divided Christian Princes which managed this war? Had the emulation betwixt
those equal Princes only been such as is the spur of virtue, far from
enmity and hateful contention, striving with good deserts to outstrip those
who by the same means sought to attain to the like end; had it been mixed with
love in regard of the affinity of their affections and sympathy of their
desires, not seeking the ruin of their competitour but succouring him in
danger; then such simultates had been both honorable and useful to the
advancing of the Holy cause: But on the other side, their affections were so
violent, and dispositions so crooked, that emulation in them boiled to hatred,
that to malice, which rested better satisfied with the miserable end of their
opposite partner, then with any tropheys deservedly erected to their own
honor. And herein the wars betwixt the Venetians and Genoans in Syria are
too pregnant an instance.

The length of the journey succeeds as the fourth impediment. There needed no
other hindrance to this voyage then the voyage; the way was so long. In
sensation, the object must not be over-distant from the sense; otherwise
Lynceus eyes may see nothing? So it is requisite in warlike adventures, that
the work be not too far from the undertakers. Indeed the Romans conquered
countries far from home: but the lands betwixt them were their own, wherein
they refreshed themselves; and well may one lift a great weight at arms end if
he has a rest to stay his elbow on. So though Spain has subdued much in the
Indies, yet there they met with none or naked resistance. It fared not thus
with the Christians in this war: By the tediousness of the journey their
strength was exhausted; they ran dregs when first they were broched in Syria,
and as it were scattered their powder in presenting, before they came to
discharge.

Frederick Barbarossa wrote a braving letter to Saladine, reckoning up the
several nations in Europe under his command, and boasting what an army of
them he would bring into Syria. M. Paris. page 197.
Saladine answered him, That he also ruled over as many peoples, and told him,
that there was no sea which hindered his men from coming quickly together;
whereas, says he, you have a great sea, over which with pains and danger you
must pass before you can bring your men hither. Besides, if the Christians
shaped their journey by land, then their miseries in Hungary, Grecia, and Asia
the less, made their land-journey more tedious and troublesome then if they
had gone by sea.

Chap. 14. The fifth impediment, Clergymen being Captains.
THat Prelates and Clergymen were often Generals in this action (as Peter
the Hermit, Pelagius the Cardinal, and many others) was another cause of
their ill success: For allow them able in their own way, for matter of
learning, yet were they unsufficient to manage martial affairs. Many who in
England have learned the French tongue, and afterward have gone over into
France, have found themselves both deaf and dumb in effect, neither hearing to
understand nor speaking to be understood: They in like manner who frame to
themselves in their studies a model of leading an army, find it as full of
errors as rules when it e^meth to be applied; and a measure of war taken by
book, falls out either too long or too short, when brought into the field to
be used.

I have heard a story of a great map-monger, who undertook to travel over
England by help of his maps, without asking the least direction of any he met.
Long he had not ridden but he met with a non plus ultra, a deep unpassable
gullet of water, without bridge, ford, or ferry. This water was as unknown to
his Camdens or Speeds maps as to himself; because it was neither body nor
branch of any constant river or brook (such as only are visible in maps) but
an ex-tempore-water, flowing from the snow which melted on hills. Worse
unexpected accidents surprise those who conceive themselves to have conned all
martial maxims out of Authors, and warrant their skill in war against all
events out of their great reading; when on the sudden some unwonted occurrent
takes them unprovided, standing amazed till destruction seiseth on them.

Indeed, sometimes such unlooked-for chances arrest even the best and most
experienced Generals, which have long been acquainted with war; nor are they
privileged by all their experience from such casualties, nor are they so
omniscient but that their skill may be posed therewith, a minute showing
sometimes what an age has not seen before: But then such aged commanders have
this advantage, that finding themselves at a fault, they can soonest know where
to beat about and recover it.

Add to the inabilitie, the incongruitie of Prelates going to fight. True, in
defensive wars necessity is their sufficient dispensation; but otherwise it
is improper. In the battle against Amalek, Josua fought; Moses prayed; the
Levites bare the ark, no office of command in the Camp. And better it had been
that Cardinal Columna had been at his beads, or in his bed, or any where else,
then in the camp in Egypt; where by his indiscreet counsel he brought all the
lives of the Christians into danger.

Chap. 15. The sixth hindrance, the Diversity of the climate disagreeing with
the bodies of Europe; And what weakeneth Northern men going Southward.
NOw follows the Diversity of the climate, which caused the death of many
thousands of the Christians, sweeping them away with horrible plagues and other
diseases. For even as men when they come into a new Corporation, must pay their
fees before they can be freemen thereof and set up trading therein; so it
always cost the Christians of Europe a dangerous sickness at least, before
they could be well acquainted with the air and climate of Palestine.

Amongst other diseases the Leprosy was one epidemicall infection which
tainted the Pilgrims coming thither. This (though most rife in our Saviors
time, God so ordering it that Judea was sickest while her Physician was
nearest) at this time of the Holy war was very dangerous. Hence was it
brought over into England (never before known in this Island) and many
Lazar-houses erected for the relief of those infected therewith: Their chief
house was at Burton-lazars in Leichestershire. I say not, as this disease began
with the Holy war in England, so it ended with it: Sure such has been Gods
goodness, that few at this day are afflicted therewith; and the leprosy of
Leprosy, I mean the contagion thereof, in this cold country is much abated.

Many other sicknesses seized on the Pilgrims there, especially in summer. The
Turks, like Salamanders, could live in that fiery country, whose scorching our
Northern bodies could not endure. Yea, long before I find it observed by
Vitruvius, that they who come cold into hot countries, cannot long subsist, but
are dissolved; whilst those that change out of hot into cold, find not only
no distemper and sickness by the alteration, but also grow more healthful,
solid, and compacted: But this perchance is easilyer said then maintained.

But let us not hereupon be disheartened to set on our Southern foes for fear
to be impaired, nor they invited to invade us by hope to be improved. Know, it
is not so much the climate, as bad and unwholesome diet inraging the climate
against us, which unsineweth those Northern nations when they come into the
South: Which bad diet, though sometimes necessary for want of better food, yet
is most-times voluntary through men's wilful intemperance. In the Portugal
action anno 1589, more English owed their Calenture to the heat of wine then
weather. Why do our English merchants bodies fadge well enough in Southern
air? why cannot our valor thrive as well there as our profit; but chiefly for
this, That merchants are careful of themselves, whilst soldiers count it
baseness to be thriftie of their own healths?

Besides, the sins of the South unmasculate Northern bodies. In hot countries
the Sirens of pleasure sing the sweetest, which quickly ravish our ears unused
to such music. But should we marching Southwards observe our health in some
proportion of temperance, and by degrees habituate our selves to the climate;
and should we keep our souls from their sins, no doubt the North might pierce
the South as far, and therein erect as high and long-lasting tropheys, as
ever the South did in the North.

Nor must it have admittance without examination into a judicious breast, what
some have observed; That Northern people never enjoyed any durable settled
government in the South. Experience avoweth they are more happy in speedy
conquering then in long enjoying of countries.

But the first Monarch the world ever knew (I mean, the Assyrian) came from the
North: Whence he is so often styled in Scripture, The King of the North;
conquering, and for many years enjoying those countries which lie betwixt him
and the sun; as Chaldea, Mesopotamia, Babylonia, Syria, Egypt: To speak
nothing of the Turks, who in the dichotomizing of the world fall under the
Northern part, and coming out of Scythia at first subdued most Southern
countries.

Chap. 16. The seventh impediment, the Vitiousnesse of the undertakers.
THus are we fallen on the next hindrance of success in this Holy war, the
Vitiousnesse of the undertakers. But here first we must make an honorable
reservation for many adventurers herein, whom we confess most pious and
religious persons. Let us not raise the opinion of our own piety by trampling
on our predecessors, as if this age had monopolized all goodness to it self.
Some no doubt most religious and truly valiant (as fearing nothing but sin)
engaged themselves in this action; of whom I could only wish, that their zeal
herein had either had more light or less heat. But with these, I say not how
many, but too many went most wicked people, the causers of the ill success.

It will be objected, Sanctitas morum has been made of some a note of the true
Church, never the sign of a fortunate army: Look on all armies generally, we
shall find them of the soldiers religion, not troubled with overmuch
preciseness: As our King John said, (whether wittily or wickedly, let others
judge) That the Buck he opened was fat, yet never heard Mass: so many
soldiers have been successful without the least smack of piety; some such
desperate villains, that fortune (to erroneous judgments) may seem to have
favored them for fear.

True: but we must not consider these adventurers as plain and mere soldiers,
but as Pilgrims and Gods army; in whom was required, and from whom was
expected more piety and purity of life and manners then in ordinary men:
whereas on the contrary, we shall make it appear, that they were more vicious
then the common sort of men. Nor do we this out of cruelty or wantonness, to
wound and mangle the memory of the dead; but to anatomize and open their
ulcerous insides, that the dead may teach the living, and lesson posterity.

Besides those that went, many were either driven or fled to the Holy land.
Those were driven, who having committed some Totum vulgus, tam casti quam
incesti, adulteri, homicidae, perjuri, praedones, Albertus Aquensis, Chron.
Hierosol. lib. 1. cap. 2. Besoldus, page 101. ex Brochardo, Malefactor
deprehensus, homicida, latro, fur, incestuosus, adulter, fornicator, timet a
judice condignam poenam, and transfretat in terram Sanctam.
horrible sin in Europe, had this penance imposed on them, To travel to
Jerusalem to expiate their faults. Many a whore was sent thither to find her
virginity: Many a murderer was enjoined to fight in the Holy war, to wash
off the guilt of Christian blood by shedding blood of Turks. The like was in
all other offenses; malefactors were sent hither to satisfy for their former
wickedness. Now God forbid we should condemn them, if truly penitents, for
impious. May he who speaks against penitents, never have the honor to be
one; since Repentance is the younger brother to Innocence it self. But we find
that many of them reverted to their former wickedness: they lost none of their
old faults and got many new, mending in this hot country as sour ale in
summer. Others fled hither, who having supererogated the gallows in their own
countries by their several misdemeanors, theft, rapes, incest, murders, to
avoid the stroke of Justice, protected themselves under this voyage; and coming
to Palestine, so profited in those Eastern schools of vices, that they learned
to be more artificially wicked. This plainly appears, as in sundry other
Authors, so chiefly in Tyrius, a witness beyond exception, who Especially in
the end of King Almericks life.
often complains hereof. And if we value testimonies rather by the weight
then number, we must credit so grave a man, who writes it with grief, and had
no doubt as much water in his eyes as ink in his pen, and surely would be
thankful to him that herein would prove him a liar.

Chap. 17. The eighth hindrance, the Treachery of the Templars; Of Sacrilege
alleged by Baronius, the cause of the ill success.
RObert Earl of Artois upbraided the Master of the Templars, That it was the
common speech, that the Holy land long since had been won, but for the false
coll^sion of the Templars and Hospitallers with the Infidels: Which words,
though proceeding from passion in him yet from premeditation in others, not
made by him but related, deserve to be observed the rather, because common
reports (like smoke, seldom but from some fire, never but from much heat) are
generally true. It is not to be denied, but that both these Orders were guilty
herein, as appears by the whole current of the story. Yea, King Almerick
fairly trussed up twelve Templars at once, Tyrius, lib. 19. cap. 11.
hanging them for delivering up an impregnable fort to Syracon. These like a
deceitful surgeon, who has more corruption in himself then the sore he
dresseth, prolonged the cure for their private profit; and this Holy war
being the trade whereby they got their gains, they lengthened it out to the
utmost: So that their Treachery may pass for the eighth impediment.

Baronius Annal. Ecclesiast. in anno 1100, and 1104.
concludes this one principal cause of the Christians ill success, That the
Kings of Jerusalem took away that city from the Patriarchs thereof, herein
committing sacrilege, a sin so heinous, that malice it self cannot wish an
enemy guilty of a worse. But wether or no this was sacrilege, we refer the
reader to what has been largely discussed before.

And here I could wish to be an auditour at the learned and unpartiall arguing
of this question, Whether overgreat donations to the Church may not afterward
be revoked? On the one side it would be pleaded, who should be judge of the
over-greatnesse, seeing too many are so narrow-hearted to the Church, they
count any thing too large for it; yea, some would cut off the flesh of the
Churches necessary maintenance, under pretense to cure her of a tympanie of
superfluities. Besides, it would be alleged, What once has been bestowed on
pious uses, must ever remain thereto: To give a thing and take a thing, is a
play too childish for children; much less must God be mocked therewith, in
resuming what has been conferred upon him. It would be argued on the other
side, That when Kings do perceive the Church ready to devour the Commonwealth
by vast and unlimited donations unto it, and Clergymen grown to suspicious
greatness, armed with hurtful and dangerous privileges derogatorie to the
royalty of Princes; then, then it is high time for Princes to pare their
overgrown greatness. But this high pitch we leave to stronger wings: Sure I am
in another kind, this Holy war was guilty of sacrilege, and for which it
thrived no whit the better; in that the Pope exempted six and twenty thousand
manours in Europe, belonging to the Templars and Hospitallers, from paying any
tithes to the Priest of the parish; so that many a minister in England smarteth
at this day for the Holy war. And if this be not sacrilege, to take away the
dowry of the Church without assuring her any jointure in lieu of it, I report
my self to any that have not the pearl of prejudice in the eye of their
judgment.

Chap. 18. Three grand faults in the Kingdom of Jerusalem, hindering the
strength and puissance thereof.
COme we now to survey the Kingdom of Jerusalem in it self: We will take it in
its vertical point, in the beginning of Baldwine the third, when grown to the
best strength and beauty; yet even then had it some faults, whereby it was
impossible ever long to subsist.

1. It lay far from any true friend. On the West it was bounded with the
mid-land-sea, but on all other sides it was environed with an Ocean of foes,
and was a country continually besieged with enemies. One being to sell his
house, amongst other commendations thereof, proclaimed, That his house had a
very good neighbor; a thing indeed considerable in the purchase, and might
advance the fale thereof a years value: Sure I am, the Kingdom of Jerusalem
had no such conveniencie, having bad neighbors round about: Cyprus indeed
their friend lay within a days sail; but alas! the Kings thereof had their
hands full to defend themselves, and could scarce spare a finger to help any
other.

2. The Kingdom was far extended, but not well compacted: all the body
thereof ran out in arms and legs. Besides that ground inhabited formerly by the
twelve tribes, and properly called the Holy land; the Kingdom of Jerusalem
ranged Northward over all Celosyria and Cilicia in the lesser Asia:
North-eastward, it roved over the Principalities of Antioch and Edessa, even
unto Carrae beyond Euphrates: Eastward, it possessed far beyond Jordan the
strong fort of Cracci, with a great part of Arabia Petrea: Southward, it
stretched to the entrance of Egypt. But as he is a strong man, whose joints are
well set and knit together, not whom nature has spunne out all in length and
never thickened him; so it is the united and well compacted Kingdom entire in
it self which is strong, not that which reaches and strideth the farthest. For
in the midst of the Kingdom of Jerusalem lay the Kingdom of Damascus, like a
canker feeding on the breast thereof: and clean through the Holy land, though
the Christians had many cities sprinkled here and there, the Turks in other
strong holds continued mingled amongst them.

3. Lastly, (what we have touched once before) some subjects to the Kings of
Jerusalem, namely, the Princes of Antioch, Edessa and Tripoli, had too large
and absolute power and authority: They would do whatsoever the King would
command them, if they thought good themselves. Now subjects should be
Adjectives, not able to stand without (much less against) their Prince, or
they will make but bad construction otherwise.

These three hindrances in the Kingdom of Jerusalem added to the nine former,
will complete a Jurie. Now if any one chance to censure one or two of them, let
him not triumph therein; for we produce not these impediments severally but
jointly, not to fight single duells but all in an army: Non noceant quamvis
singula, juncta nocent.

Chap. 19. What is to be conceived of the incredible numerousnesse of many
armies mentioned in this story.
FRequent mention has been made through this Holy war of many armies, as
well Christian as Turkish, whose number of soldiers swell very great; so as it
will not be amiss once for all to discuss the point concerning the
numerousnesse of armies anciently. And herein we branch our opinion into these
severals.

1. Asian armies are generally observed greater then those of Europe: There it
is but a sucking and infant company to have ten thousand; yea, under fifty
thousand no number. The reason of their multitude is, not that Asia is more
populous, but more spacious then Europe. Christendom is enclosed into many
small Kingdoms and free States; which severally can send forth no vast
numbers, and seldom agree so well as to make a joint collection of their
forces: Asia lies in common, in large countries, and many of them united under
one head. Besides, it is probable (especially in ancient times, as may be
proved out of Scripture) that those Eastern countries often spend their whole
stock of men, and employ all their arms-bearing people in their martial
service, not picking or culling them out, as we in Europe use to do. 2. Modern
armies are far less then those in former ages. The war- genius of the
world is altered now-a-dayes, and supplieth number with police; the foxes
skin pieceth out the lions hide. Especially armies have been printed in a
smaller letter since guns came up: One well-mounted cannon will spare the
presence and play the part of a whole band in a battle. 3. Armies both of
Europe, and chiefly in Asia (as farther off) are reported far greater then
truth. Even as many old men use to set the clock of their age too fast when
once past seventie; and growing ten years in a twelve-moneth, are presently
fourscore, yea, within a year or two after, climb up to an hundred: So it is
in relating the number of soldiers; if they exceed threescore and ten
thousand, then ad rotunditatem numeri, they are hoised up to an hundred, and
then fifty thousand more cast in for advantage. Not to speak of the facil
mistake in figures; One tells, at the first voyage of Pilgrims there went
forth Malmesb. lib. 4. page 133. Sexagies ( surely a mistake for sexies) centum
millia.
six hundred thousand; Lamp. Mellific. hist. page 313.
another counts three hundred thousand slain at the last taking of Ptolemais:
their glib pens making no more reckoning of men then of pinnes. We perchance
may do justly in imitating the unjust steward, setting down in the bill of our
belief but fifty for every hundred.
Nor is it any Paradox, but what will abide the touch, That competent forces of
able and well-appointed and well-disciplined soldiers under an experienced
General, are far more useful then such an unweldie multitude. Little
loadstones will in proportion attract a greater quantity of steel then those
which be far greater, because their poles are nearer together, and so their
virtue more united: So shall we find braver achievements by moderate armies,
then by such portentous and extravagant numbers. I never read of any miracle
done by the statue of S. Christopher in Paris, though he be rather of a
mountainlike then manlike bigness. Yea, such immoderate great armies are
subject to great inconveniences. 1. They are not so easily manageable; and the
commands of their General cool and lose some virtue in passing so long a
journey through so many. 2. It is improbable that so many thousands can be
heaped together, but the army will be very heterogeneous, patched up of
different people unsuiting in their manners; which must needs occasion much
cumbrance. 3. These crowds of soldiers may hinder one another in their
service; as many at the same time pressing out at a wicket. 4. Victuals for so
many mouths will not easily be provided; the provisions of a country serving
them but a meal, they must fast afterward. 5. Lastly, such great numbers
(though this, I must confess, is only per accidens, yet often incident) beget
carelessenesse and confidence in them; as if they would not thank God for their
victories, but conceive it a due debt owed to their multitudes. This has
induced some to the opinion to maintain, That a competent able army of thirty
thousand (which number Gonzaga that brave General did pitch on as sufficient
and complete) need not fear upon a paritie in all other respects, any company
whatsoever to come against them: such are enough, being as good as a feast, and
far better then a surfeit.

Chap. 20. Of the numberless Christians which lost their lives in this service.
XErxes viewing his army, consisting of more then a million, from an high
place all at a sight, is said to weep at the thought, That within an hundred
years all those would be mowed down with death: But what man could behold
without floods of tears, if presented to him at one view, the infinites of
people which lost their lives in this action!

In the first voyage went forth (as the most conscionable counters report)
three hundred thousand: 1095
Of these we can make the reader but spendthrifts accounts, All is gone,
without showing the particulars. For after the taking of Jerusalem, this army
was drawn so low, Tyrius, lib. 9. cap. 12.
that Godfrey being to fight with Ammiravissus the Egyptian, 1099
and bringing forth his whole strength, had but twelve hundred horse and nine
thousand foot left him.

Vrsperg. in Chron. page 239.
At the second setting forth, of two hundred and fifty thousand led hither by
Hugh brother to the King of France and sundry other Bishops, not a thousand
came into Palestine.

In the third voyage, Conrade the Emperor led forth no fewer then two hundred
thousand foot and fifty thousand horse; nor was the army of King Lewis of
France far inferior: Of whom such as returned make no noise, as not
considerable in number.

At the fourth setting forth, Frederick Barbarossa counted an hundred and
fifty thousand soldiers in his army: Of whom when they came to Ptolemais, no
more then P. Aemyl. in Phil. Aug. page 175.
eighteen hundred armed men remained.

Fifthly, what numbers were carried forth by our Richard the first and Philip
of France, I find not specified; no doubt they did bear proportion to the
greatness of the undertakers: All which at their return were consumed to a
very small company.

To omit several other intermediate actions of many Princes, who went forth
with armies and scarce came home with families; King Lewis carried forth two
and thirty thousand: Of which only six thousand came home, as their own
writers report, who tell their tale as it may sound best for the credit of
their country; whilst Knolls, Turk. hist. page 106.
others count eighty thousand to have lost their lives in that voyage: yea,
Magdeburg. Cent. 13. col. 606.
some reckon no fewer then an hundred thousand common men, besides seven
Counts, to have died in Cyprus of the plague.

Fox, in Martyrol. in Hen. 3. page 337.
At his second voyage to Tunis, of an hundred and twenty ships which lay at
anchor at Trape in Sicily, there were no more saved then the mariners of one
only French ship, and the thirteen ships of our Prince Edward; all the rest,
with men, armor and munition did miserably perish.

But enough of this doleful subject. If young Physicians with the first fee
for their practice are to purchase a new churchyard, Pope Urbane the second
might well have bought some ground for graves when he first persuaded this
bloody project; whereby he made all Jerusalem, Golgotha, a place for sculls;
and all the Holy land, Aceldama, a field of blood.

Chap. 21. The throne of Deserts: What nation merited most praise in this
war; And first of the French and Dutch service therein.
AS in the first book we welcomed each several nation when they first entered
into this service; so it is good manners now to take our solemn farewell of
them at their going out, and to examine which of them deserved most
commendation for their valor in this war. And herein me thinks the
distinction usual in some Colleges, of Founders, By-founders, and
Benefactours, may properly take place. The Founders of this Holy war, were
the French; the By-founders, the Dutch, English, and Italian; the Benefactours
(according to the different degrees of bounty) the Spanish, Polish, Danish,
Scots, and all other people of Europe.

The French I make the Founders for these reasons: First, because they began
the action first. Secondly, France in proportion sent most adventurers. Some
voyages were all of French, and all voyages were of some French. Yea, French
men were so frequent at Jerusalem, that at this day all Western Europeans there
are called Franks (as I once conceived, and perchance not without company in
my error) because so many French men came thither in the Holy war. Since, I
am converted from that false opinion, having found that two hundred years
before the Holy war was dreamed of, namely, in the time of Constantine Vide
M. Seldom on Polyolbion, page 150.
Porphyrogenetes Emperor of the East, all Western Christians were known to the
Greeks by the name of Franks; so that it seems the Turks borrowed that
appellation from the Grecians. Thirdly, As France sent the most, so many of
most eminent note: She shows for the game no worse cards then a pair royal
of Kings; Lewis the Young, Philip Augustus, and Saint Lewis; besides Philip the
Bold his son, who went halfway to Tunis. The first and last Christian King
of Europe that went to Palestine was a French man; and all the Kings of
Jerusalem, Frederick the Emperor only excepted, originally were of that
nation. Fourthly, Even at this day France is most loyal to the cause. Most
grand Masters of the Hospitallers have been French men: And at this day the
Knights of Malta, who have but four Albergies or Seminaries in all
Christendom, have Sandys Travels, page 229
three of them in France; viz. one of the France in general, one of Avergne,
and one of Provence. Yet France carries not the upper hand so clearly but that
Germany justleth for it; especially if we add to it the Low Countries, the
best stable of wooden horses, and most potent in shipping in that age of any
country in Europe; which though an amphibion betwixt both, yet custom at this
day adjudgeth it Dutch.

Now these are the several accents of honor in the Germane service: First,
That country shows three Emperors in the Holy war; Conrade, Frederick
Barbarossa, and Frederick the second. The last of these was solemnly crowned
and peaceably possessed King of Jerusalem. Secondly, Germany sent more Princes
to this war then all Europe besides. It would be an infinite task to reckon
them all; it being true of the Germane Nobility what Logicians say of a Line,
that it is divisibilis in semper divisibilia. Here honors equally descend to
sons and daughters; whereby they have Counts without counting in the whole
Empire: There were seventeen Princes of Henault, and seven and twenty Earls of
Mansfield all living together: So that one of their own countrymen says, That
the Dutch esteem none to be men but only such as are Noblemen. We will not
take notice of Germany as it is minced into petty Principalities, but as cut
into principal Provinces. We find these regnant Princes (for as for their
younger brethren, herein they are not accounted) to have been personally
present in the Holy war: Prince Palatine of Rhene,
Henry 1197
Duke (or as others, King) of Bohemia,
Jaboslaus, or Ladislaus 1147
Duke of Saxony,
Henry the younger 1197
Marquisse of Brandenburg,
Otho 1197
Archbishops of Mentz,
1 Conrade 2 Siphred 1197
Archbish. of Triers,
Theodoricus 1216
Archbish. of Colen,
Theodoricus 1216
Dukes of Austria,
1 Leopoldus the second 1190 2 Frederick 1197 3 Leopoldus the third, surnamed
the Glorious 1216
Dukes of Bavaria,
1 Guelpho 1101 2 Henry 1147 3 Lewis 1216
Landt-graves of Thuringia,
1 Herman 1197 2 Lewis 1227
Marquess of Moravia,
Conrade 1197
Duke of Mechlenburg,
Henry 1277
Earls of Flandres,
1 Theodoricus 1147 2 Philippus 1190 3 Baldwine 1200 4 William Dampier 1250 5
Guido 1270
Dukes of Brabant,
1 Godfrey 1195 2 Henry 1227
Earl of Holland,
William 1216
All these (I say not, these were all) went themselves, and led forth other
companies suitable to their greatness. The Reader, as he lights on more, at
his leisure may strike them into this catalogue. Thirdly, Germany maintained
the Teutonick Order, wholly consisting of her nation; besides Templars and
Hospitallers, whereof she had abundance: of whose loyal and valiant service we
have spoken largely before. Lastly, She fought another Holy war at the same
time against the Tartars and other barbarous people, which invaded her on her
North-east-part. And though ^ome will except, That that war cannot be
entitled Holy, because being on the defensive, it was rather of nature and
necessity then piety: yet upon examination it will appear, that this service
was less superstitious, more charitable to Christendom, and more rational
and discreet in it self; it being better husbandry, to save a whole cloth in
Europe, then to win a ragge in Asia.

Chap. 22. The English and Italian service compared; Of the Spanish, Polish,
Norvegian, Hungarian, Danish, and Swedish performance in this war.
NExt in this race of honor follow England and Italy, being very even and
hard-matched. England (it is no flattery to affirm what envy cannot deny)
spurreth up close for the prize; and though she had a great disadvantage in the
starting (Italy being much nearer to Palestine) yet she quickly recovered it.
Our country sent one King (Richard the first) and three Kings sons (Robert
Courthois, Richard of Cornwall, and Prince Edward) to this war. Yea, England
was a daily friend to this action: and besides these great and gross sums of
visible adventurers, she dropped and cast in privily many a Pilgrim of good
quality; so that there was scarce any remarkable battle or memorable siege
done through the war wherein there were not some English of eminent desert.

Yet Italy comes not any whit behind, if the achievements of her several
States, Venetians, Genoans, Pisans, Sicilians, Florentines, were made and
molded up together: Yea, for sea-service and engineers in this war, they
bear the bell away from all other nations. But these things allay the Italian
service: 1. It was not so abstracted from the dregs of mercinarinesse as that
of other countries (whose adventurers counted their very work herein sufficient
wages) but before they would yield their assistance they indented and
covenanted with the King of Jerusalem to have such and such profits, pensions,
and privileges in all places they took, to them and their posterity; not as
an honorarie reward freely conferred on them, but in nature of wages ex pacto
contracted for aforehand: as the Genoans had in Ptolemais, and the Venetians in
Tire. 2. These Italians stopped two gaps with one bush: Tyrius, lib. 10. cap.
28. and lib. 12. cap. 25.
they were Merchant-Pilgrimes, and together applied themselves to profit and
piety. Here in Tire they had their banks, and did drive a sweet trade of
spices and other Eastern commodities. 3. Lastly, As at first they gave good
milk, so they kicked it down with their heel, and by their mutual discord
caused the loss of all they helped to gain in Syria.

Spain was exercised all the time of this war in defending her self against
the Moors and Saracens in her own bowels: Yet such was her charity, that
whilst her own house was on burning, she threw some buckets of water to quench
her neighbors: and as other nations cast their superfluity, she her widows
mite into the treasury of this action; and produces two Theobalds Kings of
Navarre, and Alphonse King of Castile, that undertook expeditions to Palestine.

Hungary shows one King, Andrew; who washed himself in Jordan, and then
shrinking in the wetting returned presently home again. But this country,
though it self did go little, yet was much gone through to the Holy war
(being the rode to Syria for all land-armies) and merited well in this action,
in giving peaceable passage and courteous entertainment to Pilgrims; as to
Duke Godfrey, and Frederick Barbarossa, with all their soldiers as they
traveled through it. Had the Kings of Hungary had the same principle of
baseness in their souls as the Emperors of Grecia, they had had the same
cause of jealousy against the Christians that passed this way; yet they used
them most kindly, and disdained all dishonorable suspicions. True it is, at
the first voyage, King Coloman, not out of cruelty but carfulness and
necessary security, did use his sword against some unruly and disorderly
Pilgrims: but none were there abused which first abused not themselves. But
whatever Hungary was in that age, it is at this day Christendomes best
land-bulwark against the Turks: Where this pretty custom is used, That the
men wear so many feathers as they have killed Turks; which if observed
elsewhere, either feathers would be less, or valor more in fashion.

Poland could not stir in this war, as lying constant perdue of
Christendom against the Tartarian; 1147
yet we find Munst. Cosmog. in Polon.
Boleslaus Crispus Duke or King thereof (waiting on, shall I say? or)
accompanying Conrade the Emperor in his voyage to Palestine; and having
defraid all his and his armies costs and charges toward Constantinople, he
returned home, as not to be spared in his own country. But if by King David's
1. Sam. 30.24.
statute, the keepers of the baggage are to be sharers in the spoil with the
fighters of the battle, then surely Poland and such other countries may entitle
themselves to the honor of the war in Palestine; which in the mean time kept
home, had an eye to the main chance, and defended Europe against foreign
invaders.

Norway (in that age the sprucest of the three Kingdoms of Scandia, and best
tricked up with shipping; though at this day the case is altered with her, and
she turned from taking to paying of tribute) sent her fleet of tall soldiers
to Syria: who like good fellows, asked nothing for their work but their
victuals, and valiantly won the city of Sidon for the King of Jerusalem. And
it is considerable, that Syria (but a step or stride from Italy) was a long
race from Norway; so that their Pilgrims went not only into another country
but into another world.

Denmark was also partner in the foresaid service. 1145
Also afterward, Ericus Vide Calvisium in anno 1145. and Io. Magnum, Hist
Goth. lib. 19. cap. 10.
her King, though he went not quite through to the Holy land, yet behaved
himself bravely in Spain, and there assisted the winning of Lisbon from the
Infidels. His successor Baronius, in anno 1189.
Canutus anno 1189, had provided his navy, but was prevented by death: his
ships nevertheless came to Syria.

Of Sweden in this grand-jurie of nations I hear no Vous avez; but her default
of appearance has been excused Lib. 1. cap. 13.
before.

Chap. 23. Of the Scottish, Welsh, and Irish, their several adventures.
THere remain behind the Scottish, Welsh, and Irish. It may occasion suspicion,
that these nations either did neglect or are neglected in this Holy war,
because clean through this History there is no mention of them or their
achievements. True it is, these countries can boast of no King of their own
sent to Syria, nor of any great appearing service by them alone performed. It
seems then they did not so much play the game themselves, as bet on the hands
of others: and happily the Scottish service is accounted to the French; the Welsh
and Irish, to the English.

That Scotland was no ciphre in this war, plainly appears; 1. In that
Buchan. in Guilielmo Seniore.
David, Earl of Huntington, and younger brother to William the Elder King of
Scotland, went along with our Richard the first; no doubt suitably attended
with soldiers. This David was by a tempest cast into Egypt, taken captive by
the Turks, bought by a Venetian, brought to Constantinople, there known and
redeemed by an English merchant, and at last safely arrived at Hect. Boeth.
Alectum in Scotland; which Alectum he in memory and gratitude of his return
called Dundee, or Dei donum, Gods gift. 2. By the plentiful provision which
there was made for the Templars and Hospitallers: Who here enjoyed great
privileges; this amongst many others, Third book of Majest. cap. 18.
(Take the Scottish law in its pure naturals) That the Master of the Knicts of
the Temple and chief Priors of the Hospital of Jerusalem (wha were keepers of
strangers to the Haly grave) sold be received themselves personally in any
suit without entertaining a procuratour for them. Nor must we here forget a
Saint, William a Scot, of Perth by birth, by trade a baker, in charity so
abundant that he gave his tenth loaf to the poor, in zeal so fervent that he
vowed to visit the Holy land. But in his journey, as he passed through Kent,
Lambert, Peramb. Kent.
he was slain by his servant, buried at Rochester; afterward Sainted, and
showed many miracles.

Neither may we think, whilst all other nations were at this Martial school,
that Wales the while truanted at home. The Welsh, says my W. Malms. lib. 4.
page 133.
Author, left their forests; and now with them no sport to the hunting of
Turks: especially after that Camden, in Pembr.
Wizo and Walter his son, had founded the fair Commandrie for Hospitallers at
Slebach in Pembroke-shire, and endowed it with rich revenues.

Ireland also puts in for her portion of honor in this service. Indeed, for
the first fourscore years in the Holy war, Ireland did little there, or in
any other country. It was divided into many petty Kingdoms; so that her
peoples valor had no progressive motion in length, to make any impression in
foreign parts, but only moved round in a circle at home, their petty Reguli
spending themselves against themselves, till our Henry the second conquered
them all. After which time the Irish began to look abroad into Palestine:
witness many houses for Templars, and the stately Priorie of Kilmainam nigh
Dublin for Hospitallers; the last Lord Prior whereof at the dissolution, was
Sir John Rawson. Yea, we may well think, that all the consort of Christendom
in this war could have made no music if the Irish Harp had been wanting.

Chap. 24. Of the honorable Arms in scutcheons of Nobility occasioned by
their service in the Holy war.
NOw for a corollarie to this story, if we survey the scutcheons of the
Christian Princes and Nobility at this day, we shall find the Arms of many of
them pointing at the achievements of their predecessors in the Holy war.

Thus the Pantal. De illust. Germ. part. 2. page 201.
Dukes of Austria bear Gules a Fesse Argent, in memory of the valor of
Leopoldus at the siege of Ptolemais; whereof before.

The Duke of Savoy Hospin. De orig. Mon. cap. 17. fol. 190.
bears Gules a Cross Argent, being the cross of S. John of Jerusalem;
because his predecessors were special benefactours to that Order, and
assisted them in defending of Rhodes.

Queens College in Cambridge (to which I ow my education for my first seven
years in that Universitie) gives for parcel of her Arms, amongst many other
rich Coats, the Cross of Jerusalem; as being founded by Queen Margaret, wife
to King Henry the sixth, and daughter of Renate Earl of Angiers and titular
King of Sicilie and Jerusalem.

The noble and numerous family of the Douglasses in Scotland (whereof at this
day are one Marquess, two Earls, and a Vice-count) give in their Arms a man's
Heart, ever since Camden, in his descript. of Cludisdale.
Robert Bruise King of Scotland bequeathed his heart to James Douglasse, to
carry it to Jerusalem; which he accordingly performed.

To instance in particulars were endless: we will only sum them up in
generals. Emblemes of honor born in Coats occasioned by the Holy war, are
reducible to these heads: 1. Scallop-shells; which may fitly for the
workmanship thereof be called artificium naturae. It seems Pilgrims carried
them constantly with them, as Diogenes did his dish, to drink in. Zueri^s
Boxborn his Apology for the Holland shipping.
I find an Order of Knights called Equites Cochleares, wearing belike Cockle or
Scallop-shells, belonging to them who had done good sea-service, especially in
the Holy war: and many Hollanders (says my Author) for their good service
at the siege of Damiata were admitted into that Order. 2. Saracens Heads: It
being a maxim in Heraldrie, That it is more honorable to bear the head then
any other part of the body. They are commonly born either black or bloody.
But if Saracens in their Arms should use Christians heads, I doubt not but they
would show ten to one. 3. Pilgrims or Palmers Scrips or Bags; the Arms of the
worshipful family of the Gwill. in his Heraldrie.
Palmers in Kent. 4. Pilgrims Staves, and such like other implements and
accout^ements belonging unto them. 5. But the chiefest of all is the Cross:
which though born in Arms before, yet was most commonly and generally used
since the Holy war. The plain Cross, or S. Georges Cross, I take to be the
mother of all the rest; as plain-song is much senior to any running of
division. Now as by transposition of a few letters, a world of words are made;
so by the varying of this Cross in form, color, and metal (ringing as it
were the changes) are made infinite several Coats: The Cross of Jerusalem, or
five Crosses, most frequently used in this war; Cross P^^ee, because the
ends thereof are broad; Fichee, whose bottom is sharp, to be fixed in the
ground; Wavee, which those may justly wear who sailed thither through the
miseries of the sea, or sea of miseries: Molinee, because like to the rind of a
mill: Saltyree, or S. Andrews Cross: Florid, or garlanded with flowers: the
Cross crossed: Besides the diverse tricking or dressing; as piercing, voiding,
fimbriating, ingrailing, couping: And in fancy and devices there is still a
plus ultra; insomuch that Crosses alone as they are variously disguised, are
enough to distinguish all the several families of Gentlemen in England.


Exemplary is the Coat of George Villiers Duke of Buckingham; five
Scallop-shells on a plain Cross, speaking his predecessors valor in the Holy
war. For Sir Nicolas de Villiers Knight, followed Edward the first in his
wars in the Holy land; and then and there assumed this his new Coat: For
formerly he bore Sable three Cinquefoils Argent. This Burton in Leicestershire.
Nicolas was the ancestour of the Duke of Buckingham, lineally descended from
the ancient family of Villiers in Normandy; then which name none more
redoubted in this service: For we Hospin. De orig. Mon. in Joan.
find John de Villiers the one and twentieth Master of the Hospitallers; and
another Philip de Villiers Master of Rhodes, under whom it was surrendered to
the Turks; a yielding equal to a conquest.

Yet should one labor to find a mystery in all Arms, relating to the quality
or deserts of the owners of them (like Chrysippus, who troubled himself with
great contention to find out a Stoicall assertion of Philosophy in every
fiction of the Poets) he would light on a labor in vain. For I believe (be it
spoken with loyalty to all Kings of Arms, and Heralds their Lieutenants in
that faculty) that at the first, the Dr Ridley, View of the Civil law,. 6.
page 100.
will of the bearer was the reason of the bearing; or if at their original of
assuming them there were some special cause, yet time since has cancelled it:
And as in Mythologie, the moral has often been made since the fable; so a
sympathy betwixt the Arms and the bearer has sometimes been of later
invention. I deny not but in some Coats some probable reason may be assigned
of bearing them: But it is in vain to dig for mines in every ground, because
there is lead in Mendip hills.

To conclude; As great is the use of Arms, so this especially, To preserve the
memories of the dead. Many a dumb monument, which through time or sacrilege
has lost his tongue, the epitaph, yet has made such signs by the scutcheons
about it, that Antiquaries have understood who lay there entombed.

Chap. 25. Some offers of Christian Princes for Palestine since the end of the
Holy war, by Henry the fourth of England, Charles the eighth of France, and
James the fourth of Scotland.
AS after that the body of the sun is set, some shining still surviveth in
the west: so after this Holy war was expired, we find some straggling rays
and beams of valor offering that way; ever and anon the Christian Princes
having a bout with that design. To collect the several essays of Princes
glancing on that project, were a task of great pains and small profit;
specially, some of them being umbrages and State-representations rather then
realities, to ingratiate Princes with their subjects, or with the oratorie of
so pious a project to woo money out of peoples purses, or thereby to cloak and
cover armies levied to other intents: Besides, most of these designs were
abortive, or aborsive rather, like those untimely miscarriages not honored
with a soul or the shape and lineaments of an infant. Yet to save the Readers
longing, we will give him a taste or two; and begin with that of our Henry the
fourth of England.

The end of the reign of this our Henry was peaceable and prosperous. For
though his title was builded on a bad foundation, yet it had strong buttresses:
most of the Nobility favored and fensed it: And as for the house of York, it
appeared not; its best blood as yet ran in feminine veins, and therefore was
the less active. Now King Henry in the sunshine evening of his life (after
a stormy day) was disposed to walk abroad, and take in some foreign air. He
pitched his thoughts on the Holy Lord Verulam, in his Henry vii. page 87.
war, for to go to Jerusalem, and began to provide for the same. One
principal motive which incited him was, That it was told him he should not die
till he had heard Mass in Jerusalem. But this proved not like the revelation
told to old Luke 2.26.
Simeon: for King Henry was fain to sing his Nunc dimittis, before he expected;
and died in the chamber called Jerusalem in Westminster. By comparing this
prophecy with one of Apollo's oracles, we may conclude them to be brethren
(they are so alike) and both begotten of the father of lies: For the Devil
eartheth himself in an homonymie, as a fox in the ground; if he be stopped at
one hole, he will get out at another. How-ever, the Kings purpose deserves
remembrance and commendation, because really and seriously intended;

Far better, I believe, then that of Charles the eighth King of France: Who
in a braving Embassage which he sent to our Henry the seventh, gave him to
understand his resolutions; to make re-conquest of Naples, but as of a bridge
to L. Verulam, in Henry vii.
transport his forces into Grecia; and then not to spare blood or treasure (if
it were to the impairing of his Crown and dispeopling of France) till either he
had overthrown the Empire of the Ottomans, or taken it in his way to Paradise;
and hence (belike) he would have at Jerusalem, invited (as he said) with the
former example of our Henry the fourth. But our King Henry the seventh (being
too good a fenser to mistake a flourish for a blow) quickly resented his drift
(which was to persuade our King to peace, till Charles should perform his
projects in little Britain and elsewhere) and dealt with him accordingly. And
as for the gradation of King Charles his purposes, Naples, Grecia, Jerusalem, a
stately but difficult ascent, (where the stairs are so far asunder, the legs
must be long to stride them) the French nation was weary of climbing the first,
and then came down, vaulting nimbly into Naples and out of it again.

More cordial was that of Buchanan, in the life of James iiii.
James the fourth King of Scotland, that pious Prince: who being touched in
conscience for his fathers death (though he did not cause it, but seemed to
countenance it with his presence) ever after, in token of his contrition, wore
an iron chain about his body; and to expiate his fault, intended a journey into
Syria. He prepared his navy, provided his soudiers, imparted his project to
foreign Princes; and verily had gone, if at the first other wars, and
afterward sudden death had not caused his stay.

Chap. 26. The fictitious voyage of William Landt-grave of Hesse to Palestine
confuted.
THese are enough to satisfy; more would cloy. Only here I must discover a
cheat, and have it pilloried, lest it trouble others as it has done me: The
story I find in Calvisius, anno 1460: take it in his very words; William the
Landt-grave appointed an Holy voyage to Palestine; chose his company out of
many Noblemen and Earls, in number ninety eight: He happily finished his
journey; only one of them died in Cyprus. He brought back with him six and
forty ensigns of horse. Seven months were spent in the voyage, Fab. So
far Calvisius, avouching this Fab. for his author. Each word a wonder; not
to say, an impossibility. What? in the year 1460, when the deluge of
Mahometans had overrun most of Grecia, Asia, and Syria? William, a Landt-grave
(of Hesse, no doubt) neither the greatest nor next to the greatest Prince in
Germany, far from the sea, unfurnished with shipping, not within the
suspicion of so great a performance! Six and forty horse-ensignes taken!
Where? or from whom? Was it in war, and but one man killed? A battle so
bloudlesse seems as truthlesse; and the losing but of one man savoureth of
never a one. But seven months spent! Such achievements beseem rather an
apprentiship of years then months. Besides, was Fame all the while dead,
speechless, or asleep, that she trumpeted not this action abroad? Did only
this Fab. take notice of it? be he Faber, Fabius, Fabianus, Fabinianus, or what
you please. Why is it not storied in other writers? the Dutch men giving no
scant measure in such wares, and their Chronicles being more guilty of
remembering trifles then forgetting matters of moment?

Yet the gravitie of Calvisius recording it, moves me much on the other side;
a Chronologer of such credit, that he may take up more belief on his bare word
then some other on their bond. In this perplexity, I wrote to my oracle in
doubts of this nature, Mr Joseph Mead fellow of Christ's College in Cambridge,
since lately deceased: Hear his answer; Sir,
I have found your story in Calvisius his posthume Chronology, but can heart
of it nowhere else. I sought Reusners Basilica Genealogica, who is wont with
the name of his Princes to note briefly any act or accident of theirs
memorable, and sometimes scarce worth it: But no such of this William
Landt-grave. So in conclusion, I am resolved it is a fable out of some
Romainza; and that your Author Fab. is nothing but Fabula defectively written.
But you will say, Why did he put it into his book? I answer, He himself did
not; but had noted it in some paper put into his Chronology, preparing for a
new and fuller Edition: which, himself dying before he had digested his new
Edition (as you may see I think somewhere in the Preface) those who were
trusted with it after his death to write it out for the press, foolishly
transferred out of such paper, or perhaps out of the margin, into the text;
thinking that Fab. had been some Historian, which was nothing but that
she-authour Fabula. If this will not satisfy, I know not what to say more unto
it. Thus with best affection I rest

Yours, JOSEPH MEAD.
Christ. Coll. June 20. 1638.



This I thought fit to recite, not for his honor but to honor my self, as
conceiving it my credit to be graced with so learned a man's acquaintance.

Thus much of offertures. I will conclude with that speech of the Lady
Margaret, Countess of Richmond and Derbie, and mother to our King Henry the
seventh (a most pious woman, as that age went; though I am not of his faith who
believed her to be the next woman in goodness to the Virgin Mary:) She used to
say, that if the Christian Princes would undertake a war against the Turks to
recover the Holy land, she would be their Camdens Remains.
laundresse. But I believe she performed a work more acceptable in the eyes of
God, in founding a Professors place in either Universitie, and in building
Christ's and S. John's Colleges in Cambridge (the seminaries of so many great
scholars and grave Divines) then if she had visited either Christ's sepulcher or
S. John's church in Jerusalem.

Chap. 27. The fortunes of Jerusalem since the Holy war; and her present
estate.
SEven years after the Latin Christians were finally expelled out of Syria,
some hope presented it self of reestablishing them again. For Casanus the great
Tartar Prince, having of late subdued the Persians, and married the daughter of
the Armenian King (a Lady of great perfection) and of a Mahometane become a
Christian, at the request of his wife he besieged the city Cent^riatores, page
totius operis penult.
Jerusalem, 1298
and took it without resistance. The Temple of our Savior he gave to the
Armenians, Georgians, and other Christians, which flocked thick out of Cyprus
there to inhabit. But soon after his departure it fell back again to the
Mammalukes of Egypt; who enjoyed it till Selimus the great Turk, anno 1517,
overthrew the Empire of Mammalukes, and seized Jerusalem into his hand: whose
successors keep it at this day.

Jerusalem better acquitteth it self to the ear then to the eye; being no whit
beautiful at all. The situation thereon is very uneven, rising into hills and
sinking into dales; the lively emblem of the fortunes of the place; sometimes
advanced with prosperity, sometimes depressed in misery. Once it was well
compacted, and Psalm. 1^^.3.
built as a city that is at unity in it self; but now distracted from it
self: the suspicious houses (as if afraid to be infected with more misery then
they have already, by contiguousnesse to others) keep off at distance, having
many waste places betwixt them; not one Bydulph, page 117.
fair street in the whole city.

It has a castle, built (as it is thought) by the Pisans, Sandys Travels, page
158.
tolerably fortified. Good guard is kept about the city, and no Christians
with weapons suffered to enter. But the deepest ditch to defend Jerusalem from
the Western Christians, is the remoteness of it; and the strongest wall to
fense it, is the Turkish Empire compassing it round about.

Poor it must needs be, having no considerable commodity to vent; except a
few beads of Holy earth, which they pay too dear for that have them for the
fetching. There is in the city a covent of Franciscans, to whom Christians
repair for protection during their remaining in the city. The Padre Guardian
appoints these Pilgrims a Friar, who shows them all the monuments about
the city: Scarce a great stone, which bears the brow of reverend antiquity,
that passes without a peculiar legend upon it: But every vault under ground
has in it a deep mystery indeed. Pilgrims must follow the Friar with their
bodies and belief; and take heed how they give tradition the lie, though she
tell one never so boldly. The survey finished, they must pay the Guardian both
for their victuals and their welcome, and gratify his good words and looks;
otherwise if they forget it, he will be so bold as to remember them. The
Guardian farmeth the Sepulcher of the Turk at a yearly rent: and the Turks
which reap no benefit by Christ's death, receive much profit by his burial; and
not content with their yearly rent, squeeze the Friars here on all occasions,
making them pay large sums for little offenses.

The other subsistence which the Friars here have, is from the benevolence of
the Pope and other bountiful benefactours in Europe. Nor gets the Padre
Guardian a little by his fees of making Knights of the Sepulcher: of which
Order I find, some hundred years since, Sr John Chamond of Carew, in his
survey of Cornwall, page 118.
Lancels in Cornwall to have been dubbed Knight. But I believe no good English
subject at this day will take that honor, if offered him; both because at
their creation they are to swear loyalty to the Pope and Bydulph, page 119.
King of Spain, and because honors conferred by foreign Potentates are not
here in England acknowledged, neither in their style nor precedencie, except
given by courtesy: Witness that famous case of the Count Arundel of Wardour,
and Queen Elisabeths peremptory resolve, That her sheep should be branded with
no Camdens Elisabeth, in anno 1596.
strangers mark, but her own.

The land about it (as Authors generally agree) is barren. Yet De terra
Sancta, part. 2. cap. 1.
Brochard a Monk, who lived here some two hundred years since, commends it
to be very fruitful. Sure he had better eyes, to see more then other men
could; or else by a Sy^e^doche he imputes the fertility of parcels to the
whole country. But it is as false a consequence, as, on the other side, to
conclude from the baseness of Bagshot-heath the barrenness of all the
Kingdom of England. We may rather believe, that since the fall of the Jews
from Gods favor, the once-supernaturall fertility of the land is taken away,
and the natural strength thereof much abated and impaired.

Chap. 28. Whether it be probable that this Holy war will ever hereafter be
set on foot again.
THus we state the question; Whether this Holy war, I mean, for the winning
of the city of Jerusalem and recovering of Palestine, will probably ever
hereafter be projected and acted again. We may believe this tragedy came off
so ill the last acting, that it will not be brought on the stage the second
time.

1. The Pope will never offer to give motion to it, as knowing it unlikely to
succeed. Policies of this nature are like sleights of hand, to be showed but
once; lest what is admired at first be derided afterward.

2. Princes are grown more cunning, and will not bite at a bait so stale, so
often breathed on. The Popes ends in this war are now plainly smelt out*
which though pretty and pleasing at first, yet Princes are not now, like the
native Indians, to be cozened with glass and gaudie toys: The lodestone to
draw their affection (now out of nonage) must present it self necessary,
profitable, and probable to be effected.

3. There is a more needful work nearer hand; to resist the Turks invasion in
Europe. Hark how the Grecians call unto us, as once Acts 16.9.
the man in the vision did to S. Paul, Come over into Macedonia, and help us.
Yea, look on the Popes projects of the last Edition, and we shall find the
business of the Sepulcher buried in silence, and the Holy war running in
another chanel, against the Turks in Christendom.

4. Lastly, who is not sensible with sorrow of the dissensions (better suiting
with my prayers then my pen) wherewith Christian Princes at this day are rent
in sunder? wounds so wide that only Heavens chirurgerie can heal them: Till
which time no hope of a Holy war against the general and common foe of our
Religion.

We may safely conclude, that the regaining of Jerusalem and the Holy land from
the Turks, may better be placed amongst our desires then our hopes; as
improbable ever to come to pass: except the Platonic year, turning the wheel
of all actions round about, bring the spoke of this Holy war back again.

Chap. 29. Of the many Pretenders of titles to the Kingdom of Jerusalem.
NO Kingdom in the world is challenged at this day by such an army of Kings
as this of Jerusalem: It is sooner told what Princes of Europe do not, then
what do lay claim to it; they be so many. Take their names as I find them in
the Catalogue of Stephen a Cypriot.

1 The Emperor of the East. 2 The Patriarch of Jerusalem. 3 The Lusignans,
Kings of Cyprus. 4 Emfred Prince of Thorone. 5 Conrade de la-Rame Marquess of
Montferrat. 6 The Kings of England. 7 His Holiness. 8 The Kings of Naples. 9
The Princes of Antioch. 10 The Counts of Brienne. 11 The Kings of Armenia. 12
The Kings of Hungary. 13 The Kings of Aragon. 14 The Dukes of Anjou. 15 The
Dukes of Loraine. 16 Lewis the eleventh, King of France. 17 The Dukes of
Bourbon. 18 The Dukes of Savoy. 19 James de Lusigna, base son to the King of
Cyprus. 20 Charles de Lusigna, son to the Prince of Galilee. 21 The State of
Genoa. 22 The Marquess of Montferrat. 23 The Count of la-Vall. 24 The
Archduke of Nize. 25 The Sultan of Egypt. 26 The Emperor of the Turks.
It seems by the naming of Lewis the eleventh and James the bastard of
Cyprus, that this list was taken about the year 1466. And now how would a
Herald sweat with scouring over these time-rustie titles, to show whence these
Princes derived their several claims, and in whom the right rests at this
day? and when his work is done, who should pay him his wages?

My clew of thread is not strong enough, on the guidance thereof for me to
venture into this labyrinth of Pedegrees; we will content our selves with these
general observations: 1. It seems this catalogue contains as well those
who had jus in Regno as those who had jus ad Regnum: as namely, the Prince of
Thorone, and Patriarchs of Jerusalem, and State of Genoa; whose ambition surely
soared not so high as to claim the Kingdom of Jerusalem, but rather perched it
self upon some lands and Signories challenged therein. 2. A small matter will
serve to entitle a Prince to a titular Kingdom: In this case, Kings can better
digest corrivals where they be many, and all challenge what is worth nothing.
In this catalogue it seems some only entitle themselves out of good
fellowship and love of good company: These like squirrels recover themselves,
and climb up to a claim on the least bough, twig, yea leaf of a Right. Thus
the Counts of Brienne in France (if any still remain of that house) gave away
their cake and kept it still; in that John Bren parted with his right to this
Kingdom, in match with Iole his daughter, to Frederick the second Emperor,
and yet the Earls of his family pretend still to Jerusalem. 3. We may believe,
that by matches and under-matches some of these titles may reside in private
Gentlemen; especially in France: And what wonder? seeing within fourteen
generations, the Matthew. 1.16.
royal blood of the Kings of Judah ran in the veins of plain Joseph a painful
carpenter. 4. At this day some of those titles are finally extinct: as that of
the Emperors of the East, conquered by the Ottoman family: Their Imperial
Eagle was so far from beholding the sun, that the half moon dazzled, yea
quite put out his eyes. Rank in the same form the Kings of Armenia, and Sultans
of Egypt. 5. Some of these titles are translated: That of the Lusignans, Kings
of Cyprus, probably passed with that Island to the State of Venice; The claim
of the Hungarian Kings seems at this day to remain in the Germane Emperor.
6. Some united: The claim of the Archdukes of Nize (a style I meet not with
elsewhere) twisted with that of the Duke of Savoy; The Kings of Naples and
Aragon now joined in the King of Spain. 7. Of those which are extant at this
day, Englands appears first; our Richard receiving it in exchange of King Guy
for the Island of Cyprus. Guy's resignation was voluntary and public; the
world was witness to it: He truly received a valuable consideration, which his
heirs long peaceably enjoyed; and our English Kings styled themselves
S^belli^^s, Ennead. 9. lib. 5. page 378.
Kings of Jerusalem, till afterward they disused it for In his Proe^e, fol. 5.
reasons best known to themselves. Our Poet Harding, in a paper he presented to
King Henry the sixth, clears another double title of our Kings thereunto: And
because some palates love the mouldie best, and place the goodness of old
verses in the badnesse of them, take them as they fell from his pen; To
Jerusalem, I say, ye have great right
From Earl Geffray that hight Plantogenet,
Of Aunge^y Earl, a Prince of passing might,
The eldest son of Fouke, and first beget,
King of Jerusalem by his wife dewly set;
Whose son Geffray foresaid gat on his wife
Henry the second, that was known full rife.
Yet have ye more, from Bawldwyne Paralytious
King afterward, to the same King Henry
The Crown sent and his Banner precious,
As very heir of whole Auncestrie
Descent of blood by title lineally
From Godfray Boleyn, and Robert Curthose,
That Kings were thereof and chose.
8. Then comes forth the Popes title; who claims it many ways: Either
because he was the first and chiefest mover and advancer of this war, Lord
Paramont of this action, and all the Pilgrims no better then his servants; and
then according to the rule in Civil law, Institut. lib. 1. tit. 8.. 1.
Quod^unque per servum acquiritur, id Domino acquirit^r suo: Or else he
challenges it from John Bren, who Knolls, Hist. Turk. page 123.
subjected that Kingdom to the Sea of Rome; and yet the said John used the
style of Jerusalem all the days of his life, and also gave it away in match
with his daughter: Or else he deriveth it as forfeited to him by the Emperor
Frederick the second and his sons, for taking arms against the Church. But
what need these farre-abouts? They go the shortest cut, who accounting the Pope
Gods Lieutenant on earth (though by a Commission of his own penning) give him a
temporal power (especially in ordine ad spiritualia) over all the Kingdoms of
the world.


The original right of Jerusalem he still keeps in himself, yet has
successively gratified many Princes with a title derived from him: Nor shines
his candle the dimmer by lighting of others. First he bestowed his title on
Charles of Anjou, King of Sicilie (from which root spring the many-branched
French competitours) and since has conferred the same on the house of Aragon,
or King of Spain. Which King alone wears it in his style at this day, and
makes continual war with the Turk, who detaineth Jerusalem from him: Yea,
all West-Christendome owes her quiet sleep to his constant waking, who with
his galleys muzzleth the mouth of Tunis and Algier. Yea, God in his providence
has so ordered it, that the Dominions of Catholic Princes (as they term them)
are the case and cover on the East and South to keep and fense the Protestant
countries.

The quit-rent which the King of Spain pays yearly to the Pope for the
Kingdoms of Jerusalem, Naples, and Sicilie, is four thousand crowns, sent to
his Holiness upon a Sr Edwin Sandys, View of the West world, page 137.
hackney: Who grudgeth his tenant so great a penie-worth; yet cannot help
himself, except he would follow the Friars advice, To send home the Spanish
Hackney with a great Horse after him. What credit there is to be given to that
through-old (if not doting) prophecy, That a Centuriatores, Cent. 13. cap. 16.
col. 692.
Spaniard shall one day recover Jerusalem, we leave to the censure of others;
and mean time we will conclude more serious matters with this pleasant passage:

When the late wars in the days of Queen Heylin, Microcos. in Palestine.
Elisabeth were hot between England and Spain, there were Commissioners on both
sides appointed to treat of peace. They met at a town of the French Kings: and
first it was debated, what tongue the negotiation should be handled in. A
Spaniard, thinking to give the English Commissioners a shrewd gird, proposed
the French tongue as most fit, it being a language which the Spaniards were
well skilled in; and for these Gentlemen of England, I suppose (said he) that
they cannot be ignorant of the language of their fellow subjects; their Queen
is Queen of France as well as England. Nay in faith, Masters, (replied Doctor
Dale, the Master of Requests) the French tongue is too vulgar for a business
of this secrecy and importance, especially in a French town: we will rather
treat in Hebrew the language of Jerusalem, whereof your Master is King; I
suppose you are herein as well skilled as we in French.

At this day the Turk has eleven points of the law in Jerusalem, I mean
possession: and which is more, prescription of a hundred and twenty years, if
you date it from the time it came into the Ottoman family; but far more, if
you compute it from such time as the Mammaluke Turks have enjoyed it. Yea,
likely they are to keep it, being good at hold-fast, and who will as soon lose
their teeth as let go their prey. With the description of the greatness of
which Empire will we (God willing) now close this History.

Chap. 30. Of the greatness, strength, wealth, and wants of the Turkish
Empire; What hopes of the approaching ruin thereof.
THe Turkish Empire is the greatest and best-compacted (not excepting the
Roman it self in the height thereof) that the sun ever saw. Take sea and
land together (as bones and flesh make up one body) and from Buda in the West
to Tauris in the East, it stretches about three thousand miles: little less
is the extent thereof North and South. It lies in the heart of the world, like
a bold champion bidding defiance to all his borderers, commanding the most
fruitful countries of Europe, Asia, and Africa: Only America (not more happy
in her rich mines then in her remoteness) lies free from the reach thereof.

Populous it is not; for men will never grow thick where meat grows thin:
It lies waste, according to the old proverb, Grass springs not where the
Grand Signors horse sets his foot. Besides, a third part (I may say, half)
of those in Turkey are not Turks, but either Jews or Christians.

The strength of this Empire consists either in bones or stones, men or
munition. Of the first, The best stake in the Turks hedge is his great number
of Horsemen called Knolls, in his descript. of the greatness of the Turkish
Empire.
Timariots, conceived to exceed seven hundred thousand fighting men: These are
dispersed over all his Dominions, and have lands allotted unto them in reward
of their good service and valor, much in the nature of those soldiers of the
Romish Empire called Beneficiarii. And indeed the Turkish Empire resembles the
Roman in many particulars: not that they ever studied imitation, and by
reading of History conformed their State to Roman precedents, (far be it
from us to wrong them with the false imputation of so much learning) but rather
casually they have met in some common principles of policy. Of these
Timariots, on occasion and competent warning, he can bring into the field an
hundred and fifty thousand, all bound by the tenure of their lands to arm,
clothe, feed, pay themselves: So great an army, which would drain the wealth
of other Princes, does cost the great Turk no drop of expense.

Next follow his best footmen, called Janissaries, taken young from their
Christian parents (parallel to the Roman Pretorian soldiers) being the guard
of the Grand Signors person. But as they watch about him, so he casts a
watchful eye on them; seeing of late they are grown from painful to be proud,
yea insolent and intolerable: it being true of these Janissaries in the Turkish
Empire, as of Elephants in an army; If well ruled, they alone are enough to
win the battle; if unruly, they alone are enough to lose it. As for all other
sorts of the Turks, both foot and horse, they are but slugs; as whom the Grand
Signor little trusts, and others need less fear.

His frontier cities, especially those which respect Christendom, are exactly
fortified. Rank with these such places of importance and castles as command
passages of consequence. As for his inland-cities, there is no superfluous,
scarce competent, strength in them. But if we allow those people to be chaste
who never were solicited to be otherwise, then may many cities lying in the
bowels of his Empire pass for strong, which for a long time have not had nor
in haste are likely to have the temptation of a siege.

Of Ordinance he has great store, and has excellent materials to make them
of; and is also very powerful in shipping. Indeed ships of great burden would
be burdensome in those narrow seas, and experience has found lesser vessels of
greater use; whereof he has store. And though the Turks either want ingenie or
industry, either care not or cannot be good shipwrights themselves; yet the
spite is, as long as there is gold amongst the Turks there will be dross
amongst the Christians, I mean some who for base gain will betray the mysteries
of our useful arts unto them. As for wood to build with, he has excellent in
Bithynia; yea, generally in this wild Empire, trees grow better then men. To
his sea-munition may be reduced his multitude of slaves, though not the
informing yet (against their wills) the assisting form of his Galleys, and in
whom consists a great part of their strength and swiftness.

Nor must we forget the Pirates of Tunis and Algier; which are Turks and no
Turks: Sometimes the Grand Signor disclaimeth, renounceth and casts them off
to stand upon their own bottom; as when those Christian Princes which are
confederate with him, complain to him of the wrongs those sea-robbers have done
them. But though he sends them out to seek their own meat, he can clock them
under his wings at pleasure: And we may verily believe, though sometimes in the
summer of his own prosperity he throws them off as an upper garment of no
use, yet in cold weather he will buckle them on again; and if necessity
pincheth him, receive them not as retainers at large but as his best servants
in ordinary.

Nor is it the last and least part of the strength of this Empire, that all her
native people are linked together in one religion: The discords about which in
other kingdoms have been the cause, first of the unjoynting, and then of the
final ruin and desolation of many worthy States: Whereas here, the Mahometane
religion (if I wrong it not with so good a name) is so full of unity and
agreement, that there is no difference and dissension about it. Yea, well may
that coat have no seam which has no shape. A senseless ignorant profession it
is, not able to go to the cost of a controversy: And all colors may well
agree in the dark.

Next the strength follows the wealth; yea, it is part thereof: For all rich
Kingdoms may be strong, and purchase artificial fortification. The certain
and constant revenues of the great Turk are not great, if withal we consider
the spatiousnesse of his Dominions. Some have mounted his ordinary yearly
in-come to eight Knolls.
millions of gold. But men guess by uncertain aim at Princes revenues,
especially if they be so remote: We may believe that in their conjecture
herein, though they miss the mark, they hit the butt. Far greater might his
intrado be, if husbandry, and chiefly merchandise, were plied in his country:
merchants being the Vena porta of a Kingdom; without which it may have good
limbs, but empty veins, and nourish little. Now although this Empire be of a
vast extent, having many safe harbors to receive strangers there, and Staple
commodities (chiefly if industry were used) to allure them thither; yet has
it in effect but four prime places of trading; Constantinople, Cairo, Aleppo,
and Tauris. As for the extraordinary revenues of the Grand Signor, by his
escheats and other courses if he pleases to take them, they are a Nemo scit:
For in effect he is worth as much as all his subjects (or slaves rather)
throughout his whole Empire are worth, his spunges to squeeze at pleasure.

But the Lion is not so fierce as he is painted, nor this Empire so formidable
as fame gives it out. The Turks head is less then his turbant, and his
turbant less then it seems; swelling without, hollow within. If more
seriously it be considered, this State cannot be strong, which is a pure and
absolute tyranny. His subjects under him have nothing certain but this, That
they have nothing certain; and may thank the Grand Signor for giving them
whatsoever he takes not away from them. Their goods they hold by permission
not propriety; not sure that either they or theirs shall reap what they sow,
or eat what they reap: and hereupon husbandry is wholly neglected: For the
plowman (as well as the ground he ploweth) will be soon out of heart, if not
maintained and (as I may say) composted with hopes to receive benefit by his
labors. Here great officers, if they love themselves, must labor not to be
beloved: for popularitie is high treason; and generally wealth is a sin to be
expiated by death. In a word, it is a cruel tyranny, bathed in the blood of
their Emperors upon every succession; a heap of vassals and slaves; no Nobles
(except for time being, by office) no Gentlemen, no Freemen, no inheritance of
land, no Stirp or ancient families; a nation without any, morality, arts and
sciences, that can scarce measure an acre of land or hour of a day.

And needs not that Kingdom constant and continued pointing, which is
cemented with fear not love? May we not justly think, that there be many in
this Empire which rather wait a time then want desire to overthrow it? For
though some think the Grecians in Turkey bear such inveterate hate to the
Latin Christians, that they would rather refuse deliverance then accept them
for their deliverers; yet surely both they, and perchance some native Turks,
out of that principle of desiring liberty (the second rule next preserving
life in the charter of Nature) would be made (if this Empire were seriously
invaded, so that the foundation thereof did totter) sooner to find two hands to
pluck it down then one finger to hold it up.

And we have just cause to hope that the fall of this unweldie Empire does
approach. It was high noon with it fifty years ago; we hope now it draws
near night: the rather, because luxury, though late, yet at last has found
the Turks out, or they it. When first they came out of Turcomania, and were in
their pure naturals, they were wonderfully abstemious, neglecting all
voluptuousness, not so much out of a dislike as ignorance of it: But now
having tasted the sweetness of the cup, they can drink as great a draught as
any others. That Paradise of corporal pleasure which Mahomet promised them in
the world to come, they begin to anticipate here, at leastwise to take an
earnest of it, and have well soked themselves in luxury. Yea, now they begin
to grow covetous, both Prince and people, rather seeking to enjoy their means
with quiet then enlarge them with danger.

Heaven can as easily blast an oak as trample a mushrome. And we may expect the
ruin of this great Empire will come: for of late it has little increased its
stock, and now begins to spend of the principal. It were arrant presumption
for Flesh to prescribe God his way; or to teach him, when he means to shoot,
which arrow in his quiver to choose. Perchance the Western Christians, or the
Grecians under him (though these be better for seconds then firsts, fitter to
foment then raise a faction) or his own Janissaries, or the Persian, or the
Tartarian, or some other obscure Prince not as yet come into play in the World,
shall have the luster from God to maul this great Empire. It is more then
enough for any man to set down the fate of a single soul; much more to resolve
the doom of a whole nation when it shall be. These things we leave to
Providence to work, and posterity to behold. As for our generation, let us
sooner expect the dissolutions of our own Microcosmes then the confusion of
this Empire: For neither are own sins yet truly repented of, to have this
punishment removed from us; nor the Turks wickedness yet come to the full
ripeness, to have this great judgment laid upon them.

Soli Deo gloria.
The Preface to the Chronology.
HErein I present the Reader with a general view and synopsis of the whole
story of the age of the Holy War; that he may see the coherence betwixt the
East and the West, and in what equipage and correspondency of time the Asian
affairs go on with those of Europe: for they will reflect a mutual luster and
plainness on one another.

The Chronology is marshalled into Ranks and Files: The Ranks, or transverse
spaces, contain twenty years on a side; the Files, or columns directly
downward, are appropriated to those several States whose name they bear.

In the six first columns I have followed Helvicus with an implicit faith,
without any remarkable alteration, both in ingraffing of years and making them
concur, as also leaving sometimes empty spaces. In the other columns I have
followed several authors, and left the years unnoted where the time was
uncertain; counting it better to bring in an Ignoramus then to find a verdict
where the evidence was doubtful and obscure.

Such long notes as would not be imprisoned within the grates of this
Chronology, we have referred by asterisks to the foot of the page.

Know that every note belongs to that year wherein it begins, except
signed with this mark; which reduces it to the year it ends in.

Br. stands for Brother: S. Son: M. Months: D. Days.

Note, whilst there were Caliphs of Egypt, then the Sultans were but Deputies
and Lieutenants; but afterward the Mamaluke Sultans were absolute Princes,
acknowledging no Superior.

A Chronologicall Table
Anno Dom. Popes. Emper. of the East. Emper. of the West. Kings of England.
Kings of France. Holy War, and Kings of Jerusalem. Princes of Antioch.
Patriarchs of Antioch. Patriarchs of Jerusalem. Mrs of Kn. Hospitallers.
Caliphs of Syria. Caliphs of Egypt. 1095 URBANE the second. 8 ALEXIUS COM^ENus.
15 HENRY the fourth. 40 WILLIAM RUFUS. 8 PHILIP the first. 36 The Council of
Clermont foundeth the Holy War. MUSTETAHER 1 MUSTRAL 1 6 9 16 41 9 37 1.
VOYAGE under GODFREY Duke of Bouillon. 2 2 7 10 17 42 10 38 Nice, won by the
Christians. 3 3 8 11 18 43 11 39 Antioch, won by the Christians. BOEMUND. 1 4
4 9 M. 4 D. 18 19 44 12 40 Jerusalem, won by the Christians. 2 5 5 1100
PASCHAL the second 2 20 45 13 41 GODFREY King of Jerusalem. 1 He is taken
captive. ^ancred manageth the State in his absence. 3 BERNARD. 1 1. ARNULPHUS
M. 5 ^. GERARD. 1 6 6 1 3 21 46 HENRY the first 1 42 BALDWINE his brother. 2.
VOYAGE under several Princes and Prelates. 1 Cesaria won by the Christians.
4 2 II. DABERTUS. He stickleth for Jerusalem, to get it from the King: 1 2 7
ELAMIR, S. 1 2 4 22 47 2 43 Apamia, Laodicea, won by the Christians. 2 5 3 2
3 8 2 3 5 23 48 3 44 3 Boemund ransomed. 6 4 3 II. REIMUND le Podio. 1 9 3 4 6
24 49 4 45 Ptolemais, won by the Christians. 4 He unfortunately besieges
Char^as; 7 5 Flies to Antioch; 4 2 10 4 5 7 25 M. 10 5 46 5 Travelleth into
France; 8 6 III. EBREMARUS put in by the King, displaced by the Pope. 1 Thence
to Rome: 5 3 11 5 6 8 26 HENRY the fifth. 1 6 47 6 9 7 2 6 4 12 6 7 9 27 2 7 48
7 Returns and wastes Grecia with his navy. 10 8 3 Dies in Sicily. 7 5 13 7
8 10 28 3 8 49 8 11 9 IV. GI^ELLINUS, Archbishop of Arles. 1 6 14 8 9 11 29 4 9
LEWIS the Gross. 2 Tripolis, won by the Christians. 9 BOEMUND the second, S.
^et a child, and living in Apulia: in whose minority, first Tancred, then
Roger his kinsman, were Princes in trust. 1 10 2 7 15 9 1110 12 30 5 10 3
Berytus, Sidon won by the Christians. 10 2 11 3 8 16 10 1 13 31 6 11 4 11 3
12 4 9 17 11 2 14 32 7 12 5 12 4 13 V. ARNULPHUS, Archdeacon of Jerusalem. 1 10
18 12 3 15 33 8 13 6 13 5 14 2 11 19 13 4 16 34 9 14 7 14 6 15 3 12 20 14 Anno
Dom. Popes. Emper. of the East. Emper. of the West. Kings of England. Kings of
France. Holy War, and Kings of Jerusalem. Princes of Antioch. Patriarchs of
Antioch. Patriarchs of Jerusalem. Mrs of Kn. Hospitallers. Mrs of Kn. Templars.
Caliphs of Syria. Caliphs of Egypt. 1115 17 35 10 15 8 15 7 16 4 13 21 15 6 18
36 11 16 9 16 8 17 5 14 22 16 7 M. 5 D. 9 37 12 17 10 Baldwines voyages into
Egypt; 1. when he took Pharamia 17 9 18 He is accused for his wicked life;
posteth to Rome, and there buyeth to be innocent. 6 15 23 17 8 GELASIUS 1 D. 5.
CALO. JOHANNES S. 1 13 18 11 Baldwines voyages into Egypt; 2. when he got his
death. 18 10 19 7 16 MUSTERAS^MAD 1 18 9 2 14 19 12 BALDVVINE the second, his
kinsman. 1 Roger fighting unadvisedly with the Turks is slain 11 20 VI.
GUARIMUNDus of Amiens. 1 17 HUO^ de Pagahis, and GODFRID of S. Omars 1 2 19
1120 CALIXTUS the second. 2 3 15 20 13 2 12 21 2 18 2 3 20 1 3 4 16 21 14 3 13
22 3 19 3 4 21 2 4 5 17 22 15 He fights on disadvantage with the Turks, and
is taken captive. 4 14 23 4 20 These first nine years there were but nine
Templars. 4 5 22 3 5 6 18 23 16 5 15 24 5 21 5 6 23 4 M. 10 D. 13 7 M. 9 24 17
He is dearly ransomed. Tire taken by the Christians 6 16 25 6 22 6 7 24 5
HONORIUS the second. 2 8 LOTHARIUS the Saxon. 1 25 18 Baldwine gets so much
spoil from the conquered Turks as serves to pay his ransom. 7 Boemund now of
age, comes to Antioch, and marries King Baldwines daughter. 17 26 7 23 7
RA^CHID S. afterward deposed by the WISEMAN of the Isma^lites. 1 25 6 3 9 2 26
19 8 18 27 8 24 8 2 26 7 4 10 3 27 20 9 19 28 9 25 The Order of the Templars
confirmed by the Pope and a Council. 9 3 27 8 5 11 4 28 21 10 20 29 VII.
STEPHANUS suspected to have been poisoned by the King. 1 26 10 28 9 M. 2 D. 3
12 5 29 22 11 21 30 2 27 EVERARDus master of the Templars, to whom Pe^er
Cleniacensis writ a book in praise of this Order. 1 29 1130 INNOCENTIUS the
second. 1 13 6 30 23 12 He is surprised and slain in Cilicia. 22 31 VIII.
WILLIAM Prior of the Sepulcher. 1 28 2 30 1 2 14 7 31 24 Anno 1131. Helvicus
gives Baldwine the second sixteen years: but herein he is deceived; as also
in allowing King Fulk but eight. We, according to the consent of the best
Authors, have given the former thirteen, the latter ten.
13 Alice the Relict of Boemund, Princess Regent in the minority of
Constantia her daughter. 1 32 2 29 3 31 2 3 15 8 32 25 FULK Earl of Anjou, in
right of Millecent his wife, eldest daughter to K. Baldvvine. 1 2 33 3 30 4 32
3 4 16 9 33 26 2 3 34 4 31 33 4 5 17 10 34 27 3 4 35 5 32 34 1135 6 18 11 35 28
4 5 36 6 33 MUCTAPHIL S. to Mustetaher. 1 35 6 7 19 12 STE^HEN the Usurper. 1
29 5 REIMUND Earl of Poictou, in right of Constantia his wife. He acknowledges
himself vassal to the Grecian Emperor; and resigneth Cilicia to him. 1
RODULPHUS chosen Patriarch by the Laity. 1 7 34 2 ELHAPHIT, S. In the 20 year
of his reign he was killed by one Nosradine. Vide Tyr. lib. 18. cap. 49. and
Calvis in Anno 1156. 1 7 8 20 13 2 30 6 2 2 8 35 3 2 8 9 21 CONRADUS the third.
1 3 LEWIS the seventh, or the Younger. 1 7 3 3 9 36 ROBERT of Burgundy, Tyr.
lib. 15 c 6 4 3 9 10 22 2 4 2 8 4 4 10 37 5 4 1140 11 23 3 5 3 9 5 5 11 38 6 5
1 12 24 4 6 4 10 6 6 12 39 7 6 2 13 M. 7 5 7 5 BALDWINE the third, S. Edessa
won by Sanguine from the Christians. 1 7 ALMERICUS 1 13 40 8 7 3 M. 7 D. 8
EMANUEL Comnenus, S. 1 6 8 6 2 8 2 14 41 9 8 4 CELESTINE the second, M. 5 2 7 9
7 3 9 3 15 42 10 9 5 LUOIUS the second. M. 11 3 8 10 8 4 10 4 9. FULCHER
Archbishop of Tire. 1 43 11 10 6 EUGENIUS the third. 1 4 9 11 9 5 11 5 2 44 12
11 7 2 5 10 12 10 3. VOYAGE under Co^^ade the Emperor, and Lewis King of
France. 6 He honorably entertaineth the K. of Fran. Is slain in battle by
Noradine Tyr. lib. 17. c. 9 12 6 3 45 13 12 8 3 6 11 13 11 Damascus besieged in
vain. 7 13 7 4 46 14 13 9 4 7 12 14 12 Discords betwixt Baldvvine and his
mother Millecent. 8 CONSTANTIA his w^^ Princess. 1 8 5 47 Gaza given to the
Templars to defend BERNARD de T^eellape. 15 14 1150 5 8 13 15 13 9 2 9 6 48 16
15 1 6 9 14 16 14 10 3 10 7 49 17 16 2 7 10 FREDERICUS Barbarossa. 1 17 15 11 4
11 8 50 The Templars with BERNARD their Master, through their own covetousness
slain at Askelon. 18 17 3 M. 4 D. 12 ANASTASIUS the fourth. 11 2 18 16 12 5 12
The Hospitallers rebel against the Patriarch and deny to pay tithes. 9 51 19 18
4 M. 4 D. 24 12 3 19 17 Baldwine takes the city of Askelon. 13 RAINOLD of
Castile marries Constantia, and is Prince. in her right. 1 13 10 52 20 19 1155
ADRIAN the fourth. 2 13 4 HENRY the second. 1 18 14 He, to despite the Grecian
Emperor, wastes the island Cyprus. 2 Almerick cruelly tormented for speaking
against Fr. Reinolds marriage. 14 In vain he crawleth to Rome to complain of
them. 11 53 BERYLAND de Blanchfort. 1 21 20 6 3 14 5 2 19 15 3 15 12 1156. This
catalogue of the Masters of the Hospitallers I find in Hospinian, De origin
Monachatus. It seems strange this Nestor Rodulphus should govern his Order 54
years; yet it appears to be so, if we compare Tyri^s, lib. 14. cap. 6.
54 2 22 EIHADACH. 1 7 4 15 6 3 20 16 4 16 13 III. AUGERIUS de Balben. He is
taken prisoner, Tyr. l. 18. c. 15 3 23 These Caliphs of Egypt are very
difficult to regulate by Chronology; and are ever Heteroclites, either
deficient or redundant in the proportion of time consenting with other Princes.
Hitherto we have followed Helvicus; now ^dhere to Tyrius, lib. 19. cap. 19. and
lib. 20. cap. 12. 2 8 M. 8 D. 28 16 7 4 21 17 5 17 14 PHILIP of Naples. 1 24 3
9 ALEXANDER the third. 1 17 8 5 22 18 6 18 X. AMALRICUS Prior of the Sepulcher.
1 Afterward he renounceth his place, Tyr. lib. 20. c. 24. 2 25 4 1160 2 18 9 6
23 Order of the Carmelites first begun in Syria. 19 7 19 2 IIII. ARNOLDUS de
Campis. 26 5 1 3 19 10 7 24 20 Reinold carried captive to Aleppo. 8 20 3
MUSTENIGED. 1 6 2 4 20 11 8 25 21 BOEMUND the third, S. to Reimund. 1 He
prescribes rules to the Carmelites. 21 4 2 7 3 5 21 12 9 26 ALMERICK his Br. 1
2 22 5 3 8 4 6 22 13 10 27 2 3 23 6 4 9 5 7 23 14 11 28 3 4 24 7 V. GILBERTUS
Assalit: Who to get Pelusium for his own Order, instigated K. Almerick
(contrary to his oath) to invade Egypt. 12 Templars hanged for traitors. 5
Sanar and Dirgon fight for the Sultany of Egypt. 10 6 8 24 15 12 29 At the
instance of Sultan Saner he goes into Egypt, and drives out Syracon. 4 He is
conquered and taken prisoner; ransometh himself. 5 25 8 OTTO de Sancto Amando,
one that feared neither God nor man, Tyr. lib. 21. c. 29. 6 11 7 9 25 16 13 30
Cesarea-Philippi lost. 5 6 26 9 7 12 8 10 26 17 14 31 Almerick contrary to his
promise invadeth Egypt. 6 7 27 10 8 13 9 11 27 18 15 32 7 8 28 11 9 14 1170 12
28 19 16 33 He takes a voyage into Grecia, to visit the Emperor his kinsman.
8 9 29 12 MUSTEZ 1, S. 1 15 1 13 29 20 17 34 9 10 30 13 VI. CASTUS. 2 16 Anno
Dom. Popes. Emper. of the East. Emper. of the West. Kings of England. Kings of
France. Holy War, and Kings of Jerusalem. Princes of Antioch. Patriarchs of
Antioch. Patriarchs of Jerusalem. Mrs of Kn. Hospitallers. Mrs of Kn. Templars.
Caliphs of Syria. Turkish K. of Egypt. 1172 14 30 21 18 35 10 11 31 14 3
SALADINE with his horsenace knocks out the brains of Elhadach the last
Turkish Caliph in Egypt, Tyr. lib. 20. cap. 12. 3 15 31 22 19 36 11 12 32 15
VII. JOBERTUS. The Templars Safely kill the Ambassador of the Assasine^. 4 4
16 32 23 20 37 BALDWINE the fourth. 1 13 33 16 5 1175 17 33 24 21 38 2 14 34 17
6 6 18 34 25 22 39 William Marquess of Montferrat marries Sibyll the Kings
sister. 3 15 35 18 VIII. ROGER de Moris. 7 7 19 35 26 23 40 Saladine shamefully
conquered at Askelon. 4 Reinold of Castile, once Prince of Antioch, ransomed
from captivity. 16 36 19 8 He gets Damascus and the whole Turkish kingdom
in Sy^ia, ( Tyr. lib. 21. c. 6.) in despite of Noradines son. These great
figures recko^ Saladines reign of 16 years (for so many, Authors give him)
from his seizing of the kingdom of Damasc. But if we count his reign from the
killing of the Egyptian Caliph, he began far sooner 1 8 20 36 27 24 41 5 17 37
20 ARNOLDUS de Troge, Tyr. lib. 22. c. 7 9 2 9 21 37 28 25 42 Fatal jealousies
betwixt the King and Reimund Prince of Tripoli for many years. 6 18 38 21 10 3
1180 M. 11 D. 29 M. 5 ALEXIUS COMNENus. 1 29 26 PHILIP Augustus, S. 1 7 Boemund
by putting away Theodora his lawful wife, causes much trouble in this State.
19 39 22 NARZAI, S. 1 4 1 LUCIUS the third. 1 2 30 27 2 8 20 40 XI. HERACLIUS,
Archbish. of Cesarea. 1 2 5 2 2 ANDRONICUS, S. 1 31 28 3 9 21 41 2 3 6 3 3 2 32
29 4 Baldwine disabled with leprosy retireth himself from managing the State.
10 22 42 3 4 7 4 4 M. 11. 33 30 5 11 23 43 4 He dies in an Embassy to the
Princes in Europe. 5 8 5 M. 3 D. 28 URBANE the third. ISAAC^US ANGELUS. 1 34 31
6 BALDWINE the fifth, after eight months poisoned. 24 44 He travelleth into
the West, comes into England, consecrateth the Temple-church in London, and
returns without any aid 5 He went with Heraclius into the West; returns:
GERARDUS RIDFORD. 6 9 6 M. 10 D. 25 2 35 32 7 GUY de Lusignan in right of
Sibyll his wife. 1 25 Antioch by the Patriarch betrayed to Saladine. 45 6 7 10
7 GREGORY the eighth. M. 1. D. 27. 3 36 33 8 1 CONRADE Marquess of Montferrat
defends Tire, and is chosen King Guy taken prisoner; Jerusalem won by
Saladine. 2 26 46 7 is slain in a battle near Ptolemais. He is taken prisoner.
8 11 8 CLEMENT the third. 1 4 37 34 9 2 Guy having got liberty, besieges
Ptolemais. 3 27 1188. That Antioch was betrayed by a Patriarch, is plain by
Sabellicus: but whether Almericus was this traytou^-Patriarch, or whether it
was done by the Grecian Antipatriarch, is uncertain. Here we cease that
column, as despairing to co^^^^ne their succession any longer.
8 IX. GARNERIUS de Neapoli Syriae. TERICUS, Master of the Templars during
Gerards durance. Gerard is set at liberty, and slain in the siege of
Ptolemais. 9 12 9 2 5 38 M. 7. RICHARD the first. 1 10 3 4. VOYAGE under
Frederick surnamed Barbarossa. 4 28 9 10 13 Anno Dom. Popes. Emper. of the
East. Emper. of the West. Kings of England. Kings of France. Holy War, and
Kings of Jerusalem. Princes of Antioch. Patriarchs of Antioch. Patriarchs of
Jerusalem. Mrs of Kn. Hospitallers. Mrs of Kn. Templars. Mrs of Dutch Knights
Caliphs of Syria. Turkish K. of Egypt. 1190 3 6 HENRY the sixth, S. 1 2 11 4 5.
VOYAGE under Rich. of Engl. Philip of Fran 5 Antioch won again from the Turks
by Frederick D. of Suevia. 10 HENRY a-Wal-pot. 1 11 14 1 M. 2 D. 10 7 2 3 12 5
Conrade murdered in the marketplace of Tire. Ptolemais taken. 6 11 2 12 15 2
CELESTINE the third. 2 8 3 4 13 Guy exchangeth his Kingdom of Jerusalem for
Cyprus. 7 The time of Boemunds death is as uncertain as who was his Successor;
only we find from this time forward, the same Princes (but without name or
certain date) ^^yled both of Antioch and Tripoli. He lived viciously, and died
obscurely. 1192. Here is a subject for industry to deserve well, in filling up
the (...) of the Masters of the Templars, from the death of Gerard till the
year 1215, whose names we cannot find.
3 13 16 3 3 M. 7. 9 4 5 14 HENRY Earl of Champaigne. 1 1193. Hitherto the
succession of the Patriarchs of Jerusalem is accurately collected out of
Tyrius. The Order of those which follow, is not so authentic, being caught as
we might out of several Authors.
X. ERMEGAROUS DAPS. 4 14 SAPHADIME, Br. to Saladine. 1 4 4 ALEXIUS COMNENus
ANGELUS. 1 5 6 15 2 5 15 2 Anno Dom. Popes. Emper. of the East. Emper. of the
West. Kings of England. Kings of France. Holy War, and Kings of Jerusalem.
Princes of Antioch. Patriarchs of Jerusalem. Mrs of Kn. Hospitallers. Mrs of
Kn. Templars. Mrs of Dutch Knights Caliphs of Syria. Turkish K. of Egypt. 1195
5 2 6 7 16 3 6 16 Betwixt him and Saladines sons (whom at last he conquered
and subdued) was long war to the great comfort and profit of the Christians.
3 6 6 3 7 8 17 ALMERICK the second, King also of Cyprus. 1 7 17 4 7 M. 9 D. 11
4 8 9 18 6. VOYAGE, under Henry Duke of Saxony. Henry the Palatine, Herman
Landtgrave, etc. win Beryt^^ 2 8 18 5 8 INNOCENTIUS the third. 1 5 9 10 19
The Dutch men miserably killed on St Martines day. 3 XII. ALBERTUS succeeds
Heraclius, Spond. 9 19 6 9 2 6 OTHO the fourth. 1 11 20 Simon Earl of Montfort
comes into Palestine and makes a profitable peace. 4 10 20 7 1200 3 7 2 JOHN
his Br. 1 21 5 II. OTTO Kerpin. 1 21 8 1 4 8 3 2 22 6 2 22 9 2 5 ISAACIUS again
with ALEXIUS his S. 9 4 3 23 7. VOYAGE, under Baldwine Earl of Flandres; but by
the Pope diverted against the Grecian usurping Emperor. 7 XI. GOT^RIDUS de
Dnyjon. 3 23 10 3 6 BALDWINE Earl of Flandres. 1 5 4 24 8 4 24 11 4 7 2 6 5 25
1 INTERREGNUM of 5 years. Almerick dies of a surfeit, according to Marinus
Sanutus. 9 He perfecteth and writes a Rule to the Carmelites, Idem. 5 25 12 5
8 HENRY his Br. 1 7 6 26 2 10 Leo King of Armenia restores to the Templars
what he had violently taken from them 6 26 13 6 9 2 8 7 27 3 The Holy war
turned against the Albingenses in France. 11 III. HERMANNUS Bart. 1 27 14 7 10
3 9 8 28 4 12 2 28 1 MELADINE (as most compute) succeeds his father Saphadi^e
in Egypt. 15 8 11 4 10 9 29 5 Almerick for his laziness deposed by the Pope,
dies soon after. 13 3 29 2 16 9 12 5 11 10 30 JOHN BREN made King of Jerusalem
by the Pope. 1 4 30 3 17 1210 13 6 12 11 31 2 XIII. THOMAS A^^^. IV. HERMANNUS
a Sal^za. 1 31 4 18 1 14 7 13 12 32 3 2 32 5 19 2 15 8 FREDERICK the second. 1
13 33 4 XII. ALPHON^US de Portugallia 3 33 6 20 3 16 9 2 14 34 An army of
children going to the Holy war woefully perish by the way. 5 4 34 7 21 4 17 10
3 15 35 6 5 35 8 22 1215 18 11 4 16 36 The great Laterane Council, to advance
the Holy war. 7 He is present in the Laterane Council to solicit the Holy
war. XIII. GOTHERIDUS de-la-Rat. P. de Monte acuto. 6 36 9 Saphadine
(according to M. Paris, p. 404.) dies for grief that the fort nigh to Damiata
was taken. 23 6 M. 6 D. 9 PETER Earl of Auxerre. 1 5 17 37 8. VOYAGE under
Andrew King of Hungary. 8 7 37 10 24 7 HONORIUS the third. 2 2 6 HENRY the
third, S. 1 38 9 8 38 11 25 8 3 3 7 2 39 Damiata beseiged. 10 He fights
stoutly with the rest of his Order at the taking of Damiata, Mat. Paris, page
409 and 419. 9 39 12 MALADINE 1 9 4 4 8 3 40 Damiata taken. 11 10 40 13 2 1220
5 5 9 4 41 The Christians intrapped in water, restore Damiata for their
liberty; and conclude an eight-yeares truce. 12 11 41 14 Is wonderfully kind
to the Christians half* drowned in Egypt. 3 1 6 ROBERT. 1 10 5 42 13 12 42 15 4
2 7 2 11 6 43 14 13 43 16 5 3 8 3 12 7 He dies. 44 John Bren comes into
France, and there receives rich legacies from Philip Augustus. 15 60000 crown^
bequeathed by the K. of Fr. to the Hospit. and Templars. 14 44 17 6 4 9 4 13 8
LEWIS the eighth. 1 16 XIIII. GERALDUS. OLIVER. 15 45 18 7 5 10 5 14 9 2 17
XIIII. GUARINUS de Mon^e acuto. 16 TAHER S. 1 19 8 6 M. 8. 6 15 10 3 He is
honorably entertained at Rome, and resigneth his kingdom. 18 A bitter enemy
he was to Frederick the Emperor, and s^ded with the Pope and Templars against
him. 17 2 20 9 7 GREGORY the ninth. 1 7 16 11 St LEWIS. 1 FREDERICK, by
marriage of Iole Brens daughter. 1 The Dutch Knights under Hermannus their
Master come unto Prus^ra; yet so as many of 1230. Several Authors assign
several dates wherein the Dutch Knights came into Prussia: Perchance they came
in several parcels. Their succession I had out of Pantaleon, Munster, and the
Cen^^rists. Quare whether these Masters of the Dutch Knights in Prussia had
also command over those of their Order in Syria.
them still remained in Syria. 18 3 21 10 8 2 BALDWINE the second. 1 17 12 2 2
XV. CERVIUS. 19 4 22 11 9 3 2 18 13 3 9. VOYAGE under Frederick; who crowned
himself King of Jerusalem; and concluding a ten-yeares truce, returns into
Europe, leaving Reinold Duke of Bavaria his Viceroy in Palestine. 3 An
inveterate enemy to Frederick, whom be most spitefully and treacherously used.
20 23 12 1230 4 3 19 14 4 4 The Pr. of Antioch dies without lawful issue. 21
24 13 1 5 4 20 15 5 5 XVI. BERTRANDUS de Campis. 22 25 14 2 6 5 21 16 6 6
FREDERICK base S. to Fred. the Emp. is by Reinoldus Viceroy of Jerusale^ made
Pr. of Antioch, in spite of Henr. K. of Cyprus, who claimed that place. 1 23 26
15 3 7 6 22 17 7 7 2 24 27 16 4 8 7 23 18 8 8 3 25 MU^TENATZE^. 28 17 1235 9 8
24 19 9 9 4 26 29 18 6 10 9 25 20 10 10 5 27 30 19 7 11 10 26 21 11 11 6 28 31
20 8 12 11 27 22 12 The former ten-yeares Truce expired, Reinold concludes
another of the same term. 12 7 29 32 21 9 13 12 28 23 13 10. VOYAGE under
Theobald King of Navarre. 13 8 30 33 22 1240 14 13 29 24 14 He is unfortunately
overthrown in battle at Gaza. 14 9 31 34 23 1 M. 5. CELESTINE the fourth. D.
17. 14 30 25 15 11. VOYAGE under Richard Earl of Cornwall. 15 10 XV. ROBERTUS
HERMANNUS Petragorinus, M. Paris, page 726. V. CONRADE Landtgrave of Hassia. 1
35 24 2 The Sea void. 15 31 26 16 16 11 XVII. PETRUS de Villebride; 2 36 25 3
INNOCENTIUS the fourth. 1 16 32 27 17 17 12 3 37 26 4 2 17 33 28 18 The
Cora^ines* conquer the Christians, and sack Jerusalem. 18 13 He was in the
battle against the Corasines: as appears in M. Paris; where he writes a
bemoning letter. taken captive by the Corasines, M. Paris page 833. All the
Templars slain to eighteen, 1245 Here we are at another loss for the names of
the Templars, and will be thankful to those which will help us to them.
the Hospitallers to nineteen, the Dutch Knights to three. 4 38 27 5 3 18 34 29
19 19 14 XVIII. GUILIELMUS de Castello novo, M. Paris, page 836. 5 39 28 6 4 19
35 30 20 20 15 6 40 29 7 5 20 36 31 21 12. VOYAGE under S. Lewis King of
France. 21 The Antiochians fighting unadvisedly with the Turks, are overthrown.
16 7 He dies at Damiata's taking. 30 8 6 21 37 32 22 He arriveth in Cyprus,
and there wintereth; 22 8 MELECHSALA, S. 1 9 7 22 38 33 23 takes Damiata;
beats the Saracens. 23 9 2 Anno Dom. Popes. Emper. of the East. Emper. of the
West. Kings of England. Kings of France. Holy War, and Kings of Jerusalem.
Princes of Antioch. Patriarchs of Jerusalem. Mrs of Kn. Hospitallers. Mrs of
Kn. Templars. Mrs of Dutch Knights Caliphs of Syria. Great Cha^s of Tartary.
Mammaluke Sultans of Egypt. 1250 8 23 INTERREGNUM of 23 years, wherein there
were many Competitours for the Empire. 1 34 24 Robert Earl of Artois slain.
Lewis taken prisoner. INTERREGNUM of 14 years. 1 The Patriarch of Jerusalem
was taken prisoner with the King of France Magdeburg. Cent. 13. col. 697. All
the Hospitallers with their Master slain to one. All the Templars with their
Master slain to two. 10 TARQUEMINUS. 1 1 9 24 2 35 25 The Pastorells overthrown
in France. 2 XIX. HUGO REVEL: He ^ade a statute whereby women were admitted
into this Order. 11 2 2 10 25 3 36 26 King Lewis being ransomed comes into
Palestine; recovereth and fortifieth Sidone 3 CONRADE S. to Frederick Prince of
Antioch. 12 3 3 11 26 4 37 27 returns into France. 4 VI. POPPO. 1 MANGO
persuaded by Haito K. of Armenia to t^rn Christian. 1 4 4 M. 5 D. 14 27 5 38 28
5 2 2 Anno Dom. Popes. Emper. of the East. Emper. of the West. Kings of
England. Kings of France. Holy War, and Kings of Jerusalem. Princes of
Antioch. Patriarchs of Jerusalem. Mrs of Kn. Hospitallers. Mrs of Dutch Knights
Caliphs of Syria. Great Cha^s of Tartary. Mammaluke Sultans of Egypt. 1255
ALEXANDER the fourth. 2 28 6 39 29 6 XVI. PANTALEON, a Frenchman. 3 3 6 3 29 7
40 30 7 4 MUSTEAZEM, the last Caliph of Syria, a covetous miser, conquered by
the Tartarians. 1 4 MELECH, otherwise called CLOTHES 7 4 30 8 41 31 8 5 2
Haalach Br. to Mango takes the city of Babylon. 5 8 5 31 9 42 32 These 10
years following the Genoans fighting against the Venetians and Pisans, hasten
the ruin of the Christians in Palestine. 9 6 6 9 6 32 10 43 33 10 7 7 1260 M.
5. D. 5 MICHAEL Palaeologus. 1 11 44 34 11 Haalach the Tartarian comes to
Antioch; is there kindly entertained by Prince Conrade 8 8 BENDOCDAR. 1 1
URBANE the fourth. 1 2 12 45 35 12 He is made Pope by the name of Urbane the
fourth, Platina. 9 HAALACH succeeds his Br. Mango. 1 2 2 2 3 13 46 36 13 10 2
3 3 3 4 14 47 37 14 11 3 4 4 M. 1 D. 4 5 15 48 38 CHARLES Earl of Anjou, by the
Pope made King of Jerusalem and Si^ilia. 1 Conrade comes into Europe to
succor Conradine his kinsman. 12 ABAGA Cham his S. 1 He wins the kingdom
of Damascus from the Tartarian: takes Siphet, and kills all that would not
turn Mahometanes: wins Joppa. 5 5 CLEMENT the fourth. 1 6 16 49 39 2 VII.
HANNO de Sanger Hausen. 1 2 6 6 2 7 17 50 40 3 XX. NICOLAUS Longar. 2 3 7 7 3 8
18 51 41 4 3 4 8 8 M. 9 D. 25 9 19 52 42 5 Antioch in the absence of Conrade
won by Bendocdar. 4 5 9 9 The Sea void. 10 20 53 43 1 HUGH King of Cyprus.
13. VOYAGE under St Lewis King of France, Charles of Sicilie, and our Prince
Edward. 6 5 6 10 1270 11 21 54 44 2 Tunis taken. Lewis dies 7 BOEMUND the
fourth. 6 7 11 1 GREGORY the tenth. 1 12 22 55 PHILIP the Bold. 1 3 Prince
Edward comes to Ptolemais; 8 7 8 12 2 2 13 23 56 2 4 is desperately wounded,
yet recovereth. 9 8 9 13 3 3 14 RODULPHus ab Haspurg. 1 EDWARD the first. 1 3 5
10 9 10 14 4 4 15 2 2 4 6 11 10 11 15 Anno Dom. Popes. Emper. of the East.
Emper. of the West. Kings of England. Kings of France. Holy War, and Kings of
Jerusalem. Princes of Antioch. Patriarchs of Jerusalem. Mrs of Kn.
Hospitallers. Mrs of Kn. Templars. Mrs of Dutch Knights Great Cha^s of Tartary.
Mammaluke Sultans of Egypt. 1275 M. 4 D. 10 16 3 3 5 12 The last VOYAGE under
Henry Duke of Mechlenburg. 7 Dies May 11. BOEMUND the fifth, S. under the
tuition of the Bishop of Tortosa. 1 11 12 16 6 INNOCENT the fifth. M. 5. 17 4 4
6 13 8 2 XXI. JOHN de Villiers. 12 13 Dies by cold gotten with swimming in
Euphrates. 17 7 ADRIAN the fifth. M. 1 D. 7 18 5 5 7 14 MARIA DOMICELLA
Princess of Antioch, resigneth her right of the Kingdom of Jerusalem to
Charles. 9 3 HERMANNUS the third. 1 14 MELECHSAIT, or MELECHSARES. 1 8 JOHN the
20. M. 8 D. 8 19 6 6 8 15 10 4 2 15 2 9 NICOLAS the third. M. 8. D. 29 20 7 7 9
16 11 5 3 16 3 1280 The Sea void. 21 8 8 10 17 12 6 4 He is poisoned by the
Sultan of Babylon. 17 4 1 MARTINE the second. 1 22 9 9 11 18 13 7 5 18 5 2 2 23
10 10 12 19 The Sicilian Vespers. 14 Boemund now of age, sideth against the
Templars to the destruction of the Christian cause. 8 About this time we find a
namelesse Patiarch of Jerusalem, -- 6 TAN^O OR his Br. styled himself Mahomet
Cham and was a great persecutour of the Christians. 1 6 3 3 ANDRONICus
PALEOLOGUS 1 11 11 13 20 15 9 XXII. ODO de Pinibus. 7 2 7 4 4 2 12 12 14 1
CHARLES the second, surnamed the Lame, or the Delayer. JOHN his S. 1 10 8 3 8 5
M. 1 D. 7 3 13 13 15 2 HENRY his Br. 1 11 P^TER Belius, a valiant soldier.
BURCHARDus Schuadens. 1 ARGON Cham killed his Br. Mahonet: he favors the
Christians. 1 He expels the Carmelites out of Syria for changing their
coats. 9 6 HONORIUS the fourth. 2 4 14 14 PHILIP the Fair. 1 3 2 12 2 2 10 7 D.
2. 5 15 15 2 4 3 LUCIE his sister, married in Europe. 1 3 3 11 8 NICOLAS the
fourth. 1 6 16 16 3 5 Tripoli Sidon lost. 4 Vide Calvis. in hoc anno. 2 The
Hospitallers win the castle of Mergath. 4 4 12 9 2 7 17 17 4 6 Berytus Tire
lost. 5 3 -- who fled out of Ptolemais when it was besieged, and was drowned in
his flight: It seems his name was drowned with him. 5 RAGAITHUS his ^r. a
lazy voluptuous glutton. 1 ELPIS, or ALPHIX. 1 1290 3 8 M. 9. 18 5 7 Ptolemais
besieged; 6 How-ever, one HUGH challenges both the title of Antioch, and
principality of Tripoli, Knolls, page 123 4 XXIII. VIGILBELMUS de Villaret. He
is chosen governor of Ptolemais, and therein slain. 6 CASANUS, S. to Argon. He
was very favorable to the Christians: For in the ninth year of his reign he
wins the city of Jerusalem and restores it to the Eastern Christians; who
soon after lose it to the Sultan of Egypt.
1 2 1 4 9 ADOLPHUS of Nassau. 1 19 6 8 taken: And the Latin Christians
finally expelled out of Syria. 7 5 Deposed. 7 2 SERAPH, or ARRAPHUS. 1 2 M. 1
D. 14 10 2 20 7 9 8 6 JAMES Molaibergamon last master of the Templars in Syria,
Conti^^ator belli sacri, lib. 5. cap 13, and 17 1 CONRADus de Fertuangen. 1 3 2
3 The Sea void. 11 3 21 8 10 9 7 2 2 4 4 CELESTINE he V. M. 5. D. 7. BONE^ACE
the eighth. 12 4 22 9 11 10 8 3 3 5

If the Reader do observe any difference betwixt our former computation in the
Book and our Chronology here, let him rather rely on this latter, which I take
to be better perfected.

A Catalogue of Authors cited in this book.
A
ADricomius, De terra Sancta. Paul. AEMYLIUS; Basileae, per Sebastianum
Henricpetri; in fol. Albertus Aquensis, Chron. Hierosol. Alfonso Villeg.
Alphonsus de Castr. S. Ambrose. Ammian. Marcellin. Antoninus. Jo. Antonius
Summontius. Tho. Aquinas. Arnoldus Lubecens. S. Athanasius. Athenaeus.
Aventinus. S. Augustine.
B
Sr Fr. Bacon. Balaeus. Barklay. BARONIUS, Annal. Eccl. Colon. Agrippinae,
1624. Bellarmine. Bernard. Chr. BESOLDUS; Argentinae, 1536, in 12o. Bibliander.
Blondus. Hect. Boethius. Bolsecus. Bonaventure. Bracton. Bridenbach. Brietwood.
Brochardus. Buchanan. Burton. Bydulph. Bzorius.
C
Cesars Comment. CALVISIUS, Francofurti; edit. 3^ 1629, in 4o. Camden. Jo.
Cammanus. Canon Law. Carew. Cassanaeus. Cedrenus. Chemnitius. Civil Law.
Cochlaeus. Sr Edw. Coke. Continuator Guil. Tyrii. Continuator Matthew. Paris.
Continuator Urspergensis. Sr Rob. Cotton.
D
Daniel. P. Diaconus. Mart. Dominic. Dressaeus.
E
Egnatius. Erasmus. Estius. Jo. Euchaitensis. Eulogium Chron. Eusebius.
F
Fazellius. Field. FOX, Acts and monuments; 4. edition, 1583. Otho
Frisingensis. Froissard. Fuller.
G
Gaguinus. Gerson. Godwine. Goffridus. Grafton. Gwillam.
H
Harding. Sr Jo. Harrington. Chr. HELVICUS, Chron. Marpurgi 1629, in fol. Dr
Heylin. S. Hierome. Hieronimo Roman. Hospinian. Rog. HOVEDEN; Francofurti, 1601
in fol. Hen. HUNTINGTON; Francofurti, 1601, in fol.
I.
Bp Jewel. Illyricus. Josephus.
K
Rich. KNOLLS, Turkish Hist. 2. edition, 1610, in fol. Krantzius.
L
Lambert. LAMPADIUS Mellificium Hist. Marpurgi, 1617, in 4o. Livie. Lindwood.
Lipsius. Lombard. Luther.
M
Machiaviell. MAGDEBURGENSES Centuriae, Basileae 1624, in fol. Jo. Magnus.
Guil. MALMESBURIENSIS; Francofurti, 1601, in fol. Mantuan. Marinus Sanutus.
Martini Chron. Mr Mead. P. Mela. Mercator. Monstrell. Morison. Seb. Munster.
N
Nauclerus. NICETAS Choniates; Apud haeredes Eustathii Vignon, 1593, in 4o.
Neubrigensis. Theod. a Nyem. Greg. Nyssen.
O
Ovid.
P
Pantaleon. Matthew. PARIS; London, 1671, in fol. Jo. PAUL Perin, Luthers
forerunners, translated by S. Leonard; Land. 1624. Pero Mexya. Peter de Bloys.
Peter de Valle Sarnensi. Peter de Vineis. Pierce Plowman. Pitzaeus. Platina.
Polybius. Possevine.
R
Sr Walter Ralegh. Reinerius. Reineccius. Dr Ridley. Rivetus. Claud. Rubis.
S
An. Coc. SABELLICUS; Lugduni, in aedibus Nic. Petit. 1535. Sr Edw. Sandys. G.
Sandys Travels. Scaliger. Scotus. Mr Seldom. Du Serres. Socrates. Sozomen. Jo.
Speed. Statutes of Engl. Scotl.
Stephanus Cypriot.
T
Theodoret. Theophylact. Theophanes. Thuanus. Tremellius. Hist. conc. Trident.
Tullie. Guil. TYRIUS; Basileae, 1549, in fol.
V
Vincent. Polyd. Virgil. Vitruvius. Volaterran. URSPERGENSIS; Basileae, apud
Petrum Pernam, 1569.
W
Weaver, Fund. mon. Dr Whitaker. Dr White.
Z
Zuerius Boxhorn.
A table showing the principal things contained in this History.
A
B. Chapter ABaga makes cowards valiant, 4 32 Abbeys, how and why suppressed in
England, 5 6, 7, 8 Adamites against their will, 3 20 Albingenses; three
opinions concerning them, 18 their original, persecution, nicknames, 19
defended from crimes objected, 20 commended by their adversaries, ibid. Alexius
Emp. his treachery, 1 15 causes the Christians overthrow, 2 9 his death and
epitaph, 14 Alexius Angelus the younger a princely beggar, 3 17 Almerick K. of
Jerusalem his character, 2 33 he helps the Sultan of Egypt, 36 invadeth Egypt
against promise, 37 his death, ibid. Almerick the second, 3 16 deposed for
laziness, 23 Almerick Patriarch of Antioch, 2 26 Almerick Patriarch of
Jerusalem, 34 Andronicus a bad practiser of S. Paul 3 3 Antioch won by the
Christians, 1 17 betrayed by the Patr. to Saladine, 3 1 recovered by the Duke
of Suevia, 4 finally lost to the Sultan of Egypt, 4 26 Apostasy of many
Christians in Europe upon K. Lewis captivity, 17 Arms of Gentlemen deserved in
this war, 5 23 Arnulphus the firebrand-Patriarch of Jerusalem, 2 2, 8, 15
Assasines, their strange commonweal. 34

B
BAldwine K. of Ierus. his nature, 2 7 be wins Antipatris and Cesarea, 10 his
two voyages into Egypt, his death, 13 Baldwine the second chosen King, 14 he is
taken prisoner* and ransomed, 17 he renounceth the world, and dies, 18
Baldwine the third his character, 2 24 discord betwixt him and his mother 31 he
wins Ascalon, 32 his death, and commendation, ibid. Baldwine the fourth, 38
he conquereth Saladine, 40, 42 he is arrested with leprosy: his death, and
praise, ibid. Baldwine the fifth poisoned by his mother, 43 Baldwine Earl of
Flanders Emperor of Constantinople, 3 17 Theodore Balsamon how cousened, 2 44
Battles at or near Dogargan, 1 16 Battles at or near Antioch, 17 Battles at
or near Askelon, 2 3 Battles at or near Rhamula, 10 Battles at or near
Meander, 28 Battles at or near Tiberias, 45 Battles at or near Ptolemais, 3 5
Battles at or near Bethlehem, 11 Battles at or near Moret in France, 22
Battles at or near Gaza, 4 7 Battles at or near Tiberias, 10 Battles at or
near Manzor in Egypt, 15 Battles at or near Manzor again, 16 Bendocdar Sultan
of Egypt, 4 26, 32 Bernard Patriarch of Antioch, 2 2 An apology for S.
Bernard, 2 30 Biblianders wild fancy, 1 10 Bishops numerous in Palestine, 2 2
Boemund prince of Antioch, 1 17 he is taken prisoner, 2 3 he wastes Grecia, 11
Boemund the second, 18 Boemund the third, 36

C
B. Chapter CAliphs, their voluptuousness, 2 22, 36 Calo-Iohannes Grecian Emper.
21 Carmelites, their original, luxury, and banishment, 26 Carthage described,
4 27 Chalices in England, why of latten, 3 13 Charatux one of the wisest men in
the world, 4 Charles Earl of Anjou, K. of Ierusal. 4 25 he dies for grief, 31
Charles the second, surnamed the Delayer, ibid. Children marching to Jerusalem
woefully perish, 3 24 Choermines, their obscure original 4 9 and final
suppression, 10 Clerks no fit Captains, 2 9 5 14 Clermont Council, 1 8 Climate
how it alters health, 5 15 Conferences betwixt opposite parties in religion
never succeed, 3 21 Conrade Emperor of Germany his unfortunate voyage, 2 27
he conquereth the Turks, 28 Conrade of Montferrat K. of Ierus. 3 1 he is
miserably slain, 10 Conversions of Pagans hindered by Christians badnesse, 2 34
4 12 how it must orderly and solemnly be done, 22 Edmund Crouchback not
crooked, 26

D
B. Chapter DAbertus Patriarch of Ierusal. 2 2 he scuffleth with the Kings for that
city, and dies in banishment, 5, 7, 8 Damascus described, 29 in vain besieged
by the Christians ibid. Damiata twice taken by the Christians, and twice
surrendered, 3 25, 27 4 13, 18 Danish service in this war, 1 13 5 22
Drunkenness woefully punished, 3 16 A Duel declined, 2 1 Duells forbidden by S
t Lewis, 4 27

E
EBremarus Patriarch of Ierusal. 2 8 Prince Edward his voyage, 4 26 he is
desperately wounded, and recovereth, 29 Elianor Qu. of France plays false
with her husband, 2 28 Elianor wife to Prince Edward, her unexampled love to
her husband, 4 26 Elhadach Caliph of Egypt, 2 36 Emmanuel Emperor of Greece,
27 Engines before guns, 1 24 English service in this war, 1 13 5 22 Equality
of undertakers ruineth this Holy war, 13 Eustace refuses the kingdom, 2 14

F
B. Chapter FAith-breaking the cause of the Christians overthrow, 2 37 5 11 Fames
incredible swiftness, 1 8 The strength of imaginary Fear 3 5 Forts make some
countries weaker, 3 4 Franks, how ancient in the East, 5 21 Fred. Barbarossa
his unhappy voyage 3 3 his woeful drowning, 4 Frederick the second, K. of
Jerusalem, his disposition, 3 29 4 20 his grapplings with the Pope, 3 30 4 1
his death, and posterity, 20 French service in this war, 1 13 5 21 Fulcher
Patriarch of Jerusalem, 2 25 Fulk King of Jerusalem, 19, 23

G
GAlilee described, 1 19 Genoans achievements in this war, 2 10 Germane
service in this war, 1 13 5 21 Germane Nobility numerous, ibid. S t George, 1
17 Gibellines and Guelfes, 4 1 Godfrey King of Jerusalem, 2 1 his virtuous
vice, ibid. his death, 6 a Goose carried by the Pilgrims to Jerusalem, 1 10
Greek Church rent from the Latin, 4 4 on what occasion, ibid. wherein it
dissenteth, 5 what charitably is to be thought of them, ibid. what hope of
reconcilement, 6 Guarimand Patriarch of Jerusalem, 2 15 Guy King of Jerusalem,
43 he is taken prisoner, 45 he exchangeth his Kingdom for Cyprus, 3 10

H
B. Chapter HAalon Cham of Tartarie, 4 22, 26 Helen no Ostleresse, 1 4 Henry E. of
Champaigne K. of Ierus. 3 11 his woeful death, 15 Henry Earl of Mechlenburgh
his long captivity and late deliverance 4 30 Henry the fourth, K. of England,
his intended voyage to Jerusalem, 5 24 Heraclius the vicious Patriarch of
Jerusalem, 2 39 Holy fraud, 1 17 Holy war, arguments for it, 1 9 arguments
against it, 10 unlikely again to be set on foot, 5 27 Hugh King of Jerusalem
and Cyprus, 4 25

I
JAmes IV, K. of Scotland, has some intentions for Jerusalem, 5 24 Ianizaries
their present insolency, 5 29 Jerusalem destroyed by Titus, 1 1 rebuilt by
Adrian, 2 largely described, 23 won by the Christians under Godfrey, 24 lost
to Saladine, 2 46 recovered by Frederick the Emp. 3 31 finally won by the
Choermines, 4 9 her present estate at this day, 5 26 Jews their woeful present
condition, 1 3 the hindrance of their conversion, ibid. Interviews of Princes
dangerous, 3 6 John Bren K. of Jerusalem, 24 his discords with the Legate,
ibid. he resigneth his kingdom, 28 Irish service in this war, 5 23 Isaacius
Angelus Emp. of Constant. 3 1 Italian service in this war, 1 13 5 22 Judea
described, 1 21

K
B. Chapter KIng for Deputy in Eastern tongues, 2 2 Three faults in the Kingdom
of Jerusalem which hindered the strength of it, 5 18 Knights-Hospitallers their
original 2 4 they degenerate through wealth into luxury, ibid. they rebel
against the Patriarch about tithes, 25 brawl with the Templars, 4 8 flit from
Cypr' by Rhodes to Malta 5 5 the manner of their suppression in England, 6, 7
in vain restored by Qu. Mary, 8 Knights-Templars instituted, 2 16 many slain
through their own covetousness, 32 they become rich and proud, 4 8 their
treachery hinders the Holy war, 5 17 they are finally exstirpated out of
Christendom, 1 arguments for and against their innocence, with a moderate way
betwixt them, 2, 3 Knights Teutonicks their institution 2 16 they are honored
with a grand Master, 3 5 they come into Prussia, their service there, 5 4
Knights of the Sepulcher, 5 27

L
LAterane Council, 3 24 Length of the journey hindrance of this war, 5 13
Leopoldus Duke of Austr. his valor, 3 8 Leprosy, 5 15 Lewis the Young K. of
France his woeful journey, 2 27, 28 S t Lewis his voyage to Palestine, 4 11 he
wintereth in Cyprus, 12 lands in Egypt, winnes Damiata, 13 is conquered and
taken captive, 16 dearly ransomed, 18 S t Lewis his second voyage, 4 26 he
besieges Tunis, 27 his death and praise, ibid.

M
B. Chapter MAhometanisme; the cause why it is so spreading, 1 6 Mammalukes their
original, 2 40 their miraculous Empire, 4 19 Maronites their tenants and
reconcilement to Rome, 2 39 Meladine King of Egypt his bounty to the
Christians, 3 27 why not loved of his subjects, 4 14 his death, ibid.
Melechsala his son King of Egypt, ibid. Melechsaites Sultan of Egypt, 32
Mercenary soldiers dangerous, 2 35 yet how, well qualified, they may be
useful, ibid. Miracles of this war examined, and ranked into four sorts:
viz. 1 not done; 2 falsely done; 3 done by Nature; 4 done by Satan; 5 10

N
NIce besieged and taken by the Christians, 1 16 Nilus his wonders and nature,
2 13 Northern armies may prosper in the South, 5 15 Norvegian service, 1 13 5
22 Numbers numberless slain in these wars, 20 What Numbers competent in an
army, 19 Numbers of Asian armies, what we may conceive of them, ibid.

O
OBservation of Rog. Hoveden confuted, 2 46 Offers at Palestine since the end
of the war, 5 24 Office of the Virgin why instituted, 1 8 Owls why honored
by the Tartarians 4 2

P
B. Chapter PAlestine in general described, 1 18 Pastorells in France slain, 4 21
Pelagius the Legate, 3 24 Peter the Hermit his character, 1 8 he proves
himself but an hypocrite ibid. Peter K. of Aragon, a favourer of the
Albingenses, slain in battle, 3 22 Philip Augustus K. of France his voyage to
Palestine, and unseasonable return, 6 Pilgrimages proved unlawful, 5 9 The
Popes private profits by the Holy war, 1 11 he the principal cause of the
ill success, 5 12 Polands service in this war, 1 13 5 22 Ptolemais won by
the Christians, 2 11 regained by Saladine, 45 after three years siege
recovered by the Christians, 3 8 finally taken by Sultan Scrapha, 4 33

Q
QValitie of the adventurers in this war, 1 12

R
REd sea why so called, 2 13 Reformation, why Rome is averse from it, 4 4
Reimund Earl of Tripoli, his discords with Baldwine, 2 41 his apostasy to
Saladine, 45 his suspicious death, ibid. Relics how to be valued, 3 12 why so
many before death Renounced the world, 2 18 Richard K. of England his voyage to
Palestine, 3 6 he takes Sicily and Cyprus in his passage, 7 vanquisheth Salad.
in a set battle 11 in his return he is taken prisoner in Austria, and ransomed,
13 Richard Earl of Cornwall his voyage to Palestine, 4 8 Robert D. of Normandy
his valor, 1 16 he refuses the Kingdom of Jerusalem, and thriveth not after,
2 1 Rodulphus chosen unexpectedly Emperor of Germany, 4 30 sends supplies
to Syria, ibid. Rodulphus the unhappie Patriarch of Antioch, 2 20

S
B. Chapter Sacrilege, 5 17 Saladine kills the Caliph of Egypt, 2 37 succeeds in
Egypt and Damascus, ibid. conquereth Guy, 45 takes Jerusalem and all Syria, 46
his commendations and death, 3 14 Scholars without experience no good
Generals, 3 24 Scottish service in this war, 1 13 5 23 Sea and land-service
compared, 4 24 Simon Earl of Montfort concludes a truce in Syria, 3 16 chosen
captain against the Albingenses, 22 is killed by a woman, ibid. Sidon
described; won by the Christians, 2 12 lost to the Sultan of Egypt, 4 32
Spanish service in this war, 1 13 5 22 Stephen Patriarch of Jerusalem, 2 15
Superstition tainting this whole war, 5 9 Suspected soldiers in armies where
to be placed, 4 10 Sultans their large commissions, 2 22 Sweden appears not
in the Holy war, 1 13

T
TArtaria described, 1 7 4 2 Tartars, their name and nature, ibid. when first
known to the world, converted to Christianity, 22 their relapse to Paganism,
26 the occasion, ibid. B. Chapter Theobald King of Navarre his unhappie voyage, 4 7
Titular Bishops their use and abuse, 3 2 Pretenders of Titles to the Kingdom
of Jerusalem, 5 29 Tunis described; besieged, 4 27 taken by the Christians, 28
Turks whence descended, 1 7 their large strides into Asia, ibid. harder to be
converted then Tartars, 4 2 Turkish Empire; its greatness, strength, and
welfare; the weakness and defects of it; what hopes of its approaching ruin 5
30 Tyle Colupp a notable cheater, 4 20 Tire described, 2 12 taken by the
Christians, 17 valiantly defended by Conrade, 3 1 won by Sultan Alphir, 4 32

V
B. Chapter VEnetians performance in this war, 2 17 their bloody sea-battel*
with the Genoans, 4 24 Vitiousnesse of the Pilgrims which went to Palestine, 1
12 5 16

W
WAfer-cake why wrought in the borders of all Egyptian tapestrie, 4 18 Welsh
service in this war, 5 23 William Patriarch of Jerusalem, 2 25 William
Landt-grave of Hesse his fictitious voyage to Jerusalem confuted, 5 26 Women
warriors, 1 12 2 27 Wracks first quitted by the Kings of England to their
subjects, 3 7

FINIS.
Mart. 13. 1638.

Imprimatur Cantabrigiae per Thomam Buck.

RA. BROWNRIGG, Procan. SAM. WARD. THO. BAINBRIGG. THO. BACHCROFTS.


