FIVE SERMONS PREACHED Upon sundry especial Occasions. Viz.

1 The Sinners mourning habit: In Whitehall, March 29. being the first Tuesday
after the departure of King JAMES into Blessedness. 2 A Visitation Sermon: In
Christ's Church, at the Trienniall Visitation of the right Reverend Father in
God the Lord Bishop of London. 3 The holy Choice: In the Chapel by Guildhall,
at the Solemn Election of the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor of London. 4 The
barren Tree: At Pauls-Crosse, October. 26. 5 The Temple: At Pauls-Crosse. August.
5.
By THO: ADAMS.

Sine merito, non sine commodo.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN GRISMAND 1626.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND TRVly Noble Lord, WILLIAM, Earl of PEMBROKE.
BY your Honors favor, I had a place in the sad Court of Whitehall this last
Lent: and it was so disposed by our blessed Maker, that I know not whether, my
Text was a Comment upon the Occasion, or the Occasion upon my Text: they met
together with such unhappy happiness. As this Sermon took Birth in the
highest Sphere of our Kingdom, so there learning to presume on the help of
your Noble wing, it has adventured to fly abroad. And whither, justly, should
it take the first flight, but to your Honors Protection, from whom it received
Breath and Motion? I have been bold also to send a pair of Servants to wayt
upon it, which were produced by other solemn occasions. I humbly beseech your
Lordsh. to give them all your Pass: and then I fear not, but that for your
Noble Names sake, (not their own merit) wheresoever they light, they shall
find kind entertainment; and do yet some more good to the Church of God. Which
success, together with your Honors happiness, is still prayed for, by

Your Lordships humbly devoted and ready to be commanded, THO: ADAMS.

THE SINNERS MOVRNING HABIT.
JOB. CHAP. 42. VER. 6. Wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and
ashes.


THis is in many dear regards a mourning and penitential season, therefore I
thought best to accommodate it with a penitential Sermon. I abhor my self,
etc.

Affliction is a winged Chariot, that mounts up the soul toward heaven: nor
do we ever so rightly understand Gods Majesty, as when we are not able to
stand under our own misery. It was Naamans leprosy that brought him to the
knowledge of the Prophet, and the Prophet brought him to the saving knowledge
of the true God: had he not been a leper, he had still been a sinner. Schola
crucis, Zepper.
schola lucis: there is no such School instructing, as the cross afflicting.
If Paul had not been buffeted by Satan, he might have gone nigh to buffet
God, through danger of being puffed up with his revelations.

The Lord has many messengers, by whom he solicites man: He sends one health,
to make him a strongman: another wealth, to make him a rich man: another
sickness, to make him a weak man: another loss^s, to make him a poor man:
another age, to make him an old man: another death, to make him no man. But
among them all, none dispatcheth the business surer or sooner then affliction:
if that fail of bringing a man home, nothing can do it. He is still
importunate for an answer; yea, he speaks, and strikes. Do we complain of
his incessant blows? alas, he does but his office, he waits for our
Repentance; let us give the messenger his errand, and he will be gone. Let him
take the proud man in hand, he will humble him: he can make the Drunkard sober;
the Lascinious chaste: the Angry patient; the Covetous charitable; fetch the
Unthrift Son back again to his Father, Luke 15.17.
whom a full purse had put into an itch of traveling: the only breaker of
those wild Colts. Ier. 5. the waters of that Deluge, which (though they put men
in fear of their lives) bear them up in the Arc of Repentance higher toward
heaven. It brought the brethren to the acquaintance of Joseph, and makes many a
poor sinner familiar with the Lord Jesus.

Job was not ignorant of God before, while he sat in the Sunshine of peace;
but resting his head on the bosom of plenty, he could lie at his ease, and
contemplate the goodness of his Maker. But as when the Sun shines forth in
his most glorious brightness, we are then least able to look upon him: we
may solace our selves in his diffused rays and comfortable light, but we
cannot fix our eyes upon that burning Carbuncle. These outward things do so
engrosse us, take up our consideration, and drown our contemplative faculty
in our sense; that so long, we only observe the effects of Gods goodness,
rather then the goodness of God it self. Necessity teaches us the worth of
a friend; as Absynthium, wormwood rubbed upon the eyes, makes them smart a
little, but they see the clearer. Therefore Job confesed, that in his
prosperity he had only (as it were) heard of God; but now in his trial he
had seen him. Verse. 5.
I heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye sees thee: that
is, he had obtained a more clear and perspicuous vision of him; the eye being
more apprehensiue of the object then the ear. Segniius irritant animos dimissa
per aures. When we hear a man described, our Imagination conceiues an Idea or
form of him but darkely: if we see him, and in tentiuely look upon him,
there is an impression of him in our minds: we know his stature, his gesture,
his complexion, his proportion. Sic oculos, sic ille manus, sic or a ferebat.
Such a more full and perfect apprehension of God did calamity work in this holy
man; and from that speculation proceeds this humiliation; Wherefore I abhor
my self, and repent in dust and ashes.

Where we may consider three degrees of mortification; the Sickness, the
Death, and the Burial of Sin. I abhor my self, there sin is sick and
wounded: I repent, there it is wounded and dead: In dust and ashes, there it is
dead and buried. To deny ones self, maimes concupiscence, that it cannot
thrive: to repent, kills it, that it cannot live: in dust and ashes, buries it,
that it cannot rise up again. I throw it into the Grave, I cover it with
mould, I rake it up in dust and ashes.

But I will not pull the Text in pieces; only I follow the manuduction of the
words: for there is not a superfluous word in the verse, as the Psalmist said
of the Army of Israel, There was not one feeble person among them. It begins
as high as the glory of Heaven, and ends as low as the basest of Earth. The
first word [ Therefore] respects an infinite God: the last words [ Dust and
ashes] declare an humbled man. The meditation of the former is the cause of the
latter, and the condition of the latter is the way to the former. To study God,
is the way to make an humble man: and an humble man is in the way to come unto
God. Such a consideration will cast us down to dust and ashes: such a
prostration will lift us up to glory and blessedness. Here then is a Jacobs
Ladder, but of four rounds. Divinity is the Highest, I have se^ne th^e,
Therefore. Mortality is the lowest, Dust and ashes. Between both these, sit
two others, Shame and Sorrow; no man can abhor himself, without Shame; nor
Repent, without Sorrow. Let your honorable patience admit Job descending these
four stairs; even so low as he went; and may all your souls rise as high as
he is.

Wherefore.
This referrs us to the motive that humbled him; and that appears by the
context, to be a double meditation; one of Gods majesty, another of his
mercy. 1. Of his majesty; which being so infinite, and beyond the
comprehension of man, he considered by way of comparison, or relation to the
creatures; the great Beh^moth of the Land, the greater Leuiathan of the Sea;
upon which he has spent the precedent Chapters. Mathematicians wonder at the
Sun, that it being so much bigger then the Earth, it does not set it on fire,
and burn it to ashes: but here is the wonder; that God being so infinitely
great, and we so infinitely evil, we are not consumed. VVhatsoe^^r the Lord
would do, Psalm. 135.6.
that did he, in heaven, in earth, in the Sea, and in all deep places. If man's
power could do according to his will, or Gods will would do according to his
power, Genes. 6.7.
who could stand? I will destroy man from the face of the earth, says the
Lord. The original word is, I will steep him, as a man steepes a piece of
earth in water, till it tu^ne to dirt: for man is but clay, and forgets his
maker, and his matter. None but God can reduce man to his first principles, and
the original grains whereof he was made: and there is no dust so high, but
this great God is able to give him steeping.

2. Or this was a meditation of his mercy, then which nothing more humbles a
heart of flesh. Psalm. 130.4
With thee, O Lord, is forgiveness, that thou might be feared. One would
think, that punishment should procure fear, and forgiveness love: but nemo
magis diligit, quam qui maxim veretur offendere: no man more truly loves God,
then he that is most fearful to offend him. Thy mercy reaches to the
heavens, and thy faithfulness to the clouds; that is, above all sublimities.
God is glorious in all his works, but most glorious in his works of mercy:
and this may be one reason, why Saint Paul calls the Gospel of Christ, 1 Timothy
1.11.
a Glorious Gospel. Solomon tells us, It is the glory of a man to pass by an
offense: herein is God most Glorious, in that he pasleth by all the offenses of
his children. Lord, who can know thee, and not love thee; know thee, and not
fear thee? fear thee for thy Justice, and love thee for thy mercy: yea fear
thee for thy mercy, and love thee for thy Justice, for thou art infinitely
good in both.

Put both these together, and here is matter of humiliation, even to dust and
ashes. So Abraham interceding for Sodom; Genesis 18 27.
Behold, I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, which am but dust and
ashes. Gr^g. mo^. ^8.
Quanto magis Sancti Diuinitatis interna conspiciunt, tanto magis se nihil esse
cognoscu^t. It is a certain conclusion; no proud man knows God. Non sum
dignus, I am not worthy, is the voice of the Saints: they know God, and God
knows them. Exodus 33.17.
Moses was the meekest man upon earth, and therefore God is said to know him by
name. Genesis 32.10.
I am less then the least of thy mercies, says ^acob; lo, he was honored
to be Father of the 12. Tribes, and Heir of the Blessing. Quis ego sum
Domine, says David, who am I, O Lord? He was advanced from that lowly
conceit to be King of Israel. Mat. 3.11.
I am not worthy to loose the latchet of Christ's shoe, says John Baptist.
Lo, he was esteemed worthy to lay his hand on Christ's head. Mat. ^.8.
I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof, says the Centurion:
therefore Christ commended him, I have not found so great faith, no not in
Israel. I am the least of the Apostles, 1 Cor. 15.9.
says Paul, not worthy to be called an Apostle: therefore he is honored with
the title of The Apostle. Behold the handmaid of the Lord, says the holy
Virgin: therefore she was honored to be the Mother of the Lord, and to have
all generations call her Blessed. This Non sum dignus, the humble annihilation
of themselves, has gotten them the honor of Saints. In spiritual graces, let
us study to be great, and not to know it: as the fixed Stars are (every one)
bigger then the earth, yet appear to us less then torches. In alto non altum
sapere; not to be high-minded in high deserts, is the way to blessed
preferment. Humility is not only a virtue it self, but a vessel to contain
other virtues: like embers, which keep the fire alive that is hidden under it.
It emptieth it self, by a modest estimation of the own worth, that Christ may
fill it. It wrastleth with God, like Jacob; and winnes by yielding: and the
lower it stoopes to the ground, the more advantage it gets to obtain the
blessing. All our pride, O Lord, is from the want of knowing Thee: O thou
infinite Maker, Reveal thy self yet more unto us; so shall we abhor our
selves, and repent in dust and ashes.

I abhor my self.
It is a deep degree of mortification, for a man to abhor himself. To
abhor others is easy: to deny others, more easy: to despise others, most
easy. But it is hard to despise a man's self: to deny himself, harder:
hardest of all, to abhor himself. Every one is apt to think well, speak
well, do well to himself. Not only Charity, a spiritual virtue, but also
Lust, a carnal vice, begins at home. There is no direct Commandment in the
Bible, for a man to love himself; because we are all so naturally prone to it.
Indeed, we are bound to love our selves; so much is implied in the Precept;
Love thy neighbor as thy self; August.
therefore love Thy self, But Modus praecipiendus, vt tibiprosis; so love thy
self, as to do thy self good. But for a man, upon good terms, to abhor
himself; this is the wonder! He is more then a mere Son of Eve, that does
not ouervalue himself. Qui se non admiratur, mirabilis est: he that does not
admire himself, is a man to be admired.

Nor is this disease of proud flesh, peculiar only to those persons, whose
imperious commands, surly salutations, insolent controulements, witness to the
world how little they abhor themselves. But it haunts even the baser
condition, and fomes out at the common jaws. A proud beggar was the Wisemans
monster; but pride is the daughter of Riches. It is against reason, indeed,
that metalls should make difference of men: against religion, that it should
make such a difference of Christian men. Yet commonly, Reputation is measured
by the acre; and the altitude of Countenance is taken by the Pole of
Advancement. And as the servant values himself higher or lower, according as
his master is: so the master esteems himself greater or less, according as
his master, that is, as his Money or Estate is. His heart is proportionably
enlarged with his house: his good, and his blood rises together: Dan. 4.30.
Is not this the great Babylon, which I have built for the honor of my
Majesty? But you know, he was turned into a beast that said so. Gold and
silver are heavy metalls, and sink down in the balance: yet by a
preposterous inuersion, they lift the heart of man upwards: as the plummet of a
clock, which, while it self poyseth downwards, lifts up the striking hammer.
As Saul upon his anointing, so many a one upon his advancing, is turned quite
into another man. Luke 18.11.
God I thank thee, says the Pharisee, that I am not as other men are, nor as
this Publican: not as other men, and for this he thanks God: as if because
he thought better of himself, God must needs think better of him too. Now
he must no more take it as he has done; a new port, for a new report. He
abhorres all men, but admires himself. Yet after these blustering insolences,
and windy ostentations, all this thing is but a man, and that (God knows) a
very foolish one.

But the children of grace have learned another lesson, to think well of other
men, and to abhor themselves. And indeed, if we consider what Master we have
served, and what wages deserved, we have just cause to abhor our selves. What
part of us has not sinned, that it should not merit to be despised? Run all
over this little I Will of man, and find me one member of the body, or faculty of
the soul, that can say with Jobs messenger, Ego solus aufugi; Job. 1.15.
I alone have escaped. What one action can we justify? Produce ex tot
millibus, vnum. Where is that Innocence, which desires not to stand only in
the sight of Mercy? There is in our worst works wickedness, in our best
weakness, error in all. What time, what place, are not witnesses against us?
The very Sabbath, the day of Rest, has not rested from our evils. The very
Temple, that holy place, has been defiled with our obliquities. Our chambers,
our beds, our boords, the ground we tread, the air we breath, can tell our
follies. There is no occasion, which, if it do not testify what evil we have
done, yet can say, what good we should, and have not done.

If all this do not humble us, look we up (with Job here) to the Majesty
which we have offend^d. To spoil the Arms of a common Subject, or to
counterfeit his Seal, is no such heinous or capital crime. But to deface the
Arms of the King, to counterfeit his Broad Seal, or privy Signet, is no less
then Treason: because the disgrace redounds upon the person of the King. Every
sin dishonors God, and offers to stick ignominy upon that infinite Majesty;
therefore deserves an infinite penalty. Psalm. 51.4.
Against thee, O Lord, against thee have I sinned. I, thy creature; against
Thee, my Maker: here is a transcendencie, which when a man considers, he is
worthy to be abhorred of all men, that does not abhor himself.

Yet when God, and our own selves, stand in competition, which do we most
respect? Temptation is on our left hand, in a beautiful resemblance, to seduce
us. The will, the glory, the Judgment of God, is on our right hand, to direct
us: do we now abhor our selves? Commodity sets off inquitie, and wooes us
to be rich, though sinners: Christ bids us first s^ek thee kingdom of Heaven,
and tells us that other things shall come without seeking, they shall be added
unto us: Do we now abhor our selves? Such a sin is pleasing to my lust and
concupiscence, but it is displeasing to God and my Conscience: Do I now
abhor my self? That we love God far better then our selves, is soon
said; but to prove it, is not so easily done. He must Deny himself, Mark.
8.34.
that will be Christ's servant. Many have denied their Masters, many have
denied their Friends, many have denied their Kindred, not a few have denied
their Brothers, some have denied their own Parents, but to deny themselves,
durus hic sermo, this is a hard task. Negare suos, sua, se; to deny their
profits, to deny their pleasures, to deny their lusts, to deny their
reasons, to deny themselves? no, to do all this they utterly deny.

Yet he that repents truly, abhorres himself; Non se vt conditum, sed se vt
perditum; not the creature that God made, but the creature that himself made.
Repentance loves Animam, non malitiam, carnem, non carnalitatem; the Soul, not
the venime of the soul; the flesh, not the fl^shlinesse of it. So far as he
has corrupted himself, so far he abhorres himself; and could rather wish
non esse, not to be at all, then malum ^sse, to be displeasing to his Maker.

Thus, if we despise our selves, God will honor us: if we abhor our selves,
God will accept us: if we deny our selves, God will acknowledge us: if we
hate our selves, God will love us: if we condemn our selves, God will acquit
us: if we punish our selves, God will spare us: yea, thus if we seem lost to
our selves, we shall be found in the day of Jesus Christ.

I repent.
Repentance has much acquaintance in the world, and few friends: it is better
known then practiced; and yet not more known, then trusted. My scope, now,
shall not be the definition of it, but a persuasion to it. It is every man's
medicine; an universal Antidote, that makes many a Mithridates venture on
poison. They make bold to sin, as if they were sure to repent. But the
medicine was made for the wound, not the wound for the medicine. We have read,
if not seen, the Battle betwixt those two venomous creatures, the Toad and
the Spider: where the greater, being ouer-match'd with the poison of the less,
has recourse to a certain herb, some think the Plantane; with which she
expells the infection, and renewes the fight: but at last, the herb being
wasted, the Toad bursts and dies. We suck in sin, the poison of that old
Serpent, and presume to drive it out again with Repentance: but how if this
Herb of grace be not found in our Gardens? As Traian was marching forth
with his army, a poor woman solicited him to do her justice upon the
murderers of her only son. I will do thee Justice, woman, says the
Emperor, when I return. The woman presently replied; But what if my Lord
never return? How far soever we have run out, we hope to make all
reckonings even, when Repentance comes: but what if Repentance never comes?

It is not many years, more incitations, and abundance of means, that can
work it: but Repentance is the fair gift of God. One would think it a short
Lesson; yet Israel was forty years a learning it; and they not sooner got it,
but presently forgot it. Reu. 16.11.
Reu. 16. We read of men plagued with heat, and pains, and sores; yet they
repented not. Judas could have a broken neck, not a broken heart. There is no
such inducement to sin, as the presumption of ready Repentance: as if God had
no special riches of his own; but every sinner might command them at his
pleasure. The King has Earth of his own, he lets his subjects walk upon it:
he has a Sea, lets them sail on it: his Land yields fruit, let them eat it:
his fountains water, let them drink it. But the moneys in his Exchequer, the
garments in his Wardrope, the Jewels in his Iewel-house, none may meddle with,
but they to whom he disposes them. Gods common blessings are not denied:
Math. 5.45.
his Sun shines, his rain falls, on the righteous and unrighteous. But the
treasures of heaven, the robes of glory, the Jewels of Grace and Repentance;
these he keeps in his own hands; and gives, not where he may, but where he
will. Man's heart is like a door with a Spring lock: pull the door after you,
it locks of it self; but you cannot open it again without a key. Man's heart
does naturally lock our grace; Revel. 3.7.
none but he that has the Key of the house of David, can open the door, and
put it in. God has made a promise To Repentance, not Of Repentance: we may
trust to that promise, but there is no trusting to our selves. Nature flatters
it self with that singular instance of mercy; one malefactor on the cross
repenting at his last hour. But such has been Satan's policy, to draw evil
out of good, that the calling and saving of that one soul, has bin the
occasion of the loss of many thousands.

Wheresoever Repentance is, she does not deliberate, tarries not to ask
questions, and examine circumstances; but bestirres her joints, calls her wits
and senses together: summons her tongue to praying, her feet to walking, her
hands to working, her eyes to weeping, her heart to groaning. There is no need
to bid her go, for she runs: she runs to the word for direction, to her
own heart for remorse and compunction, to God for grace and pardon: and
wheresoever she finds Christ, 2 Kings 4.30.
she lays faster hold on him, then the Shunnamite did on the feet of Elisha;
As the Lord lives, and as thy soul lives, I will not let thee go: no Gehesi
can beat her off. She resolves that her knees shall grow to the pauement, till
mercy has answered her from heaven. As if she had felt an earth quake in her
soul, not unlike that Iaylor, when he felt the foundations of his prison
shaken; Acts 16.29.
she calls for a light the Gospel of truth, and springs in trembling; and the
first voice of her lips is, O what shall I do to be saved? She lowes with
mourning, like the Kine that carried the Arc; and never rests till she comes
to Bethshemesh, the fields of mercy. The good Star that guides her, is the
promise of God: this gives her light through all the dark clouds of her
sorrow. Confidence is her life, and soul: she draws no other breath then the
persuasion of mercy; 1 King. 20.31.
that the King of Israel is a merciful King. Faith is the heart-blood of
Repentance. The matter, composition, constitution, substance of it, is
amendment of life: there be many counterfets that walk in her habit, as King
Ahab had his shadows; but that is her substance. Her countenance is spare and
thin; she has not eyes standing out with fatness. Her diet is abstinence;
her garment and livery, Sackcloth and ashes: the Paper in her hand, is a
Petition; her dialect is Miser^re; and lest her own lusts should be bane
within her, she sweats them out with confession and tears.

We know, there is no other fortification against the Judgments of God, but
Repentance. His forccs be invisible, invincible; not repelled with sword and
target: neither portcullice, nor fortress can keep them out: there is nothing
in the world that can encounter them but Repentance. They had long since laid
our honor in the dust, rotted our carkases in the pit, sunk our souls into
hell, but for Repentance. Which of those Saints, that are now saved in heaven,
have not sinned upon earth? What could save them but Repentance? Their
infirmities are recorded, not only for the instruction of those that stand,
but also for the consolation of them that are fallen. Instruunt Patriarchae,
non solum docentes, sed and errantes. They do not only teach us by their
Doctrines, but even by their very errors. Noah was overcome with a little
wine, that escaped drowning with the world in that Deluge of water. Lot was
scorched with the flame of unnatural lust, that escaped burning in the fire of
Sodom, Sampson, the strongest; Solomon, the wisest, fell by a woman. One Balm
recovered them all, blessed Repentance. Let our souls, from these premises,
and upon the assurance of Gods promises, conclude; that if we repent, our
sins are not greater, Gods mercies cannot be less. Thus was Nineveh
overthrown, that she might not be overthrown. Quae peccatis perit, fletibus
stetit. Every man must either be a Niniuite, or a Sodomite: a Niniuite
sorrowing for sin, or a Sodomite suffering for sin. Doleat peccata reus, vt
deleat peccata Deus. If we grieve, God will forgive.

Nor yet must we think, with this one short word ( I repent) to answer for
the multitude of our offenses; as if we that had sinned in parcels, should be
forgiven in gross. It were a rare favor, if we paying but one particular of a
whole Book of debts, should be granted a general acquittance for them all.
No, let us reckon up our sins to God in confession, that our hearts may find
a plenary absolution. Nor is it enough to recount them, but we must recant
them. Do we think, that because we do not remember them, that God has
forgotten them? Are not debts of many years standing, to be called for? Man's
Justice does not forbear old offenders: no tract of time can eat out the
Characters of blood. Job 13.26.
Thou writest bitter things against me, when thou make me to possess the
sins of my youth. These things have thou done, Psalm. 50.21.
says God, and I held my peace: therefore thou thoughtest me altogether such
a one as thy self: but I will reprove thee, and set them in order before
thine eyes. Therefore let us number all the sins we can, and then God will
forgive us all the sins that we have.

If we could truly weigh our iniquities, we must needs find a necessity,
either of repenting, or of perishing. Shall we make God to frown upon us in
heaven, arm all his creatures against us on earth? shall w^e force his curses
upon us and ours? Take his rod, and teach it to scourge us with all temporal
plagues; and not repent? Shall we wound our own consciences with sins, that
they may wound us with eternal torments; make a hell in our bosoms here, and
open the gates of that lower hell to devour us hereafter; and not repent? Do
we, by sin, give Satan a right in us, a power over us, an advantage against
us; and not labor to cross his mischiefs by repentance? Do we cast
Brimstone into that infernal fire, as if it could not be hot enough, or we
should fail of tortures except we make our selves our own tormentors; and
not rather seek to quench those flames with our penitent tears?

If we could see the farewell of sin, we would abhor it, and our selves for
it; Could David have conceived the grief of his broken bones, beforehand; he
had escaped those aspersions of lust and blood. Had Achan foreseen the stones
about his ears, before he filch'd those accursed things, he would never have
fingerd them. But it may be said of us, as it was of our first parents; when
they had once sinned and fallen; Genes. 3.7.
Tunc aperti sunt oculi eorum, Then their eyes were opened; Then, not before.
In this place comes in Repentance; as a rectifier of disorders, a recaller of
aberrations, a repairer of all decays and breaches. So it pleases Gods mercy,
that the daughter should be the death of the mother. Aug.
Peccatum tristitiam peperit, tristitia peccatum conteret. Sin bred sorrow,
sorrow shall kill sin: as the oil of Scorpions heals the sting of
Scorpions.

If I should give you the picture of Repentance, I would tell you, that she is
a Virgin fair and lovely: and those tears which seem to do violence to her
beauty, rather indeed grace it. Her Breast is sore with the strokes of her own
penitent hands; which are always, either in Moses his posture in the Mount,
lifted up toward heaven; or the Publicans in the Temple, smiting her bosom.
Her knees are hardened with constant praying, her voice is hoarce with calling
to heaven; and when she cannot speak, she delivers her mind in groans. There
is not a tear falls from her, but an Angel holds a bottell to catch it. She
thinks every man's sins less then her own, every man's good deeds more. Her
compunctions are unspeakable; known only to God, and her self. She could
wish, not only men; but even beasts, and trees, and stones, to mourn with
her. She thinks, no Sun should shine, because she takes no pleasure in it;
that the Lilies should be clothed in black, because she is so apparelled.
Mercy comes down, like a glorious Cherub, and lights on her bosom, with this
message from God; I have heard thy prayers, and seen thy tears: so with a
handkerchiefe of comfort, dries her cheeks, and tells her that she is accepted
in Jesus Christ.

In dust and ashes.
I have but one staire more, down from both Text and Pulpit; and it is a very
low one; Dust and ashes.

An adorned body is not the vehicle of an humbled soul. Job, before his
affliction was not poor. Doubtless, he had his Wardrobe, his change and
choice of garments. Yet now, how does his humbled soul contemn them! as if
he threw away his vesture, saying; I have worn thee for pomp, given
countenance to a silken case; I quite mistook thy nature, get thee from me, I
am weary of thy service, thou have made me honorable with men, thou can get
me no estimation before the Lord. Repentance gives a farewell, not only to
wonted delights, but even to natural refreshings. Job lies not on a bed of
Roses and Violets, as did the Sybarites; nor on a couch beautified with the
Tapestrie of Egypt; but on a bed of Ashes. Sackcloth is his apparel; dust and
ashes the lace and embroyderie of it. Ion. 3.6.
Thus Niniu^hs King, upon that fearful sentence, rose from his throne, laid
his robe from him, covered himself with sackcloth, and sat in ashes. O what
an alteration can repentance make? From a King of the earth, to a worm of the
earth: from a foot-cloth, to sackcloth: from a Throne, to a dunghill: from
sitting in State, to lying in ashes! Whom all the reverence of the world
attended on, to whom the head was uncovered, the knee bowed, the body
prostrated; who had as many salutations, as the firmament stars, God save the
King: He throws away Crown, scepter, Majesty, and all, and sits in ashes.
How many does the golden Cup of Honor make drunk, and driven from all sense
of mortality! Riches and hearts ease, are such usual intoxications to the
souls of men; that it is rare to find any of them so low as Dust and Ashes.

Dust, as the remembrance of his original: Ashes, as the representation of his
end: Dust, that was the mother: Ashes, that shall be the daugther of our
Bodies.

Dust, the matter of our substance, the house of our souls, the original
grains whereof we were made, the top of all our kindred. The glory of the
strongest man, the beauty of the fairest woman; all is but dust. Dust; the
only compounder of differences, the absoluer of all distinctions: who can say,
which was the Client, which the Lawyer: which the borrower, which the lender:
which the captive, which the Conqueror; when they all lie together in blended
dust?

Dust; not Marble, nor Porphyrie, Gold nor precious stone, was the matter of
our bodies; but earth, and the fractions of the earth, dust. Dust, the sport of
the wind, the very slave of the beesome. This is the pit from whence we are
dug; and this is the pit, to which we shall be resolved. Genes. 3.1^
Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return again. They that sit in the
dust, and feel their own materials about them, may well renounce the
ornaments of pride, the gulf of avarice, the foolish lusts of concupiscence.
Let the covetous think, what do I scrape for? a little golden dust: the
ambitious, what do I aspire for? a little honorable dust: the libidinous,
what do I languish for? a little animated dust, blown away with the breath of
Gods displeasure.

O how goodly this building of man appears, when it is clothed with beauty
and honor! A face full of majesty, the throne of comeliness; wherein the
whiteness of the Lilie contends with the sanguine of the Rose: an active hand,
an erected countenance, an eye sparkling out luster, a smoothe complexion,
arising from an excellent temperature and composition: whereas other creatures,
by reason of their cold and gross humors, are grown over, beasts with hair,
fowls with feathers, fishes with scales. O what a workman was this, that could
raise such a Fabric out of the earth, and lay such orient colors upon Dust!
yet all is but Dust, walking, talking, breathing dust: all this beauty but the
effect of a well concocted food, and life it self but a walk from dust to
dust. Yea, and this man, or that woman, is never so beautiful, as when they
sit weeping for their sins in the dust: as Mary Magdalen was then fairest,
when she kneeled in the dust, bathing the feet of Christ with her tears, and
wiping them with her hairs: like heaven, fair sight-ward, to us that are
without; but more fair to them that are within.

The Dust is come of the same house that we are: and when she sees us proud,
and forgetful of our selves, she thinks with her self, Why should not she,
that is descended as well as we, bear up her plumes as high as ours. Therefore
she so often borrowes wings of the wind, to mount aloft into the air, and in
the streets and high ways, dasheth herself into our eyes: as if she would
say, Are you my kindred, and will not know me? will you take no notice of your
own mother? To tax the folly of our ambition, the dust in the street takes
pleasure to be ambitious.

The Jews in their mourning, used to rend their garments; as if they would be
revenged on them, for increasing their pride, and keeping them from the sight
of their nakedness. Then they put on sackcloth, and that sackcloth they
sprinkled over with dust, and ouerstrawed with ashes: to put God in mind, that
if he should arm his displeasure against them, he should but contend with
dust and ashes; and what glory could that be for him? Psalm 30.9.
Shall the dust praise thee, O God; or, art thou glorified in the pit? Nay,
rather, how often does the Lord spare us, Psalm. 103.14.
because he remembers we are but dust? To show that they had lifted up
themselves above their creation, and forgot of what they are made; now by by
Repentance returning to their first Image, in all prostrate humility they lay
in the dust; confessing, that the wind does not more easily disperse the dust,
then the breath of God was able to bring them to nothing.

Thus, Dust is not only Materia nostra, or Matter, our Mother, Job. 4.19.
or matter whereof we are made; for our foundation is in the dust. Esai. 26.19.
But Patria nostra, our Country where we shall dwell; Awake ye that dwell in
the dust. We are no better then the dust we shake off from our feet, or brush
off from our clothes. O, therefore let us turn to God in dust, before he
turn us into dust. Yea, Saint Augustine goes further, and says, that not
only the bodies of all men, but even the souls of some men, are no better
then dust. They are so set upon earth, and earthly things, that they are
transformed into earth and dust: and so become the food of that old Serpent,
whose punishment was to eat the dust.

For Ashes, they are the Emblem or representation of greater misery: Dust
only shows us, that we have deserved the dissolution of our bodies; Ashes
put us in mind that we have merited also the destruction of our Souls. Ashes
are the leauings of the fire, the offalls of consumed substances. When God
shall give up the largest buildings of Nature to the rage of that Element, it
shall reduce them to a narrow room, the remnants shall be but ashes. This
was all the Monument of those famous cities, Sodom, 2 Pet. 2.6.
Gomorra, and the rest; heaps of ashes. Ecce vix totam Hercules impleuit
vrnam, says the Poet; that great Giant scarce makes a pitcher of ashes.

For this cause, the Ancients used to repent in Ashes; remonstrating to
themselves, that they deserved burning in endless fire, more then those Ashes
wherein they wallowed. Yea, if Abraham compared himself to dust and ashes, I
may compare my soul to a spark hid in the Ashes: which, when sickness and
death shall stir up; like fire, she takes her flight upwards, and leaves the
heavy fruitless ashes of my body behind her.

In both, we have a L^sson of our own mortality. The finger of GOD has
written the Epitaph of man; the condition of his body, like Characters printed
in the Dust. Man's body, so well as the ice, expounds that Riddle; the gignit
filia matrem: the daughter begets the mother; Dust begot a body, and a body
begets Dust. Our bodies were a^ first strong Cities; but then we made them the
Forts of Rebels: our offended Liege sent his Serieant Death to arrest us of
high Treason. And though for his mercies sake in Christ, he pardoned our
sins, yet he suffers us no more to have such strong houses; but lets us
dwell in paper Cottages, mudde walls, mortal bodies. Methusalem lived nine
hundred sixty nine years; yet he was the son of Enoch, who was the son
of Iared, who was the son of Malaleel, who was the son of Cainan, who was
the son of Enos, who was the son of Seth, who was the son of Adam, who
was the son of Dust. Ask the woman that has conceived a child in her
womb; Will it be a Son? Peradventure so: Will it be well formed and
featured? Peradventure so: Will it be wise? Peradventure so: Will it be rich?
Peradventure so: Will it be long-liued? Peradventure so: Will it be mortal?
Yes, this is without peradventure; it will die. Even a Heathen, when he heard
that his son was dead, could say without changing countenance, Scio me genuisse
mortalem; I know that I begot a mortal man.

An old man is said to give Alexander a little Jewel; and told him, that it
had this virtue; so long as he kept it bright, it would out-value the most
fine gold or precious stone in the world; but if it once took dust, it would
not be worth a feather. What meant the Sage, but to give the Monarch an
Emblem of his own body; which being animated with a Soul, Eccl. 9.4.
commanded the world; but once fallen to dust, it would be worth nothing: for a
living dog is better then a dead Lion.

I conclude, I call you not to casting Dust on your heads, or sitting in Ashes*
but to that sorrow and compunction of Soul, whereof the other was but an
external Symbol or testimony. Esai. 58.5.
Let us rend our hearts, and spare our garments; humble our souls, without
afflicting our bodies. It is not a corpse wrapped in Dust and Ashes, but a
contrite heart, Psalm. 51.17.
which the Lord will not despise. Let us repent our sins, and amend our
lives: so God will pardon us by the merits, save us by the mercies, and crown
us with the glories of Jesus Christ.

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE TRIENNIALL Visitation of the Right Reverend Father in
God, the Lord Bishop of LONDON, in Christ-Church.

BY THOMAS ADAMS.

LONDON, Printed by Aug. Matthewes, and John Norton. 1625.

A VISITATION SERMON.
ACTS 15.36. And some days after, Paul said unto Barnabas, Let us go again
and visit our Brethren, in every City where we have preached the Word of the
Lord, and see how they do.


THere be certain royal Laws, which Christ and his Apostles made for
eternal use: to the observation whereof all Christian Nations and persons are
unchangeably bound. And there be some ritual things, which were at the first
convenient, but variable according to the difference of times and places.
Strictly to impose all these circumstances on us, were to make us, not the
sons, but the slaves of the Apostles. That is a fond scrupulositie, which
would press us in all fashions with a conformity to the Primitive times: as
if the Spouse of Christ might not wear a lace or a border, for which she
could not plead prescription. Diuersitas rituum commendat vnitatem fidei, says
our Anselme. Let us keep the substance; for the shadow, God has left us at
liberty. But yet when we look back upon those first patterns, and find a
rule of discipline fit for the present times; in vain we should study a new,
that are so well accommodated with the old. The business of the Text, and Day,
is a Visitation: a practice, which at the first view of the words, can plead
Antiquity; and by a reuiew, shall plead the great utility. I know there be
diverse kinds of Visitations: but whether they be National, Provincial,
Paroeciall, or Capitular; they all have Authoritatem vberrimam, being grounded
upon a practice Apostolical: and vsum saluberrimum, (to use the words of Saint
Augustine) being of a physical nature, to prevent or cure distemperatures in
the Church of God.

Generally, the form of the words is a Motion; the matter, a Visitation.

1. The motion was Paul's, the forwardest soldier in all the army of Christ:
that winged Husbandman, who plowed up the fallow hearts of the Gentiles that
with a holy zeal, greater then the ambition of Alexander, would sooner have
wanted ground; then desire to travel in the business of his Master. Terra
citius d^fecisset, quam studium praedicandi* Indeed, he had found an unusual
mercy, 1 Timothy 1.14.
as himself delivers it. The grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant toward
me: using an extraordinary phrase, to express an extraordinary grace: a word
never the like used, for a mercy never the like exhibited. There is ' Oil in
the widows cruse to sustain; 1 King. 17.16.
Aarons was far more, it ran down to the skirts of his clothing. Psalm. 133.2.
Such a superabundant grace was in Paul. For Sanctification; many Saints are
commended for some special virtues; Abraham for Faith, Moses for Meekness,
David for Thankfulness, Job for Patience; Paul is praised for them all. For
subduing of vices; men most sanctified have had some tangs; as David of anger
for Nabals churlish answer; Hezekiah had a smacke of pride; setting aside
concupiscence, Paul had no spot. For knowledge; he was rapt up into heaven,
there learned his Divinity among the Angels; his School being Paradise, his
University the third Heaven, and God his Tutor. For power; his very clothes
wrought miracles. God so trusted Paul, that he committed his whole Church unto
him. Thus was he honored: the other Apostles were sent a Christo mortali, Paul
a Christo immortali. And with the like superabundant grace did he answer his
charge; that though he were Nouissimus in ordine, he was primus in merito. Yea,
he is well called Gods Arrow, wounding every soul that heard him, with the
love of Christ. This was his motion, one act of his Apostolical care.

2. The matter is a Visitation; to visit is a word of great latitude, and
signifies the performance of all Pastoral duties: to instruct the ignorant, to
comfort: the weak, to correct the stubborn, to confirm the religious.
Strictly, it imports a Superiors scrutiny or examination of things under his
charge: as ^ Steward in a Family ouerlookes the vnder-seruants; praising the
forward, provoking the sluggard, and rectifying disorders, which are ready to
creep in through the least conniuence. This we shall the better apprehend, if
we let the Text fall into parts; of which we shall find seven.

1. The Visiters, Paul and Barnabas; for this Office was at first Apostolical,
and has ever since been Episcopal.

2. The visired, Their Brethren; whether the people under the Pastors, or the
Pastors set over the people: for as they ought to visit their own particular
charges, so the Bishops to visit them: yea, and even those Visiters may be
visited, by such Delegates as the Prince appoynts, who is the chief Visiter
under Christ.

3. The exercise, or frequent use of this office, Let us go again. For the
rareness of performing this duty may breed much inconvenience.

4. The moderation, or seasonablenesse of it; After certain days. There must
be some intermission, or else the assiduitie may make it a burden, or bring it
into contempt.

5. The latitude or extent of it; In every city; not calling all the world to
one place; as the Bishop of Rome did in his glory, summoning all Nations to his
Consistory. They visit every City, they compel not every city to visit
them. Nor do they balke the greatest for fear, nor neglect the meanest in
contempt; but every City.

6. The limitation, restraint, or confining of this Exercise; Where we have
preached the Word of God. Pagans are out of their walk; they meddle not with
unbelievers: but with those grounds wherein they have sown the seeds of the
Gospel.

7. Lastly, the intent and scope of all, To see how they do; Quomodo se
habeant; whether they fail, or thrive in their spiritual growth. These be the
passages; whereof with what brevity I can, and with what fidelity I ought.

The Visiters,
Paul and Barnabas. There is difference, I know, betwixt the Apostles and
Bishops. For besides their immediate calling, and extraordinary endowments; the
Apostles function was an unlimited circuit, Ite in vniuersum orbem, the
Bishops is a fixed or positive residence in one City. All those acts, which
proceeded from supernatural privilege, ceased with their cause; as the gift
of tongues, of miracles,and the like. Those tools that serve for the
foundation, are not the fittest for the roof. The great Master Builder made
choice of such for the first stones, which he^ meant not to employ in the
walls. But this is the first thing I would here note;

The first foundation of the Church was laid in an Inequality; Obseruat
and has ever since so continued. Paritie in government is the mother of
confusion and disorder, Arist. Polit.
and disorder does ill become the Church of God. Where all the strings or
voices be unisons or of one tenor, there can be no harmony. There be (...),
Seers: which signifies the duty of each Pastor over his flock. And there be
(...), Overseers, such as must visit and ouerlooke both flock and Seers. In
the old Testament, together with the paritie of Priesthood, there was an
imparitie of government: one Leuite above another, Priests above them, the High
Priest above them all. Christ himself is said to be a Priest after the Order
of Melchisadech: he was of some order then: but we have those that would be
Priests without any order at all; that refuse to be ordered.

Take away difference, and what will follow, but an Anabaptisticall ataxie or
confusion? It was the saying of Bishop Jewel, or the Jewel of Bishops; All
Priests have Idem Ministerium, sed diuersam potestatem. A Bishop and an
Archbishop differ not in Potestate Ordinis, sed in potestate Regiminis. Nor
does a Bishop differ from a Pastor, quoad virtutem Sacerdotij, sed quo^d
potentiam Iurisdictionis. There is one indeleble character of Priesthood to
them both. Revel. 3.7.
That great Clauiger of heaven, who opens and no man shuts, shuts and no man
opens, has left two Keys for the government of the Church: the one Clauem
Scientiae, the preaching of the Gospel, which is the more essential part of
our function: for a necessity is laid upon us, and woe unto us if we preach
not the Gospel, if we turn not that Key. The other Clauem Potentiae, the Key
of Jurisdiction or Discipline; which makes the Church Aciem ordinatam, an Army
well marshalled. The former imposes a Duty, and Haec oportet facere: the
latter imports a Decency, and Haec decet fieri. Thus did the great Shepherd
of Israel govern his flock; Zach. 11.7.
with Two Staves. One the Staff of Bands, sound Doctrine: the other the Staff
of Beauty, orderly Discipline. Col. 2.5.
Saint Paul ioynes them both together; the steadfastness of their faith, and
the comeliness of their Order, and makes them the matter of his Joy in the
Collossians. Without order, Faith it self would be at a loss. Even the
Stars do not fight from heaven, Judge. 5.20.
but in their order. Therefore is our Ministry called Orders, to show that we
are bound to Order above other Professions. This orderly distinction of
Ecclesiastical persons is set down by the Holy Ghost, 1. Cor. 12. placing
some as the head, other as the eyes, other as the feet: all members of one
Body, with mutual concord, equal amity, but unequal dignity. To be a Bishop
then, is not a Numerall, but a Munerall function; a priority in order, a
superiority in degree. Math. 24.45.
Who is a faithful and wise servant, whom his Lord has made ruler over his
household; Quem Dominus constituit super familia^? All Ministers of Christ have
their due honor, some are worthy of double honor. Far be it from us
sinners, to grudge them that honor, whereof God himself has pronounced them
worthy. This first. Again,

Paul and Barnabas. Obseruat.
Paul was a man of ardent zeal, Barnabas is interpreted the son of
consolation. Paul would have Barnabas along with him; that the lenity of the
one might somewhat mittigate and qualify the fervor of the other. Thus Moses
was with Elias, when they both met with Christ transfigured on the Mount. Elias
was a fiery spirited Prophet, inflamed with holy zeal: Moses a Prophet of a
meek and mild spirit: these two together are fit servants to wait upon the Son
of God. I do not say, that either Paul wanted compassion, or Barnabas
feruency: but this I say, that both these tempers are a happy composition in a
Visiter: and make his Breast like the sacred Arc, Hebr. 9.4.
wherein lay both Aarons Rod, and the Golden pot of Manna: the Rod of
correction, the Manna of consolation: the one a corrosiue, the other a
cordial. Spiritual Fathers should be like natural mothers, that have both
vbera, and verbera: or like Bees, having much honey, but not without a sting.
Only, let the sting be the least in their desire or intention, and the last
in execution: like God himself, Qui habet in Potestate vindictam, sed mauult
in vsu misericordiam.

There have been some, who did put lime and galle into the milk; yea ministered
pro lacte ven^num: Bone^s and Gardiners, that gave too sharp physic for the
disposition of their patients. That (as the Antiochians said of Julian, Socrat.
lib. 7. cap. 22.
taking occasion by the Bull which he stamped on his coin) have goared the
world to death. That, as if they had Saul's Commission to vex the Church of
Christ, have concluded their Visitations in blood. But mercy, no less then
holiness, becomes the brestplate of Aaron. I deny not the necessity of
Jurisdiction, both correctiue and coactiue: the one restraining where is too
much forwardness, the other enforcing where is slacknesse. There is a Rod, 1
Cor. 4.21.
and there is a Sword. Veniam ad vos in virga? Galat. 5.12.
that is the Rod. Vtinam abs^indantur qui perturbant vos; that is the Sword. If
we observe Gods proceeding in the Church, we shall find how he has fitted
men to the times and occasions. In the low and afflicted estate of Israel, they
had Moses; a man of meek spirit, and mighty in wonders. Meek, because he had
to do with a teatchy and froward people: mighty in wonders, because he had to
do with a Pharaoh. When they were settled in a quiet consistence, they had a
grave and holy Samuel. In their corrupted declination, they had a hote-spirited
Eliah; who came in a tempest, as he went out in a whirlewind. These times of
ours be of a sinful and depraved condition; therefore have need to be visited
with spirits more stirring then those of the common mould. Aug.
Imo, veni Paul cum virga; come Paul with thy Rod. Rather let us smart with
correction, then run on to confusion.

The Visited.
Their Brethren. Such was that great Apostles humility, that he calls all
believers Brethren: to show that he had but the privilege of a Brother; and
did no otherwise then all the rest, bear the arms of the Elder. Yea, why
should not an Apostle accept of that title, when the eternal Son of God is not
ashamed to call us brethren? Hebr. 2.11.
The weakest Christian is a Brother to the holiest Saint, therefore not to be
contemned. It is most unnatural for a man to despise his brother, the son of
his own father. It is a brand set upon that tongue, which must burn with
quenchlesse flames; Psalm. ^0.20.
That it spoke against his brother, and slandered his own mothers son.
Bishops are in the chiefest respect Brethren to the Ministers, in a meaner
regard they are Fathers. They are our Fathers, but in that respect whereby they
govern us: but in that respect which does save us, they are our Brethren.
Fratres in salute, Patres in ordine ad salutem. Even Princes should not scorn
the Brotherhood of their subjects: for howsoever on earth there is a necessity
of these ceremonial differences; yet in the grave for our bodies, in heaven
for our souls, there is no such distinction. If there be any disparitie after
this life, it shall be Secundum opera, not secundum officia: proportioned to
the works they have done, not to the honors they have borne. Saint Paul calls
Timothy, in one place his Son, in another place his Brother.

Bishops are brethren to Ministers in a threefold relation. 1. By nature, so
are all men. 2. By grace, so are all Christians. 3. By office, so are all
Pastors. He that Mat. 24.45. was called Rector super familiam, Ruler over the
household: the same is also termed, ver. 49. (...), a fellow servant with the
rest of the meany. All servants under one Lord, though some superior in office
to the rest. As in the civil State, within that honorable rank, both Earls
and Lords are called Barons, yet their dignities are not equal: every Earl
being a Baron, but not every Baron an Earl. So in the State Ecclesiastical,
in respect of the general service of Christ, the dispensation of his Word and
Mysteries, Bishops and Priests are all Brethren, and fellow-Presbyters: yet
though the Styles be communicable, the terms are not convertible: for every
Bishop is a Priest, but every Priest is not a Bishop. As this therefore no way
diminishes their authority, Ad. Tr^^^.
for Episcopus est sacerdotum Princeps, says Ignatius: so it commends their
humility, to call us Brethren. If we offend, Paterna agant, let them correct
us as their children: while we do well, Fraterna teneant, let them encourage
us as their Brethren. God is not tied to means: for illumination of the mind,
he often lights a great Lamp of the Sanctuary at a little wax Taper, as he
did Paul by Ananias. And for moving of affections, often with a puff of wind
he stirs up the waves of the great Ocean. Deus non est parvus in paru^; not
straightened according to the smalnesse of the Organ. On the one side love and
gravity, on the other side obedience and sincerity, on all sides holiness
and humility, becomes the Ministers of Jesus Christ.

The Exercise, or due practice of this office.

Let us go again. Let us go, that is, go personally. Let us go again,
that is, go frequently.

1. Let us go; not send our Deputy, but go our selves. He that sends, sees by
another eyes, and takes the state of things upon trust. If we go, we see by
our own, and our own eyes be our best informers. How is he Episcopus, that
never ouerlooks. So Saint Jerome in his Epistle to Nepotian, nitatur esse quod
dicitur. He is an ill Shepherd, that does not know Vultum pecoris. Know the
state of thy flocks, Prou. 27.23.
and the face of thy herds. Desire to see them, quomodo Moses voluit videre
Deum, (...), face to face. In the Proverb, Domini oculus pascit equu^, and
vestigia eius pinguefaciunt agrum. The Masters eye feeds the horse; the
presence of the Bishop, like the Northwind, dispels infection. It was Paul's
continual fear; some preuarication in his absence. 2 Cor. 12.20.
I fear I shall not find you such as I would, and that I shall be found to you
such as you would not. Saint Peter's Shadow wrought miracles, but now the
Bishops shadow will work no miracles. This is one special thing to be visited
and examined, the residence of Pastors in their Charges. It is an unhappy thing
for a man to be a stranger at home. Ep. 4. ad Episc.
Damasus compares such to wanton women; which no sooner bear children, but
presently put them forth to nurse, that with less trouble they may return to
their old pleasure^ Peraldus, Lorin. in lo^.
a Popish writer, is so bitter against those that feed their flocks by
Deputies, that he says, It is as if a man should marry a wife, and suffer
another to get children by her. ^ludque Clictovaei, magis salsum quam falsum;
Vicariam quidem salutem, personalem vero perniciem, talisbusmanere.

I know, there is a Residence Persona^l, and Pastoral: and he that is a
stranger to the Pulpit, though he straggle not out of the bounds of his Parish,
is the greatest Non-resident. And I grant, that in some cases a dispensation is
requisite; Cedat minus maiori; yet it is no hurt to pray, God persuade them all
to dwell in their own Tents. But it is not well, for a Preacher to be like a
door, when it is once oyled, then to leave creaking. It was a Friars conceit
upon Genesis 6. when the Clergy, Genesis 6.2.4.
those sons of God, began to dote upon the daughters of men, to be enamoured
on temporal preferments; then by such marriages, monsters were begot in the
Church, and the Sanctuary of God was filled with Giants, far from the shape of
Christians. It is pity, but the Bishop should forbid the Bannes; and if any
such Marriage be, it is more then time to make it a nullitie; by diuorcing them
from Idleness, covetousness, and ambition. Luke 12.42.
The faithful Steward is he that gives the household their portion of meat in
due season. 1. He must give them all meat, young and old, rich and poor,
weak and strong. 2. In due season, that is, when their appetites call for it;
nay, he must not always stay till they desire it. 3. Proprijs manibus, he
must do it with his own hands: he is but a deputy, and therefore is not
evermore allowed a deputy. Let us go our selves.

2. Let us go again. The building of the Church goes slowly forward: though
there be many laborers, there be more hinderers: God never had so many
friends, as enemies. If the Overseers look not well to the business, too many
will make Church-worke of it; for such loytering is now fallen into a Proverb.
Men are fickle, as were the Galatians, and Churches of Asia: if they be not
often visited, they will soon be corrupted. Luther said in Wittenberge, that a
few fanaticall fellows had pulled down more in a short space, then all they
could build up again in twenty years. The devil is always busy; and it is
no small labor to earth that Fox. The plant which we would have thrive, must
be often watered. The Apostles did visit to confirm, and comfort, because
that was a time of persecution. Our mischief is intestine; Pax a paganis, pax
ab haereticis, nulla pax a falsis filijs. Let but Moses turn his back, and
ascend the mount, to be Isreal's Lieger with God, the people presently speak
of making a Calfe. He went but on their Embassage to their Maker: yet as if
they had seen him take his heels, and run into the wilderness; he is no
sooner vanished out of their sight, then out of their mind, and they fall to
Idolatry. Our Churches are not like Irish timber: if they be not continually
swept, there will be spiders and cobwebs. If the servants sleep, Math. 13.25.
the Masters field is not privileged from Tares. Therefore to prevent dangers,
and to heal diseases, frequent visitation is necessary for the Church of
Christ.

The Moderation, or seasonablenes of it.
After certain days. Ex assiduitate vilitas; that which is too common,
b^comes cheap, and loses credit. Due respirations are requisite in the
holiest acts. God is so favorable to his creatures, that he requires them not
to be ouertoyled in the works of his own service. When the Temple was a
preparing, 1 Kings 5.14.
the thirty thousand workmen wrought not continuedly, but with intermission.
One month they were in Lebanon, and two at home: so their labor was more
generous, and less burdensome. Ever, ten thousand did work, while twenty
thousand breathed. The mind that is ouerlaid with business, grows dull and
heavy: over lavish expense of spirits leaves it heart-lesse. The best horse
will tire soonest, if the reins lie loose on his neck. Perfection comes by
leisure, and no excellent thing is done at once. The Gourd, which came up in a
night, withered in a day: but the plants that live long, rise slowly. It is the
rising and setting of many Suns, that ripens the business both of nature and
art. Who would not rather choose many competent meals, then buy the gluttony
of one day, with the fast of a whole week? Therefore the reverend Fathers of
the Church observe their due times of Visiting; and particular Pastors have
their set days of feeding. He is an ill Fisher, that never mends his net; a
bad Mower that never whets his Sithe.

There be some so mad of hearing, that as if their Preacher had ribbs of iron,
and a spirit of Angelical nature, they will not suffer him to breath. But are
as impatient of such a pause, as Saul was of David's sickness; 1 Samuel 19.15.
Bring him to me in the bed, that I may slay him. Such, and no more is their
pity to their Minister: Bring him though he lie sick in his bed; spare him
not, though his heat and heart be spent. And if we satisfy not their
unseasonable, unreasonable desires, they exclaim and break out into bitter
inuectiues against us: not unlike the Chinois, that whip their gods, when they
do not answer them. Such misgouern'd feeders should be stinted to their
measure, as the Israelites were to an Omer. God will never thank us for
killing our selves, to humor our hearers.

The Extent, or latitude of it.
In every City. First, such was their favor and indulgence, they went to
every city, not summoned every city to appear before them. Our grave
Diocesans do follow the blessed Apostles in this step: they visit us in our
several Deanries and Divisions, without compelling the remote dwellers to
travel unto their Consistories.

Again, In every City: such was their impartial Justice, and most equal
love to all: the greatest were not exempted from their Jurisdiction, nor the
least neglected of their compassion. The holiest Congregations may be
blemished with some malefactors. Rome, and Corinth, and Ephesus, though they
were all famous cities, had no less need of Apostles for their Visitants, then
they had for their Founders. Three traitors kindle a fire, two hundred and
fifty Captains bring sticks to it, Numb. 16.
and all Israel is ready to warm themselves at it. It was happy for Israel
when they had but one Achan, Josh. 7.
and yet that one Achan was enough to make them unhappy. The innocence of so
many thousands was not so forcible to excuse his one sin, as his one sin
was to taynt all the people. One evil man may kindle that fire, which the
whole world cannot quench. Shall Jeroboam be an Idolater alone? No, he can no
sooner set up his Calves, but his subjects, like beast, are presently down on
their knees.

Where stands that Eutopia, that city, which is in so good case, that it need
not be visited? Sin does multiply so fast, that the poor Preacher cannot
out-preach it: yea, it is well if the Bishop himself with all his authority
can suppress it. We cannot say always whence these evils come, but we are
sure they are. You have peradventure heard or seen a Motion, a Puppet-play;
how the little Idols leap, and move, and run strangely up and down. We
know it is not of themselves; but there is a fellow, behind, which we see not,
it is he that does the feat. We see in our Parishes strange motions; a drunken
companion bearding his Minister, a contentious Incendiary vexing him with
actions and slanders: an obstinate Papist carries away his Recusancie, scorns
the Preacher, seduceth the people: this is a strange kind of Puppet play: but
God knows who it is behind the curtain, that gives them their motion: only
we are sure, they cannot thus move themselves. There are many meetings, and
much ado, as if sin should be punished: a Jury is impannell'd, a sore charge
is given: the drunkard shall be made an example, Good-ale shall be talked
with, whoredom shall be whipped, and all shall be well: we look for present
reformation. But it commonly proves like the Iugglers feast in Suidas; a Table
furnished with all manner of dainties in show, whereof when they came to taste,
they found nothing but air. But I pass from the Extent, to

The Limitation, or restraint of it.
Where we have preached the Word of the Lord. Not every city, but every city
and place that has received the word of Instruction. No visiting a Garden, but
where some seeds have been planted: that which is all weeds, is left to an
higher visitation; 1 Cor. 3.13.
God shall judge them that are without. One would think that the word of God
were so prevailing, that it should beat down enormities faster then Satan can
raise them. But we find by miserable experience, that even in those cities
where the Gospel has abounded, sin has superabounded; and that this
glorious Sun has not dispelled and overcome all those fogges and mists that
have surg'd from hell. But if the Sun cause a stench, it is a sign there is
some dunghill nigh: let it reflect upon a bed of Roses, there is all sweetness.

Shall we lay the blame upon the Preachers? that were unjust in our own
consciences. What City in the world is so rich in her spiritual provision, as
this? Some whole countries within the Christian pale, have not so many learned
and painful Pastors, as be within these walls and liberties. It looks
light the firmament in a clear night, bespangled with refulgent stars, of
different magnitude, but all yielding comfortable light, to guide our feet in
the way of peace. The Church in Constantinople, wherein Nazianzen preached, was
called (...) the Resurrection Church; in respect of the great concourse and
assembly of people. Most Churches in this City may well bear that name. Where
is the fault then? I could happily tell you of some causes: the great
profanation of Gods Sabbath, the perfunctory hearing of his sacred word, the
cages of unclean birds, Brothels and drinking Schools, the negligence of the
secular Magistrate, the exemplary corruption of Rulers, the sinful indulgence
of parents and matters in their families, when the mouths of their children and
servants be filled with uncorrected oaths and blasphemies. O that we might
see an end of these things, before we see an end of all things. The last point
is,

The Intent, or end of all
To see how they do. First, to see how the Pastors do, whom they had set over
particular Congregations. The Apostles had been careful in their first
election; and good reason; Lay hands suddenly upon no man, says Saint Paul.
There is a Story in the Legend, how a Bishop devoted to the service of our
Lady, in the agony of death, prayed her to be his Mediator, as he had been
her Chaplain. To whom she answered, that for his other sins she had obtained
pardon, but his rash imposition of hands, was a case which her Son would
reserve to himself. But some that were fit in the choice, may prove unworthy
in the progress; therefore must be visited, to see how they do. For if the
Physician be sick, what shall become of his patients? Certainly, a Ministers
life is full of honor here and hereafter too, so it is full of danger here
and hereafter too. O what an honor is it to labor in Gods harvest, to be an
Ambassador from Christ, to remit and retain sins, to dress and lead the
Bride, to sit on thrones, and judge the nations? Again, what a danger is it to
answer for souls lost by our silence, to be guilty of blood, by either
teaching, or living amiss? For howsoever the doctrine it self be the Light,
yet the Preachers life is the Lantern that carries it, and keeps it from
blowing out: and it is an easier defect to want Latin or learning, then to
want honesty and discretion. God has given us the Keys; but if they rust
upon our hands, whether through foul carriage, or want of use, they will but
serve to lock our selves out of doors. Therefore we must submit to a Visitation.

How they do. What must it be examined, what store of souls they have
converted? No, it is the measure, not the success, that God looks to. Saint
Paul himself does not say, Plus profui omnibus, I did more good then the rest:
1 Cor. 1^.10.
but Plus laborani omnibus, I took more pains then the rest. ^ labored more
abundantly then they all. Our reward shall be according to our works, not
according to the fruit of our works. And our labor, how ever fruitless among
men, Verse. ^8.
shall not be in vain in the Lord. It was the complaint of a great Prophet, I
have labored in vain, Esai. 49.4.
and spent my strength for naught, yet my reward is with the Lord. Though we
cannot save you, yet our desire and endeavor to do it, shall save our selves.
We give God what we have, he asks us no more: this is enough to honor him,
and reward us.

How they do. What, how they thrive in their temporals, what riches or
preferments be given them? no, as this is none of our ambition, so it is none
of our luck or portion. Men suck our milk, like Mules, and then kick us
with their heels. Cominaeus says, he that would be a Favorite, must not have
a hard name, that so he might be easily remembered, when promotions are a
dealing. It seems that Preachers have hard names, for none remember them in
the point of benefit. The world regards them, as poor folks do their
children; they would be loath to have any more of them, because they are
troubled to maintain them they have. In Ier^boams time the lowest of the
people were made Priests, and now Priests are made the lowest of the people. A
layman, like a Mathematical line, runs on ad infinitum: only the Preacher is
bound to his competencie, yea, and defrauded of that. But let all preferments
go, so long as we can find preferment in your consciences, and be the
instruments of your salvation, we are content.

How they do. Not only the Pastors, but even all the Brethren; their errors
must also be looked into. S. Paul mentions the house of Cloe, 1 Cor. 1. It has
been declared to me, 1 Cor. 1.11.
by them which are of the house of Cloe, that there are contentions and faults
among you; from thence he had information of their disorders. Answerable to
which, we have Churchwardens, they are the house of Cloe, bound by oath to
present misdemeanors, that sins may have their just censure. Let them on the
one side, take heed of spleen, that they do nothing maliciously. So their
accusation may be just, and their affection unjust: and in doing that they
shall sin, which they had sinned in not doing. Ill^ d^t poenam, tu amisisti
laudem. On the other side: of conniuence and partiality; for there is an Omnia
been that swallows all vanities. Drunkenness, uncleanness, swearing, profanation
of the Sabbath, go abroad all the year; and when the Visitation comes, they
are locked up with an Omnia been. This is not that Charity that covers
sin, but a miserable indulgence that cherishes sin.

In the Creation there was an Omnia been; God reviewed all his works, and they
were exceeding good. In our Redemption there was an Omnia been; He has done
all things well, he has made the Blind to see, and the Lame to go; a just
confession and applause. Here was an Omnia been indeed, but there never was an
Omnia been since.

Let there be therefore a Visitation with the Rod, lest God come to visit
with f^re. God has a fourefold Visitation. 1. A Visitation of Grace and
Mercy: Luke 1.68.
Visitauit and redemit, He has visited and redeemed his people. He came not
only to see us, but to save us: not only to live among us, but to die for us.
So Paul applies that of the Psalm, What is ^an that thou art mindful of him,
Hebr. 2.6.
and the Son of man that thou visitest him? The time wherein Jerusalem heard the
oracles, and saw the miracles of our blessed Savior, is called The day of her
visitation. 2. A visitation of pit^e and compassion so when God relleued S^ra's
barrennes, Gene. 21.1.
he is said to visit her. Thus he did visit Job in his sickness, Thy
visitation has preserved my Spirit. This duty he commends to us for true
religion indeed. Iam. 1.27.
Pure religion and undefiled before God, is to visit the fatherless and
widows in their affliction. To these works he promises the kingdom of
heaven; Math. 25.43.
You have visited me when I was sick, or in prison; Therefore come ye blessed.
3. A visitation of severity and co^rection; Job 7.18.
so Job calls his trial a vis^tation: and we call the Pestilence, Gods
visitation. This he threatened even to the offenders of the house of David,
Psalm. 89.32.
I will visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with
stripes. This visitation is not without mercy; yea; it is an argument of mercy;
for when God refuses to visit, that is the sorest visitation of all. Therefore
we pray, Psalm. 80.14.
Look down from heaven, O Lord behold, and visit thy Vi^^. 4. Lastly, a
visitation of wrath and fury; Iere. ^.29.
Shall I not visit for these things, says the Lord? Shall not my soul be
avenged ^n such a Nation as this? So he visited Egypt, when he slew their
first borne; the old world, when he drowned it, Sodom, when he burned it; I
will go down and see. Thus shall he one day visit the wicked, with fire and
brimstone, and a horrible tempest: this shall be the portion of their cup.

Gods visitation cannot be eluded or avoided; there will be no appealing to a
higher Court, no reuoking by Prohibitions, no hiding from the censure, no
corrupting the Judge, no answering the matter by Proxy, no commuting the
penalty; no preventing, but either by living innocent, or dying penitent.

Therefore let us all visit our selves, that we may save God the labor. This
is a duty to which we are all naturally backward: like Elephants, that choose
troubled waters, and refuse to drink in clear springs, for fear of seeing
their own deformities. Or unthrifts, that are run so far in arrerages, they
are loath to hear of a reckoning. Or, it may be, we have chiding consciences;
and then, like those that are troubled with cursed and scolding wives at home,
love to be rambling abroad. But it is better to have our wounds searched while
they are green, then to have our limbs cut off for being festered. Descend
we then, into the depth and corners of our own hearts; let us begin our
visitation there; mortifying all our rebellious lusts, and subduing our
affections to the will of our Maker. So only shall we pass clear and
uncondemned by the great Bishop of our Souls, Jesus Christ.

I have done; Deo gloria, vobis gratia, mihi venia. Amen.

THE HOLY CHOICE. A SERMON PREACHED in the Chapel by GVILDHALL, at the
Solemnity of the Election of the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor of London.

BY THO: ADAMS.

LONDON, Printed by Aug. Matthewes, and John Norton. 1625.

THE HOLY CHOICE.
ACTS. 1.24. And they prayed; and said, Thou Lord, which know the hearts of
all men, show whether of these two thou have chosen.


THe business of the day is an Election; an election into one of the most
Noble Offices of the Kingdom; the government of this Honorable City, which
(let not envy hear it) has no parallel under the Sun. The business of my
Text is an Election too; an election into the highest office in the Church, to
be an Apostle and Witness of Jesus Christ. If you please to spare the pattern
in four circumstances; as, 1. This office is spiritual, yours temporal. 2.
This place was void by Apostasy or decession, yours is supplied by succession.
3. This election is by Lots, yours is by Suffrages. 4. This choice was but one
of two, it may be your number exceeds: the rest will suit well enough, and the
same God that was in the one, be also present in the other, by the assistance
of his holy spirit.

The argument of the Text is a prayer to God for his direction in their choice:
yea indeed, that he would choose a man for them: including a strong reason of
such a request, because he does know the hearts of all men.

They begin with prayer; this was the usual manner in the Church of God. So
Moses prayed for the choice of his Successor. Number. 27.16.
Let the Lord, the God of the spirits of all flesh set a man over the
Congregation. Christ sent not his Apostles to that holy work, John 17.27.
without a prayer* Sanctify them through thy truth. Acts 6.6.
In the choosing of those seven Deacons, they first prayed, and then laid their
hands upon them. Thus were Kings Inaugurated, with Sacrifice and Prayer. It is
not fit, he that is chosen for God, should be chosen without God. But for
this, Samuel himself may be mistaken, and choose seven wrong, before he hit
upon the right. In this; I cannot but commend your religious care; that
businesses of so great a consequence be always sanctified with a blessing.
Those which in a due proportion, must represent God to the world, ought to be
consecrated to that Majesty which they resemble, by public devotions. Every
important action requires Prayer, much more that which concerns a whole city.
When Samuel came to Bethlehem to annoint David, he calls the whole City to the
Sacrifice. Indeed the Family of Iesse was sanctified in a more special manner:
this business was most theirs, and all Isreal's in them. The fear of God
should take full possession of all our hearts, that are this day assembled: but
those with whom God has more to do then with the rest, should be more holy
then the rest.

The choice of your Wardens and Masters in your several Companies has a
solemn form; and it is the honor of your greatest Feasts, that the first
dish is a Sermon. Charity forbid, that any should think, you admit such a
Custom, rather for conuenience then devotion* as if Preaching were but a
necessary complement to a Solemnity, as Wine and Music. I am persuaded
better things of you: but if there should be any such perverse spirits, that
like the Governor of a people called Aequi, when the Romans came to him, Iussit
c^s ad quercum dicere, bade them speak to the Oak, for he had other business:
but they replied, Et h^c sacrataquercus andiat f^dus a v^bis violatum; let this
Oak bear witness, that you have broke the league which you have couenanted.
So when we come to preach to your souls, if you should secretly bid us speak
to the walls; lo even the very walls will be witnesses against you at the last
day. Though Saul be King over Samuel, yet Samuel must teach Saul how to be
King. We may instruct; though we may not rule; yea, we must instruct them
that shall rule. Therefore as we obey your call in coming to speak, so do
you obey Gods command in vouchsafing to hear. Let us apply our selves to him
with devotion, and then he will be graciously present at our Election.

This Prayer respects two things, Quem, the person whom they entreat. things,
Quid, the matter for which they entreat


The Person is described by His Omnipotence; Lord. His Omniscience, That
know the hearts of men.


Omnipotence; Lord. We acknowledge thy right, thou art fit to be thine own
chuser. Lord, there be many on earth called Lords; but those are Lords of
earth, and those Lords are earth, and those Lords must return to earth. This
Lord is Almighty; raising out of the dust to the hon^ur of Princes, and laying
the honor of Princes in the dust. Lord, of what? nay, not qualified; not Lord
of such a County, Barony, Seigniorie; nor Lord by virtue of Office and
Deputation: but in abstracto, most absolute: His Lordship is universal: Lord
of heaven, the owner of those glorious mansions: Lord of earth, disposer of all
Kingdoms and Principalities: Lord of hell, to lock up the old Dragon and his
crew in the bottomless pit: Lord of Death, to unlock the graves: he keeps
the Key, that shall let all bodies out of their earthy prisons. A potent Lord;
whither shall we go to get out of his Dominion? To heaven? Psalm. 139.7. etc
there we cannot miss him: To hell? there we cannot be without him: In
air, earth, or sea; in light or darkness, we are sure to find him. Whither
then, except to Purgatory? That Terra incognita is not mentioned in his
Lordship: the Pope may keep the key of that himself. But for the rest, he is
too saucy; exalting his universal Lordship, and hedging in the whole Christian
world for his Diocese. Stretching his arm to heaven, in rubricking what
Saints he lift: to hell, in freeing what prisoners he lift: on earth, in
setting up, or pulling down what Kings he list: but that some have cut short
his busy fingers.

To the Lord of all they commend the choice of his own servants. Every mortal
Lord has this power in his own Family: how much more that Lord, which makes
Lords? who is so fit to choose, as he that can choose the fit? Who so fit to
choose, as he that can make those fit whom he does choose? It is He alone that
can give power and grace to the elected, therefore not to be left out in the
election. How can the Apostle preach, or the Magistrate govern, without him;
when none of us all can move but in him? It is happy, when we do remit all
doubts to his decision, and resign our selves to his disposition. We must not
be our own Caruers, but let Gods choice be ours. When we know his pleasure,
let us show our obedience. And for you, upon whom this Election falls, remember
how you are bound to honor that Lord of heaven, that has ordained such honor
for you upon earth: that so in all things we may glorify his blessed Name.

Omniscience: it is Gods peculiar, to be the searcher of the heart. The heart
of man is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked; who can know it?
Iere. 17.9.10.
Who? Eg^ Domi^^s, I the Lord search the heart. He has made no window into
it, for man or Angel, to look in: only it has a door, and he keeps the key
himself.

But why the Heart? Here was an Apostle to be chosen: now wisdom, learning,
eloquence, memory, might seem to be more necessary qualities, then the
Heart. No, they are all nothing to an honest Heart. I deny not, but Learning
to divide the Word, Elocution to pronounce it, Wisdom to discern the truth,
Boldness to deliver it, be all parts requireable in a Preacher. But as if all
these were scarce worth mention in respect of the Heart; they say not, Thou
that know which of them has the subtiler wit, or abler memory; but which
has the truer heart: not which is the greater Scholar, but which is the better
man; Thou that know the Heart.

Samuel being sent to annoint a son of Iesse, when Eliab, the eldest came
forth, a man of a goodly presence, fit for his person to succeed Saul; he
thinks with himself, This choice is soon made, sure this is the head upon
which I must spend my holy Oil. The privilege of Nature and of Stature, his
primogeniture and proportion gives it him; This is he. But even the holiest
Prophet, when he speaks without God, runs into error. Signs and
apparances are the guides of our eyes; and these are seldom without a true
falsehood, or an uncertain truth. Saul had a goodly person, but a bad heart:
he was higher then all, many were better then he. It is not hard for the best
Judgment to err in the shape. Philox^menes, a magnanimous and valiant
Soldier, being invited to Magyas his house to dinner, came in due season, but
found not his Host at home. A servant seeing one so plain in clothes, and
somewhat deformed in body, thought him some sorry fellow, and set him to
cleave wood. Whereat Magyas (being returned) wondering, he received from him
this answer; Expendo poenas deformitatis meae; I pay for my vnhandsomnesse.
All is not valor, that looks big, and goes brave. He that judges by the
inside, checked Samuel for his misconceit; 1 Samuel 16.7.
Look not on his Countenance or Stature, for I have refused him: for the Lord
sees not as man sees. David's countenance was ingenuous and beautiful, but
had it promised so much as Eliabs or Abinadabs, he had not been left in the
field, while his Brethren sat at the table. Iesse could find nothing in David
worthy the competition of honor with his brethren: God could find something
to prefer him before them all. His father thought him fit to keep sheep,
thought his Brethren fit to rule men. God thinks him fit to rule, and his
Brethren to serve; and by his own immediate choice destines him to the Throne.
Here was all the difference; Samuel and Iesse went by the outside, God by the
inside: they saw the composition of the body, he the disposition of the mind.
Israel desires a King of God, and that King was chosen by the Head: God will
choose a King for Israel, and that King is chosen by the Heart. If in our choice
for God, or for our selves, we altogether follow the eye, and suffer our
thoughts to be guided by outward respects, we shall be deceived.

Thou that know the estates of men, who is rich, and fit to support a high
place; and who so poor that the place must support him? I hear some call
Wealth, Substance; but certainly at b^st, it is but a mere circumstance. It is
like the Planet Mercury; if it be joined with a good Heart, it is useful; if
with a bad and corrupt one, dangerous. But howsoever at the Beam of the
Sanctuary, money makes not the man, yet it often adds some metal to the man;
makes his Justice the bolder, and in less hazard of being vitiated. But
pauperis sapientia plus valet quam diuitis abundantia. If the poor man have
Wisdom to deliver the City, Iccles. 9.1^.
he is worthy to govern the City. I yield, that something is due to the
State of Authority; Ad populum Phaleras: So Agrippa came to the Tribunal with
great pomp and attendance. This is requisite to keep awe in the people, that
the Magistracy be not exposed to contempt. B^t Magistratus, non vestitus,
indicat virum: Wise government, not rich garment, shows an able man. It was
not riches, that they regarded.

Thou that know the Birth or Blood of men? I know, it is a reverend thing to
see an ancient Castle or Palace not in decay; or a fair Tree, sound and
perfect timber. But as foul Birds build their nests in an old forsaken house,
and doated trees are good for nothing but the fire; so the decay of Virtue is
the ruin of Nobility. To speak morally, Active worth is better then Passive;
this last we have from our Ancestors, the first from our selves. Let me rather
see one virtue in a man alive, then all the rest in his pedigree dead. Nature
is regular in the brute Creatures; Eagles do not produce crauens; and it was
a monstrous fable, that Ni^ippus his Ewe should yeane a Lion. But in man she
fails, and may bring forth the like proportion, not the like disposition.
Children do often resemble their Parents in face and features, not in heart
and qualities. It is the earthly part that follows the seed; wisdom, valor,
virtue, are of another beginning. Honor sits best upon the back of merit: I
had rather be good without Honor, then Honorable without goodness. Cottages
have yielded this as well as Palaces. Agathocles was the son of a Potter,
Bion of an infamous Curtisan. In holy Writ; Gideon was a poor Thrasher, David
a Shepherd; yet both mighty men of valor, both chosen to rule, both special
Saviors of their Country. Far be it from us to condemn all honor of the
first head, when noble deseruings have raised it; though before it could show
nothing but a White Shield. Indeed, it is not the Birth, but the new Birth,
that makes men truly Noble.

Thou that know the wisdom and policy of men? Certainly, this is
requisite to a man of place; without which he is a blind P^lyphemus, a strong
arm without an eye. But a man may be wise for himself, not for God, not for
the public good. An Ante is a wise creature for it self, but a shrewed thing
in a Garden. Magistrates, that are great lovers of themselves, are seldom true
lovers of their Country. All their actions be motions, that have recourse to
one Center, that is, themselves. A cunning head without an honest heart, is but
like him that can pack the Cards, yet when he has done, cannot play the
Game, or like a house with many convenient Stairs, Entries, and other
passages, but never a fair room; all the inwards be sluttish and offensive.
It is not then, Thou that know the Wealth, or the Birth, or the Head, but
the Heart; as if in an Election, that were the maine; it is all if the rest be
admitted on the By.

Here then we have three remarkable observations, 1. What kind of Hearts God
will not choose, and we may guess at them. 2. What Hearts he will choose, and
himself describes them. 3. Why he will choose men especially by the Heart.

First what kind of Hearts he will not choose; and of these (among many) I will
mention but three.

1. C^r di^isum, a distracted Heart; part whereof is dedicated to the Lord, and
part to the world. But he that made all, will not be contented with a piece.
Aut Caesar, aut nihil. The service of two Masters, in the obedience of their
contrary, commands, is incompetible, sensu composito. Indeed Zacheus did first
serve the world, and not Christ; afterward Christ, and not the world; but never
the world and Christ together. Many divisions followed sin. 1. It divided the
heart from God; Esai. 59.2.
Your sins have separated between you and your God. 2. It divided heart from
heart. God by Marriage made one of two, sin does often by preuarication make
two of one. It divided the tongue from the heart. So Cain answered God, when
he questioned him about Abel, Am I my Brothers keeper? As if he would say,
Go look. 4. It divided tongue from tongue, at the building of Babell; that
when one called for Brick, his fellow brings him mortar: and when he spoke of
coming down, the other falls a remoouing the ladder. 5. It divided the heart
from it self; They spoke with a double heart. Psalm. 12.2.
The original is, A heart and a heart: one for the Church, another for the
Change: one for Sundays, another for working days: one for the King, another
for the Pope. A man without a heart, is a wonder: but a man with two hearts, is
a monster. It is said of Judas, There were many hearts in one man: and we read
of the Saints, There was one heart in many men. Act^ 4.32.
Dabo illis cor vnum, a special blessing.

Now this division of heart is intolerable in a Magistrate; when he plyes his
own cause under the pretense of another; and cares not who lose, so he be a
gayner. Saint Jerome calls this C^r male locatum; for many have hearts, but
not in their right places. C^r habet in ventre gulosus, l^sciuus in libidine,
cupidus in lucris. Naturally, if the heart be removed from the proper seat,
it instantly dies. The eye vnnested from the head, cannot see: the foot
sundered from the body, cannot go: so spiritually, let the heart be vncentred
from Christ, it is dead. Thus the Coward is said to have his heart at his
heel, the timorous has his heart at his mouth, the envious has his heart in
his eyes, the Prodigal has his heart in his hand, the fool has his heart in
his tongue, the covetous locks it up in his chest. He that knows the hearts of
all men, will not choose a divided or misplaced heart.

2. C^r lapideum, a hard or stony heart. This is Ingratum ad beneficia, infidum
ad co^silia, inverecundum ad turpia, inhumanum ad bona, temerarium ad omnia. A
Rock, which all the Floods of that infinite Sea of Gods mercies and Judgments
cannot soften. A Stitthy, that is still the harder for beating. It has all the
properties of a stone: it is as cold as a stone, as heavy as a stone, as hard
as a stone, as senseless as a stone. No persuasions can heat it, no
prohibitions can stay it, no instructions can teach it, no compassions can
mollify it. Were it of iron, it might be wrought: were it of lead, it might
be molten, and cast into some better form: were it of earth, it might be
tempered to another fashion: but being stone, nothing remains but that it be
broken. What was Pharaohs greatest plague* was it the murraine of Beasts? was
it the plague of Boyles? was it the destruction of the Fruits? was it the
turning of their Rivers into Blood? was it the striking of their First borne
with death? No, though all these plagues were grievous, yet one was more
grievous then all; Cor durum, his hard heart. He that knows all hearts,
knows how ill this would be in a Magistrate: a heart, which no cries of
Orphans, no tears of Widows, no mourning of the oppressed, can melt into
pity. From such a Heart good Lord deliver us.

3. Cor cupidum, a covetous heart; the desires whereof are never filled. A
handful of corn put to the whole heap, increases it; yea, add water to the
Sea, it has so much the more: but he that loves Silver, Eccles. ^.10.
shall never be satisfied with Silver. One desire may be filled, but another
comes. Crescit amor nummi, quantum ipsa pecu^ia creseit. Natural desires are
finite, as thirst is satisfied with drink, and hunger with meat. But
vnnatuall desires be infinite; as it fares with the body in burning Fevers;
Quo plus sunt potae, plus sitiuntur aquae: So it is in the covetous heart, Vt
cum possideat plurima, plura petat. Grace can never fill the purse, nor wealth
the heart.

This vice is in all men iniquity, but in a Magistrate Blasphemy: the root
of all evil in every man, the rot of all goodness in a great Man. It leaves
them, like those Idols in the Psalm; neither eyes to see, nor ears to hear;
but only hands to handle, Such m^n will transgress for handfulls of barley,
and morsells of bread; and a very dram of profit put into the Scole of
Justice, turns i^ to the wrong side. There is not among all the charms of
Hell, a more damnable spell to inchant a Magistrate, then the love of Money.
This turns Judgment into Worm^wood, or at least into vinegar: for if
Injustice do not make it bitter as Wormwood, yet shifts and delays will make
it sour as vinegar. O how sor did and execrable should bribes be to them, and
stink worse in their nostrils then Vespasians tribute of urine! Let them not
only bind their own hands, and the hands of their servants, that may take;
but even bind the hands of them that would offer. He that uses Integrity,
does the former: but he that constantly professes Integrity, does the
latter. It is not enough to avoid the fault, but even the suspicion: It is
some discredit to the Judge, when a Clyent with his bribe comes to be denied:
for if his usual carriage had given him no hope of speeding, he would not
offer. A Servant, that is a favorite or inward, gives suspicion of corruption,
and is commonly thought but a by-way; some post^rne or back-dore for a gift to
come in, when the broad fore-gates are shut against it. This makes many aspire
to Offices and great places, not to do good, but to get goods; as some love to
be stirring the fire, if it be but to warm their own fingers. Whatsoever
affairs pass through their hands, they crook them all to their own ends;
and care not what becomes of the public good, so they may advance their own
private: and would ^et their neighbors house on fire, and it were but to roast
their own eggs. Let them banish Covetousness, with as great a hatred as
Amnon did Thamar; first thrust it out of their hearts, then shut and lock the
door after it: for the covetous heart is none of them that God chooses.

Next let us see what kind of hearts of God will choose; and they be furnished
with these virtues fit for a Magistrate.

1. There is Cor sapiens, a wise heart; and this was Salomons suite; 1 Kings
3.9.
An understanding heart. He saw, he had power enough, but not wisdom
enough; and that Royalty without wisdom, was no better then an eminent
dishonor; a very Calfe made of golden Eare-rings. There is no Trade of life,
but a peculiar wisdom belongs to it; without which all is tedious and
unprofitable: how much more to the highest and busiest vocation, the government
of men? An ignorant ruler is like a blind Pilot; who shall save the vessel
from ruin?

2. Cor patiens; a meek heart: what is it to discern the cause, and not to
be patient of the proceedings? The first Governor that God set over his
Israel, was Moses; a man of the meekest spirit upon earth. How is he fit to
govern others, that has not learned to govern himself? He that cannot rule
a Boat on the river, is not to be trusted with steering a Vessel on the
Ocean. Nor yet must this patience degenerate into cowardlinesse: Moses that was
so meek in his own cause, in Gods cause was as resolute. So there is also

3. Cor magnanimum, a heart of fortitude and courage. The rulers and squares
that regulate others, are not made of lead or soft wood, such as will bend or
bow. The principal Columns of a house, had need be heart of Oak. A timorous
and flexible Magistrate is not fit for these corrupt times. If either
threatenings can terrify him, or favor melt him, or persuasions swerue him
from Justice, he shall not want temptations. The Brain that must dispell the
fumes, ascending from a corrupt liver, stomach, or spleen, had need be of a
strong constitution. The courageous spirit that resolves to do the will of
heaven, what malignant powers soever would cross it on earth, is the heart God
chooses.

4. Lastly, there is Cor. honestum, an honest heart. Without this, courage will
prove but legal Injustice, policy but mere subtlety, and ability but the
Devils Anuile to forge mischiefs. Private men have many curbes; but men in
authority, if they fear not God, have nothing else to fear. If he be a
simple Dastard, he fears all men: if a headstrong commander, he fears no
man; like that unjust Judge, that feared neither God nor Man. Luke 18.2.
This is the ground of all fidelity to King and Country, Religion. Such was
Constantines Maxim; He cannot be faithful to me, that is unfaithful to
God. As this honorable place of the Kings Lieutena^t-ship has a Sword Bearer,
so the Magistrate himself is the Lords Sword Bearer, Romans 13.4.
says Saint Paul. And as he may never draw this Sword in his private
quarrel, so he must not let if be sheathed when Gods cause calls for it. It
is lenity and conniuence that has invited contempt to great places. Did
Justice carry a seuerer hand, they durst not traduce their Rulers in Songs and
Saty^s, the burden whereof will be their own shame. Magistrates are our
civil Fathers: and what deserve they but the curse of Cham, that lay open the
nakedness of their Fathers? When Alexander had conquered Darius, and casually
found his slain body lying naked, he threw his own coat over him, saying, I
will cover the destiny of a King. It is God alone that casts contempt upon
Princes; which that he may not do, let them preserve Cor mundum, a clean
heart, not conscious of ill demerits.

Such a one sits on the Iudgement-Seat, as one that never forgets that he must
appear before the Iudgement-Seate of Christ. So he executes Justice, as
never losing the sense of Mercy: so he shows Mercy, as not offering
violence to Justice, He can at once, punish the offense, and pity the
offender, He remembers his oath, and fears to violate it: to an enemy he is
not cruel, to a friend he will not be partial. And if ever he have but
once cut the skirt of Justice, as David the lap of Saul's garment, his Heart
smites him for it. He minds no other clock on the Bench, but that of his own
Conscience. He will not offend the Just, nor afford a good look to varlets:
nor yet does he so d^sregard their persons, as to wrong their causes. He will
maintain Piety, but not neglect Equity. In Court, he looks not before him
on the person, nor about him on the beholders, nor behind him for bribes; nay,
he will not touch them in his Cloffer or Chamber, lest the timber and stones
in the wall should-witnesse against him. So he helps the Church, that the
Commonwealth be no loser: so he looks to the Commonwealth, that the Church
may not be wronged. The lewd fear him, the good praise him, the poor bless
him; he has been a Father to Orphans, a Husband to distressed Widows. Many
prayers are laid up for him in Heaven; and when he dies, they with the
assist^nce of Angels, shall bear him up to blessedness.

Lastly, let us see why God will choose men by the heart. I deny not, but
wisdom and courage, moderation and ^atience, are all requisite concur^ences:
but the Heart is the Primum Mobile, that sets all the wheels a going, and
improoues them to the right end. When God begins to make a man good, he begins
at the heart: as Nature in forming, so God in reforming, begins there. As the
eye is the first that begins to die, and the last that begins to live: so the
heart is the first that lives, and the last that dies. It is said of the
Spider, that in the morning, before she seeks out for her prey, she mends
her broken web; and in doing that, she always begins in the midst. Before
we pursue the profits and baits of this world, let us first amend our life;
and when we undertake this, let us be sure to begin at the heart. The Heart
is the Fort or Citadell in this little I Will of man; let us fortify that, or all
will be lost. And as naturally, the heart is first in being, so here the Will
(which is meant by the Heart) is chief in commanding. The Centurions servants
did not more carefully obey him, Math 8.9.
when he said to one Go, and he goes, to another Come, and he comes, to a
third, Do this, and he does it: then all the members observe the Heart; if it
say to the eye, See, it sees: to the ear, Hear, it hearkeneth: to the
tongue, Speak, it speaks: to the foot, Walk, it walks: to the hand,
Work, it works. If the Heart lead the way to God, not a member of the body,
no^ a faculty os the soul, will stay behind. As when the Sun arises in
the morning, Birds rise from their nestes, Beasts from their dens, and Men
from their beds. They all say to the Heart, as the Israelites did to Ioshuah;
All that thou command us, Josh. 1.16.
we will do: and whither so^uer thou sendest us, we will go: only the Lord
be with thee. Therefore the penitent Publican smote his heart, Luke 18.13.
as if he would call up that, to call up all the rest. It cannot command and
go without.

No part of man can sin without the heart, the heart can sin without all the
rest. The Wolf goes to the flock, purposing to devour a Lamb, and is
prevented by the vigilancie of the Shepherd; yet Lupus exit, Lupus regreditur;
he went forth a Wolf, and comes home a Wolf. The heart intends a sin,
which is never brought into action; yet it sins in that very intention. The
hand cannot offend without the heart, the heart can offend without the hand.
The heart is like a Mill: if the wind or water be violent, the Mill will go
whether the Miller will or not; yet he may choose what kind of grain it shall
grind, wheat or darnell. If the affections be strong and passionate, the heart
will be working: yet the Christian by grace, may keep out lusts, and supply
it with good thoughts.

The Heart is Gods peculiar; the thing he especially cares for: My son, give
me thy heart: and good reason, for I gave my own Sons heart to death for
it. Non minus tuum, quia meum; It is not less thine, for being mine: yea, it
cannot be thine comfortably, unless it be mine perfectly. God requires it
principally, but not only: give him that, and all the rest will follow. He
that gives me fire, needs not be requested for light and heat; for they are
inseparable. Non corticis, Ambr.
sed cordis Deus. God does not regard the rind of the lips, but the root of
the heart. It was the Oracles answer, to him that would be instructed which
was the best Sacrifice; Da medium Lunae, Solemn simul, and canis iram: which
three characters make Cor, the Heart. Man's Affection is Gods Hall: man's
Memory, his Library: man's Intellect, his Privy Chamber; but his Closset,
Sacrary, or Chapel, is the Heart. So Saint Augustine glosseth the Pater
noster; Qui es in coelis, which art in heaven, that is, in a heavenly Heart.

All outward works an hypocrite may do, only he fails in the Heart: and
because he fails there, he is lost every where. Let the flesh look never so
fair, the good Cater will not buy it, if the liver be spak'd. Who will put
that timber into the building of his house, which is rotten at the heart? Man
judges the heart by the works, God judges the works by the heart: All other
powers of man may be suspended from doing their offices, but only the Will,
that is the Heart. Therefore God will excuse all necessary defects, but only
of the Heart. The blind man cannot serve God with his eyes, he is excused:
the deaf cannot serve God with his ears, he is excused: the dumb cannot
serve God with his tongue, he is excused: the creeple cannot serve God with
his feet, he is excused. But no man is excused for not serving God with his
Heart. Deus non respicit quantum homo valet, sed quantum velit. Saint
Chrysostom seemed to be angry with the Apostle, for saying, Math. 19.27.
Behold, w^e have left all, and followed thee. What have you left? an angle, a
couple of broken ne^tes, and a weather beaten Fish-boat; a fair deal to speak
of. But at last he corrects himself, I cry you mercy, Saint Peter* you have
forsaken all indeed: for he t^uly leaves all, that leaves Quod vel capit
mundus, vel cupit: that takes his Heart from the world, and gives it to Christ.

All other faculties of man apprehend their objects, when they are brought home
to them, only the Will, the Heart goes home to the object. Color must come to
the eye, before it can see it: sound to the ear, before it can hear it: the
object to be apprehended is brought home to the understanding, and past things
are recollected to the memory; before either can do her office. But the heart
goes home to the object. Vbi the saurus, ibi cor. Not where the heart is, there
will be the treasure: but where the treasure is, there will be the heart.

Math. 5.8.
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. Of all, the pure heart
is beholding to God, and shall one day behold God. Therefore Dadid prays,
Psalm. 51.10.
Cor mundum crea in me, Deus: Create in me a clean heart, O God. The Lord
rested from the works of his Creation the seventh day; but so dearly he
loves clean hearts, that he restes from creating them no day. As Iehu said to
^e^^nadab, 2 King. 10.15
Est t^bi cor r^ctum, Is thy heart righ^? Then give me thy hand, come up into
my chariot. So this is Gods question, Is thy heart upright? Then give me thy
hand, ascend my triumphant Chariot, the everlasting glory of heaven.

To conclude; because there is such difference of hearts, and such need of a
good one; they put it to Him that knows them all, and knows which is best of
all. For howsoever Nature knows no difference; nor is there any Quorum
praecordia Titan De meliore luto finxit: yet in regard of grace, the sanctified
heart is of purer metal then common ones. A little living stone in Gods
building, is worth a whole Quarrey of the world. One honest heart is better
then a thousand other* the richest Mine, and the coursest mould, have not such
a disproportion of value. Man often fails in his Election, God cannot err.
The choice here was extraordinary, by lots: yours is ordinary by Suffrages;
Gods hand is in both.

Great is the benefit of good Magistrates: that we may sit under our own
Vines, go in and out in peace, eat our bread in saftie, and (which is above
all) lead our lives in honest liberty: for all this we are beholding, under
God to the Magistrate, first the Supreme, then the subordinate. They are Trees,
under whose branches the people build and sing, and bring up their young ones
in religious nourture. That Silence in heaven about half an hour, Reue^. 3.
when the golden vialls were filled with sweet odours, and the prayers of the
Saints ascended as pillars of smoke and Incense, is referred by some, to the
peace of the Church under Constantine. It is the King of Mexico's Oath, when
he takes his Crown; Iustitiam se administraturum, effecturum vt Sol cursum
teneat, Nubes pluant, Rivi current, terra producat fructus; that he will
minister Justice, he will make the Sun hold his course, the Clouds to
rain, the Rivers to run, and the Earth to fructify. The meaning is, that
the upright and diligent administration of Justice, will bring all these
blessings of God upon a Country.

If we compare this City with many in foreign parts, how joyfully may we
admire our own happiness! Those murders and massacres, rapes and
constuprations, and other mischiefs, that be there as common as nights, be
rare with us. I will not say that all our people are better then theirs, I dare
say, our Government is better then theirs. Merchants make higher use, and are
more glad of calm Seas, then common passengers. So should Christians more
rejoice in peace, then can the heathen: because they know how to improoue it to
richer ends, the glory of God, and salvation of their owner souls. Proceed ye
grave and honorable Senators, in your former approved courses, to the
suppressing of vice and disorders, and to the maintenance of Truth and Peace
among us. It is none of the least renownes of this famous City, the Wisdom
and Equity of the Governors. To repeat the worthy acts done by the Lords
Majors of London, were fitter for a Chronicle; they are too large for a Sermon.

But it is high time to bless you with a Dismission, and to dismiss you with
a Blessing. That Almighty God, that knows the hearts of all, sanctify your
hearts to govern, and ours to obey; that we all seeking to do good one to
another, He may do good unto us all. To this blessed and eternal God, the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, be all glory and praise for ever. Amen.

The BARREN TREE. A Sermon Preached at Paul's Cross October 26. 1623.

BY THO: ADAMS.

LONDON, Printed by AVG: MATTHEW'S for JOHN GRISMAND, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Paul's Alley, at the sign of the Gunne. 1623.

TO THE REVErend and learned, Doctor DONE, Deane of St. Paul's, together with
the Prebend-Residentiaries of the same Church, my very good Patrons.
RlGHT WORSIPFVLL,
NOt out of any opinion of this Sermons worth, to which I dare not inuit your
Judicious eyes. Nor, any ambition to merit of my Patrons, whom I read styled,
Petty creators. But in humble acknowledgement of your favors, I present this
small Rent of Thankfulness; the poor fruit of that tree, which grows on
your own ground, and has not from the world any other sustenance. Vouchsafe,
I beseech you, your Patronage to the child, who have made the Father of it,

Your VVors. devoted Homager THO: ADAMS.

To the Reader.
I Neither affect those Rheumaticke Pens, that are still dropping upon the
Press: nor those Phlegmatic spirits, that will scarce be coniur'd into the
orb of employment. But if modest forwardness be a fault, I cannot excuse my
self.

It pleased God Almighty, to make a fearful Comment on this his own Text,
the very same day it was preached by his unworthiest servant. The argument was
but audible in the morning, before night it was visible. His holy Pen had long
since written it with ink, now his hand of Justice expounded it in the
Characters of blood, There, was only a conditional menace, So it shall be:
here a terrible remonstrance, So it is. Sure! He did not mean it for a nine
days wonder. Their sudden departure out of the World, must not so suddenly
depart from the memory of the World. Woe to that soul that shall take so
slight a notice of so extraordinary a Judgment. We do not say, They perished:
Charity forbid it. But this we say, It is a sign of Gods favor, when he
gives a man Law. We pass no sentence upon them, yet let us take warning by
them. The Remarkablenesse would not be neglected* for the Time, the Place, the
Persons, the Number, the Manner. Yet still we conclude not, This was for the
transgression of the dead: but this we are sure of, It is meant for the
admonition of the living.

Such is our Blessed Saviors conclusion, upon a parallel instance: Except ye
repent, YE shall all LIKEWISE perish. There is no place safe. e^ough for
offenders: but when the Lord is once up in arms, happy man that can make his
own peace! otherwise, in vain we hope to run from the Plague, while we
carry the Sin along with us. Yet will not our wilful and bewitched
Recusants, from these legible Characters, spell Gods plain meaning. No
impression can be made in those hearts, that are ordained to perish. For their
malicious, causeless, and unchristian censures of us, God forgive them: our
requital be only pity and prayers for them. Howsoever they give out, (and I
will not here examine) that their piety is more then ours: Impudence it self
cannot deny, but our Charity is greater then theirs. Now the holy fear of
God keep us in the ways of Faith and Obedience; that the properation of Death
may never prevent our preparation to die. And yet still, after our best
endeavor; From sudden death good Lord deliver us all. Amen.

T. A.

THE BARREN TREE.
LVKE. Cap. 13. Verse. 7. Then said he to the Dresser of his Vineyard; Behold,
these three years I come seeking fruit on this Fig Tree, and find none: cut it
down, why cumbreth it the ground?


News is brought to Christ, of a certain Judgment, which was not more
Pilates, then Gods, upon some Galileans; who, while they were sacrificing, were
sacrificed; their blood being mingled with the blood of the beasts, on the same
altar. Lest this should be wholly attributed to Pilates cruelty, without due
respect had of the omnipotent Justice, he samples it with another; of
eighteen men miscarrying by the fall of a Tower. No Pilate threw down this,
here was no humane Executioner: the matter of their death was mortar and
stones, these had no purpose to kill them. This therefore, must be an
invisible hand, working by an insensible creature: the Instrument may be
diverse, the Judge is the same.

Now, Poena paucorum, terror omnium: as an exhalation drawn from the earth,
fired and sent back again to the earth, smites only one place, but
terrifieth the whole country. So their ruins should be our terrors, let them
teach us, that they may not touch us. They are hitherto but like Moses his
Rod turned into a Serpent: not into a Bear or Lion, lest it should have
devoured Pharaoh: but into a Serpent, that he might be more afraid then hurt.
It is Gods special favor to us, that others be made examples for us, and not
we made examples for others. Nothing could teach them, let them teach us.

Of these fearful Instances our Savior makes this use; setting down a
peremptory couclusion: Vel poenitendum, vel pereundum: Except ye repent, ye
shall all likewise perish. Such venge^nce is no way to be avoided, but by
repentance. But here the Jews might flatter themselves; If we be greater
sinners then they, how comes it to pass that we speed better then they? To
this silent objection, Christ makes an Apologicall answer, verse 6. You are
not spared because you are more righteous, but because God to you is more
gracious. You deserve such or sorer Judgments; and the reason of this
impunitie is not to be looked for in your innocence, but in the Lords
patience: not because you are not worse to him, but because he is better to
you: who offers you space and grace to amend, if (at least) at last you will
bring forth the fruits of Repentance.

There be some terms in the Text; (as that the Vineyard is the Church, every
Christian a Fig Tree, God the Owner, every Pastor a Dresser:) wherein your
understandings may well prevent my discour^e: these known and familiar things I
take as granted of all hands.

It is a Parable, therefore not to be forced every way, nor made to warrant a
conclusion which the Author never meant. This were, when it offers us the
company a mile, to compel it to go with us twain: or to make Christ's
Messenger speak our errand. Such is the trade of Rome; what their own policy
has made necessary, they will teach God to make good: this is to pick
darkness out of the Su^^e. No, Verificatur in sensu suo. like a good creature,
it does only that it was made for. A Parable is not like a Looking-glass, to
represent all forms and faces: but a well drawn Picture, to remonstrate that
person whereof it is a counterfeit. It is like a knife, with the haft it cutts
not, with the back it cuts not, it cuts with the edge. A Candle is made to
light us, not to heat us: a Stoue is made to heat us, not to ^ight us: if
this Parable, like the Sun, may give both light and heat; the more
profitable, the more acceptable.

The Distribution.
Then said he to the Dresser, etc. That part of it, to which I limit my
present Discourse, delivers it self to us in these four passages.

A Consultation; Then said he to the Dress^r of his Vineyard. A Complaint.
Behold, these three years I come seeking fruit on this Fig Tree, and find
none. A Sentence; Cut it down. A Reason; Why cumbers it the ground?
The Consultation. Then said be unto, etc.

Dixit, non percussit: he spoke, he stroke not: he might have spared words,
and begun with wounds. The Tree had rather deserved the Axe and Fire, then a
Consultation of recovery. How easily would man have rejected his hopeless
brother* as when a piece of clay will not work to his mind, the Potter
throws it away: or we cast foul rags to the dunghill, little thinking
that they may become white paper. But with God, Verba antecedunt verbera; he
will be heard before he be felt. Our first Parents, when they had sinned,
Vocem andiuerunt, Heard the voice of God: Genes. 3.^
He reasoned with them, before he condemned them. If the fathers word can
correct the child, he will let the rod alone. Wicked men use the sudden
Arguments of steel and iron; as Ioab discoursed with Amasa, 2 Samuel 20.10.
in the fifth ribbe, they speak Daggers points. 1 Kings 22.24.
So Zedekiah disputed with the Prophet, a word and a blow* yea, a blow without
a word: he struck him first, and spoke to him afterward. God deals
otherwise; Revel. 3.20.
Behold, I stand at the door, and knock: he knockes at the door, does not
presently break it open. He gives us warning of his Judgments, that gave him
no warning of our sins. Why does he thus? That we might see our miserable
estate, and fall to timely deprecation: that so punishing our selves, we might
save him a labor.

Dixit, non destinauit: as if the Lord would double and repeat his thoughts,
before he decreed it to irreuocable ruin. A divine president of moderation!
If he that cannot transgress in his wrath, nor exceed in his Justice, will yet
Consulere amicum, advise with his friend: how ought frail man to suspend his
furious purposes to m^ture deliberation? It is too common with us, to attempt
dangerous and desperate actions, without further counsel then our own green
thoughts. So Anger is made a Solicitor, Passion a Judge, and Rashness an
Executioner. The wise man first considers, then speaks or does: the mad man
first speaks or does, and then considers. Which drives him on necessity to
pl^y the after-game; with shame and sor^ow to recover his former estate, or
give it lost for ever. O holy deliberation, whither art thou fled? David's H^rpe
did cast the evil spirit out, this would keep him from ever coming in. It is
a Porter at the Gate of Gods spiritual Temple, Man; that would be as sure to
keep out his enemies, as David would have bin ready to let in his friends. How
many desperate precipices of sin would be prevented, were this Rule remembered;
Consule Cultorem? For matter of estate, we are counseled by the Lawyer: for
health of body, advised by the Physician: we trust the Pilot to steer our
course by Sea, the Survey or to mete out our Land: but for the soul let it be
as barren as this Fig Tree, we take no counsel of the Gardener. Do worldlings
consult the Preacher, concerning their usurious trade before they undertake it?
Do Gallants advise with him, before they meet in Aceldama, the field of blood?
O that they would admit an answer from such a friend, before they give an
answer to such an enemy.

Dixit Vinitori. Such is the honor God Amos 3.7.
Surely, the Lord will do nothing, but he first reuealeth it to his servants,
the Prophets. Nothing, which may conduce to the office of their Ministry, and
the good of his Church. Luke 8.10.
To you it is given to know the ^ysteries of the kingdom of Heaven. To you,
not to the world, they have no such revelation. It is given, it is none of your
inheritance you were not borne to it. To know Mysteries, Sapere alta not
common things. Of the kingdom (not secular; such mysteries are for the
knowledge of Statizing Jesuits; but) of heaven. Shall I hide from Abraham the
thing that I mean to do? Genesis 18.17.
The matter concerned Sodom, not Abraham: yet was it revealed to Abraham, not
to Sodom. But does God need any man's counsel? Romans 11.34.
Who has at any time been his Counselor? Will the Potter take advice of his
pots? No; when Christ asked Philip where supply of bread might be had for the
multitude; John 6.6
This be^ said to prove him: for he himself knew what he would do. His
questions are not his, but our satisfactions. Thus does he credit his own
Ordinance, teaching the world how to esteem of them whom himself so
singularly honors. How poor a place soever they find in men's thoughts, the
King of heaven and earth calls them to his counsel. Priest, Numb. 17.
was a title whereof the Princes of Israel were ambitious: they would not,
every man have written his name on his rod, but in hope that this Dignity
might fall to his lot. Now, is the Ministry of the Gospel inferior to that
of the Law? Was the service of death more glorious then the service of life,
and salvation? lf the Evangelical Covenant be better, is the Ministration
worse? The Sons of the great think scorn of such an employment: what they
held an honor, these count a disparagement: In one and the same subject meets
their ambition and our scorn. It is ill when the Fig Tree shall despise the
Dresser, but it would be far worse if the Dresser should despise the
Fig Tree.

To the Dresser. This is the whole Congregation of his Ministers, to whom he
has committed the culture of his Vineyard: all which, by an Enallage numeri,
are summed up in one Dresser. Acts 4.32.
1. Quia Cor vnum, because they have all one heart. Ephesians. 4.12.
2. Quia officium vnum; all their labors meet in that one common term; the
^dification of the Body of Christ. 3. It is usual to name one proceteris, for
all the rest. Peter says, Though I should die with thee* I will not deny
thee. Did Peter only promise this? Math. 26.35.
No, but So said likewise the rest of the Disciples. Had not this been a
Parable, I never found a place of more probable color for the high Priest of
Rome to challenge his universal Supremacy by. But surely, he will never dress
Christ's Vineyard, as it ought, unless in a Parable. Nay, would his
Instruments forbear to sow it with brambles, to manure it with blood, and to
cast Nabaoth out of his own vineyard, it were somewhat. But let them pass!
When the Spirit wrote to a whole Church, he inscribes his Epistle under one
particular name, Angelo Ecclesiae, Revel. 2. and 3.
to the Angel of the Church.

To the Dresser. Dressing implies labor and backs, and then hang belles at
their ears to make them music. But be our reward little or much, God forbid
we should slack dressing the Vineyard of Jesus Christ.

To the Dresser. Why to him? Vt intercederet that he might plead for the Tree.
So unwilling is God to destroy, that he would have us manacle his hands with
our prayers: he would be entreated to forbear. Exodus ^2.7.
Go thy ways down, for the people which thou broughtest out of Egypt, have
corrupted themselves. Why this to Moses? That he might pray for them. He that
meant to spare them in mercy, meant withal that Moses should be beholden to
him for that mercy. And Moses indeed charge the Lord, sets upon him with so
holy a violence, that as if his prayers could vincere inuincibilem, he hears,
Let me alone. O that every Vine-dresser were full of this graciou^ ^ffection to
the trees under his charge: yea, who fears God, and in some measure has it
not? The people forgot Moses, Moses remembers the people: they could be merry
and happy without him, he would not be happy without them. Me^ rob us of our
means, lode us with reproaches: all our revenge is to solicit heaven for them
by our supplications: they sue us, we sue for them: they impouerish our
temporal condition, we pray for their eternal salvation. We could never
hope for goo^ to our selves, if we should not return them this good for their
evil.

Corah had drawn a multitude to rebel against Moses and Aaron, Numb. 16.22.
Moses and Aaron pray for their rebels. They were worthy of death, and they had
it; yet would these merciful Leaders hau^ prevented it: refusing to buy their
own peace with the loss of such enemies. Yea, they are so far from caruing
their own just revenge, that they would not have the Lord to revenge for them.
Let us fill our hearts with this great Example: the people rise up against
their Pastors, the Pastors fall on their faces for the people. Certainly, if
God had not meant to hear us, he would never inuit us to pray. But as it
pleases Him to make us His mouth to you; so also, your mouth to Him: both to
tell you, what He does say, and to return Him what you should say; to preach
against your sins; to pray for your souls. Do you hear us plead for
Christ, for Christ hears us plead for you. Indeed, we are men of polluted
lips and lives: but as Gods power is not straightened through our weakness, so,
nor is his mercy lessened through our unworthiness. Therefore as Paul had his,
Vae mihi si non praedicauero; Woe unto me, if I Preach not: So Moses, in
effect, had his Vae mihi, si non intercessero, woe unto me, if I pray not: God
forbid I should cease praying for you. But as all our Preaching can work no
good upon you, but through the holy Ghost: so all our Praying can bring no good
to you, but through Jesus Christ. We pray for you, forget not you to pray for
us. Indeed, weak ones pray with us, malicious ones pray against us, covetous
ones prey upon us* few pray for us. We entreat for you, do you entreat for us;
and that only Mediator betwixt God and man plead for us all.

The Complaint. Behold I come, etc.

This has in it two passages.

His Access. Behold, these three years, etc. His Success. I find none.
First, the Access.

Behold. Ecce is here a note of complaint. He that can thunder down sin
with vengeance, raines on it showers of complaint. Behold the Tree; he might in
a moment have put it past beholding, by throwing it into the infernal furnace.
Why does he complain, that can compel? Habet in manu potentiam, in cord
patientiam: there is power in his hand, but patience in his heart. To do
Justice, we (after a sort) constrain him: but his delight is to be merciful.

He complains. All complain of lost labors: the Shepherd after all his
vigilance, complains of straggling Lambs: the Gardener after all his
diligence, of withering Plants: the Husbandman after all his toil, of lean
Fields, and thin Haruests: Merchants after many adventures, of Wrackes and
Pyracies: Tradesmen of bad debtors, and scarcity of moneys: Lawyers complain
of few Clients, and Divines of fewer Conuerts. Thus we complain one of
another: but God has just cause to complain of us all.

Well, if the Lord complain of Sin, let not us make our selves merry with
it. Like Sampson, it may make us sport for a while, but will at last pull down
the house upon our heads. Cant. 2.12.
The voice of the Turtle is (not) heard in our Land. Vox Turturis, vox
gem^^tis. True penitents be more rare then Turtles. The voice of the Sparrow
we hear, chirping lust: of the Night-bird, buzzing ignorance: the voice of
the Scriech-owle, croaking blasphemy: of the Popiniay, gaudy pride: the voice
of the Kite and Cormorant, covetousness and oppression: these, and other
Birds of that wing be common. But, Non audita est vox Turturis: who mournes
for the sin of the time, and longs to be freed from the time of sin? It
was an unhappy spectacle in Israel, to see at once, Lachrymantem Dominum, and
ridentem populum: a weeping Savior, and deriding sinners. We complain of our
crosses and losses, we complain of our maladies, of our injuries, enemies,
miseries: the Lord open our eyes, and soften our hearts, to see and feel the
cause of all, and to complain of our sins.

I come. The Lord had often sent before, now he came himself; even by his
personal presence, accepting our nature. The Son of God that made us the
Sons of men, became the Son of man, to make us the Sons of God. He came
voluntarily: we come into the world, not by our own wills, but by the will of
our parents; Christ came by his own will. He came not for his own benefit,
but ours. What profit does the Sun receive by our looking on him? We are the
better for his light, not he for our sight. A shower of rain that waters the
earth, gets nothing to it self; the earth fares the better for it. He came for
our fruits: these cannot enrich him: Psalm. 16.
Lord, our well-doing extends not to thee.

Never came such an Inhabitant to our Country, as Jesus. Had God granted men
the liberty to beg of him what they would, and have it; they durst not have
been so bold as to ask his only Son. When the King gives a free concession
to his subject, to make choice of his own suit, without denial; he will not
be so impudent as to beg the Prince. Let us entertain him well, we fare the
better for him: the profit of our redemption bles^eth all the rest unto us.
Far be it from us to welcome him with scandals, with blasphemies, and
neglect. He may then reply, as Absolon to Hushai, 2 Samuel 16.17
Is this thy kindness to thy friend? No, you say, we make much of him, hold him
in the highest regard, trust him with our whole salvation. But know, Christ
fares not the better for thy Faith, but for thy Charity. Faith is a beggarly
receiver, Charity is a rich giu^r. Thy Faith is a hand that takes something
from him, to enrich thy self: thy Charity is a hand that gives some thing to
him, in his distressed members. Indeed Christ is the subject of all tongus, but
he is not the object of all hearts. The School disputes of him, the Pulpit
preaches of him, Profession talks of him, Profane men swear by him, few love
him, few ^erue him. He is come, let him be made welcome, by setting our best
cheer, and choycest fruits before him. Whom should we entertain, if not our
Savior?

Seeking. But, did not He know before? understands our thoughts long before
they are borne, cannot be nescious of our works when they are done. My answer
shall be short: the Lords Quaerit, is a Requirit: he does not seek a thing
that is hid from him, but requi^es a debt that is due unto him.

Seeking. This is no rare, but a continued Veni, I came: He came unto his
own, John 1.11.
etc Nor a Venturus sum; Yet a little while, Revel. 22.
and I will come. But (...): as Revel. 3.20. Sto pulsans, I stand knocking: so
here, Venio querens, l come seeking. He seeks continually: will you hear how
long?

These three years. Much time has been spent about the Interpretation of
this time; how it is appliable to the Jewish Synagogue, to whom, it was
immediately referred. I find no great difference among Expositors, saving only
in their terms. Some by the first year understand the time before the
Captivity; by the second, their return to Jury; by the last, the coming of
Christ. Some by the first year, conceive the Law given by Moses: By the
second, the Prophetical attestations: by the third, the grace of our Lord
Jesus. Some resolve it thus; the first year was the time of Circumcision, from
Abraham to Moses: the next, the Leuitical Law from Moses to Christ: the last is
the year of Salvation by the Messiah. Others understand the first year to be
of the Patriarchs, the middle year of the Judges, the third of the Kings.
After all this he was entreated to forbear it a fourth year, till it was
instructed by the Apostles: and then being found fruitless, it was cut down
by the Romans. But I rather take a definite number to be put for an
indefinite: three years is time long enough to wait for the proof of a tree:
such a proportionable expectation had the Lord for that Church, If literally
you would have it, I take this to be the probablest exposition. These three
years were the very three years of his Preaching, healing diseases, casting
out Devils, working Miracles before their faces. The other year which he
added, was the time while the Apostles offered them the Gospel of salvation.
Whereof the refusers were cut down, the accepters were saved.

He has likewise waited for the Church three years; that is, three
reuolutions of Ages, thrice five hundred years. Or he has tarried the leisure
of the whole world three years: the first year, under nature: the second,
under the Law: the third, under Grace: the fourth is now a passing, and who
knows how far it is spent?

Or to apply it to our selves, these three years of our visitation, has been
so many scores of years. Conceive the foremost to be in the days of King
Edward 6. who purged the gold from the rust and dross of Superstition,
Ignorance, and Cussenage, which it had contracted. The Sun began to shine
out in his bright luster: the Lord came seeking our fruits; but not finding
them answerable to his expectation, nor worthy of the glorious Gospel: he
drew another cloud over our Sun: teaching us better to value that heavenly
Manna, wherewith we were so suddenly grown wanton. The second year, under
Queen Elizabeth, of so blessed memory: that Royal nurse, upon whose Bosom
the Church of God leaned to take her rest. She did again vindicate this
Vineyard, which had so long lain among Friars and Monks, that it had almost
quite forgotten the language of Canaan: She taught it a new to speak the
Dialect of the Holy Ghost. When that Gracious Queen was taken from a Crown of
gold to a Diadem of glory, then began our third year; wherein our present
Sovereign was sent; Dignissimus Regno, si non natus ad Regnum: under whom we
know not, whether our Truth or Peace be more. Only let us bless him, and
bless God for him, that we may all be blessed in him. Thus far we may say of
our Land, as Syluius did of Rhodes, Semper in Sole sita est: the bright
reflection of the Gospel compasses us round about. Now he comes this third
year seeking our fruits: which when we consider, we can say no more but
Miserere Deus; Lord be merciful to us: for never were such blessings requited
with such unthankfulness. We condemn the Jews for abusing Christ's patience:
God grant they rise not up at the last day to condemn us.

three years. 1. In Youth. I have planted thee in my Vineyard, given thee the
influence of my mercies; where is thy fruitfulness? Alas, the young man sends
him away, with a Nondum tempus ficorum: it is too early for me to fall to
Mortification; would you put me to penance, before I have had the leisure and
pleasure to offend? He is ready to send Christ away in the Language of that
foul Spirit; Math. 8.29.
Art thou come to torment me before my time? But whose charge is it to
Remember thy Creator, Diebus Iuuentutis? Then the conquest is most glorious,
because then it is most difficult. You say, It is never too late; but I am
sure, It is never too soon, to be gracious and holy. The Devil is a false
Sexton, and sets back the clock of Time in prosperity: in the day of
trouble, he will make it run fast enough. 2. In middle age; and now the buying
of Farms, and trying of Beasts; the pleasures of Matrimony, the cares for
posterity. take up all the rooms of the soul. Men rather busy themselves to
gather the fruits of earth, then to yield the fruits of heaven. Here is
strength of nature, and fullness of stature; but still a defect of grace.
Perhaps, Christ has now some fair promises, of fruits hereafter: Luke. 9.61.
Let me first go bury my Father, then. But (a thousand to one) he finds
something in Domo, left by his father, that keeps him, a Domino, from
following his Master. To prevent this, it is his caution to the entertained
servant; Forget thine own people, Psalm. 45.10.
and thy fathers house: rather forgo and forget thy fathers house, then thy
Makers service. 3. In old age now the decay of body should argue a decay of
sin. The taste finds no relish in riot, the ears cannot distinguish Music,
the eyes are dim to pleasing objects, very Desire fails. now all things
promise mortification. He that cannot stir abroad in the world, what should
he do but recollect himself, and settle his thoughts on the world to come?
Now fruits, or never. Not yet: Morositie, Pride, and Avarice, are the three
diseases of old age: men covet most, when they have time to spend least: as
cheating Tradesmen then get up most commodities into their hands, when they
mean to break. Still he comes seeking fruit, and is returned with a Non
inuentus.

sign to Hezekiah; This year ye shall eat such as grows of it self: and
the second year such springs of the same: and in the third year ye shall
sow and reap, etc. the third year might afford him somewhat. But does he
forbear all trees thus long? No, some are snatch'^ away in the flower and
pride of their life: yea, they be not few, that will not allow themselves to
live; but with riot and intemperance hasten their own ends, before they have
well begun or learned what life is: like bad Scholars, that slubber out their
books before they have learned their lessons. That instead of, Non est
fructus, we may say, Non est ficus, the tree it self is gone. And that goodly
person, which like a fair ship has been long a building: and was but
yesterday put to sea, is to day sunk in the Maine. We do not eat, drink,
and sleep, and take such refections of nature, vt non moriamur, that we might
not die; that is impossible: but that we should not dye barren, but bear some
fruits up with us to him that made the Tree.

Seeking. It is fit we should offer our fruits Nath 3.12.
We should be like those ripe-figs, that fall into the mouth of the eater. The
best liquours are they that drop from their cells, of their own accord,
without pressing. The most acceptable of all oblations, be the
Freewill-offerings. Howsoever, let us be sure not to disappoynt the Lord when
he seeks.

On this Fig Tree. It is fit, that he that Prou. 27.18.
his own tree should yield him some fruit, considering what he has done for
it he may well challenge it.

1 He has planted us: we spring not up naturally; as the Oak grows from an
Acorne, the Peach from a stone: but a gracious hand has set us. We are not
borne of flesh, nor of the will of blood, John 1.1^.
or of man, but of God.

2. He has planted us in his Vineyard within the enclosed Garden of the
Church. Had he left us to the unregarded wilderness, without any Dresser to
look to us, there might have been some excuse of our barrenness. The ground
that is left to it self, is (in a manner) blameless, though it be fruitless.
But in Vineasua, which he has fenced in with his providence, blessed with his
saving influence, husbanded with his Dressers diligence, forwarded with the
beams of mercy, and showers more precious then the deawes of Hermon that fell
upon the hill of Sion. Where we participate the fatness of the ground, are
fed with vnperishing Manna, compassed about with Songs of deliverance, and have
seen our desires upon (his and) our enemies. Where Righteousness is our
walls, and Peace our bulwarks, and the ways be milk where we set our feet.

3 We are Figtrees: not brambles, no man expects Grapes from thorns. Math.
7.16.
Not Oaks or Cedars, to be a dwelling for the Storkes: But Figtrees, apt for
fruit, for pleasant fruit. If the rest be fruitless, they serve for other
purposes: but what shall become of the barren Figtree?

4. He is our Lord, and Querit suum, he seeks but his own. If our own Kin^
give us no milk, our own sheep afford us no wool, our own land return us
no increase, we are displeased: whereas these be reasonlesse creatures; but we
have sense above common nature, reason above sense, grace above reason: We are
but tennants of these, Christ is Lord of us: our sins bring the curse of
barrenness upon them, but there is no fault in God, if we be unfruitful.

5: He comes seeking: not threatening, raging, wounding, not felling down the
tree, nor stocking it up by the roots; but seeking. Dignatur expectare
fructus, cuilicet eradicare Infructuosos. Man is a loser by the barrenesse of
his garden tree: were there not a tree left, God is never the poorer.

Now lay all these together: a Lord that owes us, we are his trees: to come
into his Vineyard, where he may be confident; we live on his ground: to look
upon a Figtree, made of an apt disposition to good fruit; such a one as
himself has planted, not casually grown up: a tree not neglected, but whereon
he has bestowed great care and cost; waiting, not destroying: what can we
plead for it, if it be fruitless? God is our Lord and Proprietary, England is
his Vineyard, every one of us his Fig Tree, thus planted, watered, blessed by
his gracious mercy: He comes to us with patience, that should run to him with
penitence: seeking our fruits, that should make tender of them unsought;
waiting, that might command: now, fear, obedience, and thankfulness, keep
us from sending him back with a Non inuenio, I find none.

Fruit. This is that inseparable effect that God expects from every Tree
planted in his Garden. Romans 7.4.
We are married to Christ: to what end? That we should bring forth fruits unto
God. He seeks not for leaves, buds, or blossoms, but fruits. Could leaves
content him, we would not leave him unsatisfied: he should have an Arbor
large enough to reach to the Worlds end. Psalm. 19.4
Our tongues run apace, not seldom faster then our wits. We are Gods
debtors, and if he will take our words, so: that is all he is like to have.
Might buds please him, or blossoms: we have intentions to good, certain
offers and shows of obedience: which we wear like a cloak, or some loose
garment, that when Lust calls, we may quickly slip off. But when he seeks for
works, all our Consonants be turned into Mutes, we are speachlesse. O would he
ask us for any thing but fruits: Matthew. 22.12
but what should be expected from the Figtree, but Figs?

Of every soul here he seeks for fruits. Of the Magistrate, that he bring
forth the fruits of Justice; determining causes with sincerity of decision,
and conuenience of expedition: being so far as equity permits, a husband to
the widow, and a father to the fatherless. Of the Minister, that he bring
forth the fruits of knowledge. Aarons Rod was his Pastoral staff: in one and
the same night it bought forth buds, and blossoms, and fruit. Fruitfulness is
the best argument that God has called us: there is not a plant of his setting,
but the very branches thereof shall flourish. I do not say, our pains shall
always convert many Souls; that is Gods fruit, not ours: He charge us to
be industrious in Preaching, let Himself alone with the work of saving. Of
the private man, he expects the fruit of his calling: to be idle, is to be
barren of good; and to be barren of good, is to be pregnant of all evil.
Bella gerant alij, Protesilaus edit. but let us that are called to work, work
in our calling; otherwise at last, we shall make but a sorry answer to that
Question, Vbi fructus? Let us all produce the fruits of Charity: rich men do
good turns to themselves; as they play at Tennisse, tossing the Ball to him
that will toss it to them again: seldom to the poor, for they are not able
to bandy it back. Pride cuts, and Riot shuffles, but betwixt them both, they
deal the poor but a bad game. The fruit of Christianity is Mercy; when the
rich, like full ears of Corn, humble themselves to the poor earth in
Charity. Feed him, that feeds you: give him part of your Temporalls, from whom
you expect Eternalls: you cloathe Christ with your blackes on earth, he will
clothe you with his glorious whites in heaven. Our mercy to others, is the
Fruit of Gods mercy to us.

Fruit. Nothing is created for it self, but so placed by the most wise
providence, that it may confer something to the public good; though it be
but as the Widows two Mites to the Treasury. The poorest creature yields some
Fruit, wherein it does imitate the goodness of the Maker. We know not readily,
what good Serpents and Vermin may do; yet certainly, they have their fruit;
both in sucking up that poison of the earth, which would be contagious to man;
in setting off the beauty of the better pieces of creation: Aug.
(for though the same hand made both the Angels in heaven, and the worms on
earth; yet the Angels appear the more glorious being so compared) besides
their hidden virtues abstracted from our knowledge. Of stones they make iron,
rubbish serves to raise Bulwarks, the small pebble for the sling, worms and
flies are bayts for Fishes: every thing is enabled with some gift for the
vnniuersall benefit, and to produce those fruits is their natural work.

The Sun comes forth of his Chamber like a Bridegroom, fresh and lively; and
rejoices as a Giant, to run his diurnall course, to lighten us with his
refulgent beams, to generate, cheer, and mature things with his parentall
heat: this is his fruit. In his absence the Moon and Stars adorn the
Canopie of Heaven, reflecting their operative influence to quicken the lower
world: this is their fruits. The curled clouds, those bottles of rain,
thin as the liquour they contain, fly up and down on the wings of the
wind, delivering their moist burdens upon the earth, teats whereon the hungry
fields and pastures do suck; yet they expect no harvest from us: this is
their fruits. The subtle winds come puffing out of their cauernes, to make
artificial motions, wholesome airs, and nauigable seas; yet neither earth,
air, nor sea return them recompense: this is their fruits. The earth, in a
thankful imitation of the Heavens, locks not up her treasures within her
own Coffers; but without respect of her private benefit, is liberal of her
allowance, yielding her fatness and riches to innumerable creatures, that hang
on her breasts, and depend upon her as their common mother for maintenance: Of
the beasts that feed upon her, Kine give us their milk, Sheep their wool:
every one pays a tribute to man, their vsufructuary Lord: this is their
fruits. Fruit-bearing Trees spend not all their sap and moisture upon
themselves, or the increase of their own magnitudes: but the principal and
purer part of it is concocted into some pleasant Fruits; whereof they nor
their young Springs ever come to taste; but they proffer it us, and when it is
ripe, they voluntarily let it fall at their Masters feet. Never did the Olive
annoint it self with the own Oil, nor the Vine make it self drunk with the
own Grapes, nor the Tree in my Text, devour the own Figs: yet they all
strive to abound with Fruits.

Let me raise your Meditations from earth to heaven: the holy Angels there are
called Ministering Spirits: those royal Armies fight for us against our
enemies: like Nurses, they bear us up in their arms, and (though unseen) do
glorious Offices for us: this is part of their fruit. John 5.17.
The blessed Trinity is always working: Hitherto my Father works, and I
work. The Father by his providence and protection, the Son by his mercy and
mediation, the Holy Ghost by his grace and sanctification: all dividing the
streams of their goodness, for the best behoof of the world. The more any
thing furthers the common good, the more noble is the Nature, and more
resembling the Creator.

The Earth is fruitful, the Sea, the Air, the Heavens are fruitful; and
shall not man bring forth fruits, for whom all these are fruitful? While all
the Armies of Heaven and Earth are busied in fructifying; shall Man, of more
singular graces and faculties, be idle, a burden to the world and himself?
Both the Church of God for the propagation of piety, and the world it self
for the upholding of his estate, requires our Fruits. If Happiness consisted
in doing nothing, God that meant Adam so happy, would never have set him about
business: but as Paradise was his Storehouse, so also his workhouse: his
pleasure was his task. There is no state of man that can privilege a folded
hand: Our life is, Vita pulueris, non puluinaris. Lands, Means, and Moneys,
men make the protections of Idleness: whereas Adam commanded the whole earth,
yet work expected him. In Paradise all things did labor for man, now man must
labor for all things. Adam did work because he was happy, we his children
must work, that we may be happy. Heaven is for joys, Hell for pains, Earth
for labor. God has three houses; this is his Worke-house, that above is his
Warehouse. O then let us be fruitful; that others benefit may be ours, our
benefit theirs; and the glory of all, the Lords. If Magistrates yield not the
Fruits of Justice, Ministers the fruits of knowledge, private men the fruits of
Charity and Obedien^e; it is as unnatural, as if the Sun should forget to
shine, or the earth to fructify. God made all these for man, he made man for
himself: of us he looks for Fruit, of us let him find it, from us accept it,
in us increase it, and to us reward it, through Him, in whom alone we expect
mercy, Jesus Christ.

The success follows. Non inuenio.

We have brought the Lord into his Vineyard, heard him calling for the Dresser,
showing him a Tree, telling him of a three years expectation: now, if after
all this we inquire for the event; himself certifies us, (...), I find none.

None? Peradventure he came before the season; Nondum tempus erat Ficorum. When
should a Tree bring forth fruits, but Tempore suo? This is the praise of the
good Tree, that it brings forth the fruit in due season. Psalm. 1.3.
If the Fig Tree could have objected to the Owner, 2 Kings 5.26
as Elisha to his servant; Hoccine tempus; Is this a time to plant Vineyards,
or gather fruit? Or as the man replied to his neighbor, that came to borrowe
loaves at midnight; Is this a time to lend Bread, when my self and family are
in bed? The Spring is the season of fructifying, the Autumn of gathering.
Cant. 2.12.
When the time of the singing of Birds is come, Job 38.38.
Then the Figtree puts forth her green Figs. But Cum fermento perfundatur
puluis, when the dust is leauened with mire, and the bands of Orion have locked
up the influence of Heaven. Who seeks fruit in Winter; he must be content with
Winter fruit. There is the Winter of an afflicted Conscience; no marvel then
if neither ripe Figs, nor so much as green leaves appear: when all the
Sap is retired to the Root, as in extreme cold the blood runs to the
heart to succor it. When the Babylonians required of their captive Israelites
some Hebrewe Songs, they could soon answer; How shall we sing the Lords
Song in a strange Land? Psalm. 137.4.
Is this a time or place to be merry? But did the Lord come out of season? No,
he required it not the first day, or month, but waited the full time,
expecting fruit in the Autumn or Vintage season. Non ante tempus querit, qui
per triennium venit. He came not with a Trienniall Visitation, as Episcopal
Fathers use to visit, once in three years; but every year, every month in
the year, week of the month, day of the week. Of another Fig Tree it is
said, that The time of Figs was not yet, yet he cursed it: Here the time
was three years past without fruit, yet he cursed it not. But look to it; If
thou will not fructify Tempo^e tuo, thou shall be cut down tempore non tuo,
Eccles. ^. 17.
perish before thy time. There is not a day in the year, wherein he forbeares
seeking our fruit; yet Venio, non inuenio; I find none.

None? Nunquid quia male quasiuit Dominus? Was there any error in his search?
Men often seek Bona, good things, non been, not in a good manner. Either they
fail in their Quando, as Joseph sought Christ after a days journey; whereas
he is too precious to be missed one hour: Psalm. 32.6.
They shall seek thee Tempore inveniendi, when thou may be found. Or in the
right Vbi: as Mary sought her Son in Cognatione Carnis, among her kindred; who
was in Domo Patris, John 2.39.
in the Temple. So the Papists seek now him in Pictures, who promised to be
found in the Scriptures. Or in their Quomodo, as they that seek aliud pro
illo, aliud prae illo, another insted of him, another besides him, another with
him, another before him, which they do not seek for him. All these seek and
miss, because they seek amiss. The world is commonly mistaken in their
search: Quaerunt bona locis non suis, they seek for things out of their proper
orbs. Men seek Honor in Pride, whereas Honor is to be found in Humility.
They seek reputation in bloody revenge; alas, that is to be found in
Patience: It is the glory of a man to pass by an offense. They seek content
in Riches, which is as if one should seek for fresh water in the midst of the
Sea. But in none of these circumstances did this Seeker fail: not in the Vbi,
for he sought in the Vineyard: not in the Quando, for he came in the Vintage;
not in the Quomodo, for he sought fruit on that Figtree, about which he had
been at so great charges; yet I find none.

None? Happily not so thick with fruits Vines of Engedi: every Land is not a
Caanan, to flow with Milk and Honey. But yet some competent measure, enough
to pay the Landlord rent for the ground it stands on; no, None. If there be
none to spare, whereof the owner may make money; yet, Sufficiat ad vsum suum,
ad esum suum, that he may eat the labors of his own hands; no, None. If the
number be not as the Sand, Romans 9.27. Esaias 6.13
yet let there be a Remnant. If there cannot be a whole harvest, yet let
there be a Tenth. If not a Tenth, yet let there be some gleanings; Mich 7.1
and that is a woeful scarcity: if the gleanings be not allowed, yet let
there be here and there a Fig, Esaias 17.6.
a Grape, a Berry, on the outmost branches; that the Planter may have a taste:
It is too defective, Hab. 3.17.
when Non florebit ficus, the Tree does not flourish: but Quando non erit Vua
in vitibus, I^rem. 8.13
non ficus in ficulneis: when there shall not be a Grape on the Vine, nor a
Fig on the Tree; this is a miserable sterilitie. Some thing has some savor,
but None is good for nothing. Indeed all Trees are not equally laden: there
is the measure of a hundred, of ^ixtie, of thirty; an Omer, and an Ephah: but
the Sacred deawes of Heaven, the graces of the Gospel, bless us from having
None. I find^ none.

None? Peradventure none such as he looks for, no Fruits delicate enough for
the Almighties taste. Indeed, our best fruits are never perfect and kindly
ripened; still they relish sour and earthly, and savor of the Stock from
which they were taken. They are heavenly Plants, but grow in a foraigne and
cold Climate, not well concocted, nor worthy the charges and care bestowed
upon us. Set Orange or Figgetrees in this our cold Country, the fruit will not
quit the cost of the planting and maintaining. But the complaint is not here of
the imperfection or paucitie of fruits, but of the nullitie; None. Some
reading that Text with idle eyes; that after all our fruits, Luke 17.10.
we are still unprofitable Trees: because they can find no validity of
merit in their works, throw the Plough in the hedge, and make holyday. But
shall not the Servant do his Masters business; because he cannot earne his
Masters Inheritance? Shall the Mason say, I will share with my Sovereign in
his Kingdom, or I will not lay a stone in his building? Yet good fruits have
their reward; though not by the merit of the doer, yet by the mercy of the
accepter. Sour they be of themselves, but in Christ they have their
sweetning: and the meanest fruit, which that great Angel of the Covenant
shall present to his Father, R^^el. 8.4.
with the addition of his own precious Incense, are both received and
rewarded. In their own nature they may be corrupt; but being dyed in the
blood of Christ, they are made pleasing to God. Yea, also profitable to the
Church, and useful to men, seem they never so poor. Even a troubled Spring
does often quench a distressed Souldi^rs thirst: a small Candle does good, where
the greater Lights be absent: and the meanest fruit of holy Charity, even a
cup (though it be not of the juice of the grapes out of the Vineyard, Math.
10.48.
but) of cold water out of the tankard, in the name of Christ, shall have the
recompense. But here the complaint is not of the meannes, or fewness, but of
the Barennesse; None at all.

None? Every Tree is known by the fruits, it The just man lives by his faith,
not by his works: but he is known to live by his works, not by his invisible
faith. Neither does the fruit make good the tree, but the tree makes good the
fruit. Opera bona non faciunt iust^m, Iustus facit bona opera. Good works make
not a man righteous, but the righteous man does good works. Our persons are
justified before our actions; as of necessity the tree must be good, before it
can bear good fruit. But how shall that tree be discerned, that has no fruit?
I find none.

None? Why this to us? Why such a Text in such a time? We abound with fruits:
which way can you look, and not have your eye full of our works? They before,
in such places, have successively commended our fruits. Be it so: yet
Euripides being questioned why he always made women bad in his Plays, whereas
Sophocles ever made them good, in his: answered, Sophocles makes them such as
they ought to be, but I make them such as indeed they are. Their former
commendation have told us what we should be; but this Emblem, I fear, tells us
truly what we are. Not all of us; God forbid: here is but one Fig Tree in a
whole Vineyard thus taxed, and far be it from us to tax a whole Vineyard for
one barren Fig Tree.

None? Yes, enough of some fruits, but the Prophet calls them Ficos valde
malos, so bad that they cannot be eaten. Ie^. 24.8.
As the fruit o the Vine is commended for Quickness, the fruit of the Olive
for Fatness, so the fruit of the Fig Tree for Sweetness; in Iothams Parable.
Ephesians. 5.11.
But if it bear not Fructum natiuitatis suae, the fruit of the own kind, but
bitter figs; here had better be none at all. What an uncomfortable sight is
this to Him, whose heart is set on his Orchard; after the cost of so dear
blood to purchase it, after such indulgent care to cheerish it, and the charges
of so many workmen to dress it; yea, after so much patience to expect it (say
the Fig Tree does not bear so soon as it is planted; in our infancy we can
do nothing, in our minority we will do little; in Gods service: but now it
is grown fructifiable) I am non gustare fructus, not to have so much as a
taste? Yea, were this all; did barrenness only usurp it: but there is worse
then a mere orbitie or absence of goodness; a position of bitter fruits: Esaias
^.3
Quaesiui Vuas, inve^io Labrascas: I find wild Grapes, luxurient fruits.
Instead of the hearty effects, which Wine produces, l am answered with the
melancholy preuarications of malice.

Behold the wonder and spectacle of unthankfulness; among all Gods Creatures,
Man; and among men the barren Christian. Though Israel play the Harlot, Hosea
4.15.
yet let not Judah transgress. What may be expected from the wild Forest of
Paganism, when the Garden of Eden yields such fruits? The sweet fruit of the
Spiritual Fig Tree is mercy: our God is the God of Love, our Savior is the
Prince of Love, the Church is knit together in Love: our Root is Love, our
Sap is Love, our Ligaments Love: now if we shall suck the blood one of
another, violate the relations of peace, concoct all our moisture into malice;
here is worse then, Invenio fructum nullum, I find none: for Invenio fructum
malum, I find cursed fruits. We are grown unnatural; the hand scratcheth
the eye, the mouth biteth the hand: thorns and briars entwine and embrace one
another, while (against all nature) Fig Trees denoure one another. Math. 13.27.
Lord, thou did sow good seed in thy field, whence then has it Tares? Here
is more fruit then God would have; but for that he expects, I find none.

eaten and are fat, Psalm. 22.29.
that we should worship him. 1 Cor. 10.7
What fruit finds he? We sit down to eat and drink, and rise up to play: for
praying, playing. When we are scourged, he looks for our humiliation and
penance; Sure, in their affliction they will seek me. (...) 26.^6.
What fruit finds he? Lord, thou have smitten them, but they have not
sorrowed; an insensible desperatnesse. In this case let us pray; Lord, less of
the fruits we have, and more of them we should have. Esaias. 5.7.
Instead of righteousness, a cry: a cry indeed; a roaring cry of the
oppressors, and a mourning cry of the oppressed. Haec non sunt placido
suscipienda sinu.

Our Bells ring, our Chimneis smoke, our Fields rejoice, our Children dance,
our selus sing and play; Iouis omnia plena. But when Righteousness, has
sown, and comes to reap; here is no harvest;(...), I find none. And as there
was never less wisdom in Greece, then in time of the Seven Wise men: so never
less piety among us, then now, when upon good cause most is expected. When
the Sun is brightest the Stars be darkest: so the cleerer our light, the more
gloomy our life with the deeds of darkness. The Cimerians, that live in a
perpetual mist, though they deny a Sun, are not condemned of impiety, but
of ignorance: but Anaxogoras, that saw the Sun, and yet denied it, is not
condemned of ignorance, but of impiety. Former times were like Leah,
bleareeyed, but fruitful: the present, like Rachel fair but barren. We give
such acclamation to the Gospel, that we quite forget to observe the Law. As
upon some solemn Festival, the Bells are rung in all steeples, but then the
Clockes are tied up: there is a great untuned confusion and clangor, but no man
knows how the time passes, So in this universal allowance of liberty by the
Gospel, which indeed rejoices our hearts, had we the grace of sober usage)
the Clocks that tell us how the time passes; Truth and Conscience, that show the
bounded use, and decent form of things, are tied up, and cannot be heard.
Still Fructum non inuenio, I find no fruits. I am sorry to pass the Figtree
in this plight: but as I find it, so I must leave it, till the Lord mend it.
So I come to

The Sentence. Cut it down.

Macah's gods, perhaps he will make him no more. If this will not do, cut off
some of the arms and branches: weaken his strength, sicken his body, lay him
groaning and bleeding on the bed of sufferance: griue his heart strings with
the sense and sorrow of his sins: any thing rather then Cut it down: alas no
fruit can grow on it then, but sad despair. A man's house is foul, or a little
decayed; will he pull it down or rather repair it? There is hope of a Tree
though the root wax old in the earth, Job 14.8.
and the stock die in the ground; yet the springs of water may put new life
into it: but once cut down, all hope is cut down with it. When a man has
taken delight in a Tree, conveniently planted in his garden; what variety of
experiments will he use, before he cuts it down? Alas, thus poor silly men,
we reason: we measure things that be unmeasurable, by things that be
measurable, by things that be miserable. What we in a foolish pity would do,
we think God in his merciful wisdom should do. Yet which of us would endure
a dead Tree three years together in his Orchard? We would say, If it will not
bear fruit, to cheer us; it shall make a fire to warm us. But the Lord has
been fix and thirty Moons gracious in his forbearance, give him now leave to
be just in his vengeance. If so much indulgence cannot recover it, there is
little hope of it: Cut it down.

Cut it down. Who must do this? The dresser. An unpleasing office to him,
that has bestowed so much labor upon it, esteemed it so precious, hoped for
some reward at his Masters hand for his diligence about it; now to give the
fatal blow, to Cut it down? And if it must fall, let it be Manu aliena, non
sua, let another hand do it. Hagar will not behold her dying Son; dye he
must, she was persuaded; Genes 21.
Modo non videam, Let me not see the death of the Child. But he must obey;
Arbor non est Cul^oris, Cris.
sed Patris familias: the Tree is not the Dressers, but the Lords; and his own
is at his own disposing: Cut it down.

Cut it down. But how? How can the Minister be said to cut down a barren
soul? Some may conceive here a reference to Excommunication: Whether the
Greater, which depriues a man of all benefit by the Churches public Prayers,
and the Society of Christians. 1 Cor. ^.
Which St. Paul calls, Tradere Satanae, to deliver unto Satan: so himself
Excommunicated Hymeneus and Alexander, 1. Tim. 1.20.
delivering them unto Satan: a mi^erable condition, to be subjected to a slave,
to a dog, a drudge; but then especially fearful, when God grants unto Satan
a Writ or faculty, Pro excommunicato capiendo. The ignominy of ignominy;
besides the peril: For as Christ protecteth all the Trees in his Vineyard; so
if any be transplanted to the wild desert, they are under the god of this
world. Or the Less; which is indeed, no other properly, then an Act of the
Churches Discipline, whereby she corrects her unruly children: that smarting
with the absence of wonted comforts, they may be humbled by repentance, and so
recover their pristine state. This censure may be either too cruel, or to
triuial. Approved by the counc. of Trent. Sess 26.
The Church of Rome grants Excommunications for things lost: a man has lost
his horse, he may have an Excommunication against him that detaines him: so the
Father may hap to Excommunicate his own Son, and for the body of a Jade,
hazard the soul of his Child. Yea, which is worse, they publish
Excommunications for sins not yet committed: The Lord of a Manor has set a
row of young Elmes, he may have an Excommunication against all those that
shall do them any harm. This is to hang a man, before he has done the fact
that deserves it. These ir-rite, forcelesse, bugbeare Excommunications, the
ridiculous affordments of a mercenary Power, are not unlike those old night
spells, which blind people had from mungrel Witches, to set about their Orchards
and Houses, antidotes and charms against theeuing; wherein distrusting the
providence of God, they made themselves beholding to the Devil for safety,
Creditors, that would be paid in their moneys, may procure an Excommunication
against their Debtors, if they pay not by such a day. This were an excellent
project for you Citizens, a rounder course then arrests and tedious trialls at
Law. But it is to be doubted, that your Debtors would fear the Popes
Parchment less then the Scriueners, and an Excommunication far less then an
Outlary. There Is but four things exempted from the power of their
Excommunication, as Nauarrus notes: a Locust, an Infidel, the Devil, and the
Pope: so he has matched them, so let them go together. For the Excommunicate
must be a man, a Christian, mortal, and an Inferior: now the Locust is not a
man, the Infidel is not a Christian, the Devil is not mortal, and ^he Pope
has no Superior. But too much of that; this is a Parable, and here is no
foundation for such a building.

Cut it down. How? with an Axe of martial iron? This were an exposition fit
for Doway, or the Gunpowder-Enginers: that by Cutting it down, understood,
Blow it up: turning their Axe to a Petarre. Had God said to them, Cut it down;
the axe had bin instantly heaued up: yea, they did it, when God said no such
thing. Rather then fail of cutting it down, they would have stockd it up,
root and all: this is their mercy. But the Spiritual Axe is to cut down,
Culpas, non Animas: when we read of cutting down, remember it is meant of
men's sins, not of their souls. Preachers indeed do wound, but it is Gladio
oris, not ore gladij. with the Sword of the Spirit, not a Rouillac's Knife. If
God had meant such a cutting down, Nero had been a fitter instrument then Paul.
Psalm. 19
We read, that their sound went through the World: but that their Sword went
through the World, we never read,

Cut it down. How then? Succide, that is, Succidendam minare, threaten that I
will cut it down. Iere. 15.1.
Cast them out of my sight; Eijce, that is, Eijciendos pronuncia; say that I
will reject them. Zach. 11.9.
Quod moritur, moriatur: Quod succidendum est, succidatur, That which dies,
let it die. God sometimes sends such farewels and defiances to sinners that
will not repent. Ephraim is joined to Idols, Revel. 22.11.
let him alone. If they will not be persuaded to return, let them go on to
their ruin, let them alone. If any man will be unjust, let him be unjust: He
that will be filthy, let him be filthy still; let them perish. Abeat, pereat,
profundat, perdat.

Cut it down. This was, Sententia oris, the Consilium cordis, the purpose of
his heart. Saepe Deo minante quod peccans meretur, peccanti non fit quod Deus
minatur. Nor can this tax God of leuitie: for he that speaks with condition
of repentance, may change his word without suspicion of lightness. Tu muto
sententiam tuam, Deus mutabit suam. Thus was Nineveh cut down: Aug.
euersa ^stim malo, vt aedificaretur in bono: the subversion was menaced, the
conversion was intended. The Father shuts his rebellions Son out of doors,
will not allow him a lodging, not so much as among his servants: yet he does
not mean to let him perish with hunger and cold in the streets: but when he
has well smarted for his disobedience, upon his humble submission he is
re-entertained. The very mercies of the wicked are cruel, but the very
judgments of God are sweet. This Cutting down, is Medicinale, not mortale:
Disciplinans, non eradicans: for restitution, not destitution; for remidie not
for ruin. Indeed, if all this denuntiation and threatening cannot persuade them
to return, then comes their final predition: when they have cut off
themselves impenitently, God will cut them off impartially. But if we turn to
deprecation and repentance, he will turn to commiseration and forgiveness.
The Tree is barren, and the Lord says. Cut it down: the Tree fructifies, and
he will say Let it stand. O then let us humble our selves, and with seasonable
repentance Cut down our sins, that this terrible Sentence may n^uer Cut
down our souls.

The Reason. Why cumbreth it the ground?

Romans 9.20.
Cur ita facis? His Judgments are not always manifest, they are always just:
nor does he things because they are good, but they are therefore good because
he does them. Should he make short work on the earth, and dispatch all
barren Trees in a moment: yet thou continuest holy, O thou worship of Israel.
If he strickes us, we are not wronged; it is our desert, and his Justice. If he
spares us, we have not merited; It is his mercy. Huic fit miserecordi^, tibi
non fit iniuria: that man receives mercy, thou have no injury. Yet that he
might be justified, and the mouth of all wickedness stopped, he is content to
give a reason of this sentence. Think not I deal hardly with this Fg-tree,
let us confer together, and hear one another with patience. I will show thee
sufficient reason of cutting it down: do thou show me some cause why it
should stand. My reason is, It cumbers the ground. Terram reddit otiosam,
inutil^m. It is not only barren Formaliter, but Effectiue. In a word. 1. It
does no good. 2. It does much harm.

First, It does no good, therefore it is unworthy Terra bona, and Gens mala;
are an ill match: an opulent Land, Aug.
and a pestilent People. Peccator non est dignus pane quo vescitur. The wicked
man is not worthy of the bread he eats, of the water he drinks, of the air
he breathes, of the ground he goes on. The rich thinks himself worthy of
delicate viands, costly garments: dutiful attendance, Quia Dives, because he
is rich: yet he may not be worthy of a crumme, a rag, a respect, Quia malus,
because he is evil. It will one day grieve such fruitles Nabals, when they
must receive a multiplicitie of torments, according to the number of their
abused benefits, and they will wish that they had not fared so well upon earth,
that they might fare less ill in Hell. They live in the Vineyard, eat the
fat, and drink the sweet; turning all this juice, not into fruitful clusters,
for the behoof of Gods servants; but into their own arms and branches:
raising their Houses out of the ruins of Gods House. What good do they? Cut
them down, Why cumber they the ground? It is fit, Eccles 2.26.
that the Riches of the sinner should be laid up for the righteous: dentur
dig^ioribus.

London. What innumerable swarms of nothing does beleaguer this City? men and
women, whose whole employment is, to go from their beds to the Tap-house, then
to the Playhouse, where they make a match for the Brothel-house, and from
thence to bed again. To omit those ambulatory Christians, that wear out the
Pauement of this great Temple with their feet, but scarce ever touch stone of
it with their knees; that are never further from God, then when they are
nearest the Church. To omit that rabble of begging and pilfring vagabonds, that
like beasts, kn^w no other end of their creation, but recreation; but to eat,
and drink, and sleep. What an army of these might be mustred out of our
Suburbs? But that Idleness has disabled them to any service: they are neither
fit for God nor man. Did they yet but like worms and insects, spend up the
corruption of the Land, and leave us the less, it were somewhat. But they are
worse, even diseases and unwholesome airs, to breed infection among us. Let
Authority look to their castigation, or answer for their mischiefs: so far
as they deserve, let them not be spared; Cut them down, Why comber they the
Ground?

The barren Tree does no good you see;

1 It occupies the room where a better Tree might grow. The Kingdom of God
shall be taken from you, Math. 21.43
and given to a Nation that will bring forth the Fruits thereof. A fruitful
Nation would be content with such a dwelling. Christ foretells this mutation,
Paul shows it accomplished. Romans 11.19
They are broken off, that we (in their places) might be graffed on. Friend,
Math. 22.12.
how cammest thou in hither, having on a wedding garment? Why do thou vsurp
the seat, where a worthy guest might sit? Thus David used to purge his Court;
Psalm. 101.8.
admitting the righteous into the offices of the unrighteous. As in case of
calamitie^ ^he godly are delivered out of trouble, and the wicked comes in his
room: so in case of felicity, the ungodly shall be turned out of their
happiness, and the reighteous shall come in their stead.

A Judge is corrupt; he is girded with Justice, but the girdle saggs to that
side where the purse hangs; God will cut him down; here is room for a good
man, that will do equity: A Magistrate is partial, and draws the Sword of
Justice in his own quarrel; which he puts up in the cause of Christ: he must
be cut down, here is room for one that ^ill love and adhere to the truth. An
office is ab^sed by him that holds it; he bought dear and he cannot sell
cheap: it is time he were cut down; this place will maintain a man, that
will maintain the place, with uprightness. A Minister is barren, has no
milk in his breasts: Ministerium eius accipiat alter; Acts 1.20.
Let another take his office; here is room for one that will feed the people.
A profane Patron will let none into the Lords Vineyard, but at the
Non-licet-Gate; by which good men will never enter: his Clarke shall be Simon,
himself will be Magus: vengeance shall cut him down; here is room for one
that will freely put faithful Laborers into the Vineyard. There grows an
Oppressor, sculking in a corner; the nedy cannot find him, or if they do,
they find no fruit from him; Cut him down, here is room for one that will
pity the poor. The Lord will root out such bastard Plants, and replenish his
Garden with fruitful Trees.

2 It draws away nourishment from better neither enter themselves, Matthew.
23.13.
nor suffer others. What should become of them, that will neither do good, nor
suffer good to be done, but cutting down? A great Oak pines all the underwood
near it, yea spoils the grass that should feed the cattle. A great
Oppressor engrosseth all round about him, till there be no place left for a
fertile Tree. Mean while, himself has only some leaves, to shadow his
Sychophants; but no fruit, unless Bramble-berries, and such as the Hogs will
scarce eat.

All covet to be great Trees, few to be they starve the rest by an insensible
soaking. When mother earth, the Church, would derive her sap to some young
hopeful Plant, these intercept it. There is maintenance due to the Minister,
but the barren Impropriator stands in his way, and sucks it al from him:
perhaps he leaves him some few drops, to cool^ his temples, but not enough to
preserve life.

Abscinde, cut it down. How charitable would Lazarus have been had he been
owner of Dives his estate? How would Mordecai have promoted the good of Israel,
had he been as great a favorite as Haman was? How freely would the conscionable
man give spiritual preferments, were he a Patron? He that fears God, would
justly render the Church her dues, did he drive such trades, and dwell in such
houses, as you do. But that God, who disposes all as it pleases him, mend all
when it pleases him, even for his own mercies sake.

Thus from a plain Text I have derived you familiar persuasions: for I came
not hither to satisfy the curious head, but the honest heart. Admit but two
considerations more, and I have done.

challenge him: if he sends us good things, we are bound to thank him. The last
year, how general was the complaint all over this Kingdom? The Mower could
not fill his sithe, nor the binder up of sheues his bosom. The beasts perished
for want of fodder, yea, children dyed in the street with hunger: the poor
Father not being able with all his weeks labor to buy them (only) bread. The
fields were thin, and the barnes thinner: little in many places there was to
gather, and the unseasonable weather prevented the gathering of that little.
The emptines of their bowels did justly fill our bowels with compassion: Famine
is a sore plague. We then cried unto the Lord for fruits, and he heard us: Lo
in how plentiful a harvest he has answered our desires, to his own praise,
and our comfort! Yea, he concluded all with songs and triumphs, a joyful
haruest-home; the best sheafe of our Wheat, the best grape of the Vintage, the
best flower of our garland, the best fruit of that royal Tree, the safe
return of our gracious Prince. These be the fruits of his mercy to us, where
be the fruits of our thankfulness to him?

Secondly, the barren Fig Tree is of all most Ezech. 15.3.
The Vine fruitless, is of all trees most vselesse. It is compared to man,
Psalm. 128.3. John 15.1. Judge. 9.13.
Vxor tua sicut vitis: to the best man, I am the true vine: it cheeres the
heart of God and man. But if barren it is good for nothing, not so much as to
make a pin to hang a hat on. Oaks and Cedars are good for building, Popplars
for Pales, very bushes for hedging, doted wood for firing: but the fruitless
Vine is good for nothing. Matthew. 5.13.
Salt keeps other things from putrefying, but if it self be putrefyed, what
shall season it? A sweet Singer delights us all; but Quis medebitur cantatori a
Serpente percusso? If a Serpent has stung him, who shall recover his voice? If
the eye be blind, what shall look to the eye?

Ad nihilum valet, quod non valet ad finem suum. It is good for nothing, that
is not good for the end it was made. If a knife be not good to cut, we say it
is good for nothing: yet may some other use be invented for it. If a Plough be
not good to break the ground, we say it is good for nothing; yet it may stop a
gap. If a hound be not good to hunt, we say he is good for nothing, yet may he
in the night give warning of a thief. But if a Fig Tree, a Professor be not
good for fruit, he is indeed, good for nothing. The refuse of other things have
their uses: sour Wine will make Vinegar, old Rags make Paper, Lees are for
Dyers, Soil is good to fat the Land, Potsheards and broken tiles to mend high
ways, all good for somewhat: yea, they offer to sell the combings of hairs;
Ladies and Gentlewomen know whether they be good for any purpose or no. But the
fruitless vine, the sauourlesse Salt, the lightlesse Lamp, the Figlesse
Fig Tree, the graceless Christian, is good for nothing.

We all have our Stations in the Vineyard, to bring forth fruits, but what be
those fruits? It was a smart Invention of him, that having placed the Emperor,
and the Pope, reconciled, in their Maiestick Thrones, he brought the States of
the world before them. First comes a Counselor of State, with this Motto, I
Advise you two: then a Courtier I Flatter you three: then a Husbandman, I Feed
you four, then a Merchant, I Coussen you five: then a Lawyer, I Rob you
six: then a Soldier, I Fight for you seven: then a Physician, I Kill you
eight: Lastly a Priest, I absolve you all nine: This was his Satyr. But in the
fear of God, as our Sovereign does govern us in Truth and Peace; So let the
Counselor advise, the Judge censure, the Husbandman labor, Merchant
traffic, the Lawyer plead, the Soldier bear arms, the Divine preach; all
bring forth the fruits of righteousness: that this Kingdom may flourish, and
be an exemplary encouragement to our neighbors: that our Children may be
blessed after us, our Enemies convinced, Aliens converted, Satan confounded,
the Gospel honored, the Lord glorified, and our own souls eternally saved.
Which grace, the happy fruit of the Gospel; and glory, the happy fruit of
Grace; God the Father grant us all for his mercies sake, God the Son for his
merits sake, God the Holy Ghost for his Names sake: to whom three Persons, and
one most glorious God he rendered all honor and obedience, now and for ever.
Amen.

FINIS.
THE TEMPLE.

A Sermon Preached at PAVLS Cross the fifth of August. 1624.

BY THO. ADAMS.

LONDON, Printed by A. Mathewes for John Grismand, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Paul's Alley at the Sign of the Gunne. 1624.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR HENRY CAREY, Lord HVNSDON, Viscount Rochford.
MY LORD,
AMong the many absurdities, which give us just cause to abhor the Religion
of the present Roman Church, this seems to me none of the least; that they
have filled all the Temples under the command of their politic Hierarchy,
with Idols: and changed the glory of the Invisible God, into the worship of
visible Images. They invoke the Saints by them, yea they dare not serve the
Lord without them. As if God had repealed his vnchageable Law; and in stead of
condemning all worship by an Image, would now receive no worship without an
Image. I have observed this one, among the other famous marks of that
Synagogue; that they strive to condemn that which God has justified, and to
justify what he has condemned. For the former; He has precisely directed our
Justification only by faith in the merits of Christ: this they vehem^ntly
dispute against. For the other; He has (not without mention of his Ie^ousie)
for bidden all worship that has the least tang of Idolatry: this they eagerly
maintain. What large Volumes have they written against the Second
Commandment! as if they were not content to expunge it out of their
Catechismes, unless they did also Dogmatice (...) it to the whole world. They
first set the people upon a plain rebellion, and then make show to fetch them
off again with a neat distinction. Thus do they pumpe their wits to legitimate
that by a distinction, which God has pronounced a Bastard by his definitive
sentence: as if the Papal Decrees were that law, whereby the world should be
judged at the last day. But who will regard a house of magnificent structure,
of honorable and ancient memory, when the plague has infected it; or thieves
possess it? And who, in their right senses, will join themselves to that
Temple, which after pretense of long standing, stately building, and of many
such prerogatives and royalties, is found to be be smeared with superstitions,
and profaned with innumerable Idols? Why should we delight to dwell there,
where God has refused to dwell with us.

I publish this argument as no new thing to your Lordship: but, wherein your
well experienced knowledge is able to inform me. Only I have been bold,
through your thrice honored Name, to transmit this small Discourse to the
world: emboldened by the long proof I have had of your constant love to the
Truth, and the gracious Piety of your most noble Mother, the best
encouragement of my poor labors on earth. The best blessings of God be still
multiplied upon her, your self, your religious Lady, and your honorable
Family: which is continually implored by.

Your Lordships humble Servant. THO. ADAMS.

THE TEMPLE.
2. COR. 6.16. What agreement has the Temple of God with Idols?


IT is not fit, they should be too familiar o^ near together in this world,
whose portions shall be so far asunder in the world to come. The Sheep and
Goats are indeed now blended promiscuou^ly, and none can distinguish them
here, but he that shall separate them hereafter: the right and left hand of
the last Tribunal shall declare them. But they that be alien or opposite to us
in Faith and Profession, are manifest, and we have a frequent charge De non
commiscendo. Now the nearer this ill matched conjunction, the more intolerable;
the same board, ill; the same bed, worse; worst of all, the same Temple. So the
Apostle begins his dehortation, Be not unequally yoked with unbelievers: so he
ends it, What agreement has the Temple of God with Idols! Diverse seeds of
grain in one ground, diverse kinds of beasts in one yoke, Deuter. 22.
diverse sorts of cloth in one garment, were expressly forbidden under the Law:
and shall several Religions be allowed in one Church under the Gospel?

The absurdnes of such a mixture is here illustrated by many oppositions; the
sound of all which is Interrogatiue, the sense Negative. Righteousness and
Unrighteousness, Light and Darkness, Christ and Beliall, the Believer and the
Infidel; these can have no society, communion, no concord, no conjunction; and
What agreement has the Temple of God with Idols?

I need not by Art divide these words, for they are divided by nature. Now as
Quae Deus coniunxit, nemo separet, Those things that God has joined together,
let no man put asunder: so Quae Deus separauit, nemo coniungat, Those things
that God has put asunder, let no man join together. The scope of the Text,
and the matter of my Discourse, is to separate Idols from the Temple of God;
the holy Ghost has divided them to my hands: they cannot agree in his
sentence, let them never agree in our practice; cursed is he that goes about
to compound this controversy. The Temple is holy, Idols profane, it is not
lawful to mix Sacra profanis. The Temple is for God, Idols for the Devil:
God and the Devil admit no reconciliation. Therefore as two hostile nations,
after some treaty of peace, neither liking the proposed conditions, break off
in a rage, In hoc vterque consentimus, quod consentire nolumus, in this we both
consent, that we will not consent at all; so be it here agreed, that no
agreement can be made. In composing differences betwixt man and man, betwixt
family and family, betwixt kingdom and kingdom, Beati Pacifici, Blessed are
the Peacemakers. But in reconciling Christ and Belial, the Temple of God and
Idols, Maledicti pacifici, Cursed are the peacemakers. Here Bella geri place
at magnos habitura triumphos. God himself in Paradise did first put the
quarrel, his Apostle has here given the Alarm, and he deserves a
malediction that sounds a retreat.

But as no battle can be well fought without order, and martial array, so no
discourse can be made profitable without some method. The Temple therefore we
will suppose to be Gods Castle, and Idolatry the Invasion of it. This Castle is
but one, Idols are many. The Champions that God has set to defend his Castle,
are especially or principally Princes and Pastors, the Magistracy and the
Ministry; the adversary forces that fight against it be the Devils mercenary
Soldiers. The Munition on the one side is the Divine Scripture, the sacred
Word of God: the Engines, Ordnance, and Instruments of assault on the other
side, are Idols. Traditions, and those carnal inventions, wherewith the
corrupt heart of man seeks to batter it. This Siege is continual, this feud
implacable, the difference irreconcilable. Yet at last the war shall end,
with the ruin of those enemies, in the triumph of the righteous, and to the
everlasting glory of God?

Now though this war be every way spiritual, it is diverse ways
considerable. There is a material, and there is a mystical Temple: there are
external, and internal Idols: there be ordinary, and extraordinary
Soldiers. Every Christian, as he is a Temple of God, so not without the
assault of Idols: there is a civil war, a Rebellion within him, wherewith
he is continually exercised. In this militant estate of the Church none are
free: only he that gives full allowance to his own corruptions, is not a
Temple of God, but a Synagogue of Satan; a sink of uncleanness, rather then a
Sanctuary of holiness. Thus from one general arise many particulars; and you
will say, Gene. 30.11.
Behold a company; as Leah said of her son Gad, a Troop comes. Yet all
these branches have but one root: they are but like the wheels of a Clock,
taken a little in sunder to view, then to be put together again. Let not
their number discourage your attention. When a wealthy fouourite of the world
sent his servant to be speak lodging for him, he told the Host, Here will come
to night the Lord of such a Manor, the Landlord of such a Town, the Keeper of
such a Forest, the Master of such an Office, the Lay-parson of such a Parish,
a Knight, a Justice of Peace, a Gentleman, an Usurer, and my Master; Alas,
answers the Host, I have not lodging for half so many: Be content, replies
the servant, for all these are but one man. So if you distrust your memories
for room to entertain so many observations, yet be comforted, for all have
but this one Sum, There is no agreement betwixt the Temple of God and Idols.

The Temple.
That which was built by Solomon, was justly called the Wonder of the world: a
white and glorious Monument, set on the hill of Sion, inuiting passengers to
see it, and amazing their eyes when they beheld it. It was of white Marble
without, of Cedar and Gold within, all of the best, all beautiful, precious,
durable. So magnificent was that holy Structure, that al nations have admired
it, Psalm. 4^, 2.
all times celebrated it. Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth
is Mount Sion. While the favor of heaven was set upon Jerusalem, the joy of
the whole earth was mount Sion. It is fit, he that made the world a house for
Man, should have a house in this world made for himself: neither could it be
too costly, ^eeing all the materials that went to it were his own. Every
rotten Cottage is too good for Satan, no Fabric could be too sumptuous for
God. While his people dwelt in Tents, Himself was content to dwell in a
Tabernacle: in the flitting condition of Israel, he would have his own house
a moveable, that they might never remove without him. But when their residence
was settled in the promised Land, he would have his Tabernacle turned into a
Temple; that they dwelling where he appointed them, He might also dwell among
them. The former was for motion, the latter for rest: the one for progress,
the other his standing house. All this while God had but one House at once:
first the Tabernacle, then that gave place to the Temple, and Salomons Temple
being defaced, was supplied by Zorobabels. Now he has many houses, even so
many as there be nations, as there be congregations, as there be persons
professing Christ. We have houses of our own, why should not God have his? A
Prince has more houses then one, why should the King of Heaven be abridg'd? A
King in his own person can dwell but in one house at once; let God have never
so many, he can at once fill them all. He has a house of flesh, so every
Believer is his Temple: a house of stone, so this material one is his Temple:
a house neither of flesh nor stone, but immateriall, immortal in the heavens.
And as Christ says, John 14.
that in his Fathers House there are many Mansions; so in his Fathers militant
Church there are many houses.

It were vain to ask what God should do with a house, when we consider what
we do with our own: what, but dwell in it? But how God does dwell in it,
seems to be a question: seeing the Apostle says, that he dwells not in
Temples made with hands: Acts 17.24.
Indeed he dwells not in them, as we dwell in ours. Our house defends us, God
defends his house: our house comprehends us, God comprehends his house. We are
only within our houses, and they are without us: God is so within his house,
that he is also without it, elsewhere, every where, yea his house is within
him. When we are abroad, we cannot keep our houses; yea when we are in them
asleep, they serve to keep us. God can never be absent from his, nor does the
keeper of this Temple ever sleep. Now every material Temple, wherein the
Saints are assembled, the truth of the Gospel is preached and professed, the
Holy Sacraments duly administered, and the Lords Name is inuocated and
worshipped, is the Temple of God.

Why is it called His Temple, but for the testification of his presence? When
Cain stood excommunicated for murdering his brother, and might not come to the
place appointed for Gods service, he is said to be cast out from the presence
of the Lord. Genes. 4.16.
Some have interpreted the like of Ionahs flying from his presence; Jonah 1.3.
that he fled from the place where the Prophets used to stand ready to be sent
of God. Leuit. 10.2.
Nadab and Abihu dyed before the Lord; that is, before the Altar of the Arc or
Altar, in the Tabernacle or Temple, was said to be done coram D^mino. And yet
too many come to the Temple with so little reverence, as if they thought God
were not at home, or did not dwell in his own house. But the Lord is present
in his Temple: in vain shall we hope to find him elsewhere, if we do not
seek him here I will be in the midst of you, Math 18.20.
gathered together in my Name: not any where, not every where, but here.
Indeed, no place excludes him, but this place is sure of him: he fills all
places with his presence, he fills this with his gracious presence. Here he
both hears us, and is heard of us: Bern.
Audit orantes, docet audientes; he hears our prayers, and teaches us our
lessons. No place sends up faithful prayers in vain, no place has such a
promise of hearing as the Temple. It is the Lords Court of Audience, his
Highness Court of Requests. There humble souls open their grieuances, from
thence they return laden with graces. Why are many so void of goodness, but
because they are negligent of the public devotions? They seek not the Lord
where he may be found, therefore deserve to miss him where they pretend to
seek him. Why should they think to find God in their Closets, while they care
not to seek him in his Temples? When we need the help of our friend, do we
tarry till we meet him by chance, or till he come to us, or shall we not
rather go home to his house? Peter and John went up into the Temple at the
hour of Prayer: Acts 3.1.
they thought it no sufficient to pray in their private chambers, but join
themselves with the Congregation, as a Navy Royal to transport their holy
Merchandise to heaven. Psalm. 134.2.
Lift up your hands in the Sanctuary, and bless the Lord. Pure hands are
accepted in every place; but especially in the Sanctuary. What follows? The
Lord that made heaven and earth, bless thee out of Sion. He says not, the
Lord that made heaven, bless thee upon earth: nor, the Lord that made earth,
bless thee out of heaven: but the Lord that made heaven and earth, bless thee
out of Sion. Blessings come originally from heaven, mediately through Sion. In
the Temple let us seek, in the Temple we shall find those precious treasures
and comforts of Jesus Christ.

This Temple is not without some enemies. Besides those profane Politicians,
that think with one Eustathius, that there is no use of Temples: or those
Massilians, who (as Damascen reports) did add to other Heresies Templorum
contemptum: or those Pseudo-Apostoli, that laughed at a Temple full of
Suppliants, as a house full of fools. Or those that be of Ieroboams mind. who
to settle himself in the kingdom of Israel, diuerts the people from Gods
house at Jerusalem. In stead of that snowy and glittering Temple, they shall
have two golden representations. Sion is too far off, these shall be near
home: that is a tedious way of devotion, these both compendious and plausible.
^ntiqu. lib. 8. cap. 3.
As Josephus brings him in persuading them; My good people and friends, you
cannot but know that no place is without God, and that no place does contain
God; wheresoever we pray, he can hear us; wheresoever we worship, he can see
us: therefore the Temple is superfluous, the journey needless; God is better
able to come to you, then you are to go to him. Beside these, the Temple of
God has two kinds of foes.

1. The Anabaptists tell us; that the old superstition has made those houses
fitter for Stables then for Churches; that they ought no more to be called
Templa Dei, but Templa Idolorum; as they pretend, the Passover was called in
those corrupt times, John 2.13.
not Pascha Dei, but Pascha Iudaeorum. By the same reason they would have
removed all Princes, because some have abused their governments. But we say,
though evil men abuse good things yet if a kingdom were not a lawful State,
David and Josias would never have been Kings; for good men do not use evil
things. The Temple in Christ's time was become a den of thieves, yet even then
and there did he send up devout and holy Prayers. It is a gross ignorance
that cannot distinguish betwixt a fault that proceeds ex natura facti, Th. 1.
qu. 41. art. 6.
and that which proceeds ex abusu boni: the former is malum simpliciter, the
other is but malum per accidens. No man pulles down his house, because
uncleanness has been committed in one of the chambers. Let offenders be
removed from the Temple, not the Temple demolished because of offenses. The
Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, Math. 21.43.
says Christ; not quite taken away, but only taken from the Jews. When GOD
threatened the like to Saul, 1 Samuel 15.28.
he did not mean to have no more Kings, or to reduce it to the former state of
Judges: no, only the kingdom shall lose Saul, but Israel shall not lose the
kingdom. It is a Maxim in nature, Things dedicated to God, are not to be
transferred to the uses of men: a principle in Philosophy, Plato.
Quae recte data sunt, eripi non licet: and a proverb among our children, To
give a thing, and take a thing, is fit for the Devils darling.

2. The Sacrilegious, to whom God is beholding, if they let his Temple stand;
but for the maintenance of it, they will be so bold with him, as either to
share half, or leave him none. There be many that pray in the Temple, who yet
also prey on the Temple: as if a thief should do homage to that house in the
day, which he means to rob in the night. But alas, why should I touch that
sore which is all dead flesh* or speak against Sacrilege In orb sacrilego,
among them that delight in it? Where Lawyers are feeed, hired, bribed to
maintain Sacrilege, God and his poor Ministers may even hold their peace.
Something would be spoken for Sions sake, but I take this place and time for
neither the right Vbi nor Quando. We know, Abigail would not tell Nabal of his
drunkenesse, till he was awoke from his wine. Whenever it shall please God
to awake you from this intoxication, we may then find a season to speak to
you. But God keep you from Nabals destiny; 1 Samuel 25.37.
that when this sin shall be objected to your Consciences on your
deathbeds, your hearts do not then die in you like a stone. One thing let me
beg of you in the Name of him, whom you thus wrong: Howsoever you persist to
rob the Temple of the due Salary, yet do not stand to justify it. By
imploring mercy perhaps you may be saved, but by justifying the Injury, you
cannot but be lost. As the French King, Francis the first said to a woman
kneeling and crying to him for Justice; Stand up woman, for Justice I owe thee;
if thou beg'st any thing, beg mercy. So if you request any thing of God, let it
be mercy, for he owes you Justice: and in this point, God be merciful to you
all.

It was David's earnest prayer, One thing have I desired of the Lord, Psalm.
27.7.
and that will I seek after; that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the
days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his
Temple. There are many that pray David's words, but not with David's heart. Vnum
petij, one thing I have desired, De praeterito, for the time past: and hoc
requiram, this I will still seek after, de futuro, for the time to come: I
have required it long, and this suite I will urge till I have obtained it.
What? to dwell in some of the houses of God all the days of my life, and to
leave them to my children after me: not to serve him there with devotion, but
to make the place mine own possession. These love the House of God too well,
they love it to Have, and to Hold: but because the Conueyance is made by the
Lawyer, and not by the Minister, their Title will be found naught in the end:
and if there be not a Nifi prius to prevent them, yet at the great day of
universal Audite, the Judge of all the world shall condemn them. By this way,
the nearer to the Church, the further from God. The Lords Temple is ordained to
gain us to him, not for us to gain it from him. If we love the Lord, we will
love the habitation of his House, and the place where his Honor dwells: that
so by being humble frequenters of his Temple below, we may be made noble Saints
of his House above, the glorious kingdom of Jesus Christ.

These be the enemies to the Temple, whereof the first would separate Dominum
a Templo, the other templum a Domino: they would take God from the Temple,
these would take the Temple from God. Let me conclude this point with two
watch-words.

1. The first concerns us of the Ministry, the wayters of the Temple. It has
been an old saying, De Templo omne bonum, de Templo omne malum: all good or
evil comes from the Temple. Chrysostom.
Where the Pastor is good, and the people good, he may say to them, 1 Cor. 9.1.
as Paul to his Corinthians, Nonne opus meum vos estis in Domino, Are not ye my
work in the Lord? Where the Pastor is bad, and the people no better, they may
say to him, Nonne destructis nostra tu es in seculo, art not thou our
destruction in the world? It is no wonder, if an abused Temple make a
disordered people. A wicked Priest is the worst creature upon Gods earth: no
sin is so black, as that shall appear from under a white Surplesse. Every
man's iniquity is so much the hainouser, as his place is holyer. The sin of
the Clergy is like a Rheum, which rising from the stomach into the head, drops
down upon the lungs, fretting the most noble and vital parts, till all the
members languish into corruption. The lewd sons of Eli were so much the less
tolerable, by sinning in the Tabernacle. Their sacrifices might do away the
sins of others; no sacrifice could do away their own. Many a soul was the
cleaner for the blood of those beasts they shed; their own souls were the
fouler by it. By one and the same service, they did expiate the peoples
offenses, and multiply their own. Our Clergy is no Charter for heaven. Such
men are like the conueyances of Land, Evidences and Instruments to settle
others in the kingdom of heaven, while themselves have no part of that they
convey. It is no impossible thing, for men at once to show the way to Heaven
with their tongue, and lead the way to Hell with their foot. It was not a
Jewish Ephod, it is not a Romish Cowle, that can privilege an evil doer from
punishment. Therefore it was Gods charge to the executioners of his Judgments,
Ezekiel. 9.6. 1 Pet. 4.17. John 2.15.
Begin at my own Sanctuary: and the Apostle tells us, that Judgment shall
begin at the house of God: and Christ entering into his Prophetical Office,
began reformation at his Fathers house. Let our devout and holy behavior
prevent this; and by our reverent carriage in the Temple of God, let us honor
the God of the Temple. It should be our endeavor to raise up seed unto our
elder Brother, Aug.
to win souls unto Christ. Nunquam cessate lucrari Christo, qui lucrati
estis a Christo. If Christ, while he was upon the Cross, says Bernard, had
given me some drops of his own blood in a Violl, how carefully would I have
kept them, how dearly esteemed them, how laid them next my heart? But now he
did not think it fit to trust me with those drops, But he has entrusted to
me a flock of his lambs, those souls for whom he shed his blood, like whom
his own blood was not so dear unto him: upon these let me spend my care, my
love, my labor, that I may present them holy Saints to my dear Lord Jesus.

2. The other concerns all Christians; that they beware, lest for the abuses
of men, they despise the Temple of God. For as the Altar cannot sanctify the
Priest, so nor can the unholiness of the Priest dishallow the Altar. His sin
is his own, and cannot make you guilty: the virtue and comfort is from God,
and this is still able to make you holy. When we read, 1 Samuel 2.17.
that the sin of the Priests was great before the Lord, for men abhorred the
offering of the Lord: this we all confess, was ill done of the Priests; and I
hope no man thinks, it was well done of the people. Say their sins, yea their
very persons were worthy to be abhorred, shall men therefore scorn the
Sanctuary, and cast that contempt on the Service of God, which belongs to the
vices of man? This were to add our own evil to the evil of others, and to
offend God because he was offended. Cannot the faults of men displease us, but
we must needs fall out with God? Do we not provoke him justly to abhor our
souls, when we so unjustly contemn his service? Know, that he is able to
sanctify thy heart, even by the ministry of that man whose heart he has not
yet sanctified. The virtue consists not in the humane action, but in the divine
Institution. We say of the Sacraments themselves, much more of the Ministers;
Isti non tribuunt, quod per istos tribuitur: these do not give us, what God
does give us by them.

But this age is ficke of such a wanton levitie, that we make choice of the
Temple, according to our fancy of the Preacher: and so tie up the free Spirit
of God from blowing where he pleases, that he shall be beholding to the grace
of the Speaker, for giving grace to the hearer. So whereas Paul ties Faith to
hearing, they will tie hearing to Faith; and as they believe the holiness of
the man, so they expect fruit of the Sermon. This is to make Paul something,
and Apollos something; whereas Paul himself says they are both nothing. God
only gives the increase, and who shall appoint him by whom he shall give it?
Let the feed be good, and the ground good, and the Lord will send fruit
whosoever be the Sower. But while you make hearing a matter of sport,
Preaching is too often become an exercise of wit. Words are but the Images of
matter, and (you shall hear anon) it is not lawful to worship Images. It
dangerously mis becomes the Temple, when any thing shall be intended there,
but the glory of God, and gaining of souls to Jesus Christ.

Thus much concerning the Temple; the next point I must fall upon is

Idols.
Idol in Greek signifies a resemblance or representation, and differs not from
Image in Latin: both at first taken in a good sense: but the corruption of
times has bred a corruption of words; and Idol is now only taken for the Image
of a false god. Every Idol is an Image, but every Image is not an Idol: but
every Image made and used for religious purposes, is an Idol. The Images of God
are Idols; wherewith Popery abounds. An old man, sitting in a chair, with a
triple Crown on his head, and Pontifical robes on his back, a Dove hanging
at his beard, and a Crucifixe in his arms; is their Image of the Trinity.
This Picture sometime serves them for a god in their Churches, and sometime for
a sign at th ir tap-houses: so that it is a common saying in many of their
Cities, Such a Gentleman lies at the Trinity, and his servants at Gods head.
This they seem to do, as if they would in some sort requite their Maker:
because God made man according to his Image, therefore they, by way of
recompense, will make God according to man's Image. But this certainly they
durst not do, without putting the second Commandment out of their
Catechismes, and the whole Decalogue out of their Consciences.

I intend no polemicall discourse of this point, by examining their Arguments:
that business is fitter for the School, then the Pulpit. And, O God, that
either School or Pulpit in Christendom should be troubled about it! that any
man should dare to make that a question, which the Lord has so plainly and
punctually forbidden! Beside the Iniquity, how grievous is the absurdity? How
is a body without a spirit, like to a spirit without a body? A visible picture,
like an invisible nature? How would the King take it in scorn, to have his
picture made like a Wesell or a Hedgehog? And yet the difference betwixt the
greatest Monarch, and the least Emmet, is nothing to the distance betwixt a
finite and an infinite. If they allege with the Anthropomorphites, that the
Scripture attributes to God hands, and feet, and eyes: why therefore may they
not represent him in the same forms? But we say, the Scripture also speaks of
his covering us with the Shadow of his wings; why therefore do they not paint
him like a Bird with feathers? If they say, that he appeared to Daniel in this
form, because he is there called the Ancient of days: we answer, that Gods
Commandments, and not his apparitions, be rules to us: by the former we shall
be judged and not by the latter. It is mad Religion, to neglect what he bids us
do, and to imitate what he has done: as if we should despise his Laws, and
go about to counterfeit his thunder. God is too infinite for the comprehension
of our souls, why should we then labor to bring him into the narrow compass
of bords and stones? Certainly, that should not be Imaged, which cannot be
Imagined. But Christ was a man, why may not his Image be made? Some answer,
that no man can make an Image of Christ, without leaving out the chief part of
him, which is his Divinity. It was the Godhead united to the manhood, that
makes him Christ: sure this cannot be painted. But why should we make Christ's
Image without Christ's warrant? The Lord has forbidden the making of any Image,
whether of things in heaven, where Christ is; or of things on earth, where
Christ was; to worship them. Now till God revoke that precept, what can
authorize this practice?

Their Images of the Saints, employed to such religious purposes, make them no
less then Idolaters. It is a silly shift to say, the honor done to the Images,
reflects upon the represented Saints. When they cloth an Image, is the Saint
ere the gayer or warmer? when they offer to an Image, is the Saint ere the
richer? When they kneel to an Image. the Saint esteems himself no more
worshipped, then the King holds himself ho^oured, when a man speaks to his
picture be fore his face. Therefore some of them ar^ driven to confess
plainly, that the Image is worshipped for it self. But could the Saints in
heaven be heard speak upon earth, they would disclaim that honor, which is
^reiudiciall to their Maker. As Calvin is not afraid to say of the blessed
Virgin, that she would hold it less despite done to her, if they should pull
her by the hair of the head, or trample her in the dirt, then to set ^er in
riuality with her Son and God and Savior. But they tell us, that they
worship not the Images of false Gods, as did the Pagans; but only the Images
of Gods ^wne servants, and choice friends. But will ^he jealous God endure
this, that his hono^ ^e taken from him, upon condition it be no^ bestowed upon
his enemies, but on his friends? Idolatry is called Adultery in the Scriptures:
and shall a woman quit her self from offense, because though she do commit
adultery, yet it is with none but her husbands friends? Is this done in a good
meaning, or in love to Christ? It is but a bad excuse of a wife, to say that
she exceedingly loves her husband, therefore must have some other man to kiss
and embrace in his absence, and all this in love to her husband.

We are all by nature prone to Idolatry: when we were little children, we
loved babies: and being grown men, we are apt to love Images. And as Babies be
childrens Idols. so Idols and Images be men's Babies. It seems that Idols are
fittest for Babes, therefore so the Apostle ^its his caution, 1 John. 5.21.
Babes keep your selves from Idols. As all our knowledge comes by sense, so we
naturally desire a sensible object of devotion: finding it easier to see
Pictures, then to comprehend Doctrines, and to form prayers to the Images of
men, then to form man to the Image of God.

Nor can they excuse themselves from Idolatry, by saying they put their
confidence in God, not in the Images of God. For when the Israelites had made
their golden Calfe, and danced about, one calfe about another; they were not
such beasts, as to think that beast their God. But so can Superstition besot
the mind, that it makes us not men, before it can wake us Idolaters. What do
they say? Exodus 32.1.
Make us gods that shall go before us. Every word is wicked, absurd, sensles.
1. They had seen the power of God in many miraculous deliverances before their
eyes; the voice of God had scarce yet done thundering in their ears: he had
said, I am Jehovah, thou shall have no other gods; and this they trembling
heard him speak out of the midst of the flames: and yet they dare speak of
another god. 2. The singular number would not serve them, make us gods. How
many gods would they have? Is there any more then one? 3. Make us gods; and
were not they strange gods that could be made? In stead of acknowledging God
their Maker, they command the making of gods. 4. This charge they put upon
Aaron, as if he were able to make a god? Aaron might help to spoil a man,
either himself or them, but he could not make a man, not one hair of a man,
much less a god: and yet they say to him, Make us gods. 5. And what should
these gods do? Go before us? Alas, how should they go, that were not able to
stand? how go before others, that could not move themselves? Oh the
blockishnes of men, that make blocks to worship! Otherwise, how could they that
are the Images of God, fall down before the Images of creatures. Wisd. 13.18.
For health, they call upon that which is weak: for life, they pray to that
which is dead: and a prosperous journey they beg of that which cannot set a
foot forward.

Yet as their sin was bad enough, let not our uncharitableness make it
worse. Let us not think them so unreasonable, as to think that Calfe a God;
or that the Idol which they made to day, did bring them out of Egypt three
months before. It was the true God they meant to worship in the Calfe, and yet
(at the best) even that Idolatry was damnable. So charity bids us hope of the
Papists, that they do not take that board or stone for their God, yet withal
we find that God does take them for Idolaters. They tell us (with a new
distinction) that they forbid the people, to give Divine worship to Images: but
we say, they had better forbid the people to have Images. A block lies in the
high way, and a watchman is set by it to warn the Passengers; Take heed, here
is a block. But how if the watchman fall a sleep? Whether is the safer
course, quite to remove the block out of the way, or to trust the passengers
safety upon the watchmans vigilancie? As for their watchmen, commonly they are
as very Images as the Images themselves: and how should one block remove
another? When Jeroboam had set up his two Idols in Israel, he I rakes up his
Priests out of the common kennell; the basest of the people were good enough
for such a bastard devotion: wooden priests were fit enough to wayt upon
golden Deities. So when Micah had made him a costly Idol, he hires him a
beggarly Leuite. No ortherwise did the Painter excuse himself, for drawing the
Images of Peter and Paul too ruddy and high colored in the face; that
howsoever they were while they lived, pale with fasting and preaching, yet now
they must needs become red with blushing at the errors and ignorance of their
successors; for such with a loud noise they give themselves out to be.

To conclude, if it were as easy to convince Idolaters, as it is to confound
and tread down their Idols, this labor of Confutation had bin well spared, or
were soon ended. But if nothing can reclaim them from this superstitious
practice, let them read their fearful sentence. Their place shall be
without, Revel. 22.18.
among the dogs, those desperate sinners incapable of forgiveness. Esa. 1.31.
The strong, the Idol which they made their strength, shall be as towe, and
the maker or worshipper thereof as a spark, and they shall both burn together
in everlasting fire, and none shall quench them. Now the Lord open their eyes to
see, and sanctify their hearts to yield, that there is no agreement betwixt
the Temple of God and Idols: which is the next point, whereof I shall speak
with what brevity I can, and with what fidelity I ought.

No agreement.
There be some points which the wrangling passions of men have left further
asunder, then they found them; about which there needed not have bin such a
noise. But things that are in their own natures contrary, and opposed by the
ordinance of God, can never be reconciled. An enemy may be made a friend, but
enmity can never be made friendship. The air that is now light, may become
dark: but light can never become darkness. Contraries in the abstract are out
of all composition. The sick body be recovered to health, but health can never
be sickness. The sinner may be made righteous, but sin can never become
righteousness. Fire and water, peace and war, love and hatred, truth and
falsehood, faith and infidelity, Religion and Idolatry, can never be made
friends: there can be no agreement betwixt the Temple of God and Idols.

God is Ens entium, All in all: an Idol is nothing in the world, says the
Apostle: now All and Nothing are most contrary. Idolatry quite takes away
Faith, a fundamental part of Christian religion: for an Idol is a thing
visible, Heb. 11.1.
but Faith is of things invisible. The Idol is a false evidence of things
seen, Faith is a true evidence of things not seen. Besides, God can defend
himself, save his friends, plague his enemies: Hieron.
but Idols nec hosts absc^ndere possunt quasi dij, nec se abscondere quasi
homines; they can neither revenge themselus on prouokers, like gods; nor hide
themselves from iniurers, like men.

The foolish Philistims thought that the same house could hold both the Arc
and Dagon; 1. Sam. 5.3.
as if an insensible Statue were a fit companion for the living God. In the
morning they come to thank Dagon for the victory, and to fall down before
him, before whom they thought the God of Israel was fallen: and lo, now they
find the keeper flat on his face before the prisoner. Had they formerly of
their own accord, with awful reverence, laid him in this posture of an humble
prostration; yet God would not have brooked the indignity of such an
entertainment. But seeing they durst set up their Idol cheek by cheek with
their Maker, let them go read their folly in the Temple floor, and confess
that he which did cast their god so low, could cast them lower. Such a shame
does the Lord owe all them, which will be making matches betwixt him and Belial.
Yet they consider not, how should this God raise us, who is not able to stand,
or rise himself? Strange they must confess it, that whereas Dagon was wont to
stand, and themselves to fall down, now Dagon was fallen down, and themselves
stood; and must help up with their own god. Yea, their god seems to worship
them on his face, and to crave that succor from them, which he was never able
to give them. Yet in his place they set him again; and now lift up those hands
to him, which helped to lift him up; and prostrate those faces to him, before
whom he lay prostrate. So can Idolatry turn men into the stocks and stones
which they worship? They that make them, are like unto them. But will the Lord
put it up thus? No, the next fall shall burst it to pieces; that they may
sensibly perceive, how God scorns a Competitor, and that there is no agreement
betwixt Him and Idols. Now what is the difference betwixt the Philistims and
Papists? The Philistims would set God in the Temple of Idols, the Papists would
set Idols in the Temple of God. Both agree in this, that they would make God
and Idols agree together. But Manasseh found to his cost, 2 Chr^n. 33.7
than an Idol might not be endured in the house of God.

How vain then, are the endeavors to reconcile our church with that of Rome;
when God has interposed this bar, there is No agreement betwixt him and
Idols? Either they must receive the Temple without Idols, or we must admit
Idols with the Temple, or this composition cannot be. There is a contention
betwixt Spain and the Netherlanders, concerning the right of that Country: but
should not the Inhabitants well fortify the coasts, the raging sea would soon
determine the controversy, and by force of her waves take it from them both.
There is a contestation betwixt us and the Pontificians, which is the true
Church: but should not we in mean time carefully defend the Faith of Christ
against Idols, Superstition would quickly decide the business, and take the
possession of truth from us both. A proud and perverse stomach keeps them from
yielding to us: God and his holy word forbids our yielding to them: they will
have Idols or no Temple, we will have the Temple and no Idols: now till the
agreement be made betwixt the Temple and Idols, no atonement can be hoped
betwixt us and them.

Gal. 5.^.
I Paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you
nothing. He that would not endure a little leaven in the lump, what would he
have said of a little poison? If Moses joined with Christ, the ceremonial Law
with the Gospel, were so offensive to him; how would he have brooked Christ
and Belial, light and darkness, righteousness and unrighteousness, the cup of the
Lord and the cup of devils, the Table of the Lord, and the table of devils, the
Temple of God and Idols? In the tuning of an Instrument, those strings that be
right we meddle not with, but set the rest higher or lower, so as they make a
proportion and harmony with the former. The same God who of his gracious mercy,
has put us in the right and vniarring harmony of truth, bring them home in
true consent to us, but never suffer us to fall back unto them. Hitherto the
contention between us has not been for circumstance, but substance; not for
the bounds, but for the whole Inheritance: whether God or man, grace or nature,
the blood of Christ or the milk of Mary, the written Canon or unwritten
Tradition, Gods ordinance in establishing Kings, or the Popes usurpation in
deposing them, shall take place in our consciences, and be the rule of our
faiths and lives.

We have but one Foundation, he infallible word of God: they have a new
foundation, the voice of their Church, which they equalize in presumption of
certainty with the other. We have but one Head, that is Christ, they have
gotten a new head, and dare not but believe him, whatsoever Christ says.
Sponsus Ecclesiae nostrae Christus, Christ is our husband: they have a new
husband. While Rome was a holy Church, she had a holy husband: but now as
Christ said to the woman of Samaria, He whom thou now have, is not thine
husband: so he whom the Romanists have now got, is an adulterer, he is no
husband. So that here is Foundation against foundation, Head against head,
Husband against adulterer, Doctrine against doctrine, Faith against unbelief,
Religion against superstition, the Temple of God against Idols; and all these
so diametrally opposed, that the two Poles shall sooner meet, then these be
reconciled. Michael and the Dragon cannot agree in one Heaven, nor the Arc and
Dagon in one house, nor Jacob and Esau in one womb, nor Ioha and Cerinthus in
one Bath, nor the clean and the leprous in one c^mp, nor truth and falsehood in
one mouth, nor the Lord and Mammon in one heart, nor religion and superstition
in one kingdom, nor God and Idols in one Temple. The silly old Hermit was
sorry, that God and the Devil should be at such odds, and he would undertake to
make them friends: but the Devil bad him even spare his labor, for they two
were everlastingly fallen out. No less vain a business does that man attempt,
that would work an agreement betwixt the Temple of God and Idols.

I take leave of this point with a caution. Fly the places of infection, come
not within the smoke of Idols, lest it smother the zeal of Gods Temple in your
hearts. Reuolting Israel calls for gods; but why should this god of theirs be
fashioned like a Calfe? What may be the reason of this shape? Whence had they
the original of such an Idol? Most likely in Egypt: they had seen a black
Calfe with white spots worshipped there. This Image still ran in their minds,
and stole their hearts, and now they long to have it set up before their eyes.
Egypt will not out of their fancies: when they wanted meat, they thought of the
Egyptian fleshpots: now they want Moses, they think of the Egyptian Idols.
They brought gold out of Egypt; that very gold was contagious; the very
Eare-rings and Jewels of Egypt are fit to make Idols. The Egyptian burdens made
them run to the true God, the Egyptian examples led them to a false god. What
mean our wanderers by running to Rome and such superstitious places; unless
they were weary of the Church of God, and would fetch home Idols? If it were
granted, that there is some little truth among them, yet who is so simple, as
to seek his corn among a great heap of chafe, and that far off; who may have
it at home, winnowed and cleansed to his hand?

The very sight of evil is dangerous, and they be rare eyes that do not
convey this poison to our hearts. I have heard of some, that even by laboring
in the Spanish galleys, have come home the slaves of their superstitions. Egypt
was always an unlucky place for Israel, as Rome is for England. The people
soiourned there, and they brought home one Calfe: Jeroboam soiourned there, and
he brought home Two calves: Judge. 17.
an old woman (in all likelihood) had soiourned there, and she brought home a
great many. The Romish Idols have not the shape of calves, they have the sense
and meaning of those calves: and to fill the Temple full of Calves, what is it
but to make Religion guilty of Nonsense.
Bulls?

Consider it well, ye that make no scruple of superstitious assemblies; it will
be hard for you to dwell in a Temple of Idols untainted. Not to sin the sins
of the place we live in, is as strange, as for pure liquor tunn'd up in a musty
vessel, not to smell of the caske. Egypt will teach even a Joseph to swear: a
Peter will learn to curse in the high Priests Hall. If we be not scorched with
the fire of bad company, we shall be sure to be black'd with the smoke. The
soundest body that is, may be infected with a contagious air. Indeed a man may
travel through Ethiopia unchanged, but he cannot dwell there without a
complexion discolored. How has the common practice of others brought men to
the deuillish fashion of swearing, or to the brutish habit of drinking, by
their own confessions? Superstition, if it have once got a secret liking of
the heart, like the plague will hang in the very clothes; and after long
concealment, break forth in an unlooked for infection. The Israelites, after
all their ayring in the wilderness, will still smell of Egypt. Math. 2.15.
We read God saying, Out of Egypt have I called my Son. That God did call his
Son out of Egypt, it is no wonder: the wonder is that he did call him into
Egypt. It is true, that Egypt could not hurt Christ: the King does not follow
the Court, the Court waits upon the King: wheresoever Christ was, there was the
Church. But be our Israelites so sure of their sons, when they send them into
Egypt, or any superstitious places? It was their presumption to send them in,
let it be their repentance to call them out.

The familiar society of orthodox Christians with mis^beleeuers, has by God
ever been most strictly forbidden: and the nearer this conjunction, the more
dangerous, and displeasing to the forbidder. No man can choose a worse friend,
then one whom God holds his enemy. When Religion and Superstition meet in one
bed, they commonly produce a mungrell generation. 2 Samuel 3.3.
If David marry Maachah, their issue proves an Absolon. If Solomon love
idolatrous women, here is enough to overthrow him with all his wisdom. Other
strange women only tempt to lust, these to mis-religion; and by joining his
heart to theirs, he shall di^ioyne it from God. One Religion matching with
another, not seldom breed an Atheist, one of no religion at all. I do not
say, this is a sufficient cause of divorce after it is done, but of restraint
before it is done. They may be one flesh, though they be not one spirit. The
difference of religion or virtue makes no divorce here, the great Judges
sentence shall do that hereafter. And the believing husband is never the
further from heaven, though he cannot bring his unbelieving wife along with
him. The better shall not carry up the worse to heaven, nor the worse pull
down the be^ter to hell. Quod fieri non debuit, factum valet. But now, is
there no tree in the Garden, but the forbidden? none for me to love, but one
that hates the truth? Yes, let us say to them in pl^ine fidelity, as the
sonn^s of Jacob did to the Shichemites in dissembling policy; Gene. 34.14.
We cannot give our sister to a man that is uncircumcised: either consent you
to us in the truth of our Religion, or we will not consent to you in the
league of our Communion.

Saint Chrysostom calls this a plain denial of Christ. H^e that eats of
the meat offered to Idols, Gustu negauit Christum, has denied Christ with his
tasting. If he but handle those things with delight, Tactu negauit Christum,
he has denied Christ with his touching. Though he touch not, taste not, yet
if he stand to look upon the Idolatry with patience, Visu negauit Christum,
he has denied Christ with his eyes. If he listen to those execrable charms,
Auditu negauit Christum, has denied Christ with his ears. Omitting all these,
if he do but smell to the Incense with pleasure, Odoratu negauit Christum, he
has denied Christ with his smelling It is said of the Israelites, Commisti
sunt inter gentes, Psalm. 106.35
They were mingled among the Heathen. What followed? Presently, they learned
their works. The reason why the Raven returned not to Noah's Arc, is given by
some, because it met with a dead carkase by the way. Why do we pray, Deliver
us from evil; but that we imply, (besides all other mischiefs) there is an
infectious power in it to make us evil? Let us do that we pray, and pray
that we may do it. Yea Lord, free us from Egypt, estrange us from Rome,
separate us from Idols, deliver us from evil, For thine is the kingdom, the
power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

Thus far we have taken a literal survey of the Text; concerning the
material Temple, external or obiectuall Idols, and the impossibility of
their agreement. Now to come nearer home to our selves in a moral Exposition:
here first

The Temple of God
Is the Church of Christ, and they are so like, that we often interchange the
terms, calling a Temple the Church, and the Church a Temple of God. The
material Temple under the Law was a figure of the spiritual under the
Gospel. The former was distinguished into three rooms; the Porch, the holy
place, and the Sanctum Sanctorum, or Holy of holies. The Porch prefigured
Baptism, which is the door whereby we enter into the Church of Christ. The
Holy place, the communion of the militant church vply earth, separated from the
world. The Hoon of holies, whereinto the high Priest only entered, and that once
a year, presignified the glorious kingdom of heaven, wherinto the Lord Jesus
entered once for all. There was one Court of the Temple common, whither access
was denied to none: though they were vn^leane or uncircumcised, thus far they
might be admitted. There was another Court within that, allowed to none but the
Israelites, and of them to none but the clean. There was a third, proper only
to the Priests and Levites, whither the Laity might not come: thus far they
might bring their offerings, but further they might not offer to go. In the
Temple it self there was one room, into which the Levites might not enter,
the Priests might. Another, whither the Priests might not come; but only the
high Priest, and even he but once yearly. Some passages of the Christian
Church are common to all, even to the unclean hypocrites, and foule-hearted
sinners. They have access to Gods holy ordinances, and tread in his Courts; as
the Pharisee came into the congregation, and Judas received the Communion.
Other are secret and reserved, wherein the faithful only converse with God,
and solace themselves in the sweet fruition of his gracious presence.

The material Temple in three divisions, seemed to be a clear representation
of the Church in three degrees. The first signified the external and visible
face of the Church, from which no professor of Christ is debarred. The second,
the communion of the invisible Church upon earth. The last, the highest heaven
of Gods glorified Saints. Neither did those rooms more exceed one another then
do these parts of the spiritual house of Christ. What are the most polished
corners of the Temple, to the spiritual and living stones of the Church? What
be pebles to Saphirs, or marbles to Diamonds? Howsoever some are more
transported with insensible monuments, then with living Saints. As it was a
complaint long since, Fulget Ecclesia in parietibus, luget in pauperibus. Yet
Temples are built for men, not men for Temples: and what is a glorious edifice,
when the whole world is not worth one soul? Dead walls be of small value, to
the living Temples of the holy Ghost: yea, the temple of our body, to the
temple of Christ's Body, his Church: yea the Temple of Gods Church militant on
earth, to that which is triumphant in heaven. What is silver and gold, Cedar
and Marble, to those divine graces, faith, truth, piety, holiness? Salomons
Temple did last but some 430. years, the Church is for eternity. The Temple
took up but a little space of ground, at most the Hill Sion, the Church is
universally spread: in all parts of the world God has his chosen.

Did our intellectual eyes truly behold the beauty of this Temple, we would
with that good Emperor, esteem it better to be a member of the Church, then
head of the kingdom. We would set this one thing against all worldly glories.
As when Henry 4. that late Great king of France, was told of the king of
Spaines ample dominions: as first he is king of Castile, and I (quoth Henry) am
king of France: he is king of Navarre, and I am king of France: he is king of
Portugal, and I am king of France: he is king of Naples, and I am king of
France: he is king of the Si^ilies, and I am king of France: he is king of
Noua Hispania* the West Indies, and I am king of France; he thought the
kingdom of France equivalent to all these. So let thy soul, O Christian,
solace it self against all the wants of thy mortal pilgrimage, in this, that
thou art a member of the church. Another has more wit or learning, yet I am a
Christian: another has more honor and preferment on earth, yet I am a
Christian: another has more silver and gold and riches, yet I am a Christian:
another has large possessions, yet I have an Inheritance in heaven, I am a
Christian. David thought it not so happy to be a King in his own house, as to
be a doore-keeper in Gods house. Were our hearts thoroughly sanctified, we
would undervalue all honors to this, that we are parts of this spiritual
Temple, the members of Jesus Christ.

Idols.
Every device of man in the service of God is a mere Idol. Whatsoever we
invent out of Gods School, or substitute in Gods room, is to us an Idol.
Howsoever we flatter our selves, with reflecting all the honor on God, yet he
will reflect the vengeance on us. Job 13.7
Shall a man speak deceitfully for God, or tell a lie for his glory? He is
not so penurious of means to honor himself, as to be beholding to us for a
lie. The doctrine of universal grace seems to make much for Gods glory, but
himself says it is ^lye; for he w^ll have mercy on whom h^ will have mercy,
and whom he will he hardneth. To say that Christ in the womb wrought many
miracles, has a fair show of honoring him; but who can say it is not a lie?
Sure, we read no such matter. To distribute among the Saints departed
several Offices; as one to have the charge of women in childbed, another to
be the Patron of such a City or Country; (to omit their protection of
beasts, one for hogs, another for horses) seems to honor God in thus
honoring them: but it is a lie, and a plain derogation to his universal
providence: yea as absurd, as if the flies should take upon them to give the
charges and offices of this kingdom. To say, the Saints in heaven know the
occurrents of this nether world, and the condition of their ancient friends or
children below, reading them in the Deity, as by the reflection of a glass;
this is a fiction that carries a show of honoring God: but it does indeed
dishonor him, by making creatures as omniscient as their Maker. Besides, how
absurd is it to say, that John in Patmos seeing Christ, did see all that Christ
saw. If I standing on the ground, see a man on the top of a high Turret, do I
see all that he sees. If the sight of him that looks, be to be measured by
the sight of him on whom he looks; it will follow that he which looks on
a blind man, should see nothing at all. And who sees not the blindness of
this consequence?

To say that all the worship done to the Virgin mother, redounds to the honor
of her Son and God, is a gross falsehood. The Idolatrous Jews might as well
have pretended the honor of God, when they worshipped the Queen of heaven.
Specul Exempl.
That fanaticall vision of theirs, concerning the two ladders that reached up
to heaven, while Christ was preparing to judge the world: the one Red, at the
top whereof Christ sat: the other white, at the top whereof the Virgin sat:
and when the Friars could not get up the red ladder of Christ, but evermore
tumbled down backward, St. Francis called them up the white ladder of our
Lady, and there they were received. Did this make for the honor of Christ,
when the red blood of our Savior is not so able to bring men to heaven, as the
white milk of his mother? which must needs be the moral or meaning of it.
Barrhad in Con^ Euang.
Or the observation of Barrhadius the Jesuit, who made bold to ask Christ,
why in his ascension to heaven he did not take his mother along with him; and
makes himself this answer: It may be, Lord, for fear lest thy heavenly Court
should be in doubt, which of the two they should go first to meet, An tibi
Domino suo, an ipsi Dominae suae, whether thee their Lord, or her their Lady:
as if it had been well advised of Christ to leave his mother behind him, lest
she should share part of his glory. Did this make for the honor of Christ? To
choke up the knowledge of God, by preaching that Ignorance is the mother of
Devotion, has small color of honoring God. The ascribing of false miracles
to the living or departed Saints, seems to honor God, but sure he will never
thank them for it. Saint Augustine being sick, a blind man came to him,
expecting that he could miracu^ously restore his sight: but that good Father
sent him away with a check, Do thou think that if I could cure thee by
miracle, that I would not by miracle cure my self?

It is a foolish thought, that God will be glorified by a lie. Our judicial
Astrologers, that tie men's destinies to the Stars and Planets, pretend Gods
honor, who has given such virtue and influence to his creatures; but indeed
make the^ no better then Idols. Though the Sun and Moon be good and
necessary, yet to adore the Sun and Moon is flat Idolatry. It was not
Mercury that made the thief, nor Venus that made the strumpet: as when the
husband cudgeld his adulterous wife, and she complained that he was unnatural
to strike his own flesh; alleging that it was not she that played the harlot,
but Venus in her: to whom he replied, that neither was it she that he did
beat, but Venus in her, or rather Venus out of her.

To make this useful to ourselves; let us take heed of fancying an other
service of God, then he has prescribed us. Every Master in his own family,
appoints the manner how he will be served. He that requires our service,
requires it his own way; or else he holds us to serve our selves, not him.
Shall we make ourselves wiser then our Maker, as if he did not best know what
would best please him? Shall heaven give a blessing to that, which was devised
against the will of heaven? Does not God threaten them with the addition of
plagues, that shall add to his precepts? If such devices be good and
necessary, why did not God command them? Did he want wisdom? If they be not
necessary, why do we use them? Is it not our presumptuous folly? The Lords
Jealousy is stirred up by the rivalitie, not only of a false God, but of a
false worship. Nothing is more dangerous, then to mint his services in our own
brains. In vain do they worship me, Math. 15.9.
teaching for doctrines, the commandments of men. Is it not gricuous for men
to lose all their labor, and that in the maine business of their life? That so
many hundred oblations, so many thousand prayers, so much cost of their purses,
so much affliction to their bodies, so much anguish of their souls, should be
all forceles, fruitles? Like a dog that hunts counter, and takes great pains
to no purpose.

Evil deeds may have sometimes good meanings; but those good meanings are
answered with evil recompenses. Many bestow their labors, their goods, their
bloo^s, and yet receive torments in stead of thanks. When the Apostle bids us
mortify our earthly members, Colos^. 3.5.
he does not intend violence to our selves, but to our sins. There is one
mortification, to cast our selves out of the world: there is another
mortification, to cast the world out of us. A body macerated with scourges,
disabled with fastings, wearied with pilgrimages; was none of S. Paul's
mortification. Who has required this at your hands? Where is no command
imposed, no reward proposed; no promise made, if you do; no punishment
threatened, if you do not; what fruit can be expected but shame? Must we needs
either do nothing, or that which is worse then nothing? Shall we offer so
much, suffer so much, and all in vain? Quis haec a vobis? Let him pay you your
wages, that did set you on work. Never plead your own reason, where God has
set a plain interdiction. He that suffers his faith to be ouerruled by his
reason, may have a fat reason, but a lean faith. That man is not worthy to be
a follower of Christ, who has not denied himself; therefore denied his
Reason; for his reason is no small piece of himself. If Reason get the head in
this divine business, it presently preuailes with will, and will commands the
affections: so this new Triumvirate shall govern the Christian, Sabo^^ par. 1.
not Faith. But as when three Ambassadors were sent from Rome, to appease the
discord between Nicomedes and Prusias; whereof one was troubled with a Megrim
in his head, another had the Gowt in his toes, and the third was a fool; Cato
said merrily, that Embassage had neither Head, nor Foot, nor Heart. So that man
shall neither have a head to conceive the truth, nor a foot to walk in the
ways of obedience, nor a heart to receive the comforts of salvation; that
suffers his reason, will, and affections, to usurp upon his faith.

Hence it comes to pass, that the most horrid sins are turned into Idols; by
setting our own reasons against the manifest will of God. Thus lies shall be
fathered upon the Father of truth, and truth upon the Father of lies. Thus
breach of faith, and perjury, shall be held Orthodoxe opinions. Yea, that
execrable monster, whereof this day remembers us, Treason it self, shall be
held good Doctrine. Rude cacodaemon, that stigmaticke Idol, that gross devil
shall be worshipped. Si fas caedendo coelestia scandere, If this be the way to
the kingdom of heaven, if thus men may merit to be stars in the Firmament,
by embruing their hands in the bloud-Royall of Princes; what Jesuit will not
be a Star? When such be their principles, such must needs be their
practices. What though God condemn Treason to hell, when the Pope will advance
it to heaven? What though the Diuinne Scripture does rank traitors among dogs
and devils, when the Pope will number them among Saints? It was wont to be
said, Ex quolibet ligno non fit Mercurius, every block is not fit to make an
Image. Yet now, the most monstrous sin that ever the devil shaped in his
Infernal forge, is not only by the practice, but even by the Doctrine of
Rome, turned into an Idol. What is that we shall call sin, when murder and
Treason is held religion? Alas for our age, to bear the date of these
impieties! That our posterity should ever read in our Chronicles: In such a
year in such a day Traitors conspired against their lawful and Gracious
Sovereign: and that in those days there was a sect of men living, that did
labor in voluminous writings, to justify those horrible facts* But oh, may
those pestiferous monuments be as fast devoured by oblivion, as the authors and
abettors themselves are swallowed up by confusion. And the same God deliver us
his people from their conspiracies, that has delivered this his Church from
their Idolatries.

Thus we have looked abroad, but now have we no Idols at home? O how happy was
it, if they were as far from the Temple, as they are, from agreement with the
Temple? I will not abound in this discovery; there be three maine Idols among
us; Vain P^easure, vain Honor, and Riches: and it is to be feared, that these
three vanities have more clients then the Trinity that made us. The first is an
Idol of the water, the next an Idol of the air, the last an Idol of the earth.

1. Vain Pleasure; and oh what a world of foolish worshippers flock to this
merry Goddess! She has a Temple in every corner: Ebrietie sits in Tauernes,
burning smoky Incense, and sacrificing drink-offrings to her. So that if a man
should prophecy of wine and strong drink, Mich. 2.11.
he were a Prophet fit for this age: but to preach sobriety, is held but a dry
doctrine. We commend wine for the excellency of it; but if it could speak, as
it can take away speech, it would complain, that by our abuse, both the
excellencies are lost: for the excellent man does so spoil the excellent wine,
until the excellent wine has spoiled the excellent man. O that a man should
take pleasure in that which makes him no man: that he should let a thief in at
his mouth, to steal away his wit: that for a little throat-indulgence, he
should kill in himself not only the first Adam, his reason; but even the
second Adam his regeneration; and so commit two murders at once! In every
Brothell this Idol has her temple; where the bed of uncleanness, is the Altar,
the Priest a strumpet, and the sacrifice, a burning flesh offered to Moloch. It
is no rare thing for a man to make an Idol of his Mistres, and to spend more
time in her courtings, then he does at his prayers* more cost on her body, the^
upon his own soul. Images were but dead Idols, but painted Popiniayes be
living Idols. Pleasure has a larger extent, then I can now stand to survey:
this may be called an Idol of the Water; fluid and vnsatisfying.

2. Vain Honor is the Idol of fools: no wise man ever sought felicity in
shadows. His Temple is Pride, his Altar Ambition, his Service Flattery, his
Sacrifice Petulancy. Silly Sennacherib, to make an Idol of a Chariot: Esa.
37.24.
and no wiser Prince of Tire, Ezekiel 28.4.
to make an Idol of his own brain! Men mistake the way to be great, while they
neglect the way to be good. All the while a man hunts after his shadow, he
mis-spends his time and pains: for the Sun is upon his back, behind him, and
his shadow is still vn-ouertaken before him: but let him turn his face to the
Sun, and follow that, his shadow shall follow him. Invaine does that man pursue
honor, his shadow, while he turns his face from virtue and goodness; he shall
miss what he so labors to catch: but let him set his face toward Christ, the
Sun of righteousness, and run to the high prize of eternity, this shadow shall
wayt upon him; for those that honor me, I will honor, says the Lord.

God resists the proud; and good reason, for the proud resists God. Other
sins divert a man from God, only Pride brings him against God, and brings God
against him. There is nothing in this world worth our pride, but that moss
will grow to a stone. Pride is ever dangerous, but the^ most when it puffes us
up with a presumption of merit. Thus the Romists presume to do more good works,
and those more perfect then God requires: so that he is become a debtor to
them, and bound to make them satisfaction. But doubtless, God will more easily
bear with those sins whereof we repent, then with that righteousness whereof
we presume. Luke 18.
I am not as other men are, said the Pharisee; and the clock of his tongue went
truer then the dyall of his heart; he was not like other men indeed, sure he
was like none of them that should be saved. Humility is so hard a lesson to get
into the heart, that Christ was feign to come down from heaven, in his own
person to teach it.

Pride is even conversant about good works and graces; this Saul loves to be
among the prophets. So that if a man have some good measure of sanctification,
and of assurance of eternal life; it will be hard not to be proud of that.
Pride has hurt many, Humility never yet did harm. A man goes in at a door,
and he stoops: the door is high enough, yet he stoops: you will say, he needs
not stoop; Ber^s
yea, but says Bernard, there is no hurt in his stooping: otherwise he may
catch a knock, this way he is safe. A man may bear himself too high upon the
favor of God, there is no danger in his stooping, no harm in humility. Let me
rather be the lowest of Gods servants, then the noblest among his enemies. The
honor of this world is at best but a golden dream, from which men commonly
awake in contempt. This is an Idol of the Air.

3. Wealth is the covetous man's Idol; Job shows the form of his Canonization:
He m^kes gold his hope, Job. 31.24.
and says to the wedge, Thou art my confidence. As treason sets up a new king,
for David, Absolon: so covetousness sets up a new god, for Jehovah, Mamon. But,
O miserable god, says Luther, that cannot defend it self from rusting or
robbing. And, O more miserable man, that trusts himself upon the keeping of
that god, which himself is feign to keep. Judge. 17.
Micah did not worship his silver, till it was cast into the form of an Idol:
these spare the labor of forming, and worship the very metal. The
Superstitious adore Aurum in Idolo, gold in the Idol: the covetous find Idolum
in Auro, an Idol in the very gold. Metalla seems to sound quasi (...), Post
alia necessaria: when they had manured the ground, sown seeds, gathered
fruits, and found out other things to sustain life, then Itum est in viscer a
terra, they dug into the bowels of the earth. O that man should lay that
next his heart, which God has placed under his feet! that the thing which
might be best spared, should be most admired! Mammon has his Temple, the
world: God has his Temple, the Church: but there be many that balke Gods
Temple to go to Mammons: and they offer fair, that make some reverence to
God, as they pass by him to the world. Hence it is, that so many get riches,
and so few godliness. The Poets feign Pluto to be the god of Hell, and the god
of Riches; (as if Riches and Hell had both one Master.) Sometime they set him
forth lame and slow-paced, sometime nimble as fire. When Jupiter sends him to a
Soldier or a Scholar, he goes limping: when he sends him to on of his
Pandars, he flies like lightning. The moral is, the wealth that comes in Gods
name, comes slowly, and with diligent labor: but that which is haled in with
an evil conscience, is both hasty and abundant in the collection. This is the
worldlings maine god, all the rest be subordinate to him. Si modo Jupiter mihi
propitius sit, minores deos flocci sacio: So long as Mammon favors them, or
their Great Diana multiplies their gains; they scorn the other petty gods,
making account with a little money to buy them all. This is an Idol of the
Earth.

No agreement.
Ye cannot serve God and Mammon; you may dispute for it, you shall never
compound it. Gehezi cannot run after the forbidden talents, but he must leave
his master. Some indeed here, have so finely distinguished of the business, that
though they serve God, they will serve him more thriftily, and please him as
good cheap as they can. They have resolved not to do evil, though they may
gain by it: yet for gain, they will venture as near evil, as possibly they
can and miss it. But when it comes to push, it will be found, that for
onescruple of gold, they will make no s^ruple of conscience. But as those
Inhabitants of Judea, that served both God and Idols, did indeed neither serve
God nor Idols: so these higlers, while they would have two masters, (...)
indeed never a one. For in the evil day, their master the world will renounce
them, and then their master Christ will not receive them: so highly does he
scorn such a competition. Man was made to serve God, and the world to serve
man: so the world at best is but Gods servants servant. Now if we plead our
selves Gods servants, what an indign and preposterous thing is it, to take our
own servant, and make him competitor with our Master? God says, lend, give,
clothe, feed, harbor: Mammon says, Take, gather, extort, oppress, spoil:
whether of these is our God? Even he that is most obeyed. No less might be
said for pleasures and honors, or whatsoever is delectable to flesh and blood.
The love of this world is enmity to God; and the East and West shall sooner
unite their forces, the these be reconciled.

lt is the Devils especial aim, to bring these Idols near the Temple: he
finds no such pleasure to dominere in his own hell; but he has a mind to
Paradise. One wittily observes, that Christ chose poor Fishermen, as the
fittest to receive his Oracles, and to plant his Church; because Satan scorned
to look so low, as to tempt them. He studied to prevent Christ among the Kings
of the earth, and great Doctors, never suspecting silly fishers. But when he
found himself deceived, he will then make their whole profession to fare the
worse for it; he bears the whole succession of their Tribe an old grudge.
Before, he passed by them, and tempted the great Masters; now he will sooner
tempt them then Kings and Emperors. 1. Cor. 5.12
The Church does not judge them that are without, but them within: and Satan
had rather foil one within, then a hundred without. He has a desire to all,
but especially he loves a religious soul: he would eat that with more
greedines, then Rachel did her Mandrakes. The fall of one Christian better
pleases him, then of many unbelievers. No King makes war against his own
loyal subjects, but against rebels and enemies. The devil is to subtle, to
spend his malice upon them that do him ready service He cares not so much to
multiply Idols in Babylon, as to get one into Sion. To maintain priests of
Baal in the land of Israel, at the table of Iesabel, as it were under Gods
nose: or to set up Calves at Bethel, in scorn of the Temple; this is his
ambition. The Fox seldom preyes near home, nor does Satan meddle with his
own; they are as sure as temptation can make them. What Iailor lays more
chains upon the shackled malefactor, that loves his prison, and would not
change? The Pirate spends not a shot upon a cole-ship; but he lets fly at the
rich Merchant. Cantabit vacuus, the empty traveler may pass vnmolested: it is
the full barn that inuites the thief. If we were not belonging to the Temple,
we should not be assaulted with so many Idols; if not Christians, fewer
tentations.

Now the more potent and malicious our adversaries, the more resolute and
strong be our resistance. The more extreme the cold is without, the more does
the natural heat fortify it self within, and guard the heart. It is the note
of the ungodly, Esaias 66.3.
that they bless Idols: if we would not be such, let us bless our selves
from Idols. And as we have banished the material Idols out of our Temples, so
let us drive these spiritual ones out of our hearts Let us say with Ephraim,
we have heard God, Ho^. 14.8.
and seen him; What have we to do any more with Idols? The vices of the
religious are the shame of religion: the sight of this has made the stoutest
Champions of Christ melt into tears. Psalm. 189.136.
Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy Law. David was
one of those great Worthies of the world, not matchable in his times; yet he
weeps. Did he tear in pieces a bear like a kid? rescue a lamb with the
death of a lion? foil a mighty giant, that had dared the whole army of God?
Did he like a whirlewind, bear and beat down his enemies before him; and now
does he, like a child or a woman, fall a weeping? Yes, he had heard the name
of God blasphemed, seen his holy rites profaned, his statutes vilipended, and
violence offered to the pure and intemerate Chastity of that holy virgin, Phil.
^.1^.
Religion: this resolved that valiant heart into tears; Rivers of waters run
down mine eyes. So Paul, I tell you of them weeping, that are enemies to the
Cross of Christ. Had he with so magnanimous a courage, endured stripes and
persecutions, run through perils of all sorts and sizes, fought with beasts at
Ephesus, been rapt up to heaven, and learned his Divinity among the Angels;
and does he now weep? Yes, he had seen Idols in the Temple, Impiety in the
Church of God: this made that great spirit melt into tears. If we see these
Idols in others, or feel them in our selves, and complain not; we give God
and the Church just cause to complain of us. Now the Lord deliver his Temples
from these Idols.

But all this while we have walked in generals; and you will say, Quod omnibus
dicitur, nemini dicitur: let me now therefore come to particulars.

The Temple of God
Is every Christian as the Church is his great Temple, so his little temple is
every man. We are not only through his grace, living stones in his Temple, but
living temples in his Sion: each one bearing about him a little shrine of that
infinite Majesty. Wheresoever God dwells, there is his Temple: therefore the
believing heart is his Temple, for there he dwells. As we poor creatures of
the earth have our being in him, so he the God of heaven has his dwelling in
us. It is true, that the heaven of heavens is not able to contain him; yet the
narrow lodgings of our renewed souls are taken up for him. What were a house
made with hands unto the God of spirits; unless there be a spirit for him to
dwell in made without hands? Here if the Body be the Temple, the Soul is
Priest: if that be not the offerer, the Sacrifice will not be accepted.

In this Spiritual Temple, first there is the Porch; which we may conceive to
be the Mouth. Therefore David prays to have a Watch set at the door of his
lips; to ward the gate of Gods Temple. This may seem to be one reason of
saluting in former times by a kiss; they did kiss the gate of Gods Temple.
Here the Fear of God is the Porter; who is both ready to let in his friends,
and resolute to keep out his enemies. Let him specially watch for two sorts of
foes, the one, a traitor that goes out, evil speaking: the other, a thief
that steals in, too much drinking.

The Holy place is the sanctified mind, that which S. Paul calls the Inner man.
Here be those riches and ornaments, the divine graces. Here not only Justice,
and Faith, and Temperance, sing their parts, but the whole Quire of heavenly
virtues make up the harmony.

The Holy of holies is the purified Conscience, wher^in stand the Cherubins,
Faith and Love; and the Mercy-feat, shaded with the wings of those glorious
Angels: from which Propitiatory God gives the gracious testimonies of his good
Spirit, Romans 8.16.
witnessing with our spirits that we are his children. In this Sacrary does the
Lord converse with the soul takes her humble confession, gives her sweet
absolution. It is a place whither nor man nor Angel can enter; only the high
Priest Jesus comes, not once a year, but daily; and communicates such
inestimable favors and comforts, as no tongue can express.

Here we find the Arc, wherein the Royal law, and Pot of heavenly Manna are
preserved. the one restraining us from sin to come by a happy prevention, the
other assuring us pardon of sin past with a blessed consolation. Let us look
further upon the golden Candlesticks, our illumined understandings; whereby we
perceive the will of our Maker, and discern the way of our eternal peace.
Then upon the Tables of Shewbread, which be our holy memories, that keep the
bread of life continually ready within us. Yea, Memory is the treasury of this
Temple, which so locks up those celestial riches, that we can draw them
forth for use at all opportunities. Here is also the Veil, and those silken
curtains, and costly hangings; the Righteousness of Christ, which makes us
acceptable to God; both hiding our own infirmities, and decking us with his
virtues. Here is the Altar for sacrifice, the contrite heart: the beast to be
slain is not found among our herds, but among our affections; we must
sacrifice our lusts: the knife to kill them, which would else kill us, is the
Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God: the fire to consume them is holy zeal,
kindled in our breasts by the inspiration of God.

There be other sacrifices also for us to offer in this Temple, on this Altar.
Besides our praises and prayers; Psalm. 141.2.
the setting forth of our prayer as Incense, and the lifting up our hands as an
evening sacrifice: there is mercy, and charitable deeds. What is devotion
without compassion? What, sacrifice without mercy? Math. 5.23
If thy brother has ought against thee, yea, if thou have ought that should
have bin thy brothers; thy oblation will stink in Gods nostrils. It was an old
complaint of the Church, that her stones were clothed, and her children naked,
that the curious found matter to delight them, but the distressed found not
bread to sustain them. Aug. in Psa. 41.
Therefore says S. Augustine, Si habes taurum pinguem, occide pauperibus: If
thou have a fat Bull, sacrifice it to the poor. Though they cannot drink the
blood of goats, they can eat the flesh of bulls. Psalm. 50.1^.
And he that says, If I were hungry, I would not tell thee; yet will
acknowledge at the last day, Math. 25.
I was hungry and thou did feed me; Come thou blessed. The poor have Gods
commendatory letters to us, and our prayers be our commendatory letters to God:
if we will not hearken to him, how should he gratify us* Thus, O Christian,
art thou a moving Temple of the living God.

Let this teach us all to adorn these Temples with decent graces. Superstition
cares not what it bestows on material Fanes: mountainous Columns, Marble
Pillars, gorgeous Monuments, which yet are not sensible of their own
ornaments; spangled Crucifixes, Images clad in Silks and Tissues, with
embroydered Canopies, and Tables beset with Pearls and Diamonds. Thus
bountiful is she to her superfluities; Oh that our Religion would do
something for these ancient and ruinous walls. But how much more precious be
these spiritual Temples of our selves? How much more noble ought to be their
furnitures?

First then, if we be the Temples of God, let us be holy: for holiness, 0
Lord, becomes thy House for ever.

2. It is Domus orationis; they must have the continual exercises of Prayer.
In Templo vis orare? In te ora. Would thou pray in Gods Temple? Pray in thy
self.

3. The sound of the high praises of God must be heard in these Temples: There
every man speaks of his honor. It pleases the Lord to inhabit the praises of
Israel. Psalm. 38.9.
And Psalm. 48. We have thought of thy loving kindness, 0 God, in the midst of
thy Temple: that is, even in the midst of our selves, in our own hearts. There
let us think upon his mercies, there echo forth his praises.

4. The Inhabitant disposes all the rooms of his house: if God dwell in us,
let him rule us. Submit thy will to his word, thy affections to his Spirit. It
is fit that every man should bear rule in his own house.

5. Let us be glad when he is in us, and give him no disturbance. Let not the
foulenes of any room make him dislike his habitation. Cleanse all the sluttish
corners of sin, and perfume the whole house with Myrrh and Cassia. Still be
getting nearer to thy Landlord: other Inhabitants come home to their houses;
but here the house must strive to come home to the Inhabitant. Whenever God
comes toward thee, meet him by the way, and bid him welcome to his own.

6. Lastly, if we be the Lords houses, then no bodies else. The material
Temples are not to be diuerted to common offices: much more should the
spiritual be used only for Gods service. Let us not alienate his rights: thus
he will say, This is my house, here will I dwell, for I have a delight
therein. O may we so adorn these Temples with graces, that God may take
delight to dwell in us.

Idols.
These be the Temples: the Idols that haunt them, we better know, then know
how to expel: they be our lusts, and inordinate affections; the rebellions
of our corrupt nature, which fight against the Soul, defile the body, and
disgrace the Temples of Gods Spirit. So I pass from them, to the last point;
that betwixt these libidinous Idols, and those spiritual Temples, there can be

No agreement.
God will dwell with no Inmates: if uncleanness be there, Revel. ^1.27
will the fountain of all purity abide it? Will Christ dwell with an adulterer?
He that will suffer no unclean thing to enter his city above, will he
himself dwell in an unclean city below? O think how execrable that sin is,
which does not only take the members of Christ, and makes them the limbs of an
harlot; but even turns Christ's Temples into stinking Brothels. Our hearts be
the Altars to send up the sweet Incense of devout prayers and cherefull
thanksgiuings; if the smoke of malicious thoughts be found there, will God
accept our oblations? Is it possible, that man should please his Father, that
will not be reconciled to his brother? The Lamps of knowledge and sobriety are
burning within us; will not the deluge of drink put them out? Will the Lord
dwell in a drunken body? Must we not cease to be his Temples, when we become
Bacchus his Tuns and tunnels? There is Manna, the bread of life within us; will
not Epicurisme and throat-indulgence corrupt it? There is peace in us, will not
pride and contention affright it? There is the love of heaven in us, will not
the love of the world banish it? Shall the graces of God cohabitate with the
vices of Satan? Will the Temple of God endure Idols? No* these Eagles plumes will
not brook the blending with common feathers: this heavenly gold scorns the
mixture of base and sophisticate metalls.

Let us search our hearts and ransake them narrowly: if we do not cast out
these Idols, God will not own us for his Temples. Math ^1.13
My House shall be called the house of prayer: this was Gods Appropriation:
But you have made it a den of thieves: this is man's Impropriation. Let us take
heed of impropriating Gods house; remembering how he has reue^ged such a
profanation with scourges. We are bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6.20
therefore let us glorify God both in body and spirit, for they are his: His
purchase, his Temple, his inheritance, his habitation: do not lose so gracious
an owner, by the most ungracious sacrilege. You see many ruined houses, which
have bin once kings palaces: learn by those dead spectacles to keep your
selves from the like fortunes: left God say of you, Hoc Templum meum fuit, this
was my house; but now because it took in Idols, I have forsaken it.

Or what if we do not set up Idols in these Temples, when we make the Temples
themselus Idols? or say not with Israel, Make us gods, while we make gods of
our selves? while we dress altars, and erect shrines to our own brains, and
kiss our own hands for the good they have done us? If we attribute something
to our selves, how is Christ al in all with us? Do we justly blame them that
worship the Beast of Rome, and yet find out a new Idolatry at home? Shall we
refuse to adore the Saints and Angels, and yet give divine worship to our
selves, dust and ashes? If victory crown our battles, if plenty fill our
garners, or success answer our endeavors; must the glory of all reflect upon
our own atchieuements? This is a rivality that God will not endure, to make so
many Temples nothing but Idols. But as the Lancashire Justice said of the
ill-shap'd Rood, though it be not well favored enough for a god, it will serve
to make an excellent devil. So proud dust and ashes, that arrogates the honor
of God, and impropriates it to himself; though he be too foul for a Temple,
yet he is fit enough for an Idol. When David prays, Libera me ab homine malo,
Deliver me from the evil man, O Lord. Saint Augustine, after much study and
scrutiny to find out this evil man, at last lights upon him; ab homine malo,
that is, a me ipso: Deliver me from the evil man, deliver me from my self;
Deliver Augustine from Augustine; I am that evil man. So, of all Idolatries,
God deliver us from a superstitious worship of our selves. Some have Idolized
their Princes, some their Mistresses, some their Manufactures; but they are
innumerable that have Idolized themselves. He is a rare man that has no Idol,
no little god in a box, no especial sin in his heart, to which he gives
vxorious and affectionate Indulgence.

The only way to mend all, is for every man to begin with himself. In vain
shall we blame those faults abroad, which we tolerate at home. That man makes
himself ridiculous, who leaving his own house on fire, runs to quench his
neigbors Let but every man pull a brand from this fire, the flame will go out
alone: if every soul cleanse his own Temple, all shall be quit of Idols, and
God will accept of all. A multitude is but a heap of unities; the more we take
away, the fewer we leave behind. When a field is over grown with weeds, the
best course to have a good general harvest, is for every man to weed his
owneground. When we would have the street cleansed let every man sweep his own
door, and it is quickly done. But while every man censures, and none amends,
we do but talk against Idols, with still vnclensed Temples.

Let us pray for universal repentance, like a good Josias, to purge the houses
of God. till lust and profaneness, pride and covetousness, fraud and
wantonness, malice and drunkenness, be no more found among us: till every thing
be cast out, and nothing let in, that is unclean. So shall the Lord dwell in
us with content, and we shall dwell in him with comfort. Here we shall be a
Temple for Him, hereafter he shall be a temple for us. So we find that glorious
City describe, I saw no Temple therein, Reu. 21.22
but the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb was the Temple of it. We are Gods
Temple on earth, God shall be our Temple in heaven. To this purpose, the
Spirit of God sanctify us, and be for ever sanctified in us. Amen.

Some may happily (long ere this) have preuidicated in their censures; How is
this O pus diet in die sou? What is all this to the business of the day? I
might have prevented the objection, by comparing Idolatry with Treason: the
one being a breach of Allegiance to the Lord, the other a breach of allegiance
to the Lords Anointed. Idolatry is a Treason against God, and Treason is kind
of Idolatry against the King. From both which the divine grace, and our holy
obedience deliver us all. I conclude with application to the Time.

This is one of those blessed days celebrated for the deliverance of our
gracious Sovereign: and well may the deliverance of a King, of such a King,
deserve a day of gratulation. When God delivers a private man, he does, as it
were, repeat his Creation: but the deliverance of a King, is always a choice
piece in the Lords Chronicle. The Story, how he was endangered, and how
preserved, this place has diverse times witnessed; and that in a more punctual
manner, then I have either strength, or art, or time to match. A hard time it
seemed to be, when a King was imprisoned, when he had no guard with him but his
Innocence, no subject but a Traitor. But there was a stronger with him, then
all they could be against him. A good Prince has more guards then one: he
has, 1. a subsidiary guard, consisting of morrall men. 2. An inward guard, the
integrity of his own Conscience: 3. A spiritual guard, the prayers of his
faithful subjects. 4. A celestial guard, the protection of diligent and
powerful Angels. 5. A divine guard, his Makers providence that fenceth him in
with a wall of fire, which shall at once both preserve him, and consume his
enemies.

But my purpose is not to bring your thoughts back to the view of his peril,
but to stir your hearts up to thankfulness for his preservation. He is justly
styled, The Defender of the Faith: he has ever defended the Faith, and the
Faith has ever defended him. He has preserved the Temple of God from Idols,
and therefore God has preserved him from all his enemies. Surely that
Providence, which delivered him from those early Conspiracies, wherewith he
has been assaulted from his cradle, meant him for some extraordinary benefit,
and matchless good to the Christian world. He that gave him both life and
Crown(almost)together, has still miraculously preserved them both, from all
the raging violences of Rome and Hell. Now when the Lord delivered him, what
did he else but even deliver us all? That we might rejoice in his safety, as
the Romans did in the recovery of Germanicus; when they ran with lamps and
sacrifices to the Capitol, and there sung with shouts and acclamations; Salua
Roma, salua Patria, saluus Germanicus: the City is safe, the Country is safe,
and all in the safety of Germanicus. While we consider the blessings which we
enjoy by his gracious Government; that the estates we have gotten with honest
industry, may be safely conveyed to our posterity: that we sit under the shadow
of peace, and may teach our children to know the Lord: that the good man may
build up Temples and Hospitals, without trembling to think of savage and
barbarous violences to pull them down: that our Devotions be not molested with
vproares, nor men called from their callings by mutinies: that our Temples be
not profaned with Idols, nor the Service of God blended with superstitious
devices: that our temporal estate is preserved in liberity, our spiritual
estate may be improued in piety, and our eternal estate assured us in glory:
that our lives be protected, and in quiet our souls may be saved: for such a
King of men, bless we the God of Kings; and sing for his deliverance, as they
did for their Germanicus; as privately every day, so this day in our public
Assemblies; Salua Britannia, Salua Ecclesia, saluus IACOBVS: Our Kingdom is
safe, the Church of God is safe, our whole Estate is safe, we are all safe and
happy, in the safety and happiness of King JAMES. O that as we have good
cause to emulate, so also we would truly imitate the gratulation of Israel; we
for our King that has preserved the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 5.12.13.
as they for their King that built the Temple; while the Levites and singers
stood with Harps and Cymbals and Viols, and the Priests blowing with Trumpets;
as if they had all been one man, and made one sweet harmony to the praise of
God.

For these public and extraordinary blessings, God requires public and
extraordinary praises: that this great Assembly with prepared hearts, and
religious affections, should magnify his glorious Name: and if it were
possible, by some unusual strain of our united thanks, pierce the very skies,
and give an Echo to those celestial Quires, singing, Honor, and praise, and
glory, be to our gracious God, for all his merciful deliverances both of
Prince and people. Yea, O Lord, still preserve thine own Anointed* convert or
confound all his enemies; but upon his dead let his Crown flourish. Long, long
live that royal keeper of Gods holy Temple, and the Defender of that Faith
which he has of old given to his Saints: and let all true-hearted Israelites
say, Amen: yea, let Amen, the faithful witness in heaven, the Word and Truth of
God, say Amen to it. For our selves, let us heartily repent of our former sins,
religiously amend our future lives, abandon all our intestine Idols, serve the
Lord with pure hearts; and still, and still, God shall deliver both Him and us
from all our enemies. This God grant for his mercies sake, Jesus Christ for his
merits sake, the HolyGhost for his Names sake; to whom, three persons, and one
eternal God, be all praise and glory, ob^dience and thanksgiving, world
without end.

FINIS.

