A godly Exhortation, and fruitful admonition to virtuous parents and modest
Matrons. Describing the holy use, and blessed institution of that most
honorable state of Matrimony, and the increase of godly and happy children,
in training them up in godly education, and household discipline. R.G.

Imprinted at London for Nicholas Ling. 1584.

1 NEw, or young married folks ought not licentiously to go together, before
they have first upon their knees, secretelie in their chamber, commended
themselves unto God by prayer: after the good example of Tobias and Sara,
Tobit. 7.17. and 8, 4. 2 It is the duty of parents to bless their children,
and wish them all good: a pattern whereof we have in Genesis. Chap. 4.8. verse.
15.20. and Jacob Numbers cap. 6. verse. 24. 3 It is the mothers duty, so well
as the fathers, to instruct her children with precepts of good doctrine: so did
Bethsheba teach her son Solomon: as you may read Proverbs chap. 13.1. 4
Poverty and shame is to that child, that refuses Instruction, and will not
abide correction: but that child that regards discipline, and gives ear to
the instruction of their parents shall come to honor: Proverbs 13.1.18. 5 Who
so laugheth their father to scorn, and set their mothers commandment at
naught, the ravens of the vallie eat out their eyes, and devoured be that
child of the young eagles. Proverbs 30.17. 6 A wise child makes a glad father:
but a foolish and indiscreet daughter is a heaviness to her mother. Proverbs.
1.10. 7 A well nurtured and mannerly maiden is as a polished stone of a
Palace, and the honor of her fathers house: as appears by the prophet David
in his Psalm. 114.12.
THe holy Ghost speaking in the Scriptures of foolish sons, as that he that
begets such a one gets himself sorrow, and that the father of a fool
has no joy, Proverb. 17, 21. Means it not so much of natural idiots, and
such as are destitute of common reason: although it is true, that is a
lamentable judgment of God, and a heaviness to the parents of such a child:
as of wicked children such as either are ignorant in the word, nor knowing how
to order one right step to the kingdom of God, or else having some knowledge,
abuse it to maintain their carnal lusts and appetite. For this cause, as it
would grieve parents to have natural fools to their children, or such as
either in some imperfection of nature are dismembered, or deformed and
misfigured in the parts of their body, so much more should it grieve them to
have such children, as either for want of knowledge and heavenly wisdom, can
not walk in the fear of God, or abusing the knowledge given them, prostitute
themselves to al sin and wickedness: it is marvelous how greatly parents
can bewail the want of one natural gift proceeding of some imperfection, and
how easily they can pass over without any grief the want of all spiritual
graces, springing from corrupt education. In like manner is it strange that men
can take the matter so heavily when their children break into such offenses
as either have open shame, or civil punishment following them, and yet can make
no bones, but pass over such sins as are against the majesty of God,
accompanied with everlasting confusion, and unspeakable torments: wherein what
does the most part of men bewray, but their great hypocrisy, in that neither
their joy, nor their grief is sound to their children, and that they love
themselves more in their children, then either their salvation or the glory of
GOD: the tender love and care whereof no doubt did increase the sorrow of David
for the death of his son Absolon, who was not so much grieved for the loss
of a son, as for that untimely end of his son, to whom the time of
repentance, for his salvation and the glory of God, was denied: which happily,
if he had lived, his father David might have rejoiced in. Let us learn
therefore to correct our affections to our children, and be grieved for their
ignorance, impiety and sins, whereof either our carnal copulation, the not
lamenting of our natural corruption, the want of prayer and holy seed, or
profane education, armed with the wrath of God, may be a most just occasion.
Can a man hope for a holy posterity? or do we marvel if the Lord cross
us in the children of our bodies, when we make as bold and brutish an entrance
into that holy ordinance of the Lord as is the meeting of the neighing horse
with his mare: when being joined in that honorable estate of matrimony,
either as mere natural men without all knowledge of GOD we beget our children,
or as too carnal men without the fear and reverence of the Lord: neither
bewailing our corruptions, which we received of our ancestrie, nor praing
against the infirmities which may descend to our posterity, we abuse the
marriage bed. Lastly, when having received the fruit of the womb, we have
no care, by virtuous education, to offer it to the Lord, that our child by
carnal generation may be the child of God by spiritual regeneration. Surely
no: and yet men looking up to God his providence and secret council, without
all bethinking themselves of their corrupt generation, from which their
children are descended, without all looking back into their wicked and
godless bringing of them up, will freat against their sins, fume against
their children: yea often they will correct them, and that to serve their own
corruptions, not so much grieved for that they have sinned against God, as that
they have offended them. Christians therefore must know, that when men and
women raging with boiling lust meet together as brute beasts, having no
other respects then to satisfy their own carnal concupiscense, when they
make no conscience to sanctify the marriage bed with prayer, when they have
no care to increase the Church of Christ and the number of the elect, it is the
just judgment of God to send them either monsters, or natural fools, or else
such as having good gifts of the mind, and well proportioned bodies, are most
wicked, graceless, and profane persons. Again on the contrary we shall find
in the word of God, that noble and notable men, commended unto us for rare
examples of virtue and godliness, were children asked and obtained of God by
prayer. Our first parents Adam and Eve, being humbled after the birth of their
wicked son Caine, obtained a righteous Abell, of whom, when by his bloody
brother they were bereft, they received that holy man Seth. Abraham, begetting
in the flesh had a cursed son Ismael, but waiting by faith for the
accomplishme^t of God his covenant, he obtained a blessed Isaac. Jacob not
content with one wife, according to the ordinance of God, was punished in his
children: yet afterward being humbled he received faithful Joseph. Elkanah and
Hannah, praying and being cast down, had a Samuel that did minister before the
Lord. David and Bethsheba, lamenting their sins, obtained Solomon, a man of
excellent wisdom. Zachary and Elizabeth fearing the Lord, received John the
Baptist and forerunner of Christ. Look what sins we have received naturally
without GOD his great blessing, without prayer and humbling of our selves, we
shall convey them to posterity: and although the lord grants sometimes
civil gifts unto the children of natural and carnal men, yet for the most part
they receive their natural sins. But if the children of God by regeneration do
see in themselves, and lament their sins of generation, praying that their
natural corruptions may be prevented in their posterities, they shall see great
mercies of god, in some measure freeing their children from the same. Now when
thou shall see such sins to be in thy children, enter into thy own heart,
examine thy self, whether they are not come from thee, consider how justly the
hand of God may be upon thee: and when thou would be angry against thy
child, have an holy anger with thy self, and use this and such like
meditation with thy own soul: Lord, shall I thus punish mine own sin? and
that in my own child: shall I thus persecute the corruptions of my ancesters?
nay I see, O Lord, and prove that thou art displeased with me for the too
carnal conception of my child: I lay then in some sin, I asked it not of
thee by prayer: be merciful unto me (O Lord) and in thy good time show some
pity upon my child. Thus thinking thou go about to correct nature in thy
child which he could not help, arming thy self with prayer, repenting with
Jacob, thou shall be so affected as desirous to draw thy child out of sin,
yet with the mildest means and least rigor. And one thing is most wonderful:
that some will teach their children to speak corruptly, and do wickedly
whilst they are young, and yet beat them for it when they are old: again some
will imbolden their little ones to practice iniquity toward others, which
when by the just judgment of God they afterward exercise toward the parents
themselves, they are corrected for it. And yet deal with these and such like
men for the evil education of their children, and they will answer: do not
we as much as is of us required: we send our children to the Church to be
instructed of the pastor, and to the school to be taught of the master: if
they learn, it will be the better for them, if not, they have the more to
answer for: what can we do more? But remember, O man, consider, O woman,
whosoever thus speaks, for that sins sake, and the want of prayer there may
be a plague upon the pastors pains, and a curse upon the teachers travel. If
parents would have their children blessed at the Church and at the school, let
the^ beware they give their children no corrupt example at home by any
carelessness, profaneness, or ungodliness: otherwise parents will do them more
harm at home then both pastor and schoolmaister can do good abroad: for the
corrupt example of the one fights with ye good doctrine of the other: which
is by so much the more dangerous, because that corrupt walking is armed with
nature, and therefore more forcibly inclines the affections of children to
that side. And further experience teaches us that children like or mislike
more by countenance, gesture and behavior, then by any rule, doctrine, or
precept what soever. Some there be that will not have their children taught
until they be ten or twelve years old, because as they say, at that age they
have but an apish imitation. To whom I answer, that although they cannot then
deeply discern, nor profoundly conceive things, yet how many things before
these years will they both receive, and remember? And I demand if children be
apish in imitating that, whiles they be young, which they will have the habit of
when they be old, may they not much better do apishlie good whiles they are
young, which they may do carefully when they are old? besides let them go so
untaught, and they will grow so headstrong, that they will sooner be broken,
then bended: and sure it is that one stripe, or two words will do more good to
a child in time then a hundred stripes afterward. And here let parents be
admonished of their indiscreet correction, who do their children more harm
in showing a merry countenance after their discipline used, then they do good
by their chastisement of them whiles they do correct them. Neither do I
purpose to take away natural affections anda Christian kind of compassion in
all our censures: for it is my great complaint of the brutish unmercifulness
of many parents herein, but would wish Christians, to correct their
indiscreet affections herein by heavenly wisdom. Neither am I so Stoicall as
to deny a more mild and affable kind of speech to be both lawfully and
conveniently used to children, and yet I wish it to be void of all unseemly
lenity, and without all show of foolish, vain and unnecessary behavior. To
be brief, how needful household government toward our children is, it may
appear by the slender thriuing and small profiting either of religion or
virtue, either in the church or common wealth. Speak men of discipline never
so much, complain they of the want of church government never so loud,
preach they, teach they never so much abroad, unless they will begin
discipline in reforming their houses, and give religion some rowme at home,
they shall travail much, and profit little. And surely, if men be careful to
reform themselves first, and then their families: if their charge be greater
their circuites and provinces, wherein the Lord has placed them, it were the
best way to move the Lord to bestow reformation, and discipline on his church
among us: and of all means that now may be hoped for this seems best: for
of particular persons come families, of families towns, of towns provinces,
of provinces realms, so that conueighing discipline thus from one to another,
in time, and that shortly it would come into the church: well (I say) let
there be never so good laws in cities, never so pure orders in churches, if
there be no practice at home, if fathers of families use not doctrine, and
discipline in their houses, and join their hands to magistrate and ministers,
they may indeed, but unjustly, as many have done complain that their
children are corrupted abroad, when they were before, and are still corrupted
at home. Alas if parents, to whom the comfort of their children well brought
up is a precious crown, will not inform and reform their children in the fear
of God, how would hope sustain these men, that others will perform this
duty for them, to whom this charge does far less appertain? Lastly, let
parents remember, that therefore they have disordered and disobedient children
to themselves, because they have been disobedient children unto the Lord, and
disordered to their parents when they were young, whereof because they have not
repented, the Lord punishes their sins to others with the like sin to
themselves. Will thou know, thou father, how thou may have that blessing to
be the blessed father of a blessed seed? will thou know, thou mother, how to
avoid that curse to be the curssed mother of a curssed seed? bring thy
children within the compass of the covenant: endeavor to make thy son the
son of God, and thy daughter by nature the daughter of god by grace: and
remember how that God, which on his part protested to father Abraham that he
was all sufficient for the accomplishment of his promise in giving him a
blessed seed, and requested also on father Abraham's part, that he should walk
before him, and be upright. Will thou then have the one part of this of the
covenant: that is, that God should bless thee in thy seed? then remember also
that thou walk before the Lord, and be upright: will thou have thy children as
the blessed seed of Abraham? teach them with Abraham the judgments of the
Lord: pray for them with Abraham, that they may live in tho light of the Lord:
be ready to offer them with Abraham, that they may be a holy sacrifice unto
the Lord, It is thou, O man, O woman, that may do thy child the greatest
good, and the greatest harm: if thou prayest for him, and repentest for thy
self, the Lord will bless thy care, the pastors pains, the teachers
travail. But if thou dispisest these duties, the Lord will deny thee these
blessings, and the curse of God will be upon thy child, at home in thy house,
abroad in the Church, and in school. And seeing the Lord has promised that
he will be thy God, and bless thy seed, if thou be faithful, thou may
both hope that thou art of the faithful, if thou have a blessed seed, and
fear, that thou have not as yet the blessing of the covenant when thy seed is
accurssed. But had not Jacob wicked children, and David godless sons? and
does not daily experience teach us, that wicked men have godly children? yes:
for besides the secret counsel of the Lord herein, we must know that neither
the promise of the Lord is so universal that every particular child of a
faithful man should be within the covenant: for if of many there be but one
blessed, the promise is performed: yea, which more is, though the faithful man
have never a good child, yet, if unto the thousand generation there be but one
good, the covenant is not broken: neither must we tie the Lord his work so
much to man, that a good man may not have an evil son: seeing though the
Lord visit not his sins, yet he may visit the sins of some of the
forefathers, to the third and fourth generation going before. To the second I
say, that an evil father having a good child, though the Lord show not mercy
to that particular man therein, yet he may remember his promise to some of the
forefathers in the thousand generations going before: and though that evil man
have no curssed child, yet the curse may be accomplished in the third and
fourth generation following. Wherefore not speaking of election or reprobation,
which we leave only to the Lord to make good or bad, I exhort parents to use
the ordinary means, to bring up their children so as they either by some good
tokens may see them the children of God, and heirs of the covenant, or at
least be comforted in their own conscience if their children for some cause
unknown refuse it, in that to their ability they have used all good means
to bring them up well, and offered them to God. And if parents have cause to be
grieved, when thus traveling in good education, they cannot see good in their
children, how much more cause of grief may they have when they have used no
labor at all to bring them up in the fear of the Lord? And yet many will be
grieved for the one, that will not for the other: wherefore let us learn, if we
will convey God his blessing to our posterities, let us use ye duties there
unto, let us, if we be loath to convey God his judgments to our children,
carefully avoid the means unto it: and surely as it is a blessed thing in the
hour of death, with Simeon to depart in peace, leaving our wife, children and
servants members of Christ, spouses to Christ, children to God, and servants to
the Lord: so in death no one thing will be more grievous unto a man, then the
Lord having given him the charge of so many souls to be furthered to
salvation, that his own tormented conscience shall press him, how, in as
much as he could, he has helped them forward to their damnation: and so,
which is more fearful, he shall have them spewing and foming out on his face
continual curses in hell, accusing him for ever to be a murderer of their
souls, and a cutthrote of their salvation. How be it, in all this I do not
exempt Children from all blame, so charging the parents as though the Children
were free from all guiltiness herein: for I am not ignorant, that as in the
time of Ezechiel, so in our days youth is ready enough to take up this
proverb: the fathers have eaten sower grapes, and the Childrens teeth are set
on edge: but I affirm, that though the occasion be offered of such wicked
parents, yet the cause of destruction is still in the children themselves, And
besides that, it is sure that the soul which has sinned shall die the death.
Seeing there be some young men, who, notwithstanding the great profaneness of
the most, the manifold corruptions offered abroad, the ungodly examples
abounding at home, are so mightily preserved by the seed of grace, that they
escape safely in an holy course of life, lamenting when they see the least
occasion of evil, rejoicing in the least occasion of good things. The rest who
please themselves, and hope to shelter their sins under their parents
defaults, are plainly left without excuse, and are justly guilty of thebloud
of their own sins. Labor therefore, ye young men, to wipe away the tears of
grief from your fathers eyes, and stay the sorrowful spirits of your tender
mothers, and consider in your selves, if ye have any nature in you, and have
not buried ye use of common reason, what a shame is it to be a shame unto your
fathers, to whom ye ought to be a glory: think ye, wanton wits, that have
not cast of all natural affections, what a contempt it is to be a contempt
unto your mothers, to whom you have offered as it were a despightfull
violence, in that ye are a corrosiue to her grief, when as ye should have been
a crown unto her comforts. The end of all this breeflie is thus much: that
parents having fools, Children not walking either in knowledge or in a good
conscience must make some use of so just a cause of grief, examining
themselves, and accusing their own souls before the Lord, either for that
their meeting was profane to so holy an estate, or brutishlie, because they
desired rather a seed like unto them in flesh and blood, then such as might
be like to Christ by grace and new birth, or that they begat their offspring
as mere natural or very carnal men: or because they either prophanelie
neglected all education, or monstrouslie misliked that in their young children
which they liked in themselves, and punished in them their own corrupt
precepts, or for that they suffered their Children injuriously to do evil to
others, which they could not suffer to do to them selves: or untaught that at
home which was taught abroad: or in that they do lie in some sin unrepented
of: or else because they never made conscience to bring their posterity within
the covenant of salvation, but still loved the flesh of their children, and not
their souls. And children here also must learn that it is one special
property of a liberal and ingenious nature to be careful so to live, that in
time they may be a glory to their fathers, and a joy to their mothers: which
the Lord grant to us all, for his own glory and our everlasting comfort,
through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior. Amen.

Imprinted at London by Ihon Windet and Thomas Iudson for Nicholas Lyng Anno
domini. 1584


